    
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
   .
AS
 NGTON C T    anuar        
BRIGADIER-GENERAL BUELL, LOUISVILLE:
General McClellan should not yet be disturbed with
business. I think you better get in concert with General
Halleck at once. I write you to-night. I also telegraph and
write Halleck.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, January 1, 1862
DEAR GENERAL HALLECK: General McClellan is not
dangerously ill, as I hope, but would better not be
disturbed with business. I am very anxious that, in case of
General Buell’s moving toward Nashville, the enemy shall
not be greatly reinforced, and I think there is danger he
will be from Columbus. It seems to me that a real or
feigned attack upon Columbus from up the river at the
same time would either prevent this or compensate for it by
throwing Columbus into our hands. I wrote General Buell a
letter similar to this, meaning that he and you shall
communicate and act in concert, unless it be your judgment
and his that there is no necessity for it. You and he will
understand much better than I how to do it. Please do not
lose time in this matter.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H    
    
  
A   A
IN VIEW OF the recent declaration of the people of
Maryland of their adhesion to the Union, so distinctly made
in their recent election, the President directs that all the
prisoners who having heretofore been arrested in that
State are now detained in military custody by the
President’s authority, be released from their imprisonment
on the following conditions, namely: that if they were
holding any civil or military oﬀices when arrested, the
terms of which have expired, they shall not resume or
reclaim such oﬀice; and secondly, all persons availing
themselves of this proclamation shall engage by oath or
parole of honor to maintain the Union and the Constitution
of the United States, and in no way to aid or abet by arms,
counsel, conversation, or information of any kind the
existing insurrection against the Government of the United
States.
To guard against misapprehension it is proper to state
that this proclamation does not apply to prisoners of war.
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, January 2, 1862
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
I transmit to Congress a copy of a letter to the Secretary
of State from James R. Partridge, secretary to the executive
committee to the in exhibition to be held in London in the
course present year, and a copy of the correspond which it
refers, relative to a vessel for the of taking such articles as
persons in this country may wish to exhibit on that
occasion. As it appears no naval vessel can be spared for
the purpose, I recommend that authority be given to
charter a suitable merchant vessel, in order that facilities
similar to those aﬀorded by the government exhibition of
1851 may also be extended to citizens of the United States
who may desire to contribute to the exhibition of this year.
A. LINCOLN
    A
   
  
I A  
I
 
 
  
I H HI
 
  A 
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL D. C. BUELL.
WASHINGTON, JANUARY 4, 1862.
GENERAL BUELL:
Have arms gone forward for East Tennessee? Please tell
me the progress and condition of the movement in that
direction. Answer.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, 
JANUARY 6, 1862.
BRIGADIER-GENERAL BUELL.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your despatch of yesterday has been
received, and it disappoints and distresses me. I have
shown it to General McClellan, who says he will write you
to-day. I am not competent to criticize your views, and
therefore what I oﬀer is in justiﬁcation of myself. Of the
two, I would rather have a point on the railroad south of
Cumberland Gap than Nashville. First, because it cuts a
great 
artery 
of 
the 
enemy’s 
communication, 
which
Nashville does not; and secondly, because it is in the midst
of loyal people who would rally around it, while Nashville is
not. Again, I cannot see why the movement on East
Tennessee would not be a diversion in your favor rather
than a disadvantage, assuming that a movement toward
Nashville is the main object. But my distress is that our
friends in East Tennessee are being hanged and driven to
despair, and even now, I fear, are thinking of taking rebel
arms for the sake of personal protection. In this we lose the
most valuable stake we have in the South. My despatch, to
which yours is an answer, was sent with the knowledge of
Senator Johnson and Representative Maynard of East
Tennessee, and they will be upon me to know the answer,
 which I cannot safely show them. They would despair,
possibly resign to go and save their families somehow, or
die with them. I do not intend this to be an order in any
sense, but merely, as intimated before, to show you the
grounds of my anxiety.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
   .
WASHINGTON, January 7, 1862.
BRIGADIER-GENERAL D.C. BUELL, Louisville: Please
name as early a day as you safely can on or before which
you can be ready to move southward in concert with Major-
General Halleck. Delay is ruining us, and it is indispensable
for me to have something deﬁnite. I send a like despatch to
Major-General Halleck.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, January 10, 1862
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
I transmit to Congress a translation of an instruction to the
minister of his Majesty the Emperor of Austria accredited
to this government, and a copy of a note to that minister
from the Secretary of State relative to the questions
involved in the taking from the British steamer Trent of
certain citizens of the United States by order of Captain
Wilkes of the United States Navy. This correspondence may
be considered as a sequel to that previously communicated
to Congress relating to the same subject.
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
  
          
 
 
  A
HA     
JANUARY 10, 1862.
HEADQUARTERS DEPARTMENT OF THE MISSOURI
ST. Louis, January 6, 1862.
To His E CELLENCY THE PRESIDENT: In reply to your
Excellency’s letter of the 1st instant, I have to state that on
receiving your telegram I immediately communicated with
General Buell and have since sent him all the information I
could obtain of the enemy’s movements about Columbus
and Camp Beauregard. No considerable force has been
sent from those places to Bowling Green. They have about
22,000 men at Columbus, and the place is strongly fortiﬁed.
I have at Cairo, Port Holt, and Paducah only about 15,000,
which, after leaving guards at these places, would give me
but little over 10,000 men with which to assist General
Buell. It would be madness to attempt anything serious
with such a force, and I cannot at the present time
withdraw any from Missouri without risking the loss of this
State. The troops recently raised in other States of this
department have, without my knowledge, been sent to
Kentucky and Kansas.
I am satisﬁed that the authorities at Washington do not
appreciate the diﬀiculties with which we have to contend
 here. The operations of Lane, Jennison, and others have so
enraged the people of Missouri that it is estimated that
there is a majority of 80,000 against the government. We
are virtually in an enemy’s country. Price and others have a
considerable army in the southwest, against which I am
operating with all my available force.
This city and most of the middle and northern counties
are 
insurrectionary, 
— 
burning 
bridges, 
destroying
telegraph lines, etc., — and can be kept down only by the
presence of troops. A large portion of the foreign troops
organized by General Fremont are unreliable; indeed, many
of them are already mutinous. They have been tampered
with by politicians, and made to believe that if they get up a
mutiny and demand Fremont’s return the government will
be forced to restore him to duty here. It is believed that
some high oﬀicers are in the plot I have already been
obliged to disarm several of these organizations, and I am
daily expecting more serious outbreaks. Another grave
diﬀiculty is the want of proper general oﬀicers to command
the troops and enforce order and discipline, and especially
to protect public property from robbery and plunder. Some
of the brigadier-generals assigned to this department are
entirely ignorant of their duties and unﬁt for any command.
I assure you, Mr. President, it is very diﬀicult to accomplish
much with such means. I am in the condition of a carpenter
who is required to build a bridge with a dull axe, a broken
saw, and rotten timber. It is true that I have some very good
green timber, which will answer the purpose as soon as I
can get it into shape and season it a little.
 I know nothing of General Buell’s intended operations,
never having received any information in regard to the
general plan of campaign. If it be intended that his column
shall move on Bowling Green while another moves from
Cairo or Paducah on Columbus or Camp Beauregard, it will
be a repetition of the same strategic error which produced
the disaster of Bull Run. To operate on exterior lines
against an enemy occupying a central position will fail, as it
always has failed, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred. It
is condemned by every military authority I have ever read.
General Buell’s army and the forces at Paducah occupy
precisely the same position in relation to each other and to
the enemy as did the armies of McDowell and Patterson
before the battle of Bull Run.
Very respectfully, your obedient servant, H. W. HALLECK,
Major-General [Indorsement]
The within is a copy of a letter just received from General
Halleck. It is exceedingly discouraging. As everywhere else,
nothing can be done.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
  A
  
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., January 11, 1862
GOVERNOR JOHN A. ANDREW, Boston:
I will be greatly obliged if you will arrange; somehow
with General Butler to oﬀicer his two un-oﬀicered
regiments.
A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 13, 1861
BRIGADIER-GENERAL BUELL.
MY DEAR SIR — Your despatch of yesterday is received,
in which you say, “I received your letter and General
McClellan’s, and will at once devote my eﬀorts to your
views and his.” In the midst of my many cares I have not
seen, nor asked to see, General McClellan’s letter to you.
For my own views, I have not oﬀered and do not now oﬀer
them as orders; and while I am glad to have them
respectfully considered, I would blame you to follow them
contrary to your own clear judgment, unless I should put
them in the form of orders. As to General McClellan’s
views, you understand your duty in regard to them better
than I do.
With this preliminary I state my general idea of this war
to be, that we have the greater numbers and the enemy has
the greater facility of concentrating forces upon points of
collision; that we must fail unless we can ﬁnd some way of
making our advantage an overmatch for his; and that this
can only be done by menacing him with superior forces at
diﬀerent points at the same time, so that we can safely
attack one or both if he makes no change; and if he
weakens one to strengthen the other, forbear to attack the
 strengthened one, but seize and hold the weakened one,
gaining so much.
To illustrate: Suppose last summer, when Winchester ran
away to reinforce Manassas, we had forborne to attack
Manassas, but had seized and held Winchester. I mention
this to illustrate and not to criticise. I did not lose
conﬁdence in McDowell, and I think less harshly of
Patterson than some others seem to.... Applying the
principle to your case, my idea is that Halleck shall menace
Columbus and “down river” generally, while you menace
Bowling Green and East Tennessee. If the enemy shall
concentrate at Bowling Green, do not retire from his front,
yet do not ﬁght him there either, but seize Columbus and
East Tennessee, one or both, left exposed by the
concentration at Bowling Green. It is a matter of no small
anxiety to me, and which I am sure you will not overlook,
that the East Tennessee line is so long and over so bad a
road.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
(Indorsement.) Having to-day written General Buell a
letter, it occurs to me to send General Halleck a copy of it.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 1, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK.
MY DEAR SIR: — The Germans are true and patriotic and
so far as they have got cross in Missouri it is upon mistake
and 
misunderstanding. 
Without 
a 
knowledge 
of 
its
contents, Governor Koerner, of Illinois, will hand you this
letter. He is an educated and talented German gentleman,
as true a man as lives. With his assistance you can set
everything right with the Germans.... My clear judgment is
that, with reference to the German element in your
command, you should have Governor Koerner with you; and
if agreeable to you and him, I will make him a brigadier-
general, so that he can aﬀord to give his time. He does not
wish to command in the ﬁeld, though he has more military
knowledge than some who do. If he goes into the place, he
will simply be an eﬀicient, zealous, and unselﬁsh assistant
to you. I say all this upon intimate personal acquaintance
with Governor Koerner.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, January 17, 1862
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
I transmit to Congress a translation of an instruction to the
minister of his Majesty the King of Prussia accredited to
this government, and a copy of a note to that minister from
the Secretary of State relating to the capture and detention
of certain citizens of the United States, passengers on
board the British steamer Trent, by order of Captain Wilkes
of the United States Navy.
A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
  A  
c     A
.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON.
JANUARY 20, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
GEORGE 
B. 
McCLELLAN,
Commanding Armies of the United States: You or any
oﬀicer you may designate will in your discretion suspend
the writ of habeas corpus so far as may relate to Major
Chase, lately of the Engineer Corps of the Army of the
United States, now alleged to be guilty of treasonable
practices against this government.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD.
     I
 
    
 
  A  
A  
 
   
. 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 27, 1862.
ORDERED, THAT THE 22d day of February, 1862, be the day
for a general movement of the land and the naval forces of
the United States against the insurgent forces.
That especially the army at and about Fortress Monroe,
the Army of the Potomac, the Army of Western Virginia, the
army near Munfordville, Kentucky, the army and ﬂotilla at
Cairo, and a naval force in the Gulf of Mexico, be ready for
a movement on that day.
That all other forces, both land and naval, with their
respective commanders, obey existing orders for the time,
and be ready to obey additional orders when duly given.
That the heads of departments, and especially the
Secretaries of War and of the Navy, with all their
subordinates, and the General-in-chief, with all other
commanders and subordinates of land and naval forces, will
severally be held to their strict and full responsibilities for
the prompt execution of this order.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     A
 
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, January 31, 1862
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — It is my wish that the expedition
commonly called the “Lane Expedition” shall be, as much
as has been promised at the adjutant-general’s oﬀice,
under the supervision of General McClellan, and not any
more. I have not intended, and do not now intend, that it
shall be a great, exhausting aﬀair, but a snug, sober column
of 10,000 or 15,000. General Lane has been told by me
many times that he is under the command of General
Hunter, and assented to it as often as told. It was the
distinct agreement between him and me, when I appointed
him, that he was to be under Hunter.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     I
 
        IA  
A  
 
   
.  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 31, 1862.
ORDERED, THAT ALL the disposable force of the Army of the
Potomac, after providing safely for the defence of
Washington, be formed into an expedition for the
immediate object of seizing and occupying a point upon the
railroad southwestward of what is known as Manassas
Junction, all details to be in the discretion of the
commander-in-chief, and the expedition to move before or
on the 22d day of February next.
A. LINCOLN.
   
 I I
  
 
c     A
     A
TO GENERAL G. B. McCLELLAN, 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 3,
1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN.
DEAR SIR — You and I have distinct and diﬀerent plans
for a movement of the Army of the Potomac — yours to be
down the Chesapeake, up the Rappahannock to Urbana,
and across land to the terminus of the railroad on the York
River; mine to move directly to a point on the railroad
southwest of Manassas.
If you will give me satisfactory answers to the following
questions, I shall gladly yield my plan to yours.
First. Does not your plan involve a greatly larger
expenditure of time and money than mine?
Second. Wherein is a victory more certain by your plan
than mine?
Third. Wherein is a victory more valuable by your plan
than mine?
Fourth. In fact, would it not be less valuable in this, that
it 
would 
break 
no 
great 
line 
of 
the 
enemy’s
communications, while mine would?
Fifth. In case of disaster, would not a retreat be more
diﬀicult by your plan than mine?
Yours truly,
 A. LINCOLN.
  
 A
 A  
 A
 I
        
    I
 
   I
 
 
  
 
 
  A  
      A
dated February 3,1862.
FIRST. SUPPOSE THE enemy should attack us in force
before we reach the Occoquan, what?
Second. Suppose the enemy in force shall dispute the
crossing of the Occoquan, what? In view of this, might it
not be safest for us to cross the Occoquan at Coichester,
rather than at the village of Occoquan? This would cost the
enemy two miles of travel to meet us, but would, on the
contrary, leave us two miles farther from our ultimate
destination.
Third. Suppose we reach Maple Valley without an attack,
will we not be attacked there in force by the enemy
marching by the several roads from Manassas; and if so,
what?
  
 
. H. H  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 3, 1862.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Yours of January 30th just received.
Do just as you say about the money matter.
As you well know, I have not time to write a letter of
respectable length. God bless you, says Your friend, A.
LINCOLN.
     I    
  
A HA
I   
 
February 4, 1862
A. LINCOLN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA,
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Whereas it appears that at a term of the Circuit Court of
the United States of America for the Southern District of
New York held in the month of November, A.D. 1861,
Nathaniel Gordon was indicted and convicted for being
engaged in the slave trade, and was by the said court
sentenced to be put to death by hanging by the neck, on
Friday the 7th day of February, AD. 1862:
And whereas a large number of respectable citizens have
earnestly besought me to commute the said sentence of the
said Nathaniel Gordon to a term of imprisonment for life,
which application I have felt it to be my duty to refuse:
And whereas it has seemed to me probable that the
unsuccessful application made for the commutation of his
sentence may have prevented the said Nathaniel Gordon
from making the necessary preparation for the awful
change which awaits him;
Now, therefore, be it known, that I, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States of America, have granted
and do hereby grant unto him, the said Nathaniel Gordon, a
 respite of the above recited sentence, until Friday the
twenty-ﬁrst day of February, A.D. 1862, between the hours
of twelve o’clock at noon and three o’clock in the afternoon
of the said day, when the said sentence shall be executed.
In granting this respite, it becomes my painful duty to
admonish the prisoner that, relinquishing all expectation of
pardon by human authority, he refer himself alone to the
mercy of the common God and Father of all men.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto signed my name
and caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the City of Washington, this fourth day of
February, A.D. 1862, and of the independence of the United
States the eighty-sixth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
    A
   
  H    
A  .
WASHINGTON CITY, February 4. 1862
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES:
The third section of the “Act further to promote the
eﬀiciency of the Navy,” approved December 21, 1862,
provides:
“That the President of the United States, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, shall have the authority
to detail from the retired list of the navy for the command
of squadrons and single ships such oﬀicers as he may
believe that the good of the service requires to be thus
placed in command; and such oﬀicers may, if upon the
recommendation of the President of the United States they
shall receive a vote of thanks of Congress for their services
and gallantry in action against an enemy, be restored to the
active list, and not otherwise.”
In conformity with this law, Captain Samuel F. Du Pont,
of the navy, was nominated to the Senate for continuance
as the ﬂag-oﬀicer in command of the squadron which
recently rendered such important service to the Union in
the expedition to the coast of South Carolina.
Believing that no occasion could arise which would more
fully correspond with the intention of the law, or be more
pregnant with happy inﬂuence as an example, I cordially
 recommend that Captain Samuel F. Du Pont receive a vote
of thanks of Congress for his services and gallantry
displayed in the capture of Forts Walker and Beauregard,
commanding the entrance of Port Royal Harbor, on the 7th
of November, 1861.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   
. H
    A
  . H.  A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, FEBRUARY 4,
1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
HUNTER 
AND 
BRIGADIER-
GENERAL LANE, Leavenworth, Kansas: My wish has been
and is to avail the government of the services of both
General Hunter and General Lane, and, so far as possible,
to personally oblige both. General Hunter is the senior
oﬀicer, and must command when they serve together;
though in so far as he can consistently with the public
service and his own honor oblige General Lane, he will also
oblige 
me. 
If 
they 
cannot 
come 
to 
an 
amicable
understanding, General Lane must report to General
Hunter for duty, according to the rules, or decline the
service.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 I   
 
   
.       A I
  
 
 I I A    I 
   .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, February 14,1862.
THE BREAKING OUT of a formidable insurrection based on a
conﬂict of political ideas, being an event without precedent
in the United States, was necessarily attended by great
confusion and perplexity of the public mind. Disloyalty
before unsuspected suddenly became bold, and treason
astonished the world by bringing at once into the ﬁeld
military forces superior in number to the standing army of
the United States.
Every department of the government was paralyzed by
treason. Defection appeared in the Senate, in the House of
Representatives, in the Cabinet, in the Federal courts;
ministers and consuls returned from foreign countries to
enter the insurrectionary councils of land or naval forces;
commanding and other oﬀicers of the army and in the navy
betrayed our councils or deserted their posts for commands
in the insurgent forces. Treason was ﬂagrant in the
revenue and in the post-oﬀice service, as well as in the
Territorial governments and in the Indian reserves.
Not only governors, judges, legislators, and ministerial
oﬀicers in the States, but even whole States rushed one
after another with apparent unanimity into rebellion. The
 capital was besieged and its connection with all the States
cut oﬀ. Even in the portions of the country which were most
loyal, political combinations and secret societies were
formed furthering the work of disunion, while, from
motives of disloyalty or cupidity or from excited passions or
perverted sympathies, individuals were found furnishing
men, money, and materials of war and supplies to the
insurgents’ military and naval forces. Armies, ships,
fortiﬁcations, navy yards, arsenals, military posts, and
garrisons one after another were betrayed or abandoned to
the insurgents.
Congress had not anticipated, and so had not provided
for, the emergency. The municipal authorities were
powerless and inactive. The judicial machinery seemed as if
it had been designed, not to sustain the government, but to
embarrass and betray it.
Foreign intervention, openly invited and industriously
instigated by the abettors of the insurrection, became
imminent, and has only been prevented by the practice of
strict and impartial justice, with the most perfect
moderation, in our intercourse with nations.
The public mind was alarmed and apprehensive, though
fortunately not distracted or disheartened. It seemed to be
doubtful whether the Federal Government, which one year
before had been thought a model worthy of universal
acceptance, had indeed the ability to defend and maintain
itself.
Some reverses, which, perhaps, were unavoidable,
suﬀered by newly levied and ineﬀicient forces, discouraged
 the loyal and gave new hopes to the insurgents. Voluntary
enlistments 
seemed 
about 
to 
cease 
and 
desertions
commenced. Parties speculated upon the question whether
conscription had not become necessary to ﬁll up the armies
of the United States.
In this emergency the President felt it his duty to employ
with 
energy 
the 
extraordinary 
powers 
which 
the
Constitution conﬁdes to him in cases of insurrection. He
called into the ﬁeld such military and naval forces,
unauthorized by the existing laws, as seemed necessary. He
directed measures to prevent the use of the post-oﬀice for
treasonable correspondence. He subjected passengers to
and from foreign countries to new passport regulations,
and he instituted a blockade, suspended the writ of habeas
corpus in various places, and caused persons who were
represented to him as being or about to engage in disloyal
and treasonable practices to be arrested by special civil as
well as military agencies and detained in military custody
when necessary to prevent them and deter others from
such practices. Examinations of such cases were instituted,
and some of the persons so arrested have been discharged
from time to time under circumstances or upon conditions
compatible, as was thought, with the public safety.
Meantime a favorable change of public opinion has
occurred. The line between loyalty and disloyalty is plainly
deﬁned. The whole structure of the government is ﬁrm and
stable. Apprehension of public danger and facilities for
treasonable practices have diminished with the passions
which prompted heedless persons to adopt them. The
 insurrection is believed to have culminated and to be
declining.
The President, in view of these facts, and anxious to
favor a return to the normal course of the administration as
far as regard for the public welfare will allow, directs that
all political prisoners or state prisoners now held in military
custody be released on their subscribing to a parole
engaging them to render no aid or comfort to the enemies
in hostility to the United States.
The Secretary of War will, however, in his discretion,
except from the eﬀect of this order any persons detained as
spies in the service of the insurgents, or others whose
release 
at 
the 
present 
moment 
may 
be 
deemed
incompatible with the public safety.
To all persons who shall be so released, and who shall
keep their parole, the President grants an amnesty for any
past oﬀences of treason or disloyalty which they may have
comminuted.
Extraordinary arrests will hereafter be made under the
direction of the military authorities alone.
By order of the President EDWIN M. STANTON,
Secretary of War.
    A
   
  
    . 
A HI
 
  I  
 e ruar         
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF
THE UNITED STATES:
THE THIRD SECTION of the “Act further to promote the
eﬀiciency of the Navy,” approved December 21, 1861,
provides
“That the President of the United States, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, shall have the authority
to detail from the retired list of the navy for the command
of squadrons and single ships such oﬀicers as he may
believe that the good of the service requires to be thus
placed in command; and such oﬀicers may, if upon the
recommendation of the President of the United States they
shall receive a vote of thanks of Congress for their services
and gallantry in action against an enemy, be restored to the
active list, and not otherwise.”
In 
conformity 
with 
this 
law, 
Captain 
Louis 
M.
Goldsborough, of the navy, was nominated to the Senate for
continuance as the ﬂag-oﬀicer in command of the North
Atlantic Blockading Squadron, which recently rendered
such important service to the Union in the expedition to the
coast of North Carolina.
 Believing that no occasion could arise which would more
fully correspond with the intention of the law or be more
pregnant with happy inﬂuence as an example, I cordially
recommend that Captain Louis M. Goldsborough receive a
vote of thanks of Congress for his services and gallantry
displayed in the combined attack of the forces commanded
by him and Brigadier-General Burnside in the capture of
Roanoke Island and the destruction of rebel gunboats On
the 7th, 8th, and 10th of February, 1862.
A. LINCOLN.
  I    
 I   
 
 I   
  
 A
TO GENERAL H. W. HALLECK.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 16,
1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK, St. Louis, Missouri: You
have 
Fort 
Donelson 
safe, 
unless 
Grant 
shall 
be
overwhelmed from outside; to prevent which latter will, I
think, require all the vigilance, energy, and skill of yourself
and Buell, acting in full co-operation. Columbus will not get
at Grant, but the force from Bowling Green will. They hold
the railroad from Bowling Green to within a few miles of
Fort Donelson, with the bridge at Clarksville undisturbed. It
is unsafe to rely that they will not dare to expose Nashville
to Buell. A small part of their force can retire slowly toward
Nashville, breaking up the railroad as they go, and keep
Buell out of that city twenty days. Meanwhile Nashville will
be abundantly defended by forces from all South and
perhaps from hers at Manassas. Could not a cavalry force
from General Thomas on the upper Cumberland dash
across, almost unresisted, and cut the railroad at or near
Knoxville, Tennessee? In the midst of a bombardment at
Fort Donelson, why could not a gunboat run up and destroy
the bridge at Clarksville? Our success or failure at Fort
 Donelson is vastly important, and I beg you to put your soul
in the eﬀort. I send a copy of this to Buell.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 I   
 
   
.  . 
 I
    A I
  
  A     I 
   .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, FEBRUARY 27,
1862
IT IS ORDERED: First. That a special commission of two
persons, one of military rank and the other in civil life, be
appointed to examine the cases of the state prisoners
remaining in the military custody of the United States, and
to determine whether in view of the public Safety and the
existing rebellion they should be discharged, or remain in
military custody, or be remitted to the civil tribunals for
trial.
Second. That Major-General John A. Dix, commanding in
Baltimore, and the HON. Edwards Pierrepont, of New York,
be, and they are hereby, appointed commissioners for the
purpose above mentioned; and they are authorized to
examine, hear, and determine the cases aforesaid ex parte
and in a summary manner, at such times and places as in
their discretion they may appoint, and make full report to
the War Department.
By order of the President EDWIN M. STANTON,
Secretary of War.
  
      A I
  
  
   IA
I
    
   .
CONSIDERING THAT THE existing circumstances of the
country 
allow 
a 
partial 
restoration 
of 
commercial
intercourse between the inhabitants of those parts of the
United States heretofore declared to be in insurrection and
the citizens of the loyal States of the Union, and exercising
the authority and discretion conﬁded to me by the act of
Congress, approved July 13, 1861, entitled “An act further
to provide for the collection of duties on imports, and for
other purposes,” I hereby license and permit such
commercial intercourse in all cases within the rules and
regulations which have been or may be prescribed by the
Secretary of the Treasury for conducting and carrying on
the same on the inland waters and ways of the United
States.
WASHINGTON, February 28, 1862.
A. LINCOLN.
      H  
  H     
 IA
 
I
I    
WASHINGTON, D. C., MARCH 4, 1862
THE UNITED STATES have no enmities, animosities, or
rivalries, and no interests which conﬂict with the welfare,
safety, and rights or interests of any other nation. Their
own prosperity, happiness, and aggrandizement are sought
most safely and advantageously through the preservation
not only of peace on their own part, but peace among all
other nations. But while the United States are thus a friend
to all other nations, they do not seek to conceal the fact
that they cherish especial sentiments of friendship for, and
sympathies with, those who, like themselves, have founded
their institutions on the principle of the equal rights of
men; and such nations being more prominently neighbors
of the United States, the latter are co-operating with them
in establishing civilization and culture on the American
continent. Such being the general principles which govern
the United States in their foreign relations, you may be
assured, sir, that in all things this government will deal
justly, frankly, and, if it be possible, even liberally with
Peru, whose liberal sentiments toward us you have so
kindly expressed.
    A
   
  
        
 
I
 
  
 A  
  
A
 I A I
.
March 6, 1862
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: — I recommend the adoption of a
joint resolution by your honorable bodies which shall be
substantially as follows:
“Resolved, That the United States ought to co-operate
with any State which may adopt gradual abolishment of
slavery, giving to such State pecuniary aid, to be used by
such State, in its discretion, to compensate for the
inconveniences, public and private, produced by such
change of system.”
If the proposition contained in the resolution does not
meet the approval of Congress and the country, there is the
end; but if it does command such approval, I deem it of
importance that the States and people immediately
interested should be at once distinctly notiﬁed of the fact,
so that they may begin to consider whether to accept or
reject it. The Federal Government would ﬁnd its highest
interest in such a measure, as one of the most eﬀicient
means of self-preservation. The leaders of the existing
insurrection entertain the hope that this government will
ultimately be forced to acknowledge the independence of
 some part of the disaﬀected region, and that all the slave
States north of such part will then say, “The Union for
which we have struggled being already gone, we now
choose to go with the Southern section.” To deprive them of
this hope substantially ends the rebellion, and the initiation
of emancipation completely deprives them of it as to all the
States initiating it. The point is not that all the States
tolerating slavery would very soon, if at all, initiate
emancipation; but that, while the oﬀer is equally made to
all, the more northern shall by such initiation make it
certain to the more southern that in no event will the
former ever join the latter in their proposed confederacy. I
say “initiation” because, in my judgment, gradual and not
sudden emancipation is better for all. In the mere ﬁnancial
or pecuniary view, any member of Congress with the
census tables and treasury reports before him can readily
see for himself how very soon the current expenditures of
this war would purchase, at fair valuation, all the slaves in
any named State. Such a proposition on the part of the
General Government sets up no claim of a right by Federal
authority to interfere with slavery within State limits,
referring, as it does, the absolute control of the subject in
each case to the State and its people immediately
interested. It is proposed as a matter of perfectly free
choice with them.
In the annual message last December, I thought ﬁt to say,
“The Union must be preserved, and hence all indispensable
means must be employed.” I said this not hastily, but
deliberately. War has been made and continues to be an
 indispensable 
means 
to 
this 
end. 
A 
practical
reacknowledgment of the national authority would render
the war unnecessary, and it would at once cease. If,
however, resistance continues, the war must also continue;
and it is impossible to foresee all the incidents which may
attend and all the ruin which may follow it. Such as may
seem indispensable or may obviously promise great
eﬀiciency toward ending the struggle must and will come.
The proposition now made (though an oﬀer only), I hope
it may be esteemed no oﬀense to ask whether the
pecuniary consideration tendered would not be of more
value to the States and private persons concerned than are
the institution and property in it in the present aspect of
aﬀairs.
While it is true that the adoption of the proposed
resolution would be merely initiatory, and not within itself a
practical measure, it is recommended in the hope that it
would soon lead to important practical results. In full view
of my great responsibility to my God and to my country, I
earnestly beg the attention of Congress and the people to
the subject.
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
  
          
 
   
 A   .
STATE OF ILLINOIS, E ECUTIVE DEPARTMENT,
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., March 1, 1862
HON. EDWIN M. STANTON, SECRETARY OF WAR,
Washington, D. C.
SIR: — The government at my special request a few
months since contracted for fourteen batteries of the James
riﬂed gun, 6-pounder calibre, and a limited quantity of the
James projectiles, weighing about fourteen pounds each.
The reports showing the superiority of this gun and
projectile, both as regards range, accuracy, and execution,
for ﬁeld service over that of all others at the battle of Fort
Donelson, leads me to request that there be furnished to
the State of Illinois in the shortest time practicable seven
batteries of 12-pounder calibre James riﬂed guns, with
carriages, harness, implements, etc., complete and ready
for ﬁeld service, together with the following ﬁxed
ammunition to each gun, viz., 225 shells, 225 canister, and
50 solid projectiles, weighing about 24 pounds each, and
also 200 shells, 100 canister, and 100 solid projectiles for
each of the guns of the fourteen batteries named above,
weighing about 14 pounds each, all to be of the James
model.
 Very respectfully, RICHARD YATES, Governor of Illinois.
[Indorsement.]
March 8, 1862.
The within is from the Governor of Illinois. I understand
the seven additional batteries now sought are to be 6-gun
batteries, and the object is to mix them with the fourteen
batteries they already have so as to make each battery
consist of four 6-pounders and two 12-pounders. I shall be
very glad to have the requisition ﬁlled if it can be without
detriment to the service.
A. LINCOLN.
     I
 
    
 
  A  
A  
 
   
. .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON
MARCH 8, 1862.
Ordered: 1. That the major-general commanding the
Army of the Potomac proceed forthwith to organize that
part of the said army destined to enter upon active
operations (including the reserve, but excluding the troops
to be left in the fortiﬁcations about Washington) into four
army corps, to be commanded according to seniority of
rank, as follows: First Corps to consist of four divisions, and
to be commanded by Major-General I. McDowell. Second
Corps to consist of three divisions, and to be commanded
by Brigadier-General E. V. Sumner. Third Corps to consist
of three divisions, and to be commanded by Brigadier-
General S. P. Heintzelman. Fourth Corps to consist of three
divisions, and to be commanded by Brigadier-General E. D.
Keyes.
2. That the divisions now commanded by the oﬀicers
above assigned to the commands of army corps shall be
embraced in and form part of their respective corps.
3. The forces left for the defense of Washington will be
placed 
in 
command 
of 
Brigadier-General 
James 
S.
Wadsworth, who shall also be military governor of the
District of Columbia.
 4. That this order be executed with such promptness and
dispatch as not to delay the commencement of the
operations already directed to be underwritten by the Army
of the Potomac.
5. A ﬁfth army corps, to be commanded by Major general
N. P. Banks, will be formed from his own and General
Shields’s (late General Lander’s) divisions.
A. LINCOLN.
     I
 
    
 
  A  
A  
 
   
. .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, MARCH 8,1862
ORDERED: THAT NO change of the base of operations of the
Army of the Potomac shall be made without leaving in and
about Washington such a force as in the opinion of the
general-in-chief and the commanders of all the army corps
shall leave said city entirely secure.
That no more than two army corps (about 50,000 troops)
of said Army of the Potomac shall be moved en route for a
new base of operations until the navigation of the Potomac
from Washington to the Chesapeake Bay shall be freed
from enemy’s batteries and other obstructions, or until the
President shall hereafter give express permission.
That any movements as aforesaid en route for a new base
of operations which may be ordered by the general-in-chief,
and which may be intended to move upon the Chesapeake
Bay, shall begin to move upon the bay as early as the 18th
day of March instant, and the general-in-chief shall be
responsible that it so move as early as that day.
Ordered, That the army and navy co-operate in an
immediate eﬀort to capture the enemy’s batteries upon the
Potomac between Washington and the Chesapeake Bay.
A. LINCOLN
 I
    I 
    
  
  H      I
 
  A
 
   
 
     A     A 
REPRESENTATIVES, BY HON. J. W. CRISFIELD.
MEMORANDUM
“DEAR SIR: — I called, at the request of the President, to
ask you to come to the White House tomorrow morning, at
nine o’clock, and bring such of your colleagues as are in
town.”
WASHINGTON, March 10, 1862.
Yesterday, on my return from church, I found Mr.
Postmaster-General Blair in my room, writing the above
note, which he immediately suspended, and verbally
communicated the President’s invitation, and stated that
the President’s purpose was to have some conversation
with the delegations of Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland,
Virginia, and Delaware, in explanation of his message of
the 6th instant.
This morning these delegations, or such of them as were
in town, assembled at the White House at the appointed
time, and after some little delay were admitted to an
audience. Mr. Leary and myself were the only members
from Maryland present, and, I think, were the only
members of the delegation at that time in the city. I know
 that Mr. Pearoe, of the Senate, and Messrs. Webster and
Calvert, of the House, were absent.
After the usual salutations, and we were seated, the
President said, in substance, that he had invited us to meet
him to have some conversation with us in explanation of his
message of the 6th; that since he had sent it in several of
the gentlemen then present had visited him, but had
avoided any allusion to the message, and he therefore
inferred that the import of the message had been
misunderstood, and was regarded as inimical to the
interests we represented; and he had resolved he would
talk with us, and disabuse our minds of that erroneous
opinion.
The President then disclaimed any intent to injure the
interests or wound the sensibilities of the slave States. On
the contrary, his purpose was to protect the one and
respect the other; that we were engaged in a terrible,
wasting, and tedious war; immense armies were in the
ﬁeld, and must continue in the ﬁeld as long as the war
lasts; that these armies must, of necessity, be brought into
contact with slaves in the States we represented and in
other States as they advanced; that slaves would come to
the camps, and continual irritation was kept up; that he
was constantly annoyed by conﬂicting and antagonistic
complaints: on the one side a certain class complained if
the slave was not protected by the army; persons were
frequently found who, participating in these views, acted in
a way unfriendly to the slaveholder; on the other hand,
slaveholders complained that their rights were interfered
 with, their slaves induced to abscond and protected within
the lines; these complaints were numerous, loud and deep;
were a serious annoyance to him and embarrassing to the
progress of the war; that it kept alive a spirit hostile to the
government in the States we represented; strengthened the
hopes of the Confederates that at some day the border
States would unite with them, and thus tend to prolong the
war; and he was of opinion, if this resolution should be
adopted by Congress and accepted by our States, these
causes of irritation and these hopes would be removed, and
more would be accomplished toward shortening the war
than could be hoped from the greatest victory achieved by
Union armies; that he made this proposition in good faith,
and desired it to be accepted, if at all, voluntarily, and in
the same patriotic spirit in which it was made; that
emancipation was a subject exclusively under the control of
the States, and must be adopted or rejected by each for
itself; that he did not claim nor had this government any
right to coerce them for that purpose; that such was no
part of his purpose in making this proposition, and he
wished it to be clearly understood; that he did not expect
us there to be prepared to give him an answer, but he
hoped we would take the subject into serious consideration,
confer with one another, and then take such course as we
felt our duty and the interests of our constituents required
of us.
Mr. Noell, of Missouri, said that in his State slavery was
not considered a permanent institution; that natural causes
were there in operation which would at no distant day
 extinguish it, and he did not think that this proposition was
necessary for that; and, besides that, he and his friends felt
solicitous as to the message on account of the diﬀerent
constructions which the resolution and message had
received. The New York Tribune was for it, and understood
it to mean that we must accept gradual emancipation
according to the plan suggested, or get something worse.
The President replied that he must not be expected to
quarrel with the New York Tribune before the right time;
he hoped never to have to do it; he would not anticipate
events. In respect to emancipation in Missouri, he said that
what had been observed by Mr. Noell was probably true,
but the operation of these natural causes had not prevented
the irritating conduct to which he had referred, or
destroyed the hopes of the Confederates that Missouri
would at some time merge herself alongside of them,
which, in his judgment, the passage of this resolution by
Congress and its acceptance by Missouri would accomplish.
Mr. Crisﬁeld, of Maryland, asked what would be the
eﬀect of the refusal of the State to accept this proposal,
and he desired to know if the President looked to any policy
beyond the acceptance or rejection of this scheme.
The President replied that he had no designs beyond the
actions of the States on this particular subject. He should
lament their refusal to accept it, but he had no designs
beyond their refusal of it.
Mr. Menzies, of Kentucky, inquired if the President
thought there was any power except in the States
themselves to carry out his scheme of emancipation.
 The President replied that he thought there could not be.
He then went oﬀ into a course of remarks not qualifying the
foregoing declaration nor material to be repeated to a just
understanding of his meaning.
Mr. Crisﬁeld said he did not think the people of Maryland
looked upon slavery as a permanent institution; and he did
not know that they would be very reluctant to give it up if
provision was made to meet the loss and they could be rid
of the race; but they did not like to be coerced into
emancipation, either by the direct action of the government
or by indirection, as through the emancipation of slaves in
this District, or the conﬁscation of Southern property as
now threatened; and he thought before they would consent
to consider this proposition they would require to be
informed on these points. The President replied that, unless
he was expelled by the act of God or the Confederate
armies he should occupy that house for three years; and as
long as he remained there Maryland had nothing to fear
either for her institutions or her interests on the points
referred to.
Mr. Crisﬁeld immediately added: “Mr. President, if what
you now say could be heard by the people of Maryland,
they would consider your proposition with a much better
feeling than I fear without it they will be inclined to do.”
The President: “That [meaning a publication of what he
said] will not do; it would force me into a quarrel before the
proper time “; and, again intimating, as he had before
done, that a quarrel with the “Greeley faction” was
 impending, he said he did not wish to encounter it before
the proper time, nor at all if it could be avoided.
[The Greely faction wanted an immediate Emancipation
Proclamation. D.W.]
Governor 
Wickliﬀe, 
of 
Kentucky, 
then 
asked 
him
respecting the constitutionality of his scheme.
The President replied: “As you may suppose, I have
considered that; and the proposition now submitted does
not encounter any constitutional diﬀiculty. It proposes
simply to co-operate with any State by giving such State
pecuniary aid”; and he thought that the resolution, as
proposed by him, would be considered rather as the
expression 
of 
a 
sentiment 
than 
as 
involving 
any
constitutional question.
Mr. Hall, of Missouri, thought that if this proposition was
adopted at all it should be by the votes of the free States,
and come as a proposition from them to the slave States,
aﬀording them an inducement to put aside this subject of
discord; that it ought not to be expected that members
representing slaveholding constituencies should declare at
once, and in advance of any proposition to them, for the
emancipation of slavery.
The President said he saw and felt the force of the
objection; it was a fearful responsibility, and every
gentleman must do as he thought best; that he did not
know how this scheme was received by the members from
the free States; some of them had spoken to him and
received it kindly; but for the most part they were as
reserved and chary as we had been, and he could not tell
 how they would vote. And in reply to some expression of
Mr. Hall as to his own opinion regarding slavery, he said he
did not pretend to disguise his anti-slavery feeling; that he
thought it was wrong, and should continue to think so; but
that was not the question we had to deal with now. Slavery
existed, and that, too, as well by the act of the North as of
the South; and in any scheme to get rid of it the North as
well as the South was morally bound to do its full and equal
share. He thought the institution wrong and ought never to
have existed; but yet he recognized the rights of property
which had grown out of it, and would respect those rights
as fully as similar rights in any other property; that
property can exist and does legally exist. He thought such a
law wrong, but the rights of property resulting must be
respected; he would get rid of the odious law, not by
violating the rights, but by encouraging the proposition and
oﬀering inducements to give it up.
Here the interview, so far as this subject is concerned,
terminated by Mr. Crittenden’s assuring the President that,
whatever might be our ﬁnal action, we all thought him
solely moved by a high patriotism and sincere devotion to
the happiness and glory of his country; and with that
conviction we should consider respectfully the important
suggestions he had made.
After some conversation on the current war news, we
retired, and I immediately proceeded to my room and wrote
out this paper. J. W. CRISFIELD.
We were present at the interview described in the
foregoing paper of Mr. Crisﬁeld, and we certify that the
 substance of what passed on the occasion is in this paper
faithfully and fully given.
J. W. MENZIES, J. J. CRITTENDEN, R. MALLORY.
March 10, 1862.
     I
 
        IA  
A  
 
   
. .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 11, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN HAVING personally taken the
ﬁeld at the head of the Army of the Potomac, until
otherwise ordered he is relieved from the command of the
other military departments, he retaining command of the
Department of the Potomac.
Ordered further, That the departments now under the
respective commands of Generals Halleck and Hunter,
together with so much of that under General Buell as lies
west of a north and south line indeﬁnitely drawn through
Knoxville, Tenn., be consolidated and designated the
Department of the Mississippi, and that until otherwise
ordered Major General Halleck have command of said
department.
Ordered also, That the country west of the Department of
the Potomac and east of the Department of the Mississippi
be a military department, to be called the Mountain
Department, and that the same be commanded by Major-
General Fremont.
That all the commanders of departments, after the
receipt of this order by them, respectively report severally
and directly to the Secretary of War, and that prompt, full,
 and frequent reports will be expected of all and each of
them.
A. LINCOLN.
   
       A     A
 
  
 
 
  A
      A
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, March 13, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
GEORGE 
B. 
MCCLELLAN: The
President, having considered the plan of operations agreed
upon by yourself and the commanders of army corps,
makes no objection to the same but gives the following
directions as to its execution: 1. Leave such force at
Manassas Junction as shall make it entirely certain that the
enemy shall no repossess himself of that position and line
of communication.
2. Leave Washington entirely secure.
3. Move the remainder of the force down the Potomac,
choosing a new base at Fortress Monroe or anywhere
between here and there, or, at all events, move such
remainder of the army at once in pursuit of the enemy by
some route.
EDWARD M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
      H  
 A  A    
  
A  A H
    
 
   
A
WASHINGTON, MARCH 13, 1862
I THANK YOU, Mr. Train, for your kindness in presenting me
with this truly elegant and highly creditable specimen of
the handiwork of the mechanics of your State of
Massachusetts, and I beg of you to express my hearty
thanks 
to 
the 
donors. 
It 
displays 
a 
perfection 
of
workmanship which I really wish I had time to acknowledge
in more ﬁtting words, and I might then follow your idea
that it is suggestive, for it is evidently expected that a good
deal of whipping is to be done. But as we meet here socially
let us not think only of whipping rebels, or of those who
seem to think only of whipping negroes, but of those
pleasant days, which it is to be hoped are in store for us,
when seated behind a good pair of horses we can crack our
whips and drive through a peaceful, happy, and prosperous
land. With this idea, gentlemen, I must leave you for my
business duties. [It was likely a Buggy-Whip D.W.]
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON CITY, March 20, 1862.
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
The third section of the “Act further to promote the
eﬀiciency of the Navy,” approved December 21, 1861,
provides:
“That the President of the United States, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, shall have the authority
to detail from the retired list of the navy for the command
of squadrons and single ships such oﬀicers as he may
believe the good of the service requires to be thus placed in
command; 
and 
such 
oﬀicers 
may, 
if 
upon 
the
recommendation of the President of the United States they
shall receive a vote of thanks cf Congress for their services
and gallantry in action against an enemy, be restored to the
active list, and not otherwise.”
In conformity with this law, Captain Samuel F. Du Pont,
of the navy, was nominated to the Senate for continuance
as the ﬂag-oﬀicer in command of the squadron which
recently rendered such important service to the Union in
the expedition to the coasts of South Carolina, Georgia, and
Florida.
Believing that no occasion could arise which would more
fully correspond with the intention of the law or be more
 pregnant with happy inﬂuence as an example, I cordially
recommend that Captain Samuel F. Du Pont receive a vote
of thanks of Congress for his service and gallantry
displayed in the capture since the 21st December, 1861, of
various ports on the coasts of Georgia and Florida,
particularly Brunswick, Cumberland Island and Sound,
Amelia Island, the towns of St. Mary’s, St. Augustine, and
Jacksonville and Fernandina.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
c     A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, MARCH 31, 1862
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN.
MY DEAR SIR:-This morning I felt constrained to order
Blenker’s division to Fremont, and I write this to assure you
I did so with great pain, understanding that you would wish
it otherwise. If you could know the full pressure of the case,
I am conﬁdent that you would justify it, even beyond a mere
acknowledgment that the commander-in-chief may order
what he pleases.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 I   
   
   A  I 
TO MICHAEL CROCK. 360 N. Fourth St., Philadelphia.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 2, 1862.
MY DEAR SIR:-Allow me to thank you in behalf of my
little son for your present of white rabbits. He is very much
pleased with them.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
  I
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, April 3, 1862.
THE SECRETARY OF War will order that one or the other of
the corps of General McDowell and General Sumner remain
in front of Washington until further orders from the
department, to operate at or in the direction of Manassas
Junction, or otherwise, as occasion may require; that the
other Corps not so ordered to remain go forward to General
McClellan as speedily as possible; that General McClellan
commence his forward movements from his new base at
once, and that such incidental modiﬁcations as the
foregoing may render proper be also made. A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
c     A
.
WASHINGTON, April 6, 1862.
GENERAL G. B. McCLELLAN: Yours of 11 A. M. today
received. Secretary of War informs me that the forwarding
of transportation, ammunition, and Woodbury’s brigade,
under your orders, is not, and will not be, interfered with.
You now have over one hundred thousand troops with you,
independent of General Wool’s command. I think you better
break the enemy’s line from Yorktown to Warwick River at
once. This will probably use time as advantageously as you
can.
A. LINCOLN, President
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
c     A
.
WASHINGTON, April 9, 1862
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN.
MY DEAR SIR
 — Your despatches, complaining that you
are not properly sustained, while they do not oﬀend me, do
pain me very much.
Blenker’s division was withdrawn from you before you
left here, and you knew the pressure under which I did it,
and, as I thought, acquiesced in it certainly not without
reluctance.
After you left I ascertained that less than 20,000
unorganized men, without a single ﬁeld battery, were all
you designed to be left for the defense of Washington and
Manassas Junction, and part of this even to go to General
Hooker’s old position; General Banks’s corps, once
designed for Manassas Junction, was divided and tied up on
the line of Winchester and Strasburg, and could not leave it
without again exposing the upper Potomac and the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. This presented (or would
present when McDowell and Sumner should be gone) a
great temptation to the enemy to turn back from the
Rappahannock and sack Washington. My explicit order that
Washington should, by the judgment of all the Commanders
 of corps, be left entirely secure, had been neglected. It was
precisely this that drove me to detain McDowell.
I do not forget that I was satisﬁed with your arrangement
to leave Banks at Manassas Junction; but when that
arrangement was broken up and nothing substituted for it,
of course I was not satisﬁed. I was constrained to substitute
something for it myself.
And now allow me to ask, do you really think I should
permit the line from Richmond via Manaasas Junction to
this city to be entirely open, except what resistance could
be presented by less than 20,000 unorganized troops? This
is a question which the country will not allow me to evade.
There is a curious mystery about the number of the
troops now with you. When I telegraphed you on the 6th,
saying you had over 100,000 with you, I had just obtained
from the Secretary of War a statement, taken as he said
from your own returns, making 108,000 then with you and
en route to you. You now say you will have but 85,000 when
all enroute to you shall have reached you. How can this
discrepancy of 23,000 be accounted for?
As to General Wool’s command, I understand it is doing
for you precisely what a like number of your own would
have to do if that command was away. I suppose the whole
force which has gone forward to you is with you by this
time; and if so, I think it is the precise time for you to strike
a blow. By delay the enemy will relatively gain upon you —
that 
is, 
he 
will 
gain 
faster 
by 
fortiﬁcations 
and
reinforcements than you can by reinforcements alone.
 And once more let me tell you it is indispensable to you
that you strike a blow. I am powerless to help this. You will
do me the justice to remember I always insisted that going
down the bay in search of a ﬁeld, instead of ﬁghting at or
near Manassas, was only shifting and not surmounting a
diﬀiculty; that we would ﬁnd the same enemy and the same
or equal entrenchments at either place. The country will
not fail to note — is noting now — that the present
hesitation to move upon an entrenched enemy is but the
story of Manassas repeated.
I beg to assure you that I have never written you or
spoken to you in greater kindness of feeling than now, nor
with a fuller purpose to sustain you, so far as in my most
anxious judgment I consistently can; but you must act.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 9, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK, SAINT Louis, Mo.: If the
rigor of the conﬁnement of Magoﬀin (Governor of
Kentucky) at Alton is endangering his life, or materially
impairing his health, I wish it mitigated as far as it can be
consistently with his safe detention.
A. LINCOLN.
Please send above, by order of the President. JOHN HAY.
   
  A
A I
    
 
I
 HA
  
I I
  
   I  
 I  
APRIL 10, 1862.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: A Proclamation It has pleased Almighty God to
vouchsafe signal victories to the land and naval forces
engaged in suppressing, an internal rebellion, and at the
same time to avert from our country the dangers of foreign
intervention and invasion.
It is therefore recommended to the people of the United
States that at their next weekly assemblages in their
accustomed places of public worship which shall occur
after notice of this proclamation shall have been received,
they especially acknowledge and render thanks to our
Heavenly Father for these inestimable blessings, that they
then and there implore spiritual consolation in behalf of all
who have been brought into aﬄiction by the casualties and
calamities of sedition and civil war, and that they reverently
invoke the divine guidance for our national counsels, to the
end that they may speedily result in the restoration of
peace, harmony, and unity throughout our borders and
hasten the establishment of fraternal relations among all
the countries of the earth.
 In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this tenth day of April,
A.D. 1862, and of the independence of the United States
the eighty-sixth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
 A 
 I HI
   A     I
 
A HI
 
  
. .
MESSAGE TO CONGRESS. April 16, 1862.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: The act entitled “An act for the relief
of certain persons held to service or labor in the District of
Columbia” has this day been approved and signed.
I have never doubted the constitutional authority of
Congress to abolish slavery in this District, and I have ever
desired to see the national capital freed from the institution
in some satisfactory way. Hence there has never been in my
mind any question on the subject except the one of
expediency, arising in view of all the circumstances. If there
be matters within and about this act which might have
taken a course or shape more satisfactory to my judgment,
I do not attempt to specify them. I am gratiﬁed that the two
principles of compensation and colonization are both
recognized and practically applied in the act.
In the matter of compensation, it is provided that claims
may be presented within ninety days from the passage of
the act, “but not thereafter”; and there is no saving for
minors, femmes covert, insane or absent persons. I
presume this is an omission by mere oversight, and I
recommend that it be supplied by an amendatory or
supplemental act.
 A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
c     A
.
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN: Your despatch of the
19th was received that day. Fredericksburg is evacuated
and the bridges destroyed by the enemy, and a small part of
McDowell’s 
command 
occupies 
this 
side 
of 
the
Rappahannock, opposite the town. He purposes moving his
whole force to that point.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  
  
A     
 
  A
A. LINCOLN. E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,
April 24, 1862.
Hon. POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
MY DEAR SIR: — The member of Congress from the
district including Tiﬀin, O., calls on me about the
postmaster at that place. I believe I turned over a despatch
to you from some persons there, asking a suspension, so as
for them to be heard, or something of the sort. If nothing,
or nothing amounting to anything, has been done, I think
the suspension might now be suspended, and the
commission go forward.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
c     A
.
WASHINGTON, April 29, 1862.
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN:
Would it derange or embarrass your operations if I were
to appoint Captain Charles Griﬀin a brigadier-general of
volunteers? Please answer.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H    
A    
A         .
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: 
IN ANSWER TO the resolution of the Senate [of April 22] in
relation to Brigadier-General Stone, I have the honor to
state that he was arrested and imprisoned under my
general authority, and upon evidence which whether he be
guilty or innocent, required, as appears to me, such
proceedings to be had against him for the public safety. I
deem it incompatible with the public interest, as also,
perhaps, unjust to General Stone, to make a more
particular statement of the evidence.
He has not been tried because, in the state of military
operations at the time of his arrest and since, the oﬀicers to
constitute a court martial and for witnesses could not be
withdrawn from duty without serious injury to the service.
He will be allowed a trial without any unnecessary delay;
the charges and speciﬁcations will be furnished him in due
season, and every facility for his defense will be aﬀorded
him by the War Department.
A. LINCOLN, WASHINGTON, MAY 1, 1862
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
c     A
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, MAY 1, 1862
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLELLAN:
Your call for Parrott guns from Washington alarms me,
chieﬂy because it argues indeﬁnite procrastination. Is
anything to be done?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
WAR DEPARTMENT, MAY 1, 1862
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK, PITTSBURGH Landing,
Tennessee: I am pressed by the Missouri members of
Congress to give General Schoﬁeld independent command
in Missouri. They insist that for want of this their local
troubles gradually grow worse. I have forborne, so far, for
fear of interfering with and embarrassing your operations.
Please answer telling me whether anything, and what, I can
do for them without injuriously interfering with you.
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
   A
  I A   
 H  A
   
A
      
GENTLEMEN: — I welcome here the representatives of
the Evangelical Lutherans of the United States. I accept
with gratitude their assurances of the sympathy and
support of that enlightened, inﬂuential, and loyal class of
my fellow citizens in an important crisis which involves, in
my judgment, not only the civil and religious liberties of our
own dear land, but in a large degree the civil and religious
liberties of mankind in many countries and through many
ages. You well know, gentlemen, and the world knows, how
reluctantly I accepted this issue of battle forced upon me
on my advent to this place by the internal enemies of our
country. You all know, the world knows, the forces and the
resources the public agents have brought into employment
to sustain a government against which there has been
brought not one complaint of real injury committed against
society at home or abroad. You all may recollect that in
taking up the sword thus forced into our hands this
government appealed to the prayers of the pious and the
good, and declared that it placed its whole dependence on
the favor of God. I now humbly and reverently, in your
presence, 
reiterate 
the 
acknowledgment 
of 
that
dependence, not doubting that, if it shall please the Divine
Being who determines the destinies of nations, this shall
 remain a united people, and that they will, humbly seeking
the divine guidance, make their prolonged national
existence a source of new beneﬁts to themselves and their
successors, and to all classes and conditions of mankind.
     
 A
  
   A
 
  I     . 
.
 
  
 
H.
FORT MONROE, VIRGINIA, MAY 7, 1862
FLAG-OFFICER GOLDSBOROUGH.
SIR: — Major-General McClellan telegraphs that he has
ascertained by a reconnaissance that the battery at
Jamestown has been abandoned, and he again requests
that gunboats may be sent up the James River.
If you have tolerable conﬁdence that you can successfully
contend with the Merrimac without the help of the Galena
and two accompanying gunboats, send the Galena and two
gunboats up the James River at once. Please report your
action on this to me at once. I shall be found either at
General Wool’s headquarters or on board the Miami.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H       I
A
 
  
c     A
TO GENERAL G. B. McCLELLAN.
FORT MONROE, VIRGINIA, May 9, 1862
MAJOR-GENERAL McCLELLAN: MY DEAR SIR: — I have
just assisted the Secretary of War in framing part of a
despatch to you relating to army corps, which despatch, of
course, will have reached you long before this will. I wish to
say a few words to you privately on this subject. I ordered
the army corps organization not only on the unanimous
opinion of the twelve generals whom you had selected and
assigned as generals of divisions, but also on the
unanimous opinion of every military man I could get an
opinion from, and every modern military book, yourself only
excepted. Of course, I did not on my own judgment pretend
to understand the subject. I now think it indispensable for
you to know how your struggle against it is received in
quarters which we cannot entirely disregard. It is looked
upon as merely an eﬀort to pamper one or two pets, and to
persecute and degrade their supposed rivals. I have had no
word from Sumner, Heintzleman, or Keyes the commanders
of these corps are, of course, the three highest oﬀicers with
you; but I am constantly told that you have no consultation
or communication with them; that you consult and
communicate with nobody but General Fitz John Porter, and
 perhaps General Franklin. I do not say these complaints are
true or just; but at all events, it is proper you should know
of their existence. Do the commanders of corps disobey
your orders in anything?
When you relieved General Hamilton of his command the
other day, you thereby lost the conﬁdence of at least one of
your best friends in the Senate. And here let me say, not as
applicable 
to 
you 
personally, 
that 
Senators 
and
Representatives speak of me in their places without
question, and that oﬀicers of the army must cease
addressing insulting letters to them for taking no greater
liberty with them.
But to return. Are you strong enough — are you strong
enough even with my help — to set your foot upon the
necks of Sumner, Heintzelman, and Keyes all at once? This
is a practical and very serious question to you?
The success of your army and the cause of the country
are the same, and, of course, I only desire the good of the
cause.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A
 
  I     . 
. 
 
  
 
H
FORT MONROE, VIRGINIA, May 10, 1862
FLAG-OFFICER GOLDSBOROUGH.
MY DEAR SIR: — I send you this copy of your report of
yesterday for the purpose of saying to you in writing that
you are quite right in supposing the movement made by
you and therein reported was made in accordance with my
wishes verbally expressed to you in advance. I avail myself
of the occasion to thank you for your courtesy and all your
conduct, so far as known to me, during my brief visit here.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  AI I
  H    
  A
  
    AI
  
   .
May 12, 1862.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: A Proclamation.
Whereas, by my proclamation of the 19th of April, one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-one, it was declared that
the ports of certain States, including those of Beaufort, in
the State of North Carolina, Port Royal, in the State of
South Carolina, and New Orleans, in the State of Louisiana,
were, for reasons therein set forth, intended to be placed
under blockade; and whereas the said ports of Beaufort,
Port Royal, and New Orleans have since been blockaded;
but as the blockade of the same ports may now be safely
relaxed with advantage to the interests of commerce: Now,
therefore, be it known that I, Abraham Lincoln, President of
the United States, pursuant to the authority in me vested
by the ﬁfth section of the act of Congress approved on the
13th of July last, entitled “An act further to provide for the
collection of duties on imports, and for other purposes,” do
hereby declare that the blockade of the said ports of
Beaufort, Port Royal, and New Orleans shall so far cease
and determine, from and after the ﬁrst day of June next,
that commercial intercourse with those ports, except as to
 persons, things, and information contraband of war, may
from that time be carried on, subject to the laws of the
United States, and to the limitations and in pursuance of
the regulations which are prescribed by the Secretary of
the Treasury in his order of this date, which is appended to
this proclamation.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this twelfth day of May,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-two, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-sixth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
