    
 I     
   I
 
  A     I
 
 IA  
    .
 
  . 
A  
A .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., July 28, 1859.
HON. SAMUEL GALLOWAY.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your very complimentary, not to say
ﬂattering, letter of the 23d inst. is received. Dr. Reynolds
had induced me to expect you here; and I was disappointed
not a little by your failure to come. And yet I fear you have
formed an estimate of me which can scarcely be sustained
on a personal acquaintance.
Two things done by the Ohio Republican convention —
the repudiation of Judge Swan, and the “plank” for a repeal
of the Fugitive Slave Law — I very much regretted. These
two things are of a piece; and they are viewed by many
good men, sincerely opposed to slavery, as a struggle
 against, and in disregard of, the Constitution itself. And it is
the very thing that will greatly endanger our cause, if it be
not kept out of our national convention. There is another
thing our friends are doing which gives me some
uneasiness. It is their leaning toward “popular sovereignty.”
There are three substantial objections to this: First, no
party can command respect which sustains this year what it
opposed 
last. 
Secondly, 
Douglas 
(who 
is 
the 
most
dangerous enemy of liberty, because the most insidious
one) would have little support in the North, and by
consequence, no capital to trade on in the South, if it were
not for his friends thus magnifying him and his humbug.
But lastly, and chieﬂy, Douglas’s popular sovereignty,
accepted by the public mind as a just principle, nationalizes
slavery, and revives the African slave trade inevitably.
Taking slaves into new Territories, and buying slaves in
Africa, are identical things, identical rights or identical
wrongs, and the argument which establishes one will
establish the other. Try a thousand years for a sound reason
why Congress shall not hinder the people of Kansas from
having slaves, and, when you have found it, it will be an
equally good one why Congress should not hinder the
people of Georgia from importing slaves from Africa.
As to Governor Chase, I have a kind side for him. He was
one of the few distinguished men of the nation who gave
us, in Illinois, their sympathy last year. I never saw him, but
suppose him to be able and right-minded; but still he may
not be the most suitable as a candidate for the Presidency.
 I must say I do not think myself ﬁt for the Presidency. As
you propose a correspondence with me, I shall look for your
letters anxiously.
I have not met Dr. Reynolds since receiving your letter;
but when I shall, I will present your respects as requested.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
 I  I   A
  
     
 .
TO HAWKINS TAYLOR
SPRINGFIELD, ILL. SEPT. 6, 1859.
HAWKINS TAYLOR, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 3d is just received. There is
some mistake about my expected attendance of the U.S.
Court in your city on the 3d Tuesday of this month. I have
had no thought of being there.
It is bad to be poor. I shall go to the wall for bread and
meat if I neglect my business this year as well as last. It
would please me much to see the city and good people of
Keokuk, but for this year it is little less than an
impossibility. I am constantly receiving invitations which I
am compelled to decline. I was pressingly urged to go to
Minnesota; and I now have two invitations to go to Ohio.
These last are prompted by Douglas going there; and I am
really tempted to make a ﬂying trip to Columbus and
Cincinnati.
I do hope you will have no serious trouble in Iowa. What
thinks Grimes about it? I have not known him to be
mistaken about an election in Iowa. Present my respects to
Col. Carter, and any other friends, and believe me Yours
truly,
A. LINCOLN.
      H A   
 
 
   
HI
.
SEPTEMBER 16, 1859.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE STATE OF OHIO: I cannot
fail to remember that I appear for the ﬁrst time before an
audience in this now great State, — an audience that is
accustomed to hear such speakers as Corwin, and Chase,
and 
Wade, 
and 
many 
other 
renowned 
men; 
and,
remembering this, I feel that it will be well for you, as for
me, that you should not raise your expectations to that
standard to which you would have been justiﬁed in raising
them had one of these distinguished men appeared before
you. You would perhaps be only preparing a disappointment
for 
yourselves, 
and, 
as 
a 
consequence 
of 
your
disappointment, mortiﬁcation to me. I hope, therefore, that
you will commence with very moderate expectations; and
perhaps, if you will give me your attention, I shall be able
to interest you to a moderate degree.
Appearing here for the ﬁrst time in my life, I have been
somewhat embarrassed for a topic by way of introduction
to my speech; but I have been relieved from that
embarrassment 
by 
an 
introduction 
which 
the 
Ohio
Statesman newspaper gave me this morning. In this paper I
have read an article, in which, among other statements, I
ﬁnd the following:
 “In debating with Senator Douglas during the memorable
contest of last fall, Mr. Lincoln declared in favor of negro
suﬀrage, and attempted to defend that vile conception
against the Little Giant.”
I mention this now, at the opening of my remarks, for the
purpose of making three comments upon it. The ﬁrst I have
already announced, — it furnishes me an introductory
topic; the second is to show that the gentleman is mistaken;
thirdly, to give him an opportunity to correct it.
In the ﬁrst place, in regard to this matter being a
mistake. I have found that it is not entirely safe, when one
is misrepresented under his very nose, to allow the
misrepresentation 
to 
go 
uncontradicted. 
I 
therefore
propose, here at the outset, not only to say that this is a
misrepresentation, but to show conclusively that it is so;
and you will bear with me while I read a couple of extracts
from that very “memorable” debate with Judge Douglas last
year, to which this newspaper refers. In the ﬁrst pitched
battle which Senator Douglas and myself had, at the town
of Ottawa, I used the language which I will now read.
Having been previously reading an extract, I continued as
follows:
“Now, gentlemen, I don’t want to read at any greater
length, but this is the true complexion of all I have ever
said in regard to the institution of slavery and the black
race. This is the whole of it; and anything that argues me
into his idea of perfect social and political equality with the
negro, is but a specious and fantastic arrangement of
words, by which a man can prove a horse-chestnut to be a
 chestnut horse. I will say here, while upon this subject, that
I have no purpose directly or indirectly to interfere with the
institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe
I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to
do so. I have no purpose to introduce political and social
equality between the white and the black races. There is a
physical diﬀerence between the two which, in my
judgment, will probably forbid their ever living together
upon the footing of perfect equality; and inasmuch as it
becomes a necessity that there must be a diﬀerence, I, as
well as Judge Douglas, am in favor of the race to which I
belong having the superior position. I have never said
anything to the contrary, but I hold that, notwithstanding
all this, there is no reason in the world why the negro is not
entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the
Declaration of Independence, — the right to life, liberty and
the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is as much entitled
to these as the white man. I agree with judge Douglas, he is
not my equal in many respects, — certainly not in color,
perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowments. But in the
right to eat the bread, without leave of anybody else, which
his own hand earns, he is my equal, and the equal of Judge
Douglas, and the equal of every living man.”
Upon a subsequent occasion, when the reason for
making a statement like this occurred, I said:
“While I was at the hotel to-day an elderly gentleman
called upon me to know whether I was really in favor of
producing perfect equality between the negroes and white
people. While I had not proposed to myself on this occasion
 to say much on that subject, yet, as the question was asked
me, I thought I would occupy perhaps ﬁve minutes in
saying something in regard to it. I will say, then, that I am
not, nor ever have been, in favor of bringing about in any
way the social and political equality of the white and black
races; that I am not, nor ever have been, in favor of making
voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold
oﬀice, or intermarry with the white people; and I will say in
addition to this that there is a physical diﬀerence between
the white and black races which I believe will forever forbid
the two races living together on terms of social and
political equality. And inasmuch as they can not so live,
while they do remain together there must be the position of
superior and inferior, and I, as much as any other man, am
in favor of having the superior position assigned to the
white race. I say upon this occasion I do not perceive that
because the white man is to have the superior position, the
negro should be denied everything. I do not understand
that because I do not want a negro woman for a slave, I
must necessarily want her for a wife. My understanding is
that I can just let her alone. I am now in my ﬁftieth year,
and I certainly never have had a black woman for either a
slave or a wife. So it seems to me quite possible for us to
get along without making either slaves or wives of negroes.
I will add to this that I have never seen, to my knowledge, a
man, woman, or child, who was in favor of producing
perfect equality, social and political, between negroes and
white men. I recollect of but one distinguished instance
that I ever heard of so frequently as to be satisﬁed of its
 correctness, and that is the case of Judge Douglas’s old
friend Colonel Richard M. Johnson. I will also add to the
remarks I have made (for I am not going to enter at large
upon this subject), that I have never had the least
apprehension that I or my friends would marry negroes, if
there was no law to keep them from it; but as judge
Douglas and his friends seem to be in great apprehension
that they might, if there were no law to keep them from it, I
give him the most solemn pledge that I will to the very last
stand by the law of the State which forbids the marrying of
white people with negroes.”
There, my friends, you have brieﬂy what I have, upon
former occasions, said upon this subject to which this
newspaper, to the extent of its ability, has drawn the public
attention. In it you not only perceive, as a probability, that
in that contest I did not at any time say I was in favor of
negro suﬀrage, but the absolute proof that twice — once
substantially, and once expressly — I declared against it.
Having shown you this, there remains but a word of
comment upon that newspaper article. It is this, that I
presume the editor of that paper is an honest and truth-
loving man, and that he will be greatly obliged to me for
furnishing him thus early an opportunity to correct the
misrepresentation he has made, before it has run so long
that malicious people can call him a liar.
The Giant himself has been here recently. I have seen a
brief report of his speech. If it were otherwise unpleasant
to me to introduce the subject of the negro as a topic for
discussion, I might be somewhat relieved by the fact that
 he dealt exclusively in that subject while he was here. I
shall, therefore, without much hesitation or diﬀidence,
enter upon this subject.
The American people, on the ﬁrst day of January, 1854,
found the African slave trade prohibited by a law of
Congress. In a majority of the States of this Union, they
found African slavery, or any other sort of slavery,
prohibited by State constitutions. They also found a law
existing, supposed to be valid, by which slavery was
excluded from almost all the territory the United States
then owned. This was the condition of the country, with
reference to the institution of slavery, on the ﬁrst of
January, 1854. A few days after that, a bill was introduced
into Congress, which ran through its regular course in the
two branches of the national legislature, and ﬁnally passed
into a law in the month of May, by which the Act of
Congress prohibiting slavery from going into the Territories
of the United States was repealed. In connection with the
law itself, and, in fact, in the terms of the law, the then
existing prohibition was not only repealed, but there was a
declaration of a purpose on the part of Congress never
thereafter to exercise any power that they might have, real
or supposed, to prohibit the extension or spread of slavery.
This was a very great change; for the law thus repealed
was of more than thirty years’ standing. Following rapidly
upon the heels of this action of Congress, a decision of the
Supreme Court is made, by which it is declared that
Congress, if it desires to prohibit the spread of slavery into
the Territories, has no constitutional power to do so. Not
 only so, but that decision lays down principles which, if
pushed to their logical conclusion, — I say pushed to their
logical conclusion, — would decide that the constitutions of
free 
States, 
forbidding 
slavery, 
are 
themselves
unconstitutional. Mark me, I do not say the judges said this,
and let no man say I aﬀirm the judges used these words;
but I only say it is my opinion that what they did say, if
pressed to its logical conclusion, will inevitably result thus.
Looking at these things, the Republican party, as I
understand its principles and policy, believes that there is
great danger of the institution of slavery being spread out
and extended until it is ultimately made alike lawful in all
the States of this Union; so believing, to prevent that
incidental and ultimate consummation is the original and
chief purpose of the Republican organization. I say “chief
purpose” of the Republican organization; for it is certainly
true that if the National House shall fall into the hands of
the Republicans, they will have to attend to all the other
matters of national house-keeping, as well as this. The chief
and real purpose of the Republican party is eminently
conservative. It proposes nothing save and except to
restore this government to its original tone in regard to this
element of slavery, and there to maintain it, looking for no
further change in reference to it than that which the
original framers of the Government themselves expected
and looked forward to.
The chief danger to this purpose of the Republican party
is not just now the revival of the African slave trade, or the
passage of a Congressional slave code, or the declaring of a
 second Dred Scott decision, making slavery lawful in all the
States. These are not pressing us just now. They are not
quite ready yet. The authors of these measures know that
we are too strong for them; but they will be upon us in due
time, and we will be grappling with them hand to hand, if
they are not now headed oﬀ. They are not now the chief
danger to the purpose of the Republican organization; but
the most imminent danger that now threatens that purpose
is that insidious Douglas popular sovereignty. This is the
miner and sapper. While it does not propose to revive the
African slave trade, nor to pass a slave code, nor to make a
second Dred Scott decision, it is preparing us for the
onslaught and charge of these ultimate enemies when they
shall be ready to come on, and the word of command for
them to advance shall be given. I say this “Douglas popular
sovereignty”; for there is a broad distinction, as I now
understand it, between that article and a genuine popular
sovereignty.
I believe there is a genuine popular sovereignty. I think a
deﬁnition of “genuine popular sovereignty,” in the abstract,
would be about this: That each man shall do precisely as he
pleases with himself, and with all those things which
exclusively concern him. Applied to government, this
principle would be, that a general government shall do all
those things which pertain to it, and all the local
governments shall do precisely as they please in respect to
those 
matters 
which 
exclusively 
concern 
them. 
I
understand that this government of the United States,
under which we live, is based upon this principle; and I am
 misunderstood if it is supposed that I have any war to make
upon that principle.
Now, what is judge Douglas’s popular sovereignty? It is,
as a principle, no other than that if one man chooses to
make a slave of another man neither that other man nor
anybody else has a right to object. Applied in government,
as he seeks to apply it, it is this: If, in a new Territory into
which a few people are beginning to enter for the purpose
of making their homes, they choose to either exclude
slavery from their limits or to establish it there, however
one or the other may aﬀect the persons to be enslaved, or
the 
inﬁnitely 
greater 
number 
of 
persons 
who 
are
afterwards to inhabit that Territory, or the other members
of the families of communities, of which they are but an
incipient member, or the general head of the family of
States as parent of all, however their action may aﬀect one
or the other of these, there is no power or right to
interfere. That is Douglas’s popular sovereignty applied.
He has a good deal of trouble with popular sovereignty.
His explanations explanatory of explanations explained are
interminable. The most lengthy, and, as I suppose, the most
maturely considered of this long series of explanations is
his great essay in Harper’s Magazine. I will not attempt to
enter on any very thorough investigation of his argument as
there made and presented. I will nevertheless occupy a
good portion of your time here in drawing your attention to
certain points in it. Such of you as may have read this
document will have perceived that the judge early in the
document quotes from two persons as belonging to the
 Republican party, without naming them, but who can
readily be recognized as being Governor Seward of New
York and myself. It is true that exactly ﬁfteen months ago
this day, I believe, I for the ﬁrst time expressed a sentiment
upon this subject, and in such a manner that it should get
into print, that the public might see it beyond the circle of
my hearers; and my expression of it at that time is the
quotation that Judge Douglas makes. He has not made the
quotation with accuracy, but justice to him requires me to
say that it is suﬀiciently accurate not to change the sense.
The sense of that quotation condensed is this: that this
slavery element is a durable element of discord among us,
and that we shall probably not have perfect peace in this
country with it until it either masters the free principle in
our government, or is so far mastered by the free principle
as for the public mind to rest in the belief that it is going to
its end. This sentiment, which I now express in this way,
was, at no great distance of time, perhaps in diﬀerent
language, and in connection with some collateral ideas,
expressed by Governor Seward. Judge Douglas has been so
much annoyed by the expression of that sentiment that he
has constantly, I believe, in almost all his speeches since it
was uttered, been referring to it. I ﬁnd he alluded to it in
his speech here, as well as in the copyright essay. I do not
now enter upon this for the purpose of making an elaborate
argument to show that we were right in the expression of
that sentiment. In other words, I shall not stop to say all
that might properly be said upon this point, but I only ask
 your attention to it for the purpose of making one or two
points upon it.
If you will read the copyright essay, you will discover that
judge Douglas himself says a controversy between the
American Colonies and the Government of Great Britain
began on the slavery question in 1699, and continued from
that time until the Revolution; and, while he did not say so,
we all know that it has continued with more or less violence
ever since the Revolution.
Then we need not appeal to history, to the declarations of
the framers of the government, but we know from judge
Douglas himself that slavery began to be an element of
discord among the white people of this country as far back
as 1699, or one hundred and sixty years ago, or ﬁve
generations of men, — counting thirty years to a
generation. Now, it would seem to me that it might have
occurred to Judge Douglas, or anybody who had turned his
attention to these facts, that there was something in the
nature of that thing, slavery, somewhat durable for mischief
and discord.
There is another point I desire to make in regard to this
matter, before I leave it. From the adoption of the
Constitution down to 1820 is the precise period of our
history when we had comparative peace upon this question,
— the precise period of time when we came nearer to
having peace about it than any other time of that entire one
hundred and sixty years in which he says it began, or of the
eighty years of our own Constitution. Then it would be
worth our while to stop and examine into the probable
 reason of our coming nearer to having peace then than at
any other time. This was the precise period of time in which
our fathers adopted, and during which they followed, a
policy restricting the spread of slavery, and the whole
Union was acquiescing in it. The whole country looked
forward to the ultimate extinction of the institution. It was
when a policy had been adopted, and was prevailing, which
led all just and right-minded men to suppose that slavery
was gradually coming to an end, and that they might be
quiet about it, watching it as it expired. I think Judge
Douglas might have perceived that too; and whether he did
or not, it is worth the attention of fair-minded men, here
and elsewhere, to consider whether that is not the truth of
the case. If he had looked at these two facts, — that this
matter has been an element of discord for one hundred and
sixty years among this people, and that the only
comparative peace we have had about it was when that
policy prevailed in this government which he now wars
upon, he might then, perhaps, have been brought to a more
just appreciation of what I said ﬁfteen months ago, — that
“a house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe that
this government cannot endure permanently, half slave and
half free. I do not expect the house to fall, I do not expect
the Union to dissolve; but I do expect it will cease to be
divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other. Either
the opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it,
and place it where the public mind will rest in the belief
that it is in the course of ultimate extinction, or its
advocates will push it forward until it shall become alike
 lawful in all the States, old as well as new, North as well as
South.” That was my sentiment at that time. In connection
with it, I said: “We are now far into the ﬁfth year since a
policy was inaugurated with the avowed object and
conﬁdent promise of putting an end to slavery agitation.
Under the operation of the policy that agitation has not
only not ceased, but has constantly augmented.” I now say
to you here that we are advanced still farther into the sixth
year since that policy of Judge Douglas — that popular
sovereignty of his — for quieting the slavery question was
made the national policy. Fifteen months more have been
added since I uttered that sentiment; and I call upon you
and all other right-minded men to say whether that ﬁfteen
months have belied or corroborated my words.
While I am here upon this subject, I cannot but express
gratitude that this true view of this element of discord
among us — as I believe it is — is attracting more and more
attention. I do not believe that Governor Seward uttered
that sentiment because I had done so before, but because
he reﬂected upon this subject and saw the truth of it. Nor
do I believe because Governor Seward or I uttered it that
Mr. Hickman of Pennsylvania, in, diﬀerent language, since
that time, has declared his belief in the utter antagonism
which exists between the principles of liberty and slavery.
You see we are multiplying. Now, while I am speaking of
Hickman, let me say, I know but little about him. I have
never seen him, and know scarcely anything about the
man; but I will say this much of him: Of all the anti-
Lecompton Democracy that have been brought to my
 notice, he alone has the true, genuine ring of the metal.
And now, without indorsing anything else he has said, I will
ask this audience to give three cheers for Hickman. [The
audience 
responded 
with 
three 
rousing 
cheers 
for
Hickman.]
Another point in the copyright essay to which I would ask
your attention is rather a feature to be extracted from the
whole thing, than from any express declaration of it at any
point. It is a general feature of that document, and, indeed,
of all of Judge Douglas’s discussions of this question, that
the Territories of the United States and the States of this
Union are exactly alike; that there is no diﬀerence between
them at all; that the Constitution applies to the Territories
precisely as it does to the States; and that the United
States Government, under the Constitution, may not do in a
State what it may not do in a Territory, and what it must do
in a State it must do in a Territory. Gentlemen, is that a true
view of the case? It is necessary for this squatter
sovereignty, but is it true?
Let us consider. What does it depend upon? It depends
altogether upon the proposition that the States must,
without the interference of the General Government, do all
those things that pertain exclusively to themselves, — that
are local in their nature, that have no connection with the
General Government. After Judge Douglas has established
this proposition, which nobody disputes or ever has
disputed, he proceeds to assume, without proving it, that
slavery is one of those little, unimportant, trivial matters
which are of just about as much consequence as the
 question would be to me whether my neighbor should raise
horned cattle or plant tobacco; that there is no moral
question about it, but that it is altogether a matter of
dollars and cents; that when a new Territory is opened for
settlement, the ﬁrst man who goes into it may plant there a
thing which, like the Canada thistle or some other of those
pests of the soil, cannot be dug out by the millions of men
who will come thereafter; that it is one of those little things
that is so trivial in its nature that it has nor eﬀect upon
anybody save the few men who ﬁrst plant upon the soil;
that it is not a thing which in any way aﬀects the family of
communities 
composing 
these 
States, 
nor 
any 
way
endangers the General Government. Judge Douglas ignores
altogether the very well known fact that we have never had
a serious menace to our political existence, except it sprang
from this thing, which he chooses to regard as only upon a
par with onions and potatoes.
Turn it, and contemplate it in another view. He says that,
according 
to 
his 
popular 
sovereignty, 
the 
General
Government may give to the Territories governors, judges,
marshals, secretaries, and all the other chief men to govern
them, but they, must not touch upon this other question.
Why? The question of who shall be governor of a Territory
for a year or two, and pass away, without his track being
left upon the soil, or an act which he did for good or for evil
being left behind, is a question of vast national magnitude;
it is so much opposed in its nature to locality that the
nation itself must decide it: while this other matter of
planting slavery upon a soil, — a thing which, once planted,
 cannot be eradicated by the succeeding millions who have
as much right there as the ﬁrst comers, or, if eradicated,
not without inﬁnite diﬀiculty and a long struggle, he
considers the power to prohibit it as one of these little
local, trivial things that the nation ought not to say a word
about; that it aﬀects nobody save the few men who are
there.
Take these two things and consider them together,
present the question of planting a State with the institution
of slavery by the side of a question who shall be Governor
of Kansas for a year or two, and is there a man here, is
there a man on earth, who would not say the governor
question is the little one, and the slavery question is the
great one? I ask any honest Democrat if the small, the
local, and the trivial and temporary question is not, Who
shall be governor? while the durable, the important, and
the mischievous one is, Shall this soil be planted with
slavery?
This is an idea, I suppose, which has arisen in Judge
Douglas’s mind from his peculiar structure. I suppose the
institution of slavery really looks small to him. He is so put
up by nature that a lash upon his back would hurt him, but
a lash upon anybody else’s back does not hurt him. That is
the build of the man, and consequently he looks upon the
matter of slavery in this unimportant light.
Judge 
Douglas 
ought 
to 
remember, 
when 
he 
is
endeavoring to force this policy upon the American people,
that while he is put up in that way, a good many are not. He
ought to remember that there was once in this country a
 man by the name of Thomas Jeﬀerson, supposed to be a
Democrat, — a man whose principles and policy are not
very prevalent amongst Democrats to-day, it is true; but
that man did not take exactly this view of the insigniﬁcance
of the element of slavery which our friend judge Douglas
does. In contemplation of this thing, we all know he was led
to exclaim, “I tremble for my country when I remember
that God is just!” We know how he looked upon it when he
thus expressed himself. There was danger to this country,
— danger of the avenging justice of God, in that little
unimportant 
popular 
sovereignty 
question 
of 
judge
Douglas. He supposed there was a question of God’s
eternal justice wrapped up in the enslaving of any race of
men, or any man, and that those who did so braved the arm
of Jehovah; that when a nation thus dared the Almighty,
every friend of that nation had cause to dread his wrath.
Choose ye between Jeﬀerson and Douglas as to what is the
true view of this element among us.
There is another little diﬀiculty about this matter of
treating the Territories and States alike in all things, to
which I ask your attention, and I shall leave this branch of
the case. If there is no diﬀerence between them, why not
make the Territories States at once? What is the reason
that Kansas was not ﬁt to come into the Union when it was
organized into a Territory, in Judge Douglas’s view? Can
any of you tell any reason why it should not have come into
the Union at once? They are ﬁt, as he thinks, to decide
upon the slavery question, — the largest and most
important with which they could possibly deal: what could
 they do by coming into the Union that they are not ﬁt to do,
according to his view, by staying out of it? Oh, they are not
ﬁt to sit in Congress and decide upon the rates of postage,
or questions of ad valorem or speciﬁc duties on foreign
goods, or live-oak timber contracts, they are not ﬁt to
decide these vastly important matters, which are national
in their import, but they are ﬁt, “from the jump,” to decide
this little negro question. But, gentlemen, the case is too
plain; I occupy too much time on this head, and I pass on.
Near the close of the copyright essay, the judge, I think,
comes very near kicking his own fat into the ﬁre. I did not
think, when I commenced these remarks, that I would read
that article, but I now believe I will:
“This exposition of the history of these measures shows
conclusively that the authors of the Compromise measures
of 1850 and of the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854, as well as
the members of the Continental Congress of 1774., and the
founders of our system of government subsequent to the
Revolution, regarded the people of the Territories and
Colonies as political communities which were entitled to a
free and exclusive power of legislation in their provisional
legislatures, where their representation could alone be
preserved, in all cases of taxation and internal polity.”
When the judge saw that putting in the word “slavery”
would contradict his own history, he put in what he knew
would pass synonymous with it, “internal polity.” Whenever
we ﬁnd that in one of his speeches, the substitute is used in
this manner; and I can tell you the reason. It would be too
bald a contradiction to say slavery; but “internal polity” is a
 general phrase, which would pass in some quarters, and
which he hopes will pass with the reading community for
the same thing.
“This right pertains to the people collectively, as a law-
abiding and peaceful community, and not in the isolated
individuals who may wander upon the public domain in
violation of the law. It can only be exercised where there
are inhabitants suﬀicient to constitute a government, and
capable of performing its various functions and duties, — a
fact to be ascertained and determined by” who do you
think? Judge Douglas says “by Congress!” “Whether the
number shall be ﬁxed at ten, ﬁfteen or twenty thousand
inhabitants, does not aﬀect the principle.”
Now, I have only a few comments to make. Popular
sovereignty, by his own words, does not pertain to the few
persons who wander upon the public domain in violation of
law. We have his words for that. When it does pertain to
them, is when they are suﬀicient to be formed into an
organized political community, and he ﬁxes the minimum
for that at ten thousand, and the maximum at twenty
thousand. Now, I would like to know what is to be done
with the nine thousand? Are they all to be treated, until
they are large enough to be organized into a political
community, as wanderers upon the public land, in violation
of law? And if so treated and driven out, at what point of
time would there ever be ten thousand? If they were not
driven out, but remained there as trespassers upon the
public land in violation of the law, can they establish
slavery there? No; the judge says popular sovereignty don’t
 pertain to them then. Can they exclude it then? No; popular
sovereignty don’t pertain to them then. I would like to
know, in the case covered by the essay, what condition the
people of the Territory are in before they reach the number
of ten thousand?
But the main point I wish to ask attention to is, that the
question as to when they shall have reached a suﬀicient
number to be formed into a regular organized community is
to be decided “by Congress.” Judge Douglas says so. Well,
gentlemen, that is about all we want. No, that is all the
Southerners want. That is what all those who are for
slavery want. They do not want Congress to prohibit
slavery from coming into the new Territories, and they do
not want popular sovereignty to hinder it; and as Congress
is to say when they are ready to be organized, all that the
South has to do is to get Congress to hold oﬀ. Let Congress
hold oﬀ until they are ready to be admitted as a State, and
the South has all it wants in taking slavery into and
planting it in all the Territories that we now have or
hereafter may have. In a word, the whole thing, at a dash of
the pen, is at last put in the power of Congress; for if they
do not have this popular sovereignty until Congress
organizes them, I ask if it at last does not come from
Congress? If, at last, it amounts to anything at all, Congress
gives it to them. I submit this rather for your reﬂection
than for comment. After all that is said, at last, by a dash of
the pen, everything that has gone before is undone, and he
puts the whole question under the control of Congress.
After ﬁghting through more than three hours, if you
 undertake to read it, he at last places the whole matter
under the control of that power which he has been
contending against, and arrives at a result directly contrary
to what he had been laboring to do. He at last leaves the
whole matter to the control of Congress.
There are two main objects, as I understand it, of this
Harper’s Magazine essay. One was to show, if possible, that
the men of our Revolutionary times were in favor of his
popular sovereignty, and the other was to show that the
Dred Scott decision had not entirely squelched out this
popular sovereignty. I do not propose, in regard to this
argument drawn from the history of former times, to enter
into a detailed examination of the historical statements he
has made. I have the impression that they are inaccurate in
a great many instances, — sometimes in positive statement,
but very much more inaccurate by the suppression of
statements that really belong to the history. But I do not
propose to aﬀirm that this is so to any very great extent, or
to enter into a very minute examination of his historical
statements. I avoid doing so upon this principle, — that if it
were important for me to pass out of this lot in the least
period of time possible, and I came to that fence, and saw
by a calculation of my known strength and agility that I
could clear it at a bound, it would be folly for me to stop
and consider whether I could or not crawl through a crack.
So I say of the whole history contained in his essay where
he endeavored to link the men of the Revolution to popular
sovereignty. It only requires an eﬀort to leap out of it, a
single bound to be entirely successful. If you read it over,
 you will ﬁnd that he quotes here and there from documents
of the Revolutionary times, tending to show that the people
of the colonies were desirous of regulating their own
concerns in their own way, that the British Government
should not interfere; that at one time they struggled with
the British Government to be permitted to exclude the
African slave trade, — if not directly, to be permitted to
exclude it indirectly, by taxation suﬀicient to discourage
and destroy it. From these and many things of this sort,
judge Douglas argues that they were in favor of the people
of our own Territories excluding slavery if they wanted to,
or planting it there if they wanted to, doing just as they
pleased from the time they settled upon the Territory. Now,
however his history may apply and whatever of his
argument there may be that is sound and accurate or
unsound and inaccurate, if we can ﬁnd out what these men
did themselves do upon this very question of slavery in the
Territories, does it not end the whole thing? If, after all this
labor and eﬀort to show that the men of the Revolution
were in favor of his popular sovereignty and his mode of
dealing with slavery in the Territories, we can show that
these very men took hold of that subject, and dealt with it,
we can see for ourselves how they dealt with it. It is not a
matter of argument or inference, but we know what they
thought about it.
It is precisely upon that part of the history of the country
that one important omission is made by Judge Douglas. He
selects parts of the history of the United States upon the
subject of slavery, and treats it as the whole, omitting from
 his historical sketch the legislation of Congress in regard to
the 
admission 
of 
Missouri, 
by 
which 
the 
Missouri
Compromise was established and slavery excluded from a
country half as large as the present United States. All this
is left out of his history, and in nowise alluded to by him, so
far as I can remember, save once, when he makes a remark,
that upon his principle the Supreme Court were authorized
to pronounce a decision that the act called the Missouri
Compromise was unconstitutional. All that history has been
left out. But this part of the history of the country was not
made by the men of the Revolution.
There was another part of our political history, made by
the very men who were the actors in the Revolution, which
has taken the name of the Ordinance of ‘87. Let me bring
that history to your attention. In 1784, I believe, this same
Mr. Jeﬀerson drew up an ordinance for the government of
the country upon which we now stand, or, rather, a frame
or draft of an ordinance for the government of this country,
here in Ohio, our neighbors in Indiana, us who live in
Illinois, our neighbors in Wisconsin and Michigan. In that
ordinance, drawn up not only for the government of that
Territory, but for the Territories south of the Ohio River, Mr.
Jeﬀerson expressly provided for the prohibition of slavery.
Judge Douglas says, and perhaps is right, that that
provision was lost from that ordinance. I believe that is
true. When the vote was taken upon it, a majority of all
present in the Congress of the Confederation voted for it;
but there were so many absentees that those voting for it
did not make the clear majority necessary, and it was lost.
 But 
three 
years 
after 
that, 
the 
Congress 
of 
the
Confederation were together again, and they adopted a
new ordinance for the government of this Northwest
Territory, not contemplating territory south of the river, for
the States owning that territory had hitherto refrained from
giving it to the General Government; hence they made the
ordinance to apply only to what the Government owned. In
fact, the provision excluding slavery was inserted aside,
passed unanimously, or at any rate it passed and became a
part of the law of the land. Under that ordinance we live.
First here in Ohio you were a Territory; then an enabling
act was passed, authorizing you to form a constitution and
State Government, provided it was republican and not in
conﬂict with the Ordinance of ‘87. When you framed your
constitution and presented it for admission, I think you will
ﬁnd the legislation upon the subject will show that,
whereas you had formed a constitution that was republican,
and not in conﬂict with the Ordinance of ‘87, therefore you
were admitted upon equal footing with the original States.
The same process in a few years was gone through with in
Indiana, and so with Illinois, and the same substantially
with Michigan and Wisconsin.
Not only did that Ordinance prevail, but it was constantly
looked to whenever a step was taken by a new Territory to
become a State. Congress always turned their attention to
it, and in all their movements upon this subject they traced
their course by that Ordinance of ‘87. When they admitted
new States, they advertised them of this Ordinance, as a
part of the legislation of the country. They did so because
 they had traced the Ordinance of ‘87 throughout the
history of this country. Begin with the men of the
Revolution, and go down for sixty entire years, and until the
last scrap of that Territory comes into the Union in the form
of the State of Wisconsin, everything was made to conform
with the Ordinance of ‘87, excluding slavery from that vast
extent of country.
I omitted to mention in the right place that the
Constitution of the United States was in process of being
framed when that Ordinance was made by the Congress of
the Confederation; and one of the ﬁrst Acts of Congress
itself, under the new Constitution itself, was to give force to
that Ordinance by putting power to carry it out in the
hands of the new oﬀicers under the Constitution, in the
place of the old ones, who had been legislated out of
existence by the change in the Government from the
Confederation to the Constitution. Not only so, but I believe
Indiana once or twice, if not Ohio, petitioned the General
Government for the privilege of suspending that provision
and allowing them to have slaves. A report made by Mr.
Randolph, of Virginia, himself a slaveholder, was directly
against it, and the action was to refuse them the privilege
of violating the Ordinance of ‘87.
This period of history, which I have run over brieﬂy, is, I
presume, as familiar to most of this assembly as any other
part of the history of our country. I suppose that few of my
hearers are not as familiar with that part of history as I am,
and I only mention it to recall your attention to it at this
time. And hence I ask how extraordinary a thing it is that a
 man who has occupied a position upon the ﬂoor of the
Senate of the United States, who is now in his third term,
and who looks to see the government of this whole country
fall into his own hands, pretending to give a truthful and
accurate history o the slavery question in this country,
should so entirely ignore the whole of that portion of our
history — the most important of all. Is it not a most
extraordinary spectacle that a man should stand up and ask
for any conﬁdence in his statements who sets out as he
does with portions of history, calling upon the people to
believe that it is a true and fair representation, when the
leading part and controlling feature of the whole history is
carefully suppressed?
But the mere leaving out is not the most remarkable
feature of this most remarkable essay. His proposition is to
establish that the leading men of the Revolution were for
his great principle of nonintervention by the government in
the question of slavery in the Territories, while history
shows that they decided, in the cases actually brought
before them, in exactly the contrary way, and he knows it.
Not only did they so decide at that time, but they stuck to it
during sixty years, through thick and thin, as long as there
was one of the Revolutionary heroes upon the stage of
political action. Through their whole course, from ﬁrst to
last, they clung to freedom. And now he asks the
community to believe that the men of the Revolution were
in favor of his great principle, when we have the naked
history that they themselves dealt with this very subject
matter of his principle, and utterly repudiated his principle,
 acting upon a precisely contrary ground. It is as impudent
and absurd as if a prosecuting attorney should stand up
before a jury and ask them to convict A as the murderer of
B, while B was walking alive before them.
I say, again, if judge Douglas asserts that the men of the
Revolution acted upon principles by which, to be consistent
with themselves, they ought to have adopted his popular
sovereignty, then, upon a consideration of his own
argument, he had a right to make you believe that they
understood the principles of government, but misapplied
them, that he has arisen to enlighten the world as to the
just application of this principle. He has a right to try to
persuade you that he understands their principles better
than they did, and, therefore, he will apply them now, not
as they did, but as they ought to have done. He has a right
to go before the community and try to convince them of
this, but he has no right to attempt to impose upon any one
the belief that these men themselves approved of his great
principle. There are two ways of establishing a proposition.
One is by trying to demonstrate it upon reason, and the
other is, to show that great men in former times have
thought so and so, and thus to pass it by the weight of pure
authority. Now, if Judge Douglas will demonstrate somehow
that this is popular sovereignty, — the right of one man to
make a slave of another, without any right in that other or
any one else to object, — demonstrate it as Euclid
demonstrated propositions, — there is no objection. But
when he comes forward, seeking to carry a principle by
bringing to it the authority of men who themselves utterly
 repudiate that principle, I ask that he shall not be
permitted to do it.
I see, in the judge’s speech here, a short sentence in
these words: “Our fathers, when they formed this
government under which we live, understood this question
just as well, and even better than, we do now.” That is true;
I stick to that. I will stand by Judge Douglas in that to the
bitter end. And now, Judge Douglas, come and stand by me,
and truthfully show how they acted, understanding it better
than we do. All I ask of you, Judge Douglas, is to stick to the
proposition that the men of the Revolution understood this
subject better than we do now, and with that better
understanding they acted better than you are trying to act
now.
I wish to say something now in regard to the Dred Scott
decision, as dealt with by Judge Douglas. In that
“memorable debate” between Judge Douglas and myself,
last year, the judge thought ﬁt to commence a process of
catechising me, and at Freeport I answered his questions,
and propounded some to him. Among others propounded to
him was one that I have here now. The substance, as I
remember it, is, “Can the people of a United States
Territory, under the Dred Scott decision, in any lawful way,
against the wish of any citizen of the United States, exclude
slavery from its limits, prior to the formation of a State
constitution?” He answered that they could lawfully
exclude slavery from the United States Territories,
notwithstanding the Dred Scot decision. There was
 something about that answer that has probably been a
trouble to the judge ever since.
The Dred Scott decision expressly gives every citizen of
the United States a right to carry his slaves into the United
States Territories. And now there was some inconsistency
in saying that the decision was right, and saying, too, that
the people of the Territory could lawfully drive slavery out
again. When all the trash, the words, the collateral matter,
was cleared away from it, all the chaﬀ was fanned out of it,
it was a bare absurdity, — no less than that a thing may be
lawfully driven away from where it has a lawful right to be.
Clear it of all the verbiage, and that is the naked truth of
his proposition, — that a thing may be lawfully driven from
the place where it has a lawful right to stay. Well, it was
because the judge could n’t help seeing this that he has had
so much trouble with it; and what I want to ask your
especial attention to, just now, is to remind you, if you have
not noticed the fact, that the judge does not any longer say
that the people can exclude slavery. He does not say so in
the copyright essay; he did not say so in the speech that he
made here; and, so far as I know, since his re-election to
the Senate he has never said, as he did at Freeport, that
the people of the Territories can exclude slavery. He desires
that you, who wish the Territories to remain free, should
believe that he stands by that position; but he does not say
it himself. He escapes to some extent the absurd position I
have stated, by changing his language entirely. What he
says now is something diﬀerent in language, and we will
consider whether it is not diﬀerent in sense too. It is now
 that the Dred Scott decision, or rather the Constitution
under that decision, does not carry slavery into the
Territories beyond the power of the people of the
Territories to control it as other property. He does not say
the people can drive it out, but they can control it as other
property. The language is diﬀerent; we should consider
whether the sense is diﬀerent. Driving a horse out of this
lot is too plain a proposition to be mistaken about; it is
putting him on the other side of the fence. Or it might be a
sort of exclusion of him from the lot if you were to kill him
and let the worms devour him; but neither of these things
is the same as “controlling him as other property.” That
would be to feed him, to pamper him, to ride him, to use
and abuse him, to make the most money out of him, “as
other property”; but, please you, what do the men who are
in favor of slavery want more than this? What do they really
want, other than that slavery, being in the Territories, shall
be controlled as other property? If they want anything else,
I do not comprehend it. I ask your attention to this, ﬁrst, for
the purpose of pointing out the change of ground the judge
has made; and, in the second place, the importance of the
change, — that that change is not such as to give you
gentlemen who want his popular sovereignty the power to
exclude the institution or drive it out at all. I know the
judge 
sometimes 
squints 
at 
the 
argument 
that 
in
controlling it as other property by unfriendly legislation
they may control it to death; as you might, in the case of a
horse, perhaps, feed him so lightly and ride him so much
that he would die. But when you come to legislative control,
 there is something more to be attended to. I have no doubt,
myself, that if the Territories should undertake to control
slave property as other property that is, control it in such a
way that it would be the most valuable as property, and
make it bear its just proportion in the way of burdens as
property, really deal with it as property, — the Supreme
Court of the United States will say, “God speed you, and
amen.” But I undertake to give the opinion, at least, that if
the Territories attempt by any direct legislation to drive the
man with his slave out of the Territory, or to decide that his
slave is free because of his being taken in there, or to tax
him to such an extent that he cannot keep him there, the
Supreme 
Court 
will 
unhesitatingly 
decide 
all 
such
legislation unconstitutional, as long as that Supreme Court
is constructed as the Dred Scott Supreme Court is. The ﬁrst
two things they have already decided, except that there is a
little quibble among lawyers between the words “dicta” and
“decision.” They have already decided a negro cannot be
made free by Territorial legislation.
What is the Dred Scott decision? Judge Douglas labors to
show that it is one thing, while I think it is altogether
diﬀerent. It is a long opinion, but it is all embodied in this
short statement: “The Constitution of the United States
forbids Congress to deprive a man of his property, without
due process of law; the right of property in slaves is
distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in that Constitution:
therefore, if Congress shall undertake to say that a man’s
slave is no longer his slave when he crosses a certain line
into a Territory, that is depriving him of his property
 without due process of law, and is unconstitutional.” There
is the whole Dred Scott decision. They add that if Congress
cannot do so itself, Congress cannot confer any power to do
so; and hence any eﬀort by the Territorial Legislature to do
either of these things is absolutely decided against. It is a
foregone conclusion by that court.
Now, as to this indirect mode by “unfriendly legislation,”
all lawyers here will readily understand that such a
proposition cannot be tolerated for a moment, because a
legislature cannot indirectly do that which it cannot
accomplish directly. Then I say any legislation to control
this property, as property, for its beneﬁt as property, would
be hailed by this Dred Scott Supreme Court, and fully
sustained; but any legislation driving slave property out, or
destroying it as property, directly or indirectly, will most
assuredly, by that court, be held unconstitutional.
Judge Douglas says if the Constitution carries slavery
into the Territories, beyond the power of the people of the
Territories to control it as other property; then it follows
logically that every one who swears to support the
Constitution of the United States must give that support to
that property which it needs. And, if the Constitution
carries slavery into the Territories, beyond the power of the
people, to control it as other property, then it also carries it
into the States, because the Constitution is the supreme
law of the land. Now, gentlemen, if it were not for my
excessive modesty, I would say that I told that very thing to
Judge Douglas quite a year ago. This argument is here in
print, and if it were not for my modesty, as I said, I might
 call your attention to it. If you read it, you will ﬁnd that I
not only made that argument, but made it better than he
has made it since.
There is, however, this diﬀerence: I say now, and said
then, there is no sort of question that the Supreme Court
has decided that it is the right of the slave holder to take
his slave and hold him in the Territory; and saying this,
judge Douglas himself admits the conclusion. He says if
that is so, this consequence will follow; and because this
consequence would follow, his argument is, the decision
cannot, therefore, be that way,— “that would spoil my
popular sovereignty; and it cannot be possible that this
great 
principle 
has 
been 
squelched 
out 
in 
this
extraordinary way. It might be, if it were not for the
extraordinary consequences of spoiling my humbug.”
Another feature of the judge’s argument about the Dred
Scott case is, an eﬀort to show that that decision deals
altogether 
in 
declarations 
of 
negatives; 
that 
the
Constitution does not aﬀirm anything as expounded by the
Dred Scott decision, but it only declares a want of power a
total absence of power, in reference to the Territories. It
seems to be his purpose to make the whole of that decision
to result in a mere negative declaration of a want of power
in Congress to do anything in relation to this matter in the
Territories. I know the opinion of the Judges states that
there is a total absence of power; but that is, unfortunately;
not all it states: for the judges add that the right of
property in a slave is distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in
the Constitution. It does not stop at saying that the right of
 property in a slave is recognized in the Constitution, is
declared to exist somewhere in the Constitution, but says it
is aﬀirmed in the Constitution. Its language is equivalent to
saying that it is embodied and so woven in that instrument
that 
it 
cannot 
be 
detached 
without 
breaking 
the
Constitution itself. In a word, it is part of the Constitution.
Douglas is singularly unfortunate in his eﬀort to make
out that decision to be altogether negative, when the
express language at the vital part is that this is distinctly
aﬀirmed in the Constitution. I think myself, and I repeat it
here, that this decision does not merely carry slavery into
the Territories, but by its logical conclusion it carries it into
the States in which we live. One provision of that
Constitution is, that it shall be the supreme law of the land,
— I do not quote the language, — any constitution or law of
any State to the contrary notwithstanding. This Dred Scott
decision says that the right of property in a slave is
aﬀirmed in that Constitution which is the supreme law of
the land, any State constitution or law notwithstanding.
Then I say that to destroy a thing which is distinctly
aﬀirmed and supported by the supreme law of the land,
even by a State constitution or law, is a violation of that
supreme law, and there is no escape from it. In my
judgment there is no avoiding that result, save that the
American people shall see that constitutions are better
construed than our Constitution is construed in that
decision. They must take care that it is more faithfully and
truly carried out than it is there expounded.
 I must hasten to a conclusion. Near the beginning of my
remarks I said that this insidious Douglas popular
sovereignty is the measure that now threatens the purpose
of the Republican party to prevent slavery from being
nationalized in the United States. I propose to ask your
attention for a little while to some propositions in
aﬀirmance of that statement. Take it just as it stands, and
apply it as a principle; extend and apply that principle
elsewhere; and consider where it will lead you. I now put
this proposition, that Judge Douglas’s popular sovereignty
applied will reopen the African slave trade; and I will
demonstrate it by any variety of ways in which you can turn
the subject or look at it.
The Judge says that the people of the Territories have the
right, by his principle, to have slaves, if they want them.
Then I say that the people in Georgia have the right to buy
slaves in Africa, if they want them; and I defy any man on
earth to show any distinction between the two things, — to
show that the one is either more wicked or more unlawful;
to show, on original principles, that one is better or worse
than the other; or to show, by the Constitution, that one
diﬀers a whit from the other. He will tell me, doubtless, that
there is no constitutional provision against people taking
slaves into the new Territories, and I tell him that there is
equally no constitutional provision against buying slaves in
Africa. He will tell you that a people, in the exercise of
popular sovereignty, ought to do as they please about that
thing, and have slaves if they want them; and I tell you that
the people of Georgia are as much entitled to popular
 sovereignty and to buy slaves in Africa, if they want them,
as the people of the Territory are to have slaves if they
want them. I ask any man, dealing honestly with himself, to
point out a distinction.
I have recently seen a letter of Judge Douglas’s in which,
without stating that to be the object, he doubtless
endeavors to make a distinction between the two. He says
he is unalterably opposed to the repeal of the laws against
the African slave trade. And why? He then seeks to give a
reason that would not apply to his popular sovereignty in
the Territories. What is that reason? “The abolition of the
African slave trade is a compromise of the Constitution!” I
deny it. There is no truth in the proposition that the
abolition of the African slave trade is a compromise of the
Constitution. No man can put his ﬁnger on anything in the
Constitution, or on the line of history, which shows it. It is a
mere barren assertion, made simply for the purpose of
getting up a distinction between the revival of the African
slave trade and his “great principle.”
At the time the Constitution of the United States was
adopted, it was expected that the slave trade would be
abolished. I should assert and insist upon that, if judge
Douglas denied it. But I know that it was equally expected
that slavery would be excluded from the Territories, and I
can show by history that in regard to these two things
public opinion was exactly alike, while in regard to positive
action, there was more done in the Ordinance of ‘87 to
resist the spread of slavery than was ever done to abolish
the foreign slave trade. Lest I be misunderstood, I say
 again that at the time of the formation of the Constitution,
public expectation was that the slave trade would be
abolished, but no more so than the spread of slavery in the
Territories should be restrained. They stand alike, except
that in the Ordinance of ‘87 there was a mark left by public
opinion, showing that it was more committed against the
spread of slavery in the Territories than against the foreign
slave trade.
Compromise! What word of compromise was there about
it? Why, the public sense was then in favor of the abolition
of the slave trade; but there was at the time a very great
commercial interest involved in it, and extensive capital in
that branch of trade. There were doubtless the incipient
stages of improvement in the South in the way of farming,
dependent on the slave trade, and they made a proposition
to Congress to abolish the trade after allowing it twenty
years, — a suﬀicient time for the capital and commerce
engaged in it to be transferred to other channel. They made
no provision that it should be abolished in twenty years; I
do not doubt that they expected it would be, but they made
no bargain about it. The public sentiment left no doubt in
the minds of any that it would be done away. I repeat, there
is nothing in the history of those times in favor of that
matter being a compromise of the constitution. It was the
public expectation at the time, manifested in a thousand
ways, that the spread of slavery should also be restricted.
Then I say, if this principle is established, that there is no
wrong in slavery, and whoever wants it has a right to have
it, is a matter of dollars and cents, a sort of question as to
 how they shall deal with brutes, that between us and the
negro here there is no sort of question, but that at the
South the question is between the negro and the crocodile,
that is all, it is a mere matter of policy, there is a perfect
right, according to interest, to do just as you please, —
when this is done, where this doctrine prevails, the miners
and sappers will have formed public opinion for the slave
trade. They will be ready for Jeﬀ. Davis and Stephens and
other leaders of that company to sound the bugle for the
revival of the slave trade, for the second Dred Scott
decision, for the ﬂood of slavery to be poured over the free
States, while we shall be here tied down and helpless and
run over like sheep.
It is to be a part and parcel of this same idea to say to
men who want to adhere to the Democratic party, who have
always belonged to that party, and are only looking about
for some excuse to stick to it, but nevertheless hate slavery,
that Douglas’s popular sovereignty is as good a way as any
to oppose slavery. They allow themselves to be persuaded
easily, in accordance with their previous dispositions, into
this belief, that it is about as good a way of opposing
slavery as any, and we can do that without straining our old
party ties or breaking up old political associations. We can
do so without being called negro-worshipers. We can do
that without being subjected to the jibes and sneers that
are so readily thrown out in place of argument where no
argument can be found. So let us stick to this popular
sovereignty, — this insidious popular sovereignty.
 Now let me call your attention to one thing that has
really happened, which shows this gradual and steady
debauching of public opinion, this course of preparation for
the revival of the slave trade, for the Territorial slave code,
and the new Dred Scott decision that is to carry slavery
into the Free States. Did you ever, ﬁve years ago, hear of
anybody in the world saying that the negro had no share in
the Declaration of National Independence; that it does not
mean negroes at all; and when “all men” were spoken of,
negroes were not included?
I am satisﬁed that ﬁve years ago that proposition was not
put upon paper by any living being anywhere. I have been
unable at any time to ﬁnd a man in an audience who would
declare that he had ever known of anybody saying so ﬁve
years ago. But last year there was not a Douglas popular
sovereign in Illinois who did not say it. Is there one in Ohio
but declares his ﬁrm belief that the Declaration of
Independence did not mean negroes at all? I do not know
how this is; I have not been here much; but I presume you
are very much alike everywhere. Then I suppose that all
now 
express 
the 
belief 
that 
the 
Declaration 
of
Independence never did mean negroes. I call upon one of
them to say that he said it ﬁve years ago.
If you think that now, and did not think it then, the next
thing that strikes me is to remark that there has been a
change wrought in you, — and a very signiﬁcant change it
is, being no less than changing the negro, in your
estimation, from the rank of a man to that of a brute. They
are taking him down and placing him, when spoken of,
 among reptiles and crocodiles, as Judge Douglas himself
expresses it.
Is not this change wrought in your minds a very
important change? Public opinion in this country is
everything. In a nation like ours, this popular sovereignty
and squatter sovereignty have already wrought a change in
the public mind to the extent I have stated. There is no man
in this crowd who can contradict it.
Now, if you are opposed to slavery honestly, as much as
anybody, I ask you to note that fact, and the like of which is
to follow, to be plastered on, layer after layer, until very
soon you are prepared to deal with the negro every where
as with the brute. If public sentiment has not been
debauched already to this point, a new turn of the screw in
that direction is all that is wanting; and this is constantly
being done by the teachers of this insidious popular
sovereignty. You need but one or two turns further, until
your minds, now ripening under these teachings, will be
ready for all these things, and you will receive and support,
or submit to, the slave trade, revived with all its horrors, a
slave code enforced in our Territories, and a new Dred
Scott decision to bring slavery up into the very heart of the
free North. This, I must say, is but carrying out those words
prophetically spoken by Mr. Clay, — many, many years ago,
— I believe more than thirty years, when he told an
audience that if they would repress all tendencies to liberty
and ultimate emancipation they must go back to the era of
our independence, and muzzle the cannon which thundered
its annual joyous return on the Fourth of July; they must
 blow out the moral lights around us; they must penetrate
the human soul, and eradicate the love of liberty: but until
they did these things, and others eloquently enumerated by
him, they could not repress all tendencies to ultimate
emancipation.
I ask attention to the fact that in a pre-eminent degree
these popular sovereigns are at this work: blowing out the
moral lights around us; teaching that the negro is no longer
a man, but a brute; that the Declaration has nothing to do
with him; that he ranks with the crocodile and the reptile;
that man, with body and soul, is a matter of dollars and
cents. I suggest to this portion of the Ohio Republicans, or
Democrats, 
if 
there 
be 
any 
present, 
the 
serious
consideration of this fact that there is now going on among
you a steady process of debauching public opinion on this
subject. With this, my friends, I bid you adieu.
      H A   I
 I
A I 
HI
       
      
   
MY FELLOW-CITIZENS OF the State of Ohio: This is the ﬁrst
time in my life that I have appeared before an audience in
so great a city as this: I therefore — though I am no longer
a young man — make this appearance under some degree
of embarrassment. But I have found that when one is
embarrassed, usually the shortest way to get through with
it is to quit talking or thinking about it, and go at something
else.
I understand that you have had recently with you my
very distinguished friend Judge Douglas, of Illinois; and I
understand, without having had an opportunity (not greatly
sought, to be sure) of seeing a report of the speech that he
made here, that he did me the honor to mention my humble
name. I suppose that he did so for the purpose of making
some objection to some sentiment at some time expressed
by me. I should expect, it is true, that judge Douglas had
reminded you, or informed you, if you had never before
heard it, that I had once in my life declared it as my opinion
that this government cannot endure permanently, half slave
and half free; that a house divided against itself cannot
stand, and, as I had expressed it, I did not expect the house
to fall, that I did not expect the Union to be dissolved, but
that I did expect that it would cease to be divided, that it
 would become all one thing, or all the other; that either the
opponents of slavery would arrest the further spread of it,
and place it where the public mind would rest in the belief
that it was in the course of ultimate extinction, or the
friends of slavery will push it forward until it becomes alike
lawful in all the States, old or new, free as well as slave. I
did, ﬁfteen months ago, express that opinion, and upon
many occasions Judge Douglas has denounced it, and has
greatly, intentionally or unintentionally, misrepresented my
purpose in the expression of that opinion.
I presume, without having seen a report of his speech,
that he did so here. I presume that he alluded also to that
opinion, in diﬀerent language, having been expressed at a
subsequent time by Governor Seward of New York, and that
he took the two in a lump and denounced them; that he
tried to point out that there was something couched in this
opinion which led to the making of an entire uniformity of
the local institutions of the various States of the Union, in
utter disregard of the diﬀerent States, which in their nature
would seem to require a variety of institutions and a variety
of laws, conforming to the diﬀerences in the nature of the
diﬀerent States.
Not only so: I presume he insisted that this was a
declaration of war between the free and slave States, that it
was the sounding to the onset of continual war between the
diﬀerent States, the slave and free States.
This charge, in this form, was made by Judge Douglas on,
I believe, the 9th of July, 1858, in Chicago, in my hearing.
On the next evening, I made some reply to it. I informed
 him that many of the inferences he drew from that
expression of mine were altogether foreign to any purpose
entertained by me, and in so far as he should ascribe these
inferences to me, as my purpose, he was entirely mistaken;
and in so far as he might argue that, whatever might be my
purpose, actions conforming to my views would lead to
these results, he might argue and establish if he could; but,
so far as purposes were concerned, he was totally mistaken
as to me.
When I made that reply to him, I told him, on the
question of declaring war between the diﬀerent States of
the Union, that I had not said that I did not expect any
peace upon this question until slavery was exterminated;
that I had only said I expected peace when that institution
was put where the public mind should rest in the belief that
it was in course of ultimate extinction; that I believed, from
the organization of our government until a very recent
period of time, the institution had been placed and
continued upon such a basis; that we had had comparative
peace upon that question through a portion of that period
of time, only because the public mind rested in that belief
in regard to it, and that when we returned to that position
in relation to that matter, I supposed we should again have
peace as we previously had. I assured him, as I now, assure
you, that I neither then had, nor have, or ever had, any
purpose in any way of interfering with the institution of
slavery, where it exists. I believe we have no power, under
the Constitution of the United States, or rather under the
form of government under which we live, to interfere with
 the institution of slavery, or any other of the institutions of
our sister States, be they free or slave States. I declared
then, and I now re-declare, that I have as little inclination
to interfere with the institution of slavery where it now
exists, 
through 
the 
instrumentality 
of 
the 
General
Government, or any other instrumentality, as I believe we
have no power to do so. I accidentally used this expression:
I had no purpose of entering into the slave States to disturb
the institution of slavery. So, upon the ﬁrst occasion that
Judge Douglas got an opportunity to reply to me, he passed
by the whole body of what I had said upon that subject, and
seized upon the particular expression of mine that I had no
purpose of entering into the slave States to disturb the
institution of slavery. “Oh, no,” said he, “he [Lincoln] won’t
enter into the slave States to disturb the institution of
slavery, he is too prudent a man to do such a thing as that;
he only means that he will go on to the line between the
free and slave States, and shoot over at them. This is all he
means to do. He means to do them all the harm he can, to
disturb them all he can, in such a way as to keep his own
hide in perfect safety.”
Well, now, I did not think, at that time, that that was
either a very digniﬁed or very logical argument but so it
was, I had to get along with it as well as I could.
It has occurred to-me here to-night that if I ever do shoot
over the line at the people on the other side of the line into
a slave State, and purpose to do so, keeping my skin safe,
that I have now about the best chance I shall ever have. I
should not wonder if there are some Kentuckians about this
 audience — we are close to Kentucky; and whether that be
so or not, we are on elevated ground, and, by speaking
distinctly, I should not wonder if some of the Kentuckians
would hear me on the other side of the river. For that
reason I propose to address a portion of what I have to say
to the Kentuckians.
I say, then, in the ﬁrst place, to the Kentuckians, that I
am what they call, as I understand it, a “Black Republican.”
I think slavery is wrong, morally and politically. I desire
that it should be no further spread in — these United
States, and I should not object if it should gradually
terminate in the whole Union. While I say this for myself, I
say to you Kentuckians that I understand you diﬀer
radically with me upon this proposition; that you believe
slavery is a good thing; that slavery is right; that it ought to
be extended and perpetuated in this Union. Now, there
being this broad diﬀerence between us, I do not pretend, in
addressing 
myself 
to 
you 
Kentuckians, 
to 
attempt
proselyting you; that would be a vain eﬀort. I do not enter
upon it. I only propose to try to show you that you ought to
nominate for the next Presidency, at Charleston, my
distinguished friend Judge Douglas. In all that there is a
diﬀerence between you and him, I understand he is
sincerely for you, and more wisely for you than you are for
yourselves. I will try to demonstrate that proposition.
Understand, now, I say that I believe he is as sincerely for
you, and more wisely for you, than you are for yourselves.
What do you want more than anything else to make
successful your views of slavery, — to advance the
 outspread of it, and to secure and perpetuate the
nationality of it? What do you want more than anything
else? What — is needed absolutely? What is indispensable
to you? Why, if I may, be allowed to answer the question, it
is to retain a hold upon the North, it is to retain support
and strength from the free States. If you can get this
support and strength from the free States, you can
succeed. If you do not get this support and this strength
from the free States, you are in the minority, and you are
beaten at once.
If that proposition be admitted, — and it is undeniable, —
then the next thing I say to you is, that Douglas, of all the
men in this nation, is the only man that aﬀords you any
hold upon the free States; that no other man can give you
any strength in the free States. This being so, if you doubt
the other branch of the proposition, whether he is for you
— whether he is really for you, as I have expressed it, — I
propose asking your attention for a while to a few facts.
The issue between you and me, understand, is, that I
think slavery is wrong, and ought not to be outspread; and
you think it is right, and ought to be extended and
perpetuated. [A voice, “Oh, Lord!”] That is my Kentuckian I
am talking to now.
I now proceed to try to show you that Douglas is as
sincerely for you and more wisely for you than you are for
yourselves.
In the ﬁrst place, we know that in a government like this,
in a government of the people, where the voice of all the
men of the country, substantially, enters into the execution
 — or administration, rather — of the government, in such a
government, what lies at the bottom of all of it is public
opinion. I lay down the proposition, that Judge Douglas is
not only the man that promises you in advance a hold upon
the North, and support in the North, but he constantly
moulds public opinion to your ends; that in every possible
way he can he constantly moulds the public opinion of the
North to your ends; and if there are a few things in which
he seems to be against you, — a few things which he says
that appear to be against you, and a few that he forbears to
say which you would like to have him say you ought to
remember that the saying of the one, or the forbearing to
say the other, would lose his hold upon the North, and, by
consequence, would lose his capacity to serve you.
Upon this subject of moulding public opinion I call your
attention to the fact — for a well established fact it is —
that the Judge never says your institution of slavery is
wrong. There is not a public man in the United States, I
believe, with the exception of Senator Douglas, who has
not, at some time in his life, declared his opinion whether
the thing is right or wrong; but Senator Douglas never
declares it is wrong. He leaves himself at perfect liberty to
do all in your favor which he would be hindered from doing
if he were to declare the thing to be wrong. On the
contrary, he takes all the chances that he has for inveigling
the sentiment of the North, opposed to slavery, into your
support, by never saying it is right. This you ought to set
down to his credit: You ought to give him full credit for this
 much; little though it be, in comparison to the whole which
he does for you.
Some other, things I will ask your attention to. He said
upon the ﬂoor of the United States Senate, and he has
repeated it, as I understand, a great many times, that he
does not care whether slavery is “voted up or voted down.”
This again shows you, or ought to show you, if you would
reason upon it, that he does not believe it to be wrong; for
a man may say when he sees nothing wrong in a thing; that
he, dues not care whether it be voted up or voted down but
no man can logically say that he cares not whether a thing
goes up or goes down which to him appears to be wrong.
You therefore have a demonstration in this that to Judge
Douglas’s mind your favorite institution, which you would
have spread out and made perpetual, is no wrong.
Another thing he tells you, in a speech made at Memphis
in Tennessee, shortly after the canvass in Illinois, last year.
He there distinctly told the people that there was a “line
drawn by the Almighty across this continent, on the one
side of which the soil must always be cultivated by slaves”;
that he did not pretend to know exactly where that line
was, but that there was such a line. I want to ask your
attention to that proposition again; that there is one portion
of this continent where the Almighty has signed the soil
shall always be cultivated by slaves; that its being
cultivated by slaves at that place is right; that it has the
direct sympathy and authority of the Almighty. Whenever
you can get these Northern audiences to adopt the opinion
that slavery is right on the other side of the Ohio, whenever
 you can get them, in pursuance of Douglas’s views, to
adopt that sentiment, they will very readily make the other
argument, which is perfectly logical, that that which is
right on that side of the Ohio cannot be wrong on this, and
that if you have that property on that side of the Ohio,
under the seal and stamp of the Almighty, when by any
means it escapes over here it is wrong to have constitutions
and laws “to devil” you about it. So Douglas is moulding the
public opinion of the North, ﬁrst to say that the thing is
right in your State over the Ohio River, and hence to say
that that which is right there is not wrong here, and that all
laws and constitutions here recognizing it as being wrong
are themselves wrong, and ought to be repealed and
abrogated. He will tell you, men of Ohio, that if you choose
here to have laws against slavery, it is in conformity to the
idea that your climate is not suited to it, that your climate
is not suited to slave labor, and therefore you have
constitutions and laws against it.
Let us attend to that argument for a little while and see if
it be sound. You do not raise sugar-cane (except the new-
fashioned sugar-cane, and you won’t raise that long), but
they do raise it in Louisiana. You don’t raise it in Ohio,
because you can’t raise it proﬁtably, because the climate
don’t suit it. They do raise it in Louisiana, because there it
is proﬁtable. Now, Douglas will tell you that is precisely the
slavery question: that they do have slaves there because
they are proﬁtable, and you don’t have them here because
they are not proﬁtable. If that is so, then it leads to dealing
with the one precisely as with the other. Is there, then,
 anything in the constitution or laws of Ohio against raising
sugar-cane? Have you found it necessary to put any such
provision in your law? Surely not! No man desires to raise
sugar-cane in Ohio, but if any man did desire to do so, you
would say it was a tyrannical law that forbids his doing so;
and whenever you shall agree with Douglas, whenever your
minds are brought to adopt his argument, as surely you will
have reached the conclusion that although it is not
proﬁtable in Ohio, if any man wants it, is wrong to him not
to let him have it.
In this matter Judge Douglas is preparing the public
mind for you of Kentucky to make perpetual that good thing
in your estimation, about which you and I diﬀer.
In this connection, let me ask your attention to another
thing. I believe it is safe to assert that ﬁve years ago no
living man had expressed the opinion that the negro had no
share in the Declaration of Independence. Let me state that
again: ﬁve years ago no living man had expressed the
opinion that the negro had no share in the Declaration of
Independence. If there is in this large audience any man
who ever knew of that opinion being put upon paper as
much as ﬁve years ago, I will be obliged to him now or at a
subsequent time to show it.
If that be true I wish you then to note the next fact: that
within the space of ﬁve years Senator Douglas, in the
argument of this question, has got his entire party, so far as
I know, without exception, in saying that the negro has no
share in the Declaration of Independence. If there be now
in all these United States one Douglas man that does not
 say this, I have been unable upon any occasion to scare him
up. Now, if none of you said this ﬁve years ago, and all of
you say it now, that is a matter that you Kentuckians ought
to note. That is a vast change in the Northern public
sentiment upon that question.
Of what tendency is that change? The tendency of that
change is to bring the public mind to the conclusion that
when men are spoken of, the negro is not meant; that when
negroes are spoken of, brutes alone are contemplated. That
change in public sentiment has already degraded the black
man in the estimation of Douglas and his followers from the
condition of a man of some sort, and assigned him to the
condition of a brute. Now, you Kentuckians ought to give
Douglas credit for this. That is the largest possible stride
that can be made in regard to the perpetuation of your
thing of slavery.
A voice: Speak to Ohio men, and not to Kentuckians!
Mr. LINCOLN: I beg permission to speak as I please.
In Kentucky perhaps, in many of the slave States
certainly, you are trying to establish the rightfulness of
slavery by reference to the Bible. You are trying to show
that slavery existed in the Bible times by divine ordinance.
Now, Douglas is wiser than you, for your own beneﬁt, upon
that subject. Douglas knows that whenever you establish
that slavery was — right by the Bible, it will occur that that
slavery was the slavery of the white man, of men without
reference to color; and he knows very well that you may
entertain that idea in Kentucky as much as you please, but
you will never win any Northern support upon it. He makes
 a wiser argument for you: he makes the argument that the
slavery of the black man; the slavery of the man who has a
skin of a diﬀerent color from your own, is right. He thereby
brings to your support Northern voters who could not for a
moment be brought by your own argument of the Bible
right of slavery. Will you give him credit for that? Will you
not say that in this matter he is more wisely for you than
you are for yourselves?
Now, having established with his entire party this
doctrine, having been entirely successful in that branch of
his eﬀorts in your behalf, he is ready for another.
At this same meeting at Memphis he declared that in all
contests between the negro and the white man he was for
the white man, but that in all questions between the negro
and the crocodile he was for the negro. He did not make
that declaration accidentally at Memphis. He made it a
great many times in the canvass in Illinois last year (though
I don’t know that it was reported in any of his speeches
there, but he frequently made it). I believe he repeated it at
Columbus, and I should not wonder if he repeated it here.
It is, then, a deliberate way of expressing himself upon that
subject. It is a matter of mature deliberation with him thus
to express himself upon that point of his case. It therefore
requires deliberate attention.
The ﬁrst inference seems to be that if you do not enslave
the negro, you are wronging the white man in some way or
other, and that whoever is opposed to the negro being
enslaved, is, in some way or other, against the white man.
Is not that a falsehood? If there was a necessary conﬂict
 between the white man and the negro, I should be for the
white man as much as Judge Douglas; but I say there is no
such necessary conﬂict. I say that there is room enough for
us all to be free, and that it not only does not wrong the
white man that the negro should be free, but it positively
wrongs the mass of the white men that the negro should be
enslaved; that the mass of white men are really injured by
the eﬀects of slave labor in the vicinity of the ﬁelds of their
own labor.
But I do not desire to dwell upon this branch of the
question more than to say that this assumption of his is
false, and I do hope that that fallacy will not long prevail in
the minds of intelligent white men. At all events, you ought
to thank Judge Douglas for it; it is for your beneﬁt it is
made.
The other branch of it is, that in the struggle between the
negro and the crocodile; he is for the negro. Well, I don’t
know that there is any struggle between the negro and the
crocodile, either. I suppose that if a crocodile (or, as we old
Ohio River boatmen used to call them, alligators) should
come across a white man, he would kill him if he could; and
so he would a negro. But what, at last, is this proposition? I
believe it is a sort of proposition in proportion, which may
be stated thus: “As the negro is to the white man, so is the
crocodile to the negro; and as the negro may rightfully
treat the crocodile as a beast or reptile, so the white man
may rightfully treat the negro as a beast or a reptile.” That
is really the “knip” of all that argument of his.
 Now, my brother Kentuckians, who believe in this, you
ought to thank Judge Douglas for having put that in a much
more taking way than any of yourselves have done.
Again, Douglas’s great principle, “popular sovereignty,”
as he calls it, gives you, by natural consequence, the revival
of the slave trade whenever you want it. If you question
this, listen awhile, consider awhile what I shall advance in
support of that proposition.
He says that it is the sacred right of the man who goes
into the Territories to have slavery if he wants it. Grant that
for argument’s sake. Is it not the sacred right of the man
who don’t go there equally to buy slaves in Africa, if he
wants them? Can you point out the diﬀerence? The man
who goes into the Territories of Kansas and Nebraska, or
any other new Territory, with the sacred right of taking a
slave there which belongs to him, would certainly have no
more right to take one there than I would, who own no
slave, but who would desire to buy one and take him there.
You will not say you, the friends of Judge Douglas but that
the man who does not own a slave has an equal right to buy
one and take him to the Territory as the other does.
A voice: I want to ask a question. Don’t foreign nations
interfere with the slave trade?
Mr. LINCOLN: Well! I understand it to be a principle of
Democracy to whip foreign nations whenever, they
interfere with us.
Voice: I only asked for information. I am a Republican
myself.
 Mr. LINCOLN: You and I will be on the best terms in the
world, but I do not wish to be diverted from the point I was
trying to press.
I say that Douglas’s popular sovereignty, establishing his
sacred right in the people, if you please, if carried to its
logical conclusion gives equally the sacred right to the
people of the States or the Territories themselves to buy
slaves wherever they can buy them cheapest; and if any
man can show a distinction, I should like to hear him try it.
If any man can show how the people of Kansas have a
better right to slaves, because they want them, than the
people of Georgia have to buy them in Africa, I want him to
do it. I think it cannot be done. If it is “popular sovereignty”
for the people to have slaves because they want them, it is
popular sovereignty for them to buy them in Africa because
they desire to do so.
I know that Douglas has recently made a little eﬀort, not
seeming to notice that he had a diﬀerent theory, has made
an eﬀort to get rid of that. He has written a letter,
addressed to somebody, I believe, who resides in Iowa,
declaring his opposition to the repeal of the laws that
prohibit the Africa slave trade. He bases his opposition to
such repeal upon the ground that these laws are
themselves one of the compromises of the Constitution of
the United States. Now, it would be very interesting to see
Judge Douglas or any of his friends turn, to the Constitution
of the United States and point out that compromise, to
show where there is any compromise in the Constitution, or
provision in the Constitution; express or implied, by which
 the administrators of that Constitution are under any
obligation to repeal the African slave trade. I know, or at
least I think I know, that the framers of that Constitution
did expect the African slave trade would be abolished at the
end of twenty years, to which time their prohibition against
its 
being 
abolished 
extended 
there 
is 
abundant
contemporaneous history to show that the framers of the
Constitution expected it to be abolished. But while they so
expected, they gave nothing for that expectation, and they
put no provision in the Constitution requiring it should be
so abolished. The migration or importation of such persons
as the States shall see ﬁt to admit shall not be prohibited,
but a certain tax might be levied upon such importation.
But what was to be done after that time? The Constitution
is as silent about that as it is silent, personally, about
myself. There is absolutely nothing in it about that subject;
there is only the expectation of the framers of the
Constitution that the slave trade would be abolished at the
end of that time; and they expected it would be abolished,
owing to public sentiment, before that time; and the put
that provision in, in order that it should not be abolished
before that time, for reasons which I suppose they thought
to be sound ones, but which I will not now try to enumerate
before you.
But while, they expected the slave trade would be
abolished at that time, they expected that the spread of
slavery into the new Territories should also be restricted. It
is as easy to prove that the framers of the Constitution of
the United States expected that slavery should be
 prohibited from extending into the new Territories, as it is
to prove that it was expected that the slave trade should be
abolished. Both these things were expected. One was no
more expected than the other, and one was no more a
compromise of the Constitution than the other. There was
nothing said in the Constitution in regard to the spread of
slavery into the Territory. I grant that; but there was
something very important said about it by the same
generation of men in the adoption of the old Ordinance of
‘87, through the inﬂuence of which you here in Ohio, our
neighbors in Indiana, we in Illinois, our neighbors in
Michigan and Wisconsin, are happy, prosperous, teeming
millions of free men. That generation of men, though not to
the full extent members of the convention that framed the
Constitution, were to some extent members of that
convention, holding seats at the same time in one body and
the other, so that if there was any compromise on either of
these subjects, the strong evidence is that that compromise
was in favor of the restriction of slavery from the new
Territories.
But Douglas says that he is unalterably opposed to the
repeal of those laws because, in his view, it is a compromise
of the Constitution. You Kentuckians, no doubt, are
somewhat oﬀended with that. You ought not to be! You
ought to be patient! You ought to know that if he said less
than that, he would lose the power of “lugging” the
Northern States to your support. Really, what you would
push him to do would take from him his entire power to
serve you. And you ought to remember how long, by
 precedent, Judge Douglas holds himself obliged to stick by
compromises. You ought to remember that by the time you
yourselves think you are ready to inaugurate measures for
the revival of the African slave trade, that suﬀicient time
will have arrived, by precedent, for Judge Douglas to break
through, that compromise. He says now nothing more
strong than he said in 1849 when he declared in favor of
Missouri Compromise, — and precisely four years and a
quarter after he declared that Compromise to be a sacred
thing, which “no ruthless hand would ever daze to touch,”
he himself brought forward the measure ruthlessly to
destroy it. By a mere calculation of time it will only be four
years more until he is ready to take back his profession
about the sacredness of the Compromise abolishing the
slave trade. Precisely as soon as you are ready to have his
services in that direction, by fair calculation, you may be
sure of having them.
But you remember and set down to Judge Douglas’s debt,
or discredit, that he, last year, said the people of Territories
can, in spite of the Dred Scott decision, exclude your slaves
from those Territories; that he declared, by “unfriendly
legislation” the extension of your property into the new
Territories may be cut oﬀ, in the teeth of the decision of the
Supreme Court of the United States.
He assumed that position at Freeport on the 27th of
August, 1858. He said that the people of the Territories can
exclude slavery, in so many words: You ought, however, to
bear in mind that he has never said it since. You may hunt
in every speech that he has since made, and he has never
 used that expression once. He has never seemed to notice
that he is stating his views diﬀerently from what he did
then; but by some sort of accident, he has always really
stated it diﬀerently. He has always since then declared that
“the Constitution does not carry slavery into the Territories
of the United States beyond the power of the people legally
to control it, as other property.” Now, there is a diﬀerence
in the language used upon that former occasion and in this
latter day. There may or may not be a diﬀerence in the
meaning, but it is worth while considering whether there is
not also a diﬀerence in meaning.
What is it to exclude? Why, it is to drive it out. It is in
some way to put it out of the Territory. It is to force it
across the line, or change its character so that, as property,
it is out of existence. But what is the controlling of it “as
other property”? Is controlling it as other property the
same thing as destroying it, or driving it away? I should
think not. I should think the controlling of it as other
property would be just about what you in Kentucky should
want. I understand the controlling of property means the
controlling of it for the beneﬁt of the owner of it. While I
have no doubt the Supreme Court of the United States
would say “God speed” to any of the Territorial Legislatures
that should thus control slave property, they would sing
quite a diﬀerent tune if, by the pretence of controlling it,
they were to undertake to pass laws which virtually
excluded it, — and that upon a very well known principle to
all lawyers, that what a Legislature cannot directly do, it
cannot do by indirection; that as the Legislature has not the
 power to drive slaves out, they have no power, by
indirection, by tax, or by imposing burdens in any way on
that property, to eﬀect the same end, and that any attempt
to do so would be held by the Dred Scott court
unconstitutional.
Douglas is not willing to stand by his ﬁrst proposition
that they can exclude it, because we have seen that that
proposition amounts to nothing more nor less than the
naked absurdity that you may lawfully drive out that which
has a lawful right to remain. He admitted at ﬁrst that the
slave might be lawfully taken into the Territories under the
Constitution of the United States, and yet asserted that he
might be lawfully driven out. That being the proposition, it
is the absurdity I have stated. He is not willing to stand in
the face of that direct, naked, and impudent absurdity; he
has, therefore, modiﬁed his language into that of being
“controlled as other property.”
The Kentuckians don’t like this in Douglas! I will tell you
where it will go. He now swears by the court. He was once
a leading man in Illinois to break down a court, because it
had made a decision he did not like. But he now not only
swears by the court, the courts having got to working for
you, but he denounces all men that do not swear by the
courts, as unpatriotic, as bad citizens. When one of these
acts of unfriendly legislation shall impose such heavy
burdens as to, in eﬀect, destroy property in slaves in a
Territory, and show plainly enough that there can be no
mistake in the purpose of the Legislature to make them so
burdensome, this same Supreme Court will decide that law
 to be unconstitutional, and he will be ready to say for your
beneﬁt “I swear by the court; I give it up”; and while that is
going on he has been getting all his men to swear by the
courts, and to give it up with him. In this again he serves
you faithfully, and, as I say, more wisely than you serve
yourselves.
Again: I have alluded in the beginning of these remarks
to the fact that Judge Douglas has made great complaint of
my having expressed the opinion that this government
“cannot endure permanently, half slave and half free.” He
has complained of Seward for using diﬀerent language, and
declaring that there is an “irrepressible conﬂict” between
the principles of free and slave labor. [A voice: “He says it
is not original with Seward. That it is original with
Lincoln.”] I will attend to that immediately, sir. Since that
time, Hickman of Pennsylvania expressed the same
sentiment. He has never denounced Mr. Hickman: why?
There is a little chance, notwithstanding that opinion in the
mouth of Hickman, that he may yet be a Douglas man. That
is the diﬀerence! It is not unpatriotic to hold that opinion if
a man is a Douglas man.
But neither I, nor Seward, nor Hickman is entitled to the
enviable or unenviable distinction of having ﬁrst expressed
that idea. That same idea was expressed by the Richmond
Enquirer, in Virginia, in 1856, — quite two years before it
was expressed by the ﬁrst of us. And while Douglas was
pluming himself that in his conﬂict with my humble self,
last year, he had “squelched out” that fatal heresy, as he
delighted to call it, and had suggested that if he only had
 had a chance to be in New York and meet Seward he would
have “squelched” it there also, it never occurred to him to
breathe a word against Pryor. I don’t think that you can
discover that Douglas ever talked of going to Virginia to
“squelch” out that idea there. No. More than that. That
same Roger A. Pryor was brought to Washington City and
made the editor of the par excellence Douglas paper, after
making use of that expression, which, in us, is so
unpatriotic and heretical. From all this, my Kentucky
friends may see that this opinion is heretical in his view
only when it is expressed by men suspected of a desire that
the country shall all become free, and not when expressed
by those fairly known to entertain the desire that the whole
country shall become slave. When expressed by that class
of men, it is in nowise oﬀensive to him. In this again, my
friends of Kentucky, you have Judge Douglas with you.
There is another reason why you Southern people ought
to nominate Douglas at your convention at Charleston. That
reason is the wonderful capacity of the man, — the power
he has of doing what would seem to be impossible. Let me
call your attention to one of these apparently impossible
things:
Douglas had three or four very distinguished men of the
most extreme anti-slavery views of any men in the
Republican party expressing their desire for his re-election
to the Senate last year. That would, of itself, have seemed
to be a little wonderful; but that wonder is heightened
when we see that Wise of Virginia, a man exactly opposed
to them, a man who believes in the divine right of slavery,
 was also expressing his desire that Douglas should be
reelected; that another man that may be said to be kindred
to Wise, Mr. Breckinridge, the Vice-President, and of your
own State, was also agreeing with the anti-slavery men in
the North that Douglas ought to be re-elected. Still to
heighten the wonder, a senator from Kentucky, whom I
have always loved with an aﬀection as tender and
endearing as I have ever loved any man, who was opposed
to the anti-slavery men for reasons which seemed suﬀicient
to him, and equally opposed to Wise and Breckinridge, was
writing letters into Illinois to secure the reelection of
Douglas. Now, that all these conﬂicting elements should be
brought, while at daggers’ points with one another, to
support him, is a feat that is worthy for you to note and
consider. It is quite probable that each of these classes of
men thought, by the re-election of Douglas, their peculiar
views would gain something: it is probable that the anti-
slavery men thought their views would gain something;
that Wise and Breckinridge thought so too, as regards their
opinions; that Mr. Crittenden thought that his views would
gain something, although he was opposed to both these
other men. It is probable that each and all of them thought
that they were using Douglas; and it is yet an unsolved
problem whether he was not using them all. If he was, then
it is for you to consider whether that power to perform
wonders is one for you lightly to throw away.
There is one other thing that I will say to you, in this
relation. It is but my opinion, I give it to you without a fee.
It is my opinion that it is for you to take him or be defeated;
 and that if you do take him you may be beaten. You will
surely be beaten if you do not take him. We, the
Republicans and others forming the opposition of the
country, intend to “stand by our guns,” to be patient and
ﬁrm, and in the long run to beat you, whether you take him
or not. We know that before we fairly beat you we have to
beat you both together. We know that you are “all of a
feather,” and that we have to beat you all together, and we
expect to do it. We don’t intend to be very impatient about
it. We mean to be as deliberate and calm about it as it is
possible to be, but as ﬁrm and resolved as it is possible for
men to be. When we do as we say, — beat you, — you
perhaps want to know what we will do with you.
I will tell you, so far as I am authorized to speak for the
opposition, what we mean to do with you. We mean to treat
you, as near as we possibly can, as Washington, Jeﬀerson,
and Madison treated you. We mean to leave you alone, and
in no way interfere with your institution; to abide by all and
every compromise of the Constitution, and, in a word,
coming back to the original proposition, to treat you, so far
as degenerated men (if we have degenerated) may,
according to the examples of those noble fathers,
Washington, Jeﬀerson, and Madison. We mean to remember
that you are as good as we; that there is no diﬀerence
between us other than the diﬀerence of circumstances. We
mean to recognize and bear in mind always that you have
as good hearts in your bosoms as other people, or as we
claim to have, and treat you accordingly. We mean to marry
your girls when we have a chance, the white ones I mean;
 and I have the honor to inform you that I once did have a
chance in that way.
I have told you what we mean to do. I want to know, now,
when that thing takes place, what do you mean to do? I
often hear it intimated that you mean to divide the Union
whenever a Republican, or anything like it, is elected
President of the United States. [A voice: “That is so.”] “That
is so,” one of them says; I wonder if he is a Kentuckian? [A
voice: “He is a Douglas man.”] Well, then, I want to know
what you are going to do with your half of it? Are you going
to split the Ohio down through, and push your half oﬀ a
piece? Or are you going to keep it right alongside of us
outrageous fellows? Or are you going to build up a wall
some way between your country and ours, by which that
movable property of yours can’t come over here any more,
to the danger of your losing it? Do you think you can better
yourselves, on that subject, by leaving us here under no
obligation whatever to return those specimens of your
movable property that come hither? You have divided the
Union because we would not do right with you, as you
think, upon that subject; when we cease to be under
obligations to do anything for you, how much better oﬀ do
you think you will be? Will you make war upon us and kill
us all? Why, gentlemen, I think you are as gallant and as
brave men as live; that you can ﬁght as bravely in a good
cause, man for man, as any other people living; that you
have shown yourselves capable of this upon various
occasions: but, man for man, you are not better than we
are, and there are not so many of you as there are of us.
 You will never make much of a hand at whipping us. If we
were fewer in numbers than you, I think that you could
whip us; if we were equal, it would likely be a drawn battle;
but being inferior in numbers, you will make nothing by
attempting to master us.
But perhaps I have addressed myself as long, or longer,
to the Kentuckians than I ought to have done, inasmuch as
I have said that whatever course you take we intend in the
end to beat you. I propose to address a few remarks to our
friends, by way of discussing with them the best means of
keeping that promise that I have in good faith made.
It may appear a little episodical for me to mention the
topic of which I will speak now. It is a favorite position of
Douglas’s that the interference of the General Government,
through the Ordinance of ‘87, or through any other act of
the General Government never has made or ever can make
a free State; the Ordinance of ‘87 did not make free States
of Ohio, Indiana, or Illinois; that these States are free upon
his “great principle” of popular sovereignty, because the
people of those several States have chosen to make them
so. At Columbus, and probably here, he undertook to
compliment the people that they themselves have made the
State of Ohio free, and that the Ordinance of ‘87 was not
entitled in any degree to divide the honor with them. I have
no doubt that the people of the State of Ohio did make her
free according to their own will and judgment, but let the
facts be remembered.
In 1802, I believe, it was you who made your ﬁrst
constitution, with the clause prohibiting slavery, and you
 did it, I suppose, very nearly unanimously; but you should
bear in mind that you — speaking of you as one people —
that you did so unembarrassed by the actual presence of
the institution amongst you; that you made it a free State
not with the embarrassment upon you of already having
among you many slaves, which if they had been here, and
you had sought to make a free State, you would not know
what to do with. If they had been among you, embarrassing
diﬀiculties, most probably, would have induced you to
tolerate a slave constitution instead of a free one, as indeed
these very diﬀiculties have constrained every people on this
continent who have adopted slavery.
Pray what was it that made you free? What kept you
free? Did you not ﬁnd your country free when you came to
decide that Ohio should be a free State? It is important to
inquire by what reason you found it so. Let us take an
illustration between the States of Ohio and Kentucky.
Kentucky is separated by this River Ohio, not a mile wide. A
portion of Kentucky, by reason of the course of the Ohio, is
farther north than this portion of Ohio, in which we now
stand. Kentucky is entirely covered with slavery; Ohio is
entirely free from it: What made that diﬀerence? Was it
climate? No. A portion of Kentucky was farther north than
this portion of Ohio. Was it soil? No. There is nothing in the
soil of the one more favorable to slave than the other. It
was not climate or soil that mused one side of the line to be
entirely covered with slavery, and the other side free of it.
What was it? Study over it. Tell us, if you can, in all the
range of conjecture, if there be anything you can conceive
 of that made that diﬀerence, other than that there was no
law of any sort keeping it out of Kentucky, while the
Ordinance of ‘87 kept it out of Ohio. If there is any other
reason than this, I confess that it is wholly beyond my
power to conceive of it. This, then, I oﬀer to combat the
idea that that Ordinance has never made any State free.
I don’t stop at this illustration. I come to the State of
Indiana; and what I have said as between Kentucky and
Ohio, I repeat as between Indiana and Kentucky: it is
equally applicable. One additional argument is applicable
also to Indiana. In her Territorial condition she more than
once petitioned Congress to abrogate the Ordinance
entirely, or at least so far as to suspend its operation for a
time, in order that they should exercise the “popular
sovereignty” of having slaves if they wanted them. The men
then controlling the General Government, imitating the
men of the Revolution, refused Indiana that privilege. And
so we have the evidence that Indiana supposed she could
have slaves, if it were not for that Ordinance; that she
besought Congress to put that barrier out of the way; that
Congress refused to do so; and it all ended at last in
Indiana being a free State. Tell me not then that the
Ordinance of ‘87 had nothing to do with making Indiana a
free State, when we ﬁnd some men chaﬁng against, and
only restrained by, that barrier.
Come down again to our State of Illinois. The great
Northwest Territory, including Ohio, Indiana, Illinois,
Michigan, and Wisconsin, was acquired ﬁrst, I believe, by
the British Government, in part at least, from the French.
 Before the establishment of our independence it became a
part of Virginia, enabling Virginia afterward to transfer it to
the General Government. There were French settlements in
what is now Illinois, and at the same time there were
French settlements in what is now Missouri, in the tract of
country that was not purchased till about 1803. In these
French settlements negro slavery had existed for many
years, perhaps more than a hundred; if not as much as two
hundred years, — at Kaskaskia, in Illinois, and at St.
Genevieve, or Cape Girardeau, perhaps, in Missouri. The
number of slaves was not very great, but there was about
the same number in each place. They were there when we
acquired the Territory. There was no eﬀort made to break
up the relation of master and slave, and even the Ordinance
of 1787 was not so enforced as to destroy that slavery in
Illinois; nor did the Ordinance apply to Missouri at all.
What I want to ask your attention to; at this point, is that
Illinois and Missouri came into the Union about the same
time, Illinois in the latter part of 1818, and Missouri, after a
struggle, I believe sometime in 1820. They had been ﬁlling
up with American people about the same period of time;
their progress enabling them to come into the Union about
the same time. At the end of that ten years, in which they
had been so preparing (for it was about that period of
time), the number of slaves in Illinois had actually
decreased; while in Missouri, beginning with very few, at
the end of that ten years there were about ten thousand.
This being so, and it being remembered that Missouri and
Illinois are, to a certain extent, in the same parallel of
 latitude, that the northern half of Missouri and the
southern half of Illinois are in the same parallel of latitude,
so that climate would have the same eﬀect upon one as
upon the other, and that in the soil there is no material
diﬀerence so far as bears upon the question of slavery
being settled upon one or the other, — there being none of
those natural causes to produce a diﬀerence in ﬁlling them,
and yet there being a broad diﬀerence to their ﬁlling up, we
are led again to inquire what was the cause of that
diﬀerence.
It is most natural to say that in Missouri there was no
law to keep that country from ﬁlling up with slaves, while
in Illinois there was the Ordinance of The Ordinance being
there, slavery decreased during that ten years; the
Ordinance not being in the other, it increased from a few to
ten thousand. Can anybody doubt the reason of the
diﬀerence?
I think all these facts most abundantly prove that my
friend Judge Douglas’s proposition, that the Ordinance of
‘87, or the national restriction of slavery, never had a
tendency to make a free State, is a fallacy, — a proposition
without the shadow or substance of truth about it.
Douglas sometimes says that all the States (and it is part
of this same proposition I have been discussing) that have
become free have become so upon his “great principle”;
that the State of Illinois itself came into the Union as a
slave State, and that the people, upon the “great principle”
of popular sovereignty, have since made it a free State.
Allow me but a little while to state to you what facts there
 are to justify him in saying that Illinois came into the Union
as a slave State.
I have mentioned to you that there were a few old French
slaves there. They numbered, I think, one or two hundred.
Besides that, there had been a Territorial law for
indenturing black persons. Under that law, in violation of
the Ordinance of ‘87, but without any enforcement of the
Ordinance to overthrow the system, there had been a small
number of slaves introduced as indentured persons. Owing
to this, the clause for the prohibition of slavery was slightly
modiﬁed. Instead of running like yours, that neither slavery
nor involuntary servitude, except for crime, of which the
party shall have been duly convicted, should exist in the
State, they said that neither slavery nor involuntary
servitude should thereafter be introduced; and that the
children of indentured servants should be born free; and
nothing was said about the few old French slaves. Out of
this fact, that the clause for prohibiting slavery was
modiﬁed because of the actual presence of it, Douglas
asserts again and again that Illinois came into the Union as
a slave State. How far the facts sustain the conclusion that
he draws, it is for intelligent and impartial men to decide. I
leave it with you, with these remarks, worthy of being
remembered, that that little thing, those few indentured
servants being there, was of itself suﬀicient to modify a
constitution made by a people ardently desiring to have a
free constitution; showing the power of the actual presence
of the institution of slavery to prevent any people, however
anxious to make a free State, from making it perfectly so.
 I have been detaining you longer, perhaps, than I ought
to do.
I am in some doubt whether to introduce another topic
upon which I could talk a while. [Cries of “Go on,” and
“Give us it.”] It is this, then: Douglas’s Popular sovereignty,
as a principle, is simply this: If one man chooses to make a
slave of another man, neither that man nor anybody else
has a right to object. Apply it to government, as he seeks to
apply it, and it is this: If, in a new Territory into which a few
people are beginning to enter for the purpose of making
their homes, they choose to either exclude slavery from
their limits, or to establish it there, however one or the
other may aﬀect the persons to be enslaved, or the
inﬁnitely greater number of persons who are afterward to
inhabit that Territory, or the other members of the family of
communities of which they are but an incipient member, or
the general head of the family of States as parent of all,
however their action may aﬀect one or the other of these,
there is no power or right to interfere. That is Douglas’s
popular sovereignty applied. Now, I think that there is a
real popular sovereignty in the world. I think the deﬁnition
of popular sovereignty, in the abstract, would be about this:
that each man shall do precisely as he pleases with himself,
and with all those things which exclusively concern him.
Applied in government, this principle would be that a
general government shall do all those things which pertain
to it, and all the local governments shall do precisely as
they please in respect to those matters which exclusively
concern them.
 Douglas looks upon slavery as so insigniﬁcant that the
people must decide that question for themselves; and yet
they are not ﬁt to decide who shall be their governor, judge,
or secretary, or who shall be any of their oﬀicers. These are
vast national matters in his estimation; but the little matter
in his estimation is that of planting slavery there. That is
purely of local interest, which nobody should be allowed to
say a word about.
Labor is the great source from which nearly all, if not all,
human comforts and necessities are drawn. There is a
diﬀerence in opinion about the elements of labor in society.
Some men assume that there is necessary connection
between capital and labor, and that connection draws
within it the whole of the labor of the community. They
assume that nobody works unless capital excites them to
work. They begin next to consider what is the best way.
They say there are but two ways: one is to hire men, and to
allure them to labor by their consent; the other is to buy
the men, and drive them, to it, and that is slavery. Having
assumed that, they proceed to discuss the question of
whether the laborers themselves are better oﬀ in the
condition of slaves or of hired laborers, and they usually
decide that they are better oﬀ in the condition of slaves.
In the ﬁrst place, I say that the whole thing is a mistake.
That there is a certain relation between capital and labor, I
admit. That it does exist, and rightfully exists, I think is
true. That men who are industrious, and sober, and honest
in the pursuit of their own interests should after a while
accumulate capital, and after that should be allowed to
 enjoy it in peace, and also, if they should choose, when they
have accumulated it, to use it to save themselves from
actual labor, and hire other people to labor for them, is
right. In doing so they do not wrong the man they employ,
for they ﬁnd men who have not of their own land to work
upon, or shops to work in, and who are beneﬁted by
working for others, hired laborers, receiving their capital
for it. Thus a few men, that own capital, hire a few others,
and these establish the relation of capital and labor
rightfully, a relation of which I make no complaint. But I
insist that that relation, after all, does not embrace more
than one eighth of the labor of the country.
[The speaker proceeded to argue that the hired laborer,
with his ability to become an employer, must have every
precedence over him who labors under the inducement of
force. He continued:]
I have taken upon myself in the name of some of you to
say that we expect upon these principles to ultimately beat
them. In order to do so, I think we want and must have a
national policy in regard to the institution of slavery that
acknowledges and deals with that institution as being
wrong. Whoever desires the prevention of the spread of
slavery and the nationalization of that institution yields all
when he yields to any policy that either recognizes slavery
as being right or as being an indiﬀerent thing. Nothing will
make you successful but setting up a policy which shall
treat the thing as being wrong: When I say this, I do not
mean to say that this General Government is charged with
the duty of redressing or preventing all the wrongs in the
 world, but I do think that it is charged with preventing and
redressing all wrongs which are wrongs to itself. This
Government is expressly charged with the duty of providing
for the general welfare. We believe that the spreading out
and perpetuity of the institution of slavery impairs the
general welfare. We believe — nay, we know — that that is
the only thing that has ever threatened the perpetuity of
the Union itself. The only thing which has ever menaced
the destruction of the government under which we live is
this very thing. To repress this thing, we think, is, Providing
for the general welfare. Our friends in Kentucky diﬀer from
us. We need not make our argument for them, but we who
think it is wrong in all its relations, or in some of them at
least, must decide as to our own actions and our own
course, upon our own judgment.
I say that we must not interfere with the institution of
slavery in the States where it exists, because the
Constitution forbids it, and the general welfare does not
require us to do so. We must not withhold an eﬀicient
Fugitive Slave law, because the Constitution requires us, as
I understand it, not to withhold such a law. But we must
prevent the outspreading of the institution, because neither
the Constitution nor general welfare requires us to extend
it. We must prevent the revival of the African slave trade,
and the enacting by Congress of a Territorial slave code.
We must prevent each of these things being done by either
Congresses or courts. The people of these United States
are the rightful masters of both Congresses and courts, not
 to overthrow the Constitution, but to overthrow the men
who pervert the Constitution.
To do these things we must employ instrumentalities. We
must hold conventions; we must adopt platforms, if we
conform to ordinary custom; we must nominate candidates;
and we must carry elections. In all these things, I think that
we ought to keep in view our real purpose, and in none do
anything that stands adverse to our purpose. If we shall
adopt a platform that fails to recognize or express our
purpose, or elect a man that declares himself inimical to
our purpose, we not only take nothing by our success, but
we tacitly admit that we act upon no other principle than a
desire to have “the loaves and ﬁshes,” by which, in the end,
our apparent success is really an injury to us.
I know that this is very desirable with me, as with
everybody else, that all the elements of the opposition shall
unite in the next Presidential election and in all future time.
I am anxious that that should be; but there are things
seriously to be considered in relation to that matter. If the
terms can be arranged, I am in favor of the union. But
suppose we shall take up some man, and put him upon one
end or the other of the ticket, who declares himself against
us in regard to the prevention of the spread of slavery, who
turns up his nose and says he is tired of hearing anything
more about it, who is more against us than against the
enemy, what will be the issue? Why, he will get no slave
States, after all, — he has tried that already until being
beat is the rule for him. If we nominate him upon that
ground, he will not carry a slave State; and not only so, but
 that portion of our men who are high-strung upon the
principle we really ﬁght for will not go for him, and he
won’t get a single electoral vote anywhere, except,
perhaps, in the State of Maryland. There is no use in saying
to us that we are stubborn and obstinate because we won’t
do some such thing as this. We cannot do it. We cannot get
our men to vote it. I speak by the card, that we cannot give
the State of Illinois in such case by ﬁfty thousand. We
would be ﬂatter down than the “Negro Democracy”
themselves have the heart to wish to see us.
After saying this much let me say a little on the other
side. There are plenty of men in the slave States that are
altogether good enough for me to be either President or
Vice-President, provided they will profess their sympathy
with our purpose, and will place themselves on the ground
that our men, upon principle, can vote for them. There are
scores of them, good men in their character for intelligence
and talent and integrity. If such a one will place himself
upon the right ground, I am for his occupying one place
upon the next Republican or opposition ticket. I will
heartily go for him. But unless he does so place himself, I
think it a matter of perfect nonsense to attempt to bring
about a union upon any other basis; that if a union be
made, the elements will scatter so that there can be no
success for such a ticket, nor anything like success. The
good old maxims of the Bible axe applicable, and truly
applicable, to human aﬀairs, and in this, as in other things,
we may say here that he who is not for us is against us; he
who gathereth not with us, scattereth. I should be glad to
 have some of the many good and able and noble men of the
South to place themselves where we can confer upon them
the high honor of an election upon one or the other end of
our ticket. It would do my soul good to do that thing. It
would enable us to teach them that, inasmuch as we select
one of their own number to carry out our principles, we are
free from the charge that we mean more than we say.
But, my friends, I have detained you much longer than I
expected to do. I believe I may do myself the compliment to
say that you have stayed and heard me with great patience,
for which I return you my most sincere thanks.
    
    I    A I  
TO EDWARD WALLACE.
CLINTON, OCTOBER 11, 1859
Dr. EDWARD WALLACE.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am here just now attending court.
Yesterday, before I left Springﬁeld, your brother, Dr.
William S. Wallace, showed me a letter of yours, in which
you kindly mention my name, inquiring for my tariﬀ views,
and suggest the propriety of my writing a letter upon the
subject. I was an old Henry-Clay-Tariﬀ Whig. In old times I
made more speeches on that subject than any other.
I have not since changed my views. I believe yet, if we
could have a moderate, carefully adjusted protective tariﬀ,
so far acquiesced in as not to be a perpetual subject of
political strife, squabbles changes, and uncertainties, it
would be better for us. Still it is my opinion that just now
the revival of that question will not advance the cause
itself, or the man who revives it.
I have not thought much on the subject recently, but my
general impression is that the necessity for a protective
tariﬀ will ere long force its old opponents to take it up; and
then its old friends can join in and establish it on a more
ﬁrm and durable basis. We, the Old Whigs, have been
entirely beaten out on the tariﬀ question, and we shall not
 be able to re-establish the policy until the absence of it
shall have demonstrated the necessity for it in the minds of
men heretofore opposed to it. With this view, I should
prefer to not now write a public letter on the subject. I
therefore wish this to be considered conﬁdential. I shall be
very glad to receive a letter from you.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  
A
 
TO W. DUNGY.
SPRINGFIELD, NOVEMBER, 2, 1859.
WM. DUNGY, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of October 27 is received. When a
mortgage is given to secure two notes, and one of the notes
is sold and assigned, if the mortgaged premises are only
suﬀicient to pay one note, the one assigned will take it all.
Also, an execution from a judgment on the assigned note
may take it all; it being the same thing in substance. There
is redemption on execution sales from the United States
Court just as from any other court.
You did not mention the name of the plaintiﬀ or
defendant in the suit, and so I can tell nothing about it as to
sales, bids, etc. Write again.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   A
 
  
       H A    A  
  H
 A
 A 
DECEMBER, 1859.
............. BUT YOU Democrats are for the Union; and
you greatly fear the success of the Republicans would
destroy the Union. Why? Do the Republicans declare
against the Union? Nothing like it. Your own statement of it
is that if the Black Republicans elect a President, you
“won’t stand it.” You will break up the Union. If we shall
constitutionally elect a President, it will be our duty to see
that you submit. Old John Brown has been executed for
treason against a State. We cannot object, even though he
agreed with us in thinking slavery wrong. That cannot
excuse violence, bloodshed and treason. It could avail him
nothing that he might think himself right. So, if we
constitutionally elect a President, and therefore you
undertake to destroy the Union, it will be our duty to deal
with you as old John Brown has been dealt with. We shall
try to do our duty. We hope and believe that in no section
will a majority so act as to render such extreme measures
necessary.
  
 
. 
. 
    
.  . H
  A 
  A
 
. H.
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, Dec. 14, 1859
MESSRS. DOLE, HUBBARD 
 BROWN.
GENT.: — Your favor of the 12th is at hand, and it gives
me pleasure to be able to answer it. It is not my intention to
take part in any of the rivalries for the gubernatorial
nomination; but the fear of being misunderstood upon that
subject ought not to deter me from doing justice to Mr.
Judd, and preventing a wrong being done to him by the use
of nay name in connection with alleged wrongs to me.
In answer to your ﬁrst question, as to whether Mr. Judd
was guilty of any unfairness to me at the time of Senator
Trumbull’s 
election, 
I 
answer 
unhesitatingly 
in 
the
negative; Mr. Judd owed no political allegiance to any party
whose candidate I was. He was in the Senate, holding over,
having been elected by a Democratic Constituency. He
never was in any caucus of the friends who sought to make
me U. S. Senator, never gave me any promises or pledges to
support me, and subsequent events have greatly tended to
prove the wisdom, politically, of Mr. Judd’s course. The
election of Judge Trumbull strongly tended to sustain and
preserve the position of that lion of the Democrats who
condemned the repeal of the Missouri Compromise, and
 left them in a position of joining with us in forming the
Republican party, as was done at the Bloomington
convention in 1856.
During the canvass of 1858 for the senatorship my belief
was, and still is, that I had no more sincere and faithful
friend than Mr. Judd — certainly none whom I trusted more.
His position as chairman of the State Central Committee
led to my greater intercourse with him, and to my giving
him a larger share of my conﬁdence, than with or to almost
any other friend; and I have never suspected that that
conﬁdence was, to any degree, misplaced.
My relations with Mr. Judo since the organization of the
Republican party, in, our State, in 1856, and especially
since the adjournment of the Legislature in Feb., 1857,
have been so very intimate that I deem it an impossibility
that he could have been dealing treacherously with me. He
has also, at all times, appeared equally true and faithful to
the party. In his position as chairman of the committee, I
believe he did all that any man could have done. The best of
us are liable to commit errors, which become apparent by
subsequent developments; but I do not know of a single
error, even, committed by Mr. Judd, since he and I have
acted together politically.
I, had occasionally heard these insinuations against Mr.
Judd, before the receipt of your letter; and in no instance
have I hesitated to pronounce them wholly unjust, to the
full extent of my knowledge and belief. I have been, and
still am, very anxious to take no part between the many
friends, all good and true, who are mentioned as candidates
 for a Republican gubernatorial nomination; but I can not
feel that my own honor is quite clear if I remain silent when
I hear any one of them assailed about matters of which I
believe I know more than his assailants.
I take pleasure in adding that, of all the avowed friends I
had in the canvass of last year, I do not suspect any of
having acted treacherously to me, or to our cause; and that
there is not one of them in whose honesty, honor, and
integrity I, today, have greater conﬁdence than I have in
those of Mr. Judd.
I dislike to appear before the public in this matter; but
you are at liberty to make such use of this letter as you may
think justice requires.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. 
.  A  
  A
 
 H   .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, December 19, 1859.
MESSRS. G. M. PARSONS AND OTHERS, CENTRAL
E ECUTIVE COMMITTEE, ETC.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter of the 7th instant,
accompanied by a similar one from the governor-elect, the
Republican State oﬀicers, and the Republican members of
the State Board of Equalization of Ohio, both requesting of
me, for publication in permanent form, copies of the
political debates between Senator Douglas and myself last
year, 
has 
been 
received. 
With 
my 
grateful
acknowledgments to both you and them for the very
ﬂattering terms in which the request is communicated, I
transmit you the copies. The copies I send you are as
reported and printed by the respective friends of Senator
Douglas and myself, at the time — that is, his by his friends,
and mine by mine. It would be an unwarrantable liberty for
us to change a word or a letter in his, and the changes I
have made in mine, you perceive, are verbal only, and very
few in number. I wish the reprint to be precisely as the
copies I send, without any comment whatever.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A
 
 I
 A HI A       H
TO J. W. FELL,
SPRINGFIELD, DECEMBER 20, 1859.
J. W. FELL, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR: — Herewith is a little sketch, as you
requested. There is not much of it, for the reason, I
suppose, that there is not much of me. If anything be made
out of it, I wish it to be modest, and not to go beyond the
material. If it were thought necessary to incorporate
anything from any of my speeches I suppose there would be
no objection. Of course it must not appear to have been
written by myself.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN
—— —
I was born February 12, 1809, in Hardin County,
Kentucky. My parents were both born in Virginia, of
undistinguished families — second families, perhaps I
should say. My mother, who died in my tenth year, was of a
family of the name of Hanks, some of whom now reside in
Adams, and others in Macon County, Illinois. My paternal
grandfather, Abraham Lincoln, emigrated from Rockingham
County, Virginia, to Kentucky about 1781 or 1782, where a
year or two later he was killed by the Indians, not in battle,
but by stealth, when he was laboring to open a farm in the
 forest. His ancestors, who were Quakers, went to Virginia
from Berks County, Pennsylvania. An eﬀort to identify them
with the New England family of the same name ended in
nothing more deﬁnite than a similarity of Christian names
in both families, such as Enoch, Levi, Mordecai, Solomon,
Abraham, and the like.
My father, at the death of his father, was but six years of
age, and he grew up literally without education. He
removed from Kentucky to what is now Spencer County,
Indiana, in my eighth year. We reached our new home
about the time that State came into the Union. It was a wild
region, with many bears and other wild animals still in the
woods. There I grew up. There were some schools, so
called, but no qualiﬁcation was ever required of a teacher
beyond “readin’, writin’, and cipherin”’ to the Rule of
Three. If a straggler supposed to understand Latin
happened to sojourn in the neighborhood he was looked
upon as a wizard. There was absolutely nothing to excite
ambition for education. Of course, when I came of age I did
not know much. Still, somehow, I could read, write, and
cipher to the Rule of Three, but that was all. I have not
been to school since. The little advance I now have upon
this store of education I have picked up from time to time
under the pressure of necessity.
I was raised to farm work, which I continued till I was
twenty-two. At twenty-one I came to Illinois, Macon County.
Then I got to New Salem, at that time in Sangamon, now in
Menard County, where I remained a year as a sort of clerk
in a store. Then came the Black Hawk war; and I was
 elected a captain of volunteers, a success which gave me
more pleasure than any I have had since. I went the
campaign, was elected, ran for the Legislature the same
year (1832), and was beaten — the only time I ever have
been beaten by the people. The next and three succeeding
biennial elections I was elected to the Legislature. I was
not a candidate afterward. During this legislative period I
had studied law, and removed to Springﬁeld to practice it.
In 1846 I was once elected to the lower House of Congress.
Was not a candidate for re-election. From 1849 to 1854,
both inclusive, practiced law more assiduously than ever
before. Always a Whig in politics; and generally on the
Whig electoral tickets, making active canvasses. I was
losing interest in politics when the repeal of the Missouri
Compromise aroused me again. What I have done since
then is pretty well known.
If any personal description of me is thought desirable, it
may be said I am, in height, six feet four inches, nearly;
lean in ﬂesh, weighing on an average one hundred and
eighty pounds; dark complexion, with coarse black hair and
gray eyes. No other marks or brands recollected.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
I
A I
  
  H  
A I
A   I   
To N. B. JUDD.
SPRINGFIELD, FEBRUARY 9, 1859 HON. N. B. JUDD.
DEAR Sir: — I am not in a position where it would hurt
much for me to not be nominated on the national ticket; but
I am where it would hurt some for me to not get the Illinois
delegates. What I expected when I wrote the letter to
Messrs. 
Dole 
and 
others 
is 
now 
happening. 
Your
discomﬁted assailants are most bitter against me; and they
will, for revenge upon me, lay to the Bates egg in the
South, and to the Seward egg in the North, and go far
toward squeezing me out in the middle with nothing. Can
you help me a little in this matter in your end of the
vineyard. I mean this to be private.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN
