    
  I    
 A 
 I H   A     I
  H  
I   I   
 
 
 IA
RESOLVED, THAT 
THE Committee on the District of
Columbia be instructed to report a bill in substance as
follows:
Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of
Representatives 
of 
the 
United 
States, 
in 
Congress
assembled, That no person not now within the District of
Columbia, nor now owned by any person or persons now
resident within it, nor hereafter born within it, shall ever be
held in slavery within said District.
Sec. 2. That no person now within said District, or now
owned by any person or persons now resident within the
same, or hereafter born within it, shall ever be held in
slavery without the limits of said District: Provided, That
oﬀicers of the Government of the United States, being
citizens of the slaveholding States, coming into said District
on public business, and remaining only so long as may be
reasonably necessary for that object, may be attended into
and out of said District, and while there, by the necessary
servants of themselves and their families, without their
right to hold such servants in service being thereby
impaired.
Sec. 3. That all children born of slave mothers within
said District, on or after the ﬁrst day of January, in the year
 of our Lord eighteen hundred and ﬁfty, shall be free; but
shall be reasonably supported and educated by the
respective owners of their mothers, or by their heirs or
representatives, and shall owe reasonable service as
apprentices to such owners, heirs, or representatives, until
they respectively arrive at the age of years, when they shall
be 
entirely 
free; 
and 
the 
municipal 
authorities 
of
Washington and Georgetown, within their respective
jurisdictional limits, are hereby empowered and required to
make all suitable and necessary provision for enforcing
obedience to this section, on the part of both masters and
apprentices.
Sec. 4. That all persons now within this District, lawfully
held as slaves, or now owned by any person or persons now
resident within said District, shall remain such at the will of
their 
respective 
owners, 
their 
heirs, 
and 
legal
representatives: Provided, That such owner, or his legal
representative, may at any time receive from the Treasury
of the United States the full value of his or her slave, of the
class in this section mentioned, upon which such slave shall
be forthwith and forever free: And provided further, That
the President of the United States, the Secretary of State,
and the Secretary of the Treasury shall be a board for
determining the value of such slaves as their owners may
desire to emancipate under this section, and whose duty it
shall be to hold a session for the purpose on the ﬁrst
Monday of each calendar month, to receive all applications,
and, on satisfactory evidence in each case that the person
presented for valuation is a slave, and of the class in this
 section mentioned, and is owned by the applicant, shall
value such slave at his or her full cash value, and give to
the applicant an order on the Treasury for the amount, and
also to such slave a certiﬁcate of freedom.
Sec. 5. That the municipal authorities of Washington and
Georgetown, within their respective jurisdictional limits,
are hereby empowered and required to provide active and
eﬀicient means to arrest and deliver up to their owners all
fugitive slaves escaping into said District.
Sec. 6. That the election oﬀicers within said District of
Columbia are hereby empowered and required to open
polls, at all the usual places of holding elections, on the
ﬁrst Monday of April next, and receive the vote of every
free white male citizen above the age of twenty-one years,
having resided within said District for the period of one
year or more next preceding the time of such voting for or
against this act, to proceed in taking said votes, in all
respects not herein speciﬁed, as at elections under the
municipal laws, and with as little delay as possible to
transmit correct statements of the votes so cast to the
President of the United States; and it shall be the duty of
the President to canvass said votes immediately, and if a
majority of them be found to be for this act, to forthwith
issue his proclamation giving notice of the fact; and this act
shall only be in full force and eﬀect on and after the day of
such proclamation.
Sec. 7. That involuntary servitude for the punishment of
crime, whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,
shall in no wise be prohibited by this act.
 Sec. 8. That for all the purposes of this act, the
jurisdictional limits of Washington are extended to all parts
of the District of Columbia not now included within the
present limits of Georgetown.
  I   
 A
 I
  A
   
  H    A     
A    AI 
A   A
  A
A 
REMARKS IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
FEBRUARY 13, 1849.
MR. LINCOLN SAID he had not risen for the purpose of
making a speech, but only for the purpose of meeting some
of the objections to the bill. If he understood those
objections, the ﬁrst was that if the bill were to become a
law, it would be used to lock large portions of the public
lands from sale, without at last eﬀecting the ostensible
object of the bill — the construction of railroads in the new
States; and secondly, that Congress would be forced to the
abandonment of large portions of the public lands to the
States for which they might be reserved, without their
paying for them. This he understood to be the substance of
the objections of the gentleman from Ohio to the passage of
the bill.
If he could get the attention of the House for a few
minutes, he would ask gentlemen to tell us what motive
could induce any State Legislature, or individual, or
company of individuals, of the new States, to expend money
in surveying roads which they might know they could not
make.
(A voice: They are not required to make the road.)
 Mr. Lincoln continued: That was not the case he was
making. What motive would tempt any set of men to go into
an extensive survey of a railroad which they did not intend
to make? What good would it do? Did men act without
motive? 
Did 
business 
men 
commonly 
go 
into 
an
expenditure of money which could be of no account to
them? He generally found that men who have money were
disposed to hold on to it, unless they could see something
to be made by its investment. He could not see what motive
of advantage to the new States could be subserved by
merely keeping the public lands out of market, and
preventing their settlement. As far as he could see, the new
States were wholly without any motive to do such a thing.
This, then, he took to be a good answer to the ﬁrst
objection.
In relation to the fact assumed, that after a while, the
new States having got hold of the public lands to a certain
extent, they would turn round and compel Congress to
relinquish all claim to them, he had a word to say, by way of
recurring to the history of the past. When was the time to
come (he asked) when the States in which the public lands
were 
situated 
would 
compose 
a 
majority 
of 
the
representation in Congress, or anything like it? A majority
of Representatives would very soon reside west of the
mountains, he admitted; but would they all come from
States in which the public lands were situated? They
certainly would not; for, as these Western States grew
strong in Congress, the public lands passed away from
them, and they got on the other side of the question; and
 the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Vinton] was an example
attesting that fact.
Mr. Vinton interrupted here to say that he had stood on
this question just where he was now, for ﬁve and twenty
years.
Mr. Lincoln was not making an argument for the purpose
of convicting the gentleman of any impropriety at all. He
was speaking of a fact in history, of which his State was an
example. He was referring to a plain principle in the nature
of things. The State of Ohio had now grown to be a giant.
She had a large delegation on that ﬂoor; but was she now
in favor of granting lands to the new States, as she used to
be? The New England States, New York, and the Old
Thirteen were all rather quiet upon the subject; and it was
seen just now that a member from one of the new States
was the ﬁrst man to rise up in opposition. And such would
be with the history of this question for the future. There
never would come a time when the people residing in the
States embracing the public lands would have the entire
control of this subject; and so it was a matter of certainty
that Congress would never do more in this respect than
what 
would 
be 
dictated 
by 
a 
just 
liberality. 
The
apprehension, therefore, that the public lands were in
danger of being wrested from the General Government by
the strength of the delegation in Congress from the new
States, was utterly futile. There never could be such a
thing. If we take these lands (said he) it will not be without
your consent. We can never outnumber you. The result is
that all fear of the new States turning against the right of
 Congress to the public domain must be eﬀectually quelled,
as those who are opposed to that interest must always hold
a vast majority here, and they will never surrender the
whole or any part of the public lands unless they
themselves choose to do so. That was all he desired to say.
    
  A   
 I I A  A  
I
 
 
 
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY.
WASHINGTON, MARCH 9, 1849.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY.
DEAR SIR: Colonel R. D. Baker and myself are the only
Whig members of Congress from Illinois of the Thirtieth,
and he of the Thirty-ﬁrst. We have reason to think the
Whigs of that State hold us responsible, to some extent, for
the appointments which may be made of our citizens. We
do not know you personally, and our eﬀorts to you have so
far been unavailing. I therefore hope I am not obtrusive in
saying in this way, for him and myself, that when a citizen
of Illinois is to be appointed in your department, to an
oﬀice either in or out of the State, we most respectfully ask
to be heard.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
     
 I I A   A  
A
    
   
TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
WASHINGTON, MARCH 10, 1849.
HON. SECRETARY OF STATE.
SIR: — There are several applicants for the oﬀice of
United States Marshal for the District of Illinois. Among the
most prominent of them are Benjamin Bond, Esq., of
Carlyle, and Thomas, Esq., of Galena. Mr. Bond I know to
be personally every way worthy of the oﬀice; and he is very
numerously and most respectably recommended. His
papers I send to you; and I solicit for his claims a full and
fair consideration.
Having said this much, I add that in my individual
judgment the appointment of Mr. Thomas would be the
better.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
(Indorsed on Mr. Bond’s papers.) In this and the
accompanying envelope are the recommendations of about
two hundred good citizens of all parts of Illinois, that
Benjamin Bond be appointed marshal for that district. They
include the names of nearly all our Whigs who now are, or
have ever been, members of the State Legislature, besides
forty-six of the Democratic members of the present
 Legislature, and many other good citizens. I add that from
personal knowledge I consider Mr. Bond every way worthy
of the oﬀice, and qualiﬁed to ﬁll it. Holding the individual
opinion that the appointment of a diﬀerent gentleman
would be better, I ask especial attention and consideration
for his claims, and for the opinions expressed in his favor
by those over whom I can claim no superiority.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
   H  I
   I
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, April 7, 1849
HON. SECRETARY OF THE HOME DEPARTMENT.
DEAR SIR: — I recommend that Walter Davis be
appointed receiver of the land-oﬀice at this place,
whenever there shall be a vacancy. I cannot say that Mr.
Herndon, the present incumbent, has failed in the proper
discharge of any of the duties of the oﬀice. He is a very
warm partisan, and openly and actively opposed to the
election of General Taylor. I also understand that since
General Taylor’s election he has received a reappointment
from Mr. Polk, his old commission not having expired.
Whether this is true the records of the department will
show. I may add that the Whigs here almost universally
desire his removal.
I give no opinion of my own, but state the facts, and
express the hope that the department will act in this as in
all other cases on some proper general rule.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — The land district to which this oﬀice belongs is
very nearly if not entirely within my district; so that Colonel
Baker, the other Whig representative, claims no voice in the
appointment. A. L.
  
  H        A   
   H  I
   I
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, April 7, 1849.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE HOME DEPARTMENT.
DEAR SIR: — I recommend that Turner R. King, now of
Pekin, Illinois, be appointed register of the land-oﬀice at
this place whenever there shall be a vacancy.
I do not know that Mr. Barret, the present incumbent,
has failed in the proper discharge of any of his duties in the
oﬀice. He is a decided partisan, and openly and actively
opposed the election of General Taylor. I understand, too,
that since the election of General Taylor, Mr. Barret has
received 
a 
reappointment 
from 
Mr. 
Polk, 
his 
old
commission not having expired. Whether this be true, the
records of the department will show.
Whether he should be removed I give no opinion, but
merely express the wish that the department may act upon
some proper general rule, and that Mr. Barret’s case may
not be made an exception to it.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
P. S.-The land district to which this oﬀice belongs is very
nearly if not entirely within my district; so that Colonel
Baker, the other Whig representative, claims no voice in the
appointment. A. L.
  
  H   
  
A     
 
  A .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, April 7,1849.
HON. POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
DEAR Sir: — I recommend that Abner Y. Ellis be
appointed postmaster at this place, whenever there shall be
a vacancy. J. R. Diller, the present incumbent, I cannot say
has failed in the proper discharge of any of the duties of the
oﬀice. He, however, has been an active partisan in
opposition to us.
Located at the seat of government of the State, he has
been, for part if not the whole of the time he has held the
oﬀice, a member of the Democratic State Central
Committee, signing his name to their addresses and
manifestoes; and has been, as I understand, reappointed by
Mr. Polk since General Taylor’s election. These are the facts
of the case as I understand them, and I give no opinion of
mine as to whether he should or should not be removed.
My wish is that the department may adopt some proper
general rule for such cases, and that Mr. Diller may not be
made an exception to it, one way or the other.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — This oﬀice, with its delivery, is entirely within my
district; 
so 
that 
Colonel 
Baker, 
the 
other 
Whig
representative, claims no voice in the appointment.L.
  
  H        A   
   H  I
   I
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, April 7, 1849.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE HOME DEPARTMENT.
DEAR SIR: — I recommend that William Butler be
appointed pension agent for the Illinois agency, when the
place shall be vacant. Mr. Hurst, the present incumbent, I
believe has performed the duties very well. He is a decided
partisan, and I believe expects to be removed. Whether he
shall, I submit to the department. This oﬀice is not conﬁned
to my district, but pertains to the whole State; so that
Colonel Baker has an equal right with myself to be heard
concerning it. However, the oﬀice is located here; and I
think it is not probable that any one would desire to remove
from a distance to take it.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, April 25, 1849.
DEAR THOMPSON: A tirade is still kept up against me
here for recommending T. R. King. This morning it is openly
avowed that my supposed inﬂuence at Washington shall be
broken down generally, and King’s prospects defeated in
particular. Now, what I have done in this matter I have
done at the request of you and some other friends in
Tazewell; and I therefore ask you to either admit it is wrong
or come forward and sustain me. If the truth will permit, I
propose that you sustain me in the following manner: copy
the inclosed scrap in your own handwriting and get
everybody (not three or four, but three or four hundred) to
sign it, and then send it to me. Also, have six, eight or ten
of our best known Whig friends there write to me individual
letters, stating the truth in this matter as they understand
it. Don’t neglect or delay in the matter. I understand
information of an indictment having been found against him
about three years ago, for gaming or keeping a gaming
house, has been sent to the department. I shall try to take
care of it at the department till your action can be had and
forwarded on.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
   H  I
   I
 .
SPRINGFIELD ILLINOIS. May 10, 1849.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR.
DEAR SIR: — I regret troubling you so often in relation
to the land-oﬀices here, but I hope you will perceive the
necessity of it, and excuse me. On the 7th of April I wrote
you recommending Turner R. King for register, and Walter
Davis for receiver. Subsequently I wrote you that, for a
private reason, I had concluded to transpose them. That
private reason was the request of an old personal friend
who himself desired to be receiver, but whom I felt it my
duty to refuse a recommendation. He said if I would
transpose King and Davis he would be satisﬁed. I thought it
a whim, but, anxious to oblige him, I consented.
Immediately he commenced an assault upon King’s
character, 
intending, 
as 
I 
suppose, 
to 
defeat 
his
appointment, and thereby secure another chance for
himself. This double oﬀence of bad faith to me and slander
upon a good man is so totally outrageous that I now ask to
have King and Davis placed as I originally recommended, —
that is, King for register and Davis for receiver.
An eﬀort is being made now to have Mr. Barret, the
present register, retained. I have already said he has done
the duties of the oﬀice well, and I now add he is a
 gentleman in the true sense. Still, he submits to be the
instrument of his party to injure us. His high character
enables him to do it more eﬀectually. Last year he presided
at the convention which nominated the Democratic
candidate for Congress in this district, and afterward ran
for the State Senate himself, not desiring the seat, but
avowedly to aid and strengthen his party. He made speech
after speech with a degree of ﬁerceness and coarseness
against General Taylor not quite consistent with his
habitually gentlemanly deportment. At least one (and I
think more) of those who are now trying to have him
retained was himself an applicant for this very oﬀice, and,
failing to get my recommendation, now takes this turn.
In writing you a third time in relation to these oﬀices, I
stated that I supposed charges had been forwarded to you
against King, and that I would inquire into the truth of
them. I now send you herewith what I suppose will be an
ample defense against any such charges. I ask attention to
all the papers, but particularly to the letters of Mr. David
Mack, and the paper with the long list of names. There is
no mistake about King’s being a good man. After the unjust
assault upon him, and considering the just claims of
Tazewell County, as indicated in the letters I inclose you, it
would in my opinion be injustice, and withal a blunder, not
to appoint him, at least as soon as any one is appointed to
either of the oﬀices here.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
I     I .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., May 19, 1849.
DEAR GILLESPIE: Butterﬁeld will be commissioner of
the Gen’l Land Oﬀice, unless prevented by strong and
speedy eﬀorts. Ewing is for him, and he is only not
appointed yet because Old Zach. hangs ﬁre.
I have reliable information of this. Now, if you agree with
me that this appointment would dissatisfy rather than
gratify the Whigs of this State, that it would slacken their
energies in future contests, that his appointment in ‘41 is
an old sore with them which they will not patiently have
reopened, — in a word that his appointment now would be
a fatal blunder to the administration and our political men
here in Illinois, write Crittenden to that eﬀect. He can
control the matter. Were you to write Ewing I fear the
President would never hear of your letter. This may be
mere suspicion. You might write directly to Old Zach. You
will be the best judge of the propriety of that. Not a
moment’s time is to be lost.
Let this be conﬁdential except with Mr. Edwards and a
few others whom you know I would trust just as I do you.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   
     
  
 
  A   A
 
  I 
A   
I
 
 
TO E. EMBREE.
[Conﬁdential]
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, May 25, 1849.
HON. E. EMBREE
DEAR SIR: — I am about to ask a favor of you, one which
I hope will not cost you much. I understand the General
Land-Oﬀice is about to be given to Illinois, and that Mr.
Ewing desires Justin Butterﬁeld, of Chicago, to be the man.
I give you my word, the appointment of Mr. Butterﬁeld will
be an egregious political blunder. It will give oﬀence to the
whole Whig party here, and be worse than a dead loss to
the administration of so much of its patronage. Now, if you
can conscientiously do so, I wish you to write General
Taylor at once, saying that either I or the man I recommend
should in your opinion be appointed to that oﬀice, if any
one from Illinois shall be. I restrict my request to Illinois
because you may have a man from your own State, and I do
not ask to interfere with that.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   
     
  A  A  
IMPROVED METHOD OF LIFTING VESSELS OVER
SHOALS.
APPLICATION FOR PATENT: What I claim as my invention,
and desire to secure by letters patent, is the combination of
expansible buoyant chambers placed at the sides of a
vessel with the main shaft or shafts by means of the sliding
spars, which pass down through the buoyant chambers and
are made fast to their bottoms and the series of ropes and
pulleys or their equivalents in such a manner that by
turning the main shaft or shafts in one direction the
buoyant chambers will be forced downward into the water,
and at the same time expanded and ﬁlled with air for
buoying up the vessel by the displacement of water, and by
turning the shafts in an opposite direction the buoyant
chambers will be contracted into a small space and secured
against injury.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
  I
   I
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., June 3, 1849
HON. SECRETARY OF INTERIOR.
DEAR SIR: — Vandalia, the receiver’s oﬀice at which
place is the subject of the within, is not in my district; and I
have been much perplexed to express any preference
between Dr. Stapp and Mr. Remann. If any one man is
better qualiﬁed for such an oﬀice than all others, Dr. Stapp
is that man; still, I believe a large majority of the Whigs of
the district prefer Mr. Remann, who also is a good man.
Perhaps the papers on ﬁle will enable you to judge better
than I can. The writers of the within are good men, residing
within the land district.
Your obt. servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. H. H  
.
SPRINGFIELD, June 5, 1849.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Your two letters were received last
night. I have a great many letters to write, and so cannot
write very long ones. There must be some mistake about
Walter Davis saying I promised him the post-oﬀice. I did not
so promise him. I did tell him that if the distribution of the
oﬀices should fall into my hands, he should have
something; and if I shall be convinced he has said any more
than this, I shall be disappointed. I said this much to him
because, as I understand, he is of good character, is one of
the young men, is of the mechanics, and always faithful and
never troublesome; a Whig, and is poor, with the support of
a widow mother thrown almost exclusively on him by the
death of his brother. If these are wrong reasons, then I
have been wrong; but I have certainly not been selﬁsh in it,
because in my greatest need of friends he was against me,
and for Baker.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. Let the above be conﬁdential.
  
  . 
I     I .
DEAR GILLESPIE: 
MR. EDWARDS IS unquestionably oﬀended with me in
connection with the matter of the General Land-Oﬀice. He
wrote a letter against me which was ﬁled at the
department.
The better part of one’s life consists of his friendships;
and, of them, mine with Mr. Edwards was one of the most
cherished. I have not been false to it. At a word I could
have had the oﬀice any time before the department was
committed to Mr. Butterﬁeld, at least Mr. Ewing and the
President say as much. That word I forbore to speak, partly
for other reasons, but chieﬂy for Mr. Edwards’ sake, losing
the oﬀice (that he might gain it) I was always for; but to
lose his friendship, by the eﬀort for him, would oppress me
very 
much, 
were 
I 
not 
sustained 
by 
the 
utmost
consciousness of rectitude. I ﬁrst determined to be an
applicant, unconditionally, on the 2nd of June; and I did so
then upon being informed by a telegraphic despatch that
the question was narrowed down to Mr. B and myself, and
that the Cabinet had postponed the appointment three
weeks, for my beneﬁt. Not doubting that Mr. Edwards was
wholly out of the question I, nevertheless, would not then
have become an applicant had I supposed he would thereby
be brought to suspect me of treachery to him. Two or three
 days afterwards a conversation with Levi Davis convinced
me Mr. Edwards was dissatisﬁed; but I was then too far in
to get out. His own letter, written on the 25th of April, after
I had fully informed him of all that had passed, up to within
a few days of that time, gave assurance I had that entire
conﬁdence from him which I felt my uniform and strong
friendship for him entitled me to. Among other things it
says, “Whatever course your judgment may dictate as
proper to be pursued, shall never be excepted to by me.” I
also had had a letter from Washington, saying Chambers, of
the Republic, had brought a rumor then, that Mr. E had
declined in my favor, which rumor I judged came from Mr.
E himself, as I had not then breathed of his letter to any
living creature. In saying I had never, before the 2nd of
June, determined to be an applicant, unconditionally, I
mean to admit that, before then, I had said substantially I
would take the oﬀice rather than it should be lost to the
State, or given to one in the State whom the Whigs did not
want; but I aver that in every instance in which I spoke of
myself, I intended to keep, and now believe I did keep, Mr.
E above myself. Mr. Edwards’ ﬁrst suspicion was that I had
allowed Baker to overreach me, as his friend, in behalf of
Don Morrison. I knew this was a mistake; and the result
has proved it. I understand his view now is, that if I had
gone to open war with Baker I could have ridden him down,
and had the thing all my own way. I believe no such thing.
With Baker and some strong man from the Military tract 
elsewhere for Morrison, and we and some strong man from
the Wabash 
 elsewhere for Mr. E, it was not possible for
 either to succeed. I believed this in March, and I know it
now. The only thing which gave either any chance was the
very thing Baker 
 I proposed, — an adjustment with
themselves.
You may wish to know how Butterﬁeld ﬁnally beat me. I
can not tell you particulars now, but will when I see you. In
the meantime let it be understood I am not greatly
dissatisﬁed, — I wish the oﬀer had been so bestowed as to
encourage our friends in future contests, and I regret
exceedingly Mr. Edwards’ feelings towards me. These two
things away, I should have no regrets, — at least I think I
would not.
Write me soon.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
    
 
 I
  
    
 A H  
I H  H   A
 
  H
A IA
     
SEPTEMBER , 1849.
AT A MEETING to express sympathy with the cause of
Hungarian freedom, Dr. Todd, Thos. Lewis, Hon. A. Lincoln,
and Wm. Carpenter were appointed a committee to present
appropriate resolutions, which reported through Hon. A.
Lincoln the following:
Resolved, That, in their present glorious struggle for
liberty, the Hungarians command our highest admiration
and have our warmest sympathy.
Resolved, That they have our most ardent prayers for
their speedy triumph and ﬁnal success.
Resolved, That the Government of the United States
should acknowledge the independence of Hungary as a
nation of freemen at the very earliest moment consistent
with our amicable relations with the government against
which they are contending.
Resolved, That, in the opinion of this meeting, the
immediate 
acknowledgment 
of 
the 
independence 
of
Hungary by our government is due from American freemen
to their struggling brethren, to the general cause of
republican liberty, and not violative of the just rights of any
nation or people.
  
 
r. 
I  IA
  I HIA
.
SPRINGFIELD, Sept. 14, 1849.
DR. WILLIAM FITHIAN, Danville, Ill.
DEAR DOCTOR: — Your letter of the 9th was received a
day or two ago. The notes and mortgages you enclosed me
were duly received. I also got the original Blanchard
mortgage from Antrim Campbell, with whom Blanchard had
left it for you. I got a decree of foreclosure on the whole;
but, owing to there being no redemption on the sale to be
under the Blanchard mortgage, the court allowed Mobley
till the ﬁrst of March to pay the money, before advertising
for sale. Stuart was empowered by Mobley to appear for
him, and I had to take such decree as he would consent to,
or none at all. I cast the matter about in my mind and
concluded that as I could not get a decree we would put the
accrued interest at interest, and thereby more than match
the fact of throwing the Blanchard debt back from twelve to
six per cent., it was better to do it. This is the present state
of the case.
I can well enough understand and appreciate your
suggestions about the Land-Oﬀice at Danville; but in my
present condition, I can do nothing.
Yours, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
    I
 I  
  
ec.         .
—— — ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — On my return from Kentucky I found your
letter of the 7th of November, and have delayed answering
it till now for the reason I now brieﬂy state. From the
beginning of our acquaintance I had felt the greatest
kindness for you and had supposed it was reciprocated on
your part. Last summer, under circumstances which I
mentioned to you, I was painfully constrained to withhold a
recommendation which you desired, and shortly afterwards
I learned, in such a way as to believe it, that you were
indulging in open abuse of me. Of course my feelings were
wounded. On receiving your last letter the question
occurred whether you were attempting to use me at the
same time you would injure me, or whether you might not
have been misrepresented to me. If the former, I ought not
to answer you; if the latter, I ought, and so I have remained
in suspense. I now enclose you the letter, which you may
use if you see ﬁt.
Yours, etc., A. LINCOLN.
