    
  
  
H
  .  
     .  ri ate.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., FEBRUARY 10, 1857.
DEAR SIR: — Your note about the little paragraph in the
Republican was received yesterday, since which time I have
been too unwell to notice it. I had not supposed you wrote
or approved it. The whole originated in mistake. You know
by 
the 
conversation 
with 
me 
that 
I 
thought 
the
establishment of the paper unfortunate, but I always
expected to throw no obstacle in its way, and to patronize it
to the extent of taking and paying for one copy. When the
paper was brought to my house, my wife said to me, “Now
are you going to take another worthless little paper?” I said
to her evasively, “I have not directed the paper to be left.”
From this, in my absence, she sent the message to the
carrier. This is the whole story.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A 
 A       H
SPEECH IN SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, JUNE 26, 1857.
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I am here to-night partly by the
invitation of some of you, and partly by my own inclination.
Two weeks ago Judge Douglas spoke here on the several
subjects of Kansas, the Dred Scott decision, and Utah. I
listened to the speech at the time, and have the report of it
since. It was intended to controvert opinions which I think
just, and to assail (politically, not personally) those men
who, in common with me, entertain those opinions. For this
reason I wished then, and still wish, to make some answer
to it, which I now take the opportunity of doing.
I begin with Utah. If it prove to be true, as is probable,
that the people of Utah are in open rebellion to the United
States, then Judge Douglas is in favor of repealing their
territorial organization, and attaching them to the adjoining
States for judicial purposes. I say, too, if they are in
rebellion, they ought to be somehow coerced to obedience;
and I am not now prepared to admit or deny that the
Judge’s mode of coercing them is not as good as any. The
Republicans can fall in with it without taking back anything
they have ever said. To be sure, it would be a considerable
backing down by Judge Douglas from his much-vaunted
doctrine of self-government for the Territories; but this is
 only additional proof of what was very plain from the
beginning, that that doctrine was a mere deceitful pretense
for the beneﬁt of slavery. Those who could not see that
much in the Nebraska act itself, which forced governors,
and secretaries, and judges on the people of the Territories
without their choice or consent, could not be made to see,
though one should rise from the dead.
But in all this it is very plain the Judge evades the only
question the Republicans have ever pressed upon the
Democracy in regard to Utah. That question the Judge well
knew to be this: “If the people of Utah peacefully form a
State constitution tolerating polygamy, will the Democracy
admit them into the Union?” There is nothing in the United
States Constitution or law against polygamy; and why is it
not a part of the Judge’s “sacred right of self-government”
for the people to have it, or rather to keep it, if they
choose? These questions, so far as I know, the Judge never
answers. It might involve the Democracy to answer them
either way, and they go unanswered.
As to Kansas. The substance of the Judge’s speech on
Kansas is an eﬀort to put the free-State men in the wrong
for not voting at the election of delegates to the
constitutional convention. He says:
“There is every reason to hope and believe that the law
will be fairly interpreted and impartially executed, so as to
insure to every bona ﬁde inhabitant the free and quiet
exercise of the elective franchise.”
It appears extraordinary that Judge Douglas should make
such a statement.
 He knows that, by the law, no one can vote who has not
been registered;
and he knows that the free-State men place their refusal
to vote on the
ground that but few of them have been registered. It is
possible that this
is not true, but Judge Douglas knows it is asserted to be
true in letters,
newspapers, and public speeches, and borne by every
mail and blown by
every breeze to the eyes and ears of the world. He knows
it is boldly
declared that the people of many whole counties, and
many whole
neighborhoods in others, are left unregistered; yet he
does not venture
to contradict the declaration, or to point out how they
can vote without
being registered; but he just slips along, not seeming to
know there is
any such question of fact, and complacently declares:
“There is every reason to hope and believe that the law
will be
fairly and impartially executed, so as to insure to every
bona ﬁde
inhabitant the free and quiet exercise of the elective
franchise.”
 I readily agree that if all had a chance to vote they ought
to have voted. If, on the contrary, as they allege, and Judge
Douglas ventures not to particularly contradict, few only of
the free-State men had a chance to vote, they were
perfectly right in staying from the polls in a body.
By the way, since the Judge spoke, the Kansas election
has come oﬀ. The Judge expressed his conﬁdence that all
the Democrats in Kansas would do their duty-including
“free-State Democrats,” of course. The returns received
here as yet are very incomplete; but so far as they go, they
indicate that only about one sixth of the registered voters
have really voted; and this, too, when not more, perhaps,
than one half of the rightful voters have been registered,
thus showing the thing to have been altogether the most
exquisite 
farce 
ever 
enacted. 
I 
am 
watching 
with
considerable interest to ascertain what ﬁgure “the free-
State Democrats” cut in the concern. Of course they voted,
— all Democrats do their duty, — and of course they did not
vote for slave-State candidates. We soon shall know how
many delegates they elected, how many candidates they
had pledged to a free State, and how many votes were cast
for them.
Allow me to barely whisper my suspicion that there were
no such things in Kansas as “free-State Democrats” — that
they were altogether mythical, good only to ﬁgure in
newspapers and speeches in the free States. If there should
prove to be one real living free-State Democrat in Kansas, I
suggest that it might be well to catch him, and stuﬀ and
 preserve his skin as an interesting specimen of that soon-
to-be extinct variety of the genus Democrat.
And now as to the Dred Scott decision. That decision
declares two propositions — ﬁrst, that a negro cannot sue
in the United States courts; and secondly, that Congress
cannot prohibit slavery in the Territories. It was made by a
divided court dividing diﬀerently on the diﬀerent points.
Judge Douglas does not discuss the merits of the decision,
and in that respect I shall follow his example, believing I
could no more improve on McLean and Curtis than he
could on Taney.
He denounces all who question the correctness of that
decision, as oﬀering violent resistance to it. But who resists
it? Who has, in spite of the decision, declared Dred Scott
free, and resisted the authority of his master over him?
Judicial decisions have two uses — ﬁrst, to absolutely
determine the case decided, and secondly, to indicate to the
public how other similar cases will be decided when they
arise. For the latter use, they are called “precedents” and
“authorities.”
We believe as much as Judge Douglas (perhaps more) in
obedience to, and respect for, the judicial department of
government. We think its decisions on constitutional
questions, when fully settled, should control not only the
particular cases decided, but the general policy of the
country, subject to be disturbed only by amendments of the
Constitution as provided in that instrument itself. More
than this would be revolution. But we think the Dred Scott
decision is erroneous. We know the court that made it has
 often overruled its own decisions, and we shall do what we
can to have it to overrule this. We oﬀer no resistance to it.
Judicial decisions are of greater or less authority as
precedents according to circumstances. That this should be
so accords both with common sense and the customary
understanding of the legal profession.
If this important decision had been made by the
unanimous concurrence of the judges, and without any
apparent partisan bias, and in accordance with legal public
expectation 
and 
with 
the 
steady 
practice 
of 
the
departments throughout our history, and had been in no
part based on assumed historical facts which are not really
true; or, if wanting in some of these, it had been before the
court more than once, and had there been aﬀirmed and
reaﬀirmed through a course of years, it then might be,
perhaps would be, factious, nay, even revolutionary, not to
acquiesce in it as a precedent.
But when, as is true, we ﬁnd it wanting in all these
claims to the public conﬁdence, it is not resistance, it is not
factious, it is not even disrespectful, to treat it as not
having yet quite established a settled doctrine for the
country. But Judge Douglas considers this view awful. Hear
him:
“The courts are the tribunals prescribed by the
Constitution and created by the authority of the people to
determine, expound, and enforce the law. Hence, whoever
resists the ﬁnal decision of the highest judicial tribunal
aims a deadly blow at our whole republican system of
government — a blow which, if successful, would place all
 our rights and liberties at the mercy of passion, anarchy,
and violence. I repeat, therefore, that if resistance to the
decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States, in a
matter like the points decided in the Dred Scott case,
clearly 
within 
their 
jurisdiction 
as 
deﬁned 
by 
the
Constitution, shall be forced upon the country as a political
issue, it will become a distinct and naked issue between the
friends and enemies of the Constitution — the friends and
the enemies of the supremacy of the laws.”
Why, this same Supreme Court once decided a national
bank to be constitutional; but General Jackson, as President
of the United States, disregarded the decision, and vetoed
a bill for a recharter, partly on constitutional ground,
declaring that each public functionary must support the
Constitution “as he understands it.” But hear the General’s
own words. Here they are, taken from his veto message:
“It is maintained by the advocates of the bank that its
constitutionality, in all its features, ought to be considered
as settled by precedent, and by the decision of the Supreme
Court. To this conclusion I cannot assent. Mere precedent
is a dangerous source of authority, and should not be
regarded as deciding questions of constitutional power,
except where the acquiescence of the people and the States
can be considered as well settled. So far from this being
the case on this subject, an argument against the bank
might be based on precedent. One Congress, in 1791,
decided in favor of a bank; another, in 1811, decided
against it. One Congress, in 1815, decided against a bank;
another, in 1816, decided in its favor. Prior to the present
 Congress, therefore, the precedents drawn from that
course were equal. If we resort to the States, the
expressions of legislative, judicial, and executive opinions
against the bank have been probably to those in its favor as
four to one. There is nothing in precedent, therefore,
which, if its authority were admitted, ought to weigh in
favor of the act before me.”
I drop the quotations merely to remark that all there ever
was in the way of precedent up to the Dred Scott decision,
on the points therein decided, had been against that
decision. But hear General Jackson further:
“If the opinion of the Supreme Court covered the whole
ground of this act, it ought not to control the coordinate
authorities 
of 
this 
government. 
The 
Congress, 
the
executive, and the courts must, each for itself, be guided by
its own opinion of the Constitution. Each public oﬀicer who
takes an oath to support the Constitution swears that he
will support it as he understands it, and not as it is
understood by others.”
Again and again have I heard Judge Douglas denounce
that bank decision and applaud General Jackson for
disregarding it. It would be interesting for him to look over
his recent speech, and see how exactly his ﬁerce philippics
against us for resisting Supreme Court decisions fall upon
his own head. It will call to mind a long and ﬁerce political
war in this country, upon an issue which, in his own
language, and, of course, in his own changeless estimation,
“was a distinct issue between the friends and the enemies
 of the Constitution,” and in which war he fought in the
ranks of the enemies of the Constitution.
I have said, in substance, that the Dred Scott decision
was in part based on assumed historical facts which were
not really true, and I ought not to leave the subject without
giving some reasons for saying this; I therefore give an
instance or two, which I think fully sustain me. Chief
Justice Taney, in delivering the opinion of the majority of
the court, insists at great length that negroes were no part
of the people who made, or for whom was made, the
Declaration of Independence, or the Constitution of the
United States.
On the contrary, Judge Curtis, in his dissenting opinion,
shows that in ﬁve of the then thirteen States — to wit, New
Hampshire, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, and
North Carolina — free negroes were voters, and in
proportion to their numbers had the same part in making
the Constitution that the white people had. He shows this
with so much particularity as to leave no doubt of its truth;
and as a sort of conclusion on that point, holds the
following language:
“The Constitution was ordained and established by the
people of the United States, through the action, in each
State, of those persons who were qualiﬁed by its laws to act
thereon in behalf of themselves and all other citizens of the
State. In some of the States, as we have seen, colored
persons were among those qualiﬁed by law to act on the
subject. These colored persons were not only included in
the body of ‘the people of the United States’ by whom the
 Constitution was ordained and established; but in at least
ﬁve of the States they had the power to act, and doubtless
did act, by their suﬀrages, upon the question of its
adoption.”
Again, Chief Justice Taney says:
“It is diﬀicult at this day to realize the state of public
opinion, in relation to that unfortunate race, which
prevailed in the civilized and enlightened portions of the
world at the time of the Declaration of Independence, and
when the Constitution of the United States was framed and
adopted.”
And again, after quoting from the Declaration, he says:
“The general words above quoted would seem to include
the whole human family, and if they were used in a similar
instrument at this day, would be so understood.”
In these the Chief Justice does not directly assert, but
plainly assumes as a fact, that the public estimate of the
black man is more favorable now than it was in the days of
the Revolution. This assumption is a mistake. In some
triﬂing particulars the condition of that race has been
ameliorated; but as a whole, in this country, the change
between then and now is decidedly the other way, and their
ultimate destiny has never appeared so hopeless as in the
last three or four years. In two of the ﬁve States — New
Jersey and North Carolina — that then gave the free negro
the right of voting, the right has since been taken away,
and in a third — New York — it has been greatly abridged;
while it has not been extended, so far as I know, to a single
additional State, though the number of the States has more
 than doubled. In those days, as I understand, masters
could, at their own pleasure, emancipate their slaves; but
since then such legal restraints have been made upon
emancipation as to amount almost to prohibition. In those
days Legislatures held the unquestioned power to abolish
slavery in their respective States, but now it is becoming
quite fashionable for State constitutions to withhold that
power from the Legislatures. In those days, by common
consent, the spread of the black man’s bondage to the new
countries was prohibited, but now Congress decides that it
will not continue the prohibition, and the Supreme Court
decides that it could not if it would. In those days our
Declaration of Independence was held sacred by all, and
thought to include all; but now, to aid in making the
bondage of the negro universal and eternal, it is assailed
and sneered at and construed and hawked at and torn, till,
if its framers could rise from their graves, they could not at
all recognize it. All the powers of earth seem rapidly
combining against him. Mammon is after him, ambition
follows, philosophy follows, and the theology of the day fast
joining the cry. They have him in his prison house; they
have searched his person, and left no prying instrument
with him. One after another they have closed the heavy iron
doors upon him; and now they have him, as it were, bolted
in with a lock of hundred keys, which can never be
unlocked without the concurrence of every key — the keys
in the hands of a hundred diﬀerent men, and they scattered
to hundred diﬀerent and distant places; and they stand
musing as to what invention, in all the dominions of mind
 and matter, can be produced to make the impossibility of
his escape more complete than it is.
It is grossly incorrect to say or assume that the public
estimate of the negro is more favorable now than it was at
the origin of the government.
Three years and a half ago, Judge Douglas brought
forward his famous Nebraska Bill. The country was at once
in a blaze. He scorned all opposition, and carried it through
Congress. Since then he has seen himself superseded in a
Presidential nomination by one indorsing the general
doctrine of his measure, but at the same time standing
clear of the odium of its untimely agitation and its gross
breach of national faith; and he has seen that successful
rival constitutionally elected, not by the strength of friends,
but by the division of adversaries, being in a popular
minority of nearly four hundred thousand votes. He has
seen his chief aids in his own State, Shields and
Richardson, 
politically 
speaking, 
successively 
tried,
convicted, and executed for an oﬀence not their own but
his. And now he sees his own case standing next on the
docket for trial.
There is a natural disgust in the minds of nearly all white
people at the idea of an indiscriminate amalgamation of the
white and black races; and Judge Douglas evidently is
basing his chief hope upon the chances of his being able to
appropriate the beneﬁt of this disgust to himself. If he can,
by much drumming and repeating, fasten the odium of that
idea upon his adversaries, he thinks he can struggle
through the storm. He therefore clings to this hope, as a
 drowning man to the last plank. He makes an occasion for
lugging it in from the opposition to the Dred Scott decision.
He ﬁnds the Republicans insisting that the Declaration of
Independence includes all men, black as well as white, and
forthwith he boldly denies that it includes negroes at all,
and proceeds to argue gravely that all who contend it does,
do so only because they want to vote, and eat, and sleep,
and marry with negroes. He will have it that they cannot be
consistent else. Now I protest against the counterfeit logic
which concludes that, because I do not want a black woman
for a slave I must necessarily want her for a wife. I need
not have her for either. I can just leave her alone. In some
respects she certainly is not my equal; but in her natural
right to eat the bread she earns with her own hands,
without asking leave of any one else, she is my equal and
the equal of all others.
Chief Justice Taney, in his opinion in the Dred Scott case,
admits that the language of the Declaration is broad
enough to include the whole human family, but he and
Judge Douglas argue that the authors of that instrument
did not intend to include negroes, by the fact that they did
not at once actually place them on an equality with the
whites. Now this grave argument comes to just nothing at
all, by the other fact that they did not at once, or ever
afterward, actually place all white people on an equality
with one another. And this is the staple argument of both
the Chief Justice and the Senator for doing this obvious
violence to the plain, unmistakable language of the
Declaration.
 I think the authors of that notable instrument intended to
include all men, but they did not intend to declare all men
equal in all respects. They did not mean to say all were
equal in color, size, intellect, moral developments, or social
capacity. They deﬁned with tolerable distinctness in what
respects they did consider all men created equal — equal
with “certain inalienable rights, among which are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” This they said, and
this they meant. They did not mean to assert the obvious
untruth that all were then actually enjoying that equality,
nor yet that they were about to confer it immediately upon
them. In fact, they had no power to confer such a boon.
They 
meant 
simply 
to 
declare 
the 
right, 
so 
that
enforcement of it might follow as fast as circumstances
should permit.
They meant to set up a standard maxim for free society,
which should be familiar to all, and revered by all;
constantly looked to, constantly labored for, and, even
though never perfectly attained, constantly approximated,
and thereby constantly spreading and deepening its
inﬂuence and augmenting the happiness and value of life to
all people of all colors everywhere. The assertion that “all
men are created equal” was of no practical use in eﬀecting
our separation from Great Britain; and it was placed in the
Declaration not for that, but for future use. Its authors
meant it to be — as thank God, it is now proving itself —
stumbling-block to all those who in after times might seek
to turn a free people back into the hateful paths of
despotism. They knew the proneness of prosperity to breed
 tyrants, and they meant when such should reappear in this
fair land and commence their vocation, they should ﬁnd left
for them at least one hard nut to crack.
I have now brieﬂy expressed my view of the meaning and
object of that part of the Declaration of Independence
which declares that “all men are created equal.”
Now let us hear Judge Douglas’s view of the same
subject, as I ﬁnd it in the printed report of his late speech.
Here it is:
“No man can vindicate the character, motives, and
conduct of the signers of the Declaration of Independence,
except upon the hypothesis that they referred to the white
race alone, and not to the African, when they declared all
men to have been created equal; that they were speaking of
British subjects on this continent being equal to British
subjects born and residing in Great Britain; that they were
entitled to the same inalienable rights, and among them
were enumerated life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
The Declaration was adopted for the purpose of justifying
the colonists in the eyes of the civilized world in
withdrawing their allegiance from the British crown, and
dissolving their connection with the mother country.”
My good friends, read that carefully over some leisure
hour, and ponder well upon it; see what a mere wreck —
mangled ruin — it makes of our once glorious Declaration.
“They were speaking of British subjects on this continent
being equal to British subjects born and residing in Great
Britain”! Why, according to this, not only negroes but white
people outside of Great Britain and America were not
 spoken of in that instrument. The English, Irish, and
Scotch, along with white Americans, were included, to be
sure, but the French, Germans, and other white people of
the world are all gone to pot along with the Judge’s inferior
races!
I had thought the Declaration promised something better
than the condition of British subjects; but no, it only meant
that we should be equal to them in their own oppressed and
unequal condition. According to that, it gave no promise
that, having kicked oﬀ the king and lords of Great Britain,
we should not at once be saddled with a king and lords of
our own.
I 
had 
thought 
the 
Declaration 
contemplated 
the
progressive improvement in the condition of all men
everywhere; but no, it merely “was adopted for the purpose
of justifying the colonists in the eyes of the civilized world
in withdrawing their allegiance from the British crown, and
dissolving their connection with the mother country.” Why,
that object having been eﬀected some eighty years ago, the
Declaration is of no practical use now — mere rubbish —
old wadding left to rot on the battleﬁeld after the victory is
won.
I understand you are preparing to celebrate the
“Fourth,” to-morrow week. What for? The doings of that
day had no reference to the present; and quite half of you
are not even descendants of those who were referred to at
that day. But I suppose you will celebrate, and will even go
so far as to read the Declaration. Suppose, after you read it
 once in the old-fashioned way, you read it once more with
Judge Douglas’s version. It will then run thus:
“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all British
subjects who were on this continent eighty-one years ago
were created equal to all British subjects born and then
residing in Great Britain.”
And now I appeal to all — to Democrats as well as others
— are you really willing that the Declaration shall thus be
frittered away? — thus left no more, at most, than an
interesting memorial of the dead past? — thus shorn of its
vitality and practical value, and left without the germ or
even the suggestion of the individual rights of man in it?
But Judge Douglas is especially horriﬁed at the thought
of the mixing of blood by the white and black races. Agreed
for once — a thousand times agreed. There are white men
enough to marry all the white women and black men
enough to many all the black women; and so let them be
married. On this point we fully agree with the Judge, and
when he shall show that his policy is better adapted to
prevent amalgamation than ours, we shall drop ours and
adopt his. Let us see. In 1850 there were in the United
States 405,751 mulattoes. Very few of these are the
oﬀspring of whites and free blacks; nearly all have sprung
from black slaves and white masters. A separation of the
races is the only perfect preventive of amalgamation; but as
an immediate separation is impossible, the next best thing
is to keep them apart where they are not already together.
If white and black people never get together in Kansas,
they will never mix blood in Kansas. That is at least one
 self-evident truth. A few free colored persons may get into
the free States, in any event; but their number is too
insigniﬁcant to amount to much in the way of mixing blood.
In 1850 there were in the free States 56,649 mulattoes; but
for the most part they were not born there — they came
from the slave States, ready made up. In the same year the
slave States had 348,874 mulattoes, all of home production.
The proportion of free mulattoes to free blacks — the only
colored classes in the free States is much greater in the
slave than in the free States. It is worthy of note, too, that
among the free States those which make the colored man
the nearest equal to the white have proportionably the
fewest mulattoes, the least of amalgamation. In New
Hampshire, the State which goes farthest toward equality
between the races, there are just 184 mulattoes, while
there are in Virginia — how many do you think? — 79,775,
being 23,126 more than in all the free States together.
These statistics show that slavery is the greatest source
of amalgamation, and next to it, not the elevation, but the
degradation of the free blacks. Yet Judge Douglas dreads
the slightest restraints on the spread of slavery, and the
slightest human recognition of the negro, as tending
horribly to amalgamation!
The very Dred Scott case aﬀords a strong test as to
which party most favors amalgamation, the Republicans or
the dear Union-saving Democracy. Dred Scott, his wife, and
two daughters were all involved in the suit. We desired the
court to have held that they were citizens so far at least as
to entitle them to a hearing as to whether they were free or
 not; and then, also, that they were in fact and in law really
free. Could we have had our way, the chances of these
black girls ever mixing their blood with that of white people
would have been diminished at least to the extent that it
could not have been without their consent. But Judge
Douglas is delighted to have them decided to be slaves, and
not human enough to have a hearing, even if they were
free, and thus left subject to the forced concubinage of
their masters, and liable to become the mothers of
mulattoes in spite of themselves: the very state of case that
produces nine tenths of all the mulattoes all the mixing of
blood in the nation.
Of course, I state this case as an illustration only, not
meaning to say or intimate that the master of Dred Scott
and his family, or any more than a percentage of masters
generally, are inclined to exercise this particular power
which they hold over their female slaves.
I have said that the separation of the races is the only
perfect preventive of amalgamation. I have no right to say
all the members of the Republican party are in favor of this,
nor to say that as a party they are in favor of it. There is
nothing in their platform directly on the subject. But I can
say a very large proportion of its members are for it, and
that the chief plank in their platform — opposition to the
spread of slavery — is most favorable to that separation.
Such separation, if ever eﬀected at all, must be eﬀected
by colonization; and no political party, as such, is now doing
anything directly for colonization. Party operations at
present only favor or retard colonization incidentally. The
 enterprise is a diﬀicult one; but “where there is a will there
is a way,” and what colonization needs most is a hearty will.
Will springs from the two elements of moral sense and self-
interest. Let us be brought to believe it is morally right, and
at the same time favorable to, or at least not against, our
interest to transfer the African to his native clime, and we
shall ﬁnd a way to do it, however great the task may be.
The children of Israel, to such numbers as to include four
hundred thousand ﬁghting men, went out of Egyptian
bondage in a body.
How diﬀerently the respective courses of the Democratic
and Republican parties incidentally, bear on the question of
forming a will — a public sentiment — for colonization, is
easy to see. The Republicans inculcate, with whatever of
ability they can, that the negro is a man, that his bondage
is cruelly wrong, and that the ﬁeld of his oppression ought
not to be enlarged. The Democrats deny his manhood; deny,
or dwarf to insigniﬁcance, the wrong of his bondage; so far
as possible crush all sympathy for him, and cultivate and
excite hatred and disgust against him; compliment
themselves as Union-savers for doing so; and call the
indeﬁnite outspreading of his bondage “a sacred right of
self-government.”
The plainest print cannot be read through a gold eagle;
and it will be ever hard to ﬁnd many men who will send a
slave to Liberia, and pay his passage, while they can send
him to a new country — Kansas, for instance — and sell him
for ﬁfteen hundred dollars, and the rise.
  
 
I  IA
 
 I
  .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, August, 1857
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 14th is received, and I am
much obliged for the legal information you give.
You can scarcely be more anxious than I that the next
election in Iowa should result in favor of the Republicans. I
lost nearly all the working part of last year, giving my time
to the canvass; and I am altogether too poor to lose two
years together. I am engaged in a suit in the United States
Court at Chicago, in which the Rock Island Bridge
Company is a party. The trial is to commence on the 8th of
September, and probably will last two or three weeks.
During the trial it is not improbable that all hands may
come over and take a look at the bridge, and, if it were
possible to make it hit right, I could then speak at
Davenport. My courts go right on without cessation till late
in November. Write me again, pointing out the more
striking points of diﬀerence between your old and new
constitutions, and also whether Democratic and Republican
party lines were drawn in the adoption of it, and which
were for and which were against it. If, by possibility, I could
get over among you it might be of some advantage to know
these things in advance.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A 
 
  I
  H   
   I  A
   I
   A  .
(From the Daily Press of Chicago, Sept. 24, 1857.)
HURD ET AL. vs Railroad Bridge Co.
United 
States 
Circuit 
Court, 
Hon. 
John 
McLean,
Presiding Judge.
13th day, Tuesday, Sept. 22, 1857.
Mr. A. Lincoln addressed the jury. He said he did not
purpose to assail anybody, that he expected to grow earnest
as he proceeded but not ill-natured. “There is some conﬂict
of testimony in the case,” he said, “but one quarter of such
a number of witnesses seldom agree, and even if all were
on one side some discrepancy might be expected. We are to
try and reconcile them, and to believe that they are not
intentionally erroneous as long as we can.” He had no
prejudice, he said, against steamboats or steamboat men
nor any against St. Louis, for he supposed they went about
this matter as other people would do in their situation. “St.
Louis,” he continued, “as a commercial place may desire
that this bridge should not stand, as it is adverse to her
commerce, diverting a portion of it from the river; and it
may be that she supposes that the additional cost of
railroad transportation upon the productions of Iowa will
force them to go to St. Louis if this bridge is removed. The
meetings in St. Louis are connected with this case only as
 some witnesses are in it, and thus has some prejudice
added color to their testimony.” The last thing that would
be pleasing to him, Mr. Lincoln said, would be to have one
of these great channels, extending almost from where it
never freezes to where it never thaws, blocked up, but
there is a travel from east to west whose demands are not
less important than those of the river. It is growing larger
and larger, building up new countries with a rapidity never
before seen in the history of the world. He alluded to the
astonishing growth of Illinois, having grown within his
memory to a population of a million and a half; to Iowa and
the other young rising communities of the Northwest.
“This current of travel,” said he, “has its rights as well as
that of north and south. If the river had not the advantage
in priority and legislation we could enter into free
competition with it and we could surpass it. This particular
railroad line has a great importance and the statement of
its business during a little less than a year shows this
importance. It is in evidence that from September 8, 1856,
to August 8, 1857, 12,586 freight cars and 74,179
passengers passed over this bridge. Navigation was closed
four days short of four months last year, and during this
time while the river was of no use this road and bridge
were valuable. There is, too, a considerable portion of time
when ﬂoating or thin ice makes the river useless while the
bridge is as useful as ever. This shows that this bridge must
be treated with respect in this court and is not to be kicked
about with contempt. The other day Judge Wead alluded to
the strike of the contending interest and even a dissolution
 of the Union. The proper mode for all parties in this aﬀair is
to ‘live and let live,’ and then we will ﬁnd a cessation of this
trouble about the bridge. What mood were the steamboat
men in when this bridge was burned? Why, there was a
shouting and ringing of bells and whistling on all the boats
as it fell. It was a jubilee, a greater celebration than follows
an excited election. The ﬁrst thing I will proceed to is the
record of Mr. Gurney and the complaint of Judge Wead that
the record did not extend back over all the time from the
completion of the bridge. The principal part of the
navigation after the bridge was burned passed through the
span. When the bridge was repaired and the boats were a
second time conﬁned to the draw it was provided that this
record should be kept. That is the simple history of that
book.
“From April 19th, 1856, to May 6th — seventeen days —
there were twenty accidents and all the time since then
there have been but twenty hits, including seven accidents,
so that the dangers of this place are tapering oﬀ and as the
boatmen get cool the accidents get less. We may soon
expect if this ratio is kept up that there will be no accidents
at all.
“Judge Wead said, while admitting that the ﬂoats went
straight through, there was a diﬀerence between a ﬂoat
and a boat, but I do not remember that he indulged us with
an argument in support of this statement. Is it because
there is a diﬀerence in size? Will not a small body and a
large one ﬂoat the same way under the same inﬂuence?
True a ﬂatboat will ﬂoat faster than an egg shell and the
 egg shell might be blown away by the wind, but if under
the same inﬂuence they would go the same way. Logs,
ﬂoats, boards, various things the witnesses say all show the
same current. Then is not this test reliable? At all depths
too the direction of the current is the same. A series of
these ﬂoats would make a line as long as a boat and would
show any inﬂuence upon any part and all parts of the boat.
“I will now speak of the angular position of the piers.
What is the amount of the angle? The course of the river is
a curve and the pier is straight. If a line is produced from
the upper end of the long pier straight with the pier to a
distance of 350 feet, and a line is drawn from a point in the
channel opposite this point to the head of the pier, Colonel
Nason says they will form an angle of twenty degrees. But
the angle if measured at the pier is seven degrees; that is,
we would have to move the pier seven degrees to make it
exactly straight with the current. Would that make the
navigation better or worse? The witnesses of the plaintiﬀ
seem to think it was only necessary to say that the pier
formed an angle with the current and that settled the
matter. Our more careful and accurate witnesses say that,
though they had been accustomed to seeing the piers
placed straight with the current, yet they could see that
here the current had been made straight by us in having
made this slight angle; that the water now runs just right,
that it is straight and cannot be improved. They think that
if the pier was changed the eddy would be divided and the
navigation improved.
 “I am not now going to discuss the question what is a
material obstruction. We do not greatly diﬀer about the law.
The cases produced here are, I suppose, proper to be taken
into consideration by the court in instructing a jury. Some
of them I think are not exactly in point, but I am still willing
to trust his honor, Judge McLean, and take his instructions
as law. What is reasonable skill and care? This is a thing of
which the jury are to judge. I diﬀer from the other side
when it says that they are bound to exercise no more care
than was taken before the building of the bridge. If we are
allowed by the Legislature to build the bridge which will
require them to do more than before, when a pilot comes
along, it is unreasonable for him to dash on heedless of this
structure which has been legally put there. The Afton came
there on the 5th and lay at Rock Island until next morning.
When a boat lies up the pilot has a holiday, and would not
any of these jurors have then gone around to the bridge
and gotten acquainted with the place? Pilot Parker has
shown here that he does not understand the draw. I heard
him say that the fall from the head to the foot of the pier
was four feet; he needs information. He could have gone
there that day and seen there was no such fall. He should
have discarded passion and the chances are that he would
have had no disaster at all. He was bound to make himself
acquainted with the place.
“McCammon says that the current and the swell coming
from the long pier drove her against the long pier. In other
words drove her toward the very pier from which the
current came! It is an absurdity, an impossibility. The only
 recollection I can ﬁnd for this contradiction is in a current
which White says strikes out from the long pier and then
like a ram’s horn turns back, and this might have acted
somehow in this manner.
“It is agreed by all that the plaintiﬀ’s boat was destroyed
and that it was destroyed upon the head of the short pier;
that she moved from the channel where she was with her
bow above the head of the long pier, till she struck the
short one, swung around under the bridge and there was
crowded and destroyed.
“I shall try to prove that the average velocity of the
current through the draw with the boat in it should be ﬁve
and a half miles an hour; that it is slowest at the head of
the pier and swiftest at the foot of the pier. Their lowest
estimate in evidence is six miles an hour, their highest
twelve miles. This was the testimony of men who had made
no experiment, only conjecture. We have adopted the most
exact means. The water runs swiftest in high water and we
have taken the point of nine feet above low water. The
water when the Afton was lost was seven feet above low
water, or at least a foot lower than our time. Brayton and
his assistants timed the instruments, the best instruments
known in measuring currents. They timed them under
various circumstances and they found the current ﬁve miles
an hour and no more. They found that the water at the
upper end ran slower than ﬁve miles; that below it was
swifter than ﬁve miles, but that the average was ﬁve miles.
Shall men who have taken no care, who conjecture, some of
whom speak of twenty miles an hour, be believed against
 those who have had such a favorable and well improved
opportunity? They should not even qualify the result.
Several men have given their opinion as to the distance of
the steamboat Carson, and I suppose if one should go and
measure that distance you would believe him in preference
to all of them.
“These measurements were made when the boat was not
in the draw. It has been ascertained what is the area of the
cross section of this stream and the area of the face of the
piers, and the engineers say that the piers being put there
will increase the current proportionally as the space is
decreased. So with the boat in the draw. The depth of the
channel was twenty-two feet, the width one hundred and
sixteen feet; multiply these and you have the square-feet
across the water of the draw, viz.: 2552 feet. The Afton was
35 feet wide and drew 5 feet, making a fourteenth of the
sum. Now, one-fourteenth of ﬁve miles is ﬁve-fourteenths of
one mile — about one third of a mile — the increase of the
current. We will call the current ﬁve and a half miles per
hour. The next thing I will try to prove is that the plaintiﬀ’s
(?) boat had power to run six miles an hour in that current.
It had been testiﬁed that she was a strong, swift boat, able
to run eight miles an hour up stream in a current of four
miles an hour, and ﬁfteen miles down stream. Strike the
average and you will ﬁnd what is her average — about
eleven and a half miles. Take the ﬁve and a half miles which
is the speed of the current in the draw and it leaves the
power of that boat in that draw at six miles an hour, 528
feet per minute and 8 4 5 feet to the second.
 “Next I propose to show that there are no cross currents.
I know their witnesses say that there are cross currents —
that, as one witness says, there were three cross currents
and two eddies; so far as mere statement, without
experiment, and mingled with mistakes, can go, they have
proved. But can these men’s testimony be compared with
the nice, exact, thorough experiments of our witnesses?
Can you believe that these ﬂoats go across the currents? It
is inconceivable that they could not have discovered every
possible current. How do boats ﬁnd currents that ﬂoats
cannot discover? We assume the position then that those
cross currents are not there. My next proposition is that
the Afton passed between the S. B. Carson and the Iowa
shore. That is undisputed.
“Next I shall show that she struck ﬁrst the short pier,
then the long pier, then the short one again and there she
stopped.” Mr. Lincoln then cited the testimony of eighteen
witnesses on this point.
“How did the boat strike when she went in? Here is an
endless variety of opinion. But ten of them say what pier
she struck; three of them testify that she struck ﬁrst the
short, then the long and then the short for the last time.
None of the rest substantially contradict this. I assume that
these men have got the truth because I believe it an
established fact. My next proposition is that after she
struck the short and long pier and before she got back to
the short pier the boat got right with her bow up. So says
the pilot Parker — that he got her through until her
starboard wheel passed the short pier. This would make her
 head about even with the head of the long pier. He says her
head was as high or higher than the head of the long pier.
Other witnesses conﬁrmed this one. The ﬁnal stroke was in
the splash door aft the wheel. Witnesses diﬀer, but the
majority say that she struck thus.”
Court adjourned.
14th day, Wednesday, Sept. 23, 1857.
Mr. A. LINCOLN resumed. He said he should conclude as
soon as possible. He said the colored map of the plaintiﬀ
which was brought in during one stage of the trial showed
itself that the cross currents alleged did not exist. That the
current as represented would drive an ascending boat to
the long pier but not to the short pier, as they urge. He
explained from a model of a boat where the splash door is,
just behind the wheel. The boat struck on the lower
shoulder of the short pier as she swung around in the
splash door; then as she went on around she struck the
point or end of the pier, where she rested. “Her engineers,”
said Mr. Lincoln, “say the starboard wheel then was
rushing around rapidly. Then the boat must have struck the
upper point of the pier so far back as not to disturb the
wheel. It is forty feet from the stern of the Afton to the
splash door, and thus it appears that she had but forty feet
to go to clear the pier. How was it that the Afton with all
her power ﬂanked over from the channel to the short pier
without moving one foot ahead? Suppose she was in the
middle of the draw, her wheel would have been 31 feet
from the short pier. The reason she went over thus is her
starboard wheel was not working. I shall try to establish
 the fact that the wheel was not running and that after she
struck she went ahead strong on this same wheel. Upon the
last point the witnesses agree, that the starboard wheel
was running after she struck, and no witnesses say that it
was running while she was out in the draw ﬂanking over.”
Mr. Lincoln read from the testimonies of various
witnesses to prove that the starboard wheel was not
working while the Afton was out in the stream.
“Other witnesses show that the captain said something of
the machinery of the wheel, and the inference is that he
knew the wheel was not working. The fact is undisputed
that she did not move one inch ahead while she was moving
this 31 feet sideways. There is evidence proving that the
current there is only ﬁve miles an hour, and the only
explanation is that her power was not all used — that only
one wheel was working. The pilot says he ordered the
engineers to back her up. The engineers diﬀer from him
and said they kept on going ahead. The bow was so swung
that the current pressed it over; the pilot pressed the stern
over with the rudder, though not so fast but that the bow
gained on it, and only one wheel being in motion the boat
nearly stood still so far as motion up and down is
concerned, and thus she was thrown upon this pier. The
Afton came into the draw after she had just passed the
Carson, and as the Carson no doubt kept the true course
the Afton going around her got out of the proper way, got
across the current into the eddy which is west of a straight
line drawn down from the long pier, was compelled to
resort to these changes of wheels, which she did not do
 with suﬀicient adroitness to save her. Was it not her own
fault that she entered wrong, so far wrong that she never
got right? Is the defence to blame for that?
“For several days we were entertained with depositions
about boats ‘smelling a bar.’ Why did the Afton then, after
she had come up smelling so close to the long pier sheer oﬀ
so strangely. When she got to the centre of the very nose
she was smelling she seemed suddenly to have lost her
sense of smell and to have ﬂanked over to the short pier.”
Mr. Lincoln said there was no practicability in the project
of building a tunnel under the river, for there “is not a
tunnel that is a successful project in this world. A
suspension bridge cannot be built so high but that the
chimneys of the boats will grow up till they cannot pass.
The steamboat men will take pains to make them grow. The
cars of a railroad cannot without immense expense rise
high enough to get even with a suspension bridge or go low
enough to get through a tunnel; such expense is
unreasonable.
“The plaintiﬀs have to establish that the bridge is a
material obstruction and that they have managed their boat
with reasonable care and skill. As to the last point high
winds have nothing to do with it, for it was not a windy day.
They must show due skill and care. Diﬀiculties going down
stream will not do, for they were going up stream.
Diﬀiculties with barges in tow have nothing to do with the
accident, for they had no barge.” Mr. Lincoln said he had
much more to say, many things he could suggest to the jury,
but he wished to close to save time.
  
        . 
 
I .
DEAR DUBOIS: 
BLOOMINGTON, DEC. 19, 1857.
J. M. Douglas of the I. C. R. R. Co. is here and will carry
this letter. He says they have a large sum (near  90,000)
which they will pay into the treasury now, if they have an
assurance that they shall not be sued before Jan., 1859 —
otherwise not. I really wish you could consent to this.
Douglas says they cannot pay more, and I believe him.
I do not write this as a lawyer seeking an advantage for a
client; but only as a friend, only urging you to do what I
think I would do if I were in your situation. I mean this as
private and conﬁdential only, but I feel a good deal of
anxiety about it.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
   H 
I     I .
SPRINGFIELD, Jan. 19, 1858.
MY DEAR SIR: This morning Col. McClernand showed
me a petition for a mandamus against the Secretary of
State to compel him to certify the apportionment act of last
session; and he says it will be presented to the court to-
morrow morning. We shall be allowed three or four days to
get up a return, and I, for one, want the beneﬁt of
consultation with you.
Please come right up.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
I     I .
SPRINGFIELD, Feb 7, 1858
MY DEAR SIR: Yesterday morning the court overruled
the demurrer to Hatches return in the mandamus case.
McClernand was present; said nothing about pleading over;
and so I suppose the matter is ended.
The court gave no reason for the decision; but Peck tells
me conﬁdentially that they were unanimous in the opinion
that even if the Gov’r had signed the bill purposely, he had
the right to scratch his name oﬀ so long as the bill
remained in his custody and control.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H.  . 
HI 
  .
SPRINGFIELD, December 18, 1857.
HENRY C. WHITNEY, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Coming home from Bloomington last
night I found your letter of the 15th.
I know of no express statute or decisions as to what a J. P.
upon the expiration of his term shall do with his docket
books, papers, unﬁnished business, etc., but so far as I
know, the practice has been to hand over to the successor,
and to cease to do anything further whatever, in perfect
analogy to Sections 110 and 112, and I have supposed and
do suppose this is the law. I think the successor may
forthwith do whatever the retiring J. P. might have done. As
to the proviso to Section 114 I think it was put in to cover
possible cases, by way of caution, and not to authorize the
J. P. to go forward and ﬁnish up whatever might have been
begun by him.
The view I take, I believe, is the Common law principle,
as to retiring oﬀicers and their successors, to which I
remember but one exception, which is the case of Sheriﬀ
and ministerial oﬀicers of that class.
I have not had time to examine this subject fully, but I
have great conﬁdence I am right. You must not think of
oﬀering me pay for this.
 Mr. John O. Johnson is my friend; I gave your name to
him. He is doing the work of trying to get up a Republican
organization. I do not suppose “Long John” ever saw or
heard of him. Let me say to you conﬁdentially, that I do not
entirely appreciate what the Republican papers of Chicago
are so constantly saying against “Long John.” I consider
those papers truly devoted to the Republican cause, and
not unfriendly to me; but I do think that more of what they
say against “Long John” is dictated by personal malice than
themselves are conscious of. We can not aﬀord to lose the
services of “Long John” and I do believe the unrelenting
warfare made upon him is injuring our cause. I mean this to
be conﬁdential.
If you quietly co-operate with Mr. J. O. Johnson on getting
up an organization, I think it will be right.
Your friend as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
