    
   
     
   
 I I A   
  
 
TO Dr. ROBERT BOAL. SPRINGFIELD, January 7, 1846.
DR. ROBERT BOAL, Lacon, Ill.
DEAR DOCTOR: — Since I saw you last fall, I have often
thought of writing to you, as it was then understood I
would, but, on reﬂection, I have always found that I had
nothing new to tell you. All has happened as I then told you
I expected it would — Baker’s declining, Hardin’s taking
the track, and so on.
If Hardin and I stood precisely equal, if neither of us had
been to Congress, or if we both had, it would only accord
with what I have always done, for the sake of peace, to give
way to him; and I expect I should do it. That I can
voluntarily postpone my pretensions, when they are no
more than equal to those to which they are postponed, you
have yourself seen. But to yield to Hardin under present
circumstances seems to me as nothing else than yielding to
one who would gladly sacriﬁce me altogether. This I would
rather not submit to. That Hardin is talented, energetic,
usually generous and magnanimous, I have before this
aﬀirmed to you and do not deny. You know that my only
argument is that “turn about is fair play.” This he,
practically at least, denies.
 If it would not be taxing you too much, I wish you would
write me, telling the aspect of things in your country, or
rather your district; and also, send the names of some of
your Whig neighbors, to whom I might, with propriety,
write. Unless I can get some one to do this, Hardin, with his
old franking list, will have the advantage of me. My reliance
for a fair shake (and I want nothing more) in your country
is chieﬂy on you, because of your position and standing,
and because I am acquainted with so few others. Let me
hear from you soon.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
   
   .
SPRINGFIELD, Jan. 15, 1846.
JOHN BENNETT. FRIEND JOHN: Nathan Dresser is
here, and speaks as though the contest between Hardin
and me is to be doubtful in Menard County. I know he is
candid and this alarms me some. I asked him to tell me the
names of the men that were going strong for Hardin, he
said Morris was about as strong as any-now tell me, is
Morris going it openly? You remember you wrote me that
he would be neutral. Nathan also said that some man,
whom he could not remember, had said lately that Menard
County was going to decide the contest and that made the
contest very doubtful. Do you know who that was? Don’t
fail to write me instantly on receiving this, telling me all —
particularly the names of those who are going strong
against me.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
.  .  
  
   .
SPRINGFIELD, January 21, 1846.
DEAR SIR: — You perhaps know that General Hardin and
I have a contest for the Whig nomination for Congress for
this district.
He has had a turn and my argument is “turn about is fair
play.”
I shall be pleased if this strikes you as a suﬀicient
argument.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  A
      
A
.
SPRINGFIELD, April 26, 1846.
DEAR SIR: — I thank you for the promptness with which
you answered my letter from Bloomington. I also thank you
for the frankness with which you comment upon a certain
part of my letter; because that comment aﬀords me an
opportunity of trying to express myself better than I did
before, seeing, as I do, that in that part of my letter, you
have not understood me as I intended to be understood.
In speaking of the “dissatisfaction” of men who yet mean
to do no wrong, etc., I mean no special application of what I
said to the Whigs of Morgan, or of Morgan 
 Scott. I only
had in my mind the fact that previous to General Hardin’s
withdrawal some of his friends and some of mine had
become a little warm; and I felt, and meant to say, that for
them now to meet face to face and converse together was
the best way to eﬀace any remnant of unpleasant feeling, if
any such existed.
I did not suppose that General Hardin’s friends were in
any greater need of having their feelings corrected than
mine were. Since I saw you at Jacksonville, I have had no
more suspicion of the Whigs of Morgan than of those of any
other part of the district. I write this only to try to remove
 any impression that I distrust you and the other Whigs of
your country.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  A
      
A
.
SPRINGFIELD, May 7, 1866.
DEAR SIR: — It is a matter of high moral obligation, if
not of necessity, for me to attend the Coles and Edwards
courts. I have some cases in both of them, in which the
parties have my promise, and are depending upon me. The
court commences in Coles on the second Monday, and in
Edgar on the third. Your court in Morgan commences on
the fourth Monday; and it is my purpose to be with you
then, and make a speech. I mention the Coles and Edgar
courts in order that if I should not reach Jacksonville at the
time named you may understand the reason why. I do not,
however, think there is much danger of my being detained;
as I shall go with a purpose not to be, and consequently
shall engage in no new cases that might delay me.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
        
 I   
     I
 
 
 A     A  I I   
HI  
 
 H
  I
 I
IA
A
(A FRAGMENT).
[IN DECEMBER, 1847, when Lincoln was stumping for
Clay, he crossed into Indiana and revisited his old home. He
writes: “That part of the country is within itself as
unpoetical as any spot on earth; but still seeing it and its
objects and inhabitants aroused feelings in me which were
certainly poetry; though whether my expression of these
feelings is poetry, is quite another question.”]
Near twenty years have passed away Since here I bid
farewell
To woods and ﬁelds, and scenes of play, And playmates
loved so well.
Where many were, but few remain Of old familiar things;
But seeing them to mind again The lost and absent
brings.
The friends I left that parting day, How changed, as time
has sped!
Young childhood grown, strong manhood gray, And half
of all are dead.
 I hear the loved survivors tell How naught from death
could save, Till every sound appears a knell, And every spot
a grave.
I range the ﬁelds with pensive tread, And pace the
hollow rooms,
And feel (companion of the dead) I ‘m living in the tombs.
VERSES WRITTEN BY LINCOLN CONCERNING A
SCHOOL-FELLOW
WHO BECAME INSANE — (A FRAGMENT).
And when at length the drear and long Time soothed thy
ﬁercer woes, How plaintively thy mournful song Upon the
still night rose
I’ve heard it oft as if I dreamed, Far distant, sweet and
lone; The funeral dirge it ever seemed Of reason dead and
gone.
Air held her breath; trees with the spell Seemed
sorrowing angels round, Whose swelling tears in dewdrops
fell Upon the listening ground.
But this is past, and naught remains That raised thee o’er
the brute; Thy piercing shrieks and soothing strains Are
like, forever mute.
 Now fare thee well! More thou the cause Than subject
now of woe.
All mental pangs by time’s kind laws Hast lost the power
to know.
O Death! thou awe-inspiring prince That keepst the
world in fear, Why dost thou tear more blest ones hence,
And leave him lingering here?
    
  HI 
TO JOSHUA P. SPEED
SPRINGFIELD, OCTOBER 22, 1846.
DEAR SPEED: — You, no doubt, assign the suspension of
our correspondence to the true philosophic cause; though it
must be confessed by both of us that this is rather a cold
reason for allowing a friendship such as ours to die out by
degrees. I propose now that, upon receipt of this, you shall
be considered in my debt, and under obligations to pay
soon, and that neither shall remain long in arrears
hereafter. Are you agreed?
Being elected to Congress, though I am very grateful to
our friends for having done it, has not pleased me as much
as I expected.
We have another boy, born the 10th of March. He is very
much such a child as Bob was at his age, rather of a longer
order. Bob is “short and low,” and I expect always will be.
He talks very plainly, — almost as plainly as anybody. He is
quite smart enough. I sometimes fear that he is one of the
little rare-ripe sort that are smarter at about ﬁve than ever
after. He has a great deal of that sort of mischief that is the
oﬀspring of such animal spirits. Since I began this letter, a
messenger came to tell me Bob was lost; but by the time I
reached the house his mother had found him and had him
 whipped, and by now, very likely, he is run away again.
Mary has read your letter, and wishes to be remembered to
Mrs. Speed and you, in which I most sincerely join her.
As ever yours, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
  I  A
   
SPRINGFIELD, October 21, 1847.
MESSRS. MORRIS AND BROWN.
GENTLEMEN: — Your second letter on the matter of
Thornton and others, came to hand this morning. I went at
once to see Logan, and found that he is not engaged
against you, and that he has so sent you word by Mr.
Butterﬁeld, as he says. He says that some time ago, a
young man (who he knows not) came to him, with a copy of
the aﬀidavit, to engage him to aid in getting the Governor
to grant the warrant; and that he, Logan, told the man, that
in his opinion, the aﬀidavit was clearly insuﬀicient, upon
which the young man left, without making any engagement
with him. If the Governor shall arrive before I leave, Logan
and I will both attend to the matter, and he will attend to it,
if he does not come till after I leave; all upon the condition
that the Governor shall not have acted upon the matter,
before his arrival here. I mention this condition because, I
learned this morning from the Secretary of State, that he is
forwarding to the Governor, at Palestine, all papers he
receives in the case, as fast as he receives them. Among the
papers forwarded will be your letter to the Governor or
Secretary of, I believe, the same date and about the same
contents of your last letter to me; so that the Governor will,
 at all events have your points and authorities. The case is a
clear one on our side; but whether the Governor will view it
so is another thing.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I  IA
 H. H  
WASHINGTON, December 5, 1847.
DEAR WILLIAM: — You may remember that about a year
ago a man by the name of Wilson (James Wilson, I think)
paid us twenty dollars as an advance fee to attend to a case
in the Supreme Court for him, against a Mr. Campbell, the
record of which case was in the hands of Mr. Dixon of St.
Louis, who never furnished it to us. When I was at
Bloomington last fall I met a friend of Wilson, who
mentioned the subject to me, and induced me to write to
Wilson, telling him I would leave the ten dollars with you
which had been left with me to pay for making abstracts in
the case, so that the case may go on this winter; but I came
away, and forgot to do it. What I want now is to send you
the money, to be used accordingly, if any one comes on to
start the case, or to be retained by you if no one does.
There is nothing of consequence new here. Congress is
to organize to-morrow. Last night we held a Whig caucus
for the House, and nominated Winthrop of Massachusetts
for speaker, Sargent of Pennsylvania for sergeant-at-arms,
Homer of New Jersey door-keeper, and McCormick of
District of Columbia postmaster. The Whig majority in the
House is so small that, together with some little
 dissatisfaction, [it] leaves it doubtful whether we will elect
them all.
This paper is too thick to fold, which is the reason I send
only a half-sheet.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I  IA
 H. H  
.
WASHINGTON, December 13, 1847
DEAR WILLIAM: — Your letter, advising me of the
receipt of our fee in the bank case, is just received, and I
don’t expect to hear another as good a piece of news from
Springﬁeld while I am away. I am under no obligations to
the bank; and I therefore wish you to buy bank certiﬁcates,
and pay my debt there, so as to pay it with the least money
possible. I would as soon you should buy them of Mr.
Ridgely, or any other person at the bank, as of any one else,
provided you can get them as cheaply. I suppose, after the
bank debt shall be paid, there will be some money left, out
of which I would like to have you pay Lavely and Stout
twenty dollars, and Priest and somebody (oil-makers) ten
dollars, for materials got for house-painting. If there shall
still be any left, keep it till you see or hear from me.
I shall begin sending documents so soon as I can get
them. I wrote you yesterday about a “Congressional Globe.”
As you are all so anxious for me to distinguish myself, I
have concluded to do so before long.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
    
 
 I
  I
  H  
I  
   A    H
 
         
 A I   
DECEMBER 22, 1847
WHEREAS, THE PRESIDENT of the United States, in his
message of May 11, 1846, has declared that “the Mexican
Government not only refused to receive him [the envoy of
the United States], or to listen to his propositions, but, after
a long-continued series of menaces, has at last invaded our
territory and shed the blood of our fellow-citizens on our
own soil”;
And again, in his message of December 8, 1846, that “we
had ample cause of war against Mexico long before the
breaking out of hostilities; but even then we forbore to take
redress into our own hands until Mexico herself became
the aggressor, by invading our soil in hostile array, and
shedding the blood of our citizens”;
And yet again, in his message of December 7, 1847, that
“the Mexican Government refused even to hear the terms
of adjustment which he [our minister of peace] was
authorized 
to 
propose, 
and 
ﬁnally, 
under 
wholly
unjustiﬁable pretexts, involved the two countries in war, by
invading the territory of the State of Texas, striking the ﬁrst
blow, and shedding the blood of our citizens on our own
soil”;
 And whereas, This House is desirous to obtain a full
knowledge of all the facts which go to establish whether
the particular spot on which the blood of our citizens was
so shed was or was not at that time our own soil: therefore,
Resolved, By the House of Representatives, that the
President of the United States be respectfully requested to
inform this House:
First. Whether the spot on which the blood of our citizens
was shed, as in his message declared, was or was not
within the territory of Spain, at least after the treaty of
1819, until the Mexican revolution.
Second. Whether that spot is or is not within the territory
which was wrested from Spain by the revolutionary
government of Mexico.
Third. Whether that spot is or is not within a settlement
of people, which settlement has existed ever since long
before the Texas revolution, and until its inhabitants ﬂed
before the approach of the United States army.
Fourth. Whether that settlement is or is not isolated from
any and all other settlements by the Gulf and the Rio
Grande on the south and west, and by wide uninhabited
regions on the north and east.
Fifth. Whether the people of that settlement, or a
majority of them, or any of them, have ever submitted
themselves to the government or laws of Texas or of the
United States, by consent or by compulsion, either by
accepting oﬀice, or voting at elections, or paying tax, or
serving on juries, or having process served upon them, or
in any other way.
 Sixth. Whether the people of that settlement did or did
not ﬂee from the approach of the United States army,
leaving unprotected their homes and their growing crops,
before the blood was shed, as in the message stated; and
whether the ﬁrst blood, so shed, was or was not shed
within the inclosure of one of the people who had thus ﬂed
from it.
Seventh. Whether our citizens, whose blood was shed, as
in his message declared, were or were not, at that time,
armed oﬀicers and soldiers, sent into that settlement by the
military order of the President, through the Secretary of
War.
Eighth. Whether the military force of the United States
was or was not so sent into that settlement after General
Taylor had more than once intimated to the War
Department that, in his opinion, no such movement was
necessary to the defence or protection of Texas.
   
A    I
  H  
I  
   A    H
   
       
 A I   
JANUARY 5, 1848.
MR. LINCOLN SAID he had made an eﬀort, some few days
since, to obtain the ﬂoor in relation to this measure
[resolution 
to 
direct 
Postmaster-General 
to 
make
arrangements with railroad for carrying the mails — in
Committee of the Whole], but had failed. One of the objects
he had then had in view was now in a great measure
superseded by what had fallen from the gentleman from
Virginia who had just taken his seat. He begged to assure
his friends on the other side of the House that no assault
whatever was meant upon the Postmaster-General, and he
was glad that what the gentleman had now said modiﬁed to
a great extent the impression which might have been
created by the language he had used on a previous
occasion. He wanted to state to gentlemen who might have
entertained such impressions, that the Committee on the
Post-oﬀice 
was 
composed 
of 
ﬁve 
Whigs 
and 
four
Democrats, and their report was understood as sustaining,
not impugning, the position taken by the Postmaster-
General. That report had met with the approbation of all
the Whigs, and of all the Democrats also, with the
exception of one, and he wanted to go even further than
 this. [Intimation was informally given Mr. Lincoln that it
was not in order to mention on the ﬂoor what had taken
place in committee.] He then observed that if he had been
out of order in what he had said he took it all back so far as
he could. He had no desire, he could assure gentlemen,
ever to be out of order — though he never could keep long
in order.
Mr. Lincoln went on to observe that he diﬀered in
opinion, in the present case, from his honorable friend from
Richmond [Mr. Botts]. That gentleman, had begun his
remarks by saying that if all prepossessions in this matter
could be removed out of the way, but little diﬀiculty would
be experienced in coming to an agreement. Now, he could
assure that gentleman that he had himself begun the
examination of the subject with prepossessions all in his
favor. He had long and often heard of him, and, from what
he had heard, was prepossessed in his favor. Of the
Postmaster-General he had also heard, but had no
prepossessions in his favor, though certainly none of an
opposite kind. He diﬀered, however, with that gentleman in
politics, while in this respect he agreed with the gentleman
from Virginia [Mr. Botts], whom he wished to oblige
whenever it was in his power. That gentleman had referred
to the report made to the House by the Postmaster-General,
and had intimated an apprehension that gentlemen would
be disposed to rely, on that report alone, and derive their
views of the case from that document alone. Now it so
happened that a pamphlet had been slipped into his [Mr.
Lincoln’s] hand before he read the report of the
 Postmaster-General; so that, even in this, he had begun
with prepossessions in favor of the gentleman from
Virginia.
As to the report, he had but one remark to make: he had
carefully examined it, and he did not understand that there
was any dispute as to the facts therein stated the dispute, if
he understood it, was conﬁned altogether to the inferences
to be drawn from those facts. It was a diﬀerence not about
facts, but about conclusions. The facts were not disputed. If
he was right in this, he supposed the House might assume
the facts to be as they were stated, and thence proceed to
draw their own conclusions.
The gentleman had said that the Postmaster-General had
got into a personal squabble with the railroad company. Of
this Mr. Lincoln knew nothing, nor did he need or desire to
know anything, because it had nothing whatever to do with
a just conclusion from the premises. But the gentleman had
gone on to ask whether so great a grievance as the present
detention of the Southern mail ought not to be remedied.
Mr. Lincoln would assure the gentleman that if there was a
proper way of doing it, no man was more anxious than he
that it should be done. The report made by the committee
had been intended to yield much for the sake of removing
that grievance. That the grievance was very great there
was no dispute in any quarter. He supposed that the
statements made by the gentleman from Virginia to show
this were all entirely correct in point of fact. He did
suppose that the interruptions of regular intercourse, and
all the other inconveniences growing out of it, were all as
 that gentleman had stated them to be; and certainly, if
redress could be rendered, it was proper it should be
rendered as soon as possible. The gentleman said that in
order to eﬀect this no new legislative action was needed;
all that was necessary was that the Postmaster-General
should be required to do what the law, as it stood,
authorized and required him to do.
We come then, said Mr. Lincoln, to the law. Now the
Postmaster-General says he cannot give to this company
more than two hundred and thirty-seven dollars and ﬁfty
cents per railroad mile of transportation, and twelve and a
half per cent. less for transportation by steamboats. He
considers himself as restricted by law to this amount; and
he says, further, that he would not give more if he could,
because in his apprehension it would not be fair and just.
