    
    
 
 I
  
  H  
 A H 
   
A HA
I    
  .
CIRCUIT AND DISTRICT Court of the U. S. in and for the
State and District of Illinois. Monday, June 3, 1850.
On the opening of the Court this morning, the Hon. A.
Lincoln, a member of the Bar of this Court, suggested the
death of the Hon. Nathaniel Pope, late a judge of this
Court, since the adjournment of the last term; whereupon,
in token of respect for the memory of the deceased, it is
ordered that the Court do now adjourn until to-morrow
morning at ten o’clock.
The Hon. Stephen T. Logan, the Hon. Norman H. Purple,
the Hon. David L. Gregg, the Hon. A. Lincoln, and George
W. Meeker, Esq., were appointed a Committee to prepare
resolutions.
Whereupon, the Hon. Stephen T. Logan, in behalf of the
Committee, 
presented 
the 
following 
preamble 
and
resolutions:
Whereas The Hon. Nathaniel Pope, District Judge of the
United States Court for the District of Illinois, having
departed this life during the last vacation of said Court, and
the members of the Bar of said Court, entertaining the
highest veneration for his memory, a profound respect for
his ability, great experience, and learning as a judge, and
cherishing for his many virtues, public and private, his
 earnest 
simplicity 
of 
character 
and 
unostentatious
deportment, both in his public and private relations, the
most lively and aﬀectionate recollections, have
Resolved, That, as a manifestation of their deep sense of
the loss which has been sustained in his death, they will
wear the usual badge of mourning during the residue of the
term.
Resolved, That the Chairman communicate to the family
of the deceased a copy of these proceedings, with an
assurance of our sincere condolence on account of their
heavy bereavement.
Resolved, That the Hon. A. Williams, District Attorney of
this Court, be requested in behalf of the meeting to present
these proceedings to the Circuit Court, and respectfully to
ask that they may be entered on the records.
E. N. POWELL, Sec’y. SAMUEL H. TREAT, Ch’n.
      
   A
     
 
(fragments)
JULY 1, 1850
DISCOURAGE LITIGATION. Persuade your neighbors to
compromise whenever you can. Point out to them how the
nominal winner is often a real loser — in fees, expenses,
and waste of time. As a peace-maker the lawyer has a
superior opportunity of being a good man. There will still
be business enough.
Never stir up litigation. A worse man can scarcely be
found than one who does this. Who can be more nearly a
ﬁend than he who habitually over-hauls the register of
deeds in search of defects in titles, whereon to stir up
strife, and put money in his pocket? A moral tone ought to
be infused into the profession which should drive such men
out of it.
The matter of fees is important, far beyond the mere
question of bread and butter involved. Properly attended
to, fuller justice is done to both lawyer and client. An
exorbitant fee should never be claimed. As a general rule
never take your whole fee in advance, nor any more than a
small retainer. When fully paid beforehand, you are more
than a common mortal if you can feel the same interest in
the case as if something was still in prospect for you, as
 well as for your client. And when you lack interest in the
case the job will very likely lack skill and diligence in the
performance. Settle the amount of fee and take a note in
advance. Then you will feel that you are working for
something, and you are sure to do your work faithfully and
well. Never sell a fee note — at least not before the
consideration service is performed. It leads to negligence
and dishonesty — negligence by losing interest in the case,
and dishonesty in refusing to refund when you have
allowed the consideration to fail.
This idea of a refund or reduction of charges from the
lawyer in a failed case is a new one to me — but not a bad
one.
