    
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
  I A
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., January 1,
1864. 3.30 p.m.
GENERAL SULLIVAN, Harper’s Ferry:
Have you anything new from Winchester, Martinsburg or
thereabouts?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   I   
I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., January 2,
1864.
GOVERNOR PIERPOINT, ALE ANDRIA, Va.:
Please call and see me to-day if not too inconvenient.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 2, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER.
SIR: — The Secretary of War and myself have concluded
to discharge of the prisoners at Point Lookout the following
classes: First, those who will take the oath prescribed in
the proclamation of December 8, and issued by the consent
of General Marston, will enlist in our service. Second, those
who will take the oath and be discharged and whose homes
lie safely within our military lines.
I send by Mr. Hay this letter and a blank-book and some
other blanks, the way of using which I propose for him to
explain verbally better than I can in writing.
Yours, very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 5, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE: If not inconsistent with the
service, please allow General William Harrow as long a
leave 
of 
absence 
as 
the 
rules 
permit 
with 
the
understanding that I may lengthen it if I see ﬁt. He is an
acquaintance and friend of mine, and his family matters
very urgently require his presence.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
    
JANUARY 5, 1864.
GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: 
By 
a 
joint 
resolution 
of 
your
honorable bodies approved December 23, 1863, the paying
of bounties to veteran volunteers, as now practiced by the
War Department, is, to the extent of three hundred dollars
in each case, prohibited after this 5th day of the present
month. I transmit for your consideration a communication
from the Secretary of War, accompanied by one from the
Provost-Marshal General to him, both relating to the
subject above mentioned. I earnestly recommend that the
law be so modiﬁed as to allow bounties to be paid as they
now are, at least until the ensuing 1st day of February.
I am not without anxiety lest I appear to be importunate
in thus recalling your attention to a subject upon which you
have so recently acted, and nothing but a deep conviction
that the public interest demands it could induce me to
incur the hazard of being misunderstood on this point. The
Executive approval was given by me to the resolution
mentioned, and it is now by a closer attention and a fuller
knowledge of facts that I feel constrained to recommend a
reconsideration of the subject.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
    A
     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 6, 1864. 2
P.M.
GOVERNOR 
BRAMLETTE, 
FRANKFORT, 
Kentucky:
Yours of yesterday received. Nothing is known here about
General Foster’s order, of which you complain, beyond the
fair presumption that it comes from General Grant, and
that it has an object which, if you understood, you would be
loath to frustrate. True, these troops are, in strict law, only
to be removed by my order; but General Grant’s judgment
would be the highest incentive to me to make such order.
Nor can I understand how doing so is bad faith and
dishonor, nor yet how it so exposes Kentucky to ruin.
Military men here do not perceive how it exposes Kentucky,
and I am sure Grant would not permit it if it so appeared to
him.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. A. 
I  
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 13, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL GILLMORE: I understand an eﬀort is
being made by some worthy gentlemen to reconstruct a
legal State government in Florida. Florida is in your
Department, and it is not unlikely you may be there in
person. I have given Mr. Hay a commission of major, and
sent him to you, with some blank-books and other blanks,
to aid in the reconstruction. He will explain as to the
manner of using the blanks, and also my general views on
the subject. It is desirable for all to co-operate, but if
irreconcilable diﬀerences of opinion shall arise, you are
master. I wish the thing done in the most speedy way, so
that when done it be within the range of the late
proclamation on the subject. The detail labor will, of
course, have to be done by others; but I will be greatly
obliged if you will give it such general supervision as you
can ﬁnd consistent with your more strictly military duties.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
    
H.     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   anuar    
1864.
GOVERNOR BROUGH, Columbus, Ohio:
If Private William G. Toles, of Fifty-ninth Ohio Volunteers,
returns to his regiment and faithfully serves out his term,
he is fully pardoned for all military oﬀenses prior to this.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   
    A
 
I H
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 16, 1864.
MESSRS. CROSBY AND NICHOLS.
GENTLEMEN: The number for this month and year of
the North American Review was duly received, and for
which please accept my thanks. Of course I am not the
most impartial judge; yet, with due allowance for this, I
venture to hope that the article entitled “The President’s
Policy” will be of value to the country. I fear I am not
worthy of all which is therein kindly said of me personally.
The sentence of twelve lines, commencing at the top of
page 252, I could wish to be not exactly what it is. In what
is there expressed, the writer has not correctly understood
me. I have never had a theory that secession could absolve
States or people from their obligations. Precisely the
contrary is asserted in the inaugural address; and it was
because of my belief in the continuation of those
obligations that I was puzzled, for a time, as to denying the
legal rights of those citizens who remained individually
innocent of treason or rebellion. But I mean no more now
than to merely call attention to this point.
Yours respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   .       .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 20, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE: Sundry citizens of the State
of Arkansas petition me that an election may be held in that
State, at which to elect a Governor; that it be assumed at
that election, and thenceforward, that the constitution and
laws of the State, as before the rebellion, are in full force,
except that the constitution is so modiﬁed as to declare that
there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude,
except in the punishment of crimes whereof the party shall
have been duly convicted; that the General Assembly may
make such provisions for the freed people as shall
recognize and declare their permanent freedom, and
provide for their education, and which may yet be
construed as a temporary arrangement suitable to their
condition as a laboring, landless, and homeless class; that
said election shall be held on the 28th of March, 1864, at
all the usual places of the State, or all such as voters may
attend for that purpose, that the voters attending at eight
o’clock in the morning of said day may choose judges and
clerks of election for such purpose; that all persons
qualiﬁed by said constitution and laws, and taking the oath
presented in the President’s proclamation of December 8,
1863, either before or at the election, and none others, may
 be voters; that each set of judges and clerks may make
returns directly to you on or before the — th day of ——
next; that in all other respects said election may be
conducted according to said constitution and laws: that on
receipt of said returns, when ﬁve thousand four hundred
and six votes shall have been cast, you can receive said
votes, and ascertain all who shall thereby appear to have
been elected; that on the — th day of —— — next, all
persons so appearing to have been elected, who shall
appear before you at Little Rock, and take the oath, to be
by you severally administered, to support the Constitution
of the United States and said modiﬁed Constitution of the
State of Arkansas, may be declared by you qualiﬁed and
empowered to enter immediately upon the duties of the
oﬀices to which they shall have been respectively elected.
You will please order an election to take place on the
28th of March, 1864, and returns to be made in ﬁfteen days
thereafter.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
       A
 A          
GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH a letter addressed by the Secretary
of State, with my approval, to the Hon. Joseph A. Wright, of
Indiana, 
that 
patriotic 
and 
distinguished 
gentleman
repaired 
to 
Europe 
and 
attended 
the 
International
Agricultural Exhibition, held at Hamburg last year, and has
since his return made a report to me, which, it is believed,
can not fail to be of general interest, and especially so to
the 
agricultural 
community. 
I 
transmit 
for 
your
consideration copies of the letters and report. While it
appears by the letter that no reimbursement of expenses or
compensation was promised him, I submit whether
reasonable allowance should not be made him for them.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A   
 I
   A
    
 A I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 26, 1864.
I, ABRAHAM LINCOLN, President of the United States
having seen and considered the additional regulations of
trade prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, and
numbered LI, LII, LIII, LIV, LV, and LVI, do hereby approve
the same; and I further declare and order that all property
brought in for sale, in good faith, and actually sold in
pursuance of said Regulations LII, LIII, LIV, LV, and LVI,
after the same shall have taken eﬀect and come in force as
provided 
in 
Regulation 
LVI, 
shall 
be 
exempt 
from
conﬁscation or forfeiture to the United States.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., January 27,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL FOSTER, KNO
VILLE, Tenn.:
Is 
a 
supposed 
correspondence 
between 
General
Longstreet and yourself about the amnesty proclamation,
which is now in the newspapers, genuine?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .   A
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 28, 1864
HON. EDWARD STANLEY, San Francisco, Cal.: Yours of
yesterday received. We have rumors similar to the dispatch
received by you, but nothing very deﬁnite from North
Carolina. Knowing Mr. Stanley to be an able man, and not
doubting that he is a patriot, I should be glad for him to be
with his old acquaintances south of Virginia, but I am
unable to suggest anything deﬁnite upon the subject.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION
WASHINGTON, JANUARY 28, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK: Some citizens of Missouri,
vicinity of Kansas City, are apprehensive that there is
special danger of renewed troubles in that neighborhood,
and thence on the route toward New Mexico. I am not
impressed that the danger is very great or imminent, but I
will thank you to give Generals Rosecrans and Curtis,
respectively, such orders as may turn their attention
thereto and prevent as far as possible the apprehended
disturbance.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   I     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 29, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SICKLES, NEW York:
Could you, without it being inconvenient or disagreeable
to yourself, immediately take a trip to Arkansas for me?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
    A
     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., January 31,
1864.
GOVERNOR BRAMLETTE, FRANKFORT, Ky.:
General Boyle’s resignation is accepted, so that your
Excellency can give him the appointment proposed.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I A I
      I
 
ORDER TO SECRETARY STANTON.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, FEBRUARY 1, 1864
HON. EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
SIR:-You are directed to have a transport (either a steam
or sailing vessel, as may be deemed proper by the
Quartermaster-General) 
sent 
to 
the 
colored 
colony
established by the United States at the island of Vache, on
the coast of San Domingo, to bring back to this country
such of the colonists there as desire to return. You will have
the transport furnished with suitable supplies for that
purpose, and detail an oﬀicer of the Quartermaster’s
Department, who, under special instructions to be given,
shall have charge of the business. The colonists will be
brought 
to 
Washington, 
unless 
otherwise 
hereafter
directed, and be employed and provided for at the camps
for colored persons around that city. Those only will be
brought from the island who desire to return, and their
eﬀects will be brought with them.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
  A 
 A   
   I   H
  
 H
 A
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, February 1, 1864.
ORDERED, THAT A draft of ﬁve hundred thousand (500,000)
men, to serve for three years or during the war, be made on
the tenth (10th) day of March next, for the military service
of the United States, crediting and deducting therefrom so
many as may have been enlisted or drafted into the service
prior to the ﬁrst (1st) day of March, and not before
credited.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   A   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 3, 1864.
GOVERNOR YATES, SPRINGFIELD, Ill.:
The United States Government lot in Springﬁeld can be
used for a soldiers’ home, with the understanding that the
Government does not incur any expense in the case.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
  
  H .
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1864.
GOVERNOR J. MURPHY: My order to General Steele
about an election was made in ignorance of the action your
convention had taken or would take. A subsequent letter
directs General Steele to aid you on your own plan, and not
to thwart or hinder you. Show this to him.
A. LINCOLN.
  H    
   
   H   
A
 I A I
  
  A
A I
TOLD BY THE PRESIDENT, TO THE ARTIST F. B.
CARPENTER, 
FEBRUARY 6, 1864.
“It had got to be,” said Mr. Lincoln, “midsummer, 1862.
Things had gone on from bad to worse, until I felt that we
had reached the end of our rope on the plan of operations
we had been pursuing; that we had about played our last
card, and must change our tactics, or lose the game. I now
determined upon the adoption of the emancipation policy;
and without consultation with, or the knowledge of, the
Cabinet, I prepared the original draft of the proclamation,
and, after much anxious thought, called a Cabinet meeting
upon the subject. This was the last of July or the ﬁrst part
of the month of August, 1862. [The exact date was July 22,
1862.]... All were present excepting Mr. Blair, the
Postmaster-General, who was absent at the opening of the
discussion, but came in subsequently. I said to the Cabinet
that I had resolved upon this step, and had not called them
together to ask their advice, but to lay the subject-matter of
a proclamation before them, suggestions as to which would
be in order after they had heard it read. Mr. Lovejoy was in
error when he informed you that it excited no comment
excepting on the part of Secretary Seward. Various
 suggestions were oﬀered. Secretary Chase wished the
language stronger in reference to the arming of the blacks.
“Mr. Blair, after he came in, deprecated the policy on the
ground that it would cost the administration the fall
elections. Nothing, however, was oﬀered that I had not
already fully anticipated and settled in my mind, until
Secretary Seward spoke. He said in substance, ‘Mr.
President, I approve of the proclamation, but I question the
expediency of its issue at this juncture. The depression of
the public mind, consequent upon our repeated reverses, is
so great that I fear the eﬀect of so important a step. It may
be viewed as the last measure of an exhausted government,
a cry for help; the government stretching forth its hands to
Ethiopia, instead of Ethiopia stretching forth her hands to
the government.’ His idea,” said the President, “was that it
would be considered our last shriek on the retreat.” [This
was his precise expression.] ‘Now,’ continued Mr. Seward,
‘while I approve the measure, I suggest, sir, that you
postpone its issue until you can give it to the country
supported by military success, instead of issuing it, as
would be the case now, upon the greatest disasters of the
war.’ Mr. Lincoln continued “The wisdom of the view of the
Secretary of State struck me with very great force. It was
an aspect of the case that, in all my thought upon the
subject, I had entirely overlooked. The result was that I put
the draft of the proclamation aside, as you do your sketch
for a picture, waiting for a victory.
“From time to time I added or changed a line, touching it
up here and there, anxiously watching the process of
 events. Well, the next news we had was of Pope’s disaster
at Bull Run. Things looked darker than ever. Finally came
the week of the battle of Antietam. I determined to wait no
longer. The news came, I think, on Wednesday, that the
advantage was on our side. I was then staying at the
Soldiers’ Home [three miles out of Washington]. Here I
ﬁnished writing the second draft of the preliminary
proclamation; came up on Saturday; called the Cabinet
together to hear it, and it was published on the following
Monday.”
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    
I  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 11,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SEDGWICK, ARMY of Potomac:
Unless there be some strong reason to the contrary,
please send General Kilpatrick to us here, for two or three
days.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 H
 A   
A 
A 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 13,
1864.
HON. HORACE MAYNARD, Nashville, Tenn.: Your letter
of [the] second received. Of course Governor Johnson will
proceed with reorganization as the exigencies of the case
appear to him to require. I do not apprehend he will think it
necessary to deviate from my views to any ruinous extent.
On one hasty reading I see no such deviation in his
program, which you send.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. 
.  I H A  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, February 17, 1864.
WILLIAM M. FISHBACK, Little Rock, Arkansas: When I
ﬁxed a plan for an election in Arkansas I did it in ignorance
that your convention was doing the same work. Since I
learned the latter fact I have been constantly trying to yield
my plan to them. I have sent two letters to General Steele,
and three or four despatches to you and others, saying that
he, General Steele, must be master, but that it will probably
be best for him to merely help the convention on its own
plan. Some single mind must be master, else there will be
no 
agreement 
in 
anything, 
and 
General 
Steele,
commanding the military and being on the ground, is the
best man to be that master. Even now citizens are
telegraphing me to postpone the election to a later day
than either that ﬁxed by the convention or by me. This
discord must be silenced.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A        .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 17,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE, LITTLE Rock, Arkansas:
The day ﬁxed by the convention for the election is probably
the best, but you on the ground, and in consultation with
gentlemen there, are to decide. I should have ﬁxed no day
for an election, presented no plan for reconstruction, had I
known the convention was doing the same things. It is
probably best that you merely assist the convention on
their own plan, as to election day and all other matters I
have already written and telegraphed this half a dozen
times.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 A.  
 I
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 18,
1864.
A. ROBINSON, LEROY, N. Y.: The law only obliges us to
keep accounts with States, or at most Congressional
Districts, and it would overwhelm us to attempt in counties,
cities and towns. Nevertheless we do what we can to oblige
in particular cases. In this view I send your dispatch to the
Provost-Marshal General, asking him to do the best he can
for you.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
   
  A
 
     A           .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas, by my proclamation of the nineteenth of April,
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one, the ports of the
States of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida,
Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas were, for reasons therein
set forth, placed under blockade; and whereas, the port of
Brownsville, in the district of Brazos Santiago, in the State
of Texas, has since been blockaded, but as the blockade of
said port may now be safely relaxed with advantage to the
interests of commerce:
Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States, pursuant to the authority in
me vested by the ﬁfth section of the act of Congress
approved on the 13th of July, 1861, entitled “An act further
to provide for the collection of duties on imports, and for
other purposes,” do hereby declare that the blockade of the
said port of Brownsville shall so far cease and determine
from and after this date, that commercial intercourse with
said port, except as to persons, things, and information
hereinafter speciﬁed, may, from this date, be carried on,
subject to the laws of the United States, to the regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, and, until the
rebellion shall have been suppressed, to such orders as
may be promulgated by the general commanding the
department, or by an oﬀicer duly authorized by him and
commanding at said port. This proclamation does not
authorize or allow the shipment or conveyance of persons
in, or intending to enter, the service of the insurgents, or of
things or information intended for their use, or for their aid
or comfort, nor, except upon the permission of the
Secretary of War, or of some oﬀicer duly authorized by him,
of the following prohibited articles, namely: cannon,
mortars, ﬁrearms, pistols, bombs, grenades, powder,
saltpeter, sulphur, balls, bullets, pikes, swords, boarding-
caps (always excepting the quantity of the said articles
which may be necessary for the defense of the ship and
those who compose the crew), saddles, bridles, cartridge-
bag material, percussion and other caps, clothing adapted
for uniforms; sail-cloth of all kinds, hemp and cordage,
intoxicating drinks other than beer and light native wines.
To vessels clearing from foreign ports and destined to the
port of Brownsville, opened by this proclamation, licenses
will be granted by consuls of the United States upon
satisfactory evidence that the vessel so licensed will convey
no persons, property, or information excepted or prohibited
above, either to or from the said port; which licenses shall
be exhibited to the collector of said port immediately on
arrival, and, if required, to any oﬀicer in charge of the
blockade, and on leaving said port every vessel will be
required to have a clearance from the collector of the
 customs, according to law, showing no violation of the
conditions of the license. Any violations of said conditions
will involve the forfeiture and condemnation of the vessel
and cargo, and the exclusion of all parties concerned from
any further privilege of entering the United States during
the war for any purpose whatever.
In all respects, except as herein speciﬁed, the existing
blockade remains in full force and eﬀect as hitherto
established and maintained, nor is it relaxed by this
proclamation except in regard to the port to which
relaxation is or has been expressly applied.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed. Done at
the city of Washington, this eighteenth day of February, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-
four, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-eighth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
  
A
     A  .
E ECUTIVE, MANSION, February 19, 1864.
COMMANDER GEORGE S. BLAKE, Commandant Naval
Academy, Newport, R. I.:
I desire the case of Midshipman C. Lyon re-examined and
if not clearly inconsistent I shall be much obliged to have
the recommendation changed.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
   
 
A   
  
 
A
.
NASHVILLE, February 20, 1864.
HON. W. H. SEWARD, Secretary of State, Washington,
D.C.: In county and State elections, must citizens of
Tennessee take the oath prescribed by Governor Johnson,
or will the President’s oath of amnesty entitle them to vote?
I have been appointed to hold the March election in
Cheatham County, and wish to act understandingly.
WARREN JORDAN.
WASHINGTON, February 20, 1864.
WARREN JORDAN, NASHVILLE: In county elections you
had better stand by Governor Johnson’s plan; otherwise you
will have conﬂict and confusion. I have seen his plan.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., February 22,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, SAINT LOUIS, MO.:
Colonel Sanderson will be ordered to you to-day, a mere
omission that it was not done before. The other questions in
your despatch I am not yet prepared to answer.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A        .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., February 22,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE, LITTLE Rock, Ark.:
Yours of yesterday received. Your conference with
citizens approved. Let the election be on the 14th of March
as they agreed.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   .       .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, February 25, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE, LITTLE Rock, Arkansas:
General Sickles is not going to Arkansas. He probably will
make a tour down the Mississippi and home by the gulf and
ocean, but he will not meddle in your aﬀairs.
At one time I did intend to have him call on you and
explain more fully than I could do by letter or telegraph, so
as to avoid a diﬀiculty coming of my having made a plan
here, 
while 
the 
convention 
made 
one 
there, 
for
reorganizing Arkansas; but even his doing that has been
given up for more than two weeks. Please show this to
Governor Murphy to save me telegraphing him.
A. LINCOLN.
          
 A H   
  
      
I   
GENERAL ORDERS, NO.76.
WAR DEPARTMENT, ADJUTANT-GENERALS OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, February 26, 1864.
Sentence of Deserters.
The President directs that the sentences of all deserters
who have been condemned by court-martial to death, and
that have not been otherwise acted upon by him, be
mitigated to imprisonment during the war at the Dry
Tortugas, Florida, where they will be sent under suitable
guards by orders from army commanders.
The commanding generals, who have power to act on
proceedings of courts-martial in such cases, are authorized
in special cases to restore to duty deserters under
sentence, when in their judgment the service will be
thereby beneﬁted.
Copies of all orders issued under the foregoing
instructions will be immediately forwarded to the Adjutant-
General and to the Judge-Advocate General.
By order of the Secretary of War: B. D. TOWNSEND,
Assistant Adjutant-General
   
A     
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL BUTLER.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 26,
1864
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, Fort. Monroe, Va.: I cannot
remember at whose request it was that I gave the pass to
Mrs. Bulky. Of course detain her, if the evidence of her
being a spy is strong against her.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
.  A 
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 26,
1864.
HON. W. JAYNE.
DEAR SIR — I dislike to make changes in oﬀice so long
as they can be avoided. It multiplies my embarrassments
immensely. I dislike two appointments when one will do.
Send me the name of some man not the present marshal,
and I will nominate him to be Provost-Marshal for Dakota.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . H.  A  .
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1864.
HON. 
E. 
H: 
EAST, Secretary of State, Nashville,
Tennessee Your telegram of the twenty-sixth instant asking
for a copy of my despatch to Warren Jordan, Esq., at
Nashville Press oﬀice, has just been referred to me by
Governor Johnson. In my reply to Mr. Jordan, which was
brief and hurried, I intended to say that in the county and
State elections of Tennessee, the oath prescribed in the
proclamation of Governor Johnson on the twenty-sixth of
January, 1864, ordering an election in Tennessee on the
ﬁrst Saturday in March next, is entirely satisfactory to me
as a test of loyalty of all persons proposing or oﬀering to
vote in said elections; and coming from him would better be
observed and followed. There is no conﬂict between the
oath of amnesty in my proclamation of eighth December,
1863, and that prescribed by Governor Johnson in his
proclamation of the twenty-sixth ultimo.
No person who has taken the oath of amnesty of eighth
December, 1863, and obtained a pardon thereby, and who
intends to observe the same in good faith, should have any
objection to taking that prescribed by Governor Johnson as
a test of loyalty.
 I 
have 
seen 
and 
examined 
Governor 
Johnson’s
proclamation, and am entirely satisﬁed with his plan, which
is to restore the State government and place it under the
control of citizens truly loyal to the Government of the
United States.
A. LINCOLN.
Please send above to Governor Johnson. A. L.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 27, 1864
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
SIR: — You ask some instructions from me in relation to
the Report of Special Commission constituted by an order
of the War Department, dated December 5, 1863, “to revise
the enrolment and quotas of the City and State of New
York, and report whether there be any, and what, errors or
irregularities therein, and what corrections, if any, should
be made.”
In the correspondence between the Governor of New
York and myself last summer, I understood him to complain
that the enrolments in several of the districts of that State
had been neither accurately nor honestly made; and in view
of this, I, for the draft then immediately ensuing, ordered
an arbitrary reduction of the quotas in several of the
districts wherein they seemed too large, and said: “After
this drawing, these four districts, and also the seventeenth
and twenty-ninth, shall be carefully re-enrolled, and, if you
please, agents of yours may witness every step of the
process.” In a subsequent letter I believe some additional
districts were put into the list of those to be re-enrolled. My
idea was to do the work over according to the law, in
presence of the complaining party, and thereby to correct
 anything which might be found amiss. The commission,
whose work I am considering, seem to have proceeded
upon a totally diﬀerent idea. Not going forth to ﬁnd men at
all, 
they 
have 
proceeded 
altogether 
upon 
paper
examinations 
and 
mental 
processes. 
One 
of 
their
conclusions, as I understand, is that, as the law stands, and
attempting to follow it, the enrolling oﬀicers could not have
made the enrolments much more accurately than they did.
The report on this point might be useful to Congress. The
commission conclude that the quotas for the draft should
be based upon entire population, and they proceed upon
this basis to give a table for the State of New York, in which
some districts are reduced and some increased. For the
now ensuing draft, let the quotas stand as made by the
enrolling oﬀicers, in the districts wherein this table
requires them to be increased; and let them be reduced
according to the table in the others: this to be no precedent
for subsequent action. But, as I think this report may, on
full consideration, be shown to have much that is valuable
in it, I suggest that such consideration be given it, and that
it be especially considered whether its suggestions can be
conformed to without an alteration of the law.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN. TELEGRAM TO GENERAL THOMAS.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, February 28, 1864.
GENERAL L. THOMAS, Louisville, Kentucky: I see your
despatch of yesterday to the Secretary of War.
I wish you would go to the Mississippi River at once, and
take hold of and be master in the contraband and leasing
 business. You understand it better than any other man
does. Mr. Miller’s system doubtless is well intended, but
from what I hear I fear that, if persisted in, it would fall
dead within its own entangling details. Go there and be the
judge. A Mr. Lewis will probably follow you with something
from me on this subject, but do not wait for him. Nor is this
to induce you to violate or neglect any military order from
the General-in-Chief or Secretary of War.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A    HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 29,
1864.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY.
MY DEAR SIR: — I would have taken time to answer
yours of the 22d inst. sooner, only that I did not suppose
any evil could result from the delay, especially as, by a note,
I promptly acknowledged the receipt of yours, and
promised a fuller answer. Now, on consideration I ﬁnd there
is really very little to say. My knowledge of Mr. Pomeroy’s
letter having been made public came to me only the day
you wrote; but I had, in spite of myself, known of its
existence several days before. I have not yet read it, and I
think I shall not. I was not shocked or surprised by the
appearance of the letter, because I had had knowledge of
Mr. Pomeroy’s committee, and of secret issues which, I
supposed, came from it, and of secret agents who, I
supposed, were sent out by it for several weeks. I have
known just as little a these things as my friends have
allowed me to know. They bring the documents to me, but I
do not read them; they tell me what they think ﬁt to tell me,
but I do not inquire for more.
I fully concur with you that neither of us can justly be
held responsible for what our respective friends may do
 without our instigation or countenance and I assure you, as
you have assured me, that no assault has been made upon
you by my instigation, or with my countenance.
Whether you shall remain at the head of the Treasury
Department is a question which I will not allow myself to
consider from any standpoint other than my judgment of
the public service, and, in that view, I do not perceive
occasion for a change.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   H
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, March 1,1864.
GENERAL L. THOMAS: This introduces Mr. Lewis,
mentioned in my despatch sent you at Louisville some days
ago. I have but little personal acquaintance with him; but
he has the conﬁdence of several members of Congress here
who seem to know him well. He hopes to be useful, without
charge to the government, in facilitating the introduction of
the free-labor system on the Mississippi plantations. He is
acquainted with, and has access to, many of the planters
who wish to adopt the system. He will show you two letters
of mine on this subject, one somewhat General, and the
other relating to named persons; they are not diﬀerent in
principle. He will also show you some suggestions coming
from some of the planters themselves. I desire that all I
promise in these letters, so far as practicable, may be in
good faith carried out, and that suggestions from the
planters may be heard and adopted, so far as they may not
contravene the principles stated, nor justice, nor fairness,
to laborers. I do not herein intend to overrule your own
mature judgment on any point.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A        .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., March 3, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE, LITTLE Rock, Ark.: Yours
including address to people of Arkansas is received. I
approve the address and thank you for it. Yours in relation
to William M. Randolph also received. Let him take the oath
of December 8, and go to work for the new constitution,
and on your notifying me of it, I will immediately issue the
special pardon for him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, 
March
4,1864. MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, Fort Monroe, Va.:
Admiral Dahlgren is here, and of course is very anxious
about his son. Please send me at once all you know or can
learn of his fate.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   I
   
A 
  
  H     
  A I
 
 
 A  
    
I
  
  H     
 H
GOVERNMENT. 
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION,
WASHINGTON, March 7, 1864.
Whereas, by an Executive order of the 10th of November
last permission was given to export certain tobacco
belonging to the French government from insurgent
territory, which tobacco was supposed to have been
purchased and paid for prior to the 4th day of March, 1861;
but whereas it was subsequently ascertained that a part at
least of the said tobacco had been purchased subsequently
to that date, which fact made it necessary to suspend the
carrying into eﬀect of the said order; but whereas,
pursuant 
to 
mutual 
explanations, 
a 
satisfactory
understanding upon the subject has now been reached, it is
directed that the order aforesaid may be carried into eﬀect,
it being understood that the quantity of French tobacco so
to be exported shall not exceed seven thousand hogsheads,
and that it is the same tobacco respecting the exportation
of which application Was originally made by the French
government.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
I  
   A    
A  HA 
 
I  I   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 7, 1864.
U.S. MARSHAL, LOUISVILLE, Ky.: Until further order
suspend sale of property and further proceedings in cases
of the United States against Dr. John B. English, and S. S.
English, qt al., sureties for John L. Hill. Also same against
same sureties for Thomas A. Ireland.
A. LINCOLN.
MAJOR ECKERT: Please send the above dispatch. JNO. G.
NICOLAY, Private Secretary
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 9, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac:
New York City votes ninety-ﬁve hundred majority for
allowing soldiers to vote, and the rest of the State nearly all
on the same side. Tell the soldiers.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
   
A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, March 9, 1864.
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 1st
instant, respecting the points of commencement of the
Union Paciﬁc Railroad, on the one hundredth degree of
west longitude, and of the branch road, from the western
boundary of Iowa to the said one hundredth degree of
longitude, I transmit the accompanying report from the
Secretary of the Interior, containing the information called
for.
I deem it proper to add that on the 17th day of November
last an Executive order was made upon this subject and
delivered to the vice-president of the Union Paciﬁc Railroad
Company, which ﬁxed the point on the western boundary of
the State of Iowa from which the company should construct
their branch road to the one hundredth degree of west
longitude, and declared it to be within the limits of the
township in Iowa opposite the town of Omaha, in Nebraska.
Since then the company has represented to me that upon
actual surveys made it has determined upon the precise
point of departure of their said branch road from the
Missouri River, and located the same as described in the
accompanying report of the Secretary of the Interior, which
 point is within the limits designated in the order of
November last; and inasmuch as that order is not of record
in any of the Executive Departments, and the company
having desired a more deﬁnite one, I have made the order
of which a copy is herewith, and caused the same to be
ﬁled in the Department of the Interior.
A. LINCOLN.
 A
      
 
 
  A  
 A
 
MARCH 9, 1864.
GENERAL GRANT: — The expression of the nation’s
approbation of what you have already done, and its reliance
on you for what remains to do in the existing great
struggle, 
is 
now 
presented 
with 
this 
commission
constituting you Lieutenant-General of the Army of the
United States.
With this high honor, devolves on you an additional
responsibility. As the country herein trusts you, so, under
God, it will sustain you. I scarcely need add, that with what
I here speak for the country, goes my own hearty personal
concurrence.
GENERAL GRANT’S REPLY.
Mr. PRESIDENT: — I accept this commission, with
gratitude for the high honor conferred.
With the aid of the noble armies that have fought on so
many ﬁelds for our common country, it will be my earnest
endeavor not to disappoint your expectations.
I feel the full weight of the responsibilities now devolving
on me, and I know that if they are met, it will be due to
those armies; and above all, to the favor of that Providence
which leads both nations and men.
  
   A  I
I
 
.  . 
 A
   
A
 
 H  A 
I   
   H  
I  
   A   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., March 10,
1864.
UNDER THE AUTHORITY of an act of Congress to revive the
grade of lieutenant-General in the United States Army,
approved February 29, 1864, Lieutenant-General Ulysses S.
Grant, United States Army, is assigned to the command of
the Armies of the United States.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
  
  H .
WASHINGTON, D. C., March 12, 1864.
GOVERNOR MURPHY, LITTLE Rock, Arkansas: I am not
appointing oﬀicers for Arkansas now, and I will try to
remember your request. Do your best to get out the largest
vote possible, and of course as much of it as possible on the
right side.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  HAH
.   ri ate.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 13, 1864
HON. MICHAEL HAHN.
MY DEAR SIR: — I congratulate you on having ﬁxed your
name in history as the ﬁrst free-state governor of
Louisiana. Now, you are about to have a convention, which
among other things will probably deﬁne the elective
franchise. I barely suggest for your private consideration,
whether some of the colored people may not be let in, — as,
for instance, the very intelligent, and especially those who
have fought gallantly in our ranks. They would probably
help, in some trying time to come, to keep the jewel of
liberty within the family of freedom. But this is only a
suggestion, — not to the public, but to you alone.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  A    
   
 H
  
  H
 A
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, MARCH 14, 1864.
IN ORDER TO supply the force required to be drafted for the
Navy and to provide an adequate reserve force for all
contingencies, in addition to the ﬁve hundred thousand
men called for February 1, 1864, a call is hereby made and
a draft ordered for two hundred thousand men for the
military service (Army, Navy, and Marine Corps) of the
United States.
The proportional quotas for the diﬀerent wards, towns,
townships, precincts, or election districts, or counties, will
be made known through the Provost Marshal-General’s
Bureau, and account will be taken of the credits and
deﬁciencies on former quotas.
The 15th day of April, 1864, is designated as the time up
to which the numbers required from each ward of a city,
town, etc., may be raised by voluntary enlistment, and
drafts will be made in each ward of a city, town, etc., which
shall not have ﬁlled the quota assigned to it within the time
designated for the number required to ﬁll said quotas. The
drafts will be commenced as soon after the 15th of April as
practicable.
The Government bounties as now paid continue until
April I, 1864, at which time the additional bounties cease.
 On and after that date one hundred dollars bounty only will
be paid, as provided by the act approved July 22, 1861.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
(Private.) 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 15,
1864
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL 
GRANT, 
Nashville, 
Tenn.:
General McPherson having been assigned to the command
of a department, could not General Frank Blair, without
diﬀiculty or detriment to the service, be assigned to
command the Corps he commanded a while last autumn?
A. LINCOLN.
  A    
  
 
  A  
.  .  I     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 15, 1864.
WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
Major-General Sickles is making a tour for me from here
by way of Cairo, New Orleans, and returning by the gulf,
and ocean, and all land and naval oﬀicers and, employees
are directed to furnish reasonable transportation and other
reasonable facilities to himself and personal staﬀ not
inconsistent with the public service.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
 
   
  HAH
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 15, 1864.
HIS E CELLENCY MICHAEL HAHN, Governor of
Louisiana
Until further order, you are hereby invested with the
powers exercised hitherto by the military governor of
Louisiana.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
   
A    A  A  AI  I
  H   A  
  
  I  
WASHINGTON, MARCH 16, 1864.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:
I appear to say but a word. This extraordinary war in
which we are engaged falls heavily upon all classes of
people but the most heavily upon the soldier. For it has
been said, “All that a man hath will he give for his life;” and
while all contribute of their substance, the soldier puts his
life at stake, and often yields it up in his country’s cause.
The highest merit, then, is due to the soldier.
In this extraordinary war, extraordinary developments
have manifested themselves, such as have not been seen in
former wars; and among these manifestations nothing has
been more remarkable than these fairs for the relief of
suﬀering soldiers and their families. And the chief agents of
these fairs are the women of America.
I am not accustomed to the use of language of eulogy: I
have never studied the art of paying compliments to
women; but I must say, that if all that has been said by
orators and poets since the creation of the world in praise
of women were applied to the women of America, it would
not do them justice for their conduct during this war. I will
close by saying, God bless the women of America.
        
 A  
I       
  H
  I
 
   A  
 IA I
 
  
 
  
  
MARCH 21, 1864.
GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE:
The honorary membership in your association, as
generously tendered, is gratefully accepted.
You comprehend, as your address shows, that the
existing rebellion means more and tends to do more than
the perpetuation of African slavery — that it is, in fact, a
war upon the rights of all working people. Partly to show
that this view has not escaped my attention, and partly that
I cannot better express myself, I read a passage from the
message to Congress in December, 1861:
“It continues to develop that the insurrection is largely, if
not exclusively, a war upon the ﬁrst principle of popular
government, the rights of the people. Conclusive evidence
of this is found in the most grave and maturely considered
public documents, as well as in the General tone of the
insurgents. In those documents we ﬁnd the abridgment of
the existing right of suﬀrage, and the denial to the people
of all right to participate in the selection of public oﬀicers,
except the legislature, boldly advocated, with labored
argument to prove that large control of the people in
government is the source of all political evil. Monarchy
 itself is sometimes hinted at as a possible refuge from the
power of the people. In my present position I could scarcely
be justiﬁed were I to omit raising a warning voice against
this approach of returning despotism.
“It is not needed, nor ﬁtting here, that a General
argument should be made in favor of popular institutions;
but there is one point, with its connections, not so
hackneyed as most others, to which I ask a brief attention.
It is the eﬀort to place capital on an equal footing, if not
above labor, in the structure of government. It is assumed
that labor is available only in connection with capital; that
nobody labors unless somebody else, owning capital,
somehow by the use of it induces him to labor. This
assumed, it is next considered whether it is best that
capital shall hire laborers, and thus induce them to work by
their own consent or buy them, and drive them to it without
their consent. Having proceeded so it is naturally
concluded that all laborers are either hired laborers, or
what we call slaves. And, further, it is assumed that
whoever is once a hired laborer, is ﬁxed in that condition
for life. Now there is no such relation between capital and
labor as assumed, nor is there any such thing as a free man
being ﬁxed for life in the condition of a hired laborer. Both
these assumptions are false, and all inferences from them
are groundless.
“Labor is prior to, and independent of, capital. Capital is
only the fruit of labor, and could never have existed if labor
had not ﬁrst existed. Labor is the superior of capital, and
deserves much the higher consideration. Capital has its
 rights, which are as worthy of protection as any other
rights. Nor is it denied that there is, and probably always
will be, a relation between capital and labor, producing
mutual beneﬁts. The error is in assuming that the whole
labor of a community exists within that relation. A few men
own capital, and that few avoid labor themselves, and, with
their capital, hire or buy another few to labor for them. A
large majority belong to neither class — neither work for
others, nor have others working for them. In most of the
Southern States, a majority of the whole people, of all
colors, are neither slaves nor masters; while in the
Northern, a large majority are neither hirers nor hired.
Men with their families, wives, sons, and daughters — work
for themselves, on their farms, in their houses, and in their
shops, taking the whole product to themselves, and asking
no favors of capital on the one hand, nor of hired laborers
or slaves on the other. It is not forgotten that a
considerable number of persons mingle their own labor
with capital; that is, they labor with their own hands, and
also buy or hire others to labor for them, but this is only a
mixed and not a distinct class. No principle stated is
disturbed by the existence of this mixed class.
“Again, as has already been said, there is not, of
necessity, any such thing as the free hired laborer being
ﬁxed to that condition for life. Many independent men
everywhere in these States, a few years back in their lives,
were hired laborers. The prudent penniless beginner in the
world labors for wages a while, saves a surplus with which
to buy tools or land for himself, then labors on his own
 account another while, and at length hires another new
beginner to help him. This is the just and generous and
prosperous system which opens the way to all — gives hope
to 
all, 
and 
consequent 
energy 
and 
progress, 
and
improvement of condition to all. No men living are more
worthy to be trusted than those who toil up from poverty —
none less inclined to touch or take aught which they have
not honestly earned. Let them beware of surrendering a
political power they already possess, and which, if
surrendered, will surely be used to close the door of
advancement against such as they, and to ﬁx new
disabilities and burdens upon them, till all of liberty shall
be lost.”
The views then expressed remain unchanged, nor have I
much to add. None are so deeply interested to resist the
present rebellion as the working people. Let them beware
of prejudices, working division and hostility among
themselves. The most notable feature of a disturbance in
your city last summer was the hanging of some working
people by other working people. It should never be so. The
strongest bond of human sympathy, outside of the family
relation, should be one uniting all working people, of all
nations, and tongues, and kindreds. Nor should this lead to
a war upon property, or the owners of property. Property is
the fruit of labor; property is desirable; is a positive good in
the world. That some should be rich shows that others may
become rich, and, hence, is just encouragement to industry
and enterprise. Let not him who is houseless pull down the
house of another, but let him labor diligently and build one
 for himself, thus by example assuring that his own shall be
safe from violence when built.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 22, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, FORT Monroe, Va.: Hon. W.
R. Morrison says he has requested you by letter to eﬀect a
special exchange of Lieut. Col. A. F. Rogers, of Eightieth
Illinois Volunteers, now in Libby Prison, and I shall be glad
if you can eﬀect it.
A. LINCOLN.
  
     
 
   
I H 
 
  A   .   H
  .
( Private.) 
WASHINGTON, MARCH 13, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHURZ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of February 29 reached me only
four days ago; but the delay was of little consequence,
because I found, on feeling around, I could not invite you
here without a diﬀiculty which at least would be
unpleasant, and perhaps would be detrimental to the public
service. Allow me to suggest that if you wish to remain in
the military service, it is very dangerous for you to get
temporarily out of it; because, with a major-general once
out, it is next to impossible for even the President to get
him in again. With my appreciation of your ability and
correct principle, of course I would be very glad to have
your service for the country in the approaching political
canvass; but I fear we cannot properly have it without
separating you from the military.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 A 
  A
    
MARCH 26, 1864.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A Proclamation.
Whereas, it has become necessary to deﬁne the cases in
which insurgent enemies are entitled to the beneﬁts of the
Proclamation of the President of the United States, which
was made on the 8th day of December, 1863, and the
manner in which they shall proceed to avail themselves of
these 
beneﬁts; 
and 
whereas 
the 
objects 
of 
that
Proclamation were to suppress the insurrection and to
restore the authority of the United States; and whereas the
amnesty therein proposed by the President was oﬀered
with reference to these objects alone:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do hereby proclaim and declare that the said
Proclamation does not apply to the cases of persons who, at
the time when they seek to obtain the beneﬁts thereof by
taking the oath thereby prescribed, are in military, naval, or
civil conﬁnement or custody, or under bonds, or on parole
of the civil, military, or naval authorities, or agents of the
United States, as prisoners of war, or persons detained for
oﬀences of any kind, either before or after conviction; and
 that on the contrary it does apply only to those persons
who, being yet at large, and free from any arrest,
conﬁnement, or duress, shall voluntarily come forward and
take the said oath, with the purpose of restoring peace, and
establishing the national authority.
Persons excluded from the amnesty oﬀered in the said
Proclamation may apply to the President for clemency, like
all other oﬀenders, and their application will receive due
consideration.
I do further declare and proclaim that the oath presented
in the aforesaid proclamation of the 8th of December, 1863,
may be taken and subscribed before any commissioned
oﬀicer, civil, military, or naval, in the service of the United
States, or any civil or military oﬀicer of a State or Territory
not in insurrection, who, by the laws thereof, may be
qualiﬁed for administering oaths.
All oﬀicers who receive such oaths are hereby authorized
to give certiﬁcates thereof to the persons respectively by
whom they are made, and such oﬀicers are hereby required
to transmit the original records of such oaths, at as early a
day as may be convenient, to the Department of State,
where they will be deposited, and remain in the archives of
the Government.
The Secretary of State will keep a registry thereof, and
will, on application, in proper cases, issue certiﬁcates of
such records in the customary form of oﬀicial certiﬁcates.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed............
A. LINCOLN.
 By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 28, 1864.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — The Governor of Kentucky is here, and
desires to have the following points deﬁnitely ﬁxed: First.
That the quotas of troops furnished, and to be furnished, by
Kentucky may be adjusted upon the basis as actually
reduced by able-bodied men of hers having gone into the
rebel service; and that she be required to furnish no more
than her just quotas upon fair adjustment upon such basis.
Second. To whatever extent the enlistment and drafting,
one or both, of colored troops may be found necessary
within the State, it may be conducted within the law of
Congress; and, so far as practicable, free from collateral
embarrassments, disorders, and provocations.
I think these requests of the Governor are reasonable;
and I shall be obliged if you will give him a full hearing, and
do the best you can to eﬀect these objects.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. 
. 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 29, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your letter to Colonel Townsend,
inclosing a slip from the “Herald,” and asking a court of
inquiry, has been laid before me by the Secretary of War,
with the request that I would consider it. It is quite natural
that you should feel some sensibility on the subject; yet I
am not impressed, nor do I think the country is impressed,
with the belief that your honor demands, or the public
interest demands, such an inquiry. The country knows that
at all events you have done good service; and I believe it
agrees with me that it is much better for you to be engaged
in trying to do more, than to be diverted, as you necessarily
would be, by a court of inquiry.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 29,1864.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL 
GRANT, 
ARMY 
of 
the
Potomac: Captain Kinney, of whom I spoke to you as
desiring to go on your staﬀ, is now in your camp, in
company with Mrs. Senator Dixon. Mrs. Grant and I, and
some others, agreed last night that I should, by this
despatch, kindly call your attention to Captain Kinney.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A. 
. H
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 4, 1864.
A. G. HODGES, ESQ., Frankfort, Kentucky:
MY DEAR SIR: — You ask me to put in writing the
substance of what I verbally said the other day, in your
presence, to Governor Bramlette and Senator Dixon. It was
about as follows:
“I am naturally anti-slavery. If slavery is not wrong,
nothing is wrong. I cannot remember when I did not so
think and feel, and yet I have never understood that the
Presidency conferred upon me an unrestricted right to act
oﬀicially upon this judgment and feeling. It was in the oath
I took that I would to the best of my ability preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States. I
could not take the oﬀice without taking the oath. Nor was it
my view that I might take an oath to get power, and break
the oath in using the power. I understood, too, that in
ordinary civil administration this oath even forbade me to
practically indulge my primary abstract judgment on the
moral question of slavery. I had publicly declared this many
times, and in many ways. And I aver that, to this day, I have
done no oﬀicial act in mere deference to my abstract
judgment and feeling on slavery. I did understand, however,
that my oath to preserve the Constitution to the best of my
 ability, imposed upon me the duty of preserving, by every
indispensable means, that government, that nation, of
which that Constitution was the organic law. Was it possible
to lose the nation and yet preserve the Constitution? By
General law, life and limb must be protected; yet often a
limb must be amputated to save a life; but a life is never
wisely given to save a limb. I felt that measures, otherwise
unconstitutional, might become lawful, by becoming
indispensable to the preservation of the Constitution,
through the preservation of the nation. Right or wrong, I
assumed this ground, and now avow it. I could not feel that
to the best of my ability I had even tried to preserve the
Constitution, if, to save slavery, or any minor matter, I
should permit the wreck of government, country, and
Constitution, altogether. When, early in the war, General
Fremont attempted military emancipation, I forbade it,
because I did not then think it an indispensable necessity.
When, a little later, General Cameron, then Secretary of
War, suggested the arming of the blacks, I objected,
because I did not yet think it an indispensable necessity.
When, still later, General Hunter attempted military
emancipation, I again forbade it, because I did not yet think
the indispensable necessity had come. When, in March, and
May, and July, 1862, I made earnest and successive appeals
to the Border States to favor compensated emancipation, I
believed 
the 
indispensable 
necessity 
for 
military
emancipation and arming the blacks would come, unless
averted by that measure. They declined the proposition,
and I was, in my best judgment, driven to the alternative of
 either surrendering the Union, and with it the Constitution,
or of laying strong hand upon the colored element. I chose
the latter. In choosing it, I hoped for greater gain than loss,
but of this I was not entirely conﬁdent. More than a year of
trial now shows no loss by it in our foreign relations, none
in our home popular sentiment, none in our white military
force, no loss by it any how, or anywhere. On the contrary,
it shows a gain of quite one hundred and thirty thousand
soldiers, seamen, and laborers. These are palpable facts,
about which, as facts, there can be no caviling. We have the
men; and we could not have had them without the measure.
“And now let any Union man who complains of the
measure test himself by writing down in one line that he is
for subduing the rebellion by force of arms; and in the next,
that he is for taking these hundred and thirty thousand men
from the Union side, and placing them where they would be
but for the measure he condemns. If he cannot face his
case so stated, it is only because he cannot face the truth.”
I add a word which was not in the verbal conversation. In
telling this tale I attempt no compliment to my own
sagacity. I claim not to have controlled events, but confess
plainly that events have controlled me. Now, at the end of
three years’ struggle, the nation’s condition is not what
either party, or any man, devised or expected. God alone
can claim it. Whither it is tending seems plain. If God now
wills the removal of a great wrong, and wills also that we of
the North, as well as you of the South, shall pay fairly for
our complicity in that wrong, impartial history will ﬁnd
 therein new cause to attest and revere the justice and
goodness of God.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
  . H
 A   
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 5, 1864.
MRS HORACE MANN: MADAM: — The petition of
persons under eighteen, praying that I would free all slave
children, and the heading of which petition it appears you
wrote, was handed me a few days since by Senator Sumner.
Please tell these little people I am very glad their young
hearts are so full of just and generous sympathy, and that,
while I have not the power to grant all they ask, I trust they
will remember that God has, and that, as it seems, he wills
to do it.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 12, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, FORT Monroe, Va.:
I am pressed to get from Libby, by special exchange,
Jacob C. Hagenbuek, ﬁrst lieutenant, Company H, Sixty-
seventh Pennsylvania Volunteers. Please do it if you can
without detriment or embarrassment.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 17, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of the Potomac:
Private William Collins of Company B, of the Sixty-ninth
New York Volunteers, has been convicted of desertion, and
execution suspended as in numerous other cases. Now
Captain O’Neill, commanding the regiment, and nearly all
its other regimental and company oﬀicers, petition for his
full pardon and restoration to his company. Is there any
good objection?
A. LINCOLN.
     
   
  I    
ADDRESS AT SANITARY FAIR IN BALTIMORE,
APRIL 18, 1864.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — Calling to mind that we
are in Baltimore, we cannot fail to note that the world
moves. Looking upon these many people assembled here to
serve, as they best may, the soldiers of the Union, it occurs
at once that three years ago the same soldiers could not so
much as pass through Baltimore. The change from then till
now is both great and gratifying. Blessings on the brave
men who have wrought the change, and the fair women
who strive to reward them for it!
But Baltimore suggests more than could happen within
Baltimore. The change within Baltimore is part only of a far
wider change. When the war began, three years ago,
neither party, nor any man, expected it would last till now.
Each looked for the end, in some way, long ere to-day.
Neither did any anticipate that domestic slavery would be
much aﬀected by the war. But here we are; the war has not
ended, and slavery has been much aﬀected how much
needs not now to be recounted. So true is it that man
proposes and God disposes.
But we can see the past, though we may not claim to
have directed it; and seeing it, in this case, we feel more
 hopeful and conﬁdent for the future.
The world has never had a good deﬁnition of the word
liberty, and the American people, just now, are much in
want of one. We all declare for liberty; but in using the
same word we do not all mean the same thing. With some
the word liberty may mean for each man to do as he
pleases with himself, and the product of his labor; while
with others the same word may mean for some men to do
as they please with other men, and the product of other
men’s labor. Here are two, not only diﬀerent, but
incompatible things, called by the same name, liberty. And
it follows that each of the things is, by the respective
parties, called by two diﬀerent and incompatible names —
liberty and tyranny.
The shepherd drives the wolf from the sheep’s throat, for
which the sheep thanks the shepherd as his liberator, while
the wolf denounces him for the same act, as the destroyer
of liberty, especially as the sheep was a black one. Plainly,
the sheep and the wolf are not agreed upon a deﬁnition of
the word liberty; and precisely the same diﬀerence prevails
to-day among us human creatures, even in the North, and
all professing to love liberty. Hence we behold the process
by which thousands are daily passing from under the yoke
of bondage hailed by some as the advance of liberty, and
bewailed by others as the destruction of all liberty.
Recently, as it seems, the people of Maryland have been
doing something to deﬁne liberty, and thanks to them that,
in what they have done, the wolf’s dictionary has been
repudiated.
 It is not very becoming for one in my position to make
speeches at length; but there is another subject upon which
I feel that I ought to say a word. A painful rumor, true, I
fear, has reached us, of the massacre, by the rebel forces at
Fort Pillow, in the west end of Tennessee, on the Mississippi
River, of some three hundred colored soldiers and white
oﬀicers [I believe it latter turned out to be 500], who had
just been overpowered by their assailants [numbering
5000]. There seems to be some anxiety in the public mind
whether the Government is doing its duty to the colored
soldier, and to the service, at this point. At the beginning of
the war, and for some time, the use of colored troops was
not contemplated; and how the change of purpose was
wrought I will not now take time to explain. Upon a clear
conviction of duty I resolved to turn that element of
strength to account; and I am responsible for it to the
American people, to the Christian world, to history, and in
my ﬁnal account to God. Having determined to use the
negro as a soldier, there is no way but to give him all the
protection given to any other soldier. The diﬀiculty is not in
stating the principle, but in practically applying it. It is a
mistake to suppose the Government is indiﬀerent to this
matter, or is not doing the best it can in regard to it. We do
not to-day know that a colored soldier, or white oﬀicer
commanding colored soldiers, has been massacred by the
rebels when made a prisoner. We fear it, we believe it, I
may say, — but we do not know it. To take the life of one of
their prisoners on the assumption that they murder ours,
when it is short of certainty that they do murder ours,
 might be too serious, too cruel, a mistake. We are having
the Fort Pillow aﬀair thoroughly investigated; and such
investigation will probably show conclusively how the truth
is. If after all that has been said it shall turn out that there
has been no massacre at Fort Pillow, it will be almost safe
to say there has been none, and will be none, elsewhere. If
there has been the massacre of three hundred there, or
even the tenth part of three hundred, it will be conclusively
proved; and being so proved, the retribution shall as surely
come. It will be matter of grave consideration in what exact
course to apply the retribution; but in the supposed case it
must come.
[There was a massacre of a black company and their
oﬀicers at Fort Pillow — they were prisoners who later on,
the day of their capture, were ordered executed. The black
soldiers were tied alive to individual planks — then man
and plank were cobbled up like cord wood and burned. The
white oﬀicers were shot. D.W.]
  
  A  I
   
  
A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 20, 1864.
CALVIN TRUESDALE, ESQ., Postmaster, Rock Island,
Ill.: Thomas J. Pickett, late agent of the Quartermaster ‘s
Department for the island of Rock Island, has been
removed or suspended from that position on a charge of
having sold timber and stone from the island for his private
beneﬁt. Mr. Pickett is an old acquaintance and friend of
mine, and I will thank you, if you will, to set a day or days
and place on and at which to take testimony on the point.
Notify Mr. Pickett and one J. B. Danforth (who, as I
understand, makes the charge) to be present with their
witnesses. Take the testimony in writing oﬀered by both
sides, and report it in full to me. Please do this for me.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I     
A
I
 A   
 
A   
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 20, 1864.
OFFICER IN MILITARY COMMAND, Fort Warren,
Boston Harbor, Mass.: If there is a man by the name of
Charles Carpenter, under sentence of death for desertion,
at Fort Warren, suspend execution until further order and
send the record of his trial. If sentenced for any other
oﬀence, telegraph what it is and when he is to be executed.
Answer at all events.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I     
A
I
 A   
 
A   
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 21,1864.
OFFICER IN COMMAND AT FORT WARREN, Boston
Harbor, Mass.:
The order I sent yesterday in regard to Charles
Carpenter is hereby withdrawn and you are to act as if it
never existed.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., April 21,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , NEW York: Yesterday I was
induced to telegraph the oﬀicer in military command at
Fort Warren, Boston Harbor, Massachusetts, suspending
the execution of Charles Carpenter, to be executed
tomorrow for desertion. Just now, on reaching your order in
the case, I telegraphed the same oﬀicer withdrawing the
suspension, and leave the case entirely with you. The man’s
friends are pressing me, but I refer them to you, intending
to take no further action myself.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 23, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, FORT Monroe, Va.: Senator
Ten Eyck is very anxious to have a special exchange of
Capt. Frank J. McLean, of Ninth Tennessee Cavalry now, or
lately, at Johnson’s Island, for Capt. T. Ten Eyck, Eighteenth
U. S. Infantry, and now at Richmond. I would like to have it
done. Can it be?
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
  
 
     
    
    A  I
        .
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
1. THE GOVERNORS of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and
Wisconsin oﬀer to the President infantry troops for the
approaching campaign as follows: Ohio, thirty thousand;
Indiana, twenty thousand; Illinois, twenty thousand; Iowa,
ten thousand; Wisconsin, ﬁve thousand.
2. The term of service to be one hundred days, reckoned
from the date of muster into the service of the United
States, unless sooner discharged.
3. The troops to be mustered into the service of the
United States by regiments, when the regiments are ﬁlled
up, according to regulations, to the minimum strength —
the regiments to be organized according to the regulations
of the War Department. The whole number to be furnished
within twenty days from date of notice of the acceptance of
this proposition.
4. The troops to be clothed, armed, equipped, subsisted;
transported, and paid as other United States infantry
volunteers, and to serve in fortiﬁcations, — or wherever
their services may be required, within or without their
respective States.
 5. No bounty to be paid the troops, nor the service
charged or credited on any draft.
6. The draft for three years’ service to go on in any State
or district where the quota is not ﬁlled up; but if any oﬀicer
or soldier in this special service should be drafted, he shall
be credited for the service rendered.
JOHN BROUGH, Governor of Ohio. O. P. MORTON,
Governor of Indiana. RICHARD PATES, Governor of Illinois.
WILLIAM M. STONE, Governor of Iowa. JAMES T. LEWIS,
Governor of Wisconsin
(Indorsement.)
April 23, 1864.
The foregoing proposition of the governors is accepted,
and the Secretary of War is directed to carry it into
execution.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 23, 1864.
HON. 
SECRETARY 
OF 
WAR: MY DEAR SIR: —
According to our understanding with Major-General Frank
P. Blair at the time he took his seat in Congress last winter,
he now asks to withdraw his resignation as Major-General,
then tendered, and be sent to the ﬁeld. Let this be done.
Let the order sending him be such as shown me to-day by
the Adjutant-General, only dropping from it the names of
Maguire and Tompkins.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
H
 
I  IA
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, April 25, 1864.
JOHN WILLIAMS, SPRINGFIELD, Ill.: Yours of the 15th is
just received. Thanks for your kind remembrance. I would
accept your oﬀer at once, were it not that I fear there
might be some impropriety in it, though I do not see that
there would. I will think of it a while.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, April 25, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac: A Mr.
Corby brought you a note from me at the foot of a petition I
believe, in the case of Dawson, to be executed to-day. The
record has been examined here, and it shows too strong a
case for a pardon or commutation, unless there is
something in the poor man’s favor outside of the record,
which you on the ground may know, but I do not. My note
to you only means that if you know of any such thing
rendering a suspension of the execution proper, on your
own judgment, you are at liberty to suspend it. Otherwise I
do not interfere.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   H
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., April 26,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL THOMAS, CHATTANOOGA, Term.:
Suspend execution of death sentence of young Perry, of
Wisconsin, condemned for sleeping on his post, till further
orders, and forward record for examination.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
  
  H .
WASHINGTON, D. C., April 27, 1864.
GOVERNOR MURPHY, LITTLE Rock, Arkansas: I am
much gratiﬁed to learn that you got out so large a vote, so
nearly all the right way, at the late election; and not less so
that your State government including the legislature, is
organized and in good working order. Whatever I can I will
do to protect you; meanwhile you must do your utmost to
protect yourselves. Present my greeting to all.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
      A  I          .
TO THE HONORABLE THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: 
I HAVE THE honor to transmit herewith an address to the
President of the United States, and through him to both
Houses of Congress, on the condition and wants of the
people of east Tennessee, and asking their attention to the
necessity of some action on the part of the Government for
their relief, and which address is presented by a committee
of an organization called “The East Tennessee Relief
Association.”
Deeply commiserating the condition of these most loyal
and suﬀering people, I am unprepared to make any speciﬁc
recommendation for their relief. The military is doing and
will continue to do the best for them within its power. Their
address represents that the construction of direct railroad
communication between Knoxville and Cincinnati by way of
central Kentucky would be of great consequence in the
present emergency. It may be remembered that in the
annual 
message 
of 
December, 
1861, 
such 
railroad
construction was recommended. I now add that, with the
hearty concurrence of Congress, I would yet be pleased to
construct a road, both for the relief of these people and for
its continuing military importance.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
APRIL 28, 1864.
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
In obedience to the resolution of your honorable body, a
copy of which is herewith returned, I have the honor to
make the following brief statement, which is believed to
contain the information sought:
Prior to and at the meeting of the present Congress,
Robert C. Schenck, of Ohio, and Frank P. Blair, Jr., of
Missouri, members elect thereto, by and with the consent
of the Senate held commissions from the Executive as
major-generals in the volunteer army. General Schenck
tendered the resignation of his said commission, and took
his seat in the House of Representatives, at the assembling
thereof, upon the distinct verbal understanding with the
Secretary of War and the Executive that he might, at any
time during the session, at his own pleasure, withdraw said
resignation and return to the ﬁeld.
General Blair was, by temporary assignment of General
Sherman, in command of a corps through the battles in
front of Chattanooga, and in the march to the relief of
Knoxville, which occurred in the latter days of November
and early days of December last, and of course was not
present 
at 
the 
assembling 
of 
Congress. 
When 
he
 subsequently arrived here, he sought, and was allowed by
the Secretary of War and the Executive, the same
conditions and promise as allowed and made to General
Schenck.
General Schenck has not applied to withdraw his
resignation; but when General Grant was made Lieutenant-
General, producing some change of commanders, General
Blair sought to be assigned to the command of a corps. This
was made known to Generals Grant and Sherman, and
assented to by them, and the particular corps for him
designated.
This 
was 
all 
arranged 
and 
understood, 
as 
now
remembered, so much as a month ago; but the formal
withdrawal of General Blair’s resignation, and making the
order assigning him to the command of the corps, were not
consummated at the War Department until last week,
perhaps on the 23d of April instant. As a summary of the
whole, it may be stated that General Blair holds no military
commission or appointment other than as herein stated,
and that it is believed he is now acting as major-General
upon the assumed validity of the commission herein stated,
in connection with the facts herein stated, and not
otherwise. There are some letters, notes, telegrams, orders,
entries, and perhaps other documents in connection with
this subject, which it is believed would throw no additional
light upon it, but which will be cheerfully furnished if
desired.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 30, 1864.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT: Not expecting to see
you before the spring campaign opens, I wish to express in
this way my entire satisfaction with what you have done up
to this time, so far as I understand it.
The particulars of your plans I neither know nor seek to
know. You are vigilant and self-reliant; and, pleased with
this, I wish not to obtrude any restraints or constraints
upon you. While I am very anxious that any great disaster
or capture of our men in great number shall be avoided, I
know that these points are less likely to escape your
attention than they would be mine. If there be anything
wanting which is within my power to give, do not fail to let
me know it.
And now, with a brave army and a just cause, may God
sustain you.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I  
MAY 2, 1864.
TO 
THE 
HONORABLE 
THE 
HOUSE 
OF
REPRESENTATIVES: In compliance with the request
contained in your resolution of the 29th ultimo, a copy of
which resolution is herewith returned, I have the honor to
transmit 
the 
following: 
[Correspondence 
and 
orders
relating to the resignation and reinstatement of Major-
General Frank P. Blair, Jr., of Missouri.]
The foregoing constitutes all sought by the resolution so
far as is remembered or has been found upon diligent
search.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., May 4, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.: I
have an imploring appeal in behalf of the citizens who say
your Order No.8 will compel them to go north of Nashville.
This is in no sense an order, nor is it even a request that
you will do anything which in the least shall be a drawback
upon your military operations, but anything you can do
consistently with those operations for those suﬀering
people I shall be glad of.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 5, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, COMMANDING, Saint
Louis, Mo.:
The President directs me to inquire whether a day has
yet been ﬁxed for the execution of citizen Robert Louden,
and if so what day?
JOHN HAY, Major and Assistant Adjutant-General.
  
 
  .  .  . 
c 
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 9, 1864.
MRS. 
SARAH 
B. 
McCONKEY, 
West 
Chester, 
Pa.:
MADAM: — Our mutual friend, Judge Lewis, tells me you
do me the honor to inquire for my personal welfare. I have
been very anxious for some days in regard to our armies in
the ﬁeld, but am considerably cheered, just now, by
favorable news from them.
I am sure you will join me in the hope for their further
success; while yourself, and other good mothers, wives,
sisters, and daughters, do all you and they can, to relieve
and comfort the gallant soldiers who compose them.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
    
 
A I
 
   HA
  
I I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 9, 1864
TO THE FRIENDS OF UNION AND LIBERTY: Enough is
known of army operations, within the last ﬁve days, to
claim our special gratitude to God. While what remains
undone demands our most sincere prayers to and reliance
upon Him (without whom all eﬀort is vain), I recommend
that all patriots at their homes, in their places of public
worship, and wherever they may be, unite in common
thanksgiving and prayer to Almighty God.
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     
A
 
MAY 9, 1864.
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I am very much obliged to you
for the compliment of this call, though I apprehend it is
owing more to the good news received to-day from the
Army, than to a desire to see me. I am indeed very grateful
to the brave men who have been struggling with the enemy
in the ﬁeld, to their noble commanders who have directed
them, and especially to our Maker. Our commanders are
following up their victories resolutely and successfully. I
think, without knowing the particulars of the plans of
General Grant, that what has been accomplished is of more
importance than at ﬁrst appears. I believe, I know (and am
especially grateful to know) that General Grant has not
been jostled in his purposes, that he has made all his
points, and to-day he is on his line as he purposed before he
moved his armies. I will volunteer to say that I am very glad
at what has happened, but there is a great deal still to be
done. While we are grateful to all the brave men and
oﬀicers for the events of the past few days, we should,
above all, be very grateful to Almighty God, who gives us
victory.
There is enough yet before us requiring all loyal men and
patriots to perform their share of the labor and follow the
 example of the modest General at the head of our armies,
and sink all personal consideration for the sake of the
country. I commend you to keep yourselves in the same
tranquil mood that is characteristic of that brave and loyal
man. I have said more than I expected when I came before
you. Repeating my thanks for this call, I bid you good-bye.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    
 
A  A  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., May 10, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL WALLACE, BALTIMORE:
Please tell me what is the trouble with Dr. Hawks. Also
please ask Bishop Whittington to give me his view of the
case.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 11, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, ST. Louis, Missouri:
Complaints are coming to me of disturbances in Canoll,
Platte, and Buchanan counties. Please ascertain the truth,
correct what is found wrong, and telegraph me.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  .  
I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 12, 1864
F. B. LOOMIS, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your communication of the 28th April, in which
you oﬀer to replace the present garrison at Port Trumbull
with volunteers, which you propose to raise at your own
expense. While it seems inexpedient at this time to accept
this proposition on account of the special duties now
devolving upon the garrison mentioned, I cannot pass
unnoticed such a meritorious instance of individual
patriotism. Permit me, for the Government, to express my
cordial thanks to you for this generous and public-spirited
oﬀer, which is worthy of note among the many called forth
in these times of national trial.
I am very truly, your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A 
  H
I   
   
A I
  
A
        .
GENTLEMEN:-IN RESPONSE TO your address, allow me to
attest the accuracy of its historical statements, indorse the
sentiments it expresses, and thank you in the nation’s name
for the sure promise it gives. Nobly sustained, as the
Government has been, by all the churches, I would utter
nothing which might in the least appear invidious against
any. Yet without this, it may fairly be said, that the
Methodist Episcopal Church, not less devoted than the
best, is by its greatest numbers the most important of all. It
is no fault in others that the Methodist Church sends more
soldiers to the ﬁeld, more nurses to the hospitals, and more
prayers to Heaven than — any other. God bless the
Methodist Church Bless all the churches; and blessed be
God, who in this our great trial giveth us the churches.
     
 A
  
 
   
   A   .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  
a          .
His E CELLENCY RICHARD YATES, Springﬁeld, Ill.:
IF ANY SUCH proclamation has appeared, it is a forgery.
A. LINCOLN.
 A      A
 I
  I 
 
  
I     
 I    
 
  A       
      A
 
I 
 
ORDER TO GENERAL J. A. DI .
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, May 18,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL JOHN A. DI , Commanding at New
York: Whereas there has been wickedly and traitorously
printed and published this morning in the New York World
and New York Journal of Commerce, newspapers printed
and published in the city of New York, a false and spurious
proclamation purporting to be signed by the President and
to be countersigned by the Secretary of State, which
publication is of a treasonable nature, designed to give aid
and comfort to the enemies of the United States and to the
rebels now at war against the Government and their aiders
and abettors, you are therefore hereby commanded
forthwith to arrest and imprison in any fort or military
prison in your command, the editors, proprietors, and
publishers of the aforesaid newspapers, and all such
persons as, after public notice has been given of the
falsehood of said publication, print and publish the same
with intent to give aid and comfort to the enemy; and you
will hold the persons so arrested in close custody until they
 can be brought to trial before a military commission for
their oﬀense. You will also take possession by military force
of the printing establishments of the New York World and
Journal of Commerce, and hold the same until further
orders, and prohibit any further publication therefrom.
A. LINCOLN.
[On the morning of May 18, 3864, a forged proclamation
was published in the World, and Journal of Commerce, of
New York. The proclamation named a day for fasting and
prayer, called for 400,000 fresh troops, and purposed to
raise by an “immediate and peremptory draft,” whatever
quotas were not furnished on the day speciﬁed. Ed.]
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  .  
    .
(Cipher.)
WASHINGTON, D. C., May 18, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, Bermuda Hundred, Va.:
Until receiving your dispatch of yesterday, the idea of
commissions in the volunteers expiring at the end of three
years had not occurred to me. I think no trouble will come
of it; and, at all events, I shall take care of it so far as in me
lies. As to the major-generalships in the regular army, I
think I shall not dispose of another, at least until the
combined operations now in progress, under direction of
General Grant, and within which yourself and command are
included, shall be terminated.
Meanwhile, on behalf of yourself, oﬀicers, and men,
please accept my hearty thanks for what you and they have
so far done.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
   
I
  H     
  I
 
A
  I A
  
 
     
 
I I A       I 
MAY 19, 1864.
IT IS OFFICIALLY announced by the State Department that
citizens of the United States holding commissions and
recognized as Consuls of foreign powers, are not by law
exempt from military service if drafted:
Therefore the mere enrolment of a citizen holding a
foreign consulate will not be held to vacate his commission,
but if he shall be drafted his exequatur will be revoked
unless he shall have previously resigned in order that
another Consul may be received.
An exequatur bearing date the 3d day of May, 1858,
having been issued to Charles Hunt, a citizen of the United
States, recognizing him as a Consul of Belgium for St.
Louis, Missouri, and declaring him free to exercise and
enjoy such functions, powers, and privileges as are allowed
to the Consuls of the most favored nations in the United
States, and the said Hunt having sought to screen himself
from his military duty to his country, in consequence of thus
being invested with the consular functions of a foreign
power in the United States, it is deemed advisable that the
said Charles Hunt should no longer be permitted to
 continue in the exercise of said functions, powers, and
privileges.
These are therefore to declare that I no longer recognize
the said Hunt as Consul of Belgium, for St. Louis, Missouri,
and will not permit him to exercise or enjoy any of the
functions, powers or privileges allowed to consuls of that
nation, and that I do hereby wholly revoke and annul the
said exequatur heretofore given, and do declare the same
to be absolutely null and void from this day forward.
In testimony whereof, I have caused these letters to be
made patent, and the seal of the United States of America
to be hereunto aﬀixed................
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
 
   
  
  
 A
 H   .     
 I   
A
 I
  
a         
GOVERNOR O. P. MORTON: 
THE GETTING FORWARD of hundred-day troops to sustain
General Sherman’s lengthening lines promises much good.
Please put your best eﬀorts into the work.
A. LINCOLN.
Same to Governor Yates, Springﬁeld, Illinois; Governor
Stone, 
Davenport, 
Iowa; 
Governor 
Lewis, 
Madison,
Wisconsin.
     
 A
  
  H I  IA
A A.  A  . 
A
  A  
 
  
A HI
 
  
.  .  
a    
1864
CHRISTIANA 
A. 
SACK, 
Baltimore, 
Md.: 
I 
cannot
postpone the execution of a convicted spy on a mere
telegraphic despatch signed with a name I never heard
before. General Wallace may give you a pass to see him if
he chooses.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
    
H.
A HI
 
  I    
a          .
GOVERNOR BROUGH, Columbus, Ohio: 
YOURS 
TO SECRETARY of War [received] asking for
something cheering. We have nothing bad from anywhere. I
have just seen a despatch of Grant, of 11 P.M., May 23, on
the North Anna and partly across it, which ends as follows:
“Everything looks exceedingly favorable for us.” We have
nothing later from him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  
a         .
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, Army of Potomac: 
MR. J. C. Swift wishes a pass from me to follow your army
to pick up rags and cast-oﬀ clothing. I will give it to him if
you say so, otherwise not.
A. LINCOLN.
[“No job to big or too small” for this president — not
even a request from a Rag Picker. D.W.]
  
 A
  
   
I
  H
  A
  
  A I
 
   H  
 
  
   
A A
  I
A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 26, 1864.
WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: I am again pressed with the
claim of Mr. Marshall O. Roberts, for transportation of what
was called the Naval Brigade from New York to Fortress
Monroe. This force was a special organization got up by
one Bartlett, in pretended pursuance of written authority
from me, but in fact, pursuing the authority in scarcely
anything whatever. The credit given him by Mr. Roberts,
was given in the teeth of the express declaration that the
Government would not be responsible for the class of
expenses to which it belonged. After all some part of the
transportation became useful to the Government, and
equitably should be paid for; but I have neither time nor
means 
to 
ascertain 
this 
equitable 
amount, 
or 
any
appropriation to pay it with if ascertained. If the
Quartermaster at New York can ascertain what would
compensate for so much of the transportation as did result
usefully to the Government, it might be a step towards
reaching justice. I write this from memory, but I believe it is
substantially correct.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  . A.  
  I
 A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, JUNE 3, 1864.
HON. F. A. CONKLING AND OTHERS.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter, inviting me to be present at
a mass meeting of loyal citizens, to be held at New York on
the 4th instant, for the purpose of expressing gratitude to
Lieutenant-General Grant for his signal services, was
received yesterday. It is impossible for me to attend. I
approve, nevertheless, of whatever may tend to strengthen
and sustain General Grant and the noble armies now under
his direction. My previous high estimate of General Grant
has been maintained and heightened by what has occurred
in the remarkable campaign he is now conducting, while
the magnitude and diﬀiculty of the task before him does not
prove less than I expected. He and his brave soldiers are
now in the midst of their great trial, and I trust that at your
meeting you will so shape your good words that they may
turn to men and guns, moving to his and their support.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
  
 A         
 HI
  H
   
  I A
 
A I
A   
  
 I
.
JUNE 5, 1864.
(INDORSEMENT.) Swett is unquestionably all right. Mr.
Holt is a good man, but I had not heard or thought of him
for Vice-President. Wish not to interfere about Vice-
President. Cannot interfere about platform. Convention
must judge for itself.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   une        .
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, Army of the Potomac:
PRIVATE JAMES MCCARTHY, of the One-hundred and
fortieth New York Volunteers, is here under sentence to the
Dry Tortugas for an attempt to desert. His friends appeal to
me and if his colonel and you consent, I will send him to his
regiment. Please answer.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
A HI
 
   une        .
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, St. Louis, Missouri:
YOURS OF TO-DAY received. I am unable to conceive how a
message can be less safe by the express than by a staﬀ-
oﬀicer. If you send a verbal message, the messenger is one
additional person let into the secret.
A. LINCOLN
        
  H   
I     
 I  I
    I
 
   I
 
 
 
  HI    
I
A I
JUNE 9, 1864.
MR. 
CHAIRMAN 
AND 
GENTLEMEN 
OF 
THE
COMMITTEE: I will neither conceal my gratiﬁcation nor
restrain the expression of my gratitude that the Union
people, through their convention, in their continued eﬀort
to save and advance the nation, have deemed me not
unworthy to remain in my present position. I know no
reason to doubt that I shall accept the nomination
tendered; and yet perhaps I should not declare deﬁnitely
before reading and considering what is called the platform.
I will say now, however, I approve the declaration in favor
of so amending the Constitution as to prohibit slavery
throughout the nation. When the people in revolt, with a
hundred days of explicit notice that they could within those
days resume their allegiance without the overthrow of their
institution, and that they could not so resume it afterward,
elected to stand out, such amendment of the Constitution
as now proposed became a ﬁtting and necessary conclusion
to the ﬁnal success of the Union cause. Such alone can
meet and cover all cavils. Now the unconditional Union
men, North and South, perceive its importance and
 embrace it. In the joint names of Liberty and Union, let us
labor to give it legal form and practical eﬀect.
   A  
 
 
   H  
I
 
A I
A
 
  
 I
 H  
 I
  A  I
    
.   
  
AND 8, 1864.
1. Resolved, That it is the highest duty of every American
citizen to maintain against all their enemies the integrity of
the Union and the paramount authority of the Constitution
and laws of the United States; and that, laying aside all
diﬀerences of political opinion, we pledge ourselves, as
Union men, animated by a common sentiment and aiming
at a common object, to do everything in our power to aid
the Government in quelling by force of arms the rebellion
now raging against its authority, and in bringing to the
punishment due to their crimes the rebels and traitors
arrayed against it.
2. Resolved, That we approve the determination of the
Government of the United States not to compromise with
rebels, or to oﬀer them any terms of peace, except such as
may be based upon an unconditional surrender of their
hostility and a return to their just allegiance to the
Constitution and laws of the United States, and that we call
upon the Government to maintain this position, and to
prosecute the war with the utmost possible vigor to the
complete suppression of the rebellion, in full reliance upon
the self-sacriﬁcing patriotism, the heroic valor, and the
 undying devotion of the American people to their Country
and its free institutions.
3. Resolved, That as slavery was the cause, and now
constitutes the strength, of this rebellion, and as it must be,
always and everywhere, hostile to the principles of
republican government, justice and the national safety
demand its utter and complete extirpation from the soil of
the republic; and that while we uphold and maintain the
acts and proclamations by which the Government, in its
own defense, has aimed a death-blow at this gigantic evil,
we are in favor, furthermore, of such an amendment to the
Constitution, to be made by the people in conformity with
its provisions, as shall terminate and forever prohibit the
existence of slavery within the limits or the jurisdiction of
the United States.
4. Resolved, That the thanks of the American people are
due to the soldiers and sailors of the Army and Navy, who
have periled their lives in defense of their country and in
vindication of the honor of its ﬂag; that the nation owes to
them some permanent recognition of their patriotism and
their valor, and ample and permanent provision for those of
their survivors who have received disabling and honorable
wounds in the service of the country; and that the
memories of those who have fallen in its defense shall be
held in grateful and everlasting remembrance.
5. Resolved, That we approve and applaud the practical
wisdom, the unselﬁsh patriotism, and the unswerving
ﬁdelity to the Constitution and the principles of American
liberty, with which Abraham Lincoln has discharged under
 circumstances of unparalleled diﬀiculty the great duties
and responsibilities of the Presidential oﬀice; that we
approve and indorse as demanded by the emergency and
essential to the preservation of the nation, and as within
the provisions of the Constitution, the measures and acts
which he has adopted to defend the nation against its open
and 
secret 
foes; 
that 
we 
approve, 
especially, 
the
Proclamation of Emancipation, and the employment as
Union soldiers of men heretofore held in slavery; and that
we have full conﬁdence in his determination to carry these
and all other constitutional measures essential to the
salvation of the country into full and complete eﬀect.
6. Resolved, That we deem it essential to the General
welfare that harmony should prevail in the national
councils, and we regard as worthy of public conﬁdence and
oﬀicial trust those only who cordially indorse the principles
proclaimed 
in 
these 
resolutions, 
and 
which 
should
characterize the administration of the Government.
7. Resolved, That the Government owes to all men
employed in its armies, without regard to distinction of
color, the full protection of the laws of war, and that any
violation of these laws, or of the usages of civilized nations
in time of war, by the rebels now in arms, should be made
the subject of prompt and full redress.
8. Resolved, That foreign immigration, which in the past
has added so much to the wealth, development of
resources, and increase of power to this nation, the asylum
of the oppressed of all nations, should be fostered and
encouraged by a liberal and just policy.
 9. Resolved, That we are in favor of the speedy
construction of the railroad to the Paciﬁc coast.
10. Resolved, That the national faith, pledged for the
redemption of the public debt, must be kept inviolate, and
that for this purpose we recommend economy and rigid
responsibility in the public expenditures, and a vigorous
and just system of taxation: and that it is the duty of every
loyal State to sustain the credit and promote the use of the
national currency.
11. Resolved, That we approve the position taken by the
Government that the people of the United States can never
regard with indiﬀerence the attempt of any European
power to overthrow by force or to supplant by fraud the
institutions of any republican government on the Western
Continent, and that they will view with extreme jealousy, as
menacing to the peace and independence of their own
country, the eﬀorts of any such power to obtain new
footholds for monarchical governments, sustained by
foreign military force, in near proximity to the United
States.
        
 A 
   
A I
   
  H  
A I
A
I
   A
 
JUNE 9, 1864.
GENTLEMEN — I can only say in response to the
remarks of your chairman, that I am very grateful for the
renewed conﬁdence which has been accorded to me, both
by the convention and by the National League. I am not
insensible at all to the personal compliment there is in this,
yet I do not allow myself to believe that any but a small
portion of it is to be appropriated as a personal compliment
to me. The convention and the nation, I am assured, are
alike animated by a higher view of the interests of the
country, for the present and the great future, and the part I
am entitled to appropriate as a compliment is only that part
which I may lay hold of as being the opinion of the
convention and of the League, that I am not entirely
unworthy to be intrusted with the place I have occupied for
the last three years. I have not permitted myself,
gentlemen, to conclude that I am the best man in the
country; but I am reminded in this connection of a story of
an old Dutch farmer, who remarked to a companion once
that “it was not best to swap horses when crossing a
stream.”
        
 A 
   
A I
   
 
HI
JUNE 9, 1864.
GENTLEMEN: — I am very much obliged to you for this
compliment. I have just been saying, and will repeat it, that
the hardest of all speeches I have to answer is a serenade. I
never know what to say on these occasions. I suppose that
you have done me this kindness in connection with the
action of the Baltimore convention, which has recently
taken place, and with which, of course, I am very well
satisﬁed. What we want still more than Baltimore
conventions, or Presidential elections, is success under
General Grant. I propose that you constantly bear in mind
that the support you owe to the brave oﬀicers and soldiers
in the ﬁeld is of the very ﬁrst importance, and we should
therefore bend all our energies to that point. Now without
detaining you any longer, I propose that you help me to
close up what I am now saying with three rousing cheers
for General Grant and the oﬀicers and soldiers under his
command.
 A
      
  H   
 
    
  H  HA
AIIA
I  A
 
JUNE 11, 1864.
SIR: — IN every light in which the State of the Hawaiian
Islands can be contemplated, it is an object of profound
interest for the United States. Virtually it was once a
colony. It is now a near and intimate neighbor. It is a haven
of shelter and refreshment for our merchants, ﬁshermen,
seamen, and other citizens, when on their lawful occasions
they are navigating the eastern seas and oceans. Its people
are free, and its laws, language, and religion are largely the
fruit of our own teaching and example. The distinguished
part which you, Mr. Minister, have acted in the history of
that interesting country, is well known here. It gives me
pleasure to assure you of my sincere desire to do what I
can to render now your sojourn in the United States
agreeable to yourself, satisfactory to your sovereign, and
beneﬁcial to the Hawaiian people.
   
A     
 A
 
HI
   
I
 
 
JUNE 11, 1864.
SOLDIERS! I UNDERSTAND you have just come from Ohio;
come to help us in this the nation’s day of trial, and also of
its hopes. I thank you for your promptness in responding to
the call for troops. Your services were never needed more
than now. I know not where you are going. You may stay
here and take the places of those who will be sent to the
front, or you may go there yourselves. Wherever you go I
know you will do your best. Again I thank you. Good-by.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  H
A .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   une   
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
THOMAS, 
Louisville, 
Kentucky:
Complaint is made to me that in the vicinity of Henderson,
our militia is seizing negroes and carrying them oﬀ without
their own consent, and according to no rules whatever,
except those of absolute violence. I wish you would look
into this and inform me, and see that the making soldiers of
negroes is done according to the rules you are acting upon,
so that unnecessary provocation and irritation be avoided.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  H
A  
      .
A HI
 
  
.  .   une         .
THOMAS WEBSTER, Philadelphia:
WILL TRY TO leave here Wednesday afternoon, say at 4
P.M., remain till Thursday afternoon and then return. This
subject to events.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
   une         .   A.
.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, Headquarters Army of
the Potomac:
I HAVE JUST received your dispatch of 1 P.M. yesterday. I
begin to see it: you will succeed. God bless you all.
A. LINCOLN.
 A
     A  A  A
I A    AI  I
 HI A
   HIA
JUNE 16, 1864.
I SUPPOSE THAT this toast is intended to open the way for
me to say something. War at the best is terrible, and this of
ours in its magnitude and duration is one of the most
terrible the world has ever known. It has deranged
business totally in many places, and perhaps in all. It has
destroyed property, destroyed life, and ruined homes. It has
produced a national debt and a degree of taxation
unprecedented in the history of this country. It has caused
mourning among us until the heavens may almost be said
to be hung in black. And yet it continues. It has had
accompaniments not before known in the history of the
world. I mean the Sanitary and Christian Commissions,
with their labors for the relief of the soldiers, and the
Volunteer Refreshment Saloons, understood better by those
who hear me than by myself, and these fairs, ﬁrst begun at
Chicago and next held in Boston, Cincinnati, and other
cities. The motive and object that lie at the bottom of them
are worthy of the most that we can do for the soldier who
goes to ﬁght the battles of his country. From the fair and
tender hand of women is much, very much, done for the
soldier, continually reminding him of the care and thought
 for him at home. The knowledge that he is not forgotten is
grateful to his heart. Another view of these institutions is
worthy of thought. They are voluntary contributions, giving
proof that the national resources are not at all exhausted,
and that the national patriotism will sustain us through all.
It is a pertinent question, When is this war to end? I do not
wish to name the day when it will end, lest the end should
not come at the given time. We accepted this war, and did
not begin it. We accepted it for an object, and when that
object is accomplished the war will end, and I hope to God
that it will never end until that object is accomplished. We
are going through with our task, so far as I am concerned,
if it takes us three years longer. I have not been in the habit
of making predictions, but I am almost tempted now to
hazard one. I will. It is, that Grant is this evening in a
position, with Meade and Hancock, of Pennsylvania,
whence he can never be dislodged by the enemy until
Richmond is taken. If I shall discover that General Grant
may be greatly facilitated in the capture of Richmond by
rapidly pouring to him a large number of armed men at the
briefest notice, will you go? Will you march on with him?
[Cries of “Yes, yes.”] Then I shall call upon you when it is
necessary.
  
 A  
 
   
 
  A   A   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, Jun. 24, 1864
HONORABLE ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
SIR: — By authority of the Constitution, and moved
thereto by the fourth section of the act of Congress,
entitled “An act making appropriations for the support of
the army for the year ending the thirtieth of June, eighteen
hundred and sixty-ﬁve, and for other purposes, approved
June is, 1864,” I require your opinion in writing as to what
pay, bounty, and clothing are allowed by law to persons of
color who were free on the nineteenth day of April, 1861,
and who have been enlisted and mustered into the military
service of the United States between the month of
December, 1862, and the sixteenth of June, 1864.
Please answer as you would do, on my requirement, if
the act of June 15, 1864, had not been passed, and I will so
use your opinion as to satisfy that act.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 24, 1864.
MRS. A. LINCOLN, Boston, Massachusetts:
All well and very warm. Tad and I have been to General
Grant’s army. Returned yesterday safe and sound.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
A HI
 
   une         .
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, St. Louis, Missouri:
COMPLAINT IS MADE to me that General Brown does not do
his best to suppress bushwhackers. Please ascertain and
report to me.
A. LINCOLN.
        A     I
  H  
I
A I
  
    I
 
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 27, 1864.
HON. 
WILLIAM 
DENNISON 
AND 
OTHERS, 
a
Committee of the Union National Convention.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter of the 14th inst.., formally
notifying me that I have been nominated by the convention
you represent for the Presidency of the United States for
four years from the 4th of March next, has been received.
The nomination is gratefully accepted, as the resolutions of
the convention, called the platform, are heartily approved.
While the resolution in regard to the supplanting of
republican government upon the Western Continent is fully
concurred in, there might be misunderstanding were I not
to say that the position of the Government in relation to the
action of France in Mexico, as assumed through the State
Department and indorsed by the convention among the
measures and acts of the Executive, will be faithfully
maintained so long as the state of facts shall leave that
position pertinent and applicable.
I am especially gratiﬁed that the soldier and seaman
were not forgotten by the convention, as they forever must
and will be remembered by the grateful country for whose
salvation they devote their lives.
 Thanking you for the kind and complimentary terms in
which you have communicated the nomination and other
proceedings of the convention, I subscribe myself,
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   .       .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 29, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL STEELE: I understand that Congress
declines to admit to seats the persons sent as Senators and
Representatives from Arkansas. These persons apprehend
that, in consequence, you may not support the new State
government there as you otherwise would. My wish is that
you give that government and the people there the same
support and protection that you would if the members had
been admitted, because in no event, nor in any view of the
case, can this do any harm, while it will be the best you can
do toward suppressing the rebellion.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   une         .
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point:
DR. WORSTER WISHES to visit you with a view of getting
your permission to introduce into the army “Harmon’s
Sandal Sock.” Shall I give him a pass for that object?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
A I
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 30,
1864.
HON. DAVID TOD, Youngstown, Ohio: I have nominated
you to be Secretary of the Treasury, in place of Governor
Chase, who has resigned. Please come without a moment’s
delay.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  .    I   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 4, 1864.
TO JOHN L. SCRIPPS, ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — Complaint is made to me that you are using
your oﬀicial power to defeat Mr. Arnold’s nomination to
Congress. I am well satisﬁed with Mr. Arnold as a member
of Congress, and I do not know that the man who might
supplant him would be as satisfactory; but the correct
principle, I think, is that all our friends should have
absolute freedom of choice among our friends. My wish,
therefore, is that you will do just as you think ﬁt with your
own suﬀrage in the case, and not constrain any of your
subordinates to [do] other than [as] he thinks ﬁt with his.
This is precisely the rule I inculcated and adhered to on my
part, when a certain other nomination, now recently made,
was being canvassed for.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
TELEGRAM TO J. W. GARRETT. WASHINGTON, July 5,
1864.
J. W. GARRETT, President [B. 
 0. R. R.], Camden
Station: 
You 
say 
telegraphic 
communication 
is 
re-
established with Sandy Hook. Well, what does Sandy Hook
say about operations of enemy and of Sigel during to-day?
 A. LINCOLN.
   
       A     A
 
  
 
   
   
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, July 5, 1864.
HIS E CELLENCY HORATIO SEYMOUR, Governor of
New York, Albany: The President directs me to inform you
that a rebel force, variously estimated at from ﬁfteen to
twenty thousand men, have invaded the State of Maryland,
and have taken Martinsburg and Harper’s Ferry, and are
threatening other points; that the public safety requires
him to call upon the State executives for a militia force to
repel this invasion. He therefore directs me to call on you
for a militia force of twelve thousand men from your State
to serve not more than one hundred days, and to request
that you will with the utmost despatch forward the troops
to Washington by rail or steamboat as may be most
expeditious.
Please favor me with an answer at your earliest
convenience.
EDWIN M. STANTON,
Secretary of War.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
  H  
 I  
HA  A   
  
 
JULY 5, 1864.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
A Proclamation.
Whereas, by a proclamation which was issued on the
15th day of April, 1861, the President of the United States
announced and declared that the laws of the United States
had been for some time past, and then were, opposed and
the execution thereof obstructed in certain States therein
mentioned, by combinations too powerful to be suppressed
by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings or by the
power vested in the marshals by law; and
Whereas, immediately after the issuing of the said
proclamation the land and naval forces of the United States
were put into activity to suppress the said insurrections
and rebellion; and
Whereas, the Congress of the United States, by an act
approved on the third day of March, 1863, did enact that
during the said rebellion the President of the United States,
whenever in his judgment the public safety may require it,
is authorized to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas
corpus in any case throughout the United States, or any
part thereof; and
 Whereas, the said insurrection and rebellion still
continue, endangering the existence of the Constitution and
Government of the United States; and
Whereas, the military forces of the United States are now
actively engaged in suppressing the said insurrection and
rebellion in various parts of the States where the said
rebellion has been successful in obstructing the laws and
public authorities, especially in the States of Virginia and
Georgia; and
Whereas, on the ﬁfteenth day of September last, the
President of the United States duly issued his proclamation,
wherein he declared that the privilege of the writ of habeas
corpus should be suspended throughout the United States,
in Cases whereby the authority of the President of the
United States, the military, naval, and civil oﬀicers of the
United States, or any of them, hold persons under their
command or in their custody, either as prisoners of war,
spies, or aiders or abettors of the enemy, or oﬀicers,
soldiers, or seamen enrolled or drafted, or mustered, or
enlisted in, or belonging to the land or naval forces of the
United States, or as deserters therefrom, or otherwise
amenable to military law, or the rules and articles of war, or
the rules and regulations prescribed for the military and
naval service by authority of the President of the United
States, or for resisting a draft, or for any other oﬀence
against the military or naval service; and
Whereas, many citizens of the State of Kentucky have
joined the forces of the insurgents, who have on several
occasions entered the said State of Kentucky in large force
 and not without aid and comfort furnished by disaﬀected
and disloyal citizens of the United States residing therein,
have not only greatly disturbed the public peace but have
overborne the civil authorities and made ﬂagrant civil war,
destroying property and life in various parts of the State;
and
Whereas, it has been made known to the President of the
United States, by the oﬀicers commanding the National
armies, that combinations have been formed in the said
State of Kentucky, with a purpose of inciting the rebel
forces to renew the said operations of civil war within the
said State, and thereby to embarrass the United States
armies now operating in the said States of Virginia and
Georgia, and even to endanger their safety.
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, by virtue of the authority vested in me by
the Constitution and laws, do hereby declare that in my
judgment the public safety especially requires that the
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus so
proclaimed in the said proclamation of the 15th of
September, 1863, be made eﬀectual and be duly enforced
in and throughout the said State of Kentucky, and that
martial law be for the present declared therein. I do
therefore hereby require of the military oﬀicers of the said
State that the privilege of the habeas corpus be eﬀectually
suspended within the said State, according to the aforesaid
proclamation, and that martial law be established therein
to take eﬀect from the date of this proclamation, the said
suspension and establishment of martial law to continue
 until this proclamation shall be revoked or modiﬁed, but
not beyond the period when the said rebellion shall have
been suppressed or come to an end. And I do hereby
require and command, as well as military oﬀicers, all civil
oﬀicers and authorities existing or found within the said
State of Kentucky, to take notice of this proclamation and to
give full eﬀect to the same. The martial laws herein
proclaimed and the things in that respect herein ordered
will not be deemed or taken to interfere with the holding of
lawful 
elections, 
or 
with 
the 
proceedings 
of 
the
constitutional 
Legislature 
of 
Kentucky, 
or 
with 
the
administration of justice in the courts of law existing
therein between citizens of the United States in suits or
proceedings which do not aﬀect the military operations or
the constituted authorities of the government of the United
States.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the City of Washington this 5th day of July, in the
year of our Lord 1864, and of the independence of the
United States the eighty-eighth.
A. LINCOLN. By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
Secretary of State.
   
  A
A I
  
  A 
A  
    A      
    
    .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas, the Senate and House of Representatives at
their last session adopted a concurrent resolution, which
was approved on the second day of July instant, and which
 was in the words following, namely:
That the President of the United States be requested to
appoint a day of humiliation and prayer by the people of the
United States, that he request his constitutional advisers at
the head of the Executive Departments to unite with him,
as Chief Magistrate of the nation, at the City of
Washington, and the members of Congress, and all
magistrates, all civil, military, and naval oﬀicers, all
soldiers, sailors, and marines, with all loyal and law-abiding
people, to convene at their usual places of worship, or
wherever they may be, to confess and to repent of their
manifold sins, to implore the compassion and forgiveness of
the Almighty, that, if consistent with His will, the existing
rebellion may be speedily suppressed, and the supremacy
of the Constitution and laws of the United States may be
established throughout all the States; to implore Him, as
 the Supreme Ruler of the world, not to destroy us as a
people, nor suﬀer us to be destroyed by the hostility or
connivance of other nations, or by obstinate adhesion to
our own counsels which may be in conﬂict with His eternal,
purposes, and to implore Him to enlighten the mind of the
nation to know and do His will, humbly believing that it is
in accordance with His will that our place should be
maintained as a united people among the family of nations;
to implore Him to grant to our armed defenders, and the
masses of the people, that courage, power of resistance,
and endurance necessary to secure that result; to implore
Him in His inﬁnite goodness to soften the hearts, enlighten
the minds, and quicken the conscience of those in rebellion,
that they may lay down their arms, and speedily return to
their allegiance to the United States, that they may not be
utterly destroyed, that the eﬀusion of blood may be stayed,
and that unity and fraternity may be restored, and peace
established throughout all our borders.
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
 United States, cordially concurring with the Congress of
the United States, in the penitential and pious sentiments
expressed in the aforesaid resolutions, and heartily
approving of the devotional design and purpose thereof, do
hereby appoint the ﬁrst Thursday of August next to be
observed by the people of the United States as a day of
national humiliation and prayer.
I do hereby further invite and request the heads of the
Executive Departments of this Government, together with
all legislators, all judges and magistrates, and all other
 persons exercising authority in the land, whether civil,
military, or naval, and all soldiers, seamen, and marines in
the national service, and all other loyal and law-abiding
people of the United States, to assemble in their preferred
places of public worship on that day, and there to render to
the Almighty and merciful Ruler of the Universe, such
homage and such confessions, and to oﬀer to Him such
supplications as the Congress of the United States have, in
their aforesaid resolution, so solemnly, so earnestly, and so
reverently recommended.
In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed. Done at
the city of Washington this seventh day of July, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-four, and
of the independence of the United States the eighty-ninth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
 A  I     
 A A
     
     AI
   A   
WHOSE GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN USURPED OR
OVERTHROWN, 
A 
REPUBLICAN 
FORM 
OF
GOVERNMENT,” AND CONCERNING RECONSTRUCTION,
JULY 8, 1864. BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:
A Proclamation.
Whereas at the late session Congress passed a bill “to
guarantee to certain states whose governments have been
usurped or overthrown a republican form of government,”
a copy of which is hereunto annexed; and
Whereas, the said bill was presented to the President of
the United States for his approval less than one hour before
the sine die adjournment of said session, and was not
signed by him; and
Whereas the said bill contains, among other things, a
plan for restoring the States in rebellion to their proper
practical relation in the Union, which plan expresses the
sense of Congress upon that subject, and which plan it is
now thought ﬁt to lay before the people for their
consideration:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do proclaim, declare, and make known that
while I am (as I was in December last, when, by
 proclamation, 
I 
propounded 
a 
plan 
for 
restoration)
unprepared by a formal approval of this bill to be inﬂexibly
committed to any single plan of restoration, and while I am
also unprepared to declare that the free State constitutions
and governments already adopted and installed in Arkansas
and Louisiana shall be set aside and held for naught,
thereby repelling and discouraging the loyal citizens who
have set up the same as to further eﬀort, or to declare a
constitutional competency in Congress to abolish slavery in
States, but am at the same time sincerely hoping and
expecting that a constitutional amendment abolishing
slavery 
throughout 
the 
nation 
may 
be 
adopted,
nevertheless I am fully satisﬁed with the system for
restoration contained in the bill as one very proper plan for
the loyal people of any State choosing to adopt it, and that I
am and at all times shall be prepared to give the Executive
aid and assistance to any such people so soon as the
military resistance to the United States shall have been
suppressed in any such States and the people thereof shall
have suﬀiciently returned to their obedience to the
Constitution and the laws of the United States, in which
cases militia-governors will be appointed with directions to
proceed according to the bill.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed..............
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
 H
 A   
      .
WASHINGTON, D. C., July 9, 1864
HON. HORACE GREELEY.
DEAR SIR: — Your letter of the 7th, with inclosures,
received.
If you can ﬁnd any person, anywhere, professing to have
any proposition of Jeﬀerson Davis in writing, for peace,
embracing the restoration of the Union and abandonment
of slavery, whatever else it embraces, say to him he may
come to me with you; and that if he really brings such
proposition, he shall at the least have safe conduct with the
paper (and without publicity, if he chooses) to the point
where you shall have to meet him. The same if there be two
or more persons.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . 
. 
A     . 
A HI
 
  
.
 .   u         
J. W. GARRETT, Camden Station:
WHAT HAVE YOU heard about a battle at Monocacy to-day?
We have nothing about it here except what you say.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
   
 
 
  A  HA       
 
  A  
A  A  .
WASHINGTON, July 9, 1864. 11.57 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL L. WALLACE, Commanding Middle
Department: I am directed by the President to say that you
will rally your forces and make every possible eﬀort to
retard the enemy’s march on Baltimore.
H. W. HALLECK, Major-General and Chief of Staﬀ.
     
 A
  
  .  
A
 A
 
 H   .
A HI
 
  
.  .   u           .  . 
A.M.
THOMAS SWAN AND OTHERS, Baltimore, Maryland:
Yours of last night received. I have not a single soldier but
whom is being disposed by the military for the best
protection of all. By latest accounts the enemy is moving on
Washington. They cannot ﬂy to either place. Let us be
vigilant, but keep cool. I hope neither Baltimore nor
Washington will be sacked.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
  I     u    
      .   .
.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: 
YOUR DISPATCH TO General Halleck, referring to what I may
think in the present emergency, is shown me. General
Halleck says we have absolutely no force here ﬁt to go to
the ﬁeld. He thinks that with the hundred-day men and
invalids we have here we can defend Washington, and,
scarcely, Baltimore. Besides these there are about eight
thousand, not very reliable, under Howe, at Harper’s Ferry
with Hunter approaching that point very slowly, with what
number I suppose you know better than I. Wallace, with
some odds and ends, and part of what came up with
Ricketts, was so badly beaten yesterday at Monocacy, that
what is left can attempt no more than to defend Baltimore.
What we shall get in from Pennsylvania and New York will
scarcely be worth counting, I fear. Now, what I think is, that
you should provide to retain your hold where you are,
certainly, and bring the rest with you personally, and make
a vigorous eﬀort to destroy the enemy’s forces in this
vicinity. I think there is really a fair chance to do this, if the
movement is prompt. This is what I think upon your
suggestion, and is not an order.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
   u           .   A.
.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: 
YOURS OF 10.30 P.M. yesterday received, and very
satisfactory. The enemy will learn of Wright’s arrival, and
then the diﬀiculty will be to unite Wright and Hunter south
of the enemy before he will recross the Potomac. Some
ﬁring between Rockville and here now.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
  
.  .   u           .   . 
AM.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: Vague
rumors have been reaching us for two or three days that
Longstreet’s corps is also on its way [to] this vicinity. Look
out for its absence from your front.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
 A
         
 H
 A   
      .
    
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   u 
12, 1864.
HON. HORACE GREELEY, New York: I suppose you
received my letter of the 9th. I have just received yours of
the 13th, and am disappointed by it. I was not expecting
you to send me a letter, but to bring me a man, or men. Mr.
Hay goes to you with my answer to yours of the 13th.
A. LINCOLN.
[Carried by Major John Hay.]
     
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
   
     
    .
HON. HORACE GREELEY.
MY DEAR SIR:-Y OURS of the 13th is just received, and I
am disappointed that you have not already reached here
with those commissioners, if they would consent to come
on being shown my letter to you of the 9th instant. Show
that and this to them, and if they will come on the terms
stated in the former, bring them. I not only intend a sincere
eﬀort for peace, but I intend that you shall be a personal
witness that it is made.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  A    
    
     
 
   .   A  A
 H   
JULY 16, 1864.
THE PRESIDENT OF the United States directs that the four
persons whose names follow, to wit, HON. Clement C. Clay,
HON. Jacob Thompson, Professor James P. Holcombe,
George N. Sanders, shall have safe conduct to the city of
Washington in company with the HON. HORACE GREELEY,
and shall be exempt from arrest or annoyance of any kind
from any oﬀicer of the United States during their journey to
the said city of Washington.
By order of the President: JOHN HAY, Major and
Assistant Adjutant-General
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
 
A HI
 
   u     .     .   .   A.
.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: 
IN YOUR DISPATCH of yesterday to General Sherman, I ﬁnd
the following, to wit: “I shall make a desperate eﬀort to get
a position here, which will hold the enemy without the
necessity of so many men.”
Pressed as we are by lapse of time I am glad to hear you
say this; and yet I do hope you may ﬁnd a way that the
eﬀort shall not be desperate in the sense of great loss of
life.
A. LINCOLN, President.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. H
  
A HI
 
  
           .
MAJOR-GENERAL HUNTER, Harper’s Ferry, West Va.
YOURS OF THIS morning received. You misconceive. The
order you complain of was only nominally mine, and was
framed by those who really made it with no thought of
making you a scapegoat. It seemed to be General Grant’s
wish that the forces under General Wright and those under
you should join and drive at the enemy under General
Wright. Wright had the larger part of the force, but you had
the rank. It was thought that you would prefer Crook’s
commanding your part to your serving in person under
Wright. That is all of it. General Grant wishes you to remain
in command of the department, and I do not wish to order
otherwise.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 18, 1864.
11.25 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, CHATTAHOOCHEE River,
Georgia: I have seen your despatches objecting to agents of
Northern States opening recruiting stations near your
camps. An act of Congress authorizes this, giving the
appointment of agents to the States, and not to the
Executive Government. It is not for the War Department, or
myself, to restrain or modify the law, in its execution,
further than actual necessity may require. To be candid, I
was for the passage of the law, not apprehending at the
time that it would produce such inconvenience to the
armies in the ﬁeld as you now cause me to fear. Many of the
States were very anxious for it, and I hoped that, with their
State bounties, and active exertions, they would get out
substantial additions to our colored forces, which, unlike
white recruits, help us where they come from, as well as
where they go to. I still hope advantage from the law; and
being a law, it must be treated as such by all of us. We here
will do what we consistently can to save you from
diﬀiculties arising out of it. May I ask, therefore, that you
will give your hearty co-operation.
A. LINCOLN.
 A
  
 
   
   
I
    
  
  A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, JULY 18, 1864.
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: Any proposition which
embraces the restoration of peace, the integrity of the
whole Union, and the abandonment of slavery, and which
comes by and with an authority that can control the armies
now at war against the United States, will be received and
considered by the Executive Government of the United
States, and will be met by liberal terms on other substantial
and collateral points; and the bearer or bearers thereof
shall have safe conduct both ways.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  A  I
  
   I   H
  
 H
 A
  
 
     
JULY 18, 1864,
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A Proclamation.
Whereas by the act approved July 4, 1864, entitled “An
act further to regulate and provide for the enrolling and
calling out the national forces and for other purposes,” it is
provided that the President of the United States may, “at
his discretion, at any time hereafter, call for any number of
men, as volunteers for the respective terms of one, two,
and three years for military service,” and “that in case the
quota or any part thereof of any town, township, ward of a
city, precinct, or election district, or of a county not so
subdivided, shall not be ﬁlled within the space of ﬁfty days
after such call, then the President shall immediately order
a draft for one year to ﬁll such quota or any part thereof
which may be unﬁlled;” and
Whereas the new enrolment heretofore ordered is so far
completed as that the aforementioned act of Congress may
now be put in operation for recruiting and keeping up the
strength of the armies in the ﬁeld, for garrisons, and such
military operations as may be required for the purpose of
 suppressing the rebellion and restoring the authority of the
United States Government in the insurgent States:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do issue this my last call for ﬁve hundred
thousand volunteers for the military service: Provided,
nevertheless, That this call shall be reduced by all credits
which may be established under section eight of the
aforesaid act on account of persons who have entered the
naval service during the present rebellion and by credits
for men furnished to the military service in excess of calls
heretofore made. Volunteers will be accepted under this
call for one, two, or three years, as they may elect, and will
be entitled to the bounty provided by the law for the period
of services for which they enlist.
And 
I 
hereby 
proclaim, 
order, 
and 
direct 
that
immediately after the 5th day of September, 1864, being
ﬁfty days from the date of this call, a draft for troops to
serve for one year shall be had in every town, township,
ward of a city, precinct, or election district, or county not so
subdivided, to ﬁll the quota which shall be assigned to it
under this call or any part thereof which may be unﬁlled by
volunteers on the said 5th day of September, 1864.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the City of Washington, this 18th day of July, A.D.
1864, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-ninth.
A. LINCOLN.
 By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 20, 1864. 4.30
p.m.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, CITY Point, Va.: Yours
of yesterday, about a call for three hundred thousand, is
received. I suppose you had not seen the call for ﬁve
hundred thousand, made the day before, and which, I
suppose, covers the case. Always glad to have your
suggestions.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  . 
 I
H .
WAR DEPARTMENT, JULY. 20, 1864.
J. L. WRIGHT, Indianapolis, Ind.:
All a mistake. Mr. Stanton has not resigned.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. H
   .   i her.
WAR DEPARTMENT, JULY 23, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL HUNTER, HARPER’S Ferry, West Va.
Are you able to take care of the enemy, when he turns
back upon you, as he probably will on ﬁnding that Wright
has left?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
   
  I
   
  
 I
 A      
 
 
I  IA
 
.  
I
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 25, 1864.
GOVERNOR CURTIN: Herewith is the manuscript letter
for the gentleman who sent me a cane through your hands.
For my life I cannot make out his name; and therefore I cut
it from his letter and pasted it on, as you see. I suppose
[sic] will remember who he is, and I will thank you to
forward him the letter. He dates his letter at Philadelphia.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
      
 A I
 
  A  A
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 25, 1864.
WILLIAM O. SNIDER: The cane you did me the honor to
present through Governor Curtin was duly placed in my
hand by him. Please accept my thanks; and, at the same
time, pardon me for not having sooner found time to tender
them. Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
   
  
H
 HA   
  .  . 
   I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON. July 25, 1864.
J. C. WELLING, ESQ.
SIR: — According to the request contained in your note, I
have placed Mr. Gibson’s letter of resignation in the hands
of the President. He has read the letter, and says he
accepts the resignation, as he will be glad to do with any
other, which may be tendered, as this is, for the purpose of
taking an attitude of hostility against him.
He says he was not aware that he was so much indebted
to Mr. Gibson for having accepted the oﬀice at ﬁrst, not
remembering that he ever pressed him to do so, or that he
gave it otherwise than as was usual, upon request made on
behalf of Mr. Gibson.
He thanks Mr. Gibson for his acknowledgment that he
has been treated with personal kindness and consideration,
and says he knows of but two small drawbacks upon Mr.
Gibson’s right to still receive such treatment, one of which
is that he never could learn of his giving much attention to
the duties of his oﬀice, and the other is this studied attempt
of Mr. Gibson’s to stab him.
I am very truly, Your obedient servant, JOHN HAY.
  
  
 
     I    
.  .      A
  A A   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, JULY 25, 1864.
THOMAS CONNOR, A private in the First Veteran New York
Cavalry, is now imprisoned at hard labor for desertion. If
the Colonel of said Regiment will say in writing on this
sheets that he is willing to receive him back to the
Regiment, I will pardon, and send him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1864. 2.30 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, NEAR Atlanta: I have just
seen yours complaining of the appointment of Hovey and
Osterhaus. The point you make is unquestionably a good
one, and yet please hear a word from us. My recollection is
that both General Grant and yourself recommended both H
[ovey] and O [sterhaus] for promotion, and these, with
other strong recommendations, drew committals from us
which we could neither honorably or safely disregard. We
blamed H [ovey] for coming away in the manner in which
he did, but he knew he had apparent reason to feel
disappointed and mortiﬁed, and we felt it was not best to
crush one who certainly had been a good soldier. As to
[Osterhaus], we did not know of his leaving at the time we
made the appointment, and do not now know the terms on
which he left. Not to have appointed him, as the case
appeared to us at the time, would have been almost, if not
quite, a violation of our word. The word was given on what
we thought was high merit and somewhat on his
nationality. I beg you to believe we do not act in a spirit of
disregarding merit. We expect to await your programme for
further changes and promotions in your army. My
 profoundest thanks to you and your whole army for the
present campaign so far.
A. LINCOLN.
   
       A     A
 
  
 
 
  A
HA     .
WASHINGTON CITY, July 27, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK, CHIEF of Staﬀ of the
Army: GENERAL: — Lieutenant-General Grant having
signiﬁed that, owing to the diﬀiculties and delay of
communication between his headquarters and Washington,
it is necessary that in the present emergency military
orders must be issued directly from Washington, the
President directs me to instruct you that all the military
operations for the defense of the Middle Department, the
Department of the Susquehanna, the Department of
Washington, and the Department of West Virginia, and all
the forces in those departments, are placed under your
general command, and that you will be expected to take all
military measures necessary for defense against any attack
of the enemy and for his capture and destruction. You will
issue from time to time such orders to the commanders of
the respective departments and to the military authorities
therein as may be proper.
Your obedient servant,
EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
A HI
 
   u           .
GOVERNOR JOHNSON, Nashville, Tennessee: 
YOURS IN RELATION to General A. C. Gillam just received.
Will look after the matter to-day.
I also received yours about General Carl Schurz. I
appreciate him certainly, as highly as you do; but you can
never know until you have the trial, how diﬀicult it is to ﬁnd
a place for an oﬀicer of so high rank when there is no place
seeking him.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
rs. A
  
I  IA
 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 29, 1864.
MRS. ANNE WILLIAMSON.
MADAM: — The plaid you send me is just now placed in
my hands. I thank you for that pretty and useful present,
but still more for those good wishes for myself and our
country, which prompted you to present it.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN. INDORSEMENT,
AUGUST 3, 1864.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, August 2,
1864.
MR. PRESIDENT: — This note will introduce to you Mr.
Schley of Baltimore, who desires to appeal to you for the
revocation of an order of General Hunter, removing some
persons, citizens of Frederick, beyond his lines, and
imprisoning others. This Department has no information of
the reasons or proofs on which General Hunter acts, and I
do not therefore feel at liberty to suspend or interfere with
his action except under your direction.
Yours truly,
EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
[Indorsement.]
August 3, 1864.
 The Secretary of War will suspend the order of General
Hunter mentioned within, until further order and direct
him to send to the Department a brief report of what is
known against each one proposed to be dealt with.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
   . 
 A
 .
(Cipher.)
WASHINGTON, D. C.. August 3, 1864
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: I have
seen your despatch in which you say, “I want Sheridan put
in command of all the troops in the ﬁeld, with instructions
to put himself south of the enemy, and follow him to the
death. Wherever the enemy goes, let our troops go also.”
This, I think, is exactly right as to how our forces should
move; but please look over the despatches you may have
received from here, ever since you made that order, and
discover, if you can, that there is any idea in the head of
any one here of “putting our army south of the enemy,” or
of following him to the “death,” in any direction. I repeat to
you, it will neither be done nor attempted, unless you
watch it every day and hour, and force it.
A. LINCOLN.
[Here the President was mistaken in thinking that
Sherman, Sheridan, and Grant had the same inability of
most of his previous general oﬀicers. No one needed to
watch Grant or Sherman or Sheridan, they only needed to
get out of their way. D.W.]
     
 A
  
 H
 A   
      .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 6, 1864
HON. HORACE GREELEY, New York: Yours to Major
Hay about publication of our correspondence received.
With the suppression of a few passages in your letters in
regard to which I think you and I would not disagree, I
should be glad of the publication. Please come over and see
me.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 H
 A   
      .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 8, 1864
HON. HORACE GREELEY, New York:
I telegraphed you Saturday. Did you receive the
despatch? Please answer.
A. LINCOLN.
  
I  
 A   A
I   
 
  
TO GENERAL S. O. BURBRIDGE.
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 8, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL BURBRIDGE, Lexington, Ky.: Last
December Mrs. Emily T. Helm, half-sister of Mrs. Lincoln,
and widow of the rebel general, Ben Hardin Helm, stopped
here on her way from Georgia to Kentucky, and I gave her a
paper, as I remember, to protect her against the mere fact
of her being General Helm’s widow. I hear a rumor to-day
that you recently sought to arrest her, but were prevented
by her presenting the paper from me. I do not intend to
protect her against the consequences of disloyal words or
acts, spoken or done by her since her return to Kentucky,
and if the paper given her by me can be construed to give
her protection for such words and acts, it is hereby revoked
pro tanto. Deal with her for current conduct just as you
would with any other.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 14, 1864. 1.30 P.M.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, CITY Point, Va.: The
Secretary of War and I concur that you had better confer
with General Lee, and stipulate for a mutual discontinuance
of house-burning and other destruction of private property.
The time and manner of conference and particulars of
stipulation we leave, on our part, to your convenience and
judgment.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., August
15,1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, NEAR Atlanta, Ga.: If the
Government should purchase, on its own account, cotton
northward of you, and on the line of your communications,
would it be an inconvenience to you, or detriment to the
military service, for it to come to the north on the railroad?
A. LINCOLN.
 I
    I 
 
I H  
H
  . 
I   
AUGUST , 1864.
“MR. PRESIDENT,” SAID Governor Randall, “why can’t you
seek seclusion, and play hermit for a fortnight? It would
reinvigorate you.”
“Ah,” said the President, “two or three weeks would do
me no good. I cannot ﬂy from my thoughts — my solicitude
for this great country follows me wherever I go. I do not
think it is personal vanity or ambition, though I am not free
from these inﬁrmities, but I cannot but feel that the weal or
woe of this great nation will be decided in November. There
is no program oﬀered by any wing of the Democratic party
but that must result in the permanent destruction of the
Union.”
“But, Mr. President, General McClellan is in favor of
crushing out this rebellion by force. He will be the Chicago
candidate.”
“Sir, the slightest knowledge of arithmetic will prove to
any man that the rebel armies cannot be destroyed by
Democratic strategy. It would sacriﬁce all the white men of
the North to do it. There are now in the service of the
United States nearly one hundred and ﬁfty thousand able-
bodied colored men, most of them under arms, defending
and acquiring Union territory. The Democratic strategy
 demands that these forces be disbanded, and that the
masters be conciliated by restoring them to slavery. The
black men who now assist Union prisoners to escape are to
be converted into our enemies, in the vain hope of gaining
the good-will of their masters. We shall have to ﬁght two
nations instead of one.
“You cannot conciliate the South if you guarantee to
them ultimate success; and the experience of the present
war proves their success is inevitable if you ﬂing the
compulsory labor of millions of black men into their side of
the scale. Will you give our enemies such military
advantages as insure success, and then depend on coaxing,
ﬂattery, and concession to get them back into the Union?
Abandon all the posts now garrisoned by black men, take
one hundred and ﬁfty thousand men from our side and put
them in the battle-ﬁeld or corn-ﬁeld against us, and we
would be compelled to abandon the war in three weeks.
“We have to hold territory in inclement and sickly places;
where are the Democrats to do this? It was a free ﬁght, and
the ﬁeld was open to the war Democrats to put down this
rebellion by ﬁghting against both master and slave, long
before the present policy was inaugurated.
“There have been men base enough to propose to me to
return to slavery the black warriors of Port Hudson and
Olustee, and thus win the respect of the masters they
fought. Should I do so, I should deserve to be damned in
time and eternity. Come what will, I will keep my faith with
friend and foe. My enemies pretend I am now carrying on
this war for the sole purpose of abolition. So long as I am
 President, it shall be carried on for the sole purpose of
restoring the Union. But no human power can subdue this
rebellion without the use of the emancipation policy, and
every other policy calculated to weaken the moral and
physical forces of the rebellion.
“Freedom has given us one hundred and ﬁfty thousand
men, raised on Southern soil. It will give us more yet. Just
so much it has subtracted from the enemy, and, instead of
alienating the South, there are now evidences of a fraternal
feeling growing up between our men and the rank and ﬁle
of the rebel soldiers. Let my enemies prove to the country
that the destruction of slavery is not necessary to a
restoration of the Union. I will abide the issue.”
  
   
 
  
  A   I A I
  
 
  
 
 
   A
           .
I AM ALWAYS for the man who wishes to work; and I shall
be glad for this man to get suitable employment at Cavalry
Depot, or elsewhere.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 H.  .  A 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, August 15, 1864
HON. HENRY J. RAYMOND.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have proposed to Mr. Greeley that the
Niagara correspondence be published, suppressing only the
parts of his letters over which the red pencil is drawn in the
copy which I herewith send. He declines giving his consent
to the publication of his letters unless these parts be
published with the rest. I have concluded that it is better
for me to submit, for the time, to the consequences of the
false position in which I consider he has placed me, than to
subject the country to the consequences of publishing these
discouraging and injurious parts. I send you this, and the
accompanying copy, not for publication, but merely to
explain to you, and that you may preserve them until their
proper time shall come.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 17, 1864.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, CITY Point, Va.: I
have seen your despatch expressing your unwillingness to
break your hold where you are. Neither am I willing. Hold
on with a bulldog grip, and chew and choke as much as
possible.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
  
   IA
  
 A I
   A
           .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: 
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas the act of Congress of the 28th of September,
1850, entitled “An act to create additional collection
districts in the State of California, and to change the
existing districts therein, and to modify the existing
collection districts in the United States,” extends to
merchandise warehoused under bond the privilege of being
exported to the British North American provinces adjoining
the United States, in the manner prescribed in the act of
Congress of the 3d of March, 1845, which designates
certain frontier ports through which merchandise may be
exported, and further provides “that such other ports,
situated on the frontiers of the United States adjoining the
British North American provinces, as may hereafter be
found expedient, may have extended to them the like
privileges, on the recommendation of the Secretary of the
Treasury, and proclamation duly made by the President of
the United States, specially designating the ports to which
the aforesaid privileges are to be extended.”
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States of America, in accordance with the
 recommendation of the Secretary of the Treasury, do
hereby declare and proclaim that the port of Newport, in
the State of Vermont, is and shall be entitled to all the
privileges in regard to the exportation of merchandise in
bond to the British North American provinces adjoining the
United States, which are extended to the ports enumerated
in the seventh section of the act of Congress of the 3d of
March, 1845, aforesaid, from and after the date of this
proclamation.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed. Done at
the city of Washington, this eighteenth day of August, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-four,
and of the independence of the United States of America,
the eighty-ninth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
 I
   
 
   
   
I
 A
    HA
  
  I 
     A
           .
IF GENERAL HITCHCOCK can eﬀect a special exchange of
Thomas D. Armesy, now under conviction as a spy, or
something of the sort, and in prison at for Major Nathan
Goﬀ, made a prisoner of war, and now in prison at
Richmond, let it be done.
A. LINCOLN.
 A
      
  H      H 
HI
   
I
 
 
AUGUST 18, 1864.
SOLDIERS: — YOU are about to return to your homes
and your friends, after having, as I learn, performed in
camp a comparatively short term of duty in this great
contest. I am greatly obliged to you, and to all who have
come forward at the call of their country. I wish it might be
more generally and universally understood what the
country is now engaged in. We have, as all will agree, a free
government, where every man has a right to be equal with
every other man. In this great struggle, this form of
government and every form of human right is endangered if
our enemies succeed. There is more involved in this contest
than is realized by every one. There is involved in this
struggle, the question whether your children and my
children shall enjoy the privileges we have enjoyed. I say
this, in order to impress upon you, if you are not already so
impressed, that no small matter should divert us from our
great purpose.
There may be some inequalities in the practical
application of our system. It is fair that each man shall pay
taxes in exact proportion to the value of his property; but if
we should wait, before collecting a tax, to adjust the taxes
upon each man in exact proportion with every other man,
 we should never collect any tax at all. There may be
mistakes made sometimes; and things may be done wrong,
while the oﬀicers of the Government do all they can to
prevent mistakes. But I beg of you, as citizens of this great
Republic, not to let your minds be carried oﬀ from the great
work we have before us. This struggle is too large for you
to be diverted from it by any small matter. When you return
to your homes, rise up to the height of a generation of men
worthy of a free government, and we will carry out the
great work we have commenced. I return to you my sincere
thanks, soldiers, for the honor you have done me this
afternoon.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  
.  .  Au ust
20, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, Bermuda Hundred, Va.:
Please allow Judge Snead to go to his family on Eastern
Shore, or give me some good reason why not.
A. LINCOLN.
 A
      
  H      H 
HI
   
I
 
 
AUGUST 22, 1864.
SOLDIERS — I suppose you are going home to see your
families and friends. For the services you have done in this
great struggle in which we are engaged, I present you
sincere thanks for myself and the country.
I almost always feel inclined, when I say anything to
soldiers, to impress upon them, in a few brief remarks, the
importance of success in this contest. It is not merely for
the day, but for all time to come, that we should perpetuate
for our children’s children that great and free government
which we have enjoyed all our lives. I beg you to remember
this, not merely for my sake, but for yours. I happen,
temporarily, to occupy this big White House. I am a living
witness that any one of your children may look to come
here as my father’s child has. It is in order that each one of
you may have, through this free government which we have
enjoyed, an open ﬁeld, and a fair chance for your industry,
enterprise, and intelligence; that you may all have equal
privileges in the race of life with all its desirable human
aspirations — it is for this that the struggle should be
maintained, that we may not lose our birthrights — not only
for one, but for two or three years, if necessary. The nation
is worth ﬁghting for, to secure such an inestimable jewel.
  
 A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 23, 1864.
THIS 
MORNING, 
AS for some days past, it seems
exceedingly probable that this administration will not be re-
elected. Then it will be my duty to so co-operate with the
President-elect as to save the Union between the election
and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election
on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterward.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
    
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  Au ust
  
1864.
GOVERNOR JOHNSON, Nashville, Tenn.: Thanks to
General Gillam for making the news and also to you for
sending it. Does Joe Heiskell’s “walking to meet us” mean
any more than that “Joe” was scared and wanted to save
his skin?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . H.    
    .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  
.  .  Au ust
30,1864.
HON. B. H. BREWSTER, Astor House, New York:
Your letter of yesterday received. Thank you for it. Please
have no fears.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
   
I
  
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 31, 1864.
ANY PERSON OR persons engaged in bringing out cotton, in
strict conformity with authority given by W. P. Fessenden,
Secretary of the United States Treasury, must not be
hindered by the War, Navy, or any other Department of the
Government, or any person engaged under any of said
Departments.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  
 
   H
I
  
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, SEPTEMBER 1, 1864
COLONEL H. C. HUIDEKOPER, Meadville, Penn.
SIR: It is represented to me that there are at Rock Island,
Illinois, as rebel prisoners of war, many persons of
Northern and foreign birth who are unwilling to be
exchanged and sent South, but who wish to take the oath of
allegiance and enter the military service of the Union.
Colonel Huidekoper, on behalf of the people of some parts
of 
Pennsylvania, 
wishes 
to 
pay 
the 
bounties 
the
Government would have to pay to proper persons of this
class, have them enter the service of the United States, and
be credited to the localities furnishing the bounty money.
He will therefore proceed to Rock Island, ascertain the
names of such persons (not including any who have
attractions Southward), and telegraph them to the Provost-
Marshal-General here, whereupon direction will be given to
discharge the persons named upon their taking the oath of
allegiance; and then upon the oﬀicial evidence being
furnished that they shall have been duly received and
mustered into the service of the United States, their
number will be credited as may be directed by Colonel
Huidekoper.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 
   HA
  
I I
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON CITY, September 3,
1864.
THE SIGNAL SUCCESS that Divine Providence has recently
vouchsafed to the operations of the United States ﬂeet and
army in the harbor of Mobile, and the reduction of Fort
Powell, Fort Gaines, and Fort Morgan, and the glorious
achievements of the army under Major-General Sherman,
in the State of Georgia, resulting in the capture of the city
of Atlanta, call for devout acknowledgment to the Supreme
Being in whose hands are the destinies of nations. It is
therefore requested that on next Sunday, in all places of
worship in the United States, thanksgivings be oﬀered to
Him for His mercy in preserve our national existence
against the insurgent rebels who have been waging a cruel
war against the Government of the United States for its
overthrow, and also that prayer be made for Divine
protection to our brave soldiers and their leaders in the
ﬁeld who have so often and so gallantly periled their lives
in battling with the enemy, and for blessings and comfort
from the Father of mercies to the sick, wounded, and
prisoners, and to the orphans and widows of those who
have fallen in the service of their country, and that He will
 continue to uphold the Government of the United States
against all the eﬀorts of public enemies and secret foes.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
  
 A I 
  A
    
I I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, September 3, 1864.
THE NATIONAL THANKS are tendered by the President to
Admiral Farragut and Major-General Canby, for the skill
and harmony with which the recent operations in Mobile
Harbor and against Fort Powell, Fort Gaines, and Fort
Morgan were planned and carried into execution. Also to
Admiral Farragut and Major-General Granger, under whose
immediate command they were conducted, and to the
gallant commanders on sea and land, and to the sailors and
soldiers engaged in the operations, for their energy and
courage, which, under the blessing of Providence, have
been crowned with brilliant success, and have won for
them the applause and thanks of the nation.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 I   
A
 I
   e tem er        .
THE NATIONAL THANKS are tendered by the President to
Major-General William T. Sherman and the gallant oﬀicers
and soldiers of his command before Atlanta, for the
distinguished ability, courage, and perseverance displayed
in the campaign in Georgia, which under Divine power
resulted in the capture of the city of Atlanta. The marches,
battles, sieges, and other military operations that have
signalized this campaign must render it famous in the
annals of war, and have entitled those who have
participated therein to the applause and thanks of the
nation.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 I   
A
 I
   e tem er        .
ORDERED: FIRST, THAT on Monday, the ﬁfth day of
September, commencing at the hour of twelve o’clock noon,
there shall be given a salute of one hundred guns at the
arsenal and navy-yard, at Washington, and on Tuesday, the
6th of September, or on the day after the receipt of this
order, at each arsenal and navy-yard in the United States,
for the recent brilliant achievements of the ﬂeet and land
forces of the United States in the harbor of Mobile, and in
the reduction of Fort Powell, Fort Gaines, and Fort Morgan.
The Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy will
issue 
the 
necessary 
directions 
in 
their 
respective
departments for the execution of this order.
Second, That on Wednesday, the 7th of September,
commencing at the hour of twelve o’clock noon, there shall
be ﬁred a salute of one hundred guns at the arsenal at
Washington, and at New York, Boston, Philadelphia,
Baltimore, Pittsburg, Newport (Ky.), and St. Louis, and New
Orleans, 
Mobile, 
and 
Pensacola, 
Hilton 
Head, 
and
Newbern, the day after the receipt of this order, for the
brilliant achievements of the army under command of
Major-General Sherman, in the State of Georgia, and for
the capture of Atlanta. The Secretary of War will issue
directions for the execution of this order.
 A. LINCOLN, President Of the United States.
  
 
  . 
 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, SEPTEMBER 4,
1864.
ELIZA P. GURNEY.
MY ESTEEMED FRIEND: — I have not forgotten
probably never shall forget the very impressive occasion
when yourself and friends visited me on a Sabbath
forenoon two years ago — nor has your kind letter, written
nearly a year later, even been for gotten. In all, it has been
your purpose to strengthen my reliance on God. I am much
indebted to the good Christian people of the country for
their constant prayer and consolations; and to no one of
them, more than to yourself. The purposes of the Almighty
are perfect, and must prevail, though we erring mortals
may fail to accurately perceive them in advance. We hoped
for a happy termination of this terrible war long before this;
but God knows best, and has ruled otherwise. We shall yet
acknowledge His wisdom, and our own error therein. Mean
while we must work earnestly in the best light He gives us,
trusting that so working still conduces to the great ends He
ordains. Surely He intends some great good to follow this
mighty convulsion, which no mortal could make, and no
mortal could stay.
 Your people — the Friends — have had, and are having, a
very great trial. On principle, and faith, opposed to both
war and oppression, they can only practically oppose
oppression by war. For those appealing to me on
conscientious grounds, I have done, and shall do, the best I
could and can, in my own conscience, under my oath to the
law. That you believe this I doubt not, and believing it, I
shall still receive, for our country and myself your earnest
prayers to our Father in Heaven.
Your sincere friend, A. LINCOLN.
        
 A  
I     
   
 
  
   
  
  
  A  I
 
WHO PRESENTED HIM WITH A BIBLE, 
SEPTEMBER 7, 1864.
I can only say now, as I have often said before, it has
always been a sentiment with me, that all mankind should
be free. So far as I have been able, so far as came within
my sphere, I have always acted as I believed was just and
right, and done all I could for the good of mankind. I have,
in letters sent forth from this oﬀice, expressed myself
better than I can now.
In regard to the great Book, I have only to say it is the
best gift which God has ever given to man. All the good
from the Saviour of the world is communicated to us
through this book. But for that Book, we could not know
right from wrong. All those things desirable to man are
contained in it. I return you sincere thanks for this very
elegant copy of this great Book of God which you present.
     
 A
  
 
   
   I    I
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 8,
1864:
GOVERNOR PICKERING, OLYMPIA, W. T.:
Your patriotic despatch of yesterday received and will be
published.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   
   HA
    
 H
  
 
A    
 
  
 
HI
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON CITY, September
10, 1864.
THE TERM OF one hundred days for which the National
Guard of Ohio volunteered having expired, the President
directs an oﬀicial acknowledgment to be made of their
patriotic 
and 
valuable 
services 
during 
the 
recent
campaigns. The term of service of their enlistment was
short, but distinguished by memorable events. In the Valley
of the Shenandoah, on the Peninsula, in the operations on
the James River, around Petersburg and Richmond, in the
battle 
of 
Monocacy, 
and 
in 
the 
intrenchments 
of
Washington, and in other important service, the National
Guard of Ohio performed with alacrity the duty of patriotic
volunteers, for which they are entitled to and are hereby
tendered, through the Governor of their State, the national
thanks.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 12,
1864.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT: Sheridan and Early
are facing each other at a dead-lock. Could we not pick up
a regiment here and there, to the number of say ten
thousand men, and quietly but suddenly concentrate them
at Sheridan’s camp and enable him to make a strike?
This is but a suggestion.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  A
   
.   AI
 . 
A
  A  
 
   
A HI
 
  
.  .   e tem er
13, 1864.
HON. J. G. BLAINE, Augusta, Me.: On behalf of the
Union, thanks to Maine. Thanks to you personally for
sending the news.
A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — Send same to L. B. Smith and M. A. Blanchard,
Portland, Me. A. L.
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL ROSECRANS. E ECUTIVE
MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 13, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, Saint Louis: Postpone
the execution of S. H. Anderson for two weeks. Hear what
his friends can say in mitigation and report to me.
A. LINCOLN.
MAJOR ECKERT: Please send the above telegram.
JNO. G. NICOLAY, Private Secretary.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    
H.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 16,
1864.
GENERAL SLOUGH, ALE ANDRIA, Va.:
On the 14th I commuted the sentence of Conley, but
fearing you may not have received notice I send this. Do
not execute him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
A HI
 
  
.  .   e tem er        .
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, Atlanta, Georgia:
I FEEL GREAT interest in the subjects of your despatch
mentioning corn and sorghum, and the contemplated visit
to you.
A. LINCOLN, President of the United States.
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 19,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN: The State election of
Indiana occurs on the 11th of October, and the loss of it to
the friends of the Government would go far towards losing
the whole Union cause. The bad eﬀect upon the November
election, and especially the giving the State government to
those who will oppose the war in every possible way, are
too much to risk if it can be avoided. The draft proceeds,
notwithstanding its strong tendency to lose us the State.
Indiana is the only important State voting in October whose
soldiers cannot vote in the ﬁeld. Anything you can safely do
to let her soldiers or any part of them go home and vote at
the State election will be greatly in point. They need not
remain for the Presidential election, but may return to you
at once. This is in no sense an order, but is merely intended
to impress you with the importance to the Army itself of
your doing all you safely can, yourself being the judge of
what you can safely do.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
   
   
I
 A
    HA
  
  I 
          
        .
THE WRITER OF this, who appeals for his brother, is our
minister to Ecuador, and whom, if at all compatible, I would
like to have obliged by a special exchange of his brother.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  H  I
A
.
    
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
 e tem er
20, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Winchester, Va.:
Have just heard of your great victory. God bless you all,
oﬀicers and men. Strongly inclined to come up and See
you.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  HI  H 
  
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 21,
1864.
GENERAL HITCHCOCK:
Please see the bearer, Mr. Broadwell, on a question about
a mutual supplying of clothes to prisoners.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 22,
1864.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT: I send this as an
explanation to you, and to do justice to the Secretary of
War. I was induced, upon pressing application, to authorize
the agents of one of the districts of Pennsylvania to recruit
in one of the prison depots in Illinois; and the thing went so
far before it came to the knowledge of the Secretary that,
in my judgment, it could not be abandoned without greater
evil than would follow its going through. I did not know at
the time that you had protested against that class of thing
being done; and I now say that while this particular job
must be completed, no other of the sort will be authorized,
without an understanding with you, if at all. The Secretary
of War is wholly free of any part in this blunder.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
  
A     
 
  A    AI .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 23,
1864.
HON. MONTGOMERY BLAIR.
MY DEAR SIR: — You have generously said to me, more
than once, that whenever your resignation could be a relief
to me, it was at my disposal. The time has come. You very
well know that this proceeds from no dissatisfaction of
mine with you personally or oﬀicially. Your uniform
kindness has been unsurpassed by that of any other friend,
and while it is true that the war does not so greatly add to
the diﬀiculties of your department as to those of some
others, it is yet much to say, as I most truly can, that in the
three years and a half during which you have administered
the General Post-Oﬀice, I remember no single complaint
against you in connection therewith.
Yours, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
    
   
I
  H   
  HA   
  
    I
 I
 
     I
A     A   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, September 24, 1864.
I. CONGRESS HAVING authorized the purchase for the
United States of the products of States declared in
insurrection, and the Secretary of the Treasury having
designated New Orleans, Memphis, Nashville, Pensacola,
Port Royal, Beaufort (North Carolina), and Norfolk, as
places of purchase, and, with my approval, appointed
agents and made regulations under which said products
may be purchased, therefore:
II. All persons except such as may be in the civil, military,
or naval service of the government, having in their
possession any products of States or parts of States
declared in insurrection, which said agents are authorized
to purchase; and all persons owning or controlling such
products therein are authorized to convey such products to
either of the places which have been hereby or may
hereafter be designated as places of purchase, and such
products so destined shall not be liable to detention,
seizure, or forfeiture while in transitu, or in store waiting
transportation.
III. Any person having the certiﬁcate of a purchasing
agent, as prescribed by Treasury Regulation VIII, is
 authorized 
to 
pass 
with 
the 
necessary 
means 
of
transportation to the points named in said certiﬁcate, and
to return therefrom with the products required for the
fulﬁlment of the stipulations set forth in said certiﬁcate.
IV. Any person having sold and delivered to a purchasing
agent any products of an insurrectionary State in
accordance with the regulations in relation thereto, and
having in his possession a certiﬁcate setting forth the fact
of such purchase and sale; the character and quantity of
products, and the aggregate amount paid therefor, as
prescribed by Regulation I, shall be permitted by the
military authority commanding at the place of sale to
purchase from any authorized dealer at such place
merchandise and other articles not contraband of war nor
prohibited by order of the War Department, nor coin,
bullion, or foreign exchange, to an amount not exceeding in
value one-third of the aggregate value of the products sold
by him as certiﬁed by the agents purchasing, and the
merchandise and other articles so purchased may be
transported by the same route, and to the same place, from
and by which the products sold and delivered reached the
purchasing agent, as set forth in the certiﬁcate, and such
merchandise and other articles shall have safe conduct,
and shall not be subject to detention, seizure, or forfeiture
while being transported to the places and by the routes set
forth in the said certiﬁcate.
V. 
Generals 
commanding 
military 
districts, 
and
commandants of military posts and detachments, and
oﬀicers commanding ﬂeets, ﬂotillas, and gunboats, will give
 safe conduct to persons and products, merchandise, and
other articles duly authorized as aforesaid, and not
contraband of war, or prohibited by order of the War
Department, or of the order of such generals commanding,
or other duly authorized military or naval oﬀicer, made in
pursuance hereof, and all persons hindering or preventing
such safe conduct of persons or property will, be deemed
guilty of a military oﬀense and punished accordingly.
VI. Any person transporting or attempting to transport
any merchandise or other articles except in pursuance of
regulations of the Secretary of the Treasury, dated July 29,
1864, or in pursuance of this order, or transporting or
attempting to transport any merchandise or other articles
contraband of war or forbidden by any order of the War
Department, will be deemed guilty of a military oﬀense and
punished accordingly; and all products of insurrectionary
States found in transitu to any other person or than a
purchasing agent and a designated of purchase shall be
seized and forfeited to the States, except such as may be
moving to a loyal state under duly authorized permits of a
proper oﬀicer of the Treasury Department, as prescribed by
Regulation    VIII, concerning commercial intercourse,
dated July 29, 1864, or such as may have been found
abandoned, or have been captured and are moving in
pursuance of the act of March 12, 1864.
VII. No military or naval oﬀicer of the United States, or
person in the military or naval service, nor any civil oﬀicer,
except such as are appointed for that purpose, shall engage
in trade or traﬀic in the products of the insurrectionary
 States, or furnish transportation therefor under pain of
being deemed guilty of unlawful trading with the enemy
and punished accordingly.
VIII. The Secretary of War will make such general orders
or regulations as will insure the proper observance and
execution of,, this order, and the Secretary of the Navy will
give instructions to oﬀicers commanding ﬂeets, ﬂotillas,
and gunboats in conformity therewith.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  H  
A
.
A HI
 
  
.  .   e tem er         .
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN, Atlanta, Georgia:
YOU SAY JEFFERSON Davis is on a visit to Hood. I judge
that Brown and Stephens are the objects of his visit.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
  
. .   e tem er        .
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: 
I HOPE IT will have no constraint on you, nor do harm any
way, for me to say I am a little afraid lest Lee sends
reinforcements to Early, and thus enables him to turn upon
Sheridan.
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
 .
September 29, 1864.
I THINK THE bearer of this, Second Lieutenant Albee,
deserves a hearing. Will the Secretary of War please accord
it to him?
A. LINCOLN.
  
      
 
I
  HA
    
  H
 
 
       
  
  H
  
 
A 
FROM THE STATES OF INDIANA, ILLINOIS, IOWA, AND
WISCONSIN.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 1,
1864.
The term of one hundred days for which volunteers from
the States of Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin
volunteered, under the call of their respective governors, in
the months of May and June, to aid in the campaign of
General Sherman, having expired; the President directs an
oﬀicial acknowledgment to be made of their patriotic
service. It was their good fortune to render eﬀicient service
in the brilliant operations in the Southwest and to
contribute to the victories of the national arms over the
rebel forces in Georgia under command of Johnston and
Hood. On all occasions and in every service to which they
were assigned their duty as patriotic volunteers was
performed with alacrity and courage, for which they are
entitled to and are hereby tendered the national thanks
through the governors of their respective States.
The Secretary of War is directed to transmit a copy of
this order to the governors of Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and
Wisconsin and to cause a certiﬁcate of their honorable
 service to be delivered to the oﬀicers and soldiers of the
States above named who recently served in the military
force of the United States as volunteers for one hundred
days.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 5, 1864
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT: I inclose you a copy
of a correspondence in regard to a contemplated exchange
of naval prisoners through your lines, and not very distant
from your headquarters. It only came to the knowledge of
the War Department and of myself yesterday, and it gives
us some uneasiness. I therefore send it to you with the
statement that, as the numbers to be exchanged under it
are small, and so much has already been done to eﬀect the
exchange, I hope you may ﬁnd it consistent to let it go
forward under the general supervision of General Butler,
and particularly in reference to the points he holds vital in
exchanges. Still, you are at liberty to arrest the whole
operation if in your judgment the public good requires it.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
 
  
 A 
 
 A
  
 
  A  
c
     
  
          
I WELL REMEMBER the meetings herein narrated. See
nothing for me to object to in the narrative as being made
by General McDowell, except the phrase attributed to me
“of the Jacobinism of Congress”, [This memorandum
describes the private discussions that preceded the
transfer of McClellan’s army from the Potomac, where it
had confronted the Confederates at Manassas. See H.
J. Raymond: Life of Lincoln, ]
which phrase I do not remember using literally or in
substance, and which I wish not to be published in any
event.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 H. 
. H
  
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, October 10, 1864.
HON. HENRY W. HOFFMAN.
MY DEAR SIR: — A convention of Maryland has framed a
new constitution for the State; a public meeting is called
for this evening at Baltimore to aid in securing its
ratiﬁcation by the people, and you ask a word from me for
the occasion. I presume the only feature of the instrument
about which there is serious controversy is that which
provides for the extinction of slavery. It needs not to be a
secret and I presume it is no secret, that I wish success to
this provision. I desire it on every consideration. I wish all
men to be free. I wish the material prosperity of the already
free, which I feel sure the extinction of slavery would bring.
I wish to see in process of disappearing that only thing
which ever could bring this nation to civil war. I attempt no
argument. 
Argument 
upon 
the 
question 
is 
already
exhausted by the abler, better informed, and more
immediately interested sons of Maryland herself. I only add
that I shall be gratiﬁed exceedingly if the good people of
the State shall, by their votes, ratify the new constitution.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 10,
1864, 5 P.M.
GOVERNOR CURTIN, HARRISBURG, Pa.:
Yours of to-day just this moment received, and the
Secretary having left it is impossible for me to answer to-
day. I have not received your letter from Erie.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
      .  I
 
 
   am rid e
ass.
YOUR LETTER MAKES us a little uneasy about your health.
Telegraph us how you are. If you think it would help you,
make us a visit.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
A HI
 
  
.  .  
cto er         .
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, City Point, Va.: 
SECRETARY OF WAR not being in, I answer yours about
election. Pennsylvania very close, and still in doubt on
home vote. Ohio largely for us, with all the members of
Congress but two or three. Indiana largely for us, —
Governor, it is said, by ﬁfteen thousand, and eight of the
eleven members of Congress. Send us what you may know
of your army vote.
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     
A
 
OCTOBER 19, 1864.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I am notiﬁed
that this is a compliment paid me by the loyal Marylanders
resident in this District. I infer that the adoption of the new
constitution for the State furnishes the occasion, and that
in your view the extirpation of slavery constitutes the chief
merit of the new constitution. Most heartily do I
congratulate you, and Maryland, and the nation, and the
world, upon this event. I regret that it did not occur two
years sooner, which, I am sure, would have saved the
nation more money than would have met all the private loss
incident to the measure; but it has come at last, and I
sincerely hope its friends may fully realize all their
anticipations of good from it, and that its opponents may by
its eﬀects be agreeably and proﬁtably disappointed.
A word upon another subject. Something said by the
Secretary of State in his recent speech at Auburn, has been
construed by some into a threat, that if I shall be beaten at
the election, I will, between then and the end of my
constitutional term, do what I may be able to ruin the
Government.
Others regard the fact that the Chicago Convention
adjourned, not sine die, but to meet again, if called to do so
 by a particular individual, as the intimation of a purpose
that if their nominee shall be elected he will at once seize
control of the Government. I hope the good people will
permit themselves to suﬀer no uneasiness on either point. I
am struggling to maintain the Government, not to
overthrow it. I am struggling especially to prevent others
from overthrowing it. I therefore say, that if I live, I shall
remain President until the 4th of next March, and that
whoever shall be constitutionally elected, in November,
shall be duly installed as President on the 4th of March,
and in the interval I shall do my utmost that whoever is to
hold the helm for the next voyage shall start with the best
possible chance of saving the ship. This is due to the
people, both on principle and under the Constitution. Their
will, constitutionally expressed, is the ultimate law for all. If
they should deliberately resolve to have immediate peace,
even at the loss of their country and their liberties, I know
not the power or the right to resist them. It is their own
business, and they must do as they please with their own. I
believe, however, they are still resolved to preserve their
country and their liberties; and in this, in oﬀice or out of it,
I am resolved to stand by them. I may add, that in this
purpose to save the country and its liberties, no classes of
people seem so nearly unanimous as the soldiers in the
ﬁeld and the sailors aﬂoat. Do they not have the hardest of
it? Who should quail while they do not? God bless the
soldiers and seamen, with all their brave commanders.
   
  A
A I
 
   HA
  
I I
  
  
  
        .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
It has pleased Almighty God to prolong our national life
another year, defending us with his guardian care against
unfriendly designs from abroad, and vouchsaﬁng to us in
His mercy many and signal victories over the enemy, who is
of our own household. It has also pleased our Heavenly
Father to favor as well our citizens in their homes as our
soldiers in their camps, and our sailors on the rivers and
seas, with unusual health. He has largely augmented our
free population by emancipation and by immigration, while
he has opened to us new: sources of wealth, and has
crowned the labor of our working-men in every department
of industry with abundant rewards. Moreover, he has been
pleased to animate and inspire our minds and hearts with
fortitude, courage, and resolution suﬀicient for the great
trial of civil war into which we have been brought by our
adherence as a nation to the cause of freedom and
humanity, and to aﬀord to us reasonable hopes of an
ultimate and happy deliverance from all our dangers and
aﬄictions.
 Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do hereby appoint and set apart the last
Thursday in November next as a day which I desire to be
observed by all my fellow-citizens, wherever they may be
then, as a day of thanksgiving and praise to Almighty God,
the beneﬁcent Creator and Ruler of the Universe. And I do
further recommend to my fellow-citizens aforesaid, that on
that occasion they do reverently humble themselves in the
dust, and from thence oﬀer up penitent and fervent prayers
and supplications to the great Disposer of events for a
return of the inestimable blessings of peace, union, and
harmony throughout the, land which it has pleased him to
assign as a dwelling-place for ourselves and for our
posterity throughout all generations.
In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this twentieth day of
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-four, and of the independence of the
United States the eighty-ninth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  o  . 
. 
I 
 A . 
A HI
 
  
.
 .  
cto er         .  .    .
.
J. G. NICOLAY, Saint Louis, Missouri:
WHILE CURTIS IS ﬁghting Price, have you any idea where
the force under Rosecrans is, or what it is doing?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I  IA
  .  A
      A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 22,
1864.
MESSRS WILLIAM B. CAMPBELL, THOMAS A. R.
NELSON, JAMES T. P. CARTER, JOHN WILLIAMS, A.
BLIZZARD, HENRY COOPER, BAILLIE PEYTON, JOHN
LELLYET, 
EMERSON 
ETHERIDGE, 
and 
JOHN 
D.
PERRYMAN.
GENTLEMEN: — On the 15th day of this month, as I
remember, a printed paper manuscript, with a few
manuscript interlineations, called a protest, with your
names appended thereto, and accompanied by another
printed paper, purporting to be a proclamation by Andrew
Johnson, Military Governor of Tennessee, and also a
manuscript paper, purporting to be extracts from the Code
of Tennessee, were laid before me.
The protest, proclamation, and extracts are respectively
as follows:
[The protest is here recited, and also the proclamation of
Governor Johnson, dated September 30, to which it refers,
together with a list of the counties in East, Middle, and
West Tennessee; also extracts from the Code of Tennessee
in relation to electors of President and Vice-President,
qualiﬁcations of voters for members of the General
 Assembly, places of holding elections, and oﬀicers of
popular elections.]
At the time these papers were presented, as before
stated, I had never seen either of them, nor heard of the
subject to which they related, except in a general way one
day previously.
Up to the present moment, nothing whatever upon the
subject has passed between Governor Johnson, or any one
else, connected with the proclamation, and myself.
Since receiving the papers, as stated, I have given the
subject such brief consideration as I have been able to do,
in the midst of so many pressing public duties.
My conclusion is, that I can have nothing to do with the
matter, either to sustain the plan as the convention and
Governor Johnson have initiated it, or to revoke or modify it
as you demand.
By the Constitution and laws, the President is charged
with no duty in the presidential election in any State, nor
do I in this case perceive any military reason for his
interference in the matter.
The movement set on foot by the convention and
Governor Johnson does not, as seems to be assumed by
you, emanate from the National Executive.
In no proper sense can it be considered other than an
independent movement of, at least, a portion of the loyal
people of Tennessee.
I do not perceive in the plan any menace, or violence, or
coercion towards any one.
 Governor Johnson, like any other loyal citizen of
Tennessee, has the right to favor any political plan he
chooses, and, as military governor, it is his duty to keep
peace among and for the loyal people of the State.
I cannot discern that by this plan he purposes any more.
But you object to the plan.
Leaving it alone will be your perfect security against it. It
is not proposed to force you into it. Do as you please, on
your own account, peaceably and loyally, and Governor
Johnson will not molest you, but will protect you against
violence as far as in his power.
I presume that the conducting of a presidential election
in Tennessee in strict accordance with the old Code of the
State, is not now a possibility.
It is scarcely necessary to add, that if any election shall
be held and any votes shall be cast in the State of
Tennessee for President and Vice-President of the United
States, it will belong, not to the military agents, nor yet to
the Executive Department, but exclusively to another
department of the Government, to determine whether they
are entitled to be counted in conformity with the
Constitution and laws of the United States.
Except it be to give protection against violence, I decline
to interfere in any way with any presidential election.
A. LINCOLN.
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN. E ECUTIVE
MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 22, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN:
 With great pleasure I tender to you and your brave army
the thanks of the nation, and my own personal admiration
and 
gratitude, 
for 
the 
month’s 
operations 
in 
the
Shenandoah Valley; and especially for the splendid work of
October 19, 1864.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. H.  H
A .
A HI
 
  
.  .  
cto er          
P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL THOMAS, Nashville, Tennessee: I
have received information to-day, having great appearance
of authenticity, that there is to be a rebel raid into Western
Kentucky; that it is to consist of four thousand infantry and
three thousand cavalry, and is to start from Corinth,
Mississippi, On the fourth day of November.
A. LINCOLN, President.
Send copy to General Washburn at Memphis. A. L.
     
 A
  
  .  . 
A I .     
 I 
A
 I
  
A HI
 
  
. .  
cto er   
1864.
HON. THOMAS T. DAVIS, Syracuse, N.Y.:
I have ordered that Milton D. Norton be discharged on
taking the oath. Please notify his mother.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 A
I  I
 
  A
A I
 
  H
I
OCTOBER 31, 1864.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: A Proclamation Whereas the Congress of the
United States passed an act, which was approved on the
21st day of March last, entitled “An act to enable the people
of Nevada to form a constitution and State government,
and for the admission of such State into the Union on an
equal footing with the original States;” and, Whereas the
said constitution and State government have been formed,
pursuant to the conditions prescribed by the ﬁfth section of
the act of Congress aforesaid, and the certiﬁcate required
by the said act and also a copy of the constitution and
ordinances have been submitted to the President of the
United States: Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham
Lincoln, President of the United States, in accordance with
the duty imposed upon me by the act of Congress aforesaid,
do hereby declare and proclaim that the said State of
Nevada is admitted into the Union on an equal footing with
the original States.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed..........
A. LINCOLN.
 By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
   I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November 4, 1864
MAJOR-GENERAL BURBRIDGE, LE
INGTON, Ky.
Suspend execution of all the deserters ordered to be
executed on Sunday at Louisville, until further order, and
send me the records in the cases. Acknowledge receipt.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
A A  
  I    A  
 I    A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November 6,
1864. 9 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL CANBY, NEW Orleans, La.: Please
forward with all possible despatch to the naval oﬀicer
commanding at Mobile Bay the following order.
A. LINCOLN.
(Inclosure.)
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November 6,
1864.
NAVAL OFFICER IN COMMAND AT MOBILE BAY
Do not on any account, or on any showing of authority
whatever, from whomsoever purporting to come, allow the
blockade to be violated.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  AI 
     AI    
  
A  A H
     .
WASHINGTON, D. C., November 8, 1864.
TO THE MANAGING COMMITTEE OF THE SAILORS’
FAIR, Boston, Massachusetts Allow me to wish you a great
success. With the old fame of the Navy made brighter in
the present war you cannot fail. I name none lest I wrong
others by omission. To all, from rear-admiral to honest Jack,
I tender the nation’s admiration and gratitude.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 A. H.  I  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November 8,
1864.
HON. A. H. RICE, Boston, Massachusetts:
Yours received. I have no other notice that the ox is mine.
If it be really so, I present it to the Sailors’ Fair as a
contribution.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
       A     
A 
.
A HI
 
  
o em er        .
HON. WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Auburn, New York:
NEWS FROM GRANT, Sherman, Thomas and Rosecrans
satisfactory, but not important. Pirate Florida captured by
the Wachusett October 7, on the coast of Brazil. The
information is certain.
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     
A
   
  
     
    .
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS: — Even before I
had been informed by you that this compliment was paid
me by loyal citizens of Pennsylvania, friendly to me, I had
inferred that you were of that portion of my countrymen
who think that the best interests of the nation are to be
subserved by the support of the present administration. I
do not pretend to say that you, who think so, embrace all
the patriotism and loyalty of the country, but I do believe,
and I trust without personal interest, that the welfare of the
country does require that such support and indorsement
should be given.
I earnestly believe that the consequences of this day’s
work, if it be as you assume, and as now seems probable,
will be to the lasting advantage, if not to the very salvation,
of the country. I cannot at this hour say what has been the
result of the election. But, whatever it may be, I have no
desire to modify this opinion: that all who have labored to-
day in behalf of the Union have wrought for the best
interests of the country and the world; not only for the
present, but for all future ages.
I am thankful to God for this approval of the people; but,
while deeply grateful for this mark of their conﬁdence in
me, if I know my heart, my gratitude is free from any taint
 of personal triumph. I do not impugn the motives of any
one opposed to me. It is no pleasure to me to triumph over
any one, but I give thanks to the Almighty for this evidence
of the people’s resolution to stand by free government and
the rights of humanity.
     
 A
  
 H. 
. H
  
A
. 
A
  A  
 
   
A HI
 
  
.  . 
o em er
  
1864.
H. HOFFMAN, Baltimore, Md.: The Maryland soldiers in
the Army of the Potomac cast a total vote of fourteen
hundred and twenty-eight, out of which we get eleven
hundred and sixty majority. This is directly from General
Meade and General Grant.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
  A I  
   
 
RESPONSE TO A SERENADE, NOVEMBER 10, 1864.
IT 
HAS 
LONG been a grave question whether any
government, not too strong for the liberties of its people,
can be strong enough to maintain its existence in great
emergencies. On this point the present rebellion brought
our government to a severe test, and a presidential election
occurring in regular course during the rebellion, added not
a little to the strain.
If the loyal people united were put to the utmost of their
strength by the rebellion, must they not fail when divided
and 
partially 
paralyzed 
by 
a 
political 
war 
among
themselves? But the election was a necessity. We cannot
have free government without elections; and if the election
could force us to forego or postpone a national election, it
might fairly claim to have already conquered and ruined us.
The strife of the election is but human nature practically
applied to the facts of the case. What has occurred in this
case must ever recur in similar cases. Human nature will
not change. In any future great national trial, compared
with the men of this, we will have as weak and as strong, as
silly and as wise, as bad and as good. Let us, therefore,
study the incidents of this as philosophy to learn wisdom
from, and none of them as wrongs to be revenged.
 But 
the 
election, 
along 
with 
its 
incidental 
and
undesirable strife, has done good, too. It has demonstrated
that a people’s government can sustain a national election
in the midst of a great civil war. Until now, it has not been
known to the world that this was a possibility. It shows,
also, how sound and strong we still are. It shows that even
among the candidates of the same party, he who is most
devoted to the Union and most opposed to treason can
receive most of the people’s votes. It shows, also, to the
extent yet known, that we have more men now than we had
when the war began. Gold is good in its place; but living,
brave, and patriotic men are better than gold.
But the rebellion continues, and, now that the election is
over, may not all have a common interest to reunite in a
common eﬀort to save our common country? For my own
part, I have striven and shall strive to avoid placing any
obstacle in the way. So long as I have been here, I have not
willingly planted a thorn in any man’s bosom. While I am
duly sensible to the high compliment of a re-election, and
duly grateful, as I trust, to Almighty God, for having
directed my countrymen to a right conclusion, as I think,
for their good, it adds nothing to my satisfaction that any
other man may be disappointed by the result.
May I ask those who have not diﬀered with me to join
with me in this same spirit towards those who have? And
now, let me close by asking three hearty cheers for our
brave soldiers and seamen, and their gallant and skillful
commanders.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.  
   I
 .
A HI
 
  
. .  
o em er         .
MAJOR-GENERAL BURBRIDGE, Lexington, Ky.: 
I HAVE JUST received a telegram from Governor Bramlette
saying: “General John B. Houston, a loyal man and
prominent citizen, was arrested, and yesterday, started oﬀ
by General Burbridge, to be sent beyond our lines by way
of Catlettsburg, for no other oﬀense than opposition to your
re-election,” and I have answered him as follows below, of
which please take notice and report to me.
A. LINCOLN.
 A HI
 
  
. .  
o em er         .
   
    A
        ran  ort    .
YOURS OF YESTERDAY received. I can scarcely believe that
General John B. Houston has been arrested “for no other
oﬀense than opposition to my re-election;” for, if that had
been deemed suﬀicient cause of arrest, I should have heard
of more than one arrest in Kentucky on election day. If,
however, General Houston has been arrested for no other
cause than opposition to my re-election, General Burbridge
will discharge him at once, I sending him a copy of this as
an order to that eﬀect.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . A. H
   
 .
(Private.) 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November
14, 1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL HURLBUT: Few things since I have
been here have impressed me more painfully than what, for
four or ﬁve months past, has appeared a bitter military
opposition to the new State government of Louisiana. I still
indulged some hope that I was mistaken in the fact; but
copies of a correspondence on the subject between General
Canby and yourself, and shown me to-day, dispel that hope.
A very fair proportion of the people of Louisiana have
inaugurated a new State government, making an excellent
new constitution — better for the poor black man than we
have in Illinois. This was done under military protection,
directed by me, in the belief, still sincerely entertained,
that with such a nucleus around which to build we could
get the State into position again sooner than otherwise. In
this belief a general promise of protection and support,
applicable alike to Louisiana and other States, was given in
the last annual message. During the formation of the new
government and constitution they were supported by nearly
every loyal person, and opposed by every secessionist. And
this support and this opposition, from the respective
standpoints of the parties, was perfectly consistent and
 logical. Every Unionist ought to wish the new government
to succeed; and every disunionist must desire it to fail. Its
failure would gladden the heart of Slidell in Europe, and of
every enemy of the old ﬂag in the world. Every advocate of
slavery naturally desires to see blasted and crushed the
liberty promised the black man by the new constitution. But
why General Canby and General Hurlbut should join on the
same side is to me incomprehensible.
Of course, in the condition of things at New Orleans, the
military must not be thwarted by the civil authority; but
when the Constitutional Convention, for what it deems a
breach of privilege, arrests an editor in no way connected
with the military, the military necessity for insulting the
convention and forcibly discharging the editor is diﬀicult to
perceive. Neither is the military necessity for protecting
the people against paying large salaries ﬁxed by a
legislature of their own choosing very apparent. Equally
diﬀicult to perceive is the military necessity for forcibly
interposing to prevent a bank from loaning its own money
to the State. These things, if they have occurred, are, at the
best, no better than gratuitous hostility. I wish I could hope
that they may be shown not to have occurred. To make
assurance against misunderstanding, I repeat that in the
existing condition of things in Louisiana, the military must
not be thwarted by the civil authority; and I add that on
points of diﬀerence the commanding general must be judge
and master. But I also add that in the exercise of this
judgment and control, a purpose, obvious, and scarcely
 unavowed, to transcend all military necessity, in order to
crush out the civil government, will not be overlooked.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
        
 
A   A
 
I
  
I    
  
            .
THE PRESIDENT, IN reply, said that he had to confess he
had been duly notiﬁed of the intention to make this friendly
call some days ago, and in this he had had a fair
opportunity aﬀorded to be ready with a set speech; but he
had not prepared one, being too busy for that purpose. He
would say, however, that he was gratiﬁed with the result of
the presidential election. He had kept as near as he could
to the exercise of his best judgment for the interest of the
whole country, and to have the seal of approbation stamped
on the course he had pursued was exceedingly grateful to
his feelings. He thought he could say, in as large a sense as
any other man, that his pleasure consisted in belief that the
policy he had pursued was the best, if not the only one, for
the safety of the country.
He had said before, and now repeated, that he indulged
in no feeling of triumph over any man who thought or acted
diﬀerently from himself. He had no such feeling toward any
living man. When he thought of Maryland, in particular, he
was of the opinion that she had more than double her share
in what had occurred in the recent elections. The adoption
of a free-State constitution was a greater thing than the
part taken by the people of the State in the presidential
election. He would any day have stipulated to lose
 Maryland in the presidential election to save it by the
adoption 
of 
a 
free-State 
constitution, 
because 
the
presidential election comes every four years, while that is a
thing which, being done, cannot be undone. He therefore
thought that in that they had a victory for the right worth a
great deal more than their part in the presidential election,
though of the latter he thought highly. He had once before
said, but would say again, that those who have diﬀered
with us and opposed us will see that the result of the
presidential election is better for their own good than if
they had been successful.
Thanking the committee for their compliment, he
brought his brief speech to a close.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
   
  A
 
  
           
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas by my proclamation of the 19th of April, 1861, it
was declared that the ports of certain States, including
those of Norfolk, in the State of Virginia, Fernandina and
Pensacola, in the State of Florida, were, for reasons therein
set forth, intended to be placed under blockade; and:
Whereas the said ports were subsequently blockaded
accordingly, but having for some time past been in the
military possession of the United States, it is deeemd
advisable that they should be opened to domestic and
foreign commerce:
Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States, pursuant to the authority in
me vested by the ﬁfth section of the act of Congress
approved on the 13th of July, 1861, entitled “An act further
to provide for the collection of duties on imports, and for
other purposes,” do hereby declare that the blockade of the
said ports of Norfolk, Fernandina, and Pensacola shall so
far cease and determine, from and after the ﬁrst day of
December next, that commercial intercourse with those
 ports, except as to persons, things, and information
contraband of war, may, from that time, be carried on,
subject to the laws of the United States, to the limitations
and in pursuance of the regulations which may be
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, and to such
military and naval regulations as are now in force, or may
hereafter be found necessary.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed. Done at
the city of Washington, this nineteenth day of November, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-
four, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-ninth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  I     A  
 H 
TO MRS. BI BY.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November
21, 1864.
MRS. BI BY, Boston, Massachusetts.
DEAR MADAM: — I have been shown in the ﬁles of the
War Department a statement of the Adjutant-General of
Massachusetts that you are the mother of ﬁve sons who
have died gloriously on the ﬁeld of battle. I feel how weak
and fruitless must be any words of mine which should
attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss so
overwhelming. But I cannot refrain from tendering to you
the consolation that may be found in the thanks of the
Republic they died to save. I pray that our Heavenly Father
may assuage the anguish of your bereavement, and leave
you only the cherished memory of the loved and lost, and
the solemn pride that must be yours to have laid so costly a
sacriﬁce upon the altar of freedom.
Yours very sincerely and respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  HI  I  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, November 21,
1864.
DEACON JOHN PHILLIPS.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have heard of the incident at the polls
in your town, in which you acted so honorable a part, and I
take the liberty of writing to you to express my personal
gratitude for the compliment paid me by the suﬀrage of a
citizen so venerable.
The example of such devotion to civic duties in one
whose days have already been extended an average lifetime
beyond the Psalmist’s limit, cannot but be valuable and
fruitful. It is not for myself only, but for the country which
you have in your sphere served so long and so well, that I
thank you.
Your friend and servant, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
    A
     .
A HI
 
  
.  . 
  
            .
GOVERNOR BRAMLETTE, Frankfort, Ky.:
YOURS OF TO-DAY received. It seems that Lieutenant-
Governor Jacobs and Colonel Wolford are stationary now.
General Sudarth and Mr. Hodges are here, and the
Secretary of War and myself are trying to devise means of
paciﬁcation and harmony for Kentucky, which we hope to
eﬀect soon, now that the passion-exciting subject of the
election is past.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
A HI
 
  
. .  
  
           
GOVERNOR CURTIN, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania;
I HAVE NO knowledge, information, or belief, that three
States — or any States, oﬀer to resume allegiance.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    A
 .
    
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
 
. .  
 .
26, 1864 MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS:
Please telegraph me brieﬂy on what charge and evidence
Mrs. Anna B. Martin has been sent to the penitentiary at
Alton.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A
DECEMBER 3, 1864.
ON THURSDAY OF last week, two ladies from Tennessee
came before the President, asking the release of their
husbands held as prisoners of war at Johnson’s Island. They
were put oﬀ until Friday, when they came again, and were
again put oﬀ until Saturday. At each of the interviews one
of the ladies urged that her husband was a religious man,
and on Saturday the President ordered the release of the
prisoners, when he said to this lady: “You say your husband
is a religious man; tell him when you meet him, that I say I
am not much of a judge of religion, but that, in my opinion,
the religion that sets men to rebel and ﬁght against their
own government, because, as they think, that government
does not suﬀiciently help some men to eat their bread in
the sweat of other men’s faces, is not the sort of religion
upon which people can get to heaven.”
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
   
I
  H     A
     
A 
A
 
 A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 3, 1864.
A WAR STEAMER, called the Funayma Solace, having been
built in this country, for the Japanese government and at
the instance of that government, it is deemed to comport
with the public interest, in view of the unsettled condition
of the relations of the United States with that Empire, that
the steamer should not be allowed to proceed to Japan. If,
however, the Secretary of the Navy should ascertain that
the steamer is adapted to our service, he is authorized to
purchase her, but the purchase money will be held in trust
toward satisfying any valid claims which may be presented
by the Japanese on account of the construction of the
steamer and the failure to deliver the same, as above set
forth.
A. LINCOLN. MESSAGE TO CONGRESS.
WASHINGTON CITY, December 5, 1864
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
In conformity to the law of July 16, 1862, I most cordially
recommend that Captain John A. Winslow, United States
Navy, receive a vote of thanks from Congress for the skill
and gallantry exhibited by him in the brilliant action whilst
in command of the United States steamer Keaysarge, which
 led to the total destruction of the piratical craft Alabama,
on the 19th of June, 1864., a vessel superior in tonnage,
superior in number of guns, and superior in number of
crew.
This recommendation is specially made in order to
comply with the requirements of the ninth section of the
aforesaid act, which is in the following words, viz: That any
line oﬀicer of the navy or marine corps may be advanced
one grade, if, upon recommendation by the President by
name he receives the thanks of Congress for highly
distinguished conduct in conﬂict with the enemy, or far
extraordinary heroism in the line of his profession.
A. LINCOLN,
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON CITY, December 5, 1864.
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
In conformity to the law of July 16, 1862, I most cordially
recommend that Lieutenant William B. Gushing, United
States Navy, receive a vote of thanks from Congress for his
important, gallant, and perilous achievement in destroying
the rebel ironclad steamer Albemarle on the night of the
27th of October, 1864., at Plymouth, N. C.
The destruction of so formidable a vessel, which had
resisted the continued attacks of a number of our vessels
on former occasions, is an important event touching our
future naval and military operations, and would reﬂect
honor on any oﬀicer, and redounds to the credit of this
young oﬀicer and the few brave comrades who assisted in
this successful and daring undertaking.
This recommendation is specially made in order to
comply with the requirements of the ninth section of the
Aforesaid act, which is in the following words, namely:
That any line oﬀicer of the navy or marine corps may be
advanced one grade if upon recommendation of the
President by name he receives the thanks of Congress for
highly distinguished conduct in conﬂict with the enemy, or
for extraordinary heroism in the line of his profession.
 A. LINCOLN.
 A
 A  
   A
   
  
    
DECEMBER 6, 1864.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES:
Again the blessings of health and abundant harvests
claim our profoundest gratitude to Almighty God.
The condition of our foreign aﬀairs is reasonably
satisfactory.
Mexico continues to be a theater of civil war. While our
political relations with that country have undergone no
change, we have at the same time strictly maintained
neutrality between the belligerents.
At the request of the States of Costa Rica and Nicaragua,
a competent engineer has been authorized to make a
survey of the river San Juan and the port of San Juan. It is a
source of much satisfaction that the diﬀiculties which for a
moment excited some political apprehensions and caused a
closing of the interoceanic transit route have been amicably
adjusted, and that there is a good prospect that the route
will soon be reopened with an increase of capacity and
adaptation. We could not exaggerate either the commercial
or the political importance of that great improvement.
It would be doing injustice to an important South
American State not to acknowledge the directness,
 frankness, and cordiality with which the United States of
Colombia have entered into intimate relations with this
government. A claims convention has been constituted to
complete the unﬁnished work of the one which closed its
session in 1861.
The new liberal constitution of Venezuela having gone
into eﬀect with the universal acquiescence of the people,
the government under it has been recognized and
diplomatic intercourse with it has opened in a cordial and
friendly spirit. The long-deferred Aves Island claim has
been satisfactorily paid and discharged.
Mutual payments have been made of the claims awarded
by the late joint commission for the settlement of claims
between the United States and Peru. An earnest and
cordial friendship continues to exist between the two
countries, and such eﬀorts as were in my power have been
used to remove misunderstanding, and avert a threatened
war between Peru and Spain.
Our relations are of the most friendly nature with Chile,
the Argentine Republic, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Paraguay, San
Salvador, and Haiti.
During the past year no diﬀerences of any kind have
arisen with any of these republics, and on the other hand,
their sympathies with the United States are constantly
expressed with cordiality and earnestness.
The claim arising from the seizure of the cargo of the
brig Macedonian in 1821 has been paid in full by the
Government of Chile.
 Civil war continues in the Spanish part of San Domingo,
apparently without prospect of an early close.
Oﬀicial correspondence has been freely opened with
Liberia, and it gives us a pleasing view of social and
political progress in that republic. It may be expected to
derive new vigor from American inﬂuence improved by the
rapid disappearance of slavery in the United States.
I solicit your authority to furnish to the republic a
gunboat, at moderate cost, to be reimbursed to the United
States by instalments. Such a vessel is needed for the
safety of that state against the native African races, and in
Liberian hands it would be more eﬀective in arresting the
African slave-trade than a squadron in our own hands. The
possession of the least organized naval force would
stimulate a generous ambition in the republic, and the
conﬁdence which we should manifest by furnishing it would
win forbearance and favor toward the colony from all
civilized nations.
The proposed overland telegraph between America and
Europe, by the way of Bering Straits and Asiatic Russia,
which was sanctioned by Congress at the last session, has
been undertaken, under very favorable circumstances, by
an association of American citizens, with the cordial good-
will and support as well of this Government as of those of
Great Britain and Russia. Assurances have been received
from most of the South American States of their high
appreciation of the enterprise and their readiness to co-
operate in constructing lines tributary to that world-
encircling communication. I learn with much satisfaction
 that the noble design of a telegraphic communication
between the eastern coast of America and Great Britain has
been 
renewed, 
with 
full 
expectation 
of 
its 
early
accomplishment.
Thus it is hoped that with the return of domestic peace
the country will be able to resume with energy and
advantage its former high career of commerce and
civilization.
Our very popular and estimable representative in Egypt
died in April last. An unpleasant altercation which arose
between the temporary incumbent of the oﬀice and the
Government of the Pasha resulted in a suspension of
intercourse. The evil was promptly corrected on the arrival
of the successor in the consulate, and our relations with
Egypt, as well as our relations with the Barbary Powers,
are entirely satisfactory.
The rebellion which has so long been ﬂagrant in China
has at last been suppressed, with the co-operating good
oﬀices of this Government and of the other Western
commercial States. The judicial consular establishment
there has become very diﬀicult and onerous, and it will
need legislative revision to adapt it to the extension of our
commerce and to the more intimate intercourse which has
been instituted with the Government and people of that
vast Empire. China seems to be accepting with hearty
good-will the conventional laws which regulate commercial
and social intercourse among the Western nations.
Owing to the peculiar situation of Japan and the
anomalous form of its Government, the action of that
 empire in performing treaty stipulations is inconstant and
capricious. Nevertheless, good progress has been eﬀected
by the Western powers, moving with enlightened concert.
Our own pecuniary claims have been allowed or put in
course of settlement, and the inland sea has been reopened
to commerce. There is reason also to believe that these
proceedings have increased rather than diminished the
friendship of Japan toward the United States.
The ports of Norfolk, Fernandina, and Pensacola have
been opened by proclamation. It is hoped that foreign
merchants will now consider whether it is not safer and
more proﬁtable to themselves, as well as just to the United
States, to resort to these and other open ports than it is to
pursue, through many hazards and at vast cost, a
contraband trade with other ports which are closed, if not
by actual military occupation, at least by a lawful and
eﬀective blockade.
For myself, I have no doubt of the power and duty of the
Executive, under the law of nations, to exclude enemies of
the human race from an asylum in the United States. If
Congress should think that proceedings in such cases lack
the authority of law, or ought to be further regulated by it, I
recommend 
that 
provision 
be 
made 
for 
eﬀectually
preventing foreign slave traders from acquiring domicile
and facilities for their criminal occupation in our country.
It is possible that if it were a new and open question the
maritime powers, with the lights they now enjoy, would not
concede the privileges of a naval belligerent to the
insurgents of the United States, destitute, as they are, and
 always have been, equally of ships of war and of ports and
harbors. Disloyal emissaries have been neither assiduous
nor more successful during the last year than they were
before that time in their eﬀorts, under favor of that
privilege, to embroil our country in foreign wars. The
desire and determination of the governments of the
maritime states to defeat that design are believed to be as
sincere as and can not be more earnest than our own.
Nevertheless, unforeseen political diﬀiculties have arisen,
especially in Brazilian and British ports and on the northern
boundary of the United States, which have required, and
are likely to continue to require, the practice of constant
vigilance and a just and conciliatory spirit on the part of the
United States, as well as of the nations concerned and their
governments.
Commissioners have been appointed under the treaty
with Great Britain on the adjustment of the claims of the
Hudson Bay and Puget Sound Agricultural Companies, in
Oregon, and are now proceeding to the execution of the
trust assigned to them.
In view of the insecurity of life and property in the region
adjacent to the Canadian border, by reason of recent
assaults and depredations committed by inimical and
desperate persons who are harbored there, it has been
thought proper to give notice that after the expiration of six
months, the period conditionally stipulated in the existing
arrangement with Great Britain, the United States must
hold themselves at liberty to increase their naval armament
upon the Lakes if they shall ﬁnd that proceeding necessary.
 The condition of the border will necessarily come into
consideration in connection with the question of continuing
or modifying the rights of transit from Canada through the
United States, as well as the regulation of imposts, which
were temporarily established by the reciprocity treaty of
the 5th June, 1854.
I desire, however, to be understood while making this
statement that the colonial authorities of Canada are not
deemed to be intentionally unjust or unfriendly toward the
United States, but, on the contrary, there is every reason to
expect that, with the approval of the Imperial Government,
they will take the necessary measures to prevent new
incursions across the border.
The act passed at the last session for the encouragement
of immigration has so far as was possible been put into
operation. It seems to need amendment which will enable
the oﬀicers of the Government to prevent the practice of
frauds against the immigrants while on their way and on
their arrival in the ports, so as to secure them here a free
choice of avocations and places of settlement. A liberal
disposition toward this great national policy is manifested
by most of the European States, and ought to be
reciprocated on our part by giving the immigrants eﬀective
national protection. I regard our immigrants as one of the
principal replenishing streams which are appointed by
Providence to repair the ravages of internal war and its
wastes of national strength and health. All that is necessary
is to secure the ﬂow of that stream in its present fullness,
and to that end the Government must in every way make it
 manifest that it neither needs nor designs to impose
involuntary military service upon those who come from
other lands to cast their lot in our country. The ﬁnancial
aﬀairs 
of 
the 
Government 
have 
been 
successfully
administered during the last year. The legislation of the last
session of Congress has beneﬁcially aﬀected the revenues,
although suﬀicient time has not yet elapsed to experience
the full eﬀect of several of the provisions of the acts of
Congress imposing increased taxation.
The receipts during the year from all sources, upon the
basis of warrants signed by the Secretary of the Treasury,
including loans and the balance in the Treasury on the 1st
day of July, 1863, were  1,394,196,007.62, and the
aggregate disbursements, upon the same basis, were
 1,298,056,101.89, leaving a balance in the Treasury, as
shown by warrants, of  96,739,905.73.
Deduct from these amounts the amount of the principal
of the public debt redeemed and the amount of issues in
substitution therefor, and the actual cash operations of the
Treasury were: receipts,  884,076,646.57; disbursements,
 865,234,087.86; which leaves a cash balance in the
Treasury of  18,842,558.71.
Of the receipts there were derived from customs
 102,316,152.99, from lands  588,333.29, from direct
taxes  475,648.96, from internal revenue  109,741,134.10,
from miscellaneous sources  47,511,448.10, and from
loans applied to actual expenditures, including former
balance,  623,443,929.13.
 There 
were 
disbursed 
for 
the 
civil 
service
 27,505,599.46, for pensions and Indians  7,517,930.97,
for the War Department  690,791,842.97, for the Navy
Department  85,733,292.77, for interest on the public debt
 53,685,421.69, making an aggregate of  865,234,087.86,
and leaving a balance in the Treasury of  18,842,558.71, as
before stated.
For the actual receipts and disbursements for the ﬁrst
quarter and the estimated receipts and disbursements for
the three remaining quarters of the current ﬁscal year, and
the general operations of the Treasury in detail, I refer you
to the report of the Secretary of the Treasury. I concur with
him in the opinion that the proportion of moneys required
to meet the expenses consequent upon the war derived
from taxation should be still further increased; and I
earnestly invite your attention to this subject to the end
that there be such additional legislation as shall be
required to meet the just expectations of the Secretary.
The public debt on the ﬁrst day of July last, as appears by
the books of the Treasury, amounted to  1,740,690,489.49.
Probably, should the war continue for another year, that
amount may be increased by not far from  500,000,000.
Held, as it is, for the most part by our own people, it has
become a substantial branch of national, though private,
property. For obvious reasons the more nearly this property
can be distributed among all the people the better. To favor
such general distribution, greater inducements to become
owners might, perhaps, with good eﬀect and without injury
be presented to persons of limited means. With this view I
 suggest whether it might not be both competent and
expedient for Congress to provide that a limited amount of
some future issue of public securities might be held by any
bona ﬁde purchaser exempt from taxation and from seizure
for debt, under such restrictions and limitations as might
be necessary to guard against abuse of so important a
privilege. This would enable every prudent person to set
aside a small annuity against a possible day of want.
Privileges like these would render the possession of such
securities to the amount limited most desirable to every
person of small means who might be able to save enough
for the purpose. The great advantage of citizens being
creditors as well as debtors with relation to the public debt
is obvious. Men readily perceive that they can not be much
oppressed by a debt which they owe to themselves.
The public debt on the ﬁrst day of July last, although
somewhat exceeding the estimate of the Secretary of the
Treasury made to Congress at the commencement of the
last session, falls short of the estimate of that oﬀicer made
in the preceding December as to its probable amount at the
beginning of this year by the sum of  3,995,097.31. This
fact exhibits a satisfactory condition and conduct of the
operations of the Treasury.
The national banking system is proving to be acceptable
to capitalists and to the people. On the twenty-ﬁfth day of
November ﬁve hundred and eighty-four national banks had
been organized, a considerable number of which were
conversions from State banks. Changes from State systems
to the national system are rapidly taking place, and it is
 hoped that very soon there will be in the United States no
banks of issue not authorized by Congress and no bank-
note circulation not secured by the Government. That the
Government and the people will derive great beneﬁt from
this change in the banking systems of the country can
hardly be questioned. The national system will create a
reliable and permanent inﬂuence in support of the national
credit and protect the people against losses in the use of
paper money. Whether or not any further legislation is
advisable for the suppression of State-bank issues, it will be
for Congress to determine. It seems quite clear that the
Treasury can not be satisfactorily conducted unless the
Government can exercise a restraining power over the
bank-note circulation of the country.
The report of the Secretary of War and the accompanying
documents will detail the campaigns of the armies in the
ﬁeld since the date of the last annual message, and also the
operations of the several administrative bureaus of the War
Department during the last year. It will also specify the
measures deemed essential for the national defense and to
keep up and supply the requisite military force.
The report of the Secretary of the Navy presents a
comprehensive and satisfactory exhibit of the aﬀairs of that
Department and of the naval service. It is a subject of
congratulation and laudable pride to our countrymen that a
Navy of such vast proportions has been organized in so
brief a period and conducted with so much eﬀiciency and
success.
 The general exhibit of the Navy, including vessels under
construction on the ﬁrst of December, 1864, shows a total
of 671 vessels, carrying 4610 guns, and of 510,396 tons,
being an actual increase during the year, over and above all
losses by shipwreck or in battle, of 83 vessels, 167 guns,
and 42,427 tons.
The total number of men at this time in the naval service,
including oﬀicers, is about 51,000.
There have been captured by the Navy during the year
324 vessels, and the whole number of naval captures since
hostilities commenced is 1379, of which 267 are steamers.
The gross proceeds arising from the sale of condemned
prize property thus far reported amount to  14,369,250.51.
A large amount of such proceeds is still under adjudication
and yet to be reported.
The total expenditure of the Navy Department of every
description, including the cost of the immense squadrons
that have been called into existence from the fourth of
March, 
1861, 
to 
the 
ﬁrst 
of 
November, 
1864, 
is
 238,647,262.35.
Your favorable consideration is invited to the various
recommendations of the Secretary of the Navy, especially in
regard to a navy-yard and suitable establishment for the
construction and repair of iron vessels and the machinery
and armature for our ships, to which reference was made in
my last annual message.
Your attention is also invited to the views expressed in
the report in relation to the legislation of Congress at its
last session in respect to prize on our inland waters.
 I cordially concur in the recommendation of the
Secretary as to the propriety of creating the new rank of
vice-admiral in our naval service.
Your attention is invited to the report of the Postmaster-
General for a detailed account of the operations and
ﬁnancial condition of the Post-Oﬀice Department.
The postal revenues for the year ending June 30, 1864,
amounted to  12,438,253.78, and the expenditures to
 12,644,786.20, the excess of expenditures over receipts
being  206,532.42.
The views presented by the Postmaster-General on the
subject of special grants by the Government in aid of the
establishment of new lines of ocean mail steamships and
the policy he recommends for the development of increased
commercial intercourse with adjacent and neighboring
countries should receive the careful consideration of
Congress.
It is of noteworthy interest that the steady expansion of
population, improvement, and governmental institutions
over the new and unoccupied portions of our country have
scarcely been checked, much less impeded or destroyed, by
our great civil war, which at ﬁrst glance would seem to
have absorbed almost the entire energies of the nation.
The organization and admission of the State of Nevada
has been completed in conformity with law, and thus our
excellent system is ﬁrmly established in the mountains,
which once seemed a barren and uninhabitable waste
between the Atlantic States and those which have grown up
on the coast of the Paciﬁc Ocean.
 The Territories of the Union are generally in a condition
of prosperity and rapid growth. Idaho and Montana, by
reason of their great distance and the interruption of
communication with them by Indian hostilities, have been
only partially organized; but it is understood that these
diﬀiculties are about to disappear, which will permit their
governments, like those of the others, to go into speedy and
full operation.
As intimately connected with and promotive of this
material growth of the nation, I ask the attention of
Congress to the valuable information and important
recommendations relating to the public lands, Indian
aﬀairs, the Paciﬁc Railroad, and mineral discoveries
contained in the report of the Secretary of the Interior
which is herewith transmitted, and which report also
embraces the subjects of patents, pensions, and other
topics of public interest pertaining to his Department.
The quantity of public land disposed of during the ﬁve
quarters ending on the thirtieth of September last was
4,221,342 acres, of which 1,538,614 acres were entered
under the homestead law. The remainder was located with
military land warrants, agricultural scrip certiﬁed to States
for railroads, and sold for cash. The cash received from
sales and location fees was  1,019,446.
The income from sales during the ﬁscal year ending June
30, 1864, was  678,007.21, against  136,077.95 received
during the preceding year. The aggregate number of acres
surveyed during the year has been equal to the quantity
 disposed of, and there is open to settlement about
133,000,000 acres of surveyed land.
The great enterprise of connecting the Atlantic with the
Paciﬁc States by railways and telegraph lines has been
entered upon with a vigor that gives assurance of success,
notwithstanding the embarrassments arising from the
prevailing high prices of materials and labor. The route of
the main line of the road has been deﬁnitely located for one
hundred miles westward from the initial point at Omaha
City, Nebraska, and a preliminary location of the Paciﬁc
Railroad of California has been made from Sacramento
eastward to the great bend of the Truckee River in Nevada.
Numerous discoveries of gold, silver, and cinnabar mines
have been added to the many heretofore known, and the
country occupied by the Sierra Nevada and Rocky
mountains and the subordinate ranges now teems with
enterprising labor, which is richly remunerative. It is
believed that the produce of the mines of precious metals
in that region has during the year reached, if not exceeded,
 100,000,000 in value.
It was recommended in my last annual message that our
Indian system be remodeled. Congress at its last session,
acting 
upon 
the 
recommendation, 
did 
provide 
for
reorganizing the system in California, and it is believed that
under the present organization the management of the
Indians there will be attended with reasonable success.
Much yet remains to be done to provide for the proper
government of the Indians in other parts of the country, to
render it secure for the advancing settler, and to provide
 for the welfare of the Indian. The Secretary reiterates his
recommendations, and to them the attention of Congress is
invited.
The liberal provisions made by Congress for paying
pensions to invalid soldiers and sailors of the Republic and
to the widows, orphans, and dependent mothers of those
who have fallen in battle or died of disease contracted or of
wounds received in the service of their country have been
diligently administered. There have been added to the
pension rolls during the year ending the 30th day of June
last the names of 16,770 invalid soldiers and of 271
disabled seamen, making the present number of army
invalid pensioners 22,767 and of navy invalid pensioners
712.
Of widows, orphans, and mothers 22,198 have been
placed on the army pension rolls and 248 on the navy rolls.
The present number of army pensioners of this class is
25,433 and of navy pensioners 793. At the beginning of the
year the number of Revolutionary pensioners was 1430.
Only twelve of them were soldiers, of whom seven have
since died. The remainder are those who under the law
receive pensions because of relationship to Revolutionary
soldiers. During the year ending the thirtieth of June, 1864,
 4,504,616.92 have been paid to pensioners of all classes.
I cheerfully commend to your continued patronage the
benevolent institutions of the District of Columbia which
have hitherto been established or fostered by Congress,
and respectfully refer for information concerning them and
in relation to the Washington Aqueduct, the Capitol, and
 other matters of local interest to the report of the
Secretary.
The Agricultural Department, under the supervision of its
present energetic and faithful head, is rapidly commending
itself to the great and vital interest it was created to
advance. It is peculiarly the people’s department, in which
they feel more directly concerned than in any other. I
commend it to the continued attention and fostering care of
Congress.
The war continues. Since the last annual message all the
important lines and positions then occupied by our forces
have been maintained and our arms have steadily
advanced, thus liberating the regions left in rear, so that
Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, and parts of other States
have again produced reasonably fair crops.
The most remarkable feature in the military operations of
the year is General Sherman’s attempted march of three
hundred miles directly through the insurgent region. It
tends to show a great increase of our relative strength that
our General-in-Chief should feel able to confront and hold
in check every active force of the enemy, and yet to detach
a well-appointed large army to move on such an expedition.
The result not yet being known, conjecture in regard to it is
not here indulged.
Important movements have also occurred during the year
to the eﬀect of molding society for durability in the Union.
Although short of complete success, it is much in the right
direction that twelve thousand citizens in each of the States
of Arkansas and Louisiana have organized loyal State
 governments, with free constitutions, and are earnestly
struggling 
to 
maintain 
and 
administer 
them. 
The
movements in the same direction more extensive though
less deﬁnite in Missouri, Kentucky, and Tennessee, should
not be overlooked. But Maryland presents the example of
complete success. Maryland is secure to liberty and union
for all the future. The genius of rebellion will no more claim
Maryland. Like another foul spirit being driven out, it may
seek to tear her, but it will woo her no more.
At the last session of Congress a proposed amendment of
the Constitution abolishing slavery throughout the United
States passed the Senate, but failed for lack of the requisite
two-thirds vote in the House of Representatives. Although
the present is the same Congress and nearly the same
members, 
and 
without 
questioning 
the 
wisdom 
or
patriotism of those who stood in opposition, I venture to
recommend the reconsideration and passage of the
measure at the present session. Of course the abstract
question is not changed; but an intervening election shows
almost certainly that the next Congress will pass the
measure if this does not. Hence there is only a question of
time as to when the proposed amendment will go to the
States for their action. And as it is to so go at all events,
may we not agree that the sooner the better? It is not
claimed that the election has imposed a duty on members
to change their views or their votes any further than, as an
additional element to be considered, their judgment may be
aﬀected by it. It is the voice of the people now for the ﬁrst
time heard upon the question. In a great national crisis like
 ours, unanimity of action among those seeking a common
end is very desirable, almost indispensable. And yet no
approach to such unanimity is attainable unless some
deference shall be paid to the will of the majority simply
because it is the will of the majority. In this case the
common end is the maintenance of the Union, and among
the means to secure that end such will, through the
election, is most clearly declared in favor of such
Constitutional amendment.
The most reliable indication of public purpose in this
country is derived through our popular elections. Judging
by the recent canvass and its result, the purpose of the
people within the loyal States to maintain the integrity of
the Union was never more ﬁrm nor more nearly unanimous
than now. The extraordinary calmness and good order with
which the millions of voters met and mingled at the polls
give strong assurance of this. Not only all those who
supported the Union ticket, so called, but a great majority
of the opposing party also may be fairly claimed to
entertain and to be actuated by the same purpose. It is an
unanswerable argument to this eﬀect that no candidate for
any oﬀice whatever, high or low, has ventured to seek votes
on the avowal that he was for giving up the Union. There
have been much impugning of motives and much heated
controversy as to the proper means and best mode of
advancing the Union cause, but on the distinct issue of
Union or no Union the politicians have shown their
instinctive knowledge that there is no diversity among the
people. In aﬀording the people the fair opportunity of
 showing one to another and to the world this ﬁrmness and
unanimity of purpose, the election has been of vast value to
the national cause.
The election has exhibited another fact not less valuable
to be known — the fact that we do not approach exhaustion
in the most important branch of national resources, that of
living men. While it is melancholy to reﬂect that the war
has ﬁlled so many graves and carried mourning to so many
hearts, it is some relief to know that, compared with the
surviving, the fallen have been so few. While corps and
divisions and brigades and regiments have formed and
fought and dwindled and gone out of existence, a great
majority of the men who composed them are still living. The
same is true of the naval service. The election returns
prove this. So many voters could not else be found. The
States regularly holding elections, both now and four years
ago, to wit, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wisconsin, cast
3,982,011 votes now, against 3,870,222 cast then, showing
an aggregate now of 3,982,011. To this is to be added
33,762 cast now in the new States of Kansas and Nevada,
which States did not vote in 1860, thus swelling the
aggregate to 4,015,773 and the net increase during the
three years and a half of war to 145,551. A table is
appended showing particulars. To this again should be
added the number of all soldiers in the ﬁeld from
 Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware,
Indiana, Illinois, and California, who by the laws of those
States could not vote away from their homes, and which
number can not be less than 90,000. Nor yet is this all. The
number in organized Territories is triple now what it was
four years ago — while thousands, white and black, join us
as the national arms press back the insurgent lines. So
much is shown, aﬀirmatively and negatively, by the
election. It is not material to inquire how the increase has
been produced or to show that it would have been greater
but for the war, which is probably true. The important fact
remains demonstrated that we have more men now than we
had when the war began; that we are not exhausted nor in
process of exhaustion; that we are gaining strength and
may if need be maintain the contest indeﬁnitely. [This
sentence recognizes the concern of a guerilla war after the
main war ﬁnished.]This as to men. Material resources are
now more complete and abundant than ever.
The national resources, then, are unexhausted, and, as
we believe, inexhaustible. The public purpose to re-
establish and maintain the national authority is unchanged,
and, as we believe, unchangeable. The manner of
continuing the eﬀort remains to choose. On careful
consideration of all the evidence accessible it seems to me
that no attempt at negotiation with the insurgent leader
could result in any good. He would accept nothing short of
severance of the Union, precisely what we will not and can
not give. His declarations to this eﬀect are explicit and oft
repeated. He does not attempt to deceive us. He aﬀords us
 no excuse to deceive ourselves. He can not voluntarily
reaccept the Union; we can not voluntarily yield it. Between
him and us the issue is distinct, simple, and inﬂexible. It is
an issue which can only be tried by war and decided by
victory. If we yield, we are beaten; if the Southern people
fail him, he is beaten. Either way it would be the victory
and defeat following war. What is true, however, of him who
heads the insurgent cause is not necessarily true of those
who follow. Although he can not reaccept the Union, they
can. Some of them, we know, already desire peace and
reunion. The number of such may increase. They can at any
moment have peace simply by laying down their arms and
submitting to the national authority under the Constitution.
After so much the Government could not, if it would,
maintain war against them. The loyal people would not
sustain or allow it. If questions should remain, we would
adjust 
them 
by 
the 
peaceful 
means 
of 
legislation,
conference, 
courts, 
and 
votes, 
operating 
only 
in
Constitutional and lawful channels. Some certain, and other
possible, questions are and would be beyond the Executive
power to adjust; as, for instance, the admission of members
into 
Congress 
and 
whatever 
might 
require 
the
appropriation of money. The Executive power itself would
be greatly diminished by the cessation of actual war.
Pardons and remissions of forfeitures, however, would still
be within Executive control. In what spirit and temper this
control would be exercised can be fairly judged of by the
past.
 A year ago general pardon and amnesty, upon speciﬁed
terms, were oﬀered to all except certain designated
classes, and it was at the same time made known that the
excepted classes were still within contemplation of special
clemency. During the year many availed themselves of the
general provision, and many more would, only that the
signs of bad faith in some led to such precautionary
measures as rendered the practical process less easy and
certain. During the same time also special pardons have
been granted to individuals of the excepted classes, and no
voluntary application has been denied. Thus practically the
door has been for a full year open to all except such as
were not in condition to make free choice; that is, such as
were in custody or under constraint. It is still so open to all.
But the time may come, probably will come, when public
duty shall demand that it be closed and that in lieu more
rigorous measures than heretofore shall be adopted.
In presenting the abandonment of armed resistance to
the national authority on the part of the insurgents as the
only indispensable condition to ending the war on the part
of the Government, I retract nothing heretofore said as to
slavery. I repeat the declaration made a year ago, that
“while I remain in my present position I shall not attempt to
retract or modify the emancipation proclamation, nor shall
I return to slavery any person who is free by the terms of
that proclamation or by any of the acts of Congress.” If the
people should, by whatever mode or means, make it an
Executive duty to re-enslave such persons, another, and not
I, must be their instrument to perform it.
 In stating a single condition of peace I mean simply to
say that the war will cease on the part of the Government
whenever it shall have ceased on the part of those who
began it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     
A
   
   
           .
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I believe I shall
never be old enough to speak without embarrassment when
I have nothing to talk about. I have no good news to tell
you, and yet I have no bad news to tell. We have talked of
elections until there is nothing more to say about them. The
most interesting news now we have is from Sherman. We
all know where he went in at, but I can’t tell where he will
come out at. I will now close by proposing three cheers for
General Sherman and his army.
     
 A
  
 
   
  HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 7, 1864.
GOVERNOR HALL, JEFFERSON City, Mo.: Complaint is
made to me of the doings of a man at Hannibal, Mo., by the
name of Haywood, who, as I am told, has charge of some
militia force, and is not in the United States service. Please
inquire into the matter and correct anything you may ﬁnd
amiss if in your power.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
    A   I
H.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., December 8,
1864.
COLONEL FASLEIGH, LOUISVILLE, Ky.: I am appealed
to in behalf of a man by the name of Frank Fairbairns, said
to have been for a long time and still in prison, without any
deﬁnite ground stated. How is it?
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A  
I
 I
  
I  I
  
TO INVESTIGATE THE MILITARY DIVISION WEST OF THE
MISSISSIPPI.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, DECEMBER 10, 1864.
ORDERED, First, that Major-General William P. Smith
and the Hon. Henry Stanbery be, and they are hereby,
appointed special commissioners to investigate and report,
for the information of the President; upon the civil and
military administration in the military division bordering
upon and west of the Mississippi, under such instructions
as shall be issued by authority of the President and the War
Department.
Second, said commissioners shall have power to examine
witnesses upon oath, and to take such proofs orally or in
writing, upon the subject-matters of investigation as they
may deem expedient, and return the same together with
their report.
Third, all oﬀicers and persons in the military, naval and
revenue services, or in any branch of the public service
under the authority of the United States Government, are
required, upon subpoena issued by direction of the said
commissioners, to appear before them at such time and
place as may be designated in said subpoena and to give
testimony on oath touching such matters as may be
 inquired of by the commissioners, and to produce such
books, papers, writings, and documents as they may be
notiﬁed or required to produce by the commissioners, and
as may be in their possession.
Fourth, said special commissioners shall also investigate
and report upon any other matters that may hereafter be
directed by the Secretary of War, and shall with all
convenient dispatch make report to him in writing of their
investigation, and shall also from time to time make special
reports to the Secretary of War upon such matters as they
may deem of importance to the public interests.
Fifth, the Secretary of War shall assign to the said
commissioners such aid and assistance as may be required
for the performance of their duties, and make such just and
reasonable allowances and compensation for the said
commissioners and for the persons employed by them as he
may deem proper.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
  H.  H
A .
A HI
 
  
. .  
ecem er         .
MAJOR-GENERAL THOMAS, Nashville, Tennessee: 
PLEASE ACCEPT FOR yourself, oﬀicers, and men, the
nation’s thanks for your good work of yesterday. You made
a magniﬁcent beginning; a grand consummation is within
your easy reach. Do not let it slip.
A. LINCOLN,
  I
I
 
   H   
   
 A     
   
 
TO COLONEL B. D. TAYLOR
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December ,
1864.
DEAR COLONEL DICK: — I have long determined to
make public the origin of the greenback and tell the world
that it is Dick Taylor’s creation. You had always been
friendly to me, and when troublous times fell on us, and my
shoulders, though broad and willing, were weak, and
myself surrounded by such circumstances and such people
that I knew not whom to trust, then I said in my extremity:
“I will send for Colonel Taylor; he will know what to do.” I
think it was in January, 1862, on or about the 16th, that I
did so. You came, and I said to you:
“What can we do?” Said you, “Why, issue Treasury notes
bearing no interest, printed on the best banking paper.
Issue enough to pay oﬀ the Army expenses and declare it
legal tender.”
Chase thought it a hazardous thing, but we ﬁnally
accomplished it, and gave the people of this Republic the
greatest blessing they ever had — their own paper to pay
their own debts.
It is due to you, the father of the present greenback, that
the people should know it, and I take great pleasure in
 making it known. How many times have I laughed at you
telling me plainly that I was too lazy to be anything but a
lawyer.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I    I
  
A
 A
 HA  A
A.     
 I   
A
 I
WASHINGTON, DECEMBER 16, 1864
   I    I
  
A
 at  hattanoo a   enn.
IT IS SAID that Harry Walters, a private in the Anderson
cavalry, is now and for a long time has been in prison at
Chattanooga. Please report to me what is his condition, and
for what he is imprisoned.
A. LINCOLN.
  A    
           
 
       
   
      
    .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
A PROCLAMATION
Whereas, by the act approved July 4, 1864, entitled “An
act further to regulate and provide for the enrolling and
calling out the national forces, and for other purposes,” it is
provided that the President of the United States may, “at
his discretion, at any time hereafter, call for any number of
men, as volunteers for the respective terms of one, two,
and three years for military service,” and “that in case the
quota or any part thereof of any town, township, ward of a
city, precinct, or election district, or of any country not so
subdivided, shall not be ﬁlled within the space of ﬁfty days
after such call, then the President shall immediately order
a draft for one year to ﬁll such quota or any part thereof
which may be unﬁlled;” and
Whereas, by the credits allowed in accordance with the
act of Congress on the call for 500,000 men, made July 18,
1864, the number of men to be obtained under that call
was reduced to 280,000; and
Whereas, the operations of the enemy in certain States
have rendered it impracticable to procure from them their
full quotas of troops under said call; and
 Whereas, from the foregoing causes but 240,000 men
have been put into the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps under
the said call of July 18, 1864, leaving a deﬁciency on that
call of two hundred and sixty thousand (260,000):
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States of America, in order to supply the aforesaid
deﬁciency and to provide for casualties in the military and
naval service of the United States, do issue this my call for
three hundred thousand (300,000) volunteers to serve for
one, two, or three years. The quotas of the States, districts,
and subdistricts under this call will be assigned by the War
Department through the bureau of the Provost-Marshal
General of the United States, and “in case the quota or any
part thereof of any town, township, ward of a city, precinct,
or election district, or of any county not so subdivided, shall
not be ﬁlled” before the ﬁfteenth of February, 1865, then a
draft shall be made to ﬁll such quota or any part thereof
under this call which may be unﬁlled on said ﬁfteenth day
of February, 1865.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed..........
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  H  
A
   
A  H  
  H    A
TO GENERAL W. T. SHERMAN.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December
26, 1864
MY DEAR GENERAL SHERMAN: — Many, many thanks
for your Christmas gift, the capture of Savannah.
When you were about leaving Atlanta for the Atlantic
coast, I was anxious, if not fearful; but feeling that you
were the better judge, and remembering that “nothing
risked, nothing gained,” I did not interfere. Now, the
undertaking being a success, the honor is all yours; for I
believe none of us went further than to acquiesce.
And taking the work of General Thomas into the count,
as it should be taken, it is indeed a great success. Not only
does it aﬀord the obvious and immediate military
advantages; but in showing to the world that your army
could be divided, putting the stronger part to an important
new service, and yet leaving enough to vanquish the old
opposing force of the whole, — Hood’s army, — it brings
those who sat in darkness to see a great light. But what
next?
I suppose it will be safe if I leave General Grant and
yourself to decide.
 Please make my grateful acknowledgments to your whole
army of oﬀicers and men.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I    I
  
A
 A
   I
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 27,
1864.
OFFICER IN COMMAND at Lexington, Ky.:
If within your power send me the particulars of the
causes for which Lieutenant-Governor Jacob was arrested
and sent away.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
A   A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 27,
1864.
DR. JOHN MACLEAN:
MY DEAR SIR: — I have the honor to acknowledge the
reception of your note of the twentieth of December,
conveying the announcement that the Trustees of the
College of New Jersey had conferred upon me the degree of
Doctor of Laws.
The assurance conveyed by this high compliment, that
the course of the Government which I represent, has
received the approval of a body of gentlemen of such
character and intelligence, in this time of public trial, is
most grateful to me.
Thoughtful men must feel that the fate of civilization
upon this continent is involved in the issue of our contest.
Among the most gratifying proofs of this conviction is the
hearty devotion everywhere exhibited by our schools and
colleges to the national cause.
I am most thankful if my labors have seemed to conduct
to the preservation of those institutions, under which alone
we can expect good government and in its train sound
learning, and the progress of the liberal arts.
I am, sir, very truly, your obedient servant,
 A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I    I
  
A
 A
A H I   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 28,
1864.
OFFICER IN COMMAND at Nashville, Tenn.: Suspend
execution of James R. Mallory, for six weeks from Friday
the thirtieth of this month, which time I have given his
friends to make proof, if they can, upon certain points.
A. LINCOLN,
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, D. C., December 28, 1864. 5.30 p.m.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT, CITY Point, Va.:
If there be no objection, please tell me what you now
understand of the Wilmington expedition, present and
prospective.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 29,
1864.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER: There is a man in Company
I, Eleventh Connecticut Volunteers, First Brigade, Third
Division, Twenty-fourth Army Corps, at Chapin’s Farm, Va.;
under the assumed name of William Stanley, but whose real
name is Frank R. Judd, and who is under arrest, and
probably about to be tried for desertion. He is the son of
our present minister to Prussia, who is a close personal
friend of Senator Trumbull and myself. We are not willing
for the boy to be shot, but we think it as well that his trial
go regularly on, suspending execution until further order
from me and reporting to me.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
   
A 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, December 30,
1864.
COLONEL WARNER, INDIANAPOLIS, Ind.: It is said that
you were on the court-martial that tried John Lennon, and
that you are disposed to advise his being pardoned and
sent to his regiment. If this be true, telegraph me to that
eﬀect at once.
A. LINCOLN.
