INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 

The Lahore Congress remains firesh in my memory — a vivid 
patch. That is natural, for I played a leading r&le there, and, for 
a moment, occupied the centre of the stage; and I like to think 
sometimes of the emotions that filled me during those crowded 
days. I can never forget the magnificent welcome that the people 
of Lahore gave me, tremendous in its volume and its intensity. 
I knew well that this overflowing enthusiasm was for a symbol 
and an idea, not for me personally; yet it was no little thing for 
a person to become that symbol, even for a while, in the eyes 
and hearts of great numbers of people, and I felt exhila- 
rated and lifted out of myself. But my personal reactions 
were of little account, and there were big issues at stake. The 
whole atmosphere was electric and surcharged with the gravity 
of the occasion. Our decisions were not going to be mere criti- 
cisms or protests or expressions of opinion, but a call to action 
which was bound to convulse the country and affect the lives of 
millions. 

What the distant future held for us and our country, none 
dare prophesy; the immediate future was clear enough, and 
it held the promise of strife and suflfering for us and those who 
were dear to us. This thought sobered our enthusiasms and 
made us very conscious of our responsibility. Every vote that 
we gave became a message of farewell to ease and comfort and 
domestic happiness and the intercourse of fiiends, and an 
invitation to lonely days and nights and physical and mental 
distress. 

The main resolution on Independence, and the action to be 
taken in furtherance of our freedom struggle, was passed almost 
unanimously, barely a score of persons, out of many thousands, 
voting against it. The real voting took place on a side issue, 
which came in the form of an amendment. This amendment 
was defeated and the voting figures were announced and the 
main resolution declared carried, by a curious coincidence, at the 
stroke of midnight on December 3 ist, as the old year yielded 
place to the new. Thus even as the year of grace, fixed by the 
Calcutta Congress, expired; the new dedsion was i^en and pre- 
parations for the struggle laundied. The wheels had been set 
moving, but we were stiU in darkness as to how and when we 

SOI 



302 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were to begin. The All-India Congress Committee had been 
authorised to plan and carry out our campaign, but all knew 
that the retd decision lay with Gandhiji. 

The Lahore Congress was attended by large numbers of people 
from the Frontier Province near by. Individual delegates from 
this province had always come to the Congress sessions, and for 
some years past Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan had been attending 
and t^ing part in our deliberations. In Lahore for the first time 
''a large batch of earnest young men from the Frontier came into 
touch with all-India political currents. Their fresh minds were 
impressed, and they returned with a sense of unity with the rest 
of India in the struggle for freedom and full of enthusiasm for 
it. They were simple but effective men of action, less given to 
talk and quibbling than the people of any other province in 
India, and they started organising their people and spreading 
the new ideas. They met with success, and the men and women 
' of the Frontier, the latest to join m India's struggle, played an 
outstanding and remarkable part from 1930 onwards. 

Immediately after the Lahore Congress, and in obedience to 
its mandate, my father called upon the Congress members of 
the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils to resign 
from their seats. Nearly all of them came out in a body, a very 
few refusing to do so, although this involved a breach of their 
election promises. 

^ Still we were vague about the future. In spite of the enthu- 
siasm shown at the Congress session, no one knew- what the 
response of the country would be to a programme of action. 
We had burned our boats and could not go back, but the country 
ahead of us was an almost strange and uncharted land. To give 
a start to our campaign, and partly also to judge the temper 
of the country, January 26th was fixed as Independence Day, 
when a pledge of independence was to be taken all over the 
country. 

And so, full of doubt about our programme, but pushed on 
by enthusiasm and the desire to do something effective, we 
waited for the march of events. I was in Allahabad during the 
early part of January; my father was mostly away. It was the 
dime of the great annual fair, the Magh Mela; probably it was 
the special Kumbh year, and hundreds of thousands of men 
and women were continually streaming into Allahabad, or holy 
Prayag, as it was to the pilgrims. They were all kinds of people, 
chiefly peasants, also labourers, shopkeepers, artisans, merchants, 
business men, professional people— indeed, it was a cross-section 
of Hindu India. As I lyatehed these great crowds and the un- 




LAHORE CONGRESS 1 929 
Nehru (standing on right) as President Elert 





INDtPENDENCt AND AFTER ^03 

ending streams of people going to and from the river, I won- 
dered how they would react to the call for civil resistance and 
peaceful direct action. How many of them knew or cared for 
the Lahore decisions? How amazingly powerful was that faith 
which had for thousand.s of years brought them and their for- 
bears from ever;^ corner of India to bathe in the holy Gan^a I 
Could they not divert some of this tremendous energy to political 
and economic action to better their own lot? Or were their 
minds too full of the trappings and traditions of their religion 
to leave room for other thought? I knew, of course, that these 
other thoughts were already there, stirring the placid stillness of 
ages. It was the movement of these vague ideas and desires 
among the masses that had caused the upheavals of the past 
dozen years and had changed the face of India. There was no 
doubt about their existence and of the dynamic energy behind 
them. But still doubt came and questions arose to which there 
was no immediate answer. How far had these ideas spread? 
What strength lay behind them, what capacity for organised 
action, for long endurance? 

Our house attracted crowds of pilgrims. It lay conveniently 
situated near one of the places of pilgrimage, Bharadwaj, where 
in olden times there was a primitive university, and on me days 
of the mela an endless stream of visitors would come to us from 
dawn to dusk. Curiosity, I suppose, brought most of them, and 
the desire to see well-known persona they had heard of, especi- 
ally my father. But a large proportion of those who came were 
politically inclined, and asked questions about the Congress and 
what it had decided and what was going to happen; and they 
were full of their own economic troubles and wanted to know 
what they should do about them. Our political slogans they 
knew well, and aU day the house resounded with them. I started 
the day by saying a few words to each group of twenty or fifty 
or a hundred as it came, one after the other, but soon this proved 
an impossible undertaking, and I silently saluted them whrai 
they came. There was a limit to this, too, and then I tried to 
lijd e myself. It was all in vain. The slogans became louder and 
louder, the verandas of the house were full of these visitors of 
ours, each door and vrindow had a collection of prying eyes. It 
was impossible to work or talk or feed or, indeed, do anything. 
This was not only embarrassing, it was annoying and irritating. 
Yet there they were, these people looking up vwth shining eyes 
full of affection, with generations of poverty and suffering 
behind them, and still pouring out their gratitude and love and 
asking for little in return, except fellow-feeling and sympathy. 



204 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was impossible not to feel humbled and awed by this abun- 
dance of affection and devotion. 

A dear friend of ours was staying with us at the time, and 
often it became impossible to carry on any conversation with 
her, for every five minutes or less T had to go out to say a word 
or two to a crowd that had assembled, and in between we listened 
to the slogans and shouting oucside. She was amused at my 
plight and a little impressed, I think, by what she considered my 
great popularity with the masses. (As a matter of fact the prin- 
cipal attraction was my father, but, as he was away, I had to 
face the music.) She turned to me suddenly and asked me how 
I liked this hero-worship. Did I not feel proud of it? I hesitated 
a little before answering, and this led her to think that she had, 
perhaps, embarrassed me by too personal a question. She apolo- 
gised. She had not embarrassed me in the least, but I found the 
question difficult to answer. My mind wandered away, and I 
began to analyse my own feelings and reactions. They were very 
mixed. 

It was true that I had achieved, almost accidentally as it 
were, an unusual degree of popularity with the masses; I was 
appreciated by the intelligentsia; and to young men and women 
I was a bit of a hero, and a halo of romance seemed to surround 
me in their eyes. Songs had been written about me, and the 
most impossible and ridiculous legends had grown up. Even my 
opponents had often put in a good word for me and patronis- 
ingly admitted that I was not lacldng in competence or in good 
faith. 

Onljr a saint, perhaps, or an inhuman monster could survive 
all this, tmscathed and unaffected, and I can place myself in 
neither of these categories. It went to my head, intoxicated me a 
little, and gave me confidence and strength. I became ^I imagine 
80, for it is a difficult task to look at oneself from outside) just a 
little bit autocratic in my ways, just a shade dictatorial. And 
yet I do not think that mj conceit increased markedly. I had a 
fair measure of my abilities, I thought, and I was by no means 
humble about them. But 1 knew well enough that there was 
nothing at all remarkable about them, and I was very conscious 
of my Failings. A habit of introspection probably helped me to 
retain my balance and view many happenings connected with 
myself in a detached manner. Experience of public life showed 
me that popularity was often the handmaiden of undesirable 
persons; it was certainly not an invariable sign of virtue or 
intelligence. Was I popular then because of my failings or my 
accomplishments? Why indeed was I popular? 



INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 205 

Not because of intellectual attainments, for they were not 
extraordinary, and, in any event, they do not make for popu- 
larity. Not because of so-called sacrifices, for it is patent that 
hundreds and thousands in our own day in India have suffered 
infinitely more, even to the point of the last sacrifice. My repu- 
tation as a hero is entirely a bogus one, and I do not feel at all 
heroic, and generally the heroic attitude or the dramatic pose in 
life strikes me as silly. As for romance, 1 should say that I am 
the least romantic of individuals. It is true that I have some 
physical and mental courage, but the background of that is 
probably pride ; personal, group, and national, and a reluctance * 
to be coerced into anything. 

I had no satisfactory answer to my question. Then I proceeded 
along a diflerent line of inquiry. I found that one of the most 
persistent legends about my father and myself was to the effect 
that we used to send our linen weekly from India to a Paris 
laundry. We have repeatedly contradicted this, but the legend 
persists. Anything more fantastic and absurd it is difficult for 
me to imagine, and if anyone is foolish enough to indulge in 
this wasteml snobbery, I should have thought he would get a 
special mention for being a prize fool. 

Another equally persistent legend, often repeated in spite of 
denial, is that I was at school with the Prince of Wales. The 
story goes on to say that when the Prince came to India in iqai 
he asked for me; I was then in gaol. As a matter of fact, 1 was 
not only not at school with him, but I have never had the advan- 
tage of meeting him or speaking to him. 

I do not mean to imply that my reputation or popularity, such 
as they are, depend on these or similar legends. They may have 
a more secure foundation, but there is no doubt that the super- 
structure has a thick covering of snobbery, as is evidenced by 
these stories. At any rate, there is the idea of mixing in high 
society and living a life of luxury and then renouncing it all, 
and renunciation has always appemed to the Indian mind. As a 
basis for a reputation this does not at all appeal to me. I prefer 
the active virtues to the passive ones, and renunciation and sacri- 
fice for their own sakes have litde appeal for me. I do value 
them &om another point of view— that of mental and spiritual 
training— just as a simple and regular life is necessary for the 
athlete to keep in good physical condition. And die capacity for 
endurance and perseverance in spite of hard knocks is essential 
for those who wish to dabble in great undertakings. But I have 
no liking or attraction for the ascetic view of life, the negation 
of life, the terrified abstention firom its joys a.nd sensadons. I 



2o6 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


have not consciously renounced anything that I really valued; 
but then values change. 

The question that my friend had asked me still remained un- 
answered; did I not feel proud of this hero-worship of the 
crowd? I disliked it and wanted to run atvay from it, and yet I 
had got used to it, and when it was wholly absent, I rather missed 
it. Neither way brought .satisfaction, but, on the whole, the 
crowd had filled some inner need of mine. The notion that I 
could influence them and move them to action gave me a sense 
of authority over their minds and hearts; and this satisfied, to 
some extent, my tvill to power. On their part, they exercised a 
subtle tyranny over me, for their confidence and affection moved 
inner depths within me and evoked emotional responses. 
Individualist as I was, sometimes the barriers of individuality 
seemed to melt away, and I felt that it would be better to be 
accursed with these unhappy people than to be saved alone. But 
the barriers were too solid to disappear, and I peeped over them 
virith wondering eyes at this phenomenon which I railed to under- 
stand. 


Conceit, like fat on the human body, grows imperceptibly, 
Iwer upon layer, and the person whom it affects is unconscious 
of the daily accretion. Fortunately the hard knocks of a mad 
world tone it down or even squash it completely, and there has 
been no lack of these hard knocks for us in India during recent 
years. The school of life has been a difficult one for us, and 
suffering is a hard taskmaster. 

I have been fortunate in another respect also — the possession 
of family members and friends and comrades, who have helped 
me to retain a proper perspective and not to lose my mental 
equilibrium. Public funaions, addresses by municipalities and 
local boards and other public bodies!, processions and the like, 
used to be a great strain on my nerves and my sense of humour 
wd reality. The most extravagant and pompous language would 
w used, Md everybody would look so solemn and pious that I 
felt an almost uncontrollable desire to laugh, or to stick out 
my tongue, or stand on my head, just for the pleasure of shock- 
ing and w«ching the reacrions on the faces at that august 
assetnblyl Fortunately for my reputation and for the sober res- 
pcrabihty of public life in India, I have suppressed this mad 
and usually behaved with due propriety. But not always 
oom^es there has been an exhibition on my part in a crowded 

in processions, which I find extra- 
ordt^y trymg. I have sudd^y left a procession, arranged in 
our honour, and disappeared in the crowd, leaving my wife or 



INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 207 

some Other person to carry on, perched up in a car or carriage, 
with that procession. 

This continuous effort to suppress one’s feelings and behave 
in public is a bit of a strain, and the usual result is that one puts 
on a glum and solid look on public occasions. Perhaps because 
of this I was once described in an article in a Hindu magazine 
as resembling a Hindu widow! I must say that, much as I 
admire Hindu widows of the old type, this gave me a shock. 
The author evidently meant to praise me for some qualities he 
thought I possessed — a spirit of gentle resignation and renuncia- 
tion and a smileless devotion to work. I had hoped that I pos- 
sessed — and, indeed, I wish that Hindu tvidows would possess — 
more active and aggressive qualities and the capacity for humour 
and laughter. Gandhiji once told an interviewer that if he had 
not had the gift of humour he might have committed suicide, 
or something to this effect. I would not presume to go so far, 
but life certainly w'ould have been almost intolerable for me but 
for the humour and light touches that .some people gave to it, 

My vety popularity and the brave addresses that came my way, 
foil (as is, indeed, the custom of all such addresses in India) of 
choice and flowery language and extravagant conceits, became 
subjects for raillery in the circle of my family and intimate 
friends. The high-sounding and pompous words and titles that 
were often used for all those prominent in the national move- 
ment, were picked out by my wife and sisters and others and 
bandied about irreverently. I was addressed as Bharat Bhushan — 
‘Jewel of India’ Tyagamurti — ^‘O Embodiment of Sacrifice’; 
and this light-hearted treatment soothed me, and the tension 
of those solemn public gatherings, where I had to remain on my 
best behaviour, gradually relaxed. Even my little daughter 
joined in the game. Only my mother insisted on taking me 
seriously, and she never wholly approved of any sarcasm or 
raillery at the expense of her darling boy. Father was amused; 
he had a way of quietly expressing his deep understanding and 
sympathy. 

But aU these shouting crowds, and dull and wearying public 
functions, and interminable arguments, and the dust and tumble 
of politics touched me on the surface only, though sometimes 
the touch was sharp and pointed. My real conflict lay within 
me, a conflict of ideas, desires and loyalties, of subconscious 
depths struggling with outer circumstances, of an inner hunger 
unsatisfied. I became a battleground, where various forces 
struggled for mastery. I sought an escape from this; I tried to 
find harmony and equilibrium, and in this, attempt I rushed 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


ao8 

into action. That gave me some peace; outer conflict relieved 
the strain of the inner struggle. 

Why am I writing all this sitting here in prison? The quest 
i.? stiirthe .same, in prison or outside, and I write down my past 
feelings and experiences in the hope that this may bring me 
some peace and psychic satisfaction. 