THE END OF A LONG TERM 

The time for my discharge was drawing near. I had received 
the usual remissions for ‘ good behaviour and this had reduced 
my two-year term by t&ee and half months. My peace of 
mmd, or rather the general dullness of the mind which prison 
produces, was being disturbed by the excitement created by the 
prospect of release. What must I do outside? A difficult 
question, and the hesitation I had in answering it took away 
&om the joy of going out. But even that was a momentary 
feeling, and my long-suppressed energy was bubbling up and 
I was eager to be out. 

The end of July 1933 brought a painffil and very disturbing 
piece of news — the sudden death of J. M. Sen-Gupta. We had 
not only been close colleagues on the Congress Working Com- 
mittee tor many years, but he was also a link with my early 
Cambridge days. We met in Cambridge first— I was a freshman, 
and he had just taken his degree. 

Sen-Gupta died under detention. He had been made a State 
prisoner on his return firom Europe early in 1932, while he was 
yet on board ship in Bombay. Since then he had been a 
prisoner or a ‘detenu, and his health had deteriorated. Various 
mcilities were given to him by the Government, but evidently 
they could not check the cotu^e of the disease. His funeral in 
Calcutta was the occasion for a remarkable mass demonstration 
and tribute; it seemed that the long pentrup sufifering soul of 
Bengal had ffiimd an oudet ffir a while at least. 

So SenGupta had gone. Subhas Bose, another State prisoner 
whose healm had broken down by years of interment and 
prison, had at last been permitted by me Govermnent to go ,to 
Europe fiir treatment. The veteran Vuhabhhhai Patel also lay ill 
in Europe. And how many others had broken down in health 
or died, unable to stand the physical strain of gaol life and 
ceaseless activity outside I How many, though outwardly not 
much changed, had suffered deeper mental derangements and 
developed complexes on account of the ahnormd lives they 
had been made to lead I . . 

SenGupta’s diath made me vividly aware of all this terrible, 
silent sumring going on throughout the country, and I fflt 
.weary and depressed. To what end was all this? To what end? 

mw 



396 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I had been fortunate about my own health, and in spite of 
the strains and irregular life of Congress activity I had, on the 
whole, kept well. Partly, I suppose, this was due to a good 
constitution I had inherited, partly to my care of the body. 
Illness and weak health as well as too much fat seemed to me 
a most unbecoming state of alfairs, and with the help of 
exercise, plenty of fresh air, and simple food, I managed to keep 
away from them. My own experience has been mat a vast 
proportion of the ailments of the Indian middle classes are 
caused by wrong feeding; the food is both rich and excessive. 
(This applies only to those who can afford such wasteful habits.) 
The fond mother lays the firm foundation of life-long indiges- 
tion by over-feeding the child with sweets and other so-called 
dainties. The child is also muffled up in too many clothes. 
The English people in India also seem to eat far too much, 
although their food is less rich. Probably they have improved 
a little from the older generation which used to consume 
enormous quantities of food, hot and strong. 

I have cared little for food fads, and have only avoided over- 
eating and rich foods. Like nearly all Kashmiri Brahmans our 
family was a meat-eating one, and from clJldhood onwards I 
had always taken meat, ^thou^h I never fancied it much. With 
die coming of Non-Co-operauon in 1920 I gave up meat and 
became a vegetarian. I remained a vegetarian till a visit to 
Europe six years later, when I relapsed to meat-eating. On my 
return to India I became a vegetarian again, and since then 1 
have been more or less a vegetarian. Meat-eating seems to 
agree with me well, but I have developed a distaste for it, and 
it gives me a feeling of coarseness. 

My periods of ill-health, chiefly in prison in 193a, when for 
many months I got a rise of temperature every, day> annoyed 
me, because they hurt my conceit of good health. And for the 
first time I did not think, as I used to do, in terms of abounding 
life and energy, but a spectre of a gradual decay and a wearing 
away rose up before me and alarmed me. I do not think I am 
particularly frightened of death. But a slow deterioration, 
bodily and mental, was quite another matter. However, my 
fears proved exaggerated, and I managed to get rid of the indis- 
position and bimg my body imder control. Long sun-baths 
during the winter helped me to get back my feeling of well- 
being. While my companions in prison would shiver in their 
coats and shawls, I would sit, bare^odied, delightfully warmed 
up by the sun’s embrace. This was only possible in North India 
during the winter, as elsewhere the sun is usually too hot. 



THE END OF A LONG TERM 


397 

Among my exercises one pleased me particularly — the 
shirshasana, standing on the head with the palms of the hands, 
fingers interlocked, supporting the back of the head, elbows on 
the floor, body vertical, upside down. I suppose physically this 
exercise is very good : I liked it even more for its psychological 
ei&ct on me. The slightly comic position increased my good 
humour and made me a little more tolerant of life's vagaries. 

My usual good health and the bodily sense of well-being 
have been of very great help to me in. getting over periods of 
depression, which are inevitable in prison life. They have 
helped me also in accommodating myself to changing con- 
ditions in prison or outside. I have had many shocks, which 
at the time seemed to bowl me over, but to my own surprise I 
have recovered sooner than I expected. I suppose a test of my 
fundamental sobriety and sanity is the fact that I hardly know 
what a bad headache is, nor have I ever been troubled with 
insomnia. I have escaped these common diseases of civilisation, 
as also bad eyesight, in spite of excessive use of the eyes for 
reading and writing, sometimes in a bad light in gaol. An 
eye specialist expressed his amazement last year at my good 
eyesight. Eight years before he had prophesied that I would 
have to take to spectacles in another year or two. He was very 
much mistaken, and I am still carrying on successfully without 
them. Although these facts might establish my reputation for 
sobriety and sanity, I might add that I have a horror of people 
who are inescapably and unchangingly sane and sober. 

While I waited for my discharge from prison, the new form 
of civil disobedience for individuals was beginning outside. 
Gandhiji decided to give the lead and, after giving foil notice 
to the authorities, he started on August ist with the intention 
of preaching civil resistance to the Gujrat peasantry. He was 
immediately arrested, sentenced to one year, and sent back 
again to his cell in Yeravda. I was glad he had gone back. 
But soon a new complication arose. Gandhiji claimed the same 
facilities for carrying on Haiijan work firom prison as he had 
had before; the Government refused to grant them. Suddenly 
we heard that Gandhiji had started fasting again on this issue. 
It seemed an extraordinarily trivial matter for such a tremen- 
dous step. It was quite impossible for me to understand his 
decision, even though he might be completely right in his 
argument with the Government. We could do nothing, and we 
looked on, bewildered. 

After a week of the fast his condition grew rapidly worse. He 
had been removed to a hospital, but he was still a prisoner 



398 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and Government would not give in on the question of facilities 
for Harijan work. He lost the will to live (which he had during 
his previous fasts) and allowed himself to go down hill. The 
end seemed to be near. He said good-bye and even made dis- 
positions about the few personal articles that were lying about 
him, giving some to the nurses. But the Government had no 
intention of allowing him to die on their hands, and that 
evening he was suddenly discharged. It was just in time to 
save him. Another day and perhaps it would have been too 
late. ProbabW a great deal of the credit for saving him 
should go to C. F. Andrews who had rushed to India, contrary 
to Gandhiji’s advice. 

Meanwhile I was transferred from Dehra Dun Gaol on 
August a3rd, and I returned to Naini Prison after more than 
a year and a half’s residence in other gaols. Just then news 
came of my mother’s sudden illness and her removal to hos- 
pital. On the 30th August, 1933 , 1 was discharged from Naini 
liecause my mother’s condition was considered serious. Ordi- 
narily I would have been released, at the latest, on September 
nth when my term expired. I was thus given an additional 
thirteen days of remission by the Provincial Government. 