COCONADA AND M. MOHAMAD ALI 

In December 1933 the annual session of the Congress was held 
at Coconada in the South. Maulana Mohamad Ali was the 
President and, as was his wont, he delivered an enormously long 
presidential address. But it was an interesting one. He traced 
the growth of political and communal feeling amon^ the Mos- 
lems and showed how the famous Moslem deputation to the 
Viceroy in 1908, under the leadership of the Aga Khan, which 
led to the first official declaration in favour of separate elector- 
ates, was a command performance and had been engineered by 
the Government itself. 

Mohamad Ali induced me, much against my will, to accept 
the All-India Congress secretaryship for his year of president- 
ship. I had no desire to accept executive responsibQity, when 
I was not clear about future policy. But I could not resist 
Mohamad Ali, and both of us felt that some other secretary 
might not be able to work as harmoniously with the new Presi- 
dent as I could. He had strong Ukes and dislikes, and I was 
fortunate enough to be included in his ‘likes’. A bond of 
affection and mutual appreciation tied us to each other. He was 
deeply and, as I considered, most irrationally religious, and I was 
not, but I was attracted by his earnestness, his over-flowing 
energy and keen intelligence. He had a nimble wit, but some- 
times his devastating sarcasm hurt, and he lost many a fiiend 
thereby. It was quite impossible for him to keep a clever remark 
to himself, whatever the consequences might be. 

We got on well together during his year of office, though we 
had many little points of difierence. I introduced in our A.I.C.C. 
office a practice of addressing all our members by their names 
only, without any prefixes or suffixes, honorific titles and the like. 
There ate so many of these m India — Mahatma, Maulana, Pan- 
dit, Shaikh, Syed, Mimshi, Kfoulvi, and latterly Sriyut and Shri, 
and, of course, Mr. and Esquire — and they are so abhndantly 
and often unnecessarily used that 1 wanted to set a good example. 
But I was not to have my way. Mohamed Ali sent me a frantic 
telegram directing me 'as:pr«ident’ to revert to our old prac- 
tice and, in particular, always to address Gandhi ji as Mahatma. 

Another firequent subject for argum^t between us was the 
Almighty. Mohamed Afi had an extrfiordinary way of hrin^g 

117 



Il8 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

in some reference to God even in Congress resolutions, either by 
way of expressing gratitude or some kind of prayer. I used to 
protest, and then he would shout at me for my irreligion. And 
yet, curiously enough, he would tell me later that he was quite 
•sure that I was fundamentally religious, in spite of my super- 
ficial behaviour or my declaradons to the contrary, I have often 
wondered how much truth there was in his statement. Perhaps 
it depends on what is meant by religion and religious. 

I avoided discussing this subject of religion with him, because 
I knew we would only irritate each other, and I might hurt him. 
It is always a difficult subject to discuss with convinced believers 
of any creed. With most Moslems it is probably an even harder 
matter for discussion, since no latitude of thought is officially 
permitted to them. Ideologically, theirs is a straight and narrow 
path, and the believer must not swerve to the right or the 
left. Hindus are somewhat different, though not always so. In 
practice they may be very orthodox; they may, and do, indulge 
in the most out-or-date, reactionary and even pernicious customs, 
and yet they will usually be prepared to discuss the most radical 
ideas about religion. I imagine the modern Arya Samajists have 
not, as a rule, this wide intellectual approach. Like the Moslems, 
they follow their own straight and narrow path. There is a 
certain philosophical tradition among the intelligent Hindus, 
which, though it does not affect practice, does make a difference 
to the ideological approach to a religious question. Partly, I 
suppose, this is due to the wide and often conflicting variety 
of opinions and customs that are included in the Hindu fold. 
It has, indeed, often been remarked that Hinduism is hardly 
a religion in the usual sense of the word. And yet, what amazing 
tenacity it has got, what tremendous power of survival I One 
may even be a professing atheist — as the old Hindu philosopher, 
Charvaka, was — and yet no one dare say that he has ceased to 
be a Hindu. Hinduism clings on to its children, almost despite 
them. A Brahman I was bom, and a Brahman I seem to remain 
whatever I might say or do in regard to religion or social cus- 
tom. To the Indian world I am ‘ Pandit ’ so and so, in spite of 
my desire not to have this or any other honorific title attached 
to niy name. I remember meeting a Turkish scholar once in 
Switprland, to whom I had sent previously a letter of intro- 
duction in which I had been referred to as ‘ Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehm He was surprised and a little disappointed to see me 
for, as he told me, the ' Pandit ’ had led him to expect a reverend 
and scholarly gentleman of advanced years. 

So Mohamad Ali and 1 did not discuss religion. But he did 



COCONADA AND M- MOHAMAD ALI I Ip 

not possess the virtue of silence, and some years later (I think 
this was in 1925 or early in 1926) he could not repress himself 
on this subject any more. He burst out one day, as I was visiting 
him in his house in Delhi, and said that he insisted on discussing 
religion with me. I tried to dissuade him, pointing out that our 
view-points were very different, and we were not likely to make 
much impression on each other. But he was not going to be 
diverted. “ We must have it out,” he said. “ I suppose you think 
that I am a fanatic. Well, I am going to show you that I am 
not.” He told me that he had studied the subject of religion 
deeply and extensively. He pointed out shelves full of books 
on various religions, especially Islam and Christianity, and 
including some modern books like H. G. Wells’s God, the 
Invisible King. During the long years of his war-time intern- 
ment, he had gone through the Quran repeatedly, and consulted 
all the commentaries on it. As a result of this study he found 
out, so he told me, that about 97 per cent, of what was contained 
in the Quran was entirely reasonable, and could be justified 
even apart from the Quran. The remaining 3 per cent, was 
not prima facie acceptable to his reason. But was it more likely 
that the Quran, which was obviously right in regard to 97 per 
cent., was also right in regard to the remaining 3 per cent,, 
than that his feeble reasoning feculty was right and the Quran 
wrong? He came to the conclusion that the chances were 
heavily in favour of the Quran, and so he accepted it as 100 per 
cent, correct. 

The logic of this argument was not obvious, but I had no 
wish to argue. What rollowed really surprised me. Mohamad 
Ali said that he was quite certain that if any one read the 
Quran with an open and receptive mind, he would be convinced 
of its truth. He knew (he added) that Bapu (Gandhiji) had 
read it carefuUy, and he must, therefore, have been convinced 
of the truth of Islam. But his pride of heart had kept him 
fi:om declaring this. 

After his year of presidentship, Mohamad Ali gradually 
drifted away from the Congress, or, perhaps, as he would have 
put it, the Congress drifted away from him. The process was 
a slow one, and he continued to attend Congress and A.I.C.C. 
meeting, and take vigorous part in them for several years 
more. But the rift widened, estrangement grew. Perhaps no 
particular individual or individuals were to blame for this; it 
was an inevitable result of certain objective conditions in the 
country. But it was an unfortunate result, which hurt many 
of us. For, whatever the differences on the communal question 



120 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

might have been, there were very few differences on the political 
issue. He was devoted to the idea of Indian independence. And 
because of this common political outlook, it was always possible 
to come to some mutually satisfactory arrangement with him 
on the communal issue. There was nothing in common, poli- 
tically, between him and the reactionaries who pose as the 
champions of communal interests. 

It was a misfortune for India that he left the country for 
Europe in the summer of 1928. A great effort was then made 
to solve the communal problem, and it came very near success. 
If Mohamad Ali had been here then, it is just conceivable that 
matters would have shaped differently. But by the time he 
came back the break had already taken place and, inevitably, 
he found himself on the other side. 

Two years later, in 1930, when large numbers of our people 
were in prison and the Civil Disobedience movement was in full 
swing, Mohamad Ali ignored the Congress decision, and at- 
tended the Round Table Conference. I was hurt by his going. 
I believe that in his own heart he was tmhappy about it, and 
there is enough evidence of this in his activities in London. He 
felt that his real place was in the fight in India, not in the 
futile conference chamber in London. And if he had returned 
to his country he would, I feel sure, have joined that struggle. 
Physically, he was a doomed man, and for years past the grip of 
disease was tightening upon him. In London his overwhelming 
anxiety to achieve, to do something worth while, when rest and 
treatment was what he needed, hastened his end. The news of 
his death came to me in Naini Prison as a blow. 

I met him for the last time on the occasion of the Lahore 
Congress in December 1929. He was not pleased with some 
parts of my presidential address, and he criticised it vigorously. 
He saw that the Congress was going ahead, and becoming poli- 
tically more aggressive. He was aggressive enough himself, and, 
being so, he disliked taking a back-seat and allowing others to 
be in the front. He gave me solemn warning : " I warn you, 
Jawahar, that your present colleagues will desert you. Tliey 
will leave you in the lurch in a crisis. Your own Congressmen 
will send you to the gallows." A dismal prophecy 1 

The Coconada Congress, held in Deceinber 1923, had a special 
interest for me, because the foundations of an aU-India volun- 
teer organisation, the Hindustani Seva Dal, were laid there. 
There had been no lack of volunteer organisations even before, 
both fi>r or^nisatlonal work and for gaol-going. But there was 
little disciplme, little cohesion. Dr. N. S. Hardii^pr conreivpd 



COCONAUA AND M. MOHAMAU ALI I2I 

the idea of having a well-disciplined all-India corps trained to do 
national work under the general guidance of the Congress, He 
pressed me to co-operate with him in this, and I gladly did so, 
for the idea appealed to me. The beginnings were made at 
Coconada. We were surprised to find later how much opposition 
there was to the Seva Dal among leading Congressmen. Some 
said that this was a dangerous departure, as it meant introducing 
a military element in the Congress, and the military arm might 
over-power the civil authority I Others seemed to think that 
the only discipline necessary was for the volunteer to obey orders 
issued from above, and for the rest it was hardly desirable for 
volunteers even to walk in step. At the back of the mind of some 
was the notion that the idea of having trained and drilled 
volunteers was somehow inconsistent with the Congress prin- 
ciple of non-violence. Hardiker, however, devoted himself to 
this task, and by the patient labour of years he demonstrated 
how much more efficient and even non-violent our trained 
volunteers could be. 

Soon after my return from Coconada, in January 1924 , 1 had 
a new kind of experience in Allahabad. I write from memory, 
and I am likely to get mixed up about dates. But I think that 
was the year of the Kumbh, or the Ardh-Kumbh, the great bath- 
ing mela held on the banks of the Ganges at Allahabad. Vast 
numbers of pilgrims usually turn up, and most of them bathe 
at the confluence of the Ganges and the Jumna— the Triveni, it 
is called, as the mydiical Saraswati is also supposed to join the 
other two. The Ganges river-bed is about a mile wide, but in 
winter the river shrinks and leaves a wide expanse of sand 
exposed, which is very useful for the camps of the pilgrims. 
Within this river-bed, the Ganges frequently changes its course. 
In 1924 the current of the Ganges was such that it was un- 
doubtedly dangerous for crowds to bathe at the Triveni. With 
certain precautions, and the control of the numbers bathing at 
a time, the danger could be greatly lessened. 

I was not at all interested in this question, as I did not pro- 
pose to acquire merit by bathing in the river on the auspicious 
days. But I noticed in the Press that a controversy was |;oing 
on between Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and the Provindd 
Government, the latter (or the local authorities) having issued 
orders prohibiting all bathing at the junction of the rivers. 
This was objected to by Malaviyaji, as, from the religious point 
of view, the whole point was to bathe at that confluence. The 
Government was perfectly justified in taking precautions to pre- 
vent accidents and possible serious loss of life, but, as usual. 



123 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it set about its work in the most wobden and irritating way 
possible. 

On the big day of the Kumbh, I went down to the river early 
in the morning to see the mela, with no intention of bathing. 
On arrival at the river bank, I learnt that Malaviyaji had sent 
some kinti of polite ultimatum to the District Magistrate, ask- 
ing him fer permission to bathe at the Triveni. Malaviyaji was 
agitated, and the atmosphere was tense. The Magistrate refused 
permission. TTbiereupon Malaviyaji decided to offer Satyagraha, 
and, accompanied by about two hundred others, he marched 
towards the junction of the rivers. I was interested in these 
developments and, on the spur of the moment, joined the 
Satyagraha band. A tremendous barrier had been erected right 
across the open space, to keep away people from the confluence. 
When we reached this high palisade, we were stopped by the 
police, and a ladder we had was taken aw^ from us. Being 
non-violent Satyagrahis, we sat down peacefully on the sands 
near the palisade. And there we sat for the whole morning and 
part of the afternoon. Hour after hour went by, the sim became 
stronger, the sand hotter, and all of us hungrier. Foot and 
mounted police stood by on both sides of us. I think the 
regular cavalry was also there. Most of us grew impatient, and 
said that something should be done. I believe the authorities 
also grew impatient, and decided to force the pace. Some order 
was given to the cavalry, who mounted their horses. It struck 
me ^ do not know if I was right) that they were going to 
charge us and drive us away in this fashion. I did not fency 
the idea of being chased by mounted troopers, and, anyhow, 
I was fed up with sitting there. So I suggested to those sitting 
near me that we might as well cross over the palisade, and 
I motmted it. Immediately scores of others did likewise, and 
some even pulled out a few stakes, thus making a passage-way. 
Somebody gave me a national flag, and I stuck it on top of the 
palisade, where I continued to sit. I grew rather excited, and 
thoroughly enjoyed myself, watching the people clambering up 
or going through and the mounted troopers trying to push them 
away. I must say that the cavalry did their work as harmlessly 
as possible. They waved about thm wooden stafi^, and pushed 
people with them, but reflrained from causing much injury. 
Faint memories of revolutionary barricades came to me. 

At last I got down on the other side and, feeling very hot after 
my exertions, decided to have a dip in the Ganges. On coming 
back, I was amazed to find that Malaviyaji and many others 
were still sitting on the other side of the palisade as before. But 



COCONADA AND M. MOHAMAD AH 133 

the mounted troopers and the foot police now stood shoulder 
to shoulder between the Satyagrahis and the palisade. So I 
went (having got out by a roundabout way) and sat down again 
near Malaviyaji. For some time we sat on, and I noticed that 
Malaviyaji was greatly agitated; he seemed to be trying to con- 
trol some strong emotion. Suddenly, without a hint to any one, 
he dived in the most extraordinary way through the policemen 
and the horses. For any one, that would have been a surprising 
dive, but for an old and physically weak person like Malaviyaji, 
it was astounding. Anyhow, we all followed him; we all dived. 
After some effort to keep us back the cavalry and the police 
did not interfere. A little later they were withdrawn. 

We half expected some proceedings to be taken against us 
by the Government, but nothing of the kind happened. Govern- 
ment probably did not wish to lake any steps against Malaviyaji, 
and so the smaller fry got off too. 