NON-VIOLENClL AND THE DOCTRINE OF 
THE SWORD 

The sudden suspension of our movement after the Chauri 
Chaura incident was resented, I think, by almost all the promi- 
nent Congress leaders— other than Gandhiji of course. My father 
(who was in gaol at the time) was much upset by it. The younger 
people were naturally even more agitated. Our mounting hopes 
tumbled to the ground, and this mental reaction was to be 
expected. What troubled us even more were the reasons given 
for this suspension and the consequences that seemed to flow 
from them. Chauri Chaura may have been and was a deplorable 
occurrence and wholly opposed to the spirit of the non-violent 
movement; but were a remote village and a mob of excited 
peasants in an out-of-the-way place going to put an end, for 
some time at least, to our national struggle for tteedom? If this 
was the inevitable consequence of a sporadic act of violence, 
then surely there was something lacking in the philosophy and 
technitjue of a non-violent struggle. For it seemed to us to be 
impossible to ^arantee against the occurrence of some such 
imtoward incident. Must we train the three hundred and odd 
millions of India in the theory and practice of non-violent 
action before we could go forward? And, even so, how many of 
us could, say that imder extreme provocation from the police 
we would be able to remain perfectly peaceful? But even if we 
succeeded, what of the numerous agents provocateurs, stool 
pigeons, and the like who crept into our movement and indulged 
in violence themselves or induced others to do so? If this was 
the sole condition of its function, then the non-violent method 
of resistance would always fail. 

We had accepted that method, the Congress had made that 
method its own, because of a belief in its effectiveness. Gandhiji 
had placed it before the coimt^ not only as the right method 
but as the most effective one tor our purpose. In spite of its 
negative naine it was a dynamic method, the very opposite of 
a meek submission to a tyrant’s will. It was not a coward’s refuge 
frorn action, but the brave m an’s defiance of evil and national 
subjection. But what was the use of the bravest and the strongest 
if a few odd persons— maybe even our opponents in the guise of 
friends — ^had the power to upset or end our movement bv their 
rash behaviour? , ^ 



NON-VIOLENCE 


83 

Gandhiji had pleaded fo? the adoption of the way of non- 
violence, of peaceful non-co-operation, with all the eloquence 
and persuasive power which he so abundantly possessed. His 
language had been simple and tmadorned, his voice and appear- 
ance cool and clear and devoid of all emotion, but behind that 
outward covering of ice there was the heat of a blazing fire and 
concentrated passion, and the words he uttered winged their 
way to the innermost recesses of our minds and hearts, and 
created a strange ferment there. The way he pointed out was 
hard and difficult, but it was a brave path, and it seemed to 
lead to the promised land of freedom. Because of that promise 
we pledged our faith and marched ahead. In a famous article — 
“ The Doctrine of the Sword he had written in 1920 : 

"I do believe that when there is only a choice between 
cowardice and violence, I would advise violence. ... I would 
rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honour 
than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain 
a helpless victim to her own dishonour. But I believe that non- 
violence is infinitely superior to violence, forgiveness is more 
manly than punishment Bpti 

" Forgiveness adorns a soldier. But abstinence is forgiveness 
only when there is power to punish; it is meaningless when 
it pretends to proceed from a helpless creature. A mouse hardly 
forgives a cat when it allows itself to be tom to pieces by 
her- . . . But I do not believe India to be helpless, I do not 
believe myself to be a helpless creature. . . . 

“ Let me not be misunderstood. Strength does not come from 
physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will. . . . 

“ I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. The 
religion of non-violence is not meant merely for the Rishis 
and saints. It is meant for the common people as well. Non- 
violence is the law of our species as violence is the law of the 
brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute and he knows no 
law but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires 
obedience to a higher law — to the strength of the spirit. 

“ I have therefore ventured to place before India the ancient 
law of self-sacrifice. For Satyagrahjand its off-shoots, non-co- 
operation and civil resistance, are nothing but new names for 
the law of suffering. The Rishis who discovered the law of 
non-violence in the midst of violoice, were greater geniuses than 
Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Welling- 
ton. Having themselves known the use of arms, they realised 
their uselessness and taught a weary world that its salvation 
lay not through violence but through non-violence. 



84 JAWAHARLAI. NEHRU 

“Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscious 
suffering. It does not mean meek submission to the will of 
the evil-doer, but it means the putting of one’s whole soul 
against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
being, it is possible for a single individual to defy the whole 
might of an unjust empire to save his honour, his religion, his 
soul and lay the foundation for that empire’s fall or regenera- 
tion. 

“ And so I am not pleading for India to practise non-violence 
because it is weak. I want her to practise non-violence being 
conscious of her strength and power. ... I want India to 
recognise that she has a soul that cannot perish, and that can 
rise triumphant above any physical weakness and defy the 
physical combination of a whole world. . . . 

“ I isolate this non-co-operation from Sinn Feinism, for, it is 
so conceived as to be incapable of being offered side by side 
with violence. But I invite even the school of violence to give 
this peaceful non-co-operation a trial. It will not fail through 
its inherent weakness. It may fail because of poverty of 
response. Then will be the time for real danger. The high- 
s’ouled men, who are unable to suffer national humiliation any 
longer, will want to vent their wrath. They will take to violence. 
So far as I know, they must perish without delivering them- 
selves or their country from the wrong. If India takes up the 
doctrine of the sword, she may gain momentary victory. Then 
India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to 
India because I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she 
has a mission for the world.” 

We were moved by these argmnents, but for us and for the 
National Congress as a whole the non-violent method was not, 
and could not be, a religion or an unchallengeable creed or 
dogma. It could only be a policy and a method promising 
certain results, and by those results it would have to be finally 
judged. Individuals might make of it a religion or incontro- 
vertible creed. But no political organisation, so long as it 
remained political, could do so. 

Chauri Chaura and its consequences made us examine these 
implications of non-violence as a method, and we felt that, if 
Gandhiji’s argument for the suspension of civil resistance was 
, correct, our opponents would always have the power to create 
circumstances which would necessarily result in our abandoning 
the struggle. Was this the fault of the non-violent method itself 
or of Gandhiji’s interpretation of it? After all, he was the 
author and originator of it, and who could be a better judge of 



NON-VIOLENCE 85 

what it was and what it was not? And without him where was 
our movement? 

Many years later, just before the 1930 Civil Disobedience 
movement began, Gandhiji, much to our satisfaction, made this 
point clear. He stated that the movement should not be aban- 
doned because of the occurrence of sporadic acts of violence. 
If the non-violent method of struggle could not function 
because of such almost inevitable happenings, then it was 
obvious that it was not an ideal method for all occasions, and 
this he was not prepared to admit. For him the method, being 
the right method, should suit all circumstances and should be 
able to function, at any rate in a restricted way, even in a hostile 
atmosphere. Whether this interpretation, which widened the 
scope of non-violent action, represented an evolution in his own 
mind or not I do not know. 

As a matter of fact even the suspension of civil resistance in 
February 1922 was certainly not due to Chauri Chaura alone, 
although most people imagined so. That was only the last straw. 
Gandhiji has offen acted almost by instinct; by long and close 
association with the masses he appears to have developed, as 
great popular leaders often do, a new sense which tells him how 
the mass feels, what it does and what it can do. He reacts to 
this instinctive feeling and fashions his action accordingly, and 
later, for the benefit of his surprised and resentful colleagues, 
tries to clothe his decision with reasons. This covering is often 
very inadequate, as it seemed after Chauri Chaura. At that time 
our movement, in spite of its apparent power and the widespread 
enthusiasm, was going to pieces. All organisation and discipline 
was disappearing; almost all our good men were in prison, and 
the masses had so fer received little training to carry on by them- 
selves. Any unknown man who wanted to do so could take 
charge of a Congress Committee and, as a matter of fact, large 
numbers of undesirable men, including agents provocateurs, 
came to die front and even controlled some local Congress and 
Khilafat organisations. There was no way of checking them. 

This kind of thing is, of course, to some extent almost 
inevitable in such a struggle. The leaders must take the lead in 
going to prison, and trust to others to carry on. All that can be 
done is to train the masses in some simple kinds of activity and, 
even more so, to abstain from certain other kinds of activity. 
In 1930 we had already spent several years in ^ving some such 
training, and the Civil Disobedience movement then and in 1932 
was a very powerful and organised a£^. This was lacking in 
1921 and iQaa, and there was little behind the excitement and 



86 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

enthusiasm of the people. There is little doubt that if the move- 
men had continued there would have been growing sporadic 
violence in many places. This would have been crushed by 
Government in a bloody manner and a reign of terror estab- 
lished which would have thoroughly demoralised the people. 

These were probably the reasons and influences that worked in 
Gandhiji’s mind, and granting his premises and the desirability 
of carrying on with the technique of non-violence, his decision 
was right. He had to stop the rot and build anew. From another 
and an entirely different view-point his decision might be con- 
sidered wrong, but that view-point had nothing to do with the 
non-violent method. It was not possible to have it both ways. To 
invite a bloody suppression of the movement in that pardculai 
sporadic way and at that stage would not, of course, have put an 
end to the national movement, for such movements have a way 
of rising from their ashes. Temporary set-backs are often helpful 
in clarifying issues and in giving backbone; what matters is not 
a set-back or apparent defeat, but the principles and ideals: If 
these principles can be kept untarnished by the masses, then re- 
covery comes soon. But what were our principles and objectives 
in I pa I and ipaa? A vague Swaraj with no dear ideology behind 
it and a particular technique of non-violent struggle. %ie latter 
method would naturally have gone if the country had taken to 
sporadic violence on any big scale, and as to the former, there 
was little to hold on to. The people generally were not strong 
enough to carry on the struggle for long and, in spite of almost 
universal discontent with foreign rule and sympathy with the 
Congress, there was not enough backbone or organisation. They 
could not last. Even the crowds that went to prison did so on the 
spur of the moment, expecting the whole thing to be over very 
soon. 

It may be, therefore, that the dedsion to suspend civil resist- 
ance in ipaa was a right one, though the manner of doing it left 
much to be desired and brought about a certain demoralisation. 

It is possible, however, that this sudden bottling up of a great 
movement contributed to a tragic development in Ae country. 
The drift to sporadic and futile violence in the political struggle 
was stopped, but the suppressed violence had to find a way out, 
and in the following years this perhaps aggravated the com- 
munal trouble. The communalists of various denominations, 
mostly political reactionaries, had been forced to lie low because 
of the overwhelming mass support for the non-co-operation and 
civil disobedience movemmt. They emerged now from their 
retirement. Many others, secret service agents and people who 



NON-VIOLENCE 


87 

sought to please the authorities by creating communal friction, 
also worked on the same theme. The Moplah rising and its extra- 
ordinarily cruel suppression — ^what a horrible thing was the 
baking to death of the Moplah prisoners in the closed railway 
vansl — ^had already given a handle to those who stirred the 
waters of communal discord. It is just possible that if civil 
resistance had not been stopped and the movement had been 
crushed by Government, there would have been less communal 
bitterness and less superfluous energy left for the subsequent 
communal riots. 

Before civil resistance was called off an incident occurred which 
might have led to different results. The first wave of civil resist- 
ance amazed and frightened the Government. It was then that 
Lord Reading, the Viceroy, said in a public speech that he was 
troubled and perplexed. The Prince of Wales was in India, and 
his presence added greatly to the Government's responsibility. 
An attempt was made by the Government in December ipai, 
soon after the mass arrests at the beginning of the month, to 
come to some understanding with the Congress. This was especi- 
ally in view of the Prince’s forthcoming visit to Calcutta. There 
were some informal talks between representatives of the Bengal 
Government and Deshbandhu Das, who was in gaol then. A 
proposal seems to have been made, that a small round table con- 
ference might take place between the Government and the Con- 
gress. This proposal appears to have fallen through because 
Gandhiji insisted that Maulana Mohamad Ali, who was then in 
prison in Karachi, should be present at this conference. Govern- 
ment would not agree to thite. 

Mr. C. R. Das ^d not approve of Gandhiji’s attitude in this 
matter and, when he came out of prison later, he publicly criti- 
cised him and said that he had blundered. Most of us (we were 
in gaol) do not know the details of what took place then, and it 
is difficult to judge without all the facts. It seems, however, that 
little good could have come out of the conference at that stage. 
It was an effort on the part of Government to tide over somehow 
the period of the Prince’s visit to Calcutta. The basic problems 
that faced us would have remained. Nine years later, when the 
nation and the Congress were fer stronger, such a conference 
took place without any great results. But apart firom this, it seems 
to me that Gandhiji’s insistence on Mohamad Ali’s presence was 
perfectly justified. Not only as a Congress leader but as the leader 
of the Khilafat movement — and the Khilafat question was then 
an important plank in the Congress programme— his presence 
was essential. No policy or manoeuvre can ever be a right one if 



88 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it involves the forsaking of a colleague. The fact that Govern- 
ment were not prepared to release him from gaol itself shows 
that there was no likelihood of any results from a conference. 

Both my father and I had been sentenced to six months’ im- 
prisonment on different charges and by different courts. The 
trials were farcical and, as was our custom, we took no part in 
them. Il was easy enough, of course, to find enough material in 
our speeches or other activities for a conviction. But the actual 
choice was amusing. Father was tried as a member of an illegal 
organisation, the Congress Volunteers, and to prove this a form 
with his signature in Hindi was produced. The signature was 
certainly his, but, as it happened, he had hardly ever signed in 
Hindi before, and very few persons could recognise his Hindi 
signature. A tattered gentleman was then produced who swore 
to the signature. The man was quite illiterate, and he held the 
signature upside down when he examined it. My daughter, 
aged four at the time, had her first experience of the dock during 
father's trial, as he held her in his arms throughout. 

My offence was distributing notices for a hartal. This was no 
oflfence under the law then, though I believe it is one now, for 
we are rapidly advancing towards Dominion Status. However, I 
was sentenced. Three months later I was informed in the prison, 
where I was with my father and others, that some revising 
authority had come to the conclusion that I was wrongly sen- 
tenced and I was to be discharged. I was surprised, as no one had 
taken any step on my behalf. The suspension of civil resistance 
had apparently galvanised the revising judges into activity. I was 
sorry to go out, leaving my father behind. 

I decided to go almost immediately to Gandhiji in Ahmeda- 
bad. Before I arrived there he had been arrested, and my inter- 
view with him took place in Sabarmati Prison. I was present at 
his trial. It was a memorable occasion, and those of us who were 
present are not likely ever to forget it. The judge, an English- 
man, behaved with dignity and feeling. Gandhiji’s statement to 
the court was a most moving one, and we came away, emotion- 
ally stirred, and with the impress of his vivid phrases and 
striking images in our mind. 

I came badt to Allahabad. I felt unhappy and lonely outside 
the prison when so many of my friends and colleagues were 
behind prison bars. I found that the Congress organisation was 
not functioning well and I tried to put it straight. In particular 
I interested myself in the boycott of foreign cloth. This item of 
our programme still continued in spite of the withdrawal of 
civil resistance. Nearly all the cloth merchants in Allahabad had 



NON-VIOLENCE 


89 

pledged themselves not to import or purchase foreign cloth, and 
had formed an association for the purpose. The rules of this 
association laid dovm that any infringement would be punished 
by a fine. I found that several of the big dealers had broken 
their pledges and were importing foreign cloth. This was very 
unfair to those who stuck to their pledges. We remonstrated 
with little result, and the cloth dealers’ association seemed to be 
powerless to take action. So we decided to picket the shops of the 
erring merchants. Even a hint of picketing was enough for our 
purpose. Fines were paid, pledges were taken afresh. The money 
from the fines went to the clofri merchants’ association. 

Two or three days later I was arrested, together with a number 
of colleagues who had taken part in the negotiations with the 
merchants. We were charged with criminal intimidation and 
extortion 1 I was further charged with some other offences, in- 
cluding sedition. I did not d^end myself, but I made a long 
statement in court. I was sentenced on at least three counts, 
including intimidation and extortion, but the sedition charge 
was not proceeded with, as it was probably considered that I had 
already got as much as I deserved. As far as I remember there 
were three sentences, two of which were for eighteen months 
and were concurrent- In all, I think, I was sentenced to a year 
and nine months. That was my second sentence. I went back to 
prison after about six weeks spent outside it. 