FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 

Should Gandhiji go to London for the Round Table Confer- 
ence or not? Again and again the question arose, and there 
was no definite answer. No one knew till the last moment — ^not 
even the Congress Working Committee or Gandhiji hinaself. 
For the answer depended on many things, and new happenings 
were constantly giving a fresh turn to the situation. Behind 
that question and answer lay real and difficult problems. 

We were told repeatedly, on behalf of the British Govern- 
ment and their firiends, that the Round Table Conference had 
already laid down the ficamework of the constitution, that the 
principal lines of the picture had been drawn, and all that re- 
mained was the filling of this picture. But the Congress did 
not t hink so, and so far as it was concerned, the picture had to 
be drawn or painted firom the very beginning on an almost 
blank canvas. It was true that by the Delhi agreement the 
federal basis had been approved and the idea of safeguards 
accepted. But a federation had long seemed to many of us the 
best solution of the Indian constitutional problem, and our 
approval of this idea did not mean our acceptance of the par- 
ticular type of federation envisaged by the first Round Table 
Conference, A federation was perfecdy compatible with political 
independence and social change. It was far more difficult to fit 
in the idea of safeguards and, ordinarily, they would mean a 
substantial diminution of sovereignty, but the qualifying phrase 
“ in the interests of India ” helped us to get over this mmculty 
to some extent at least, though not perhaps very successfully. 
In any event, the Karachi Congress had made it clear that an 
acceptable constitution must provide for full control of defence, 
foreign aifiiirs, and financim and economic policy, and an 
examination of the question of India’s indebtedness to foreign ' 
(meaning largely British) interests before liabilities were under- 
taken; and the Wdamental rights resolution had also indicated 
some of the political and economic changes desired. All this 
was incompatible with many of the Roimd Table Conference 
decisions, as well as with the existing firamework of administra- 
tion in India. 

The gulf between the Congress view-point and that of the 
British Government was immense, and it seemed exceedingly •• 

*75 



276 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

unlikely that it could be bridged at that stage. Very few Con- 
gressmen expected any measure of agreement between the 
Congress and the Government at the Round Table Conference, 
and even Gandhiji, optimistic as he always is, could not look 
forward to much. And yet he was never hopeless and was deter- 
mined to try to the very end. All of us felt that whether success 
ramp or not, the effort had to be made, in continuation of the 
Delhi agreement. But there were two vital considerations which 
might have barred our participation in the second Round Table 
Conference. We could only go if we had full freedom to place 
our view-point in its entirety before the Round Table Confer- 
ence, and were not prevented from doing so by being told that 
the matter had already been decided, or for any other reason. 
We could also be prevented from being represented at the 
Round Table Conference by conditions in India. A situation 
might have developed here which precipitated a conflict with 
Government, or in which we had to face severe repression. If 
this took place in India and our very house was on fire, it would 
have been singularly out of place for any representative of ours 
to ignore the fire and talk academically of constitutions and the 
like.in London. 

The situation was developing svnftly in India. This was 
noticeable aU over the country, and especially so in Bengal, the 
United Provinces, and the Frontier Province. In Bengal the 
Delhi agreement had made little difference, and the tension con- 
tinued and grew worse. Some civil disobedience prisoners were 
discharged, but thousands of politicals, who were technically 
not civil disobedience prisoners, remained in prison. The 
detenus also continued in gaol or detention camps. Fresh arrests 
were frequently made for ‘ seditious ’ speeches or other political 
activities, and generally it was felt that the Government offen- 
sive had continued without any abatement. For the Congress, 
the Bengal problem has been an extraordinarily difficult one 
because of the existence of terrorism. Compared to the normal 
Congress activities and civil disobedience, these terroristic activi- 
ties were, in extent and importance, very little. But they made 
a loud noise and attracted great attention. They also helped in 
making it difficult fer Congress work to function as in most 
other provinces, for terrorism produced an atmosphere which 
was not favourable to peaceful direct action. Inevitably they 
invited the severest repression from the Government, and this 
fell vrith considerable impartiality on terrorist and non-terrorist 
alike. 

It was difficult for the police and the local executive 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 277 

authorities not to make use of the special laws and ordinances 
(meant for the terrorists) for Congressmen, labour and peasant 
workers and others whose activities they disapproved of. It is 
possible than the real offence of many of the detenus, kept now 
for years without charge or trial or conviction, was not terror- 
istic activity but other effective political activity. Thejt have 
been given no chance of proving or di^roving anything, or 
even of knowing what their sins are. They are hot tried in 
court, presumabfy because the police have not sufficient evi- 
dence against them to secure a conviction, although it is well 
known that the British-Indian laws for offences against the State 
are amazingly thorough and comprehensive, and it is difficult 
to escape from their close meshes. It often happens that a person 
is acquitted by the law courts and is immediately arrested again 
and thereafter treated as a detenu. 

The Congress Working Committee felt very helpless before 
this intricate problem of Bengal. They were continually op- 
pressed by it, and some Bengal matter was always coming up 
before them in different forms. They dealt with it as best they 
could, but they knew well that they were not really tackling the 
problem. So, rather weakly, they simply allowed matters to 
drift there; it is a little difficult to say what else they could 
have done, placed as they were. This attitude of the Working 
Committee was much resented in Bengal, and an impression 
grew up there that the Congress executive, as well as the other 
provinces, were ignoring Bengal. In the hour of her trial 
Bengal seemed to be deserted. This impression was entirely 
wrong, for the whole of India was full of sympathy for the 
people of Bengal, but it did not know how to trtinslate this 
sympathy into effective help. And, besides, every part of India 
had to face its own troubles. 

In the United Provinces the agrarian situation was becoming 
worse. The Provincial Government temporised with the prob- 
lem and delayed a decision about rent and revenue remissions, 
and forcible collections were begun. There were wholesale eject- 
ments and attachments. While we were in Ceylon there had 
taken place two or three agrarian riots when forcible attempts 
were made to collect rents. The riots were jpetty in themsdves, 
but unhappily they resulted in the death of the lantllord or his 
^ent. Gandniji had gone to Naini Tal (also when I was in 
Ceylon) to discuss the agrarian situation with the Governor of 
the U.P., Sir Malcolm Hailey, without much result. When the 
Government announced its remissions, they fell for short of ex- 
pertations, and in the rural areas there was a continuous and an 



278 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ever-growing uproar. As the pressure of landlord plus govern- 
ment grew on the peasantry, and thousands of tenants were 
ejected from their holdings and had their little property seized, 
a situation developed which in most other countries would have 
resulted in a big peasant rising. I think it was very largely due 
to the efforts of the Congress which kept the tenants from in- 
dulging in violent activity. But there was an abundance of 
violence against them. 

There was one bright side to this agrarian upheaval and dis- 
tress. Owing to the very low prices of agricultural produce, the 
poorer classes, including the peasants, unless they were dis- 
possessed, had more to eat than they had had for a long time. 

In the Frontier Province, as in Bengal, the Delhi Pact brought 
no peace. There was a permanent state of tension there, and 
government was a military affair, with special laws and ordi- 
nances and heavy punishments £}r trivial offences. To oppose 
this state of affairs, Abdul Ghaffar Khan led a great agitation, 
and he soon became a bugbear to the Government. From village 
to viUagh he went striding along, carrying his six-feet-three of 
Pathan manhood, and establishmg centres of the ' Redshirts *. 
Wherever he or his principal lieutenants went, they left a trail 
of their ‘ Redshirts ’ behind, and the whole province was soon 
covered by branches of the ‘Khudai Khidmatgar They were 
thoroughly peaceful and, in spite of vague allegations, not a 
single definite charge of violence against them has been estab- 
lished. But whether they were peaceful or not, they had the 
tradition of war and violence behind them, and they lived near 
the turbulent frontier, and this rapid growth of a disdplmed 
movement, closely allied to the Indian national movement, 
thoroughly upset the Government. I do not suppose they ever 
believed in its professions of peace and non-violence. But even 
if they had done so, their reactions to it would only have been 
of fright and annoyance. It represented too much of actual 
and potential power for them to view it with equanimity. 

Of this great movement the unquestioned head was Khan 
Abdul Gbaffar Khan— “ Fakhr-e-Afghan ”, ” Fakr-e-Pathan ”, 
the ‘Pride of the Pathans’, ‘ Gandln-e-Sarhad ’, the ‘Frontier 
Gandhi as he came to be known. He had attained an amazing 
popularity in the Frontier Province by sheer dint of quiet, 
persevering work, undaunted by difficulties or Government 
action. He was, and is, no politidan as politidans go; he knows 
nothing of the tactics and manoeuvres of polirics. A tall, 
straight mian, straight in body and mind, hating fuss and too 
much talk, looking forward to freedom for his Frontier Province 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 279 

people within the framework of Indian freedom, but vague 
about, and uninterested in, constitutions and legal talk. Action 
was necessary to achieve anything, and Mahatma Gandhi had 
taught a remarkable way of peaceful action which appealed to 
him. For action, organisation was necessary; therefore, without 
further argument or much drafting of rules for his organisation, 
he started organising— and with remarkable success. 

He was especially attracted to Gandhiji. At first his shyness 
and desire to keep in the background mafie him keep away 
from him. Later they had to meet to discuss various matters, 
and their contacts grew. It was surprising how this Pathan 
accepted the idea of non-violence, far more so in theory than 
many of us. And it was because he believed in it tW he 
managed to impress his people with the importance of remain- 
ing peaceful in spite of provocation. It would be absurd to say 
that the people of the Frontier Province have given up aU 
thoughts of ever indulging in violence, just as it would be 
absurd to say this of the people generally in any province. The 
masses are moved by waves of emotion, and no one can predict 
what they might do when so moved. But the self discipline that 
the frontier people showed in 1930 and subsequent years has 
been something amazing. 

Government officials and some of our very timid countrymen 
look askance at the ‘ Frontier Gandhi They cannot take him 
at his word, and can only think in terms of deep intrigue. But 
the past years have brought him and other frontier comrades 
very near to Congress workers in other parts of India, and 
between them there has grown up a close comradeship and 
mutual appreciation and regard. Abdul Ghafiar Khan has been 
known and liked for many years in Congress circles. But he has 
grown to be. something more than an individual comrade; more 
and more he has come to be, in the eyes of the rest of India, 
the symbol of the courage and sacrifice of a gallant and indo- 
mitable people, comrades of ours in a common struggle. 

Long before I had heard of Abdul Ghaffor Khan, 1 knew his 
brother. Dr. £[han Sahib. He was a student at St. Thomas’s 
Hospital in London when I was at Cambridge, and later, when 
I was eating my Bar dinners at the Inner Temple he and 1 
became dose friends, and hardly a day went by, when I was in 
London, when we did not meet. I returned to India, leaving 
him in England, and he stayed on for many more Kars, serving 
as a doctor in war-time. I saw him next in Naini Prison. 

The frontier ‘Redshirts’ co-operated with the Congress, but 
they were an organisation apart. It was a peculiar position. 



aSo JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The real connecting link was Abdul GhafFar Khan. This 
question was fuUy considered by the Working Committee in 
consultation with the Frontier Province leaders in the summer 
of 193 1 1 and it was decided to absorb the ‘Redshirts’ into the 
Congress. The ‘ Redshirt ’ movement thus became part of the 
Congress organisation. 

It was Gandhiji’s wish to go to the Frontier Province immedi- 
ately after the Karachi Congress, but the Government did not 
encourage this at all. Repeatedly, in later months, when 
Government officials complained of the doings of the ‘Red- 
shirts’, he pressed to be allowed to go there to find out for 
himself, but to no purpose. Nor was my going there approved. 
In view of the Delhi agreement, it was not considered desirable 
by us to enter the Frontier Province against the declared wish 
of the Government. 

Yet another of the problems before the Working Committee 
was the communal problem. There was nothing new about this, 
although it had a way of reappearing in novel and fantastic 
attire. The Round Table Conference gave it an added impor- 
tance at the time, as it was obvious that the British Government 
would keep it in the forefiront and subordinate all other issues 
to it. The members of the Conference, all nominees of the 
Government, had been mainly chosen in order to give impor- 
tance to the communal and sectional interests, and to lay stress 
on these divergences rather than on the common interests. The 
Government had even refused, pointedly and aggressively, to 
nominate any leader of the Nationalist Muslims. Gandhiji fdt 
that if the Conference, at the instance of the British Govern- 
ment, became entangled in the communal issue right at the 
beginning, the real political and economic issues womd not get 
proper consideration. Under these circtunstances, his going to 
the Conference would be of litde use. He put it to the Working 
Committee, therefore, that he should only go to London if some 
understanding on the communal issue was previously arrived 
at between the parties concerned. His instinct was perfectly 
justified, but nevertheless the Committee overruled him and 
decided that he must not refuse to go merely on the ground 
that we had failed to solve the communal problem. An attempt 
was made hj the Committee, in consultation with representa- 
tives of' various communities, to put forward a proposed solu- 
tion. This had no great success. 

These were some of the major problems before us during that 
summer of 1931, besides a large number of minor issues. From 
all over the country we were continually receiving complaints 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 281 

from local Congress Committees pointing out breaches of the 
Delhi Pact by local ofScials. The more important of these were 
forwarded by us to the Government, which, in its turn, brought 
charges against Congressmen of violation of the Pact. So 
charges and counter<harges were made, and later they were 
published in the Press. Needless to say, this did not result in 
the improvement of the relations between the Congress and 
the Government. 

And yet this friction on petty matters was hy itself of no 
great importance. Its importance lay in its revealing the 
development of a more fundamental conflict, something which 
did not depend on individuals but arose from the very namre 
of our national struggle and the want of equilibrium of our 
agrarian economy, something that could not be liquidated or 
compromised away without a basic change. Our national move- 
ment had originally begun because of the desire of our upper 
middle classes to find means of self expression and self-growth, 
and behind it there was the political and economic urge. It 
spread to the lower middle classes and became a power in the 
land; and then it began to stir the rural masses who were find- 
ing it more and more difficult to keep up, as a whole, even 
their miserable rock-bottom standard of living. The old self- 
sufficient village economy had long ceased to exist. Auxiliary 
cottage industries, ancillary to agriculture, which had relieved 
somewhat the burden on the land, had died off, partly because 
of State policy, but largely because, they could not compete with 
the rising machine industry. The bmden on land grew and the 
growth of Indian industry was too slow to make much differ- 
ence to this. Ill-equipped and almost unawares, the overbur- 
dened village was thrown into the world market and was tossed 
about hither and thither. It could not compete on even terms. 
It was backward in its methods of production, and its land 
system, resulting in a progressive fragmentation of holdings, 
made radical improvement impossible. So the agricultural 
classes, both landlords and tenants, went downhill, except 
during brief periods of boom. The landlords tried to pass on 
the burden to their tenantry, and the growing pauperisation of 
the peasantry— both the petty landholders and the tenants — 
drew them to the national movement. The agricultural prole- 
tariat, the large numbers of landless labourers in rural areas, 
were also attracted; and for all these rural classes ' nationalism ' 
or ' swaraj ’ meant fundamental changes in the land system, 
which would relieve or lessen their burdens and provide land 
for the landless. These desires 'ffiund no clear expression eithd: 



a82 JAWAHASLAL NEHRU 

in the peasantry or in the middle-class leaders of the national 
movement. 

The Civil Disobedience movement of 1930 happened to fit in 
unbeknown to its own leaders at first, with the great world 
slump in industry and agriculture. The rural masses were 
powerfully affected by this sIuim, and they turned to the Con- 
gress and civil disobedience. For them it was not a matter 
of a fine constitution drawn up in London or elsewhere, 
but of a basic change in the land system, especially in the 
zamindari areas. The zamindari system, indeed, seemed to 
have outlived its day and had no stability left in it. But the 
British Government, situated as it was, could not venture to 
undertake a radical change of this land system. Even when 
it had appointed the Royal Agricultural Commission, the terms 
of reference to it barred a discussion of the question of owner- 
ship of land or the system of land tenure. 

Thus the conflict lay in tihe very nature of things in India 
then, and it could not be charmed away by phrases or com- 
promises. Only a solution of the basic problem of land (not to 
mention other vital national issues) could resolve that conflict. 
And of this solution through the instrumentality of the British 
Government there was no possibility. Temporary measures 
might alleviate the distress for a while; severe repression might 
frighten and prevent public expression of it; but neither helped 
in the solution of the problem. 

The British Government, like most governments I suppose, 
has an idea that much of the trouble in India is due to '^agita- 
tors It is a singularly inept notion. India has had a great 
leader during the past fifteen years who has won the affection 
and even adoration of her miuions, and has seemed to impose 
his will on her in many ways. He has played a vitally impor- 
tant part in her recent history, and yet more important than 
he were the people themselves who seemed to follow blindly 
his behests. The people were the principal actors, and behind 
them, pushing them on, were great historical urges which pre- 
pared them and made them ready to listen to their leader’s 
piping. But for that historical setting and political and social 
urges, no leaders or agitatom could have inspired them to 
action. It was Gandhiji’s chief virtue as a leader that he could 
instinctively feel the pulse of the people and know when con- 
ditions were ripe for growth and action. 

In 1930 the nation^ movement in India fitted in fiir a while 
with the growing social forces of the country, and because of 
this a great power came to it, a sense of reality, as if it was 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 283 

indeed marching step by step with history- The Congress 
represented that national movement, and this power and 
strength were reflected in the growth of Congress prestige. 
This was something vague, incalculable, indefinable, but never- 
theless very much present. The peasantry, of course, turned to 
the Congress and gave it its real strength; the lower middle<lass 
formed the backbone of its fighting ranks. Even the upper 
bourgeoisie, troubled by this new atmosphere, thought it safer 
to be friendly with the Congress. The great majority of the 
textile mills in India signed undertakings prescribed by the 
Congress, and were afraid of doing things which might bring on 
them the displeasure of the Congress. Wiile people argued fine 
legal points in London at the first R.T.C., the reality of power 
seemed to be slowly and imperceptibly flowing towards the 
Congress as representing the people. This illusion grew even 
after the Delhi Pact, not because of vainglorious speeches, but 
because of the events of ^930 and after, indeed, probably the 
persons who were most conscious of the difficulties and dangers 
ahead were the Congress leaders, and they took every care not 
to minimise them. 

This vague sense of a dual authority growing in the country 
was naturally most irritating to the Government. It had no 
real basis in fact, as physical power rested completely with the 
authorities, but that it existed psychologically there was no 
doubt. For an authoritarian, irremovable government this was 
an impossible situation, and it was this subde atmosphere that 
really got on their nerves, and not a few odd village speeches or 
processions of which they conrolained later. A dash, therefore, 
seemed inevitable; for the Congress could hardly commit 
voluntary hara-kiri, and the Government could not tolerate this 
atmosphere of duality, and was bent on crushing the Coimress. 
This dash was deferred because of the second Round Table 
Conference. For some reason or other the British Government 
was very^een on having Gandhiji in London, and avoided, as 
far as possible, doing anything to prevent this. 

And yet the sense of conflict grew, and we could fed the 
hardening on the side of Government. Soon after the Delhi 
Pact, Lord Irwin had left India and Lord WiUingdon had come 
in his place as Viceroy. A legend grew up that the new Viceroy 
was a hard and stem person and not so amenable to compromise 
as his predecessor. Many of our polilidans have inherited a 
‘ liberal' habit of thinking of politics in terms of persons rather 
than of prindples. They do not realise that the broad imperial 
policy of the British Government does not depend , on the 



284 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

personal views of the Viceroys. The change of Viceroys, 
therefore, did not and could not make any difference, but, 
as it happened, the policy of Government ^adually changed 
owing to the development of the situation. The Civil Service 
hierarchy had not approved of pacts and dealings with the 
Congress; all their training and authoritarian conceptions of 
government were opposed to this. They had an idea that they 
had added to the Congress influence and Gandhiji’s prestige by 
dealing with him almost as an equal and it was about time 
that he was brought down a pe^ or two. The notion was a 
very foolish one, but then the Indian Civil Service is not known 
for the originality of its conceptions. Whatever the reason, the 
Government stiffened its back and tightened its hold, and it 
seemed to tell us, in the words of the old prophet: My little 
finger is thicker than my father’s loins. Where^ he chastised 
you with whips, I will chastise you with scorpions. 

But the time for chastisement was not yet. If possible the 
Congress was to be represented at the second Round Table Con- 
ference. Twice Gandhiji went to Simla to have long conversa- 
tions with the Viceroy and other officials. They discussed many 
of the points at issue, especially the ‘ Redshirt ’ movement in 
the Frontier and U.P. Agrarian situation, the two prob- 
lems, apart from Bengal, which seemed to be worrying the 
Government most. 

Gandhiji had sent for me from Simla, and I had occasion to 
meet some of the Government of India officials also. My talks 
were limited to the U.P. They were frank talks, and the real 
conflicts, which lay behind the petty charges and counter- 
charges, were discussed. I remember being told that the 
Government had been in a position in February 1931 to crush 
the Civil Disobedience movement absolutely within three 
months at the most. They had perfected their machinery of 
repression and only a push had to be given to it; a button 
pressed. But preferring, if possible, a settlement by agreement 
to one imposed by force, they had decided to try the experi- 
ment of mutual talks which had led to the Delhi agreement. 
If the agreement had not come off, the button was always 
there, and could have been pressed at a moment’s notice. And 
there seemed to be a hint that the button might have to be 
pressed in the not distant future if we did not behave. It was 
all said very courteously and very frankly, and both of us knew 
that, quite apart from us and whatever we might say or do, 
conff ct was ineidtable. 

Another high official paid a compliment to the Congress. We 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 385 

were for the moment discussing wider problems of a non- 
political nature, and he told me that, politics apart, the Con- 
gress had done a great service to India. The usual charge 
Drought against Indians was that they were not good organisers, 
but during 1930 the Congress had done a wonderful bit of 
organising, despite enormous difficulties and opposition. 

Gandhiji’s first visit to Simla was inconclusive in so far as the 
question of going to the Round Table Conference was con- 
cerned. The second visit took place in the last week of August. 
A final decision had to be taken one way or the other, but still 
he found it difficult to make up his mind to leave India. In 
Bengal, in the Frontier Province, and in the U.P., he saw 
trouble ahead, and he did not want to go unless he had some 
assurance of peace in India. At last some kind of an agree- 
ment was arrived at with the Government embodied in a 
statement and some letters that were exchanged. This was 
done at the very last moment to enable him to travel by the 
liner that was carrying the delegates to the R.T.C. Indeed, it 
was after the last moment, in a sense, as the last train had gone. 
A special train firom Simla to Kalka was arranged, and other 
trains were delayed to make the connections. 

I accompanied him from Simla to Bombay, and there, one 
bright morning towards the end of August, I waved goodbye 
to him as he was carried away to the Arabian Sea and the 
far West. That was my last glimpse of him for two years. 