A SOUTHERN HOLIDAY 

My doctors urged me to take some rest and go for a chtmge, 
and I decided to spend a month in Ceylon. India, huge as the 
country is, did not offer a real prospect of change or mental 
rest, for wherever I might go, I would probably come across 

g olitical associates and the same problems would pursue me. 

leylon was the nearest place within reach of India, and so to 
Ceylon we went — ^Kamala, Indira and I. That was the first 
holiday I had had since our return from Europe in 1937, the 
first time since then that my wife and daughter and I holidayed 
together peacefully with little to distract our attention. There 
has been no repetition of that experience, and sometimes I 
wonder if there will be any. 

And yet we did not rea% have much rest in Ceylon, except 
for two weeks at Nuwara Eliya.. We were fairly overwhelmed 
by the hospitality and firiendliness of all classes of people there. 
It was very pleasant to find all this goodwill, but it was often 
embarrassing also. At Nuwara Eliya groups of labourers, tea- 
garden workers and others would come dail^, walking many 
miles, bringing gracious gifts with them— wild flowers, vege- 
tables, home-made butter. We could not, as a rule, even con- 
verse together; we merely looked at each other and smiled. 
Our little house was fiiU of these precious gifts of theirs, which 
they had given out of their poverty, and we passed them on to 
the local hospital and orphanages. 

We visited many of the fttmous sights and historical ruins 
of the island, and Buddhist monasteries, and the rich tropical 
forests. At i^uradhapura, I liked greatly an old seated statue 
•of the Buddha. A year later, when I was in Dehra Dun Gaol, a 
friend in Ceylon sent me a picture of this statue, and I kept it 
on my little table in my cell. It became a precious companion 
for me, and the strong, calm features of Buddha’s statue 
soothed me and gave me strength and helped me to overcome 
many a period of depression. 

Buddha has always had a great appeal for me. It is diflScult 
for me to analyse this appeal, but it is not a religious appeal, 
and I am not interested m foe dogmas that have grown up 
round Buddhism. It is the personality that has drawn me. So 
also the personality of Christ has attracted me greatly. 

*71 



JAWAHARLAL NtHRU 


273 

I saw manj Buddhist hhikhus (monks) in their monasteries 
and on the highways, meeting with respect wherever they went. 
The dominant expression of almost all of them was one of 
peace and calm, a strange detachment from the cares of the 
world. They did "not have intellectual faces, as a rule, and 
there was no trace of the fierce conflicts of the mind on their 
countenances. Life seemed to be for them a smooth-flowing 
river moving slowly to the great ocean. I looked at them with 
some envy, with just a faint yearning for a ha!ven, but I knew 
well enough that my lot was a different one, cast in storms and 
tempests. There was to be no haven for me, for the tempests 
within me were as stormy as those outside. And if perchance I 
found myself in a safe harbour, protected from the fury of the 
winds, would I be contented or happy there? 

For a little while the harbour was pleasant, and one could lie 
down and dream and allow the soothing and enervating charm 
of the tropics to steal over one. Ceylon fitted in with my mood 
then, and the beauty of the island filled me with delight. Our 
month of holiday was soon over, and it was with real regret 
that we bade good-bye. So many memories come back to me 
of Ae land and her peoplej they have been pleasant com- 
panions during the long, empty days in prison. One little inci- 
dent lingers in my memory; it was near JafEna, I think. The 
teachers and boys of a school stopped our car and said a few 
words of greeting. The ardent, eager faces of die boys stood 
out, and then one of their number came to me, shook hands 
with me, and without question or argument, said : " I will not 
filter.’' That bright young face with shining eyes, full of deter- 
mination, is imprinted in iny mind. I do not know who he was; 

I have lost trace of him. But somehow I have the conviction 
that he will remain true to his word and will not falter when he 
has to face life’s difficult problems. 

From Ceylon we went to South India, right to the southern 
tip at Cape Comorin. Amazingly peaceful it was there. And 
ffien through Travancore, Cochin, Malabar, Mysore, Hydera- 
uB-d — ^mostly Indian States, some the most progressive of their 
kind, some the most backward. Travancore and Cochin educa- 
tionally far in advance of British India; Mysore probably ahead 
industrially; Hyderabad almost a perfect feudal relic. We re- 
ceived courtesy and welcome everywhere, both from the people 
and the authorities, but bdiind that welcome I could sense 
the armety of the latter lest our visit might lead the people 
to think dangerously, Mysore and Travancore seemed to give 
some avil liberty and opportunities of political work at the 




INDIRA PRIYADARSHINI 
Jawaharlal’s daughter 



A SOUTHERN HOLIDAY 


time; in Hyderabad even this was wholly absent; and I felt, in 
spite of the courtesy that surrounded us, stifled and suffocated. 
Latterly the Mysore and Travancore governments have with- 
dravm even the measure of civil liberty and political activity 
that they had previously permitted. 

In Bangalore, in the Mysore State, I had hoisted at a great 
gathering a national flag on an enormous iron pole. Not long 
after my departure this pole was broken up into bits, and the 
Mysore government made the display of the flag an offence. 
This ill-treatment and insult of the flag I had hoisted pained 
me greatly. 

In Travancore to-day even the Congress has been made an 
unlawful association, and no one can enrol ordinary members 
for it, although in British India it is now laivful since the with- 
drawal of civil disobedience. Thus both Mysore and Travan- 
core are crushing ordinary peaceful political activity and have 
taken back some facilities they had previously allowed. They 
have moved backwards. Hyderabad had no necessity for going 
back or withdrawing facilities, for it had never moved forward 
at all or given any facility of the kind. Political meetings are 
unknown in Hyderabad, and even social and religious gather- 
ings are looked upon with suspicion, and specid permission 
has to be taken for them. There are no newspapers worthy of 
the name issued there, and, in order to prevent the germs of 
corruption from coming from outeide, a large number of news- 
papers published in other parts of India are prevented entry. 
So strict is this policy of exclusion that even Moderate journals 
are excluded. 

In Cochin we visited the quarter of the ‘White Jews’, as 
they are called, and saw one of the services in their old taber- 
nade. The little community is very andent and very unique. 
It is dwindling in numbers. The part of Cochin they live in, 
we were told, resembled andent Jerusalem. It certainly had an 
andent look about it. 

We also visited, along the backwaters of Malabar, some of 
the" towns inhabited chiefly by Christians belonging to the 
Syrian churches. Few people realise that Christianity came to 
India as early as the first century after Christ, long beft>re 
Europe turned to it, and established a firm hold in' South India. 
Although these Christians have their religious head in Antioch 
or somewhere in Syria, their Christianity is practically indi- 
genous and has j^w outside contacts. 

To my surprise, we also came across a colony of Nestorians in 
the South; I was told by their bishop that there were ten thou- 

T 



274 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

sand of them. I had laboured under the impression that the Nes- 
torians had long be.en absorbed in other sects, and I did not 
know that they had ever flourished in India. But I was told 
that at one time they had a fairly large following in India, 
.extending as far north as Benares. 

We had gone to Hyderabad especially to pay a visit to Mrs. 
Sarojini Naidu and her daughters, Padmaja and Leilamani. 
During our stay with them a small purdanashin gathering of 
women assembled at their house to meet my wife, and Kamala 
apparently addressed them. Probably she spoke of women’s 
struggle for freedom against man-made laws and customs (a 
favourite topic of hers) and urged the women not to be too 
submissive to their menfolk. Ihere was an interesting sequel 
to this two or three weeks later, when a distracted husband 
wrote to Kamala from Hyderabad and said that since her visit 
to that city his wife had behaved strangely. She would not 
listen to him and fall in with his wishes, as she used to, but 
would argde with him and even adopt an aggressive attitude. 

Seven weeks after we had sailed from Bombay fer Ceylon we 
were back in that dty, and immediately I plimged again into 
the whirlpool of Congress politics. There were meetings of the 
Working Committee to consider vital problems— a rapidly- 
changing and developing situation in India, the U.P. agrarian 
impasse, the phenomenal growth of the ‘ Redshirt ’ movement 
in the Frontier province under Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s 
leadership, Bengal in an extreme state of tension and sup- 
pressed anger and unrest, the ever-present communal problem, 
and petty local conflicts, over a variety of issues, between Con- 
gressmen and Government oflSdals, involving mutual charges 
of breaches of the Delhi Pact. And then there was the ever- 
recurring question: was the Congress to be represented at the 
second Round Table Conference? Should Mahatma Gandhi go 
there? 