NON-CO-OPERATION 

I HAVE dealt with the Oudh agrarian upheaval in some little 
detail because it lifted the veil and disclosed a fundamental 
aspect of the Indian problem to me to which nationalists had 
paid hardly any attention. Agrarian troubles arc frequently 
taking place in various parts of India, symptoms of a deep- 
seated unrest, and the kisan agitation in certain parts of Oudh 
in 1930 and 1931 was but one of them, though it was, in its own 
way, a remarkable and a revealing one. In its origin it was en- 
tirely unconnected with politics or politicians, and right through 
its course the influence of outsiders and politicians was of tie 
slightest. From an all-India point of view, however, it was a 
local affair and very little attention was paid to it. Even the 
newspapers of the United Provinces largely ignored it. For their 
editors and the majority of their town-dwelling readers, the 
doings of mobs of semi-naked peasants had no real political or 
other significance. 

The Punjab and the Khilafat wrongs were the topics of the 
day, and non-co-operation, which was to attempt to bring about a 
righting of these wrongs, was the all-absorbing subject. The 
larger issue of national freedom or Swaraj was for the moment 
not stressed. Gandhiji disliked vague and big objectives, he 
always preferred concentrating on something specific and defi- 
nite. Nevertheless, Swaraj was very much in the air and in 
people’s thoughts, and frequent reference was made to it in 
innumerable gatherings and conferences. 

In the autumn of 1930 a special session of the Congress met 
at Calcutta to consider what steps should be taken and, in par- 
ticular, to decide about non-co-operation, Lala LajpatRai, freshly 
back from the United States after a long absence from home, 
was the President. He' disliked the new-fangled proposal of non- 
co-operation and opposed it. He was usually considered an 
Extremist in Indian politics, hut his general outlook was defi- 
nitely constitutional and moderate. Force of drcumstances and 
not <moice or convictions had made him an ally of Lokamanya 
Tilak and other Extremists in the early days of the century. 
But he had a social and economic outlook, strengthened by his 
long residence abroad, and this gave him a broader vision than 
that of most Indian leaders. 

e* 



64 JAWAHARI-AL NEHRU 

Wilfrid Scawen Blunt in his “ Diaries ” describes an interview 
he had (about 1909) with Gokhale and Lalaji. He is very hard 
on both, considering them far too cautious and afraid of facing 
realities. And yet Lalaji feced them far more than most Indian 
leaders. Blunt’s impressions make us realise how low was the 
temper of our politics and our leaders at that time, and how 
an able and experienced foreigner was struck by them. But a 
decade had made a great difference to that temper. 

Lala Lajpat Rai was not alone in his opposition; he had a 
great and impressive company with him. Indeed, almost the 
entire Old Guard of the Conmess opposed Gandhiji’s resolution 
of non-co-operation. Mr. C. R. Das led the opposition, not be- 
cause he disapproved of the spirit behind the resolution, for he 
was prepared to go as far or even farther, but chiefly because 
he objected to the boycott of the new legislatures. 

Of the prominent leaders of the older generation my father 
was the only one to take his stand by Gandhiji at that time. It 
was no easy matter for him to do so. He sensed and was much 
influenced by the objections that had led most of his old col- 
leagues to oppose. He hesitated, as they did, to take a novel 
step towards an xmknown re^bn, where it was hardly possible 
to keep one’s old bearings. Yet he was inevitably drawn to 8om6 
form of effective action, and the proposal did embody definite 
action, though not exactly on the lines of his thought. It took 
hikn a long time to make up his mind. He had long talks with 
Gandhiji and Mr. C. R. Das. Mr. Das and he were thrown a 
great deal together just then as they were both appearing, on 
opposite sides, in a big thofussil case. 'They looked at the problem 
ftom much the same point of view and there was very little 
difference between them even as regards the conclusion. Yet 
that little difference was just enough to keep them on either side 
of the main resolution at the Special Congress. Three months 
later they met again at the Nagpur Congress, and from then 
onwards they pulled together, ever coming nearer to ekeh 
other. - 

I saw very little of father in those days before the Calcutta 
Special Congress.' But whenever I met him, I noticed, how he 
was continually grappling with this problem. Quite apart from 
the national aspect of the q^uestion there was the personal aspect. 
Non-co-operation meant his withdrawing firom his legal practice; 
it meant a total break with his past life and a new 
of it— not an easy matter when one is on the eve of one's sixties 
birthday. It was a break from old political colleagues, firom Hs 
profession, firom the sodal life to which he had grown accus- 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


65 

tomed, and a giving up of many an expensive habit which he 
had grown into. For the financial aspect of the question was 
not an unimportant one, and it was obvious that he would have 
to reduce his standard of living if his income from his pro- 
fession vanished. 

But his reason, his strong sense of self-respect, and his pride, 
all led him step by step to throw in his lot wholeheartedly with 
the new movement. The accumulated anger with which a series 
of events, duminating in the Punjab tragedy and its aftermath, 
filled him; the sense of utter wrong-doing and injustice, the 
bitterness of national humiliation, had to find some way out. 
But he was not to be swept away by a wave of enthusiasm. It 
was only when his reason, backed by the trained mind of a 
lawyer, had weighed all the pros and cons that he\ook the final 
decision and joined Gandhiji in his campaign. 

He was attracted by Gandhiji as a man, and that no doubt was 
a factor which influenced him. Nothing could have made him 
a close associate of a person he disliked, for he was always strong 
in his likes and dislikes. But it was a strange combination — the 
saint, the stoic, the man of religion, one who went through life 
rejecting what it offers in the way of sensation and physical 
pleasure, and one who had been a bit of an epicure, who 
accepted life and welcomed and enjoyed its many sensations, 
and cared little for what may come in the hereafter. In the 
language of psychoanalysis it was a meeting of an introvert with 
an extrovert. Yet there were common bonds, common in- 
terests, which drew the two together and kept up, even when, 
in later years, their politics diverged, a close friendship between 
them. 

Walter Pater, in one of his books, mentipns how the saint and 
the epicure, starting from opposed points, travelling different 
paths, one with a rdigious teir^r, the other opposed to it, and 
yet both with an outlook which, in its stress and earnestness, is 
very unlike any lower development of temper, often understand 
ea<±i other better than either would understand the mere man 
of the world— and sometimes they actually touch. 

This Special Session at Calcutta began the Gandhi era in Con- 
gress politics which has lasted since then, except for a period 
in the twenties when he kept in the background and allowed the 
Swaraj Party, under the leadership of Deshbandhu C. R. Das 
and my father, to fill the picture. The whole look of the Con- 
gress changed; European dothes vanished and soon only khadi 
was to be seen; a new class of delegate, chiefly drawn firom the 
lower middle classes became the type of Congressman; the 



66 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

language used became increasingly Hindustani, or sometimes 
the language of the province where the session was held, as 
many of the delegates did not understand English, and there 
was also a growing prejudice against using a foreign language 
in our national work ; and a new life and enthusiasm and earnest- 
ness became evident in Congress gatherings. 

After the Congress was over Gandhiji paid a visit to the 
veteran editor of the Amrit Bazaar Patrika, Syt Motilal Ghose, 
who was lying on his death-bed. I accompanied him. Motilal 
Bahu blessed Gandhiji and his movement, and he added that, 
as for himself, he was going away to other regions, and wherever 
these might be, he had one great satisfaction — ^lie would be some- 
where where the British Empire did not exist. At last he would 
be beyond the reach of this Empire ! 

On our way back from the Calcutta Special Congress I accom- 
panied Gandhiji to Santiniketan on a visit to Rabindra Nath 
Tagore and his most lovahlc elder brother ‘ Boro Dada ’. We 
spent some days there, and I remember C. E. Andrews giving 
me some books which interested and influenced me greatly. 
They dealt with the economic aspects of inmerialism in Africa. 
One of these hooks — ^Morell’s Black Man's Burden — amoved me 
greatly. 

About this time or a little later, C. F. Andrews wrote a pam- 
phlet advocating independence for India. I think it was called 
Independence — the Immediate Need. This was a brilliant essay 
based on some of Seeley’s writings on India, and it seemed to 
me not only to make out an unanswerable case for independence 
but also to mirror the inmost recesses of our hearts. The deep 
urge that moved us and our halflformed desires seemed to take 
clear shape in. his simple and earnest language. There was no 
economic background or socialism in what he had written; it 
was nationalism pure and simple, the feeling of the humiliation 
of India and a fierce desire to be rid of it and to put 
an end to our continuing degradation. It was wonderful that 
C. F. Andrews, a foreigner and one belonging to the dominant 
race in India, should echo that cry of our inmost being. Non- 
co-operation was essentially, as Seeley had said long ago, " the 
notion that it was shameful to assist the foreigner in maintain- 
ing his domination ”. And Andrews had written that " the only 
way of self-recovery was through some vital upheaval &om 
wimin. The explosive force needed for such an upheaval must, 
be generated vdthin the soul of India itself. It could not come 
through loans and gifts and grants and concessions and pro- 
clamations ftom without. It must come from. within . 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


67 

Therefore, it was with the intense joy of mental and spiritual 
deliverance from an intolerable burden, that I watched the 
actual outbreak of such an inner explosive force, as that which 
actually occurred when Mahatma Gandhi spoke to the heart 
of India the mantram . — ‘Be free I Be slaves no more! ’ and 
the heart of India responded. In a sudden moveinent her 
fetters began to be loosened, and the pathway of freedom 
was opened.” 

The next three months witnessed the advancing tide of non- 
co-operation all over the country. The appeal for a boycott of 
the elections to the new legislatures was remarkably successful. 
It did not and could not prevent everybody from going to these 
councils and thus keep the seats vacant. Even a handful of 
voters could elect or there might be an unopposed election. But 
the great majority of voters aljstained from voting, and all who 
cared for the vehemently expressed sense of the country re- 
frained from standing as candidates. Sir Valentine Chirol 
happened to he in Allahabad on the election day, and he made 
a round of the polling booths. He returned amazed at the 
efficiency of the boycott. At one rural polling station, about 
fifteen miles from Allahabad city, he found that not a single 
voter had appeared. He gives an account of his experiences in 
one of his books on India. 

The wisdom of this boycott had been questioned by Mr. C. R. 
Das and others at the Calcutta session, but they stood by the 
Congress decision. The elections being over, this point of dif 
ference was removed, and the next full session of the Congress 
at Nagpur in December 1920 saw a reunion of many of the old 
Congress leaders on the plank of non-co-operation. The very 
success of the movement had convinced many a doubter and 
waverer, 

A few old leaders, however, dropped out of the Congress after 
Calcutta, and among these a popular and well-known figure was 
that of Mr. M. A. Jinnah. Sarojini Naidu had called him the 
“Ambassador of Hindu-Muslim unity”, and he had been 
largely responsible in the past fer bringing the Moslem League 
nearer to the Congress. But the new devdopments in the Con- 
gress — ^non-co-operation and the new constitution which made it 
more of a popular and mass organization — were thoroughly dis- 
approved of by him. He disagreed on political grounds, but it 
was not politics iii the main diat kept him away. There were 
still many people m the Congress who were politically even less 
advanced than he was. But temperamentally he did not fit in 
at all with the new Congress. He felt completely out of his 



68 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

element in the khadi-dad crowd demanding speeches in Hindu- 
stani. The enthusiasm of the people outside struck him as 
mob-hysteria. There was as much difference between him and 
the Indian masses as between Savile Row and Bond Street and 
the Indian village with its mud-huts. He suggested once 
privately that only matriculates should he taken into the Con- 
gress. I do not know if he wa.s serious in making this remarkable 
suggestion, but it was in harmony with his general outlook. So 
he drifted away from the Congress and became a rather solitary 
figure in Indian politics. Later, unhappily, the old Ambassador 
of Unity associated himself with the most reactionary elements 
in Muslim communalism. 

The Moderates or Liberals had, of course, nothing to do with 
the Congress, They not only kept away from it; they merged 
themselves in the Government, became ministers and high 
officials under the new scheme, and helped in fighting non- 
co-operation and the Congress. They had obtained almost what 
they desired, some reforms had been granted, and so there was 
no need for them to agitate. While the country was seething 
with excitement and becoming more and more revolutionary, 
they became frankly counter-revolutionary, a part of the Govern- 
ment itself. They were completely cut off from the people and 
developed a habit, which has persisted since, of looking at prob- 
lems firom the official point of view. They ceased to be a party 
in any real sense and became a small number of individuals 
dotted about in a few big cities. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri became an 
Imperial Envoy, visiting, at the instance of the British Govern- 
ment, various British dominions as well as the United States of 
America, and strongly criticising the Congress and his own 
cotmtrymen for the struggle they were carrying on against that 
Government. 

And yet the Liberals were far from happy. It is not a pleasant 
experience to be cut off from one’s own people, to sense hostility 
even though one may not see it or hear it. A mass upheaval is 
not kind to the non-conformists, though Gandhiji’s repeated 
warnings made non<o-operation far milder and gentler to its 
opponents than it otherwise would have been. But even so, the 
very atmosphere stifled those who opposed the movement, just 
as it invigor^e,d and filled with life and energy those who sup- 
ported itr^mass upheavals and real revolutionary movements 
always have this double effect : they encourage and bring out 
the personality of those whp constitute the masses or side with 
them, and at the same time they suppress psycholoeicallv and 
stifle those who differ from them 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


69 

This was the reason why some people complained that non- 
co-operation was intolerant and tended to introduce a dead 
uniformity of opinion and action. There was truth in this 
complaint, but the truth lay in this, that non-co-operation was 
a mass movement, and it was led by a man of commanding 
personality who inspired devotion in India’s millions. A more 
vital truth, however, lay in its effect on the masses. There was a 
tremendous feeling of release there, a throwing-olf of a great 
burden, a new sense of freedom. The fear that had crushed 
them retired into tlie background, and they straightened their 
backs and raised their heads. Even in remote bazaars the 
common folk talked of the Congress and Swaraj (for the Nagpur 
Congress had finally made Swaraj the goal), and what had hap- 
pened in the Punjab, and the Khilafat — ^but the word ‘ Khilafat ’ 
bore a strange meaning in most of the rural areas. People 
thought it came from Wiilaf, an Urdu word meaning ‘ against ' 
or ‘ opposed to ’, and so they took it to mean : opposed to Govern- 
ment ! They discussed, of course, especially their own particular 
economic grievances. Innumerable meetings and conferences 
added greatly to their political education. 

Many of us who worked for the Congress programme lived 
in a kind of intoxication during the year ipai. We were full of 
excitement and optimism and a buoyant enthusiasm. We §cnsed 
the happiness of a person , crusading for a cause. We were not 
troubled with doubts or hesitation; our path seemed to lie glear 
in front of us and we marched ahead-, lifted up by the en- 
thusiasm of others, and helping to push on others. We worked 
hard, harder than we had ever done before, for we knew 
that the conflict with the Government would come soon, 
and we wanted to do as much as possible before we were 
removed. 

Above all, we had a sense of fireedom and a pride in that firee- 
dom. The old feeling of oppression and frustration was 
completely gone. There was no more whispering, no round- 
about legal phraseology to avoid getting into trouble with the 
authorities. We said what we felt and shouted it out firom the 
house-tops. What did we care for the consequences? Prison? We 
looked forward to it ; that would help our cause still further. The 
irmumerable spies and secret-service men who used to surround 
us and follow us about became rather pitiable individuals as there 
was nothing secret for them to discover. All our cards were 
always on ihe table. 

We had not only a feeling of satisfaction at doing efiective 
political work which was changing the face of India before our 



70 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

eyes and, as wc believed, bringing Indian freedom very near, 
but also an agreeable sense of moral superiority over our 
opponents, both in regard to our goal and our methods. We 
were proud of our leader and of the unique method he had 
evolved, and often we indulged in fits of self-righteousness. In 
the midst of strife, and while we ourselves encouraged that 
strife, we had a sense of inner peace. 

As our moral grew, that of the Government went down. They 
did not understand what was happening; it seemed that the 
old world they knew in India was toppling down. There was a 
new aggressive spirit abroad and self-reliance and fearlessness, 
and the great prop of British rule in India — prestige — was 
visibly wilting. Repression in a small way only strengthened 
the movement, and the Government hesitated for long before 
it would take action against the big leaders. It did not know 
what the consequences might be. Was the Indian Army 
reliable? Would the police carry out orders? As Lord Reading, 
the Viceroy, said in December 1921, they were "puzzled and 
perplexed 

An interesting circular was sent confidentially by the 
U.P. Government to its district officers in the summer of 
1921. This circular, which was published later in a newspaper, 
stated with sorrow that the “ initiative ” was always with the 
"enemy”, meaning the Congress, and this was an unfortu- 
nate state of affairs. Various methods were then suggested to 
regain the initiative, among them being the starting of those 
ludicrous bodies, the “ Aman Sabhas It was believed that this 
particular method of combating non-co-operation was adopted 
at the suggestion of the Liberal Ministers. 

The nerves of many a British official began to give way. The 
strain was great. There was this ever-growing opposition and 
spirit of defiance which overshadowed official India like a vast 
monsoon cloud, and yet because of its peaceful methods it 
offered no handle, no grip, no opportunity for forcible sup- 
pression. The average En^ishman did not believe in the hona- 
fides of non-violence; he thought that all this was camouflage, 
a cloak to cover some vast secret design which would burst out 
in violent upheaval one day. Nurtured from childhood in the 
wide-spread belief that the East is a mysterious place, and in its 
bazaars and narrow lanes secret conspiracies are being continu- 
ally hatched, the Englishman can seldom think straight on 
matters relating to these lands of supposed mystery! He never 
makes an 'attempt to understand that somewhat obvious and 
very unmysterious person the Easterner. He keeps well away 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


71 

from him, gets his ideas about him from tales abounding in spies 
and secret societies, and then allows his imagination to run riot. 
So it was in the Punjab early in April 1919 when a sudden fear 
overwhelmed the authorities and the English people generally, 
made them see danger everywhere, a widespread rising, a second 
mutiny with its frightful massacres, and, in a blind, instinctive 
attempt at self-preservation at any cost, led them to that 
frightfulness, of which Jallianwala and the Crawling Lane of 
Amritsar have become symbols and byw'ords. 

The year 1921 was a year of great tension, and there was much 
to irritate and annoy and unnerve the official. What was actu- 
ally happening was bad enough, but what was imagined was 
far worse. I remember an instance which illustrates this riot of 
the imagination. My sister Swarup’s wedding, which was taking 
place at Allahabad, was fixed for the loth May, 1921, the actual 
date having been calculated, as usual on such occasions, by a 
reference to the Samvat calendar, and an auspicious day chosen. 
Gandhiji and a number of leading Congressmen, including the 
Ali brothers, had been invited, and to suit their convenience, 
a meeting of the Congress Working Committee was fixed at 
Allahabad about that time. The local Congressmen wanted to 
profit by the presence of famous leaders from outside, and so 
they organised a district conference on a big scale, expect- 
ing a large number of peasants from the surrounding rural 
areas. 

There was a great deal of bustle and excitement in Allahabad 
on account of Uiese political gatherings. This had a remarkable 
effect on the nerves of some people. I learnt one day through a 
barrister ffiend that many English people were thoroughly upset 
and expected some sudden upheaval in the city. They distrusted 
their Indian servants, and carried about revolvers in their 

E ockets. It was even said privately that the Allahabad Fort was 
ept in readiness for the English colony to retire tliere in case 
of need. I was much surprised and could not make out why 
any one should contemplate the possibility of a rising in the 
sleepy and peaceful city of Allahabad just when the very apostle 
of non-violence was going to visit us. Oh, it was said. May loth 
(the day accidentally fixed for my sister’s marriage) was the anni- 
versary of the outbreak of the Mutiny at Meerut in 1857 and 
tliis was going to be celebrated I 
Owing to the prominence given to the Khilafat movement in 
1921 a large number of Moulyies and Muslim religious leaders 
took a prominent part in the political struggle. They gave a 
definite religious tinge to the movement, and Muslims generally 



72 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were greatly influenced by it. Many a Westernised Muslim, who 
was not of a particularly religious turn of mind, began to grow 
a beard and otherwise conform to the tenets of Orthodoxy. The 
influence and prestige of the Moulvics, which had been gradu- 
ally declining owing to new ideas and a progressive Westernisa- 
tion, began to grow again and dominate the Muslim community. 
The Ali brothers, themselves of a religious turn of mind, helped 
in this process, and so did Gandhiji, who paid the greatest regard 
to the Moulvies and the Maulanas. 

Gandhiji, indeed, was continually laying stress on the religious 
and spiritual side of the movement. His religion was not dog- 
matic, but it did mean a definitely religious outlook on life, and 
the whole movement was strongly influenced by this and took 
on a revivalist character so far as the masses were concerned. 
The great majority of Congress workers naturally tried to model 
themselves alter their leader and even repeated his language. 
And yet Gandhiji's leading colleagues in the Working Com- 
mittee— my father, Deshbandhu Das, Lala Lajpat Rai, and 
others— were nor men of religion in the ordinary sense of the 
word, and they considered political problems on the political 
plane only. In their public utterances they did not bring in 
religion. But whatever they said had far less influence than the 
force of their personal example — ^had they not given up a great 
deal that the world values and taken to simpler ways of living? 
This in itself was taken as a sign "of religion and helped in 
spreading the atmosphere of revivalism. 

I used to be troubled sometimes at the growth of this religious 
element in our politics, both on the Hindu and the Muslim side. 
I did not like it at all. Much that Moulvies and Maulanas and 
Swamis and the like said in their public addresses seemed to me 
most unfortunate. Their history and sociology and economics 
appeared to me all wrong, and the religious twist that was given 
to everjrthing prevented all clear thinking. Even some of 
Gandhiji’s phrases sometimes jarred upon me— thus his frequent 
reference to Rama Raj as a golden age which was to return. But 
I was powerless to intervene, and I consoled myself with the 
thought that Gandhiji used the words because they were well 
known and understood by the masses. He had an amazing knack 
of reaching the heart of the people. — • . 

But I did not worry myself much over these matters. I was 
too full of my work and the progress of our movement to care 
for such trifles, as I thought at the time they were. A vast move- 
ment had all sorts and kinds of people in it, and so long as our 
main direction was correct, a few eddies and bac^^waters did not 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


73 

matter. As for Gandhiji himself, he was a very difficult person 
to understand, sometimes his language was almost incom- 
prehensible to an average modern. But we felt that we knew 
him quite well enough to realise that he was a great and unique 
man and a glorious leader, and having put our faith in him we 
gave him an almost blank cheque, for the time being at least. 
Often we discussed his fads and peculiarities among ourselves 
and said, half-humorously, that when Swaraj came these fads 
must not be encouraged. 

Many of us, however, were too much under his influence in 
political and other matters to remain wholly immune even in 
the sphere of religion. Where a direct attack might not have 
succeeded, many an indirect approach went a long way to under- 
mine the defences. The outward ways of religion did not appeal 
to me, and above all I disliked the exploitation of the people by 
the so-called men of religion, but still I toned down towards it. 
I came nearer to a religious frame of mind in 1921 than at any 
other time since my early boyhood. Even so I did not come very 
near. 

What I admired was the moral and ethical side of our 
movement and of satyagraha. I did not give an absolute 
allegiance to the doctrine of non-violence or accept it for ever, 
but it attracted me more and more, and the belief grew upon 
me that, situated as we were in India and with our background 
and traditions, it was the right policy for us. The spiritualisation 
of politics, using the word not in its narrow religious sense, 
seemed to me a fine idea. A worthy end should have worthy 
means leading up to it. That seemed not only a good ethical 
doctrine but sound, practical politics, for the means that are not 
good often defeat the end in view and raise new problems and 
difficulties. And then it seemed so unbecoming, so degrading 
to the self-respect of an individual or a nation to submit to such 
means, to go through the mire. How can one escape being sullied 
by it? How can we march ahead swiftly and with dignity if we 
stoop or crawl? 

Such were my thoughts then. And the non<o-operation move- 
ment offered me what I wanted— the goal of national freedom 
and (as I thought) the ending of the exploitation of the under- 
dog, and the means which satisfied my moral sense and gave me 
a sense of personal freedom. So great was this personal satis- 
ftiction that even a possibility of failure did not count for much, 
for such failure could only be temporary. I did not understand 
dr feel drawn to the metaphysical part of the Bhagavad Gita, 
but I l^ff to read the verses— recited every evening in Gandhiji’s 



74 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ashram prayers — which say what a man should be like : Calm 
of purpose, serene and unmoved, doing his job and not caring 
overmuch for the result of his action. Not being very calm or 
detached myself, I suppose, this ideal appealed to me all the 
more. 