AN INTERLUDE AT NABHA 

The tug-of-war between the Swarajists and the No-changers 
went on, the former gradually gaining. Another stage, marking 
a Swarajist advance, was reached at a special session of the 
Congress held at Delhi in the autumn of 1933. It was 
immediately after this Congress that I had a strange and un- 
expected adventure. 

The Sikhs, and especially the Akalis among them, had been 
coming into repeated conflict with the Government in the Pun- 
jab. A revivalist movement among them had taken it upon 
Itself to purge their Gurdwaras by driving out corrupt Mahants 
and taking possession of the places of worship and the property 
belonging to them.' The Government intervened and there was 
conflict. The Gurdwara movenient was partly due to the general 
awakening caused by non-co-operation, and the methods of the 
Akalis were modelled on non-violent Satyagraha. Many incidents 
took place, but chief among them was the famous Guru-ka-Bagh 
struggle, where scores of Sikhs, many of them eac-soldiers, 
allovired themselves to be brutally beaten by the police without 
raising their hands or turning back flom their mission. India 
was startled by this amazing display of tenacity and courage. ‘ 
The Gurdwara Committee was declared illegal oy the Govern- 
ment, and the struggle continued for some years and ended in 
the victory of the Sikhs. The Congress was naturally sympa- 
thetic, and for some time it had a special liaison officer in 
Amritsar to keep in close touch with the Akali movement. 

The incident to which I am going to refer had little to do with 
this general Sikh movement, but there is no doubt that it 
occurred because of this Sikh upheaval. The rulers of two Sikh 
States in the Punjab, Patiala, and Nabha, had a bitter, personal 
quarrel which resulted ultimately in the deposition of the 
Maharaja of Nabha by the Government of India. A British 
Administrator was appointed to rule the Nabha State. This 
deposition was resented by the Sikhs, and they agitated against 
it both in Nabha and outside. In the course of diis agitation, 
a religious ceremony, at a place called Jaito in Nabha State, was 
stopped by the new Administrator. To protest against this, and 
with the declared object of continuing the interrupted cere- 
mony, the Sikhs began sending jathas (batches of men) to Jaito; 

ICO 



no JAWAHARLAL NEHBU 

These jathas were stopped, beaten by the police, arrested, and 
usually carried to an out-oTthe-way place in the jungle and left 
there. I had been reading accounts of these beatings from, time 
to time, and when I learnt at Delhi, immediately after the 
Special Congress, that another jatha was going and I was in- 
vited to come and see what happened, I gladly accepted the 
invitation. It meant the loss of only a day to me, as Jaito was 
near Delhi. Two of my Congre.ss colleagues — ^A. T. Gidwani and 
K, Santanum of Madras — accompanied me. The jatha marched 
most of the way. It was arranged that we should go to the 
nearest railway station and then try to reach by road the Nabha 
boundary near Jaito just when the jatiin was due to arrive there. 
We arrived in time, having come in a country cart, and followed 
the jatha, keeping apart from it. On arrival at Jaito the jatha 
was stopped by the police, and immediately an order was served 
on me, signed by the English Administrator, calling upon me 
not to enter Nabha territory, and if I had entered it, to leave it 
immediately, A similar order was served on Gidwani and 
Santanum, but without their names being mentioned, as the 
Nabha authorities did not know them. My colleagues and I told 
the police officer that we were there not as part of the jatha but 
as spectators, and it was not our intention to break any of the 
Nabha laws. Besides, when we were already in the Nabha ter- 
ritories there could be no question of our not entering them, 
and obviously we could not vanish suddenly into thin air. 
Probably the next train from Jaito went many hours later. So 
for the present, we told him, we proposed to remain there. We 
were immediately arrested and taken to the lock-up. After our 
removal the jatha was dealt with in the usual manner. 

We were kept the whole day in the lock-up and in the evening 
we were marched to the station. Santanum and I were hand- 
cuffed together, his left wrist to my right one, and a 
attached to the handcuff was held by the policeman leading us. 
Gidwani, also handcuffed and chained, brought up the rear. 
This march of ours down the streets of Jaito town reminded me 
forably of a dog being led on by a chain. We felt somewhat 
Irritated to begin with, but the humour of the situation dawned 
upon us, and on the whole we enjoyed the experience. We did 
not OTjoy night that followed. This was partly spent in 
crowded third-class compartments in slow-moving trains, with 
A « S’ midnight, and partly in a lock-up at Nabha. 

this ttme, till the forenoon of next day, when we were finally 
delivered up at the Nabha Gaol, the joint handcuff and the 
heavy chain kept us company. Neither of us could move at all 

without the other’s co-operation. To be bandcufi'ed to another 
person for a whole night and part of a day is not an experience 
I should like to repeat. 

In Nabha Gaol we were all three kept in a most unwholesome 
and insanitary cell. It was small and damp, with a low ceiling 
which we could almost touch. At night we slept on the floor, 
and I would wake up with a start, full of horror, to find that a 
rat or a mouse had just' passed over my face. 

Two or three days later we were taken to court for our case, 
and the most extraordinary and Gilbertian proceedings went on 
there from day to day. The magistrate or judge seemed to he 
wholly uneducated. He knew no English, of course, but I doubt 
if he knew how to write the court language, Urdu. We watched 
him for over a week, and during all this time he never wrote a 
line. If he wanted to write anything he made the court reader 
do it. We put in a number of small applications. He did not 
pass any orders on them at the time. He kept them and pro- 
duced them the next day with a note written by somebody else 
on them. We did not formally defend ourselves. We had got 
so used to not defending cases in court during the non-co- 
operation movement that the idea of defence, even when 
it was manifestly permissible, seemed almost indecent. But 
I gave the court a long statement containing the facts, as well 
as my own opinion about Nahha ways, especially under British 
administration. 

Our case was dragging on firom day to day although it was a 
simple enough affair. Suddenly there was a diversion. One after- 
noon after the court had risen for the day we were kept waiting 
in the building; and late in the evening, at about 7 p.ra., we were 
taken to another room where a person was sitting by a table 
and there were some other people about. One man, our old friend 
the police officer who had arrested us at Jaito, was there, and he 
got up and began making a statement, I inquired where we 
were and what was happening. I was informed that it was a 
court-room .and we were being tried for conspiracy. This was an 
entirely different proceeding firom the one we had so for at- 
tended, which was for breadi of the order not to enter Nabha 
territory. It was evidently thought that the maximum sentence 
for this breach being only six months was not enough punish- 
ment for us and a more serious charge was necessary. Apparently 
three were not enough for conspiracy, and so a fourth man, who 
had absolutely nothing to do with us, was arrested and put on his 
trial with us. This unhapj^y man, a Sikh, was not known to us, 
but we had just seen him m the fields on our Way to Jaito. 



II2 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The lawyer in me was rather taken aback by the casu alness 
with which a conspiracy trial had been started. The case t^s a 
totally false oheTiJUt decency required that some formalities 
should be observed. I pointedout to the judge that we had had 
no notice whatever and that we might have wanted to make 
arrangements for our defence. This did not worry him at all. It 
was the Nabha way. If we wanted to engage a lawyer for our 
defence we could chose some one in Nabha. When I suggested 
that I might want some lawyer from outside I was told that this 
was not permitted under the Nabha rules. We were fiirther 
enlightened about the peculiarities of Nabha procedure. In 
some disgust we told the judge to do what he liked, but so far 
as we were concerned we would take no part in the proceedings. 
I could not wholly adhere to this resolve. It was difficult to listen 
to the most astounding lies about us and remain silent, and so 
occasionally we expressed our opinion, briefly but pointedly, 
about the witnesses. We also gave the court a statement in writ- 
ing about the facts. This second judge, who tried the conspiracy 
case, was more educated and intelligent than the other one. 

Both these cases went on and we looked forward to our daily 
visits to the two courts-rooms, for that meant a temporary escape 
from the foul cell in gaol. Meanwhile, we were approached, on 
behalf of the Administrator, by the Superintendent of the'gaol, 
and told that if we would express our regret and give an under- 
taking to go away from Nabha, the proceedings against us would 
be dropped. We replied that there was nothing to express regret 
about, so far as we were concerned; it was for the administra- 
tion to apologise to us. We were also not prepared to give any 
undertaking. ® ^ 

About a fortnight after our arrest the two trials at last ended. 
All this lime had been, taken up by the prosecution, for we were 
not defending. Much of it had been wasted in long waits, for 
every little difficulty that arose necessitated an adjournment or 
a reference to^ some authority behind the scenes — ^probably the 
English Administrator. On the last day when the prosecution 
case was closed we handed in our written statements. The first 
com adjourned and, to our surprise, returned a little later with 
a bulky judgment written out in Urdu. Obviously this huge 
pdgment could not have been written during the interval. It 
Md been prepared before our statements had been handed in. 
Ihe judgment was not read out; we were merely told that we 
had been awarded the maximum sentence of six months for 
breach of the order to leave Nabha territory. 

In the conspiracy case we were sentenced the same day to 



AN INTiHLUOJi, AT NABtlA 1 I 3 

either eighteen months or two years, I forget which. This was to 
be in addition to the sentence for six months. Thus we were 
given in all either two years or two and a half years. 

Right through our trial there had been any number of 
remarkable incidents which gave us some insight into the re- 
alities of Indian State administration, or rather the British 
administration of an Indian State. TTie whole procedure was 
farcical. Because of this I suppose no newspaperman or outsider 
was allowed in court. The police did what they pleased, and 
often ignored the judge or magistrate and actually disobeyed 
his directions. The poor magistrate meekly put up with this, 
but we saw no reason why we should do so. On several occasions 
I had to stand up and insist on the police behaving and obeying 
the magistrate. Sometimes there was an unseemly snatching of 
papers hy the police, and the magistrate, being incapable of 
action or of introducing order in his own court, we had partly 
to do his job ! The poor magistrate was in an imhappy position. 
He was afraid of the police, and he seemed to be a little 
frightened of us, too, for our arrest had been noised in the 
press. If this was the state of affairs when more or less pro- 
minent politicians like us w^e concerned, what, I wonder, would 
be the fate of others less known? 

My father knew something of Indian States, and so he was 
greatly upset at my tmexpected arrest in Nabha. Only the fact 
of arrest was known; little else in the way of news could leak 
out. In his distress he even telegraphed to the Viceroy for news 
of me. Difficulties were put in the way of his visiting me in 
Nabha, but he was’ allowed at last to interview me in prison. He 
could not be of any help to me, as I was not defending myself, 
and I begged him to go back to Allahabad and not to worry. He 
returned, but he left a young lawyer colleague of ours, Kapil 
Dev Malaviya, in Nabha to watch the proceedings. Kapil Dev’s 
knowledge of law and procedure must have been considerably 
augmented by his brief experience of the Nabha Courts. The 
poHce tried to deprive him forcibly in open court of some papers 
that he had. ' 

Most of the Indian States are well known for their, back- 
wardness and their semi-ffiudal conditions. They are personal 
autocracies, devoid even of competence or benevolence. Many 
a strange thing occurs there whida never receives publidty. And 
yet their very inefficiency lessens the evil in some ways and 
lightens the burden, on. their unhappy people. For this is re- 
flected in a weak executive, and it results in making even tyranny 
and injustice inefficient. That does not make tyranny more 



1 14 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

bearable, but it does make it less far-reaching and widespread. 
Ihe assumption of direct British control over an Indian State 
has a curious result in changing this equilibrium. The semi- 
feudal conditions are retained, autberaejr is kept, the old laws 
and procedure are still supposed to function, all the restrictions 
on personal liberty and association and expression of opinion 
(and these are all-embracing) continue, but one change is made 
which alters the whole background. The executive becomes 
stronger and a measure of effiaency is introduced, and this leads 
to a tightening-up of all the feudal and autocratic bonds. In 
course of time the British administration would no doubt 
change some of the archaic customs and methods, for they come 
in the way of efficient government as well as commercial pene- 
tration. But to begin with they take full advantage of them to 
tighten their hold on the people who have now to put up not 
only with feudalism and autocracy, but with an efficient enforce- 
ment of them by a strong executive. 

I saw something of this in Nabha. The State was under a 
British Administrator, a member of the Indian Civil Service, 
and he had the full powers of an autocrat, subject only to the 
Government of India. And yet at every turn we were referred 
to Nabha laws and procedure to justify the denial of the most 
ordinary rights. We had to face a combination of feudalism 
and the modem bureaucratic machine with the disadvantages of 
of both and the advantages of neither. 

So our trial was over and we had been sentenced. We did not 
know what the judgments contained, but the solid fact of a long 
sentence had a sobering effect. We asked for copies of the 
jud^ents, and were told to apply formally for them. 

Tnat evening in gaol the Superintendent sent for us and 
showed us an order of the Administrator under the Criminal 
Procedure Code suspending our sentences. There was no con- 
dition attached, and the legal result of that order was that the 
sentences ended so far as we were concerned. The Superintendent 
then produced a separate order called an Executive Order, also 
issued by the Administrator, asking us to leave Nabha and not to 
return to the State without special permission. I asked for the 
copies of the two orders, but they were refused. We were then 
escorted to the railway station and released there. We did not 
know a soul in Nabha, and even the city gates had been closed 
for the night. We found that a train was leaving soon for 
Ambala, and'we took this. From Ambala I went on to Delhi and 
Allahabad. 

From Allahabad I wrote to the Administrator requesting him 



AN INTERLUDE AT NABHA II5 

to send me copies of his two orders, so that I might know exactly 
what they were, also copies of the two judgments. He refused 
to supply any of these copies. I pointed out that I might decide 
to file an ^peal, but he persisted in his refusal. In spite of 
repeated efforts I have never had the opportunity to read these 
judgments, wrhich sentenced me and my two colleagues to two 
years or two and a half years. For aught I know, these sentences 
may still be hanging over me, and may take effect whenever 
the Nabha authorities or the British Government so choose. 

The three of us were discharged in this ‘ suspended ' way, but 
I could never find out what had happened to the fourth mem- 
ber of the alleged consjpiracy, the Sikh who had been tacked on 
to us for the second trial. Very likely he was not discharged. 
He had no powerful friends or public interest to help him and, 
like many another person, he sank into the oblivion of a State 
prison. He was not forgotten by us. We did what we could and 
this was very little, and, I believe, the Gurdwara Committee 
interested itself in his case also. We found out that he was one 
of the old ‘ Komagata Maru ’ lot, and he had only recently come 
out of prison after a long period. The police do not believe in 
leaving such people out, and so they tacked him on to the 
trumped-up charge against us. 

All three of us — Gidwani, Samamim and I — ^brought an un- 
pleasant companion with us firom our cell in Nabha Gaol. This 
was the typhus germ, and each one of us had an attack of 
typhoid. Mine was severe and for a while dangerous enough, 
but it was the lightest of the three, and I was only bed-ridden 
for about three or four weeks, but the other two were very 
seriously ill for long periods. 

There was yet another sequel to this Nabha episode. Probably 
six months, or more, later Gidwani was acting as the Congress 
representative in Amritsar, keeping in touch with the Sikh 
Gurdwara Committee. The Committee sent a special jatha of 
five hundred persons to Jaito, and Gidwani decided to accom- 
pany it as an observer to the Nabha border. He had no intention 
of entering Nabha territory. The jatha was fired on by the 
police near the border, and many persons were, I believe, killed 
and wounded. Gidwani went to die help of the wounded when 
he was pounced upon by the police and taken away. No pro- 
ceedings in court were taken against him. He was simply kept 
in prison for the best part of a year when, utterly broken in 
health, he was discharged, 

Gidwani’s arrest and confinement seemed to me to be a mon- 
strous abuse of executive authority. I wrote to , the Adminis- 



JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 


Il6 

trator (who was still the same English member of the I.C.S.) 
and asked him why Gidwani had been treated in this way. He 
replied that Gidwani had been imprisoned because he had 
broken the order not to enter Nabha territory without per- 
mission. I challenged the legality of this as well as, of course, 
the propriety of arresting a man who was giving succour to 
the wounded, and I asked the Administrator to send me or pub- 
lish a copy of the order in question. He refused to do so. I felt 
inclined to go to Nabha myself and allow the Administrator 
to treat me as he had treated Gidwani. Loyalty to a colleague 
seemed to demand it. But many friends thought otherwise and 
dissuaded me. I took shelter behind the advice of friends, and 
made of it a pretext to cover my own weakness. For, after all, 
it was my weakness and disinclination to go to Nabha Gaol again 
that kept me away, and I have always felt a little ashamed of 
thus deserting a colleague. As often with us all, discretion was 
preferred to valour. 

