II 


CHILDHOOD 

My childhood was thus a sheltered and uneventful one. I 
listened to the grown-up talk of my cousins without always un- 
derstanding all of it. Often this talk related to the overbearing 
character and insulting manners of the English people, as well as 
Eurasians, towards Indians, and how it was the duty of every 
Indian to stand up to this and not to tolerate it. Instances of con- 
flicts between the rulers and the ruled were common and were 
fully discussed. It was a notorious fact that whenever an English- 
man killed an Indian he was acquitted by a jury of his own 
countrymen. In railway trains compartments .were reserved for 
Europeans and however crowded the train might be— and they 
used to be terribly crowded — ^no Indian was allowed to travel in 
them, even though they were empty. Even an unreserved com- 
partment would be taken possession of by an Englishman and he 
would not allow any Indian to enter it. Benches and chairs were 
also reserved for Europeans in public parks and other places. I 
was filled vnth resentment against the alien rulers of my country 
who misbehaved in this manner, and whenever an Indian hit back 
I was glad. Not infrequently one of my cousins or one of their 
fiiends became personally involved in these individual encounters 
and then of course we all got very excited over it. One of the 
cousins was the strong man of the family and he loved to pick a 
quarrd with an Englishman, or more frequently with Eurasians, 
who, perhaps to show off their oneness with the ruling race, were 
often even more offensive than the English official or merchant. 
Such quarrels took place especially during railway journeys. 

Mudx as I began to resent the presence and behaviour of the 
alien rulers, I had no feeling whatever, so far as I can remember, 
against individual Englishmen. I had had English governesses 
and occasionally I saw English friends of my father's visiting 
lum. In my heart I rather admired the English. 

In the evenings usually many fiiends came to visit ftither and 
he would relax after the tension of the day and the house would 
resound with his tremendous laughter. His laugh became ftmous 
in Allahabad. Sometimes I would peep at him arid his friends 
from behind a curtain, trying to m^e out what these great big 
people said to each other. If I was caught in the act I would be 
dragged out and, rather firigbtened, made to sit for a while on 



(JHILUuUUU 


7 

father’s knee. Once I saw him drinking claret or some other red 
wine. Whisky I knew. 1 had often seen him and his hiends drink 
it. But the new red stuff filled me with horror and I rushed to 
my mother to tell her that father was drinking blood. 

I admired father tremendously. He seemed to me the embodi- 
ment of strength and courage and cleverness, far above all the 
other men I saw, and I treasured the hope that when I grew up 
I would be rather like him. But much as I admired him and 
loved him I feared him also. I had seen him losing his temper at 
servants and others and he seemed to me terrible then and I 
shivered with fright, mixed sometimes with resentment, at the 
treatment of a servant. His temper was indeed an awful thing 
and even in after years I do not think I ever came across anything 
to match it in its own line. But, fortunately, he had a strong 
sense of humour also and an iron will, and he could control 
himself as a rule. As he grew older this power of control grew- 
and it was very rare for him to indulge in anything like his old 
temper. 

One of my earliest recollections is of this temper, for I was the 
victim of it. I must have been about five or six then. I noticed 
one day two fountain-pens on his office table and I looked at them 
with greed. I argued with myself that father could not require 
both at the same time and so I helped myself to one of them. 
Later I foimd that a mighty search was being made for the lost 
pen and I grew frightened at what I had done, but I did not 
confess. The pen was discovered and my guilt proclaimed to the 
world. Father was very angry and he gave me a tremendous 
thrashing. Almost blind with pain and mortification at my 
disgrace 1 rushed to mother, and for several days various creams 
and ointments were applied to my aching and quivering little 
body. 

I do not remember bearing any ill-will towards my father be- 
cause of this punishment. I think I must have felt tliat it was a 
just punishment, though perhaps overdone. But though my 
admiration and affection for him remained as strong as ever, fear 
formed a part of them. Not so with my mother. I had no fear of 
her, for I knew that she would condpne everythii^ I did, and, 
because of her excessive and indiscriminating love for me, I tried 
to dominate over her a little. I saw much more of her than I 
did of father and she seemed nearer to me and I would confide 
in her when I would not dream of doing so to father. She was 
petite and short of stature and soon I was almost as tall a$ she 
waT and felt more of an equal with her. I admired her beauty 
and loved her amazingly small and beautiful hands and feet. 



8 JAWAHARLAL NEH.RU 

She belonged to a fresher stock from Kashmir and her people 
had only left the homeland two generations back. 

Another of my early confidants was a munshi of my father’s, 
Munshi Mubarak Ali. He came from a well-to-do family of 
Badaun. The Revolt of 1857 had ruined the family and the 
English troops had partly exterminated it. This affliction had 
made h im gentle and forbearing with everybody, especially with 
r hi l rlren, and for me he was a sure haven of refuge whenever I 
was unhappy or in trouble. With his fine grey beard he seemed 
to my young eyes very ancient and full of old-time lore, and I 
used to snuggle up to him and listen, wide-eyed, by the hour to 
his innumerable stories — old tales from the Arabian Nights or 
other sources, or accounts of the happenings in 1857 and 1858. 
It was many years later, when I was grown up, that “ Munshiji ” 
died, and the memory of him still remains with me as a dear 
and precious possession. 

There were other stories also that I listened to, stories from the 
old Hindu mythology, from the epics, the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata, that my mother and aunt used to tell us. My 
aunt, the widow of Pandit Nand Lai, was learned in the old 
Indian books and had an inexhaustible simply of these tales, and 
my knowledge of Indian mythology and folklore became quite 
considerable. 

Of religion I had very hazy notions. It seemed to be a woman’s 
affair. Father and my older cousins treated the question humor- 
ously and refused to take it seriously. The women of the family 
indulged in various ceremonies and pujas from time to time and 
I rather enjoyed them, though I tried to imitate to some extent 
the casual attitude of the grown-up men of the family. Some- 
times I accompanied my mother or aunt to the Ganges for a dip, 
sometimes we visited temples in Allahabad itself or in Benares 
or elsewhere, or went to sec a sanyasi reputed to be very holy. 
But all this left little impression on my mind. 

Then there were the great festival days — ^the Holi, when all 
over the city there was a spirit of revelry and we could squirt 
water at each other; the Divali, the festival of light, when all the 
houses were lit up with thousands of dim lights in earthen 
cups; the Janmashtami to celebrate the birth in prison of 
Kmhna at the midnight hour (but it was veiy difficult for us to 
keep awake till then); the Dasehra and Ram Lila when tableaux 
and processions re-enacted the old story of Ramachandra and his 
conquest of Lanka and vast crowds assembled to see them. All 
the children also went to see the Mohurrum processions with 
their silken alums and their sorrowful celebration of the tragic 





CtllLUUOOU 


Story of Hasan and Husain in distant Arabia. And on the two Id 
days Muiishiji would'dress up in his best attire and go to the big 
mosque for prayers, and I would go to his house and consume 
sweet vermicelli and other dainties. And then there were the 
smaller festivals of which there are many in the Hindu calendar, 
Rakshabandhan, Bhayya duj, etc. 

Amongst us and the other Kashmiris there were also some 
special celebrations which were not observed by most of the 
other Hindus. Chief of these was the Naoroz, the New Year’s 
Day according to the Samvat calendar. This was always a special 
day for us when all of us wore new clothes, and the young people 
of the house got small sums of money as tips. 

But more than all these festivals I was interested in one annual 
event in which I played the central part^ — ^the celebration of the 
anniversary of my birth. This was a day of great excitement for 
me. Early in the morning I was weighed in a huge balance 
against some bagfuls of wheat and other articles which were then 
distributed to the poor ; and then I arrayed myself in new clothes 
and received presents, and later in the day there was a party. I 
felt the hero of the occasion. My chief grievance was that my 
birthday came so rarely. Indeed I tried to start an agitation for 
more frequent birthdays. I did not realize then that a time would 
come when birthdays would become unpleasant reminders of 
advancing age. 

Sometimes the whole family journeyed to a distant town to 
attend a marriage, either of a cousin of mine or of some more 
distant relation or fiiriend. Those were exciting journeys for us, 
children, for all rules were relaxed during these marriage festivi- 
ties and we had the free run of the place. Numerous frunilies 
usually lived crowded together in the shadi-khana, the marriage 
house, where the party stayed, and there were many boys and 
girls and children. On these occasions I could not complain of 
loneliness and we had our heart’s fill of play and mischief, with 
an occasional scolding from our elders. 

Indian marriages, biDth among the rich and the poor, have had 
their full share of condemnation as wasteful and extravagant 
display. They deserve all this, fiven apart from the waste, it is 
most painful to see the vulgar display which has no artistic or 
aesthetic value of any kind. (Needless to say there are excep- 
tions.) For all this the really guilty people are the middle classes. 
The poor are also extrava^mt, even at the cost of burdensome 
debts, but it is the height of absurdity' to say, as some people do, 
that their poverty is due to their social customs! It is often for- 
gotten that the life of the poor is terribly dull and monotonodsi. 



10 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and an occasional marriage celebration, bringing with it sortie 
feasting and singing, comes to them as an oasis in a desert of 
soulless toil, a refuge from domesticity and the prosaic business 
of life. Who would be cruel enough to deny this consolation to 
them, who have such few occasions for laughter? Stop waste by 
all means, lessen the extravagance (big and foolish words to use 
for the little show that the poor put up in their poverty I), but 
do not make their life more drab and cheerless than it is. 

So also for the middle classes. Waste and extravagance apart 
these marriages are big social reunions where distant relations 
and old friends meet after long intervals. India is a big country 
and it is not easy for friends to meet, and for many to meet 
together at the same time is stiU more difficult. Hence the popu- 
larity of the marriage celebrations. The only rival to them, and 
it has already excelled them in many ways even as a social 
reunion, is the political gathering, the various conferences, or 
the Qmgressl 

Kashmiris have had one advantage over many others in India, 
especially in the north. They have never had any purdah, or 
seclusion of women, among themselves. Finding this custom 
prevailing in the Indian plains, when they came down, they 
adopted it, but only partly and in so far as their relations with 
others and non-Kashmiris were concerned. That was considered 
then in northern India, where most of the Kashmiris stayed, an 
inevitable sign of social status. But among themselves they stuck 
to the free social life of men and women, and every. Kashmiri 
had the free entree into any Kashmiri house. In Kashmiri feasts 
and ceremonies men and women met together and sat together, 
though often the women would sit in one bunch. Boys and 
girls used to meet on a more or less equal footing. They did not, 
of course, have the freedom of the modem West. 

So passed my early years. Sometimes, as was inevitable in a 
large family, there were family squabbles. When these happened 
to assume unusual proportions they reached my father’s ears and 
he was angry and seemed to think that aU such happenings were 
due to the folly of women. I did not understand what exactly 
had happened but I saw that something was very wrong as 
people seemed to speak in a peculiarly disagreeable way or to 
avoid each other. I felt very unhappy. Father’s intervention, 
when it took place, shook us all up. 

One little incident of those early days stands out in my 
memory. I must have been about seven or eight then. I used to 
go out every day for a ride accompanied by a sowar from 
cavalry imit then stationed in Allahabad. One evening I had ^ 



CJHILUHUUI} 


1 1 

fall and my pony — a pretty animal, partly Arab — returned home 
without me. Father was giving a tennis party. There was great 
consternation and all the members of the party, headed by 
father, formed a procession in all kinds of vehicles, and set out 
in search of me. They met me on the way and I was treated as 
if I had performed some heroic deedl 