THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 


During my visit to Poona to see Gandhiji, I accompanied him 
one evening to the Servants of India Society's home. For an 
hour or so questions were put to him on political matters by some 
of the members of the Society, and he answered them. Mr. 
Srinivasa Sastri, the President of the Society, was not there, nor 
was Pandit Hriday Nath Kunzru, probably the ablest of the 
other members, but some senior members were present. A few 
of us who were present on the occasion listened with growing 
amazement, for the questions related to the most trivial of 
happenings. Mostly they dealt with Gandhiji's old request for 
an interview with the Viceroy and the Viceroy’s refusal. Was 
this the only important subject they could think of in a world 
full of problems, and when their own country was carrying on 
a hard struggle for freedom and hundreds of organisations 
were outlawed? 'There was the agrarian crisis and the industrial 
depression causing widespread unemployment. 'There were the 
dreadful happenings in Bengal and the Frontier and in other 
parts of India, the suppression of freedom of thought and 
speech and writing and assembly; and so many other national 
and international problems. But the questions were limited to 
unimportant happenings, and the possible reactions of the 
Viceroy and the Government of India to an approach by 
Gandhiji. 

I had a strong feeling as if I had entered a monastery, the 
inhabitants of which had long been cut off &om effective 
contact with the outside world. And yet our friends were active 
politicians, able men with long records of public service and 
sacrifice. They formed, with a few others, the real backbone of 
the Liberal Party. The rest of the Party was a vague, amor' 
phous lot of people, who wanted occasionally to have the sen- 
sation of being connected with political activities. Some of 
these, especially in Bombay and Madras, were indistinguishable 
from Government officials. 

The questions that a country puts are a measure of that 
country^ political development. Often the failure oif that 
countiy is due to the fact that it has not put the right question 
to itself. Our wasting our tiir s and energy and tempen over 
the commimal distribution of seats, or our forming parties on 





410 . JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the Communal Award and carrying bn a sterile controversy 
about it to the exclusion of vital problems, is a measure of our 
political backwardness. In the same way the questions that 
were put to Gandhiji that day in the Servants of India Society’s 
home mirrored the strange mental stable of that Society and of 
the Liberal Party. They seemed to have no political or eco- 
nomic principles, no wide outlook, and their politics seemed to 
be of the parlour or court variety— what high officials would do 
or would not do. 

One is apt to be misled by the name ' Liberal Party ’. The 
word elsewhere, and especially in England, stood for a certain 
economic policy— free trade and laisser-faire, etc. — and a cer- 
tain ideology of individual freedom and civil liberties. The 
English Liberal tradition was based on economic foundations. 
The desire for freedom in trade and to be rid of the King’s 
monopolies and arbitrary taxation, led to the desire for political 
liberty. The Indian Liberals have no such background. They 
do not believe in free trade, being almost all protectionists, and 
they attach little importance to civil liberties as recent events 
have shown. Their close contacts with and general support of 
the semi-feudal and autocratic Indian States, wherO even the 
beginnings of democracy and personal freedom are non- 
existent, also distinguish them from the European type of 
Liberal. Indeed the Indian Liberals are not liberal at all in 
any sense of the word, or at most they are liberal only in spots 
and patches. What they exactly are it is difficult to say, for 
they have no firm positive basis of ideas, and, though small in 
numbers, differ from one another. They are strong only in 
negation. They see error everywhere and attempt to avoid it, 
and hope that in doing so they will find the truth. Truth for 
them indeed always lies between two extremes. By criticising 
everything they consider extreme, they experience the feeling 
of being virtuous and moderate and good. This method helps 
them in avoiding painful and difficult processes of thought 
and in having to put forward constructive ideas. Capitalism, 
some of them vaguely feel, has not wholly succeeded in Europe, 
and is in trouble; on the other hand socialism is obviously bad, 
because it attacks vested interests. Probably some mystic solu- 
tion will be found in the future, some half-way house, and 
meanwhile vested interests should be protected. If therp was 
an arrament as to whether the earth was flat or round, prob- 
ably mey would condemn both these extreme views and suggest 
tentatively that it might be square or elliptical. 

Over trivial and unimportant matters they grow quite excited. 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 41I 

and there is an amazing amount of houha and shouting. 
Consciously and sub-consciously they avoid tackling funda- 
mental issues, for such issues require fundamental remedies and 
the courage of thought and action. Hence Liberal defeats and 
victories are of little consequence. They relate to no principle. 
The leading characteristic of the Party and the distinguishing 
feature, if it can be considered so, is thus moderation in every- 
thing, good or bad. It is an outlook on life and the old name— 
the Moderates — was perhaps the most suitable. 

" In moderadon placing all my glory 
While Tories call me Whig and Whigs a Tory.” * 

But moderation, however admirable it might be, is not a 
bright and scintillating virtue. It produces dullness, and so the 
Inman Liberals have unhappily become a ‘Dull Brigade* — 
sombre and serious in their looks, dull in their writing and 
conversation, and lacking in humour. Of course there are 
exceptions, and the most notable of these is Sir Tcj Bahadur 
Sapru who, in his personal lilfe, is certainly not dull or lacking 
in humour and who enjoys even a joke against himself. But 
on the whole, the Liberal group represents bourgeoisdom in 
excelsis with all its pedestrian solidity. The header of Alla- 
habad, which ip the leading Liberal newspaper, had a revealing 
editorial note last year. It stated that great and unusual men 
had always brought trouble to the world, and therefore it pre- 
ferred the ordinary, mediocre kind of man. With a fine and 
frank gesture it nailed its flag to mediocrity. 

Moderation and conservatism and a desire to avoid risks and 
sudden changes are often 'the iiievitable accompaniments of old 
age. They do not seem quite so appropriate in the young, but 
ours is an ancient land, and sometimes its children seem to be 
born tired and weary, with all the lack-lustre and marks of 
age upon them. But even this old country is now convulsed by 
the forces of change, and the moderate outlook is bewildered. 
The old world is passing, and all the sweet reasonableness of 
which the Liberal are capable does not make any difference; 
they might as well argue with the hurricane or the flood or the 
earthqu^e. Old assumptions &il them, and they dare not seek 
for new ways of thought and action. Dr. A. N. Whitdbead, 
speaking of the European tradition, says : “ The whole of this 
tradition is warped by the vicious assumption that each genera- 
tion will substantially live amid the conditions governing the 
lives of its fathers, and will transihit those conditions to mould 
* Alexander Pope. 



413 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

with equal force the lives of its children. We are living in the 
first period of human history for which the assumption is 
false.” Dr. Whitehead errs on the side of moderation in his 
analysis, for probably that assumption has always been untrue. 
If the European tradition has been conservative, how much 
more so has ours been? But the mechanics of history pay little 
attention to these traditions when the time ffar change comes. 
We watch helplessly and blame others for the failure of our 
plans. And that, as Mr. Gerald Heard points out, is the " most 
disastrous of illusions, the projection that convinces itself 
that any failure in one’s plans must be due not to a mistake in 
one’s own thinking, but to a deliberate thwarting by some one 
else.” 

All of us suffer from this terrible illusion. I sometimes think 
that Gandhiji is not free from it. But we act at least and try 
to keep in touch with life, and by trial and error sometimes 
lessen the power of the illusion and stumble along. But the 
Liberals suffer most. For they do not act for fear of acting 
Avrongly, they do not move for fear of falling, they keep away 
from all healthy contacts with the masses, and sit enchanted 
and self-hypnotised in their mental cells. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri 
warned his fellow-Liberals a year and a half ago not to " stand 
by and let things pass.” That warning had greater truth in it 
than he himself probably realised. Thinking always in terms 
of what the Government did, he was referring to the constitu- 
tional changes that were being hatched by various official com- 
mittees. But the misfortune of the Liberals had been that they 
stood by and let things pass when their own people were 
marching ahead. They feared their own masses, and they pre- 
ferred to tilienate themselves from' these masses rather than fall 
out with our rulers. Was it any wonder that they became 
strangers in their own land, and life went by and left them 
standing? When fierce struggles were waged for life and free- 
dom by their count^men, there was no doubt on which side 
of the barricade the Liberals stood. From the other side of tihat 
barricade they gave us good advice, and were full of moral 
platitudes, laying them on thick like sticky paint. Their co- 
operation with the British Government in the round table 
conferences and committees was a moral factor of value to the 
Government. A denial of it would have made a difference. It 
was remarkable that at one of these conferences even the 
British Labour Party kept away; not so our Liberals, who 
went in spite of an appeal by some Britishers to them not to 
do so. 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 


413 

We are all moderates or extremists in varying degrees, and 
for various objects. If we care enough for anything we are 
likely to feel strongly about it, to be extremist about it. Other- 
wise we can aiford a gracious tolerance, a philosophical modera- 
tion, which really hides to some extent our indifference. I have 
known the mildest of Moderates to grow very aggressive and 
extremist when a suggestion was made for the sweeping away 
of certain vested interests in land. Our Liberal friends repre- 
sent to some extent the prosperous and well-to-do. They can 
afford to wait for Swaraj, and need not excite themselves about 
it. But any proposal for radical social change disturbs them 
greatly, and they are no longer moderate or sweetly reasonable 
about it. Thus their moderation is really confined to their 
attitude towards the British Government, and they nurse the 
hope that if they are sufficiently respectful and compromising 
perhaps, as a reward for this behaviour, they might be listened 
to. Inevitably they have to accept the British view-point. Blue 
books beepme their passionate study, Erskine May's Parlia- 
mentary Practice and such-like books their constant com- 
panions, a new Government Report a matter for excitement 
and speculation. Liberal leaders returning from England make 
mysterious statements about the doings of the great ones in 
■Whitehall, for Whitehall is the Valhalla of Liberals, Respon- 
sivists and other similar groups. In the old days it was said that 
good Americans when they died went to Paris, and it may be 
that the shades of good Liberals sometimes haunt the precincts 
of Whitehall, . 

I write of Liberals, but what I write applies to many of us 
also in the Congress. It applies even more to the Responsivists, 
who have outdistanced the Liberals in their moderation. There 
is a great deal of difference between the average Liberal and 
the average Congressman, and yet the dividing line is not clear 
and definite. Ideologically there is little to choose between the 
advanced Liberal and the moderate Congressman. But, thanks 
to Gandhiji, every Congressman has kept some touch with the 
soil and the people of the cmmtry, and he has dabbled in 
action, and because of this he has escaped some of the conse- 
quences of a vague and defective ideolow. Not so the Liberals ; 
they have lost touch with both the md and the new. As a 
group they represent a vanishing species. 

Most of us, I suppose, have lost the old pagan feeling mid 
not gained the new insight. Not for us to "have sight of 
Proteus rising from the sea”; or "hear old Triton blow his 
wreathed horn.” And very few Of us are fortunate enough--- 



414 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

“ To see a World in a Grain of Sand 
And a Heaven in a Wild flower. 

Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand 
And Eternity in an hour”' 

Not for most of us, unhappily, to sense the mysterious life 
of Nature, to hear her whisper closd to our ears, to thrill and 
quiver at her touch. Those ^ys are gone. But though we may 
not see the sublime in Nature as we used to, we have sought 
to find it in the glory and tragedy of humanity, in its mighty 
dreams and inner tempests, its pangs and failures, its conflicts 
and misery, and, over all this, its faith in a great destiny and 
a realisation of those dreams. That has been some recompense 
for us for all the heart-breaks that such a search involves, and 
often we have been raised above the pettiness of life. But many 
have not undertaken this search, and having cut themselves 
adrift from the ancient ways, find no road to follow in the 
present. They neither dream nor do they act. They have no 
understanding of human convulsions like the great French 
Revolution or the Russian Revolution. The complex, swift and 
cruel eruptions of human desires, long suppressed, frighten 
them. For them the Bastille has not yet fallen. 

It is often said with righteous indignation that “ Patriotism 
is not a monopoly of Congressmen.” The same phrase is re- 
peated again and again with a lack of originality which is some- 
what distressing. I hope no Congressman has ever claimed a 
corner in this emotion. Certainly I do not think it is a Con- 
gress monopoly, and I would be glad to make a present of it to 
any one who desired it. It is often enough the refuge of the 
opportunist and the careerist, and there are so many varieties 
of it to suit all tastes, all interests, all classes. If Judas had been 
alive to-day he would no doubt act in its name. Patriotism is 
no longer enough: we want something higher, wider and 
nobler. 

Nor is moderation enough by itself. Restraint is good and is 
the measure of our culture, but behind that restraint there must 
be something to restrain and hold back. It has been, and is, 
man’s destiny to control the elements, to ride the thunderbolt, 
to bring the raging fire and the rushing and tumbling waters 
to his use, but most difficult of all for him has been to restrain 
and hold in check the passions that consume him. So long as 
he will not master them, he cannot enter fully into his human 
heritage. But are we to restrain the legs that move not and the 
hands that are palsied? 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 415 

I cannot resist the temptation to quote four lines of Roy 
Campbell’s, written on some South African novelists. They seem 
to be equally applicable to various political groups in India : 

“ They praise the firm restraint with which you write. 

I’m with you there, of course. 

You use the snafile and the curb all right, 

But where’s the bloody horse? " 

Our Liberal friends tell us that they follow the narrow path 
of the golden mean, and steer themselves between the extremes 
of the Congress and the Government. They constitute them- 
selves the judges of the failings of both, and congratulate them- 
selves that they are free from either. 'They endeavour to hold 
the scales and, like the figure of Justice, I suppose, they keep 
their eyes closed or bandaged. Is it my fancy merely that takes 
me ba^ through the ages and makes me listen to mat frmous 
cry ; " Scribes and Phansees. ... Ye blind guides, which strain 
at a gnat and swallow a camel 1 ” 