ANIMALS IN PRISON 

For fourteen and a half months I lived in nw little cell or 
room in the Dehra Dun Gaol, and I began to feel as if I was 
almost a part of it. I was familiar with every bit of it; I knew 
every mark arrd dent on the whitewashed walls and on the 
uneven floor and the ceiling with its moth-eaten rafters. In the 
little yard outside I greeted little tufts of grass and odd bits of 
stone as old firiends. I was not alone in my cell, for several 
colonies of wasps and hornets lived there, and many lizards 
found a home behind the rafters, emerging in the evenings in 
search of prey. If thoughts and emotions leave their traces 
behind in the physical surroundings, the very air of that cell 
must be thick with them, and they must cling to every object 
in that little space. 

I had had better cells in other prisons, but in Dehra Dun I 
had one privilege which was very precious to me. The gaol 
proper was a very small one, and we were kept in an old 
lock-up outside the gaol walls, but within the gaol compound. 
This place was so small that Acre was no room to walk about 
in it, and so we were allowed, morning and evening, to go out 
and walk up and down in front of the gate, a distance of 
about a hundred yards. We remained in the gaol compound, 
but this coming outside the walls gave us a view of the moun- 
tains and the fields and a public road at some distance. This 
was not a special privilege for me; it was common for aU the 
A and B Class prisoners kept at Dehra Dun. Within the com- 
pound, but outside the gaol walls, there was another small 
building called the European Lock-up. This had no enclosing 
wall, and a person inside the cell could have a fine view of the 
mountains and the life outside. European convicts and odiers 
kept here were also allowed to walk in front of the gaol gate 
every morning and evening. 

Only a prisoner who has been confined for long behind high 
walls can appreciate the extraordinary psychological value of 
these outside walks and open views. I loved these outings, and 
I did not give them up even during the monsoon, when the 
rain came down for days in torrents and I had to in 
ankle-deep of water. I would have welcomed the outing in any 
place, but the sight of the towering Himalayas near by was an 

AA 



354 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

added joy which went a long way to removing the weariness 
of prison. It was my good fortune that during the long period 
when I had no interviews, and when for many months I was 
quite alone, I could gaze at these mountains that I loved. I 
could not see the mountains from my cell, but my mind was 
full of them and I was ever' conscious of their nearness, and a 
secret intimacy seemed to grow between us. 

“ Flocks of birds have flown high and away; 

A solitary drift of cloud, too, has gone, wandering on. 

And I sit alone with Ching-ting Peak, towering beyond. 

We never grow tired of each other, the mountain and I.” 

I am afraid I cannot say with the poet, Li.T’ai Po, that I 
never grew weary, even of the mountain; but that was a rare 
experience, and, as a rule, I found great comfort in its 
proximity. Its solidity and imperturbability looked down upon 
me with the wisdom of a million years, and mocked at my 
varying humours and soothed my fevered mind. 

Spring was very pleasant in Dehra, and it was a far longer 
one than in the plains below. The winter had denuded almost 
•all the trees of their leaves, and they stood naked and bare. 
Even four magnificent pecpal trees, which stood in front of the 
gaol gate, much to my surprise, dropped nearly all their leaves. 
Gaunt and cheerless they stood there, till the spring air warmed 
them up again and sent a message of life to their innermost 
cells. Suddenly there was a stir both in the peepals and the 
other trees, and an air of mjrstery surrounded them as of 
secret operations going on behind the scenes; and I would be 
stirtled to find little bits of green peeping out all over them. 
It was a gay and cheering sight; And then, very rapidly, the 
leaves would come out in their millions and glisten in the sun- 
light and play about in the breeze. How wonderful is the 
sudden change from bud to leaf I 

I had never noticed before that fresh mango leaves are 
reddish-brown, russet coloured, remarkably like the autumn 
tints on the Kashmir hills. But they change colour soon and 
become green. 

The monsoon rains were always welcome, for they ended the 
summer heat. But one could have too much of a good thing, 
and Dehra Dun is one of the favoured haunts of the rain god. 
Within the first five or six weeks of the break of the monsoon 
we would have about fifty or sixty inches of rain, and it was 
. not pleasant to sit cooped up in a little narrow place trying to 



ANIMALS IN PRISON 


355 

avoid the tvater dripping from the ceiling or rushing in from 
the windows. 

Autumn again was pleasant, and so was the winter, except 
when it rained. With thunder and rain and piercing cold 
winds, one longed for a decent habitation and a little warmth 
and comfort. Occasionally there would be a hailstorm, with 
hailstones bigger than marbles coming down on the corrugated 
iron roofs and making a tremendous noise, something like an 
artillery bombardment. 

I remember one day particularly; it was the a4th of Decem- 
ber, 1933. There was a thunderstorm and rain all day, and it 
was bitterly cold. Altogether it was one of the most miserable 
days, from the bodily point of view, that I have spent in gaol. 
In the evening it cleared up suddenly, and all my misery de- 
parted when I saw all the neighbouring mountains and hills 
covered with a thick mantle of snow. The next day — Christ- 
mas Day — was lovely and clear, and there was a beautiful view 
of snow-covered mountains. 

Prevented from indulging in normal activities we became 
more observant of nature’s ways. We watched also the various 
animals and insects that came our tvay. As I grew more 
observant I noticed all manner of insects living in my cell or 
in the little yard outside. I realised that while I complained of 
loneliness, that yard, which seemed empty and deserted, was 
teeming with life. All these creeping or crawling or flying in- 
sects lived their life without interfering with me in any way, 
and I saw no reason why I should interfere with them. But 
there was continuous war between me and bed-bugs, mosquitos, 
and, to some extent, flies. Wasps and hornets I tolerated, and 
there were himdreds of them in my cell. There had been a 
little tiff between us when, inadvertently I think, a wasp had 
stung me. In my anger I tried to exterminate the lot, but they 
put up a brave fight in defence of their temporary home, which 
probably contained their eggs, and I desisted and decided to 
leave them in peace if they did not interfere with me any 
more. For over a year after diat I lived in that cell surrounded 
by these wasps and hornets, and they never attacked me, and 
we respected each other. 

Bats I did not like, but I had to endure them. They flew 
soundlessly in the evening^dusk, and one could just see them 
against the darkening sky.Eerie things; I had a horror of them. 
They seemed to pass within an inch of one’s face, and I was 
always afraid that they might hit me. Higher up in the air 
passed the big bats, the flying-foxes. 



356 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I used to watch the ants and the white ants and other insects 
by the hour. And the lizards as they crept about in the 
evenings and stalked their prey and chased each other, wagging 
their tails in a most comic fashion. Ordinarily they avoided 
wasps, but twice I saw them stalk them with enormous care 
and seize them from the front. I do not know if this avoidance 
of the sting was intentional or accidental. 

Then there were squirrels, crowds of them if trees were 
about. They would become very venturesome and come right 
near us. In Lucknow Gaol I used to sit reading almost without 
moving for considerable periods, and a squirrel would climb 
up my leg and sit on my knee and have a look round. And 
then It would look into my eyes and realise that I was not a 
tree or whatever it had tideen me for. Fear would disable it 
for a moment, and then it would scamper away. Little baby 
squirrels would sometimes fall down from the trees. The 
mother would come after them, roll them up into a little ball, 
and carry them off to safety. Occasionally the baby got lost. 
One of my companions picked up three of these lost baby 
squirrels and looked after them. They were so tiriy that it was 
a problem how "fo feed them. The problem was, however, 
solved rather ingeniously. A fountain-pen filler, with a little 
cotton wool attached to it, made an efficient feeding bottle. 

Pigeons abounded in all the gaols I went to, except in the 
mountain prison of Almora. There were thousands of them, 
and in the eveniims the sky would be thick with them. Some- 
times the gaol officials would shoot them down and feed on 
them. There were mainas, of course; they are to be found 
everywhere. A pair of them nested over my cell door in Dehra 
Dun, and I used to feed them. They grew quite tame, and if 
there was any delay in their morning or evening meal they 
would sit quite near me and loudly demand their food. It was 
amusing to watch their signs and listen to their impatient cries. 

In Naini there were thousands of parrots, and large numbers 
of them lived in the crevices of my barrack walls. Their court- 
ship and love-making was always a fascinating sight, and 
sometimes there were fierce quarrels between two male parrots 
over a lady parrot, who sat calmly by waiting for the result of 
the encounter and ready to grant her favours to the winner. 

Dehra Dun had a variety of birds, and there was a regular 
jumble of singing and lively chattering and twittering, and 
high above it all came the koel’s plaintive call. During the 
monsoon and just before it the Brain-Fever bird visited us, and 
I realised soon why it was so named. It was amazing the per- 



ANIMAtS IN PRISON 


357 

slstence with which it went on repeating the same notes, in 
daytime and at night, in sunshine and in pouring rain. We 
could not see most of these birds, we could only hear them 
as a rule, as there were no trees in our little yard. But I used 
to watch the eagles and the kites gliding gracefully high up in 
the air, sometimes swooping down and then allowing them- 
selves to be carried up by a current of air. Often a horde of 
wild duck would fly over our heads. 

There was a large colony of monkeys in Bareilly Gaol and 
their antics were always worth watching. One incident im- 
pressed me. A baby monkey managed to come down into our 
barrack enclosure and he could not mount up the wall again. 
The warder and some convict overseers and other prisoners 
caught hold of him and tied a bit of string round his neck. 
The parents (presumably) of the little one saw all this from 
the top of the high wall, and their anger grew. Suddenly one 
of them, a huge monkey, jumped down and charged almost 
right into the crowd which surrounded the baby monkey. It 
was an extraordinary brave thing to do, for the warder and 
C.O.’s had sticks and lathis and they were brandishing them 
about, and there was quite a crowd of them. Reckless courage 
triumphed, and the crowd of humans fled, terrified, leaving 
their sticks behind theml The little monkey was rescued. 

We had often animal visitors that were not welcome. 
Scorpions were frequently found in our cells, especially after 
a thunderstorm. It was surprising that I was never stung by 
one, for I would come across them in the most unlikely places — 
on my bed, or sitting on a book which I had just lifted up. I 
kept a particularly black and poisonous-looking brute in a 
bottle for some time, feeding him with flies, etc., and then 
when I tied him up on a wall with a string he managed to 
escape. I had no desire to meet him loose again, and so I 
cleaned my cell out and hunted for him everywhere, but he 
had vanished. 

Three or four snakes were also found in my cells or near 
them. News of one of them got out, and there were headlines 
in the Press. As a matter of fact I welcomed the diversion. 
Prison life is dull enough, and everything that breaks through 
the monotony is appreaated. Not that I appreciate or welcome 
snakes, but they do not fill me with terror as they do some 
people. I am aftaid of their bite, of course, and would protect 
myself if I saw a snake. But there would be no feeling of 
repulsion or overwhelming flight. Centipedes horrify me 
much more; it is not so much fear as instinaive repulsion. In 



35S jAWArtAKLAl. KEHRU 

Alipore Gaol in Calciifta I woke in the middle of the night 
and felt something crawling over my foot. I pressed a torch 
I had and I saw a centipede on the bed. Instinctively and with 
amazing rapidity I vaulted clear out of that bed and nearly hit 
the cell wall. I realised fully then what Pavlov’s reflexes were. 

In Dehra Dun I saw a new animal, or rather an animal which 
was new to me. I was standing at the gaol gate talking to the 
gaoler when we noticed a man outside carrying a strange 
animal. The gaoler sent for him, and I saw something between 
a lizard and a crocodile, about two feet long w'ith claws and a 
scaly covering. This uncouth animal, which was very much 
alive, had been twisted round in a most peculiar way forming 
a kind of knot, and its owner had passed a pole through this 
knot and was merrily carrying it in this fashion. He called it 
a “Bo.” When asked by the gaoler what he proposed to do 
with it, he replied with a broad smile that he would make 
bhujji — a. kind of curry — out of it! He was a forest-dweller. 
Subsequently I discovered from reading F. W. Champion’s book 
— The Jungle in Sunlight and Shadow — that this animal was 
the Pangolin. 

Prisoners, especially long-term convicts, have to suffer most 
from emotional starvation. Often they seek some emotional 
satisfaction by keeping animal pets. The ordinary prisoner can- 
not keep them, but the convict overseers have a little more 
freedom and the gaol staff usually does not object. The com- 
monest pets were squirrels and, strangely, mongooses. Dogs 
are not allowed in gaols, but cats seem to be encouraged. A 
little kitten made friends with me once. It belonged to a gaol 
official, and when he was transferred he took it away with him. 
I missed it. Although dogs are not allowed, I got tied up with 
some dogs accidentally in Dehra Dun. A gaol official had 
brought a bitch, and then he was transferred, and he deserted 
her. The poor thing became a homeless wanderer, living under 
culverts, picking up scraps from the warders, usually starving. 
As I was being kept in the lock-up outside the gaol proper, she 
used to come to me begging for food. I began to feed her 
regularly, and she gave birth to a litter of pups under a culvert. 
Many of these were taken away, but three remained and I fed 
them; One of the puppies fell ill with a violent distemper, and 
gave me a mat deal of trouble. I nursed her with cafe, and 
sometimes I would get up a dozen times in the course of the 
night to look after her. She survived, and I was happy that my 
nursing had pulled her round. 

I came in contact with animals far more in prison than I had 



ANIMALS IN PRISON 359 

done outside. I had always been fond of dogs, and had kept 
some, but I could never look after them properly as other 
matters claimed my attention. In prison I was grateful for their 
company. Indians do not, as a rule, approve of animals as 
household pets. It is remarkable that in spite of their general 
philosophy of non-violence to animals, they are often singularly 
careless and unkind to them. Even the cow, that favoured 
animal, though looked up to and almost worshipped by many 
Hindus and often the cause of riots, is not treated kindly. 
Worship and kindliness do not always go together. 

Different countries have adopted different animals as symbols 
of their ambition or character — ^the eagle of the United States 
of America and of Germany, the lion and bulldog of England, 
the fighting-cock of France, the bear of old Ritssia. How far 
do these patron animals mould national character? Most of 
them are aggressive, fighting animals, beasts of prey. It is not 
surprising that the people who grow up with these examples 
before them should mould themselves consciously after them 
and strike up aggressive attitudes, and roar, and prey on others. 
Nor is it surprising that the Hindu should be mild and non- 
violent, for his patron animal is the cow. 