IN EUROPE 

I was going back to Europe after more than thirteen years — 
years of war, and revolution, and tremendous change. The old 
world I knew had expired in the hlood and horror of the War 
and a new world awaited me. I expected to remain in Europe for 
six or seven months or, at most, till the end of the year. Actually 
our stay lengthened out to a year and nine months. 

It was a quiet and restful period for both my mind and body. 
We spent it chiefly in Switzerland, in Geneva, and in a mountain 
sanatorium at Montana. My yoimger sister, Krishna, came from 
India and joined us early in Ae summer of 1926, and remained 
with us till the end of our stay in Europe. I could not leave my 
wife for long, and so I could only pay brief visits to other places. 
Later, when my wife was better, we travelled a little in France, 
England, and Germany. On our mountain-top, surrounded by 
the winter snow, I felt completely cut off ftom India as well as 
the European world. India, and Indian happenings, seemed 
especially far away. I was a distant onlooker, reading, watching, 
following events, gazing at the new Europe, its politics, eco- 
nomics, and the &r freer human relationships, and trying to 
understand them. When we were in Geneva I was naturally 
interested in the activities of the I,eague of Nations and the 
International Labour Office. 

But with the coming of winter, the winter sports absorbed 
my attention ; for some months they were ray chief occupation 
and interest. I had done ice-skating previously, but sld-ing was 
a new experimee, and I succumbed to its fascination. It was a 
painful experience for a long time, but I persisted bravely, in 
spite of innumerable falls, and I came to enjoy it. 

Life was very uneventful on the whole. The days went by and 
my wife gradually gained strength and health. We saw few 
Inffians ; indeed, we saw few people apart from the little colony 
hvmg in that mountain resort. But in the course of the year 

Spent in Europe, we came across some 
mdian exiles and old revolutionaries whosfe names had been 
familiar to me. 

There was Shyamaji Krishnavarma living with his ailing wife 
high up the top floor of a house in Geneva. The aged couple 
lived by themselves with no whole-time servants, and their rooms 



IN EUROPE 


149 

were musty and suffocating, and everything had a thick layer 
of dust, Shyamaji had plenty of money, but he did not believe 
in spending it. He would even save a few centimes by walking 
instead of taking the tram. He was suspicious of all comers, 
presuming them, until the contrary was proved, to be either 
British agents or after his money. His pockets bulged with 
ancient copies of his old paper, the Indian Sociolo^t, and he 
would pull them out and point with some excitement to some 
article he had written a dozen years previously. His talk was 
of the old days, of India House at Hampstead, of the various 
persons that the British Government had sent to spy on him, and 
how he had spotted them and outwitted them. The walls of his 
rooms were covered with shelves full of old books, dust-laden 
and neglected, looking down sorrowfully on the intruder. Books 
and papers also littered the floor; they seemed to have remained 
so for days and weeks, and even months past. Over the whole 
place there hung an atmosphere -of gloom, an air of decay; 
life seemed to be an unwelcome stranger there, and, as one 
walked through the dark and silent corridors, one almost ex- 
pected to come across, round the comer, the shadow of death. 
With relief one came out , of that flat and breathed the air 
outside. 

Shyamaji desired to make some arrangement about his money, 
to create some trust for a public purpose, preferably for the edu- 
cation of Indians in foreign countries. He suggested that I 
might be one of the trustees, but I showed no keenness for 
shouldering this responsibility. I had no desire to get mixed up 
with his financial affairs; and, besides, I felt that if I showed any 
undue interest he would immediately suspect me of coveting his 
money. No one knew how much he had. It was rumoured that 
he had lost greatly in the German inflation. 

Occasionally prominent Indians used to pass through Geneva. 
Those who came to the League of Nations were of the official 
variety, ^d Shyamaji would not, of coune, go anywhere near 
them. But the Labour Office sometimes brought non-officiab 
of note, even prominent Congressmen, and Shyamaji would try 
to meet them. It was interesting to watch their reactions to him. 
Invariably they felt uncomfortable, and tried to avoid him in 
public, and excused themselves, whenever they could, in private. 
He was not considered a safo person with whom to be associated 
or seen "with. 

And so Shyamaji and his wife lived their lonely life without 
children or relatives or friends, with hardly any associations, 
hardly any human contacts. He was a relic of the past, and had 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


really outlived his day. He did not fit in with the present, and 
the world passed him by, ignoring him. But there was still some 
of the old fire in his eyes, and though there was little in common 
between him and me, I could not withhold my sympathy and 
consideration for him. 

Recently the newspapers reported his death, followed soon 
after by the death of the gentle Gujrati old lady who had been 
his life-long companion in exile in foreign lands. It was stated 
that a large sum of money was left by her for the training of 
Indian women abroad. 

Another well-known person whose name I had often heard, 
but whom I met for the first time in Switzerland, was Raja 
Mahendra Pratap. He was (and, I suppose, is still) a delightful 
optimist, living completely in the air and refusing to have any- 
thing to do with realities. 1 was a little taken aback when I first 
saw him. He appeared in strange composite attire, which might 
have been suit^le in the highlands of Tibet or in the Siberian 
plains, but was completely out of place at Montreux in the sum- 
mer. It was a kind of semi-military costume, with high Russian 
boots, and there were numerous large pockets, all biuring with 
papers, photographs, etc. There was a letter from Bethman- 
HoUweg, the German Chancellor, an autographed picture of* 
the Kaiser, a fine scroll from the Dalai Lama of Tibet, and 
innumerahle documents and pictures. It was amazing how much 
those various pockets contained. He’ told us that once he had 
lost a dispatch-box, containing valuable papers, in China, and 
ever since then he had considered it safer to carry his papers on 
his person! Hence the numerous pockets. 

Mahendra Pratap was full of stories of his wanderings and 
adventure in Japan, China, Tibet, and Afghanistan. He had 
led a varied life, and the record of it was an interesting one. 
His latest enthusiasm was 'for a 'Happiness Society’ which 
he had himself founded, and which had for its motto : ” Be 
Apparently this society had met with greatest success 
in Latvia (or was it Lithuania?). 

His idea of propaganda was to send out periodically large 
numbers of post cards containing a printed message from 
to members of various conferences that met in Geneva or else- 
where. These messages were signed by him, but the name given 
was an extraordinary one— long and varied. * Mahendra Pratap ’ 
had been reduced to initials,- but many other names had been 
added, each addition representing apparently some favoured 
country he had visited. In this way he emphasized his inter- 
national and cosmopolitan character, and, fittingly, the final 



IN EUROPE 


151 

description below this unique name was " Servant of Mankind 
It was difficult to take Mahendra Pratap seriously. He seemed 
to be a character out of medieval -romance, a Don Quixote who 
had strayed into the twentieth century. But he was absolutely 
straight and thoroughly earnest. 

In Paris we saw old Madame Cama, rather fierce and terri- 
fying as she came up to you and peered into your face, and, 
pointing at you, asked abruptly who you were. The answer 
made no difference (probably she was too deaf to hear it) for she 
formed her own impressions and stuck to them, despite facts to 
the contrary. 

Then there was Moulvi Obeidulla, whom I met for a short 
while in Italy. He seemed to me to be clever, but rather in the 
sense of possessing an ability for old-style political manoeuvring. 
He was not in touch with modern ideas. He had produced a 
scheme for the ' United States ’ or ‘ United Republics of India 
which was quite an able attempt to solve the commvmal prob- 
lem. He tdld me of some of his pasi activities in Istanbul (it 
was still called Constantinople then) and, not attaching mu^ 
importance to them, I soon ffirgot about them. Some months 
later he met Lala Lajpat Rai and, apparently, repeated the 
same story to him. Lalaji was vastly impressed and exercised 
about it, and that story, with many unjustifiable inferences 
and amazing deductions, played an important part in the 
Indian Council elections that year. Moulvi Obeidulla later went 
to the Hedjaz, and for years past no news of him has come my 
way. 

Another Moulvi, but a different type entirely, was Barkatulla 
whom I first met in Berlin. He was a ddightml old man, very 
enthusiastic and very likeable. He was ramer simple, not very 
intelligent, but still trying to imbibe new ideas and to under- 
stand the present-day world. He died in San Francisco in 1927, 
while we were in Switzerland. I was grieved to learn of his 
passing away. 

In Berlin there was quite a number of those who had ffirmed 
an Indian group in war-time, but the group had long gone to 
pieces. They had feUen out and quarreUed amongst themselves, 
each suspecting the other of betrayal. That seems to be the 
fate of political exiles everywhere. Many of these Berlin Indians 
had settled down to sedate middle-class occupations— when these 
could be had, and that was not often in post-war Germany— -and 
had ceased to be in any way revolutionary. They even avoided 
politics. 

The story of this old war-time group was interesting. Most of 



153 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

them were students in various German universities in that 
feteful summer of 1914. They lived a common life with the 
German students, sang their songs, joined in their games, drank 
beer with them, and approached their culture with sympathy 
and consideration. The War was no concern of theirs, but they 
could not help being moved to some extent by the wave, of 
nationalistic hysteria that swept over Germany. Their feeling 
was really anti-British, and not pro-German, and their Indian 
nationalism inclined them to the enemies of Britain. Soon after 
the outbreak of the War a few other Indians, more consciously 
revolutionary, drifted into Germany through Switzerland. These 
people formed themselves into a committee, and sent for Har- 
dayal, who was on the west coast of the United States at the 
time. Hardayal came some months later, but meanwhile the 
Committee had become quite important. This importance had 
been thrust upon them by the German Government, who were, 
naturally, anxious to exploit all anti-British feelings to their 
own advantage. The Indians, on their part, wanted to take 
advantage of the international simation for their own national- 
istic purposes, and had no intention of allowing themselves to 
be exploited purely for Germany’s advantage. They did not 
have much choice in the matter, but they felt 'that they had 
something to give which the German authorities were keen on 
haying, and this gave them a handle to bargain with. They 
insist^ on assurances and pledges for Indian freedom. The 
German Foreign Office seems to have entered into a regular 
treaty with them, in which it pledged itself to acknowledge 
Indian independence in case of victory, and it was on this pledge 
and condition, and many other minor conditions, that the Indian 
^oup promised support in the war. The Committee was offi- 
cially honoured in every way, md its representatives were treated 
almost on the footing of foreign ambassadors. 

This sudden importance, thrust on a small group consisting 
mainly of inexperienced young men, went to the heads of some 
of them. They felt that they were playing a historic rdle, that 
they were involved in great and epoch-making undertaHngs. 
Many of them had exciting adventures, hair-breadth escapes. 
In the later stages of the war, their importance visibly lessened, 
rad they began to be ignored. Hardayal, who had come over 
nrom America, had long been discarded. He did not fit in with 
the Committee at all, and both the Committee and the German 
Goveanment considered him unreliable, and quietly pushed 
him aside. Years later, when I was in Europe in ipafi and 
i 9 * 7 » I surprised to find with what bitterness and resent- 



IN EUROPE 


«53 

mem most of the old Indian residents in Europe thought of 
Hardayal. He lived at the time In Sweden. I did not meet 
him. 

The War ended, and with it ended finally the Indian Com- 
mittee in Berlin. Life became a dreary affair for them after the 
failure of all their hopes. They had gambled for high stakes 
and lost. In any event, life would have seemed a humdrum 
affair after the nigh adventure and importance of those war- 
time years. But even a secure, humdrum life was not to be had 
for the asking. They could not return to India, and defeated 
Germany after the War was not an easy place to live in. It was 
a hard struggle. A few of them were later allowed by the 
British Government to return to India, but many had to stay 
on in Germany. Their position was peculiar. They were, 
apparently, citizens of no State. They had no proper passports. 
Travel outside Germany was hardly possible, even residence in 
Germany was full of difficulties and was at the mercy of the 
local police. It was a life of insecurity and hardship, and day-to- 
day worry; of continual anxiety to find the wherewithal to eat 
and live. 

The Nazi regime since early in 1933 has added to their mis- 
fortunes, unless they fall in completely with the Nazi doctrine. 
Non-Nordic, and especially Asiatic, foreigners are not welcome 
in Germany; they are only suffered to exist so long as they 
behave. Hitler has pointedly declared himself in favour of 
British imperialist rule in Inffia, no doubt because he wants to 
gain the goodwill of Britain, and he does not wish to encourage 
any Indians who may have displeased the British Government. 

One of the exiles in Berlin whom we met, a prominent mem- 
ber of the old war-time group, was Champakraman Pillai. He 
was rather pompous, and young Indian students had given him 
an irreverent title. He could think in terms of nationalism only, 
and shrunk away from the social or economic approach to a 
question. With the German Nationalists, the Steelhelmets, he 
was perfectly at home. He was one of the very few Indians in 
Germany who got on w:th the Nazis. A few months bade, in 
gaol, I read of his death in Berlin. 

An entirely different type of person was Virendranath Chat - 
topadhvava . member of a famous family in India. PopuIa:ff v 
knovm as Chatto . he was a very able and a very deliglit^l 
person. He was always hard up, his dothes were very much 
the worse for wear, and often he found it difficult to raise the 
wherewithal for a meal. But his humour and lightheartedness 
never left him. He had been some years senior to me during my 



1^4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

educational days in England. He was at Oxford when I went 
to Harrow. Since those days he had jiot returned to India, and, 
sometimes, a fit of homesickness came to him, when he longed 
to be back. All his home-ties had long been severed, and it is 
quite certain that if he came to India he would soon feel un- 
happy and out of joint. But in spite of the passage of many 
years and long wandering, the pull of the home remains. No 
exile can escape the malady of his tribe, that consumption of 
the soul, as Mazzini called it. 

I must say that I was not greatly impressed by most of the 
Indian political exiles that I met abroad, although I admired 
their sacrifice, and sympathised with their sulferings and present 
difficulties, which are very real. I did not meet many of them; 
there are so many spread out all over the world. Only a few 
are known to us even by reputation, and the others have dropped 
out of the Indian world and been forgotten by thrir countrymen 
whom they sought to serve. Of the few I met, the only persons 
who impressed me intellectually were V. Chattopadhyaya and 
M. N. Roy. Roy I met for a brief half-hour in Moscow. He was 
a leading Communist then, although, subsequently, his com- 
munism drifted away from the orthodox Comintern brand, 
Chatto was not, I believe, a regular Communist, but he was 
communistically inclined. Roy has been in an Indian prison 
for more than three years now. 

There were many other Indians floating about the face of 
Europe, talking a revolutionary language, making daring and 
fimtasdc suggestions, asking curious questions. They seemed 
to have the impress of the British Secret Service upon them. 

We met, of course, many Europeans and Americans. From 
Geneva we went on a pilgrimage many a time (the first time 
with a letter of introduction ftom Gandhijl) to the ViUa Olga 
at Villeneuve, to see Romain RoUand. Another precious 
memory is that of Ernst Toller, the young German poet and 
dramatist, now, under Nazi rule, no longer a German; and of 
Roger Baldwin, of the Civil liberties Union of New York. In 
Geneva we also made fiiends with Dhan Gopal Mukerji, the 
author, who has settled down in America. 

Before going to Europe I had met Frank Buchman, of the 
Oxfmd Group Movement, in India. He had given me some of 
the literature of his movement, and I had read it with amaze- 
ment. Sudden conversions and confessions, and a reidvalist 
atmosphere generally, seemed to me to go ill with intellectuality. 
I could not make out how some persons, who seemed obviouriy 
intelligent, should experience these strange emotions and be 



IN EUROPE 


155 

affected by them to a great extent. I grew curious. I met Frank 
Buchman again, in Geneva, and he invited me to one of his 
international house-parties, somewhere in Rumania, I think, this 
otie was. I was sorry I could not go and look at this new emo- 
tionalism at close quarters. My curiosity has thus remained 
unsatisfied, and the more I read of the growth of the Oxford 
Group Movement, the more I wonder. 