ELEVEN DAYS 

For the Sword outwears its sheath, 

And the soul wears out the breast. 

Byron, 

My release was temporary. I was given to understand that it 
was for a day or two or for such longer period as the doctors 
might think absolutely necessary. It was a peculiar position, 
full of uncertainty, and it was not possible for me to settle 
down to anything. A fixed period would have enabled me to 
know how I stood, and I would have tried to adjust myself to 
it. As it was, any day, at any moment, I might be taken back 
to prison. 

The change was sudden and I was wholly unprepared for 
it. From solitary confinement to a crowded house with doctors, 
nurses, and relatives. My daughter Indira had also come from 
Santiniketan. Many friends were continually coming to see me 
and enquire aft§x»1^3.mala’s health. The style of living was 
quite differentr there were home comforts, better food. And 
colouring all this background was anxiety for Kamala’s serious 
condition. 

There she lay frail and utterly weak, a shadow of herself, 
struggling feebly with her illness, and the thought that she 
might leave me became an intolerable obsession. It was 
eighteen and a half years since our marriage, and my mind 
wandered back to that day and to all that tibese succeeding 
years had brought us. I was twenty-six at the time and she 
was about seventeen, a slip of a girl, utterly unsophisticated 
in the ways of the world. The difference in our ages was con- 
siderable, but greater still was the difference in our mental out- 
look, for I was far more grown-up than she was: And yet with 
all my appearance of worldly wisdom I was very boyish, and 
I hardly realised that this ddicatc, sensitive girl's mind was 
slowly unfolding like a flower and required gentle and careful 
tending. We were attracted to each other and got on well 
enough, but our backwoundS were different and there was a 
want of adjustment. These maladjustments would sometimes 
lead to friction and there were many petty quarrels over 
trivialities, boy-and-girl affairs which did not last long and 

00 fi6l 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


563 

ended in a quick reconciliation. Both had a quick temper, a 
sensitive nature, and a childish notion of keeping one’s dignity. 
In spite of this our attachment grew, though the want of ad- 
justment lessened only slowly. Twenty-one months after our 
marriage, Indira, our daughter and only child, arrived. 

Our marriage had almost coincided with new developments 
in politics, and my absorption in them grew. They were the 
Home Rule days, and soon after came Martial Law in the 
/Punjab and Non-Co-operation, and more and more I was in- 
volved in the dust and tumble of public affairs. So great 
became my concentration in these activities that, all uncon- 
sciously, I almost overlooked her and left her to her own 
resources, just when she required my full co-operation. My 
affection for her continued and even grew, and it was a great 
comfort to know that she was there to help me with her sooth- 
ing influence. She gave me strength, but she must have suf- 
fered and felt a little neglected. An unkindness to her would 
almost have been better than this semi-forgetful, casual attitude. 

And then came her recurring illness and my long absences in 

E rison, when we could only meet at gaol interviews. The Civil 
Usobedience movement brought her in the front rank of our 
fighters, and she rejoiced when she too went to prison. We grew 
ever nearer to each other. Our rare meetings became precious, 
and we looked forward to them and counted the days that in- 
tervened. We could not get tired of each other or stale, for 
there was always a freshness and novelty about our meetings 
and brief periods together. Each of us was continually making 
fresh discoveries in the other, though sometimes perhaps the 
new discoveries were not to our liking. Even our grown-up 
disagreements had something boyish and girlish about them. 

A.fter eighteen years of married life she had still retained her 
girlish and virginal appearance; there was notlung matronly 
about her. Almost she might have been the bride that came to 
our house so long ago. But I had changed vastly, and though 
I was fiit and supple and active enough tor my age — and, I was 
told, I still possessed some boyish traits — ^my looks betrayed 
me. I was partly bald and my hair was grey, lines and furrows 
crossed my face and dark shadows surrounded my eyes. The 
last four years with their troubles and worries had left many 
a mark on me. Often, in these later years when Kamala and 
I had gone out together in a strange place, she was mistaken, 
to my embarrassment, for my daughter. She and Indira looked 
like two sisters. 

Eighteen years of married life! But how many long years 



ELEVEN DAYS 


563 

out of them had I spent in prison-cell, and Kamala in hos- 
pitals and sanatoria? And now again I was serving a prison 
sentence and out just for a few days, and she was lying ill, 
struggling for life. I felt a little irritated at her for her care- 
lessness about her health. And yet how could I blame her, 
for her eager spirit fretted at her inaction and her inability to take 
her full share in the national struggle. Physically unable to do 
so, she could neither take to work properly nor to treatment, 
and the fire inside her wore down the body. 

Surely she was not §oing to leave me now when I needed her 
most? Why, we had just begun to know and understand each 
other really; our joint life was only now properly beginning. 
We relied so much on each other, we had so much to do 
together. 

So I thought as I watched her from day to day and hour 
to hour. 

Colleagues and friends came to see me. They told me of much 
that had happened of which I was unaware. They discussed 
current political problems and asked me questions. I found it 
difficult to answer them. It was not easy for my mind to get 
away firom Kamala’s illness, and after the isolation and detach- 
ment of gaolT was not in a position to face concrete questions 
suddenly. Long experience had taught me that it is not pos- 
sible to appraise a situation from the limited information 
available in gaol. Personal contacts were necessary for a proper 
mental reaction, otherwise the expression of opinion was likely 
to be purely academic and divorced from reality. It seemed 
also unfiiir to Gandhiji and my old colleagues of the Congress 
Working Committee for me to say anything definite regarding 
Congress policy before I had had the opportunity to discuss 
everything with them. My mind was full of criticisms of much 
that had been done, but I was not prepared to make any 
positive suggestions. Not expecting to come out of prison just 
then I had not thought along these lines. 

I had also a feeling that in view of the courtesy shown by 
the Government in allowing me to come to my wife, it would 
not be proper for me to take advantage of this for political 
purposes. I had given no undertaking or assurance to avoid 
any such activity, nevertheless I was condnually being pulled 
back by this idea. 

I avoided issuing any public statements except to contradict 
false rumours. Even m private I refi'ained firom committing 
myself to any definite line of policy, but I was free enough 
with my criticisms of past events. The Congress Socialist Party 



564 JAWAHARI,AL NEHRU 

had recently come into existence, and many of my intimate 
colleagues were associated with it. So far as I had gathered, its 
general policy was agreeable to me, but it seemed a curious and 
mixed assemblage and, even if I had been completely free, I 
would not have suddenly joined it. Local politics took up some 
of my time, for in Allahabad, as in several other places, there 
had been an extraordinarily virulent campaign during the 
elections for the local Congress Committees. No principles were 
involved, it was purely a question of personalities, and I was 
asked to help in settling some of the personal quarrels that had 
arisen. 

I had no desire whatever to go into these matters, nor had I 
the time. In spite of this some of the facts came to my notice 
and caused me great distress. It was surprising that people 
should get so vastly excited over local Congress elections. 
Among the most prominent were those who had retired during 
the struggle for various private reasons. With the withdrawal 
of civil disobedience those reasons ceased to have weight, and 
they emerged suddenly and carried on a fierce and often vulgar 
campaign against each other. It was extraordinary how the 
ordinary canons of decency were fiirgotten in the passionate 
desires to down the other party. I was especially grieved at the 
fact that Kamala’s name and even her illness had been ex- 
ploited for the purposes of these local elections. 

Among the wider questions that were discussed was the 
Congress decision to contest the coming elections to the Legisla- 
tive Assembly. Many of the younger groups opposed this 
decision because they thought it was a return to parliamentary 
and compromising methods, but they suggested no effective 
alternative. Some of these opponents on grounds of high 
principle had, curiously enough, no objection to organisations 
other than the Congress running the elections. Their object 
seemed to be to leave the field clear to communal organisations. 

I felt disgusted with the local squabble and the kind of 
politics which were rapidly developing. I felt out of tune with 
them and a stranger in my own dty of Allahabad. What could 
I do, I wondered, in this environment when the time came for 
me to attend to such matters? 

I wrote to Gandhiji about Kamala’s condition. As I thought 
I would be going back to prison soon and might have no other 
chance to do so, I gave him also some glimpse into my mind. , 
Recent events had embittered and distressed me greatly, and 
my letter carried a faint reflection of this. I did not attempt 
to suggest what should be done or what should not be done; 



ELEVEN DAYS 


565 

all I did was to interpret some of my reactions to what had 
happened. It was a letter full of barely suppressed emotion, 
and I learnt subsequently that it pained Gandhiji considerably. 

Day after day went by and I waited for the summons to 
prison or some other intimation from Government. From time 
to time I was informed that further directions would be issued 
the next day or the day after. Meanwhile the doaors were 
asked to send a daily hulletia of my wife’s condition to Govern- 
ment. Kamala had slightly improved since my arrival. 

It was generally believed, even by those who are usually in 
the confidence of the Government, that I would have been Mly 
discharged but for two impending events— the full session of 
the Congress that was taking place in October in Bombay and 
the Assembly Elections in November. Out of prison I might 
be a disturbing factor at these, and so it seemed probable that 
I might be sent back to prison for another three months and 
then discharged. There was also the possibility of my not 
being sent back to gaol, and this possibility seemed to grow as 
the days went by. I almost decided to settle down. 

It was the eleventh day after my release, August ajrd. The 
police car drove up and the police officer came up to me and 
told me that my time was up and I had to acconmany him to 
Naini Prison. I hade good-bye to my people. As I was getting 
into the police car my ailing mother ran up again to me with 
arms outstretched. That face of hm haunted me for long. 