I AM EXTERNED AND THE CONSEQUENCES 
THEREOF 

My politics had been those of my class, the bourgeoisie. Indeed 
all vocal politics then (and to a great extent even now) were those 
of the middle classes, and Moderate and Extremist alike repre- 
sented them and, in different keys, sought their betterment. The 
Moderate represented especially the handful of the upper middle 
class who had on the whole prospered under British rule and 
wanted no sudden changes which might endanger their present 
position and interests. They had close relations with the British 
Government and the big landlord class. The Extremist repre- 
sented also the lower ranks of the middle class. The industrial 
workers, their number swollen up by the war, were only locally 
organised in some places and had little influence. The peasantiy 
were a blind, poverty-stricken, suffering mass, resigned to their 
miserable fate and sat upon and exploited by all who came in 
contact with them— -the Government, landlords, money-lenders, 
petty ofl&cials, police, lawyers, priests. 

A reader of the newsp^ers would hardly imagine that a vast 
peasantry and millions of workers existed in India or bad any 
importance. The British-owned Anglo-Indian newspapers were 
fun of the doings of high ofidcials; English social life in the big 
dties and in the hill stations was described at great length with 
its parties, fancy-dress balls and amateur theatricals. Indian 
politics, fiom the Indian point of view-, were almost completely 
Ignored by them, even the Confess sessions being disposed of 
in a few lines on a back page. They were not considered news 
of any value except when some Indian, prominent or otherwise, 
slanged or criticised the Congress and its pretensions. Occasion- 
ally there was a brief referents to a strike, and the rural areas 
only came into prominence when there was a riot. 

Indian newspapers tried to model themselves on the Anglo- 
Indian ones but gave much greater prominence to the nationalist 
movetnent. For the rest they were interested in the appointment 
bf Indians to important or unimportant oflSces, their promotions 
and transfers — ^when there was always a party given to the out- 
going ofl&cer at which "great enthusiasm prevailed At the 
tiine of a flesh Government settlement of an agricultural area, 

, which almost always resulted in an increase of Government 



I AM EXTERKEO 


49 

revenue, there was an outcry because the landlord’s pocket was 
affected. The poor tenant was nowhere in tlie picture. These 
newspapers were owned and controlled chiefly by the landlords 
and the industrialists. Such was that which was called the 
“nationalist ” press. 

One of the persistent demands of the Congress itself, during 
its early years, was a permanent settlement of the land in the 
non-settled areas, in order that the rights of the landlords might 
be protected. No mention was made of the tenant. 

Conditions have changed greatly during the last twenty years 
because of the growth of the nationalist movement, and now 
even the British-owned newspapers have to give space to Indian 
political problems if they are to retain their Indian readers. 
But they do so in their own peculiar way. Indian newspapers 
have developed a slightly wider outlook and talk benevolently of 
the worker and the peasant, because that is the fashion, and there 
is a growing interest in industrial and rural problems among their 
readers. But essentially now, as before, they voice the interests 
of the Indian capitalist and landlord class which owns them. 
Many Indian princes have also taken to investing money in these 
newspapers and they see to it that they get their money’s worth. 
Yet many of these newspapers arc called " Congress ” news- 
papers, although many of those who control them are not even 
members of the Congress. But the Congress is a popular word 
with the public and many an individual and a group exploit it 
to their advantage.. Newspapers which are prepared to take up 
a more advanced position have, of course, always to live in fear 
of big fines or even of suppression under the stringent press 
laws and censorship. 

In igao I was totally ignorant of labour conditions in fiictories 
or fields, and my politied outlook was entirely bourgeois. I knew, 
of course, that there was terrible poverty and misery, and I felt 
that the first aim of a politically free India must be to tackle 
this problem of poverty. But political fireedom, with the 
inevitable dominance of the middle class, seemed to me the 
obvious next step. I was paying a little more attention to the 
peasant problem since Gandhiji’s agrarian movements in Cham- 
paran ffiehar) and Kaira (Gujrat). But my mind was full of 
politiou developments in 1920 and of the coming of non- 
co-operation which was looming on the horizon. 

Just then a new interest devdoped in my life which was to 
play an important part in later years. I was thrown, almost 
without any will of my own, into contact with the peasantiy. 
This came about in a tnirious way. 



50 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

My mother and Kamala (my wife) were both unwell, and early 
in May 1920 I took them up to Mussoorie. My father was busy 
then in a big raj case in which he was opposing Mr. C. R. Das. 
We stopped at the Savoy Hotel in Mussoorie. At that time, peace 
negotiations were proceeding between the Afghan and British 
envoys (this was after the brief Afghan War in 1919 when 
Amanullah came to the throne) at Mussoorie, and the Afghan 
delegation were stopping at the Savoy Hotel. They kept to them- 
selves, however, fed separately, and did not appear in the 
common rooms. I was not particularly interested in them, and 
for a whole month I did not see a single member of their delega- 
tion, and if I saw them I did not recognise them. Suddenly one 
evening I had a visit &om the Superintendent of Police and 
he showed me a letter from the local Government asking him to 
get an undertaking from me that I would not have any dealings 
or contacts with the Afghan delegation. This struck me as extra- 
ordinary since I had not even seen them during a month’s stay 
and there was little chance of my doing so. The Superintendent 
knew this, as he was closely watching the delegation, and there 
were literally crowds of secret service men about. But to give 
any undertaking went against the grain and I told him so. He 
asked me to see the District Magistrate, the Superintendent of 
the Dun, and I did so. As I persisted in my refusal to give an 
undertaking an order of extemment was served on me, calling 
upon me to leave the district of Dehra Dun within twenty-four 
hours, which really meant within a few hours from Mussoorie. 
I did not like the idea of leaving my mother and wife, both 
of whom were ailing; and yet 1 did not think it right to break 
the order. There was no civil disobedience then. So I left 
Mussoorie. 

My father had known Sir Harcourt Butler, who was then 
Governor of the United Provinces, fairly well, and he wrote to 
him a friendly letter saying that he was sure that he (Sir 
Harcourt) could not have issued such a stupid order; it must 
be some bright person in Simla who was responsible for it. Sir 
Harcourt replied that the order was quite a harmless one and 
Jawaharlal could easily have complied with it without any injury 
to his dignity. Father, in reply, disagreed with this and added 
that, although there was no intention of deliberately breaking 
the order, if my mother’s or wife's health demanded it, I would 
certainly return to Mussoorie, order or no order. As it happened, 
my mother’s condition took a tpm for the worse, and both father 
and I immediatdy started for Mussoorie. Just before starting, 
we reedved a telegram resdnding the order. 



I AM EXTERNED 


51 

When we reached Mussoorie the next morning the first person 
I noticed in the courtyard of the hotel was an Afghan who had 
my baby daughter in his arms! I learnt that he was a minister 
and a member of the Afghan delegation. It transpired that 
immediately after my externment the Afghans had read about 
it in the newspapers, and they were so much interested that the 
head of the delegation took to sending my mother a basket of 
fruit and flowers every day. 

Father and I met one or two members of the delegation later 
and we were cordially invited to visit Afghanistan. Unhappily 
we were unable to take advantage of this offer, and I do not 
know if the invitation stands under the new dispensation in that 
country. 

As. a result of the externment order from Mussoorie I spent 
about two weeks in Allahabad, and it was during this period that 
I got entangled in theXiron (peasant) movement. That entangle- 
ment grew in later years and influenced my mental outlook 
greatly. I have sometimes wondered what would have happened 
if I had not been externed and had not been in Allahabad just 
then with no other engagements. Very probably I would have 
been drawn to the kisans anyhow, sooner or later, but the manner 
of my going to them would have been different and the eflfect 
on me might also have been different. 

Early in June 1920 (so far as I can remember) about two 
hundred kisans marched fifty miles from the interior of Partab- 
garh district to Allahabad city with the intention of drawing 
the attention of the prominent politicians there to their woe- 
begone condition. They were led by a man named Ramachandra, 
1^0 himself was not a local peasant. I learnt that these kisans 
were squatting on the river bank, on one of the Jumna ghats, 
and, accompanied by some friends, went to see them. They told 
us of the crushing exactions of the taluqadars, of inhuman 
treatment, and that their condition had become , wholly in- 
tolerable. They begged us to acconmany them back to make 
inquiries as weU as to protect them from the vengeance of the 
taluqadars who were angry at thdr having come to Allaha- 
bad on this mission. They would accept no denial and literally 
clung on to us. At last I promised to visit them two days or so 
later. 

I went there with some colleagues and we spent three daw in 
the villages far from the railway and even the pucca road. That 
visit was a revdation to me. We found the whole counti^side 
afire with enthusiasm and full of a strange excitement. Enor- 
mous gatherings would take place at the briefest notice by word 



53 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of mouth. One village would communicate with another, and 
the second with the third, and so on, and presently whole villages 
would empty out, and all over the fields there would be men and 
women and children on the march to the meeting-place. Or, 
more swiftly still, the cry of Sita Ram — Sita Ra-a-a-a-m — would 
fill the air, and travel far in aU directions and be echoed back 
firom other villages, and then people would come streaming out 
or even running as fast as they could. They were in miserable 
rags, men and women, but their faces were full of excitement 
and their eyes glistened and seemed to expect strange happen- 
ings which would, as if by a miracle, put an end to their long 
misery. 

They showered their affection on us and looked on us with 
loving and hopeful eyes, as if we were the bearers of good tidings, 
the guides who were to lead them to the promised land. Looking 
at them and their misery and overflowing gratitude, I was filled 
with shame and sorrow, shame at my own easy-going and com- 
fortable life and our petty politics of the city which ignored this 
vast multitude of semi-naked sons and daughters of India, sorrow 
at the degradation and overwhelming poverty of India. A new 
picture of India seemed to rise before me, naked, starving, 
crushed, and utterly miserable. And their faith, in us, casual 
visitors from the distant dt^, embarrassed me and filled me with 
a new responsibility that firightened me. 

I listened to their innumerable tales of sorrow, their crushing 
and ever-growing burden of rent, illegal exactions, ejectments 
firom land and mud hut, beatings; surrounded on all sides by 
vultures who preyed on them — ^zamindar’s agents, money-lenders, 
police; toiling all day to find that what they produced was not 
theirs and their reward was kicks and curses and a hungry 
stomach. Many of those who were present were landless people 
who had been ejected by the landlords, and had no land or hut 
to faU back upon. The land was rich but the burden on it was 
very heavy, the holdings were small and there were too many 
people after them. Tafing advantage of this land hunger the 
landlords, unable under the law to enhance their rents he- 
TOnd a certain percentage, charged huge illegal premiums, 
^e tenant, knowing of no other alternative, bprrowed money 
ftom the money-lender and paid the premium, and then, un- 
able to pay his debt or even the rent, was ejected and lost all 
he had. 

This process was an old one and the progressive pauperisation 
of the peasantry had been going on for a long time. What had 
happened to hnng matters to a head and rouse up the country- 



I AM EXTERNED 


53 

side? Economic conditions, of course, but these conditions were 
similar all over Oudh, while the agrarian upheaval of 1920 and 
1921 was largely confined to three districts— Partabgarh, Rae 
Bareli and Fyzabad. This was partly due to the leadership of a 
remarkable person, Ramachandra, Baba Ramachandra as he was 
called. 

Ramachandra was a man fiom Maharashtra in western 
India and he had been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. On 
his return he had gradually drifted to these districts of Oudh 
and wandered about reciting Tulsidas’s Ramayana and listening 
to tenants’ grievances. He had little education and to some 
extent he exploited the tenantry for his own benefit, but he 
showed remarkable powers of organisation. He taught the 
peasants to meet firequently in sabhas (meetings) to discuss their 
own troubles and thus gave them a feeling of solidarity. Occa- 
sionally huge mass meetings were held and this produced a sense 
of power. Slta-Ram was an old and cominon cry but he gave it 
an almost warlike significance and made it a signal for emer- 

f encies as well as a bond between different villages. Fyzabad, 
artabgarh and Rae Bareli are full of the old legends of 
Ramacnandra and Sita — ^thesc districts formed part of the king- 
dom of Ayodhya — and the favourite book of the masses is 
Tulsidas’s Hindt Ramayana. Many people knew htmdreds of 
verses from this by heart. A recitation of this book and 
appropriate quotations from it was a favourite practice of 
Ramachandra. Having organised the peasantry to some extent 
he made all manner of promises to them, vague and nebulous 
but full of hope for them. He had no programme of any kind 
and when he had brought them to a pitch of exdtement he tried 
to shift the responsibuity to others. This led him to bring a 
number of peasants' to Allahabad to interest people there in the 
movement. 

Ramachandra continued to take a prominent part in the 
agrarian movement for another year and served two or three 
sentences in, prison, but he turned out later to be a very irres- 
ponsible and unrefiable person. 

Oudh was a particularly good area for an agrarian agitation. 
It was, and is, the land of the taluqadars — ^the "Barons of 
Oudh ’’ they call themselves— and the zamindari system at its 
worst flourished there. The exactions of the landlords were 
becoming unbearable and the number of landless labourers was 
growing. There was on the whole only one class of tenant and 
this heq>ed united action. 

■ India may be roughly divided into two parts— the zamindui 



54 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

area with its big landlords, and the area containing peasant pro- 
prietors, but there is a measure of overlapping. The three 
provinces of Bengal, Behar, and the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh, form the zamindari area. The peasant proprietors are 
comparatively better off, although even their condition is often 
pitiable. The mass of the peasantry in the Punjab or Gujrat 
(where there are peasant proprietors) is far better off than the 
tenants of the zamindari areas. In the greater part of these 
zamindari areas there were many kinds of tenancies — occupancy 
tenants, non-occupancy tenants, sub-tenancies, etc. The interests 
of various tenants often conflict against each other and this mili- 
tates against joint action. In Oudh, however, there were no 
occuptmcy tenants or even life tenants in 1920. There were only 
short-term tenants who were continually being ejected in favour 
of some one who was willing to pay a higher premium. Because 
there was principally one class of tenant, it was easier to organise 
them for joint action. 

In practice there was no guarantee in Oudh for even the short 
term of the contract. A landlord hardly ever gave a! receipt for 
rent received, and he could always say that the rent had not been 
paid and eject the tenant, for whom it was impossible to prove 
the contra^. Besides the rent there were an extraordinary num- 
ber of illegal exactions. In one taluqa I was told that there had 
been as many as fifty different kinds of such exactions. Probably 
this number was exaggerated but it is notorious how taluqadars 
often make their tenants pay for every special expenditure — a 
marriage in the family, cost of the son’s education in foreign 
countries, a party to the Governor or other high official, a pur- 
chase of a car or an elephant. Indeed these exactions have got 
special names — motrauna (tax for pmehase of motor), hathauna 
(tax for purchase of elephant), etc. 

It was not surprising therefore that a big agrarian agitation 
should develop in Oudh. What was surprising to me then was 
that this should have developed quite spontaneously without any 
dty help or intervention of politicians and the like. The agrarian 
movement was entirely separate firom the Congress and it had 
nothing to do with the non-co-operation that was taking shape. 
Or perhaps it will be more correct to say that both these wide- 
spread and powerful movements were due to the same funda- 
mental causes. The peasantry had of course taken part in 
the great hartals that Gandhiji had proclaimed in 1919 and 
later, his name was becoming a charm for the man in the 
village. 

What mnazed me still more was our total ignorance in the 



I AM EXTERNED 


55 

cities of this great agrarian movement. No newspaper had con- 
tained a line about it; they were not interested in rural areas. I 
realised more than ever how cut off we were &om our people and 
how we lived and worked and agitated in a little world apart 
from them. 