EARTHQUAKE 

It was the afternoon of the 15th January, 1934. I was stand- 
ing in the veranda of our house in Allahabad addressing a 
group of peasants. The annual Magh Mela had begun, and we 
had crowds of visitors all day. Suddenly I became unsteady on 
my feet and could hardly keep my balance. I clung on to a 
column near by. Doors started banging and a rumbling noise 
came from the adjoining Swaraj Bhawan, where many of the 
tiles were sliding down the roof. Being unaccustomed to earth- 
quakes, I did not know at first what was happening, but I soon 
realised it. I was rather amused and interested at this novel 
experience and I continued my talk to the peasants and began 
telling them about the earthquake. My old aunt shouted out 
to me from some distance to run out of the building. The idea 
struck me as absurd. I did not take the earthquake seriously, 
and in any event I was not going to leave my bed-ridden motlier 
upstairs, and my wife, who was probably packing, also upstairs 
and seek safety for myself For what seemed quite an appre- 
ciable time the shocks continued and then passed off. They 
provided a few minutes’ conversation and soon were almost 
forgotten. We did not know then, nor could we guess, what 
those two or three minutes had meant to millions in Behar and 
elsewhere. 

That evening Kamala and I left for Calcutta and, all un- 
knowing, we were carried by our train that night through the 
southern earthquake area. The next day there was little news 
in Calcutta about the disaster. The day after bits of news be^an 
to come in. On the third day we began to have a faint notion 
of the calamity. 

We busied ourselves with our Calcutta programme. There 
were plenty of doctors to be seen repeatedly, and it was finally 
decided that Kamala was to come back to Calcutta for treat- 
ment a month or two later. Then there were fi:iends and Con- 
gress colleagues whom we had not met for a long time. I had 
a terrible sense of oppression all the time. People seemed to 
be afraid of doing almost anything lest trouble should come 
to them; they had gone through much. Newspapers were more 
cautious than anywhere else in India. There was also, as else- 
where in India, doubt and confusion about future work. It was 

II 481 



JAWAHAULAL NEHRU 


482 

indeed this doubt, and not so much fear, that prevented any 
effective political activity. There were fascist tendencies much 
in evidence, and socialist and communist tendencies — all rather 
vague and running into each other. It was difficult to draw 
hard and fast lines between these groups. I had neither the 
time nor the opportunity to find out much about the tefforist 
movement, which was receiving a great deal of attention and 
advertisement from official sources. As far as I could gather, it 
had no political significance whatever, and the old members 
of the terrorist groups had no faith left in it. Thw were 
beginning to think on different lines. Resentment at Govern- 
ment action in Bengal had, however, led individuals here and 
there to break loose and indulge in a kind of feud. Indeed, on 
either side this idea of a feud seemed to be dominant. On the 
side of the individual terrorists this was obvious enough. On 
the side of the State also the attitude was far more that of 
carrying on a feud, with occasional reprisals, than of calmly 
grappling with an anti-social occurrence and suppressing it. Any 
government faced by terroristic acts is bound to combat them 
and try to suppress them. But serene control is more becoming 
in a government than excessive action applied indiscriminately 
to guilty and innocent alike, and chiefly to the latter because 
they are sure to be more numerous. Perhaps it is not easy to 
remain calm and collected in the face of such a threat. Ter- 
roristic acts were becoming rare, but the possibility of them 
was ever present, and this was enough to upset the composure 
of those who had to deal with them. Such acts, it is patent 
enough, are not a disease but the symptoms of a disease. It is 
futile to treat the symptoms and not the disease itself, 

I believe that a number of young men and women, who are 
supposed to have dealings with terrorists, are really attracted by 
the glamour of secret work. Secrecy and risk have always an 
appeal for the adventurous type of youth; the desire to be in the 
know, to find out what all this shouting is about, and who are 
these men behind the scenes. It is the call of the detective 
story. These people have no intention of doing anything, 
certainly not a terroristic act, but their mere association with 
suspects in the eyes of the police is enough to make them sus- 
pect also. Soon they are likely to find themselves in the ranks 
of the detenus, or in an internment camp, if a worse fate does 
not await them. 

Law and order, we are told, are among the proud achieve- 
ments of British rule in India. My own instincts are entirely 
in favour of them. I Uke discipline in life, and dislike anarchy 



EARTHQUAKE 


483 

and disorder and inefficiency. But bitter experience has made 
me doubt the value of the law and order that states and 
governments impose on a people. Sometimes the price one pays 
for them is excessive, and the law is but the will of the domi- 
nant faction and the order is the reflex of an all-pervading fear. 
Sometimes, indeed, the so-called law and order might be more 
justly called the absence of law and order. Any achievement 
that is based on widespread fear can hardly be a desirable one, 
and an ‘ order ’ that has for its basis the coercive apparatus of 
the State, and cannot exist without it, is more like a military 
occupation than civil rule. I find in the Rajataranglni, the 
thousand-year-old rashmiri historic epic of the poet Xalhana, 
that the phrase which is repeatedly used in the sense of law and 
order, something that it was the duty of the ruler and the State 
to preserve, is dhanna and abhaya — ^righteousness and absence 
of fear.- Law was something more than mere law, and order was 
the fearlessness of the people. Hovy much more desirable is this 
idea of inculcating fearlessness than of enforcing ' order ’ on a 
frightened populace! 

We spent three and a half days in Calcutta and during this 
period I addressed three public meetings. As I had done before 
in Calcutta, I condemned and argued against terroristic acts, 
and then I passed on to the methods that the Government had 
adopted in Bengal. I spoke from a full heart, for I had been 
greatly moved by accounts of occurrences in the province. 
What pained me most was the manner in which human dignity 
had been outraged by indiscriminate suppression of whole 
populations. The political problem, urgent as it was, took second 
place before this human problem. These three’ speeches of 
mine formed the three counts against me in my subsequent 
trial in Calcutta and my present sentence is due to them. 

From Calcutta we went to Santiniketan to pay a visit to the 
poet Rabindra Nath Tagore. It was always a joy to meet him 
and, having come so near, we did not wish to miss him. I had 
been to Santiniketan twice before. It was Kamala’s first visit, 
and she had come especially to see the place as we were think- 
ing of sending our daughter there. Indira was going to appear 
for her matriculation soon afterwards, and the problem of her 
future education was troubling us. I was wholly against her 
joining the regular official or semi-official universities, for I dis- 
liked them. The whole atmosphere that envelops them is 
official, oppressive and authoritarian. They have no doubt pro- 
duced fine men and women in the past, and they will continue 
to do so. But tiiese few exceptions cannot save the universities 



484 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

from the charge of suppressing and deadening the fine instincts 
of youth. Santinikctan offered an escape from this dead hand, 
and so we fixed upon it, although in some ways it was not so 
up to date and well-equipped as the other universities. 

On our way back we stopped at Patna to discuss with Rajen- 
dra Babu the problem of earthquake relief. He had just been 
discharged from prison and, inevitably, he had taken the lead 
in unofficial relief work. Our arrival was unexpected, for none 
of our telegrams had been delivered. The house where we 
intended staying with Kamala’s brother was in ruins; it was 
a big double-storied brick structure. So, like many others, we 
lived in the open. 

The next day I paid a visit to Muzafl’arpur. It was exactly seven 
days after the earthquake and little had so far been done to 
remove the debris, except from some of the main streets. As 
these streets were cleaned corpses were being discovered, some in 
curiously expressive attitudes, as if trying to ward off a falling 
wall or roof. The ruins were an impressive and terrifying sight. 
The survivors were thoroughly shaken-up and cowed by their 
nerve-racking experiences. 

Returning to Allahabad, collections of funds and materials 
were immediately organised, and all of us, of the Congress or 
out of it, took this up in earnest. Some of my colleagues were 
of opinion that because of the earthquake the Independence 
Day celebrations .should be called off. But other colleagues and 
I saw no reason why even an earthquake should interfere with 
our programme. So on the 26th January we had a large num- 
ber of meetings in the villages of Allahabad district and a 
meeting in the city, and we met with greater success than we 
had anticipated. Most people expected police interference and 
arrests, and on a minor scale there was some interference. But, 
much to our surprise, we survived the meeting. In some of our 
villages and in some other cities arrests were made. 

Soon after returning from Behar I issued a statement about 
the earthquake,' ending up with an appeal for funds. In this 
statement I criticised the inactivity of the Behar Government 
during the first few days after the earthquake. It was not my 
intention to criticise the officials in the earthquake areas, for 
they had had to deal with a very difficult situation which would 
have tried the stoutest nerves, and I was sorry that some of my 
words were capable of this interpretation. But I did feel 
strongly tliat the headquarters of the Behar Government had 
not shown great competence to begin with, especially in the 
matter of removal of debris, which might have saved lives. 



EARTHQUAKE 


485 

Thousands of people were killed in Monghyr city alone, and 
three weeks later I saw a vast quantity of dehris still lying 
untouched, although a few miles away at Jamalpur there was 
a large colony of many thousands of railway workers, who 
could have been utilised for this purpose within a few hours of 
the catastrophe. Living people were unearthed even twelve days 
after the earthquake. The Government had taken immediate 
steps to protect property, but they had not been so expeditious 
in trying to rescue people who lay buried. The municipalities 
in these areas were not functioning. 

I think my criticism was justified, and I found later that the 
great majority of people in the earthquake areas agreed with 
it. But whether it was justified or not, it was honestly made, 
not with the intention of blaming the Government, but of 
speeding them up. No one acctaed them of any deliberate sins 
of commission or omission in this respect. It was a novel and 
overpowering situation and errors were excusable. The Behar 
Government, so far as I know (fi)r I have been in gaol), later on 
worked with energy and competence to repair the ravages of 
the earthquake. 

But my criticism was resented, and soon afterwards a few 
people in Behar came out with a general testimonial in favour 
of the Government as a kind of counterblast. The earthquake 
and its demands Became almost a secondary matter. More im- 
portant was the fact that the Government had been criticised, 
and it must he defended by its loyal subjects. This was an 
interesting instance of a widespread phenomenon in India — 
the dislike of criticism of the Government, which is a common- 
place in Western countries. It is the military mentality, which 
cannot tolerate criticism. Like the King, the British Govern- 
ment in India and all of its superior officials can do no wrong. 
To hint at any such thing is Itse majeste. 

The curious part of it is that a charge of inefficiency and 
incompetence is resented far more than an accusation of harsh 
government or tyranny. The latter might indeed land the 
person making it in prison, but the Government is used to it 
and does not really mind it. After all, in a way, it mi^t almost 
be considered a compliment to an imperial race. But to he 
called inefficient and wanting in nerve hurts, for this strikes at 
the root of their selfiesteem; it disturbs the messianic delusions 
of the English officials in India. They are like the Anglican 
bishop who was prepared to put up meekly with a charge of 
unchristian behaviour, but who resented and hit out when 
some one called him foolish and incompetent. 



JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 


486 

There is a general belief among Englishmen, frequently 
asserted as if it was an incontrovertible maxim, that a change 
of government in India, involving a reduction or elimination 
of British influence, would result in a much worse and more 
inefficient government. Holding this belief, but generous in 
their enthusiasm, radicals and Englishmen of advanced views 
plead that good government is no substitute for self-government, 
and if Indians want to go to the dogs, they should be permitted 
to do so. I do not know what will happen to India when British 
influence is eliminated. Much depends on how the British 
withdraw and who is in control in India then, and on a host 
of other considerations, national and international. I can quite 
conceive a state of affairs, established with the help of the 
British, which will be more inefficient and generally worse than 
anything that we can have to-day, for it will have all the vices 
of the present system without its virtues. I can conceive more 
readily still a different state of affairs which, from the point of 
view of the Indian people, will be far more efficient and bene- 
ficial than anything we have to-day. It is possible that the 
coercive apparatus of the State may not be so efficient, and the 
administrative apparatus not quite so shiny, but there will be 
greater efficiency in production, consumption, and the activities 
which go to raise the physical, the spiritual;' and cultural stan- 
dards of the masses. I believe that self-government is good’ for 
any country. But I am not prepared to accept even self- 
government at the cost of real good government. Self-govern- 
ment if it is to justify itself must stand ultimately for better 
government for the masses. It is because I believe that the 
British Government in India, wliatever its claims in the past 
may have been, is incapable of providing good government and 
rising standards for the masses to-day, that I feel that it has 
outlived its utility, such as it was, m India. The only real 
justification for Indian freedom is the promise of better govern- 
ment, of a higher standard for the masses, of industrial and 
cultural growth, and of the removal of the atmosphere of fear 
and suppression that foreign imperialist rule invariably brings 
in its train. The British Government and the I.C.S., though 
they may be strong enough to impose their will on India, are 
not efficient or competent enough to solve India’s problems of 
to-day, and even less of the future, because their foundations 
and assumptions are all wrong and they have lost touch with 
reality, A government or ruling class which is not competent 
enough, or which represents a passing order, cannot long con- 
tinue even to impose their will. 




THE AUTHOR 



EARTHQUAKE 487 

The Allahabad Earthquake Relief Committee deputed me to 
visit the areas affected by the earthquake and to report on the 
methods of relief-work adopted there. I went immediatelyi 
aloiie, and for ten days I wandered about those torn and ruined 
territories. It was a very strenuous tour, and I had little sleep 
during those days. From five in the morning till almost mid- 
night we were up and about, motoring over the cracked and 
crumpled-up roads, or going by little boats where the bridges had 
collapsed and the roads were under water owing to a change in 
level. The towns were impressive enough with their extensive 
ruins, and their roads torn up and twisted sometimes as by a 
giant hand, or raised high above the plinth of the houses on 
either side. Out of huge cracks in these roads water and sand 
had gushed out and swept away men and cattle. More even 
than these towns, the plains of North Behar— the garden of 
Behar, they used to be called — had desolation and destruction 
stamped upon them. Mile upon mile of sand, and large sheets 
of water, and huge cracks and vast numbers of little craters 
out of which this sand and water had come. Some British 
officers who flew over this area said that it bore some resem- 
blance to the battlefields of northern France in war-time and 
soon after. 

It must have been -a terrible experience. The earthquake 
began with strong side-to-side movements which knocked down 
any person who was standing. Then there were up-and-down 
movements, and a vast rumbhng and reverberating noise as of 
an artillery bombardment or a hundred aeroplanes in the sky, 
and waters gushed out in innumerable places out of huge 
fissures and craters and rose to about ten or twelve feet. All 
this probably lasted for three minutes or a litde more and then 
it died dovm, but those three minutes were terrible enough. 
It is not surprising that many persons who saw this happen 
imagined that this was the end of the world. In the cities mere 
was a noise of falling houses, and a rushing of waters, and an 
atmosphere full of dust which made it impossible to see even 
a few yards. In the rural areas there was not much dust and 
one could see a little farther, but there were no calm-eyed 
spectators about. Those who survived lay flat on the ground, or 
rolled about, in an agony of terror. 

A little boy of twelve was dug out (I think in Muzaffarpur) 
alive ten days after the earthquake. He was greatly surprised. 
He had imagined, when he was knocked down and imprisoned 
by falling material, that the world had ended and he was the 
solitary survivor. 



490 jawaharlal nehru 

that drew a vast sum of money from all over India. Weak in 
health, he threw himself into the work of relief. He over- 
worked himself, for he became the centre of all activity and 
everybody turned to him for advice. 

During my tour in the earthquake areas, or just before going 
there, I read with a great shock Gandhiji’s statement to the 
effect that the earthquake had been a punishment for the sin 
of untouchability. This was a staggering remark and I wel- 
comed and wholly agreed with Rabindra Nath Tagore’s answer 
to it. Anything more opposed to the scientific outlook it would 
be difficult to imagine. Perhaps even science will not be abso- 
lutely dogmatic to-day about the effect of emotional states and 
psychic occurrences on matter. A mental shock may result in 
indigestion or something worse to the person concerned. But 
to suggest that a human custom or failing had its reactions on 
the movements of the earth’s crust is an astounding thing. The 
idea of sin and divine wrath and man’s relative importance in 
the affairs of the universe — they take us back a few hun- 
dred years, when the Inquisition flourished in Europe and 
burned Giordano Bruno for his scientific heresy and sent many 
a witch to the stake I Even in the eighteenth century in 
America leading Boston divines attributed earthquakes in Mas- 
sachusetts to the impiety of lightning rods. 

And if the earthquake was a divine punishment for sin, how 
are we to discover for which sin we are being punished? — for, 
alas I we have many sins to atone fijr. Each person can have his 
pet explanation; we may have been punished for submitting to 
putting up with an unjust social system, 
the Maharaja of Durbhanga, the owner of enormous estates, 
was, financially, one of the major sufferers from the earth- 
quake. We might as well say that this was a judgment on the 
zammdari system. That would be nearer the mark than to 
suggest that the more or leas innocent people of Behar were 
being made to suffer vicariously for the sins of untouchability 
of the people of South India. Wliy did not the earthquake visit 
the land of untouchability itself? Or the British Government 
might call the calamity a divine punishment for civil dis- 
obedi^ce, for, as a matter of fact, North Behar, which suffered 
most from the earthquake, took a leading part in the freedom 
movement. 

We can go on speculating indefinitely in this manner. And 
then’ of course, the question arises why we should interfere 
with the workings of Providence or try to lessen the effect of its 
divine decrees by our humaue efforts. And we begin to wonder 



EARTHQUAKE 


491 

why Providence has played this cruel joke on us : to make us 
full of imperfections, to surround us with snares and pitfalls, to 
create a miserable and cruel world, to make the tiger and the 
lamb, and then to punish us. 

‘‘ When the stars threw down their spearo 
And v/ater’d heaven with their tears, 

Dare he laugh his work to see? 

Dare he who made the lamb make thee? ” 

On my last night in Patna I sat up till very late with many 
friends and comrades who had gathered there from various 
provinces to olFer their services for relief work. The U.P. was 
well represented and some of our chosen men were there. We 
discussed a problem that was troubling us : how far must we 
allow ourselves to be involved in earthquake relief? That 
meant, to that extent at least, a withdrawal from political work. 
Relief work was very exacting and we could not take it up 
casually. Absorption in it might well involve a long period of 
absence from the active political sphere, and that was bound to 
have a bad effect politically on our province. Although there 
were many in the Congress fold, the people who make a differ- 
ence were always limited in number and could ill be spared. 
And yet the call of the earthquake could not be ignored. For 
my part I had no intention of devoting myself exclusively to 
relief work. I felt that there would be no lack of people for 
that; there were few for more risky activities. 

So we talked till far into the night. We discussed the last 
Independence Day and how some of our colleagues had been 
arrested then, while we had escaped. I told them laughingly 
that I had discovered the secret of militant politics with perfect 
safety. 

I got back home in Allahabad on February iith, dead 
tired after my tour. Ten strenuous days had made me look 
ghastly and my people were surprised at my appearance. I tried 
to begin writing my report of the tour for the Allahabad Relief 
Committee, but sleep overcame me. I spent at least twelve hours 
out of the next twenty-four in sleep. 

Next day, in the late afternoon, Kamala and I had finished 
tea and Purushottam Das Tandon had just then joined us. We 
were standing in the veranda when a car drove up and a police 
officer alighted. I knew immediately that my time had come. I 
went up to him and said : “ Bahut dinon se apka intazar tha 
“ I have been waiting for you &r a long time,” He was a little 



492 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

apologetic and said that he was not to hlame. The warrant was 
from Calcutta. 

Five months and thirteen days I had been out, and now 1 
went back again to seclusion and loneliness. But the real burden 
was not mine; it had to be shouldered, as always, by the women 
folk — by my ailing mother, my wife, my sister. 



ALIPORE GAOL 


Already how am I so far 
Out of that minute? Must I go 
Still like the thistle-ball, no bar, 

Onward wherever light winds blow. 

Fixed by no friendly star? 

Robert Browning 

That very night I was taken to Calcutta. From Howrah station 
a huge black Maria carried me to Lai Bazaar Police Station. 
I had read much of this famous headquarters of the Calcutta 
police and I looked round with interest. There were large 
numbers of European sergeants and inspectors to be seen, fer 
more than would have been in evidence in any police head- 
quarters in Northern India. The constables seemed to be almost 
all from Behar or the eastern districts of the U.P. During the 
many journeys I made in the big prison lorry, to court and back 
or from one prison to another, a number of these constables 
used to accompany me inside. They looked thoroughly un- 
happy, disliking their job, and obviously full of sympathy for 
me. Sometimes their eyes glistened with tears. 

I was kept in the Presidency Gaol to begin with, and from 
there I was taken for my trial to the Chief Presidency Magis- 
trate’s court. This was a novel experience. The court-room and 
building had more the appearance of a besieged fortress than 
of an open court. Except for a few newspaper men and the 
usual lawyers, no outsiders were allowed anywhere in the neigh- 
bourhood. The police was present in some force. These arrange- 
ments apparently had not been made especiaEy for me; that was 
the daily routine. When I was taken to the court-room I had to 
march through a long passage ^side the room) which was 
closely wired on top and at the side. It was like going through a 
cage. The dock was far from the magistrate’s seat. The court- 
room was crowded with policemen and black-coated and gowned 

used enough to court trials. Many of my previous trials 
had taken place in gaol precincts. But there had always been 
some friends, relatives, familiar faces about, and the whole 
atmosphere had been a little easier. The police had usually 


lawyers 
I was 



494 jawaharlal nishru 

kept in the background and there had never been any cage-like 
structures about. Here it was very different, and I gazed at 
strange, unfamiliar faces between whom and me there was 
nothing in common. It was not an attractive crowd. I am 
afraid gowned lawyers en masse are not beautiful to look at, 
and police-court lawyers seem to develop a peculiarly unlovely 
look. At last I managed to spot one familiar lawyer’s face in 
that black array, but he was lost in that crowd. 

I felt very lonely and isolated even when I sat on the balcony 
outside before the trial began. My pulse must have quickened 
a little, and inwardly I was not quite so composed as I usually 
had been during my previous trials. It struck me then that if 
even I, with so much experience of trials and convictions, could 
react abnormally to that situation, how much more must young 
and inexperienced people feel the tension? 

I felt much better in the dock itself. There was, as usual, no 
defence offered, and I read out a brief statement. The next 
day, February i6th, I was sentenced to two years. My seventh 
term of imprisonment had begun. 

I looked back with some satisfaction to my five and a half 
months’ stay outside. That time had been fairly well occupied, 
and I had managed to get through some useful jobs. My 
mother had turned the corner and was out of immediate 
danger. My younger sister, Krishna, had married.’ My daugh- 
ter's future education had been' fixed up. I had straighten, ed 
out some of my domestic and financial tangles. Many personal 
matters that I had been long neglecting had been attended to. 
In the field of public affairs I knew that no one could do much 
then. I had at least helped a little in stiffening up the Congress 
attitude and in directing it to some extent towards social and 
economic ways of thinking. My Poona correspondence with 
Gandhiji, and later my articles in the Press, had made a differ- 
ence. My articles on the communal question had also done 
some good. And then I had met Gandhiji again after more 
than two years, and many other firiends and comrades, and had 
charged myself with nervous and emotional energy for another 
period. 

One shadow remained to darken my mind—Kamala’s ill- 
health. I had no notion then how very ill she was, for she has a 
habit of carrying on till she collapses. But I was worried. And 
yet I hoped that now I was in prison she would be free to devote 
herself to her treatment. It was more difficult to do so whilst I 
was out and she was not willing to leave me for long. 

I had olie other regret. I was sorry that I had not visited 
