THE DELHI PACT 

On the day and almost at the very hour of my father’s death, 
a large group of the Indian members of the Round Table Con- 
ference landed in Bombay. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri and Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru, and perhaps some others whom I do not re- 
member, came direct to Allahabad. Gandhiji and some mem- 
bers of the Congress Working Committee were already there. 
There were some private meetings at our house at which an 
account ivas given of what the R.T.C. had done. At the very 
commencement, however, there was a little incident. Mr. Sastri, 
entirely of his own accord, expressed regret for what he had 
said at Edinburgh. He added that he was much influenced 
always by his surroundings and his ‘ exuberant verbosity ’ was 
apt to run away with him. 

The Round Table Delegates.did not tell us anything of impor- 
tance about the R.T.C. that we did not know already. They did 
tell us of various intrigues behind the scenes, of what Lord So- 
and-So said or Sir Somebody did in private. Our Liberal friends 
in India have always seemed to me to attach more importance 
to private talks and gossip with and about high officials than 
to principles or to the realities of the Indian situation. Our 
informal discussions with the Liberal leaders did not lead to 
anything, and our previous opinions were only confirmed that 
the R.T.C. decisions had not the least value. Some one then 
suggested — forget who he was — ^that Gandhiji should write to 
the Viceroy and ask for an interview and have a frank talk 
with him. He agreed to do so, although I do not think that he 
expected much in the way of result. But, on principle, he was 
always willing to go out of his way to meet and discuss any- 
thing with his opponents. Being absolutely convinced of the 
rightness of his own position he hoped to convince the other 
parly; but it was jperhaps something more than intellectual con- 
viction that he aimed at. He was always after a psychological 
change, a breaking of the barriers of anger and distrust, an 
approach to the other’s goodwill and fine feelings. He knew 
that if this change took place, conviction became far easier, or 
even if there was no conviction, opposition was toned down 
and the sting was taken out of the conflict. In his personal 
dealings with .individuals hostile to him, he had gained many 



250 JAVVAHARLAL NEHRU 

a victory; it was remarkable how, by sheer force of personality, 
he would win over an opponent. Many a critic and a scoffer 
had been overwhelmed by this personality and became an 
admirer, and even though the criticism continued, it could 
never again have a trace of mockery. 

Conscious of this power, Gandhiji always welcomed a meet- 
ing with those who disagreed with him. But it was one thijig 
to deal with individuals on personal or minor issues; it was 
<^uite another matter to come up against an impersonal thing 
like the British Government representing triumphant imperial- 
ism. Realising this, Gandhiji went to the interview with 
Lord Irwin with no high expectation. The Civil Disobedience 
movement was still going on. though it had toned down because 
there was much talk of pourparlers with Government. 

The interview was arranged without delay, and Gandhiji 
went oflf to Delhi, telling us that if there were any serious 
conversations with the Viceroy regarding a provisional settle- 
ment, he would send for the members of the Working Com- 
mittee. A few days later we were all summoned to Delhi. For 
three weeks we remained there, meeting daily and having long 
and exhausting discussions. Gandhiji had frequent interviews 
with Lord Irwin, but sometimes there was a gap of three or 
four da^s, probably because the Government of India was 
communicatmg with the India Office in London. Sometimes 
apparently small matters or even certain words would hold up 
progress. One such word was ‘ suspension ’ of civil disobedience. 
Gandhiji had all along made it clear that civil disobedience 
could not be finally stopped or given up, as it was the only 
weapon in the hands of uie people. It could, however, be sus- 
pended. Lord Irwin objected to this word and wanted finality 
ab()ut the word, to which Gandhiji would not agree. Ultimately 
the word ‘discontinued’ was used. There were also prolonged 
discussions about the picketing of foreign cloth and liquor 
shops. Most of our time was spent on considering pro- 
visional arrangements for a pact, and little attention was given 
to fundamental matters. Probably it was thought that these 
basw matters could be considered later under more favourable 
conditions when a provisional settlement had been made and 
the day-to-day struggle discontinued. We looked upon those 
talks M Iwding up to an armistice, which might then be fol- 
lowed by further conversations on the real matters in issue. 

Delhi attracted in those days all manner of people. There 
were many foreign journalists, especially Americans, and they 
were somewhat annoyed with us for our reticence. They would 



■I’nE DELHI PACT 


251 

tell US that they got much more news about the Gandhiji-Irwin 
conversations from the New Delhi Secretariat than from us, 
which was a fact. Then there were many people of high degree 
who hurried to pay their respects to Gandhiji, for was not the 
Mahatma’s star in the ascendant? It was very amusing to see 
these people, who had kept far away from Gandhiji and the 
Congress and often condemned them, now hastening to make 
amends. The Congress seemed to have made good, and.no one 
knew what the future might hold. Anyway, it was safer to keep 
on good terms with the Congress and its leaders. A year later 
yet another change was wimessed in them, and they were 
shouting their deep abhorrence of the Congress and all its 
works and their utter dissociation from it. 

Even the communalists were stirred by events, and sensed 
with some apprehension that they might not occupy a very 
prominent place in the coming order. And so, many of them 
came to the Mahatma and assured him that they were per- 
fectly willing to come to terms on the communal issue ana, if 
only he would take the initiative, there would be no difficulty 
about a settlement. 

A ceaseless stream of people, of high and low degree, came 
to Dr. Ansari’s house, where Gandhjji and most of us were 
staying, and in our leisure moments wc watched them with 
interest and profit. For some years our chief contacts had been 
with the poor in towns and villages and those who were down 
and out in gaols. The very prosperous gentlemen who came 
to visit Gan&iji showed us another side of human nature, and 
a vciy adaptable side, for wherever they sensed power and 
success, they turned to it and welcomed it with the sunshine 
of their smiles. Many of them were staunch pillars of the 
British Government in India. It was comforting to know that 
they would become equally staunch pillars of any other 
government that might flourish in India. 

Often in those days I used to accompany Gandhiji in his 
early morning walks in New Delhi. That was usually the only 
time one had a chance of talking to him, for the rest of the 
day was cut up into little bits, each minute allotted to some- 
body or something. Even the early morning walk was some- 
times given over to an interviewer, usually firom abroad, or 
to a friend, come for a personal consultation. We talked of 
many matters, of the past, of the present, and especially of the 
future. I remember how he surprised me with one of his ideas 
about the foture of the Congress. I had imag^ed that the 
Congress, as such, would automatically cease to exist with the 



2^2 JAWAHARtAL NEHRU 

coming of freedom. He thought that the Congress should 
continue, hut on one condition : that it passed a self-denying 
ordinance, laying it down that none of its members could 
accept a paid job under the State, and if any one wanted such 
a post of authority in the State, he would have to leave the 
Congress. I do not at present remember how he worked this 
out, but the whole idea underlying it was that the Congress 
by its detachment and having no axe to grind, could exercise 
tremendous moral pressure on the Executive as well as other 
departments of the Government, and thus keep them on the 
right track. 

Now this is ait extraordinary idea which I find it difficult 
to grasp, and innumerable difficulties present themselves. It 
seems to me that such an assembly, if it could be conceived, 
would be exploited by some vested interest. But practicality 
apart, it does help one to understand a little the background of 
Gandhiji’s thought. It is the very opposite of the modern idea 
of a party which is built up to seize the State power in order 
to refashion the political and economic structure according to 
certain pre-conceived ideas; or that kind of party, found often 
enough nowadays, whose function seems to be (to quote 
Mr. R. H. Tawney) to offer the largest possible number of 
carrots to the largest number of donkeys. 

Gandhiji’s conception of democracy is definitely a meta- 
physical one. It has nothing to do with numbers or majority 
or representation in the ordinary sense. It is based on service 
and sacrifice, and it uses moral pressure. In a recent statement ^ 
he defines a democrat. He claims to be ‘a born democrat’. 
“I make that claim, if complete identification with the poorest 
of mankind, longing to live no better than they, and a cor- 
responding conscious effort to approach that level to the best 
of one’s ability, can entitle one to make it.” He fiirther dis- 
cusses democracy: 

“Let U3 recognise the fact that the Congress enjoys the 
prestige of a democratic character and influence not by the 
number of delegates and visitors it has drawn to its annual 
function, but by an ever-increasing amount of service it has 
rendered. Western democracy is on its trial, if it has not al- 
ready proved a failure. May it be reserved to Indja to evolve 
the true science of democracy by giving a visible demonstration 
of its success, 

“Corruption and hypocrisy ought not to be the inevitable 
products of democracy, as they undoubtedly are to-day. Nor 
' Dated September 17, iq'54. , 



THE DELHI PACT 


253 


is bulk a true test of democracy. True democracy is not in- 
consistent with a few persons representing the spirit, the hope 
and the aspirations of those whom they claim to represent. 
I hold that democracy cannot be evolved by forcible methods. 
The spirit of democracy cannot be imposed &om without; it 
has to come from within.” 

This is certainly not Western democracy, as he himself says; 
but, curiously enough, there is some similarity to the com- 
munist conception of democracy, for that, too, has a meta- 
physical touch. A few communists will claim to represent the 
real needs and desires of the masses, even though the latter 
may themselves be unaware of them. The mass will become 
a metaphysical conception with them, and it is this that they 
claim to represent. The similarity, however, is slight and does 
not take us far; the differences in outlook and approach are far 
greater, notably in regard to methods and force. 

Whether Gandhiji is a democrat or not, he does represent the 
peasant inasscs of India; he is the quintessence of the conscious 
and’suhcbnsdous will of those millions. It is perhaps something 
more than representation; for he is the idealised personification 
of those vast millions. Of course, he is not the average peasant. 
A man of the keenest intellect, of fine feeling and good taste, 
wide vision; very human, and yet essentially the ascetic who 
has suppressed his passions and emotions, sublimated them 
and directed them in spiritual channels; a tremendous person- 
ality, drawing people to himself like a magnet, and calling out 
fierce loyalties and attachments — all this so utterly unlike and 
beyond a peasant. And yet withal he is the great peasant, with 
a peasant’s outlook on arairs, and with a peasant’s blindness to 
some aspects of life. But India is peasant India, and so he 
knows his India well and reacts to her lightest tremors, and 
gauges a situation accurately and almost instinctively, and has 
a knack of acting at the psychological moment. 

What a problem and a puzzle he has been not only to the 
British Government but to his own people and his closest 
associates! Perhaps in every other country he would be out of 
place to-day, but India still seems to understand, or at least 
appreciate, the prophetic-religious type of man, talking of sin 
and salvation and non-violence. Indian mythology is full of 
stories of great ascetics, who, by the rigour of their sacrifices 
and .self-imposed penance, built up a ‘ mountain of merit ’ which 
threatened the dominion of some of the lesser gods and upset 
the established order. > These myths have often come to my 
mind when I have watched the amazing energy and inner 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

power of Gandhiji, coming out of some inexhaustible spiritual 
reservoir. He was obviously not of the world’s ordinary coin- 
age; he was minted of a difterent and rare variety, and often 
the ui^nown stared at us through his eyes. 

India, even urban India, even the new industrial India, had 
the impress of the peasant upon her, and it was natural enough 
for her to make this son of hers, so like her and yet so unlike, 
an idol and a beloved leader. He revived ancient and half- 
forgotten memories, and gave her glimpses of her own soul. 
Crushed in the dark misery of the present, she had tried to find 
relief in helpless muttering and in vague dreams of the past 
and the future, but he came and gave hope to her mind and 
strength to her much-battered body, and the future became 
an alluring vision. Two-faced like Janus, she looked both back- 
wards into the past and forward into the future, and tried to 
combine the two. 

Many of us had cut adrift from this peasant outlook, and 
the old ways of thought and custom and religion had become 
alien to us. We called ourselves moderns, and thought in terms 
of ‘ progress ’, and industrialisation and a higher standard of 
living and collectivisation. We considered the peasant’s view- 
point reactionary, and some, and a growing number, looked with 
favour towards socialism and communism. How came we to 
associate ourselves with Gandhiji political^, and to become, in 
many instances, his devoted followers? The question is hard 
to answer, and to one who docs not know Gandhiji, no answer 
is likely to satisfy. Personality is an indefinable thing, a strange 
force that has power over the souls of men, and he possesses 
this in ample measure, and to all who come to him he often 
apj^ears in a different aspect. He attracted people, but it was 
ultimately intellectual conviction that brought them to him and 
kept them there. They did not agree with his philosophy of 
life, or even with many of his ideals. Often they did not 
understand him. But the action that he proposed was some- 
thing tangible which could be understood and appreciated 
inteflectuaUj. Any action would have been welcome after the 
long tradition of inaction which our spineless politics had 
nurtured; brave and effective action with an ethical halo about 
it had an irresistible appeal, botli to the intellect and the 
emotions. Step by step he convinced us of the rightness of the 
^.-action, and we went with him, although we did not accept his 
philosophy. To divorce action from the thought underlying it 
was not perhaps a proper procedure and was bound to lead to 
mental conflict and trouble later. Vaguely wc hoped that 



THE DELHI PACT 


255 

Gandhiji, being essentially a man of action and very sensitive 
to changing conditions, would advance along the line that 
seemed to us to be right. And in any event the road he was 
following was the right one thus far, and if the future meant 
a parting it would be folly to anticipate it. 

All this shows that we were by no means dear or certain in 
our minds. Always we had the feeling that while we might 
be more logical, Gandhiji knew India far better than we did, 
and a man who could command such tremendous devotion and 
loyalty must have something in him that corresponded to the 
needs and aspirations of the masses. If we could convince him, 
we felt that we could also convert these masses. And it seemed 

K ossible to convince him for, in spite of his peasant outlook, 
e was the born rebel, a revolutionary out for big changes, 
whom no fear of consequences could stop. 

How he disciplined our lazy and demoralised people and 
made them woA: — ^not by force or any material inducement, 
but by a gentle look and a soft word and, above all, by personal 
example! In the early days of Satyagraha in India, as long 
ago as 1919, I remember how Umar Sobani of Bombay called 
him the 'beloved slave-driver*. Much had happened in the 
dozen years since then. Umar had not lived to see these 
changes, but we who had been more fortunate looked back 
from those early months of 1931 with joy and elation. Nine- 
teen-thirty had, indeed, been a wonder year for us, and Gandhiji 
seemed to have changed the face of our country with his magic 
touch. No one was foolish enough to think that we had 
triumphed finally over the British Government. Our feeling 
of elation had little to do with the Government. We were 
proud of our people, of our women folk, of our youth, of our 
children for the part they had played in the movement. It was 
a spiritual gain, valuable at any time and to any people, but 
doubly so to us, a subject and down-trodden people. And we 
were anxious that nothing should happen to take this away 
from us, 

To me, personally, Gandhiji had always shown extraordinary 
kindness and consideration, and my father's death had brought 
him particularly near to me. He had always listened patiently 
to whatever I had to say, and had made every effort to meet my 
wishes. This had, indeed, led me to think that perhaps some 
colleagues and I could influence him continuously in a socialist 
direcdon, and he had himself said that he was prepared to go 
step by step as he saw his way to do so. It se^ed to me almost 
inevitable then that he would accept the fundamental socialist 



2^6 JAWAHARLJiL NEHRU 

position, ns I saw no other way out from the violence and in- 
justice and waste and misery of the existing order. He might 
disagree about the methods but not about the ideal. So I 
thought then, but I realise now that there are basic differences 
between Gandhiji’s ideals and the socialist objective. 

To go back to Delhi in February 1931, The Gandhi-Irwin 
talks went on from time to time, and then they came to a 
sudden stop. For several days Gandhiji was not sent for by 
the Viceroy, and it seemed to us that the break had come. The 
members of the Working Committee prepared to leave Delhi 
for their respective provinces. Before leaving we conferred to- 
gether about our future plans and civil disobedience (which 
was in theory still going on). We felt certain that as soon as 
the break was defintely announced we would have no further 
opportunity of meeting and conferring together. We expected 
arrest, and we had been told, and it seemed likely, that the 
Government would launch a fierce offensive against the Con- 
gress; something much fiercer than we had so far had. So we 
met together at what we thought was our final meeting, and 
we passed various resolutions to guide the movement in the 
future. One resolution had a certain significance. So far, the 
practice had been for each Acting-President to nominate his 
successor in case of arrest, and also to fill by nomination the 
vacancies in the Working Committee. The substitute Working 
Committees hardly functioned and had little authority to take 
the initiative in any matter. They could only go to prison. 
There was always a risk, however, that this continuous process 
of substitution might place the Congress in a false position. 
There were obvious dangers to it. The Working Committee in- 
Delhi, therefore, decided that in future there should be no 
nominations of acting-Presidents or substitute members. So 
long as any members (or member) of the original Committee 
were out of gaol they would fimetion as the full Committee. 
When all of them were in prison, then there would be no 
Committee functioning, but, we said rather grandiloquently, 
the powers of the Working Committee would then vest in each 
man and woman in the country, and we called upon them to 
carry on the struggle uncompromisingly. 

This resolution was a brave lead for a continuance of the 
fight, and it left no loophole for compromise. It was also a 
recognition of the fact that it was becoming increasingly dif- 
ficult for our headquarters to keep in touch with all parts of 
country and to issue instructions regularly. This was 
inevitable, as most of our workers were well-known men and 



TH*; DELHI PACT 


257 

women, and they worked openly. They could always be arrested. 
During 1930 a secret courier service had been built up to carry 
instructions, bring reports, and do inspection work. This 
worked well, and it demonstrated to us that we could organise 
secret information work of this kind with great success. But 
to some extent it did not fit in with our open movement, and 
Candhiji was averse to it. In the absence of instructions from 
headquarters we had to place the responsibility for carrying 
on the work on local people, as otherwise they would simply 
wait helplessly for directions from above and do nothing. When 
possible, of course, instructions were sent. 

So we passed this resolution and other resolutions (none of 
them were published or became cfiective because of subsequent 
events) and packed up to go. Just then another summons came 
from Lord Irwin, and the conversations were resumed. 

On the night of the 4th of March we waited till midnight 
for Gandhiji^ return from the Viceroy’s house. He came back 
about a a.m., and we were woken up and told that an agree- 
ment had been reached. We saw the draft. I knew most of the 
clauses, for they had been often discussed, but, at the very top, 
clause a * with its reference to safeguards, etc., gave me a tre- 
mendous shock. I was wholly unprepared for it. I said nothing 
then, and we all retired. 

There was nothing more to be said. The thing had been 
done, our leader had committed himself ; and even if we dis- 
agreed with him, what could we do? Throw him over? Break 
from him? Announce our disagreement? That might bring 
some personal satisfaction to an individual, but it made no 
difference to the final decision. The Civil Disobedience move- 
ment was ended for the time being at least, and not even the 
Working Committee could push it on now, when the Govern- 
ment could declare that Mr. Gandhi had already agreed to a 
settlement. I was perfectly willing, as were our other colleagues, 
to suspend civil disobedience and to come to a temporary settle- 

^ Clause a of the Delhi Settlement (dated March 5, 1931): "As 
regards constitudonal questions, the scope of future discussion is 
stated, with the assent of His Majesty’s Government, to be with 
the object of considering further the scheme for the constitutional 
Government of India discussed at the Round Table Conference. Of 
the scheme there outlined. Federation is an essential part; so also 
are Indian responsibility and reservations or safeguards in the in- 
terests of India, for such matters as, for instance, defence; external 
affairs; the position of minorities; the ISnandal credit of Ihdia, and 
the discharge of . obligations." 



2^8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ment with the Government. It was not an easy matter for any 
of us to send our comrades back to gaol, or to be instrumental 
in keeping many thousands in prison who were already there. 
Prison is not a pleasant place to spend our days and nights, 
though many Of us may train ourselves for it and talk light- 
heartedly of its crushing routine. Besides, three weeks or more 
of conversations between Gandhiji and Lord Irwin had led the 
country to expect that a settlement was coming, and a final 
break would have been a disappointment. So all of us in the 
Worl^g Committee were decidedly in favour of a provisional 
settlement (for obviously it could be nothing more), provided 
that thereby we did not surrender any vital position. 

So far as I was concerned I was not very much concerned 
with many of the pqints that had given rise to great argument. 
Two matters interested me above all others. One was that our 
objective of independence should in no way be toned down, 
.and the second was the effect of the settlement on our U.P. 
agrarian situation. Our no-tax or no-rent campaign- had so far 
been a great success, and in certain areas hardly any collections 
had been made. The peasantry were in fine mettle, and world 
agricultural conditions and prices were worse than ever, making 
4t difficult for them to pay. Out no-tax campai^ had been 
both political and economic. If there was a provisional settle-, 
ment with the Government, civil disobedience would be ‘'with- 
drawn and the political basis for the no-tax campaign would 
go. But what of the economic side, of the terrible fall m prices, 
and of the inability of most of the peasants to pay anything 
like the demand? Gandhiji had made this point quite clear to 
Lord Irwin. He had stated that while the no-tax campaign 
would be withdrawn, we could not advise the peasantry to pay 
beyond their capacity. This matter could not be discussed in 
detail with the Government of India as it was a provincial 
matter. We were assured that the Provincial Government would 
gladly confer with us on the subject and would do everything 
in its power to relieve the distress of the peasantry. It was a 
vague assurance, but, under the circumstances, it was difficult 
to have anything more definite. This matter was thus, for the 
time being, disposed of. 

The other and vital question of our objective, of indepen- 
dence, remained. And now I saw in that Clause a of the settle- 
ment that even this seemed to be jeopardised. Was it for this 
that our people had behaved so gallantly ffir a year? Were all 
our. brave words and deeds to end in this? The independence 
'resolution of the Congress, the pledge of January a6, so often 



TJtilS iJjiLjal PACT 


259 

repeated? So I lay and pondered on that March night, and in 
my heart there was a great emptiness as of something precious 
gone, almost heyond recall. 

" This is the way the world ends, 

Not with a bang, but a whimper.” 
