WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 

I SPENT three days in the villages, came back to Allahabad, and 
then went again. During these brief visits we wandered about a 
great deal from village to village, feeding with the peasants, living 
with them in their mud huts, talking to them for long hours, 
and often addressing meetings, big and small. We had originally 
gone in a light car and the peasants were so keen that hundreds 
of them, working overnight, built temporary roads across the 
fields so that our car could go right into the interior. Often the 
car got stuck and was bodily lifted out by scores of willing hands. 
But we had to leave the car eventually and to do most of our 
journeying by foot. Everywhere we went we were accompanied 
by pohcemen,C.I.D. men, and a Deputy Collector from Lucknow. 
I am afraid we gave them a bad time with our continuous march- 
ing across fields and they were quite tired out and fed up with us 
and the kisans. The Deputy Collector was a somewhat effeminate 
youth from Lucknow and he had turned up in patent leather 

ra l He begged us sometimes to restrain our ardour and 
a he ultimately dropped out, being unable to keep up 
with us. 

It was the hottest time of the year, June, just before the mon- 
soon. The sun scorched and blinded. I was quite unused to 
going out in the sun and ever since my return from England I 
had gone to the hills for part of every summer^ And now I was 
wandering about all day in the open sun with not even a sun-hat, 
my head being wrapped in a small towel. So full was I of other 
matters that I quite forgot about the heat and it was only on my 
return to Allahabad, when I noticed the rich tan I had developed, 
that I remembered what I had gone through. I was pleased with 
myself for I realised that I could stand the heat with the best 
of them and my fear of it was wholly unjustified. I have found 
that I can bear both extreme heat and great cold.vnthout much 
discomfort, and this has stood me in good stead in my work as 
well as in my periods in prison. This was no doubt due to my 
general physical fitness and my habit of taking exercise, a lesson 
I learnt from my father, who was a bit of an athlete and, almost 
to the end of his days, continued his daily exercise. His head be- 
came covered with silvery hair, his face was deeply furrowed and 
looked old and weary with thought, but the rest of his body, to 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 57 

within a year or two of his death, seemed to be twenty years 
younger. 

Even before my visit to Partabgarh in June 1920 , 1 had often 
passed through villages, stopped there and talked to the peasants. 
I had seen them in their scores of thousands on the banks of the 
Ganges during the big melas and we had taken our Home Rule 
propaganda to them. But someliow I had not fully realised what 
they were and what they meant to India, Like most of us, I 
took them for granted. This realisation came to me during these 
Partabgarh visits and ever since then my mental picture of 
India always contains this naked, hungry mass. Perhaps there 
was some kind of electricity in the air, perhaps I was in a recep- 
tive frame of mind and the pictures I saw and the impressions I 
gathered were indelibly impressed on my mind. 

These peasants took away the shyness from me and taught me 
to speak in public. Till then I hardly spoke at a public gathering ; 
I was frightened at the prospect, espeaally if the speaking was to 
be done m Hindustani, as it almost always was. But I could not 
possib^ avoid addressing these peasant gatherings, and how 
could I be shy of these poor tmsophisticated people? I did not 
know the arts of oratory and so I spoke to them, man to man, 
and told them what I had in my mind and in my heart. Whether 
the gathering consisted of a few persons or of ten thousand or 
more I stuck to my conversational and rather personal method 
of speaking, and I found that, whatever might be lacking in 
it, I could at least go on. I was fluent enough. Perh^s many of 
them could not tmderstand a great deal of what I said. My 
language or my thought was not simple enough for them. Many 
did not hear me when the gathering was very large for my voice 
did not carry far. But all this did not matter much to them when 
once they had given their confidence and faith to a person, 

I went back to Mussoorie to my mother and wife but my mind 
was full of the hisans and I was eager to be back. As soon as I 
returned I resumed my visits to the villages and watched the 
agrarian movement grow in strength. The down-trodden kisan 
began to gain a new confidence in himself and walked straighter 
with head up. His fear of the landlords’ agents and the police 
lessened, and when there was an ejectment from a holding no 
other kisan would make an offer for that land. Physical violence 
on the part of the zamindars’ servants and illegal exactions be- 
came infrequent, and whenever an instance occurred, it was im- 
mediately reported and an attempt at an inquiry was held. This 
checked the zamindars’ agents as well as the police. The talu- 
qadars were frightened and . were on the defensive and the 



58 JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 

provincial government promised an ainendment of the Oudh 
Tenancy Law. 

The taluqadars and the big zamindars, the lords of the land, 
the " natural leaders of the people ”, as they are proud of calling 
themselves, had been the spoilt children of the British Govern- 
ment, but that Government had succeeded, by the special educa- 
tion and upbringing it provided or failed to provide for them, in 
reducing them, as a class, to a state of complete intellectual 
impotence. They did nothing at all for their tenantry, such as 
landlords in other countries have to some little extent often 
done, and became complete parasites on the land and the people. 
Their chief activity lay in endeavouring to placate the local 
officials, without whose favour they could not exist for long, and 
demanding ceaselessly a protection of their special interests and 
privileges. 

The word ‘ zamindar ’ is rather deceptive, and one is apt to 
think that all zamindars are big landlords. In the ryotwari pro- 
vinces it means the peasant proprietor. Even in the typical 
zamindari provinces, it includes in its fold the relatively few big 
landlords, thousands of middle landowners, and hundreds of 
thousands of persons who live in extreme poverty and are no 
better than tenants. In the United Provinces, so far as I can re- 
member, there are a million and a half persons classed as zamin- 
dars. Probably over ninety per cent, of these are almost on the 
same level as the poorest tenants, and another nine per cent, are 
only moderately well off. The biggish landowners are not more 
than five thousand in the whole province, and of this number, 
about one-tenth might be considered the really big zamindars 
and taluqadars. In some instances the bigger tenants are better 
off than the destitute petty landowners. Both these poor land- 
owners and the middle landlords, though often intellectually 
backward, are as a whole a fine body of men and women, and, 
with proper education and training, can be made into excellent 
citizens. They have taken a considerable part in the nationalist 
movement. Not so the taluqadars and the big zamindars, barring 
a few notable exceptions. They have not even the virtues of an 
aristocracy. As a class they are physically and intellectually 
degenerate and have outlived their day; they will continue only 
so long as an external power like the British Government props 
them up. 

Right through the year 192* I'continued my visits to the rural 
areas, but my field of activity grew till it comprised the whole of 
the United Provinces. Non-co-operation had begun in earnest 
and its message had reached the remotest village. A host of 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 59 

Congress workers in each district went about the rural areas with 
the new message to which they often added, rather vaguely, a 
removal of kisan grievances. Swaraj was an all-embracing word 
to cover everything. Yet the two movements — ^non-co-operation 
and the agrarian — ^wcre quite separate, though they overlapped 
and influenced each other greatly in our province. As a result of 
Congress preaching, litigation went down with a rush and 
villages established their pancliayats to deal with their disputes. 
Especially powerful was the influence of the Congress in favour 
of peace, for the new creed of non-violence was stressed wherever 
the Congress worker went. This may not have been fully appreci- 
ated or understood but it did prevent the peasantry ftom taking 
to violence. 

This was no small result. Agrarian upheavals are notoriously 
violent, leading to jacqueries, and the peasants of part of Oudh 
in those days were desperate and at white heat. A spark would 
have lighted a flame. Yet they remained amazingly peaceful. 
The only instance of physical violence on a taluqadar that I 
remember was when a peasant went up to him as he was sitting 
in his own house, surrounded by his Mends, and slapped him on 
the face on the ground that he was immoral and inconsiderate 
to his own wifel 

There was violence of another kind later which led to conflicts 
with the Government. But this conflict was bound to come, for 
the Government could not tolerate this growing power of a 
united peasantry. The kisans took to travelling in railway trains 
in large numbers without tickets, especially when they had to 
attend their periodical big mass meetings which sometimes con- 
sisted of sixty or seventy thousand persons. It was difficult to 
move them and, unheard of thing, they openly defied the rail- 
way authorities, telling them that tlie old days were gone. At 
whose instigation they took to the free mass travelling i do not 
know. We had not suggested it to them. We suddenly heard that 
they were doing it. Striaer railway control prevented this later. 

In the autumn of igao (when I was aww in Calcutta attending 
the special session of the Conmess) a few kisan leaders were 
arrested for some petty offence, ^ey were to be tried in Partab- 
garh town but on the day of the trial a huge concourse of 
peasants filled the court compound and lined the route to the 
gaol where the accused leaders were kept. The magistrate’s nerve 
gave way and he postponed the trial to the next day. But the 
crowd grew and almost surrounded the gaol. The kisans can 
easily carry on for a few days on a handfiil of parched nam. 
Ultimately the kisan leaders wfere discharged, perhaps after a 



6o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

formal trial inside the gaol. I forget how this came about but for 
the hisans this was a great triumph and they began to- think that 
they could always have their way by weight of numbers alone. 
To the Government this position was intolerable and soon after 
a similar occasion arose and this time it ended differently. 

It was at the beginning of January 19a i . I had just returned to 
Allahabad from the Nagpur Congress when I received a telegram 
from Rae Bareli asking me to go there immediately as trouble 
was expected. I left the next day. I discovered that some leading 
kisans had been arrested some days back and had been lodged in 
the local gaol. Remembering their success at Partabgarh and the 
tactics they had then adopted, the peasants marched to Rae 
Bareli town for a mass demonstration. But this time the Govern-, 
ment was not going to permit it and additional police and mili- 
tary had been collected to stop the kisans. Just outside the town 
on the other side of a little river, the main body of the kisans 
was stopped. Many of them, however, streamed in from other 
directions. On arrival at the station I learnt of this situation and 
immediately I proceeded straight to the river where the military 
were said to face the peasants. On the way I received a hurriedly 
written note from the District Magistrate asking me to go back. 
I wrote my reply on the back of it enquiring under what law and 
what section he was was asking me to go back and till I heard 
from him I proposed to go on. As I reached the river sounds of 
firing could be heard from the other side. I was stopped at the 
bridge by the military and as I waited there I was suddenly sur- 
rounded by large numbers of frightened kis,ans who had been 
hiding in the fields on this side ofthe river. So I held a meeting 
of about a couple of thousand peasants on the spot and tried to 
remove their fear and lessen their excitement. It was rather an 
unusual situation with firing going on on their brethren within 
a stone’s throw across a little stream and the military in evidence 
eve^ujhere. But the meeting was quite successful and took away 
, the edge from the kisans^ fear. The District Magistrate then re- 
turned from the firing line and, at his request, I accompanied 
■ him to his bouse. There he kept me, under some pretm or other, 
jfor over two hours, evidently wanting to keep me away from the 
kisans and my colleagues in the city. 

We found later that many-men had been killed in the firing. 
The kisans had refused to msperse or to go back but otherwise 
they had been perfectly peaceful. I am quite sure that if I or 
some one else they trusted had been there and had asked them to 
do so they would have dispersed. They refused to take th eir 
orders from men they did ndt trust. Some one actually suggested 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 6l 

to the Magistrate to wait for me a little but he refused. He could 
Dot permit an agitator to succeed where he had failed. That is 
not the way of foreign governments depending on prestige. 

Firing on kisans took place on two occasions in Rae Bareli 
district about that time and then began, what was much worse, a 
reign of terror for every prominent kisan worker or member of a 
panchayat. Government had decided to crush the movement. 
Hand-spinning on the charkha was then spreading among the 
peasantry at the instance of the Congress. A charkha therefore 
became the symbol of sedition and its owner got into trouble, 
the charkha itself being often burnt. Thus the Government tried 
to crush by hundreds of arrests and other methods both the 
agrarian and the Congress movements in the rural areas of Rae 
Bareli and Partabgarh. Most of the principal workers were com- 
mon to the two movements. 

A little later, in the year ipai, Fyzabad district had its dose of 
widespread repression. The trouble started there in a peculiar 
way. The peasants of some villages went and looted the property 
of a taluqadar. It transpired subsequently that they had been in- 
cited to do so by the servants of another zamindar who had some 
kind of feud with the taluqadar. The poor ignorant peasants 
were actually told that it was the wish of Mahatma Gandhi that 
they should loot and they vrillingly agreed to carry out this be- 
hest, shouting ‘‘ Mahatma Gandhi ki jai ” in the process. 

I was very angry when I heard of this and within a day or two 
of the occurrence I was on the spot, somewhere near Akbarpur 
in Fyzabad district. On arrival I called a meeting for the same 
day and within a few hours five or six thousand persons had 
collected from numerous villages within a radius of ten miles. I 
spoke harshly to them for the shame they had brought on them- 
selves and our cause and said that the guilty persons must confess 
publicly. (I was full in those days of what I conceived to be the 
spirit of Gandhi ji’s Satyagraha). I called upon those who had par- 
ticipated in the looting to raise their hands, and strange to say, 
there, in the presence of numerous police officials, about two 
dozen hands went up. That meant certain trouble for them. 

When I spoke to many of them privately later and heard their 
artless story of how they had been misled, I felt vtxj sorry for 
tlipm and I began to regret having exposed these foolish and 
sinmle folk to long terms of imprisonment. But the people who 
sufifoed were not just two or three dozen. The chance w^ too 
good to be lost and full advantage was tak^ of the occasion to 
crush the agrarian movement in that district. Over a thousand 
arrests were made, and the district gaol was overcrowded, wd the 



63 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

trial went on for the best part of a year- Many died in prison 
during the trial. Many others received long sentences and in later 
years, when I went to prison, I came across some of them, boys 
and young men, spending their youth in prison. 

The Indian kisans have little staying power, little energy to 
resist for long. Famines and epidemics come and slay them in 
their millions. It was surprising that they had shown for a whole 
year great powers of resistance against the combined pressure of 
government and landlord. But they began to weary a little and 
the determined attack of the Government on their movement 
ultimately broke its spirit for the time being. But it continued 
still in a lower key. There were not such vast demonstrations 
as before, but most villages contained old workers who had not 
been terrorised and who carried on the work in a small way. All 
this, it must be remembered, was prior to the gaol-going which 
the Congress started at the end of 1921. Even in this the kisans 
took a considerable part, in spite of all they had suffered during 
the previous year. 

Frightened by the agrarian movement, the Government had 
hurried on with tenancy legislation. This promised some im- 
provement in the lot of the kisan but the measure was toned 
down when it was found that the movement was already under 
control. The principal change it affected was to give a life ten- 
ancy to the kisan in Oudh. This sounded attractive to him but, 
as he has found out subsequently, his lot is in no way better. 

Agrarian troubles continued to crop up in Oudh but on a 
smaller scale. The world depression which began in 1939, how- 
ever, again created a great crisis owing to the fall in prices. 