WHAT IS RELIGION? 

Our peaceful and monotonous routine in gaol was suddenly 
upset in the middle of September 1933 by a bombshell. News 
came that Gandhiji had decided to “ fast unto death ” in disap- 
proval of the separate electorates given by Mr. Ramssw Mac- 
Donald’s Communal Award to the Depressed Classes. Wiat a 
capacity he had to give shocks to people ! Suddenly all manner 
of ideas rushed into my head; all kinds of possibilities and 
contingencies rose up before me and upset my equilibrium 
completely. For two days I was in darkness with no light to 
show the way out, my heart sinking when I thought of some 
results of Gandhiji’s action. The personal aspect was powerful 
enough, and I thought with anguish that I might not see him 
again. It was over a year ago that I had seen him last on board 
ship on the way to England. Was that going to be my last 
sight of him? 

And then ..felt annoyed with him for choosing a side-issue 
for his final sacrifice — ^just a question of electorate. What would 
be the result on our freedom movement? Would not the larger 
issues fade into the background, for the time being at least? 
And if he attained his immediate object and got a joint elec- 
torate for the Depressed Classes, would not that result in a 
reaction and a feeling that something has been achieved and 
nothing more need be done for a while? And was not his action 
a recognition, and in part an acceptance, of the Communal 
Award and the general scheme of things as sponsored by the 
Government? Was this consistent with Non-Co-operation and 
Civil Disobedience? After so much sacrifice and brave en- 
deavour, was our movement to tail off into something insig- 
nificant? 

... I felt angry with him at his religious and sentimental ap- 
proach to a political question, and his frequent references to 
God in connection with it. He even seemed to suggest that 
God had indicated the very date of the fast. What a terrible 
example to set I 

If Bapu died I What would India be like then? And how 
would her politics run? There seemed to he a dreary and dismal 
future ahead, and despair seized my heart whdi I thought of 
it. 


87 ° 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


371 

So I thought and thought, and confusion reigned in my head, 
and anger and hopelessness, and love for hiin who was the 
cause of this upheaval. I hardly knew what to do, and I was 
irritable and short-tempered wiA everybody, and most of all 
with myself. 

And then a strange thing happened to me. I had quite an 
emotional crisis, and at the end of it I felt calmer and the 
future seemed not so dark. Bapu had a curious knack of doing 
the right thing at the psychological moment, and it might be 
that his action — ^impossible to justify. as it was from my point 
of view — would lead to great results, not only in the narrow 
field in which it was confined, but in the wider aspects of our 
national struggle. And even if Bapu died our struggle for 
freedom would go on. So whatever happened, one must keep 
ready and fit for it. Having made up my mind to face even 
Gandhiji’s death without flinching, I felt calm and collected 
and ready to face the world and aU it might offer. 

Then came news of the tremendous upheaval all over the 
country, a magic wave of enthusiasm running through Hindu 
society, and untouchability appeared to be doomed. What a 
magician, I thought, was this little man sitting in Yeravda 
Prison, and how well he knew how to pull the strings that 
move people’s hearts ! 

A telegram from him reached me. It was the first message 
I had received from him since my conviction, and it did me 
good to hear from him after tliat long interval. In this tele- 
gram he said : 

During all these days of agony you have been before mind’s 
eye. I am most anxious to know your opinion. You know how 
I value your opinion. Saw Indu (and) Sarup’s children. Indu 
looked happy and in possession of more flesh. Doing very well. 
Wire reply. Love. 

■ It was extraordinary, and yet it was characteristic of him, 
that in the agony of his fast and in the midst of his many 
preoccupations, he should refer to the visit of my daughter 
and my sister’s children to him, and even mention that Indira 
had put on flesh! (My sister was also in prison then and all 
these children were at school in Poona.) He never forgets the 
seemingly little things in life which reaUy mean so much. 

News also came to me just then that some settlement had 
been reached over the electorate issue. The superintenddit of 
the gaol was good enough to allow me to send an answer to 
Gandhiji, and I sent him the following telegram ; 



372 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Your telegram and brief news that some settlement reached 
filled me with relief and joy. First news of your decision to fast 
caused mental agony and confusion, but ultimately optimism 
triumphed and I regained peace of mind. No sacrifice too great 
for suppressed downtrodden classes. Freedom must be judged 
by freedom of lowest but feel danger of other issues obscuring 
only goal. Am unable to judge from religious view point. 
Danger your methods being exploited by others but how can I 
presume to advise a magician. Love. 

A ‘pact’ was signed by various people gathered in Poona, 
and with unusual speed the British Prime Minister accepted it 
and varied his previous award accordingly, and the fast was 
broken. I disliked such pacts and agreements greatly, but I 
welcomed the Poona Pact apart from its contents. 

The excitement was over and we reverted to our gaol routine. 
News of the Harijan movement and of Gandhiji’s activities 
from prison came , to us, and I was not very happy about it. 
There was no doubt that a tremendous push had been given to 
the movement to end untouchability and raise the unhappy 
depressed classes, not so much by the pact as by the crusading 
enthusiasm created all over the country. That was to be wel- 
comed. But it was equally obvious that civil disobedience had 
suffered. The country’s attention had been diverted to other 
issues, and many Congress workers had turned to the Harijan 
cause. Probably most of these people wanted an excuse to 
revert to safer activities which did not involve the risk of gaol 
going or, worse still, lathi blows and confiscations of property. 
That was natural, and it was not fair to expect all the thousands 
of our workers to keep always ready for intense suffering and the 
break-up and destruction of their homes. But still it was pain- 
ful to watch this slow decay of our great movement. Civil 
disobedience was, however, still going on, and occasionally there 
were mass demonstrations like the Calcutta Congress in March- 
April 1933. Gandhiji was in Yeravda Prison, but he had been 
' given certain privileges to meet people and issue directions for 
the Harijan movements. Somehow this took away from the 
sting of his being in prison. All this depressed me. 

Many months later, early in May 1933, Gandhiji began his 
twenty-one-day fast. The first news of 'tms had again come as 
a sho^ to me, but I accepted it as an inevitable occurrence and 
sc hoole d myself to it. Indeed I was irritated that people should 
urge him to give it up, after he had made up his mind and 
declared it to the public. For me the fast was an incompre- 
hensible thing and, if I had been asked before the decision had 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


373 

been taken, I would certainly have spoken strongly against it. 
But I attached great value to Gandhi ji’s word, and it seemed to 
me wrong for any one to try to make him break it, in a per- 
sonal matter which, to him, was of supreme importance. So, 
unhappy as I was, I put up with it. 

A few days before beginning his fast he wrote to me, a typical 
letter which moved me very much. As he asked for a reply 
I sent him the following telegram : 

Your letter. What can I say about matters I do not under- 
stand. I feel lost in strange country where you are the only 
familiar landmark and I try to grope my way in dark but I 
stumble. Whatever happens my love and thoughts tvill be with 
you. 

I had struggled against my utter disapproval of his act and 
my desire not to hurt him. I felt, however, that I had not sent 
him a cheerful message, and now that he was bent on under- 
going his terrible ordeal, which might even end in his death, 
I ou^t to cheer him up as much as I could. Little things make 
a difference psychologically, and he would have to strain every 
nerve to survive. I felt also that we should accept whatever 
happened, even his death, if unhappily it should occur, with a 
stout heart. So I sent him another telegram : 

Now diat you are launched on your great enterprise may I 
send you again love and greetings and assure you that I feel 
more clearly now that whatever happens it is well and whatever 
happens you win. 

He survived the fast. On the first day of it he was discharged 
from prison, and on his advice Civil Disobedience was suspended 
for six weeks. 

Again I watched the emotional upheaval of the country 
during the fast, and I wondered more and more if this was the 
right method in politics. It seemed tp be sheer rpvivalism, and 
clear thinking had not a ghost of a chance against it. All badia, 
or most of it, stared reverently at the Mahatma and expected 
him to perform miracle after miracle and put an end to un- 
touchabuity and get swaraj and so on — and did precious little 
itself f And Gan&iiji did not encourage others to think; his 
insistence was only on purity and sacnfice. I felt that I was 
drifting further and further away from him mentally, in spite 
of my strong emotional attachment to him. Often enough he 
was guided in his political activities by an unerring instinct. He 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


374 

had the flair for action, but was the way of faith the right way 
to train a nation? It might pay for a short while, but in the 
long run? 

And I could not understand how he could accept, as he 
seemed to do, the present social order, which was based 
on violence and conflict. Within me also conflict raged, and I 
was torn between rival loyalties. I knew that there was trouble 
ahead for me, when the enforced protection of gaol was re- 
moved. I felt lonely and homeless, and India, to whom I had 
given my love and for whom I had laboured, seemed a strange 
and bewildering land to me. Was it my fault that I could not 
enter into the spirit and ways of thinking of my countrymen? 
Even with my closest associates I felt that an invisible barrier 
came between us and, unhappy at being unable to overcome it, 
I shrank back into my shell. TTie old world seemed to envelop 
them, the old world of past ideologies, hopes and desires. The 
new world was yet far distant. 

“ Wandering between two worlds, one dead. 

The other powerless to be born. 

With nowhere yet to rest his head.” 

India is supposed to be a religious country above everything 
else, and Hindu and Moslem and Sikh and others take pride in 
their faiths and testify to their truth by breaking heads. The 
spectacle of what is called religion, or at any rate organised 
religion, in India and elsewhere has filled me with horror, and 
I have frequently condemned it and wished to make a clean 
sweep of it. Almost always it seems to stand for blind belief 
and reaction, dogma and bigotry, superstition and exploitation, 
and the preservation of vested interests. And yet I knew well 
that there was something else in it, something which supplied a 
deep inner craving of human beings. How else could it have 
been the tremendous power it has been and brought peace and 
comfort to innumerable tortured souls? Was that peace merely 
the shelter of blind belief and absence of questioning, the calm 
that comes firom being safe in harbour, protected from the 
storms of the open sea, or was it something more? In some 
cases certainly it was something more. 

But organised religion, whatever its past may have been, to- 
day is very largely an empty form devoid of real content. Mr. 
G. K. Chesterton has compared it (not. his own particular brand 
of religion, but others 1) to a fijssil which is the form of an 
animal or organism firom which all its own organic substance 
has entirely msappeared, but which has kept its shape, because 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


375 

it has been filled up by some totally different substance. And 
even where something of value still remains, it is enveloped by 
other and harmful contents. 

That seems to have happened in our Eastern religions as well 
as in the Western. The Church of England is perhaps the most 
obvious example of a religion which is not a religion in any 
real sense of the word. Partly that applies to all organised 
Protestantism, but the Church of England has probably 
gone further because it ha.s long been a State political depart- 
ment.^ 

Many of its votaries are undoubtedly of the highest character, 
but it is remarkable how that Church has served the purposes 
of British imperialism and given both capitalism and imperial- 


' In India the Church of England has been almost indistinguish- 
able from the Government. The officially paid (out of Indian 
revenues) priests and diaplains are the symbols of the imperial 
power just as the higher services are. The Church has been, on the 
whole, a conservative and reactionary force in Indian politics and 
generally opposed to reform or advance. The average missionary is 
usually wholly ignorant of India's past history and culture and does 
not take the slightest trouble to find out what it was or is. He is 
more interested m pointing out the sins and failings of the heathen. 
Of course, there have been many fine exceptions. India does not 
possess a mo:|:e devoted friend than Charlie Andrews, whose abound- 
ing love and spirit of service and overflowing friendliness it is a joy 
to have. The Christa Seva Sangh of Poona contains some fine 
Englishmen, whose religion has led them to understand and serve 
and not to patronise, and who have devoted themselves with all 
their great ^ts to a selfless service of the Indian people. There 
are many other English churchmen whose memory is treasured in 
India. 

The Archbishop of Canterbury, speaking in the House of Lords 
on December la, 1934, referred to the preamble of the Montagu- 
Chelmsford reforms of 1919 and said that "he sometimes thought 
the great declaration had been somewhat hastily made, and sup- 
posed that it was one of the hasty, generous gestures after the War, 
but the goal set could not be wiAdrawn.” It is worthy of note that 
the head of the English Church should take such an exceedingly 
conservative view or Indian politics. A step, which was considered 
wholly insufficient by Indian opinion and which, because of this, 
led to non-co-operation and all its consequences, is consid^ed by 
the Archbishop as “ hasty and generous." It is a comforting doc- 
trine from the point of view of the English ruling classes, and, no 
doubt, this conviction of their own generosity, evra to the point of 
rashness, -must produce a righteous glow of satisfaction. 



376 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ism a moral and Christian covering. It has sought to justify, 
from the highest ethical standards, British predatory policy in 
Asia and Africa, and given that extraordinary and enviable 
feeling of being always in the right to the English, Whether the 
Church has helped in producing this attitude of smug rectitude 
or is itself a product of it, I do not know. Other less favoured 
countries on the Continent of Europe and in America often 
accuse the English of hypocrisy — per fide Albion is an old taunt 
— ^but the accusation is probably the outcome of envy at British 
success, and certainly no other imperialist Power can afford to 
throw stones at England, for its own record is equally shady. 
No nation that is consciously hypocritical could have the 
reserves of strength that the British have repeatedly shown, and 
the brand of ‘ religion ’ which they have adopted has apparently 
helped them in this by blunting their moral susceptibilities 
where their own interests were concerned. Other peoples and 
nations have often behaved far worse than the British have 
done, but they have never succeeded, quite to the same extent, 
in making a virtue of what profited them. All of us find it 
remarkably easy to spot the mote in the other’s eye and over- 
look the beam in our own, but perhaps the British excel at this 
performance,* 

Protestantism tried to adapt itself to new Conditions and 
wanted to have the best of both worlds. It succeeded remark- 
ably so far as this world was concerned, but from the religious 
point of view it fell, as an organised religion, between two stools, 
and religion gradually gave place to sentimentality and big 
business. Roman Catholicism escaped this fate, as it stuck on to 
the old stool, and, so long as that stool holds, it will flourish. 
To-day it seems to be the only living religion, in the restricted 
sense of the word, in the West, A Roman Catholic friend sent 
me in prison many books on Catholicism and Papal Encyclicals 
and I read them with interest. Studying them, I realised the 

* A recent instance of how the Chinch of England indirectly 
influences politics in India has come to my notice. At a provindal 
conference of the U.P. Indian Christians held at Cawnpore on the 
7th November, 1934, the Chairman of the Reception Committee, 
Mr. E, V. David, said : “ As Christians we are bound by our religion 
to loyalty to die King, who is the Defender of our Faith.” Inevit- 
ably that meant support of British imperialism in India. Mr. David 
further expressed his sympathies with some of the views of the ' die- 
hard' Conservative elements in England in regard to the I.C.S., the 
police, and the whole proposed constitution, which, according to 
them, might endanger Chnstian misrions in India. 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


377 

hold it had on such large numbers of people. It offered, as 
Islam and popular Hinduism offer, a safe anchorage from doubt 
and mental conflict, an assurance of a future life which will 
make up for the deficiencies of this life. 

I am afraid it is impossible for me to seek harbourage in this 
way. I prefer the open sea, with all its storms and tempests. Nor 
am I greatly interested in the after life, in what happens after 
death. I find the problems of this life sufficiently absorbing to 
fill my mind. The traditional Chinese outlook, fundamentally 
ethical and yet irreligious or tinged with religious scepticism, 
has an appeal for me, though in its application to life I may not 
agree. It is the Tao, the path to be followed and the way of life 
that interests me; how to understand life, not to reject it but to 
accept it, to conform to it and to improve it. But the usual 
religious outlook does not concern itself with this world. It 
seems to me to be the enemy of clear thought, for it is based 
not only on the acceptance without demur of certain fixed and 
unalterable theories and dogmas, but also on sentiment and 
emotion and passion. It is far removed from what I consider 
spiritually and things of the spirit, and it deliberately or 
unconsciously shuts its eyes to reality lest reality may not 
fit in with preconceived notions. It is narrow and intolerant 
of other opinions and ideas; it is self-centred and egotistic, and 
it often allows itself to be exploited by selfseekers and oppor- 
tunists. 

This does not mean that men of religion have not been and 
are not still often of the highest moral and spiritual type. But 
it does mean that the religious outlook does not help, and even 
hinders, the moral and spiritual progress of a people, if 
morality and spirituality are to be judged by this world’s stan- 
dards, and not by the hereafter. Usually religion becomes an 
asocial quest for God or the Absolute, and the religious man is 
concerned far more with his own salvation than with the good 
of society. The mystic tries to rid himself of self, and in the 
process usually becomes obsessed with it. Moral standards have 
no relation to social needs, but are based on a highly meta- 
physical doctrine of sin. And organised religion invariably 
becomes a vested interest and thus, inevitably a reactionary fierce 
opposing change and progress. 

It is well known that the Christian Church in the early days 
did not help the slaves to improve their social status. The slaves 
became the feudal serfs of the Middle Ages of Europe because 
of economic conditions. The attitude of the Church, as late m 
two hundred years ago (in 17.27), was well exemplified in a letter 



JAWAHARLAL NKHRU 


378 

written by the Bishop of London to the slave-owners of the 
southern colonies of America.^ 

“ Christianity,” wrote the Bishop, “ and the embracing of the 
gospel does not make the least alteration in Civil property or in 
any of the duties which belong to civil relations: but in all these 
respects it continues Persons just in the same State as it found 
them. The Freedom which Christianity gives is Freedom from 
the bondage of Sin and Satan and from the Dominion of Men’s 
Lusts and Passions and inordinate Desires; hut as to their out- 
ward condition, whatever that was before, whether bond or free, 
their being baptised and becoming Christians makes no manner 
of change in them.” 

No organised religion to-day will express itself in this out- 
spoken manner, but essentially its attitude to property and the 
existing social order will be the same. 

Words are well known to be, by themselves, very imperfect 
means of communication, and are often understood in a variety 
of ways. No word perhaps in any language is more likely to be 
interpreted in different ways by different people as the word 
‘ religion ’ (or the corresponding words in other languages). 
Probably to no two persons will the same complex of ideas and 
images arise on hearing or reading this word. Amon^ these 
ideas and images may be those of rites and ceremonial, of 
sacred books, of a community of people, of certain dogmas, of 
morals, reverence, love, fear, hatred, charity, sacrifice, asceti- 
cism, fasting, feasting, prayer, ancient history, marriage, death, 
the next world, of riots and the breaking of heads, and so on. 
Apart from the tremendous confusion caused by this immense 
variety of images and interpretations, almost invariably there 
will be a strong emotional response which will make dispassion- 
ate consideration impossible. The word ‘religion’ has lost all 
precise significance (if it ever had it) and only causes confusion 
and gives rise to interminable debate and argument, when often 
enough entirely different meanings are attached to it. It would 
be far better if it was dropped from use altogether and other 
words with more limited meanings were used instead, such as : 
theology, philosophy, morals, ethics, spirituality, metaphysics, 
duty, ceremonial, etc. Even these words are va^e enough, but 
they have a much more limited range than ‘ religion.’ A great 
advantage would be that these words have not yet attached to 

* This letter is quoted in Reinhold Niebuhr's Moral Man and 
Immoral Society (p. 78), a book which is exceedingly interesting and 
stimulating. 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


379 

themselves, to the same extent, the passions and emotions that 
surround and envelop the word ‘ religion.’ 

What then is religion (to use the word in spite of its obvious 
disadvantages)? Probably it consists of the inner development 
of the individual, the evolution of his consciousness in a certain 
direction which is considered good. What that direcdon is will 
again be a matter for debate. But, as far as I understand it, 
religion lays stress bn this inner change and considers outward 
change hs but the projection of this inner development. There 
can be no doubt that this inner development powerfully influ- 
ences the outer environment. But it is equally obvious that the 
outer environment powerfully influences the inner development. 
Both act and interact on each other. It is a commonplace that in 
the modern industrial West outward development has far out- 
stripped the inner, but it does not follow, as many people in the 
East appear to imagine, that because we are industrially back- 
ward and our external development has been slow, therefore our 
inner evolution has been greater. That is one of the delusions 
with which we try to comfort om-selves and try to overcome our 
feeling of inferiority. It may be that individuals can rise above 
circumstances and environment and reach great inner heights. 
But for large groups and nations a certain measure of external 
development is essential before the inner evolution can take 
place. A man who is the victim of economic circumstances, and 
who is hedged and restricted by the struggle to live, can very 
rarely achieve inner consciousness of any nigh degree. A class 
that is downtrodden and exploited can never progress inwardly. 
A nation which is politically and economicaUy subject to 
another and hedged and circumscribed and exploited can never 
achieve inner growth. Thus even for inner development exter- 
nal freedom and a suitable environment become necessary. In 
the attempt to gain this outer feeedom and to change the en- 
vironment so as to remove all hindrances to inner development, 
it is desirable that the means should be such as not to defeat 
the real object in view. I take it that when Gandhiji says that 
the means are more important than the end, he has something 
of this kind in view. But the means should be such as lead to 
the end, otherwise they are wasted effort, and they might even 
result in even greater degradation, both outer and inner. 

“No man can live without religion,” Gandhiji has written 
somewhere. "There are some who in the egotism of their reason 
declare that they have nothing to do with felTpon. But that is 
like a man saying that he breathes, but that he has no nose ” 
Again he says : ‘TVly devotion to truth has drawn me into the 



380 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

field of politics; and I can say without the slightest hesitation, 
and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has 
nothing to do with politics do not know what religion means.” 
Perhaps it would have heen more correct if he had said that 
most of these people who want to exclude religion from life and 
politics mean by that word * religion ’ something very different 
from what he means. It is obvious that he is using it in a sense 
— ^probably moral and ethical more than any other^-different 
from that of the critics of religion. This use of the same word 
with different meanings makes mutual comprehension still more 
difficult. 

A very modern definition of religion, with which the men of 
religion will not agree, is that of Professor John Dewey. 
According to him, religion is “whatever introduces genuine 
perspective into the piecemeal and shifting episodes' of exist- 
ence or again " any activity pursued in behalf of an ideal end 
against obstacles, and in spite of threats of personal loss, 
because of conviction of its general and enduring value, is reli- 
gious in quality.” If this is religion, then surely no one can 
have the slightest objection to it. 

Remain Rolland also has stretched religion to mean some- 
thing which will probably horrify the ormodox of organised 
religions. In his Life of Ramkrishna, he says ; 

“. , . many souls who are or who believe they are free from 
all religious lielief, but who in reality live immersed in a state of 
super-rational consciousness, which they term Socialism, Com- 
munism, Humanitarianism, Nationalism and even Rationalism. 
It is the quality of thought and not its object which determines 
its. source and allows us to decide whether or not it emanates 
from religion. If it turns fearlessly towards the search for truth 
at all costs with single-minded sincerity prepared for any sacri- 
fice, I should call it religious; fcr it presupposes faith in an end 
to human dfbrt higher than the life of exisdhg society, and 
even higher than the" life of huinmity as a whole. Scepticism 
itself, when it proceeds from vigorous natures true to the core, 
when it is an expression of strength and not of weakness, joins 
in the march of the Grand Army of the religious Soul.” ’ 

I cannot presume to fulfil the conditions laid down by Romain 
Rolland, but on these terms I am prepared to be a humble 
camp-follower of the Grand Army, 