EPILOGUE 

Wc are enjoined to labour; but it is not granted to us to 
complete our labours. 

The Talmud. 

I HAVE reached the end of the story. This egotistical nar- 
rative of my adventures through life, such as they are, has 
been brought up to to-day, February 14, 1935, District Gaol, 
Almora. Three months ago to-day I celebrated in this prison 
my forty-fifth birthday, and I suppose I have still many years 
to live. Sometimes a sense of age and weariness steals over me, 
at other times I feel full of energy and vitality. I have a fairly 
tough body, and my mind has a capacity for recovering from 
shock, so I imagine I shall yet survive for long unless some sud- 
den fate overtakes me. But the future has to be lived before it 
can be written about. 

The adventures have not been very exciting perhaps; long 
years in prison can hardly be termed adventurous. Nor have 
they been in any way unique, fer I have shared these years with 
their ups and downs with tens of thousands of my country- 
men and countrywomen; and this record of changing moods, 
of exaltations and depressions, of intense activity and enforced 
solitude, is our common record. I have been one of a mass, 
moving with it, swaying it occasionally, being influenced by it; 
and yet, like the other units, an individual, apart from the 
others, living my separate life in the heart of the crowd. We 
have posed often enough and struck up attitudes, but there 
was something very real and intensely truthful in much that 
we did, and this lifted us out of our petty selves and made us 
more vital and gave us an importance that we would otherwise 
not have had. Sometimes we were fortunate enough to ex- 
perience that fullness of life which comes from attempting to 
fit ideals with action. And we realised that any other life in- 
volving a renunciation of these ideals and a tame submission 
to superior force, would have been a wasted existence, full of 
discontent and inner sorrow. 

To me these years have brought one rich gift, among many 
others. More and more I have looked upon life as an adventure 
of absorbing interest, where there is so much to learn, so much 

•SOO 



EPILOGUE 


597 

to do. I have continually had a feeling of growing up, and 
that feeling is still with me and gives a zest to my activities as 
well as to the reading of books, and generally makes life worth 
while. 

In writing this narrative I have tried to give my moods and 
thoughts at the time of each event, to represent as far as I 
could my feelings on the occasion. It is difficult to recapture 
a past mood, and it is not easy to forget subsequent happenings. 
Later ideas thus must inevitably have coloured my account of 
earlier days, but my object was, primarily for my own benefit, 
to trace my own mental growth. Perhaps what I have written 
is not so much an account of what I have been but of what 
I have sometimes wanted to be or imagined myself to be. 

Some months ago Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Aiyar stated in 
public that I did not represent mass-feeling, but that I was all 
the more dangerous because of my sacrifices and idealism and 
the fervour of my convictions, which he characterised as ‘ self- 
hypnotisation ’. A person suffering from self-hypnosis can 
hardly judge himself, and, in any event, I would not presume 
to join issue on this personal matter with C.P. We have not 
met &r many years, but there was a time, long ago, when we 
were joint secretaries of the Home Rule League. Since then 
much has happened, and C.P. has risen by ascending spirals 
to dizzy heights and I have remamed of the earth, earthy. 
There is little now in common between us except our common 
nationality. He is to-day a full-blooded apologist of British 
rule in India, especially during the last few years; an admirer 
of dictatorship in India and elsewhere, and himself a shining 
ornament of autocracy in an Indian State. We disagree about 
most things, I suppose, but we agree on one somewhat trivial 
subject. He is absolutely right when he says that I do not 
represent mass-feeling. I have no illusions on that point. 

Indeed, I often wonder if I represent any one at all, and I 
am inclined to think that I do not, though many have kindly 
and friendly feelings towards me. I have become a queer mix- 
ture of the East and West, out of place everywhere, at home 
nowhere. Perhaps my thoughts and Mproach to life are more 
fiTfin to what is called Western than Eastern, but India clings 
to me, as she does to all her children, in innumerable ways; 
and behind me lie, somewhere in the subconscious, racial 
memories of a hundred, or whatever the number may be, 
generations of Brahmans, I cannot get rid of either that past, 
inheritance or my recent acquisitions. They are both part of 
me, and, though they help me in both the East and the West, 



598 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

they also create in me a feeling of spiritual loneliness not only 
in public activities but in life itself I am a stranger and alien 
in the West. I cannot be of it. But in my own country also, 
sometimes, I have an exile’s feeling. 

The distant mountains seem easy of access and climbing, 
the top beckons, but, as one approaches, difficulties appear, 
and the higher one goes the more laborious becomes the 
journey and the summit recedes into the clouds. Yet the 
climbing is worth the effort and has its own joy and satis- 
faction. Perhaps it is the struggle that gives value to life, not 
so much the ultimate result. Often it is difficult to know which 
is the right path; it is easier sometimes to know what is not 
right, and to avoid that is something after all. If I may 
quote, with all humility, the last words of the great Socrates : 
" I know not what death is — ^it may be a good thing, and I am 
not aftaid of it. But I do know that it is a bad thing to desert 
one’s past, and I prefer what may be good to what I know to 
be bad.” 

The years I have spent in prison! Sitting alone, wrapped 
in my thoughts, how many seasons I have seen go by, follow- 
ing each other into oblivion 1 How many moons I have watched 
wax and wane, and the pageant of the stars moving along 
inexorably and majesticaUyl How many yesterdays of my 
youth lie buried here; and sometimes I see the ghosts of these 
dead yesterdays rise up, bringing poignant memories, and 
whispering to me : " Was it worth while? ” There is no hesita- 
tion about the answer. If I were given the chance to go through 
my life again, with my present knowledge and experience 
added, I would no doubt try to make many changes in my 
personal life; I would endeavour to improve in many ways on 
what I had previously done, but my major decisions in public 
affairs would remain untouched. Indeed, I could not vary them, 
for they were stronger than myself, and a force beyond my 
control drove me to them. 

It is almost exactly a year since my conviction; a year has 
gone by out of the two years of my sentence. Another full 
jrear remains, for there are no remissions this time, as simple 
imprisonment carries no such deductions. Even the eleven days 
that I was out in August last have been added on to the period 
of my sentence. But this year too will pass, and I shall go 
out— -and then? I do not know, but I have a feeling that a 
chapter of my fife is over and another chapter will , begin. 
What this is going to be I cannot clearly guess. The leaves of 
the hoo^ of Hfr arp rlnced. 



POSTSCRIPT 


Badenweiler, Scshwarzwald, 
October 25, 1935 

In May last my wife left Bhowali for further treatment in 
Europe. After her departure there were no more visits to 
Bhowali for me, no more fortnightly outings and drives on 
the mountain roads. I missed them, and Almora Gaol seemed 
to be drearier than before. 

News came of the Quetta earthquake, and for a while all 
else was forgotten. But not for long, for the Government of 
India does not allow us to forget it or its peculiar ways. Soon 
we learnt that Rajendra Prasad, the Congress President, and the 
man who knew more about earthquake relief work than almost 
any other person in India, was not permitted to go to Quetta 
and help in relief. Nor could Gandhiji or any other public man 
of note. Many Indian netvspapers had their securities con- 
fiscated for writing articles on Quetta. 

Everywhere the military mentality, the police outlook— in the 
Assembly, in civil government, in bombing on the Frontier. 
Almost it would seem that the British Government in India is 
permanently at war with large sections of' the Indian people. 

The police are a useful and a necessary force, but a world full 
of policemen and the police bludgeon may not, perhaps, be a 
desirable place to live in. It has often been said that an unre- 
strained use of force degrades the user of it as it humiliates 
and degrades the object of it. Few things are more striking 
to-day in India than the progressive deterioration, moral, and 
intellectual, of the higher services, more especially the Indian 
Civil Service. ' This is most in evidence in the superior officials, 
but it nms like a thread throughout the services. Whenever 
occasion arises fi)r making a firesh appointment to the higher 
ranks, the person who represaats the new spirit best is inevit- 
ably chosen. 

On September 4th I was suddenly discharged ftom Almora 
Gaol as news had come that my wife’s condition was critical. 
She was under treatment in Badenwdler in the SchwarEwald 
in Germany. My sentence iras ' suspended ', I was told, and I 

5QO 



60O JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was released five and half months before my time. I hurried 
to Europe by air. 

Europe in turmoil, fearful of war and tumult and with 
economic crises always on the horizon; Abyssinia invaded and 
her people bombed; various imperialist systems in conflict and 
threatening each other; and England, the greatest of the im- 
perialist Powers, standing up for peace and the League Covenant 
while it bombs and ruthlessly oppresses its subject peoples. But 
here in the Black Forest it is c^m and peacenil, and even the 
swastika is not much in evidence. I watch the mists steal up 
the valley and hide the distant frontier of France and cover 
the landscape, and I wonder what lies behind them. 