THE COMING OF GANDHIJf: SATYAGRAHA 
AND AMRITSAR 

The end of the World War found India in a state of suppressed 
excitement. Industrialisation had spread and the capitalist class 
had grown in wealth and power. This handful at the top had 
prospered and were greedy for more power and opportunity to 
invest their savings and add to their wealth.' The great majority, 
however, were not so fortunate and looked forward to a lighten- 
ing of the burdens that crushed them. Among the middle classes 
there was everywhere an expectation of great constitutional 
changes which would bring a large measure of self-rule and thus 
better their lot by opening out many fresh avenues of growth to 
them. Political agitation, peacefiil and wholly constitutional as 
it was, seemed to be working itself to a head and people talked 
with assurance of self-determination and self-government. Some 
of this unrest was visible alsp among the masses, especially the 
peasantry. In the rural areas of the Punjab the forcible methods 
of recruitment were still bitterly remembered, and the fierce 
suppression of the ‘ Komagata Maru ' people and others by con- 
spiracy trials added to the widespread resentment. The soldiers 
back fi-om active service on distant fronts were no longer the 
subservient robots that they^ used to be. They had grown men- 
tally and there was much discontent among them. 

Among the Muslims there was anger over the treatment of 
Turkey and the Kliilafat question and an agitation was growing. 
The treaty with Turkey had not been signed yet, but the whole 
situation was ominous. So, while they agitated, they waited. 

The dominant note all over India was one of waiting and 
expectation, full of hope and yet tinged with fear and anxiety. 
Theii came the Rowlatt Bills with their drastic provisions for 
arrest and trial without any of the checks and formalities which 
the law is supposed to provide. A wave of anger greeted them 
aU over India and even the Moderates joined in this and opposed 
the measures with all their might. Indeed there was universal 
opposition on the part of Indians of all shades of opinion. Still 
the Bills were pushed through by the officials and became law, 
the principal concession made bemg to limit them for three 
years. 

It is instructive to look back after fifteen years to these Bills 

40 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 4I 

and the upheaval they caused. They were made into law and yet, 
so far as I know, they were never used even once during the three 
years of their life — ^three years 'which were not quiet years hut 
were the most troubled years that India had known since the 
Revolt of 1857. Thus the British Government, in the teeth of 
un anim ous public opinion, pushed through a law which they 
themselves never used afterwards, and thus invited an upheaval. 
One might almost think that the object of the measure was to 
bring trouble. 

Another interesting ftict is this. To-day, fifteen years later, we 
have any number of laws on the statute book, functioning ftom 
day to day, which are far harsher than the Rowlatt Bills were. 
Compared to these new laws and ordinances, under which we 
now enjoy the blessings of British rule, the Rowlatt Bills might 
almost be considered a charter of liberty. There is this difference, 
of course: since 1919 we have had a large instalment of what 
is called self-government, known as the Montagu-Chelmsford 
scheme, and now we are told that we are on the verge of another 
big instalment. We progress. 

Gandhiji had passed through a serious illness early in 1919. 
Almost ftom his sick bed he begged the Viceroy not to give his 
consent to the Rowlatt Bills. That appeal was ignored as others 
had been and then, almost against his will, Gandhiji took the 
leadership in his first all-India agitation. He started the Satyag- 
raha Sabha, the members of wmch were pledged to disobey the 
Rowlatt Act, if it was applied to them, as well as other objection- 
able laws to be specified from time to time. In other words they 
were to court gaol openly and deliberately. 

When I first read about this proposal in the newspapers my 
reaction was one of tremendous reuef. Here at last was a way 
out of the tangle, a method of action which was straight and 
open and possmly effective. I was , afire with enthusiasm and 
wanted to join the Satyagraha Sabha immediately.^ I hardly 
thought of the consequences— -law-breaking, gaol-going, etc. — 
and if I thought of them I did not care. But suddenly my ardour 
was damped and I realised that all was not plain sailing. My 
father was dead against this new idea. He was not in the habit 
of being swept away by new proposals; he thought carefully of 
the consequences before he took any fresh step. And the more he 
thought of the Satyagraha Sabha and its prominme, the lew he 
liked it. *What good would the gaol-going of a number of indi- 
viduals do, what pressure could it bring on the Government? 
Apart jftom these general considerations, what really moved him 
was the personal issue. .It seemed to him preposterous that I 



42 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

should go to prison. The trek to prison had not then begun and 
the idea was most repulsive. Father was intensely attached to his 
children. He was not showy in his affection, but behind his 
restraint there was a great love. 

For many days there was this mental conflict, and because 
both of us felt that big issues were at stake involving a complete 
upsetting of our lives, we tried hard to be as considerate to each 
other as possible. I wanted to lessen his obvious suffering if I 
could, but I had no doubt in my mind that I had to go the way 
of Satyagraha. Both of us had a distressing time, and night alter 
night I wandered about alone, tortured in mind and trying to 
grope my way out. Father — discovered later— actually tried 
sleeping on the floor to find out what it was like, as he thought 
that this would be my lot in prison. 

Gandhiji came to Allahabad at father’s request and they had 
long talks at which I was not present. As a result Gandhiji 
advised me not to precipitate matters or to do anything which 
might upset father. I was not happy at this, but other events 
took place in India which changed the whole situation, and the 
Satyagraha Sabha stopped its activities. 

Satyagraha Day — all-India hartals and complete’suspension of 
business — ^firing by the police and military at Delhi andt Amritsar, 
and the killing of many people — ^mob violence in Amritsar and 
Ahmedabad— the massacre of Jallianwala Bagh — ^the long horror 
and terrible indignity of martial law in the Punjab. The Punjab 
was isolated, cut off from the rest of India; a thick veil seemed 
to cover it and hide it firom outside eyes. There was hardly 
any news, and people could not go there or come out from 
there. 

Odd individuals, who managed to escape from that inferno, 
were so terror-struck that they could give no clear account. Help- 
lessly and impotently, we, who were outside, waited for scraps of 
news and bitterness fflled our hearts. Some of us wanted to go 
openly to the affected parts of the Punjab and defy the martial 
law regulations. But we were kept ba^, and meanwhile a big 
orgamsation for relief and enquiry was set up on behalf of the 
Congress. 

As soon as martial law was vnthdratyn from the principal areas 
and outsiders were allowed to come in, prominent Congressmen 
and others poured into the Punjab offering their services for 
relief or enquiry work. The relief work was largely directed by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and Swami Shraddhananda; the 
enquiry part was mainly under the direction of my father and 
Mr. C. R. Dm, with Gandhiji taking a great deal of interest in 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 43 

it and often being consulted by the others. Deshbandhu Das 
especially took the Amritsar area under his charge and I was 
deputed to accompany him there and assist him in any way he 
desired. That was the first occasion 1 had of working with him 
and under him and I valued that experience very much and my 
admiration for him grew. Most of the evidence relating to 
Jallianwala Bagh and that terrible lane where human beings were 
made to crawl on their bellies, that subsequently appeared in the 
Congress Inquiry Report, was taken down in our presence. We 
paid numerous visits to the so-called Bagh itself and examined 
every bit of it carefully. 

A suggestion has been made, I think by Mr. Edward Thomp- 
son, that General Dyer was under the impression that there were 
other exits from the Bagh and it was because of this that he 
continued his firing for so long. Even if that was Dyer’s impres- 
sion, and there were in fact some exits, that would hardly lessen 
his responsibility. But it seems very strange that he should have 
such an impression. Any person, standing on the raised ground 
where he stood, could have a good view of the entire space and 
could see how shut in it was on all sides by houses several storeys 
high. Only on one side, for a hundred met or so, there was no 
house, but a low wall about five feet high. With a murderous 
fire mowing them down and unable to find a way out, thousands 
of people rushed to this wall and tried to climb over it. The 
fire was then directed, it appears (both from our evidence and the 
innumerable bullet-marks on the wall itself) towards this wall to 
prevent people from escaping over it. And when all was over, 
some of the biggest heaps of dead and wounded lay on either 
side of this wall. 

Towards the end of that year (t9*9) ^ travelled fi:om Amritsar 
to Delhi by the night train. The compartment I entered was 
almost full and aU the berths, except one upper one, were occu- 
pied by sleeping passengers. I took the vacant upper berth. In 
the morning I discovered that aU my fellow-passengers were 
military officers. They conversed with each other in loud voices 
which I could not help overhearing. One of them was holding 
forth in an aggressive and triumphant tone and soon I discovered 
that he was Dyer, the hero of Jallianwala Bagh, and he was 
describing his Amritsar experiences. He pointed out how he had 
the whole town at his mercy and he had felt like reducing the 
rebellious city to a heap of ashes, but he took pity on it and 
refirained. Hfe was evidently coming back from, Lahore after 
giving his evidence before the Hunter Committee of Inqmiy. 
I was greatly shocked to hear his conversatton and to observe his 



44 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

callous manner. He descended at Delhi station in pyjamas with 
bright pink stripes, and a dressing-gown. 

During the Punjab inquiry I saw a great deal of Gandhiji. 
Very often his proposals seemed novel to our committee and it 
did not approve of them. But almost always he argued his way 
to their acceptance and subsequent events showed the wisdom of 
his advice. Faith in his political insight grew in me. 

The Punjab happenings and the inquiry into them had a 
profound effect on father. His whole legal and constitutional 
foundations were shaken by them and his mind was gradually 
prepared for that change which was to come a year later. He had 
mready moved far from his old moderate position. Dissatisfied 
with the leading Moderate newspaper, the Leader of Allahabad, 
he had started another daily, the Independent, from Allahabad 
early in 1919. This paper met with great success, but firom the 
verjr beginning it was handicapped by quite an amazing degree 
of mcompetencc in the running of it. Almost everybody con- 
nected with it — directors, editors, managerial staff— had ' their 
share. of responsibility for this. I was one of the directors, with- 
out the least experience of the job, and the troubles and the 
squabbles of the paper became quite a nightmare to me. Both 
my father and I were, however, soon dragged away to the Punjab, 
and during our long absence the paper deteriorated greatly and 
became involved in financial diflBculties. It never recovered from 
them, and, although it had bright patches in 1920 and 1921, it 
began to go to pieces as soon as we went to gaol. It expired finally 
early in 1923. This experience of newspaper proprietorship gave 
me a fright and ever smee I have refused to assume responwbility 
as a director of any newspaper. Indeed I could not do so because 
of my preoccupations in pnson and outside. 

Fa&er presided over the Amritsar Congress during Christmas 
1919. He issued a moving appeal to the Moderate leaders or the 
liberals, as they were now calling themselves, to join this session 
because of the new situation created by the horrors of martial 
law. “ The lacerated heart of the Punjab " called to them, he 
wrote. Would they not answer that call? But they did not 
answer it in the way he wanted, ^d refused to join. Their eyes 
were on the new reforms that were coming as a result of the 
Montagu-Chehnsford recommendations. Tms refusal hurt father 
and widened the^lf between him and the Liberals. 

The Amritsar Congress was the first Gandhi Congress. Loka- 
manya Tilak was also present and took a prominent part in the 
deliberations, but there could be no doubt about it that the 
majority of the, delegates, and even more so the great crowds 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 45 

outside, looked to Gandhi for leadership. The slogan Mahatma 
Gandhi ki jai began to dominate the Indian political horizon. 
The Ali Brothers, recently discharged from internment, imme- 
diately joined the Congress, and the national movement began 
to take a new shape and develop a new orientation. 

M. Mohammad Ali went off soon on a Khilafat deputarion to 
Europe. In India the KhilaBtt Committee came more and more 
under Gandhiji’s influence and began to flirt with his ideas of 
non-violent non-co-operation. I remember one of the earliest 
meetings of the Khilafat leaders and Moulvies and Ulemas in 
Delhi in January 1920. A Khilafat deputation was going to wait 
on the Viceroy, and Gandhiji was to join it. Before he reached 
Delhi, however, a draft of the proposed address was, according 
to custom, sent to the Viceroy. When Gandhiji arrived and read 
this draft, he strongly disapproved of it and even said that he 
could not be a party to the deputation, if this draft was not 
materially altered. His objection was that the draft was vague 
and wordy and there was no clear indication in it of the abso- 
lute minimum demands which the Muslims must have. He 
said that this was not ftiir to the Viceroy and the British Govern- 
ment, or to the people, or to themselves. They must not make 
exaggerated clemands which they were not going to press, but 
should state the minimum clearly and without possibility of 
doubt, and stand by it to the death. If they were serious, this 
was the only right and honourable course to adopt. 

This argument was a novel one in political or other circles in 
India. "We were used to vague exaggerations and flowery lan- 
guage and always there was an idea of a bargain in our minds. 
Gandhiji, however, carried his point and he wrote to the Private 
Secretary of the Viceroy, pointing out the defects and vagueness 
of the draft address sent, and forwarding a few additional para- 
graphs to be added to it. These paragraphs gave the minimum 
demands. The Viceroy’s reply was interesting. He refused to 
accept the new paragraphs and said that the previous draft.was, 
in his opinion, quite proper. Gandhiji felt that this corres- 
pondence had made his own position and that of the Khilafat 
Committee clear, and so he joined the deputation after all. 

It was obvious that the Government were not going to accept 
the demands of the Khilafet Committee and a struggle was 
therefore bound to come. There were long talks with the 
Moulvies and the Ulemas, and non-violence and non-co-operation 
were discussed, especially non-violence. Gandhiji told them that 
he was theirs to command, but on the delate understanding 
that they accepted non-violence with aU its implications. There 



46 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was to be no weakening on that, no temporising, no mental 
reservations. It was not easy for the Moulvies to grasp this idea 
but they agreed, making it clear that they did so as a policy 
only and not as a creed, for their religion did not prohibit the 
use of violence in a righteous cause. 

The political and the Khilafat movements developed side by 
side during that year igao, both going in the same direction and 
eventually joining hands with the adoption by the Congress of 
Gandhiji’s non-violent non-co-operation. The Khilafat Com- 
mittee adopted this programme first, and August ist was fixed 
for the commencement of the campaign. 

Earlier in the year a Muslim meeting (I think it was the Council 
of the Moslem League) was held in Allahabad to consider this 
programme. The meeting took place in Syed Raza Ali’s house. 
M. Mohammad Ali was still in Europe but M. Shaukat Ali was 
present. I remember that meeting because it thoroughly dis- 
appointed me. Shaukat AU was, of course, full of enthusiasm 
but almost all the others looked thoroughly unhappy and uncom- 
fortable. They did not have the courage to disagree and yet 
they obviously had no intention of doing anything ra.sh. Were 
these the people to lead a revolutionary movement, I thought, 
and to challenge the British Empire? .Gandhiji addressed them 
and after hearing him they looked even more frmhtencd than 
before. He spoke well in his best dictatorial vein. He was humble 
but also clear-cut and hard as a diamond, pleasant and soft- 
spoken but inflexible and terribly earnest. His eyes were mild 
and deep, yet out of them blazed out a fierce energy and deter- 
mination. This is going to be a great struggle, he said, with a 
very powerful adversary. If you want to take it up, you must 
be prepared to lose everything, and you must subject yourself 
to the strictest non-violence and discipline. When war is declared 
martial law prevails, and in our non-violent struggle there will 
also have to be dictatorship and martial law on our side, if we 
are to win. You have every right to kick me out, to demand my 
head, or to pimish me whenever and howsoever you choose. But 
so long as you choose to keep me as your leader you must accept 
nw conditions, you must accept dictatorship and the discipline 
of martial law. But that dictatorship will always be subject to 
your goodwill and to your accqitance arid to your co-operailon. 
The moment you have had enough of me, throw me out, 
trample upon me, and I shall not complain. 

Something to this effect he said and these military analogies 
and the unyielding earnestness of the man made the flesh of 
most of bis hearm creep. But Shaukat Ali was there to keep 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 47 

the waverers up to the mark, and when the time for voting came 
the great majority of them quietly and shamefacedly voted for 
the proposition, that is for warl 

As vve were coming home from the meeting I asked Gandhiji 
if this was the way to start a great struggle. I had expected 
enthusiasm, spirited language and a flashing of eyes; instead we 
saw a very tame gathering of timid, middle-aged folk. And yet 
these people, such was the pressure of mass opinion, voted for 
the struggle. Of course, very few of these members of the 
Moslem League joined the struggle later. Many of them found 
a safe sanctuary in Government jobs. The Moslem League did 
not represent, then or later, any considerable section of Moslem 
opinion. It was the Khilafet Committee of 1920 that was a 
powerful and far more representative body, and it was this Com- 
mittee that entered upon the struggle with enthusiasm. 

The ist of August had been fixed by Gandhiji for the 
inauguration of non-co-operation, although the Congress had 
not considered or accepted the proposal so far. On that dajr 
Lokamanya Tilak died m Bombay. That very morning Gandhiji 
had reached Bombay after a tour in Sindh. I was with him and 
we joined that mighty demonstration in which the whole of 
Bombay’s million population seemed to have poured out to do 
reverence to the great leader whom' they had loved so well. 