IMPASSE 

The possibility of my re-arrest and conviction always hung over 
me. It was, indeed, more than a possibility when the land was 
ruled by Ordinances and the like and the Congress itself was 
an illegal organisation. Constimted as the British Government 
was, and constituted as I was, my supression seemed inevitable. 
This ever-present prospect influenced my work. I could not 
settle down to anything, and I was in a hurry to get through 
as much as possible. 

And yet I had no desire to invite arrest, and to a large extent 
I avoided activities which might lead to it. Invitations came to 
me from many places in the province and outside to undertake 
a tour. I refused them, for any such speaking tour could only 
be a raging campaign which would be abruptly ended. There 
was no half-way house for me then. When I visited any place 
for some other object— to confer with Gandhiji and the Work- 
ing Committee members — I addressed public meetings and 
spoke freely. In Jubbulpore we had a great meeting and a very 
impressive procession; in E)elhi the gathering was one of the 
biggest I had seen there. Indeed, the very success of these 
meetings made it clear that the Government would not tolerate 
their frequent repetition. In Delhi, soon after the meeting, 
there was a very .strong rumour of my impending arrest, but 
1 survived and returned to Allahabad, breaking journey at 
Aligarh to address the Muslim University students there. 

I disliked the idea of taking part in non-political public 
activities when the Government was trying to crush all efective 
political work. I found a strong tendency among Congressmen 
to seek shelter from such work by engaging in the most hum- 
drum activities which, though desirable in themselves, had 
little to do with our struggle. The tendency was natural, but 
I felt that it should not be encouraged just then. 

In the middle of October 1933 we had meetings of our U.P. 
Congress workers in Allahabad to consider the situation and 
decide, on future work. The Provincial Congress Committee 
was an illegal body, and as our object was to meet and not just 
to defy the law, we did not formally convene this committee. 
But we asked all its members who were outside gaol, as well as 
other selected workers, to come to an informal conference. 

473 



474 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

There was no secrecy about our meetings, though they were 
private, and we did not know till the lait moment whether the 
Government would interfere or not. At these meetings we paid 
a great deal of attention to the world situation — the great 
slump, naziism, communism, etc. We wanted our comrades to 
see the Indian struggle in relation to what was happening else- 
^where. The conference ultimately passed a socialistic resolution 
defining our objective and expressed itself against the with- 
drawal of civil disobedience. Everybody knew well enough 
that there was no chance of widespread civil disobedience, and 
even individual civil disobedience was likely to peter out soon 
or continue on a very restricted scale. But a withdrawal made 
little difference to us as the Government oflEensivc and Ordinance 
laws continued. So, more as a gesture tlian anything else, we 
decided to continue the formal civil disobedience but in effect 
our instructions to our workers were not to go out of their way 
to invite arrest. They were to carry on their normal work and 
if arrest came in the course of that, to accept it with good 
grace. In particular, they were asked to renew contacts with 
die rural areas and find out the condition of the peasantry, 
both as a result of the remissions of rent and Government 
repression. There was no question of a no-rent campaign then. 
This had been formally withdrawn after the Poona Conference, 
and it was obvious that it could not be revived under the cir- 
cumstances. 

This programme was a mild and inoffensive one with nothing 
patently illegal in it, and yet we knew that it would lead to 
arrests. As soon as our workers went to the villages they were 
arrested and charged, quite wrongly, with preaching a no-rent 
campaign (which had been made an offence under the Ordi- 
ance laws) and convicted. It was my intention to go to these 
rural areas after the arrest of many of my comrades, but other 
activities claimed my attention and I postponed my visit till it 
was too late. 

Twice, during those months, tiie members of the Working 
Committee met together to consider the all-India situation. 
The Committee itself was not ftmetioning, not so much because 
it was an illegal bo(^ but because, at Gandhiji’s instance after 
Poona, aU Congress Committees and offices had been suspended. 
I happened to occupy a peculiar position as, on coming out of 
gaol, I refused to join this self-denying ordinance and insisted on 
calling myself the General Secretary of the Congress. But I 
functioned in the air. There was no proper office, no staff, no 
acting-president, and Gandhiji, though available for consul- 



IMPASSfi 


475 

ration, was busy with one of his tremendous all-India tours, 
this time for Harijan work. We managed to catch him during 
his tour at Jubbulpore and Delhi and held our consultations 
with Working Committee members. They served to bring out 
clearly the differences between various members. There was 
an impasse, and no way out of it agreeable to everybody. Gan- 
dhiji was the deciding factor between those who wanted to with- 
draw civil disobedience and those who were against this. As he 
was then in favour of the latter course, matters continued as 
before. 

The question of contesting elections on behalf of the Con- 
gress to the legislatures was sometimes discussed by Congress- 
men, though the Working Committee members were not much 
interested in this at the time. It did not arise; it was obviously 
premature. The 'Reforms’ were not likely to materialise for 
another two or three years at least, and there was then no 
mention of fresh elections for the Assembly. Personally I had 
no theoretical objection to contesting elections, and I felt sure 
in my mind that when the time came the Congress would have 
to go in for them. But to raise this question then was only to 
distract attention. I hoped that the continuance of our struggle 
would clear up the issues that faced us and prevent the com- 
promising elements from dominating the situation. 

Meanwhile I continued sending articles and statements to the 
Press. To some extent I had to tone down my writings, for they 
were written with a view to publication, and there was the 
censor and various laws whose octopus-like tentacles reached 
far. Even if I was prepared to take risks, the printers, pub- 
lishers and editors were not. On the whole the newspapers were 
good to me and stretched many a point in my favour. But not 
always. Sometimes statements and passages were suppressed, 
and once a whole long article, over which I had taken some 
pains, never saw the light of day. When I was in Calcutta in 
'Japuary 1934 the editor of one of the leading dailies came to 
see'fti^He told me that he had sent one of my statements to 
the Edtlbt^Chief of all Calcutta newspapers for his opinion, 
and as the’S^itor-in-Chief had disapproved of it, it had not 
been publishedSThe ‘ Editor-in-Chief ’ was the Government 
Press Censor for Catemta. 

In some of my PressNkt^iews and statements I ventured to 
criticise forcibly some grolljk^^nd individuals. This -was re- 
sented, partly because of the loKi^^ich Gandhiji had helped, 
to spread, that Congress could be a?ll»sjjed without any danger 
of its hitting back. Gandhiji himself set an example of 



476 JAWAHARLAT- NEHRU 

this and in varying degrees leading Congressmen had followed 
his lead, though sometimes this was not so. Usually we stuck 
to vague and pious phrases, and this gave an opportunity to our 
critics to get away with their faulty reasoning and opportunist 
tactics. The real issues were avoided on both sides, and an 
honest discussion, with occasional parry and thrust, seldom took 
place, as it does in Western countries, except where facism 
prevails, 

A friend, whose opinion I valued, wrote to me that she had 
been a little surprised at the vigour of some of my statements to 
the Press — was almost becoming ‘ cattish '. Was this the out- 
come of ‘ frustration ' of my hopes ? I wondered. Partly it was 
true, for nationally all of us suffer from frustration. Indi- 
vidually also it must have been true to some extent. Yet I was 
not very conscious of the feeling because personally I had no 
sensation of suppression or failure. Ever since Gandhiji came 
within my ken politically, I learnt one thing at least from him : 
not to suppress my ideas within me for fear of the consequences. 
That habit— -followed in the political sphere (in other spheres it 
would be more difficult and dangerous to follow)— has often got 
me into trouble, but it has also brought much satisfaction with 
it. I think that it is because of this that many of us have 
escaped real bitterness of heart and the worst kinds of frus- 
tration. The knowledge also that large numbers of people think 
of one with affection is very soothing and is a powerful antidote 
against defeatism and frustration. The most terrible of all 
feelings, I imagine, is to be alone, forgotten by others. 

But, even so, how can one escape m this strange, unhappy 
world z, feeling of frustration? How often everything seems to 
go wrong, and though we carry on, doubts assail us when we 
see the quality of human material around us. I am afraid I feel 
anger and resentment often enough at various happenings and 
developments, and even at persons and groups. And latterly 
I have begun to resent more and more the drawing-room atti- 
tude to life, which ignores vital issues and considers it improper 
to refer to them, because they happen to touch one’s pocket or 
pet prejudices. With all this resentment and frustration and 
‘ cattishness I hope I have not yet lost the gift of laughing at 
my own and other people’s follies. 

I sometimes wonder at the feitb of people in a beneficent 
Providence : how it survives shock after shock, and how disaster 
JrtseBf and disproof of benefictoce are considered but tests of 
the soundness of that Those delightful lines of Gerard 
Hopkins find an ecjio'ln many a heart: 



IMFASS£ 


477 


“ Thou art indeed just, Lord, if I contend 
With thee; but, sir, so what I plead is just. 

do sinners’ ways prosper? and why must 
Disappointment all I endeavour end? 

Wert thou my enemy, O thou my friend. 

How wouldst thou worse, I wonder, than thou dost 
Defeat, thwart me? Oh, the sots and thralls of lust 
Do in spare hours more thrive than I that spend, 

Sir, life upon thy cause. . . 

Faith in progress, in a cause, in ideals, in human goodness 
and human destiny — are they not nearly allied to faith in a 
Providence? If we seek to Justify them by reason and logic 
immediately we get into difficulties. But something within us 
clutches to that hope and faith, for, deprived of them, life 
would be a wilderness without an oasis. 

The efFert of my propaganda itpspf nf 

my colleagues of the Working Committee. They would have 
put up with me without complaint, as they had done for several 
years during which I had been carrying on this propaganda, 
but I was now frightening to some extent the vested interests 
in the country, and my activities could no longer be called 
innocuous. I knew that some of my colleagues w'ere no 
Socialists, but I had always thought that, as a member of the 
Congress Executive I had perfect freedom to carry on socialist 
propaganda without committing the Congress to it. The realisa- 
tion that some members of the Working Committee did not 
think that I had that freedom came as a surprise. I was putting 
them in a false position and they resented it. But what was I to 
do? I was not going to give up what I considered the most 
important part of my work. I would much rather resign from 
the Working Committee if there was a conflict between the 
two. But how could I resign when the Committee was illegal 
and was not even functioning properly? 

This difficulty faced me again later— I think it was towards 
the end of December — when Gandhiji wrote to me from 
Madras, He sent me a cutting from the Madras Mail containing 
an interview he had given. The interviewer had asked him 
about me and he had replied almost apologising for my acti- 
vities and expressing his faith in my rectitude: I would not 
commit the Congress to these novel ways. I did not particu- 
larly fancy this reference to me, but what upset me much more 
was Gandhiji’s defence, further on in the interview, of the big 
zamindari system,' He seemed to think that this was a very 
desirable part of rural and national economy, This was a great 



478 JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

surprise to me for the big zamindaris and taluqas have very 
few defenders to-day. All over the world they have been broken 
up, and even in India most people recognise that they cannot 
last long. Even taluqadars and zamindars would welcome an 
end of the system provided, of course, they got sufficient com- 
pensation therefor.* The system is indeed sinking of its own 
weight. And yet Gandhiji was in favour of it and talked of 
trusteeship and the like. How very different was his outlook 
from mine, I thought again, and I wondered how far I could 
co-operate with him in future. Must I continue to remain in 
the Working Committee? There was no way out just then, and 
a few weeks later the question became irrelevant because of my 
return to prison. 

My domestic affairs took up a lot of my time. My mother’s 
health continued to improve, but very slowly. She was still bed- 
ridden, but she seemed to be out of danger. I turned to my 
financial affairs which had been long neglected and were in a 
muddle. We had been spending much more than we could 
afford, and there seemed to be no obvious way of reducing our 
expenditure. I was not particularly anxious about making 
both ends meet. Almost I looked forward to the time when I 
would have no money left. Money and possessions are useful 
enough in the modern world, but often they become a burden 
for one who wants to go on a long journey. It is very difficult 
for moneyed people to take part in undertakings which involve 
risk; they are always afraid of losing their goods and chattels. 
What is the good of money or property if the Government can 
take possession of it when it chooses, or even confiscate it? So 
I almost wished to get rid of what little I had. Our needs were 
few and I felt confident of my ability to earn enough. My 
chief concern was that my mother, in the evening of her life, 
should not suffer discomforts or any marked lowering of the 
standard of living. I was also anxious that my daughter’s 
education should not be interfered with, and this, according to 
my thinking, involved a stay in Europe. Apart from this, 

* Mr. P. N, Tagore, Chairman of the Reception Committee of the 
All-Bengal Landholders’ Conference, said in his address on Decem- 
ber 33, 1934 : “ Personally I will not regret the day when lands of 
the zamindars are nationalised, as ha.s been done in Ireland, upon 
payment of adequate compensation to the landlord.” It should be 
remembered that the Bengal landholders, being under the Per- 
manent Settlement, are better off than the landholders in the 
non-permanently settled areas. Mr. P. N, Tagore’s ideas about 
nationalisation appear to be vague. 



IMPASSE 


479 

neither my wife nor I had any special need for money. Or so 
we thought, being unused to the real lack of it. I am quite 
sure that when the time comes when we lack money, we shall 
not be happy about it. One extravagance which I have kept 
up will be hard to give up, and this is the buying of books. 

To improve the immediate financial situation we decided to 
sell off my wife’s jewellery, the silver and other similar articles 
that we possessed, as well as many cart-loads of odds and ends. 
Kamala did not like the idea of parting with her jewellery, 
although she had not worn any of it for a dozen years and it 
had lain in the bank. But she had looked forward to handing 
it on to our daughter. 

It was January 1934. Continued arrests of our workers in the 
villages of the Allahabad district, although innocently em- 
ployed, seemed to demand that we should follow in their steps 
and visit those villages. Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, our very effective 
secretary of the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, was also 
under arrest. January 36th — ^Independence Day — ^was coming 
and it could not be ignored. Despite Ordinances and prohi- 
bitions it had been regularly observed in various parts of the 
country every year since 1930. But who was to give the lead? 
And what was the lead to be? There was no one besides me 
who was functioning, even in theorjr, as an official of the All- 
India Congress. I consulted some friends and almost all agreed 
that something should be done, but there was no agreement as 
to what this something should be, I found a general tendency 
to avoid any action which might lead to arrests on a large scale. 
Eventually I issued a brief appeal for the appropriate celebra- 
tion of Independence Day, the manner of doing so to be 
decided by each local area for itself. In Allahabad we planned 
a fairly widespread celebration all over the district. 

We felt that the organisers of this Independence Day celebra- 
tion would be arrested on that day. Before I went back to 
prison again I wanted to pay a visit to Bengal. This was partly 
to meet old colleagues there, but really it was to be a gesture 
in the nature of tribute to the people of Bengal for their 
extraordinary sufferings during the past few years. I knew 
very well that I could do nothing to help them. Sympathy and 
fellow-feeling did not go far, and yet they were very welcome, 
and Bengal was especially suffering from a sense of isolation, 
of being deserted by the rest of India in her hour of need. 
That feeling was not justified, but nevertheless it was there. 

I had also to go to Calcutta with Kamala to consult our 
doctors there about her tre-ntment. She had been far from well. 



480 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

but we had both tried to overlook this to some extent and post- 
pone recourse to a treatment which might involve a long stay 
in Calcutta or elsewhere. We wanted to be together as much 
as possible during my brief period outside prison. After I 
went back to gaol, I thought, she would have plenty of time for 
doctors and treatment. Now that arrest seemed near, I decided 
to have these consultations at least in my presence in Calcutta; 
the rest could be attended to later. 

So we decided to go to Calcutta, Kamala and I, on January 
15th. We wanted to return in good time for our Independence 
Day meetings. 