CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 

Sixteen years ago Gandhiji Impressed India with his doctrine 
of non-violence. Ever since then it has dominated the Indian 
horizon. Vast numbers of people have repeated it unthinkingly 
but with approval, some have wrestled with it and then accepted 
it, with or without reservation, some have openly jeered at it. It 
has played a major part in our political and social life, and it 
has also attracted a great deal of attention in the wider world. 
The doctrine is of course almost as old as human thought, but 
perhaps Gandhiji was the first to apply it on a mass scale to 
political and social movements. Formerly it was an individual 
affair and was thus essentially religious. It was the restraint of 
the individual and his attempt to achieve complete disinter- 
estedness and thus to raise himself above the level of worldly 
conflict and attain a kind of personal freedom and salvation. 
There was no idea behind it of dealing with the larger social 
problems and of changing social conditions, except very indi- 
rectly and remotely. There vras almost an acceptance of the 
existing social fabric with' all its inequality and injustice. 
Gandhiji tried to make this individual ideal into a social group 
ideal. He was out to change political conditions as well as 
social; and deliberately, with this end in view, he applied the 
non-violent method on this wider and wholly different plane. 
"Those who have to bring about radical changes in human 
conditions and surroundings,” he has written, “cannot do it 
except by raising a ferment in society. There are only two 
methods of doing this, violent and non-violent. Violent pressure 
is felt on the physical being and it degrades him who uses it as 
it depresses the victim, but non-violent pressure exerted through 
self-suffering, as by fasting, works in an entirely diflferent way. 
It touches not the phyiscal body but it touches and strengthens 
the moral fibre of those against whom it is directed.” ^ 

The idea was to some extent in harmony with Indian thought 
and it was accepted, superficially at least, with enthusiasm by 
the country. Very few realised the far-reaching implications 
that lay behind it, and the few who did so rather vaguely took 
refuge in faith and action. But, when the tempo of aaion 

^ Extracts from statement made by Gandhiji on December 4, 193a 
on the occasion of one of his fasts. 

m 



JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 


538 

slackened, innumerable questions arose in the minds of some 
people, and it was extraordinarily difficult to find answers to 
them. These questions did not affect the immediate course that 
had to be followed in politics. Rather they dealt with the whole 
philosophy that lay behind this idea of non-violent resistance. 
In a political sense the non-violent movement has not succeeded 
so far, for India is still held in the vice-like grip of imperialism. 
In a social sense it has not even envisaged a radical change. 
And yet any one with the slightest penetration can see that it 
has worked a remarkable change in India’s millions. It has 
given them character, strength and self-reliance — precious gifts 
without which any progress, political or social, is difficult to 
achieve or to retain. How far these undoubted gains are due to 
non-violence or to the fact of conflict itself, it is difficult to say. 
Such gains have been achieved by various peoples on numerous 
occasions through violent conflict. Yet it may be said, I think 
with confidence, that the non-violent method has been of ines- 
timable value to us in this respect. It has definitely helped in 
raising that ‘ferment in society’ to which Gandhiji refers, 
though undoubtedly that ferment was due to basic causes and 
conditions. It has brought about that quickening process in the 
masses that precedes revolutionary change. 

That is an obvious point in its favour, but it does not carry us 
far. The real questions remain unanswered. Unfortunately 
Gandhiji does not help us much in solving the problem. He has 
written and spoken on innumerable occasions on the subject, 
but, so far as I know, he has never considered in public all its 
implications, philosophically or scientifically. ‘ He lays stress 
on the means lieing more important than the end, of conversion 
being better than coercion, and there is a tendency to identify 
non-violence with truth and all goodness. Indeed he often uses 
the terms as if they were synonymous. There is also the ten- 
dency to consider all those who may not agree with this as 
outside the pale of the elect and as having offended against 
the moral law. In the case of some of his followers this 
translates itself inevitably into a feeling of self-righteousness. 

Those of us who are not fortunate enough to have this faith 
are, however, troubled with a host of doubts. These doubts 
do not relate so much to immediate necessities, but to the 
mind’s desire for some consistent philosophy of action which is 
both moral from the individual view-point and is at the same 
, * Richard B. Gregg in his The Power of Non-Violence has dis- 
cussed the subject scientifically. His book is most interesting and 
thought-provoking. 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 


539 

time socially effective. I confess that these doubts have not left 
me, and I see no satisfiictory solution of the problem. I dislike 
violence intensely, and yet I am full of violence myself and, 
consciously or unconsciously, I am often attempting to coerce 
others. And can anything be greater coercion than the psychic 
coercion of Gandhiji which reduces many of his intimate fol- 
lowers and colleagues to a state of mental pulp? 

But the real question was: can national and social groups 
imbibe sufficiently this individual creed of non-violence, for it 
involved a tremendou.s rise of mankind in the ma.ss to a high 
level of love and goodness? It is true that the only really 
desirable ultimate ideal is to raise humanity to this level and to 
abolish hatred and ugliness and selfishness. Whether that is 
possible or not, even ultimately, may be a debatable question; 
but without that to hope for life would almost become “ a tale 
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” 
To attain this ideal, are we to work for it directly by preaching 
these virtues, regardless of the obstructions whiA make it im- 
possible of achievement and which encourage every contrary 
tendency? Or must we not remove these obstructions first and 
create a more suitable and more ffivourable environment for the 
growth of love, beauty, goodness? Or can we combine- the two 
processes? 

And then again is the line between violence and non-violence, 
compulsion and conversion, so obvious? Often enough moral 
force is a far more terrible coercive factor than physical violence. 
And is non-violence synonymous with truth? What is truth is 
an ancient question to which a thousand answers have been 
given, and yet the question remains. But whatever it majr be, it 
cannot certainly be wholly identified with non-violence. Violence 
itself, though bad, cannot be considered intrinsically unmoral. 
There are shades and grades of it and often it may be preferable 
to something that is worse. Gandhiji himself has said that it is 
j better than cowardice, fear, and slavery, and a host of other evils 
might be added to this list. It is true that usually violence is 
associated with ill-will, but in theory at least this need not always 
be so. It is conceivable that violence may be based on goodwill 
(that of a surgeon, for example) and anything that has this for 
a basis can never be fundamentally immoral. After all, the final 
tests of ethics and morality arp goodwill and ill-will. Thus, 
although violence is very often imjustifiable morally and may be 
considered dangerous ftom that view-point, it need not always 
be so. 

All life is full of conflict and violence, and it seems to be true 



540 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

that violence breeds violence and is thus not a way to overcome 
it. And yet to forswear it altogether leads to a wholly negative 
attitude utterly out of touch with life itself. Violence is the very 
life-blood of the modern State and social system. Without the 
coercive apparatus of the State taxes would not be realised, land- 
lords would not get their rents, and private property would 
disappear. The law, with the help of its armed forces, excludes 
others from the use of private property. The national State 
itself exists because of offensive and defensive violence. 

Gandhiji’s non-violence, it is true, is certainly not a purely 
negative affair. It is not non-resistance. It is non-violent resis- 
tance, which is a very different thing, a positive and dynamic 
method of action. It was not meant for those who meekly accept 
the status quo. The very purpose for which it was designed was 
to create “a ferment in society” and thus to change existing 
conditions. Whatever the motives of conversion behind it, in 
practice it has been a powerful weapon of compulsion as well, 
though that compulsion is exercised in the most civilised and 
least objectionable manner. Indeed it is interesting to note that 
Gandhiji actually used the word,' compel ’ in Itia earlier writings. 
Criticising the Viceroy’s (Lord Chelmsford's) speech in 1920 on 
the Punjab Martial Law wrongs, he wrote: 

". . . the speech his Excellency delivered at the time of the 
opening of the Council shows to me a mental attitude which 
makes association with him or his Government impossible for 
self-respecting men. 

“The remarks on the Punjab mean a flat refusal to grant 
redress. He would have us to concentrate on the problems of the 
immediate ' future ’I The immediate future is to compel repen- 
tance on the part of the Government on the Punjab matter. Of 
this there is no sign. On the contrary his Excellency resists the 
temptation to reply to his critics, meaning thereby that he has 
not changed his opinion on the many vital matters affecting the 
honour of India. He is ‘ content to leave the issues to the verdict 
of history.' Now this kind of language, in my opinion, is calcu- 
lated further to inflame the Indian mind. Of what use can a 
favourable verdict of history be to men who have been wronged 
and who are still under the heels of officers who have shown 
themselves utterly unfit to hold offices of trust and responsi- 
bility? The plea tor co-operation is, to say the least, hypocritical 
in the face of the determination to refuse justice to the Punjab.” 
, Governments are notoriously based on nolence, not only the 
open violence of the armed forces, but the fer more dangerous 
violence, more subtly exercised, of spies, informers, agents pro- 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 54I 

vocateurs, false propaganda, direct and indirect through educa- 
tion, Press, etc., religious and other forms of fear, economic 
destitution and starvation. As between two governments it is 
taken for granted that every manner of falsehood and treachery 
is justified, provided it is not found out, even in peace-time and 
much more so in war-time. Three hundred years ago Sir Henry 
Wotton, a poet and himself a British ambassador, defined an 
ambassador as “ an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good 
of his country.” Nowadays ambassadors are supported by mili- 
tary, naval and commercial attaches whose chief function is to 
spy in the country to which they are sent. Behind them functions 
the vast network of the secret service, with its innumerable 
ramifications and webs of intrigue and deception, its spies and 
counter-spies, its connections with the underworld of crime, its 
bribery and degradation of human nature, its secret murders. Bad 
as all this is in peace-time, war gives it enormous importance and 
its baneful influence spreads'ln every direction. It is astonishing 
to read now of some of the instances of propaganda during the 
World War, the amazing falsehoods spread about enemy 
countries, the vast sums spent on this and on the secret services. 
But peace to-day is itself merely an interval between two wars, 
a preparation for war, and to some extent a continuation of the 
conflict in economic and other spheres. There is a continuous 
tug-of-war between the victors and the vanquished, between the 
imperialist powers and their colonial dependencies, between the 
privileged classes and the exploited classes. The war atmosphere, 
with all its accompaniments of violence and falsehood, continues 
in some measure therefore even during so-called peacertime, and 
both the soldier and the civilian official are trained to meet this 
situation. Lord Wolseley writes in the Soldier’s Pocket-Book for 
Field Service : “ We will keep hammering along with the con- 
viction that ' honesty is the best policy ’, and that truth always 
wins in the long run. These pretty sentences do well for a child’s 
copy-book, but the man who acts upon them in war had better 
sheathe his sword for ever.” 

Under present conditions with nation against nation and class 
against class this basis of violence and falsehood seems almost 
inevitable. Privileged nations and groups, desirous of holding on 
to their power and privileges and denying those whom they 
oppress the opportunities of growth, must rely on violence, coer- 
cion and i^sehood. It may be possible, as public opinion grows 
and the realities of these conflicts and their suppression become 
more manifest, for the violence to he toned down. As a matter 
of fact all recent experience points to the contrary, and violence 



543 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

has grown as the challenge to existing institutions has gained 
weight. Even when outward violence has been toned down, it 
has taken subtler and more dangerous forms. Neither the growth 
of reason nor of the religious outlook nor morality have checked 
in any way this tendency to violence. Individuals have pro- 
gressed and gone up in the human scale, and probably there are 
far more of these higher-type individuals (the highest type 
excepted) in the world to-day than at any previous period of 
history; society as a whole has progressed, and to a very small 
extent begun to attempt the control of the primitive and bar- 
barian instincts. But on the whole groups and communities have 
not improved greatly. The individual in becoming more civilised 
has passed on many of his primitive passions and vices to the 
community, and as violence always attracts the morally second- 
rate, the leaders of these communities are seldom their best men 
and women. 

But even if we assume that the worst forms of violence will be 
gradually removed from the State, it is impossible to ignore the 
Fact that both government and social life necessitate some 
coercion. Social life necessitates some form of government, and 
the men so placed in authority must curb and prevent all indi- 
vidual or group tendencies which are inherently selfish and likely 
to injure society. Usually they go much further than necessary, 
for power corrupts and degrades. So that however much those 
rulers may love liberty and hate coercion, they will have to 
exercise coercion on recalcitrant individuals, till such time when 
every human being in that State is perfect, wholly unselfish, and 
devoted to the common good. The rulers of that State will also 
have to exercise coercion on outside groups who make predatory 
attacks, that is to say they will have to defend themselves, meet- 
ing force with force. The necessity for this will only disappear 
when there is only a single World-State. 

If force and coercion are thus necessary both for external 
defence and internal cohesion, where is one to draw the line? 
Once this fateful concession is made of ethics to politics. Rein- 
hold Neibuhr points out,* and coercion is accepted as a necessary 
- instrument of social cohesion, it is not possible to make absolute 
distinctions between non-violent and violent types of coercion, or 
between the coercion used by governments and that used by 
revolutionaries. 

I do not know for certain, but I imagine that Gandhiji will 
admit that in this imperfect world a national State will have to 


* In Moral Man and Immoral Society, 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 543 

use force to defend itself against unprovoked attack from out- 
side. Of course the State should allow an absolutely peaceful and 
friendly policy to its neighbour and other States, but nevertheless 
it is absurd to deny the possibility of attack. The State will also 
have to pass some laws of a coercive nature, in the sense that they 
take away some rights and privileges from various classes and 
groups and restrict liberty of action. All laws are to some extent 
coercive. The Karachi programme of the Congress lays down 
that “ In order to end the exploitation of the masses, political 
freedom must include real economic freedom of the starving 
millions.” To give effect to this desirable sentiment the over- 
privileged will have to give up much to the under-privileged. 
Further, it is laid down that workers must have a living wage and 
various other amenities; that special taxes will be charged on 
property; that “ the State shall own or control key industries and 
services, mineral resources, railways, waterways, shipping and 
other means of public transport.” Also that “ intoxicating drinks 
and drugs shall be totally prohibited.” All this is likely to be 
objected to by considerable numbers of people. They may sub- 
mit to the will of the majority, but that will be because they are 
afraid of the consequences of disobedience. Democracy indeed 
means the coercion of the minority by the majority. 

If a law affecting property rights or abolishing them to a large 
extent is passed by a majority, is that to be objected to because 
it is coercion? Manifestly not, because the same procedure is 
followed in the adoption of all democratic laws. Objection, there- 
fore, cannot be taken on the ground of coercion. It might be 
said that the majority was acting wrongly or immorally. The 
question to be considered then is : whether the law as passed by 
a majority offended any ethical principle. Who is to decide this? 
If individuals and groups are allowed to interpret ethics in 
accordance with their own interests, there is an end of demo- 
cratic procedure. Personally I feel that the institution of private 
property (except in a very restricted sense) gives dangerous power 
to individuals over society as a whole, and is therefore very harm- 
ful to society. I consider it immoral, far more so than drink, 
which harms the individual more than society. 

I have been told, however, by some people who claim to believe 
in the doctrine of non-violence that to attempt to nationalise 
private property, except with the consent of the ovjners thereof, 
would be coercion, and as such opposed to non-violence. Indeed 
this view-point has been impressed upon me by big zamindars, 
who do not scruple to take the aid of the State in forcibly 
collecting their rents; and capitalists, owning many factories. 



JAWAHARLAL NiiHRU 


J44 

who will not even permit independent labour unions to exist in 
their domains. The fact that a majority of the people affected 
desires the change is not considered enough, the very people who 
stand to lose by it should be converted. Thus a few interested 
parties can hold up an obviously desirable change. 

If there is one thing that history shows it is this : that economic 
interests shape the political views of groups and classes. Neither 
reason nor moral considerations override these interests. Indi- 
viduals may be converted, they may surrender their special 
privileges, although this is rare enough, but classes and groups 
do not do so. The attempt to convert a governing and privileged 
class into forsaking power and giving up its unjust privileges has 
therefore always so far failed, and there seems to be no reason 
whatever to hold that it will succeed in the future. Reinhold 
Niebuhr in his book ‘ directs his argument against the moralists 
"who imagine that the egoism of individuals is being pro- 
gressively checked by the development of rationality or the 
growth of a religiously inspired goodwill, and that nothing but 
the continuance of this process is necessary to establish social 
harmony between all the human societies and colleaives." These 
moralists "‘disregard the political necessities in the struggle for 
justice in human society by failing to recognise those elements 
in man’s collective behaviour which belong to the order of 
nature and can never be brought completely under the dominion 
of reason or conscience. They do not recognise that when col- 
lective power, whether in the form of imperialism or class 
domination, exploits weakness, it can never be dislodged unless 
power is raised against it.’’ And again : " Since reason is always, 
to some degree, the servant of interest in a social situation, social 
justice cannot be resolved by moral or rational suasion alone. . . . 
Conflict is inevitable, and in this conflict power must be chal- 
le^ed by power." 

To think, therefore, in terms of pure conversion of a class or 
nation ojr of the removal of conflict by rational argument and 
appeals to justice, is to delude oneself. It is an illusion to imagine 
that a dominant imperialist Power will give up its domination 
over a country, or that a class will give up its superior position 
and privileges unless effective pressure, amounting to coercion, 
is exercised. 

Gandhiji obviously wants to apply that pressure, though he 
does not call it coercion. According to him, his method is self- 
suffering. It is a little difflcult to consider this, as there is a 

’ . . *' Moral Man and Immoral Society. 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 545 

metaphysical element in it and it does not yield to measurement 
or any other material approach. That it has considerable effect 
on the opponent is undoubted. It exposes his moral defences, it 
unnerves him, it appeals to the best in him, it leaves the door 
open for conciliation. There can be no doubt that the approach 
of love and self-suffering has powerful psychic reactions on the 
adversary as well as on the onlookers. Most shikaris know that it 
makes a difference how one approaches a wild animal. He seems 
to sense the aggressive spirit from afar and reacts to it. Even 
a suspicion of fear in the man, hardly realised by him, is con- 
veyed somehow to the animal and makes him afraid, and in this 
fear he attacks. If the nerve of a lion-tamer fail him for an 
instant there is immediate danger of his being attacked. An 
absolutely fearless man is seldom in danger from wild animals 
unless some untoward accident occurs. It seems natural, there- 
fore, that human beings should be susceptible to these psychic 
influences. But though individuals may be affected, it is doubtful 
if a class or group is affected. That class, as a class, does not 
come into personal and intimate contact with the other party; 
even the reports it hears are partial and distorted. And, in any 
event, its automatic reaction of anger against any group that 
challenges its position is so great that all minor feelings are 
swallowed up in it. Having for long accustomed itself to the 
notion that its superior position and privileges were necessary 
for the good of society, any contrary opinion savours of heresy. 
Law and order and the maintenance of the status quo become 
the chief virtues, and attempts to challenge them the chief sins. 

So that, so far as the opposite group is concerned, the process 
of conversion does not go far. Indeed sometimes the very 
mildness and saintliness of their adversary makes them angrier 
still, for it seems to put them in the wrong; and when a person 
begins to suspect that he might be in the wrong, his virtuous 
indignation grows. Nevertheless, a non-violent technique does 
affect odd individuals on the oiiier side, and thereby weakens 
the solidity of opposition. Even more so it gains the sympathy 
of neutrals and is a powerful means of influencing world 
opinion. But here again there is the probability of the governing 

g roup preventing the news from going out or of distorting it, 
ecause it controls the agencies of publicity and can thus prevent 
the real facts ftom being known. The most potent and far- 
reaching effect of the non-violent method is, however, on the 
large numbers of more or less indifferent people of the country 
in which this technique is practised. They are certainly con- 
verted and often become enthusiasts in its favour, but then they 

NN 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


546 

did not require much conversion as they generally approved of 
the object aimed at. The effect is not so obvious on those who 
dread the change. The rapid spread of non-co-operation and 
civil disobedience in India was a demonstration of how a non- 
violent movement exercises a powerful influence on vast numbers 
and converts many waverers. It did not convert to any marked 
extent those who were ab initio hostile to it. Indeed the success 
of the movement increased their fears and made them even 
more hostile. 

If it is once admitted that a State is justified in using violence 
to defend its freedom, it is difficult to understand why it is not 
equally justified in adopting violent and coercive methods in 
ti^ng to achieve that freedom. A violent method may be unde- 
sirable and inexpedient, but it would not be wholly unjustifiable 
and barred. The mere fact that a government happens to be 
the dominant faction controlling the armed forces does not give 
it a greater right to the use of violence. In the event of a non- 
violent revolution succeeding and controlling the State, does it 
immediately acquire the right to use violence, which it did not 
possess before? If there is an insurrection against its authority, 
how is it going to meet it? It will naturally be disinclined to use 
violent methods, and will try every peaceful way to ineet the 
situation, but it cannot give up the right to use violence. There 
are sure to be disaffected elements in the population opposed to 
the change, and they will try to go back to the previous condi- 
tion. If they think that their violence will not be checked by 
the coercive apparatus of the new State, they are all the more 
likely to indulge in it. It seems, therefore, that it is quite im- 
possible to draw a hard and fast line between violence and non- 
violence, coercion and conversion. The difficulty is real enough 
in considering political changes, it becomes far worse as between 
privileged and exploited classes. 

To suflFer for an ideal has always commanded admiration; to 
submit to suffering for a cause tvithout giving in or hitting back 
has a nobility and grandeur in it which force recognition. And 
yet there is only a thin line which divides this from suffering 
for suffering’s sake, and this latter kind of self-suffering is apt to 
become morbid and even a little degrading. If violence is often 
sadistic, non-violence in its negative aspects at least is likely to 
err on the other side. There is also always the possibility for 
non-riolence to be made a cloak for cowardice and inaction, as 
well as the maintenance of the status quo. 

During the past few years in India, ever since the idea of 
radical social changes has assumed importance here, it has often 



CONVEJISION OR COMPULSION 547 

been stated that such a change necessarily involves the -use of 
violence and cannot therefore be advocated. Class conflicts must 
not be mentioned (however much they might exist) because they 
jar on the vision of perfect co-operation and a non-violent pro- 
gress to whatever goal might lie in the future. It is quite 
possible that a solution of the social problem cannot be brought 
about ivithout violence at some stage, for it seems certain that 
the privileged classes will not hesitate to use violence to maintain 
their favoured position. But, in theory, if it is possible to bring 
about a great political change by a non-violent technique, why 
should it not be equally possible to affect a radical social change 
by this method? If we can get political freedom and the elimi- 
nation of British imperialism from India non-violently, why 
should we not also solve the problem of the feudal princes and 
landlords and other social problems in the same way, and estab- 
lish a Socialist State? Whether all this is possible or not non- 
violently is not so much the question. The point is that either 
both of these objectives are possible of attainment non-violently 
or neither. Surely it cannot be said that a non-violent method 
can only be used against a foreign ruler. Prima facie it should be 
far easier to use it within a country against indigenous selfish 
interests and obstructionists, for the psychological effect on them 
will be greater than elsewhere. 

The recent tendency in India to condemn objectives and 
policies simply because they are supposed to conflict with non- 
violence seems to me an inversion of the right method of look- 
ing at such problems. We took to the non-violent method 
fifteen years ago because it promised to take us to our goal in the 
most desirable and effective way. The goal was then apart from 
non-violence; it was not a mere appendage or outcome of it. No 
one could have said then that freedom or independence must 
only be aimed at if they are attainable by non-violent means. 
But now our goal itself is judged in terms of non-violence and 
rejected if it does not seem to fit in with it. The idea of non- 
violence is thus becoming an inflexible dogma which may not 
be challenged. As such it is losing its spiritual appeal to the 
intellect, and taking its place in the pigeon-holes of faith and 
religion. It is even becoming a sheet7anchor for vested interests, 
who exploit it to maintain the status quo,' 

This is unfortunate for, I do believe, the ideas of non-violent 
resistance and the non-violent technique of struggle are of 
great value to India as well as to the rest of the world, and 
Gandhiji has done a tremendous service in forcing modem 
thought to consider them. I believe they have a great future 



548 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

before them. It may be that mankind is not sufficiently advanced 
to adopt them in their entirety. “You offer your candle of 
vision to the blind,” says a character in A.E.’s Interpreters, “ but 
virhat use can it be to the blind except as a bludgeon? ” For the 
present the vision may not materialise sufficiently, but like all 
great ideas its influence will grow and it will more and more 
affect our actions. Non-co-operation, the withdrawal of co- 
operation from a State or society which is considered evil, is a 
powerful and dynamic notion. Even if a handful of persons of 
moral worth practise it, its effect spreads and goes on increasing. 
With large numbers the external effect becomes more marked, 
but there is a tendency for other factors to obscure the moral 
issue. The extension of it seems to affect its intensity. The 
collective man gradually pushes back the individual. 

The stress, however, on pure non-violence has made it some- 
thing remote and apart from life, and there is a tendency for 
people either to accept it blindly and religiously or not at all. 
The intellectual element has receded into the background. In 
1920 it had a great effect on the Terrorists in India, and drew 
many away from their ranks, and even those who remained 
were held back by doubt and stopped their violent activities. It 
has no such influence on them now. Even within the Congress 
ranks many of the vital elements who played a notable part in 
the Non-Co-operation and Civil Disobedience movements, and in 
all sincerity tried to live up to the implications of the non-violent 
method, are now considered as heretics who have no business to 
continue as Congressmen because they are not prepared to make 
non-violence a creed and a religion, or to give up the only goal 
they consider worth striving for — a Socialist State with equal 
justice and opportunity for all, a planned society which can only 
come into existence with the abolition of most of the privileges 
and property rights that exist to-day. Gandhiji, of course, con- 
tinues to be a vital force whose non-violence is of a dynamic 
and aggressive character, and no one knows when he might 
again galvanise the country in a forward movement. With all 
his greatness and his contradictions and power of moving 
masses, he is above the usual standards. One cannot measure 
him. or judge him as we would others. But riiahy of ffiose who 
claim to follow him tend to become ineffectual pacifists or non- 
resisters of the Tolstoyan variety or juSt mfembers of a narrow 
sect, not in touch with life and reality. And they gather rotmd 
themselves quite a number of people who are interested in main- 
taining the' present order, and who take shelter under non- 
violence for this purpose. Opportunism thus creeps ih’ and the 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 549 

process of converting the adversary leads, in the interests of 
non-violence, to one’s own conversion and lining up with the 
adversary. When enthusiasm wanes and we weaken, there is 
always a tendency to go back a little, to compromise, and it is 
comforting to call this the art of winning over the opponent. 
And sometimes we make this gain at the cost of our own old 
colleagues. We deprecate their extravagances, their utterances, 
that irritate our new friends, and accuse them of breaking the 
unity of our ranks. Instead of a real change of the social order, 
stress is laid on charity and benevolence within the existing 
system, the vested interests remaining where they were. 

I am convinced that Gandhiji has done a great service to us by 
stressing the importance of the means. And yet I feel sure that 
the final emphasis must necessarily be on the end and goal in 
view. Unless wc can conceive that, clearly we can never be any- 
thing but aimless wanderers, wasting our energies on unimpor- 
tant side-issues. But the means cannot be ignored for, quite 
apart from the moral side, they have a practical side. Bad and 
immoral means often defeat the end in view or raise tremendous 
new problems. And, after all, it is the means that a person adopts 
and not the end he declares that enables us to judge him truly. 
I’o adopt means that leads to needless conflict and to the piling 
up of hatreds, is likely to make the achievement of the goal 
more difficult and distant. End and means are indeed so inti- 
mately connected that they can hardly be separated. Essentially, 
therefore, the means must be such as lessen conflict and hatred 
or, at any rate, try to limit them as fiir as possible (for they seem 
to be inevitable), and to encourage goodwill. It becomes more 
a question of motive and intention and temper than of any 
particular method. It is on this basic motive that Gandhiji's 
stress has been, and if he has fiiiled to change human nature to 
any appreciable extent, he succeeded surprisingly in impressing 
this motive on a great national movement involving millions. 
His insistence on strict moral discipline was also very necessary, 
though his standards of that individual discipline are perhaps 
debatable. ’He attaches vast importance to the self-regarding sins 
or failings and very little to social sins. The necessity for this 
discipline is obvious, for the temptation to leave the wilderness 
and join the privileged groups in the seats of power has drawn 
away many a Congressman. For a noted Congressman the door 
to that favoured land is always open. 

The whole world is in the gnp to-day of various crises, but 
the greatest of these is the crisis of the spirit. This is especially 
so in the East, for recent chan^^ in Asia have been more rapid 



550 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

than elsewhere and the process of adjustment is painful. The 
political problem which seems to dominate the situation is 
perhaps the least important of all, though it is the primary 
problem for us, and it must be disposed of satisfactorily before 
the real questions are tackled. For ages past we have been 
accustomed to an almost unchanging basic social order, and 
many of us still believe that it is the only possible and rightful 
basis of society, and associate our moral notions with it. But 
our attempts to fit in the past with the present fail, as they are 
bound to do. “In the last resort,” wrote Veblen, the American 
economist, “the economic moralities wait on the economic 
necessities.” The necessities of to-day will force us to formulate 
a new morality in accordance with them. If we are to find a 
way out of this crisis of the spirit and realise what are the true 
spiritual values to-day, we shall have to face the issues frankly 
and boldly and not take refuge under the dogmas of any reli- 
gion. What rdigion says may be good or bad, but the way it 
says it and wants us to believe it is certainly not conducive to an 
intellectual consideration of any problem. As Freud has pointed 
out, the dogmas of religion “deserve to be believed: firstly, 
because our primal ancestors already believed them; secondly, 
because we possess proofs, which have been handed down to us 
from this very period of antiquity; and thirdly, because it is 
forbidden to raise the question of their authenticity at all.”^ 

If we consider non-violence and all it implies from the reli- 
gious, dogmatic point of view there is no room for argument. 
It reduces itself to the narrow .creed of a sect which people may 
or may not accept. It loses vitality and application to present- 
day problems. But if we are prepared to discuss it in relation 
to' existing conditions it can help us greatly in our attempts to 
refashion this world. Tliis consideration must take into account 
l^e nature and wealoiesses of collective man. Any activity on a 
mass scale, and especially any activity aiming at radical and 
revolutionaiy changes, is affected not only by what the leaders 
think of it hut by existing conditions and, still more, by what 
the human material they work with thinks about it. 

Violence has played a great part in the world’s history. It is 
to-day playing an equally important part, and probably it will 
continue to do so for a considerable time. Most of the changes 
in the past have been caused by violence and coercion. W. E. 
Gladstone once said: "I am sorry to say that if no instructions 
had been addressed in political crises to the people of this 

^ The Future of an Illusion. 



CONVJiRSION OR COMPULSION 55I 

country except to remember to hate violence, to love order, and 
to exercise patience, the liberties of this country would never 
have been attained.” 

It is impossible to ignore the importance of violence in the 
past and present. To do so is to ignore life. Yet violence is un- 
doubtedly bad and brings an unending trail of evil conse- 
quences with it. And worse even than violence are the motives 
of hatred, cruelty, revenge and punishment which very often 
accompany violence. Indeed violence is bad not intrinsically, 
but because of these motives that go with it. There can be 
violence without these motives; there can be violence for a good 
object as well as for an evil object. But it is extremely difficult 
to separate violence from those motives, and therefore it is 
desirable to avoid violence as far as possible. In avoiding it, 
however, one cannot accept a negative attitude of submitting 
to other and far greater evils. Submission to violence or the 
acceptance of an unjust rdgime based on violence, is the very 
negation of the spirit of non-violence. The non-violent method, 
in order to justify itself, must be dynamic and capable of 
changing such a regime or social order. 

Whether it can do so or not I do not know. It can, I think, 
carry us a long way, but I doubt if it can take us to the final 
goal. In any event, some form of coercion seems to be inevit- 
able, for people who hold power and privilege do not give them 
up till they are forced to do so, or till conditions are created 
which make it more harmful to them to keep these privileges 
than to give them up. The present conflicts in society, national 
as well as class conflicts, can never be resolved except by coer- 
cion^ Conversion, of course, there must be on a large seme, for 
so long as large numbers are not converted there can be no real 
basis for a movement of social change. But coercion over some 
will follow. Nor is it right for us to cover up these basic conflicts 
and try to make out that they do not exist. That is not only a 
suppression of the truth, but it direedy leads to bolstering up 
the existing order by misleading people as to the true facts, and 
giving the ruling classes the moi^ basis which they are always 
seeking in order to justify their special privileges. In order to 
combat an unjust system the false premises on which it is based 
must be exposed and the reality laid bare. One of the virtues 
of non-co-operation is that it exposes these false premises and 
lies by our refusal to submit to them or to co-operate in their 
furtherance. 

Our final aim can only be a classless society with equal 
economic justice and opportunity for all, a society organised on 



553 JAWAHARLAL NLHRU 

a planned basis for the raising of mankind to higher material 
and cultured levels, to a cultivation of spiritual values, of co- 
operation, unselfishness, the spirit of service, the desire to do 
right, goodwill and love — ^ultimately a world order. Everything 
that comes in the way will have to be removed, gently if pos- 
sible, forcibly if necessary. And there seems to he little doubt 
that coercion will often be necessary. But if force is used it 
should not be in the spirit of hatred or cruelty, but with the 
dispassionate desire to remove an obstruction. That will be 
difficult. It is not an easy task; there is no easy way, and the 
pitfalls are numerous. The difficulties and pitfalls do not dis- 
appear by our ignoring them, but by realising their true nature 
and facing them boldly. All this sounds fanciful and Utopian, 
and it is highly unlikely that many people will be moved by 
these noble motives. But we can keep them in view and stress 
them, and it may be that gradually they will lessen the hatreds 
and passions that fill most of us. 

Our methods must lead to this goal and be based on these 
motives. But we must also realise that human nature being 
what it is, in the mass, it will not always respond to our appeals 
and persuasions, or act in accordance with high moral prin- 
ciples. Compulsion will often be necessary, in addition to con- 
version, and the best we can do is to limit this compulsion and 
use it in such a manner that its evil is lessened. 