THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 

What has been the record of British rule in India? I doubt if 
it is possible for any Indian or Englishman to take an objective 
and dispassionate view of this long record. And even if this 
were possible, it would be still more difficult to weigh and 
measure the psychological and other immaterial factors. We 
are told that British rule “has given to India that which 
throughout the centuries she never possessed, a government,- 
whose authority is vmcjuestioned in any part of me sub-con- 
tinent ’V it has estabhshed the rule of law and a just and 
efficient administration; it has brought to India Western con- 
ceptions of parliamentary government and personal liberties; 
and " by transforming British India into a single unitary state 
it has engendered amongst Indians a sense of political unity “ 
and thus fostered the mst beginnings of nationalism.* That 
is the British case, and there is much truth in it, though the 
rule of law and personal liberties have not been evident for 
many years. 

The Indian survey of this period lays stress on many other 
factors, and points out the injury, mat eria l and spirimaJ, that 
foreign rule has brought us. The view-point is so different that 
sometimes the very thing that is commended by the British is 
condemned by Indians. As Doctor Ananda Coomaraswamy 
writes : “ One of the most remarkable features of British rule 
in India is that the greatest injuries inflicted upon the Indian 
people have the outward appearance of blessings.” 

As a matter of fact the changes that have taken place in 
India diflring the last century or more have been world changes 
common to most countries in the East and West. The growth 
of industrialism in Western Europe, and later on in the rest of 
the world, brought nationalism and the strong unitary state in 
its train everywhere. The British can take creiSt for having first 
opened India’ s windo w to the West and brought her one aspect 
of Western indu^rialism and science. But having done so uiey 
throttled the further industriaf growth of the country till , 
circumstances forced their hands. India was already the meet- ’ 
ing-place of two cultures, the western Asiatic culture of Islam 

* The quotadons are from the Report of the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (1934). 



434 JAWAHARLAL NEHRtT 

and the eastern, her own product, which spread to the Far East 
And now a third and more powerful impulse came from further 
west, and India became a meal point and a battle-ground for 
various old and new ideas. There can be no doubt that this 
third impulse would have triumphed and thus solved many of 
India's old problems, but the British, who had themsdves 
helped in brmging it, tried to stop its further progress. They 
preve nted our industria l growth, and thus delayed our political 
growtti, and preserved all the out-of-date feudal and other relics 
they could find in the country. They even froze up our 
changing and to some extent progressing laws and customs at 
the stage they foimd them, and made it difficult for us to 
get out of their shackles. It was not with their good,will or 
assistance that the bourgeoisie grew in India. But after intro- 
ducing the railway and other products of industrialism they 
cotdd not stop the wheel of change; they could only check it 
and slow it down, and this they did to their own manifest ad- 
vantage. 

"On this solid foundation the majestic structure of the 
Government of India rests, and it can be claimed with certainty 
that in the period which has elapsed since i8j8 when the Crown 
assumed supremacy over all the territories of the East India 
Company, the educational and material progress of India has 
been greater than it was ever within her power to achieve during 
any other period of her long and chequered history.” ^ This 
statement is not so self-evident as it appears to be, and it has 
often been stated that literacy actually went down with the 
coming of British rule. But even if the statement was wholly 
true, it amounts to a comparison of the modem industrial age 
with past ages. In almost every country in the world the educa- 
tional and material progress has been tremendous during the 
past century because of science and industrialism, and it may 
be said with assurance of any such country that progress of 
this kind "has been greater than was ever within her power 
to achieve during any other period of her long and chequered 
history” — ^though perhaps that country’s history may not be 
a long one in comparison with Indian history. Are we need- 
lessly ca ntank erous and perverae if we suggest that some such 
technical process would have come to us anyhow in this in- 
dustrial age, and even without British rule? And, indeed, if we 
compare oiir lot with many other countries, may we not hazard 
the guess that such progress might have been greater, for we have 
had to contend agamst a stifling of (hat progress by t|ie British 
^ Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee (1934). 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 


435 

themselves? Railways, telegraphs, telephones, wireless and the 
like are hardly tests of the goodness or beneficence of British 
rule. They were welcome and necessary, and because the British 
happened to be the a^nts who brought theta first, we should 
be grateful to them. But even, these heralds of industrialism 
came to us primarily for the str^gthening of British rule. 
They were the veins and arteries through which the nation’s 
blood should have coursed, increasing its trade, carrying its 
produce, and bringing new life and wealth to its millions. It is 
true that in the long-run some such result was likely, but they 
were designed and worked for another purpose — ^to strengthen 
the imperial hold and to capture markets for British goods — 
which they succeeded in achieving. I am all in favour of 
in dustrialisation and the latest methods of transpeirt, but 
sometimes, as I rushed across the Indian plains, the railway, 
that life-giver, has almost seemed to me liW iron bands con- 
fining and imprisoning India. 

The British conception of ruling India was the police con- 
ception of the State. Government’s job was to protect tEe"State 
and leave the rest to others. Their public finance de^t with 
milita^ expenditure, police, civil administration, interest on 
debt. The economic needs of the citizens were not looked after, 
and were sacrificed to British interests. The cultural and other 
needs of the /people, except for a tiny handful, were entirely 
neglected. The changing conceptions of, public finance which 
brought free and universal education, improvement of public 
health, care of poor and feeble-minded, insurance of workers 
against illness, old age and unemployment, etc., in other 
countries, were almost entirely beyond the ken of die Govern- 
ment. It could not indulge in these spending activities for its 
tax system was most regressive, taking a much larger pro- 
portion of small incomes than of the larger ones, and its ex- 
penditure on its protective and administrative functions was 
terribly heavy and swallowed up most of the revenue. 

The outstanding feature of British rule was their concen- 
tration on everythi ng that went to strengthen their poli tical and 
ec onomic hold on fhe country. Everything else was incidental. 
If they built up a powerful central government and an efficient 
police force, that was an achievement for which they can take 
credit, but die Indian people can hardly congratulate tiiemselves 
on it. Unity is a good thing, but unity in subjection is hardly 
a thing to be proud of. The very strength of a despotic govern- 
ment may become a greater buraen for a' people; and a police 
force, no doubt useful in many ways, can be, and has been often 



436 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


enou^, turned against the very people it is supposed to pro- 
tect. Bertrand Russell, comparing modern civilisation with the 
old Greek, has recently written : “ The only serious superiority 
of Greek civilisation as compared to ours was the inefficiency 
of the police, which enabled a larger proportion of decent 
people to escape.” 

Britain’s supremacy in India brought us peace, and India was 
certainly in need of peace after the troubles and misfortunes 
■^that followed the break-up of the Moghal empire. Peace is a 
precious commodity, necessary for any progress, and it was 
welcome to us when it came. But even peace can be purchased 
at too great a price, and we can have the perfect peace of the 
grave, and the absolute safety of a cage or of prison. Or peace 
may be the sodden despair of men unable to better themselves. 
The peace which is imposed by an alien conqueror has hardly 
the restful and soothing qualities of the real article. War is 
a terrible thing and to be avoided, but it does encourage some 
virtues, which, according to William James, the psychologist, 
are: fidelity, cohesiveness, tenacity, heroism, conscience, edu- 
cation, inventiveness, economy, and physical health and vigour. 
Because of this, James sought for a moral equivalent of war 
which, without the horrors of war, would encourage these 
virtues in a community. Perhaps if he had "learnt of non- 
co-operation and dvil disobedience he would have found some- 
thing after his own heart, a moral and peaceful equivalent of 
war. 

It is a futile task to consider the ‘ifs’ and possibilities of 
history. I feel sure that it was a good thing for India to come 
in contact with the sdentific and industrial West. Science was 


the great gift of the West, and India lacked this, and without 
it she was doomed to decay. The manner of our contacts was 
unfortunate, and yet, perhaps, only a succession of violent 
shocks could shake us out of our torpor. From this point of 
view the Protestant, individualistic, Anglo-Saxon English were 
suitable, for- they were more different from us than most other 
Westerners, and could give us greater shocks. 

They gave us. political unity and that was a desirable thing, 
^but wheflier lye had this unity or not, Indian nationalism would 
'have grown and demanded that unity. The Arab world is to- 
day sj^t up into a large number of separate states — ^indepen- 
dent, protected, mandatory and the like — ^but throughout all of 
them runs the desire for Arab unity. There can be no doubt 
that Arab nationalism would largely achieve this unity if Wes- 
tern imperialist powers did not stand in the way. But, as in 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 437 

India, it is the purpose of these powers to encourage disruptive 
tendencies and create minority problems which weaken and 
partly counteract the nationalist urge and give an excuse to the 
imperialist power to stay on and pose as the impartial arbi- 
trator. 

The political unity of India was achieved incidentally as 
a side-product of the Empire’s advance. In later years, when 
that unity allied itself to nationalism and challenged alien rule, 
we witnessed the deliberate promotion of disunity and sec- 
tarianism, formidable obstacles to our future progress. 

What a long time it is since the British came here, a century 
and three-quarters since they became dominant I They had a 
free hand, as despotic governments have, and a magnificent 
opportunity to mould India according to their desire. During 
these years the world has changed out of all recognition— 
England, Europe, America, Japan. The insignificant American 
colonies bordering the Atlantic in the eighteenth century con- 
stitute to-day the wealthiest, the most powerful and techni call y 
the most advanced nation; Japan, within a brief span, has 
undergone amazing changes; the vast territories of the U.S.S.R., 
where till only yesterday the dead hand of the Tsar's govern- 
ment suppressed and stifled all growth, now pulsate with a new 
life and build a new world berore our eyes. There have been 
big changes in India also, and the country is very different 
from what it was in the eighteenth century — ^railways, irrigation 
works, factories, schools and colleges, huge government offices, 
etc., etc. 

And yet, in spite of these changes, what is India like to-day? 
A servile state, with its splendid strength caged up, hardly 
daring to breaAe freely, governed by strangers firom afar; her 
people poor beyond compare, short-lived and incapable of 
resisting disease and epidemic; illiteracy rampant; vast areas 
devoid of all sanitary or medical provision; unemployment on 
a prodigious scale, both among the middle classes and the 
masses. Freedom, democracy, socialism, communism are, we 
are told, the slogans of unpractical idealists, doctrinaires or 
knaves; the test must be one of the well-bdng of the people as 
a whole. That is indeed a vital test, and by that test India 
makes a terribly poor show to-day. We read of great schemes 
of unemployment relief and the alleviation of distress in other 
countries; what of our scores of millions of unemployed ^d 
the distress that is widespread and permanent? We read , also 
of housing schemes elsewhere; where are the houses of hun- 
dreds of millions of our people, who live in mud huts or have 



438 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

no shelter at all? May we not envy the lot of other countries 
where education, sanitation, medical relief, cultural facilities, 
and production advance rapidly ahead, while we remain where 
we were, or plod wearily along at the pace of a snail? Russia 
in a brief dozen years of wonderful effort has almost ended 
illiteracy in her vast territories, and has evolved a fine and 
up-to-date system of education, in touch with the life of the 
masses. Backward Turkey, under the Ataturk, Mustapha 
Kemal’s leadership, has also made giant strides towards wide- 
spread literacy. Fascist Italy, on the very threshold of its career, 
attacked illiteracy with vigour. Gentile, the Education Minister, 
called for “a fiontal attack on illiteracy. That gangrenous 
plague, which is rotting our body politic, must be extirpated 
with a hot iron.” Hard words, unseemly for a drawing-room, 
but they show the conviction and energy behind the thought. 
We are politer here and use more rounded phrases. We move 
warily and exhaust our energies in commissions and commit- 
tees. 

Indians have been accused of talking too much and doing 
little. It is a just charge. But may we not express our wonder 
at the inexhaustible capacity of the British for committees and 
commissions, each of which, after long labour, produces a 
learned report— -"a great State document” — ^wbich is duly 
praised and pigeon-holed? And so we get the sensation of 
moving ahead, of progress, and yet have the advantage of 
remaimng where we were. Honour is satisfied, and vested 
interests remain untouched and secure. Other countries discuss 
how to get on; we discuss checks and brakes and safeguards 
lest -we go too fast. 

“ The Imperial splendour became the measure of the people's 
poverty,” so we are told (by the Joint Parliamentary Committee 
1934) of the Moghal times. It is a just observation, but may we 
not apply the same measure to-day? What of New Delhi 
to-day with its Viceregal pomp and pageantry, and the Pro- 
vincial GQvemors with all their ostentation? And all this with 
a background of abject and astonishing poverty. The contrast 
hurts, and it is a little difficult to imagine how sensitive men 
can put up with it. India to-day is a poor and dismal sight 
behind all the splendours of the imperial firontage. There is 
a mat deal of patchwork and superficiality, and behind it the 
umiappy petty bourgeoisie, crushed more and more by modem 
conditions. Further back come the workers, living miserably 
in grinding poverty, and then the peasant, that symbol of 
India, whose lot it is to be “ bom. to Endless Nisiht 



-iRE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 


439 


“ Bowed by the weight of centuries he leans 
^on his hoe and,gaze8 on the ground, 

The emptiness of ages on his face, 

And on his back the burden of the world. 

• • • * a • 

“ Through this dread shape the suffering ages look. 

Time’s tragedy is in -that aching stoop. 

Through this dread shape humanity betrayed. 

Plundered, profaned and disinherited. 

Cries protest to the powers that made the world, 

A protest that is also prophecy.” * 

It would be absurd to cast the blame for all India’s ills on the 
British. That responsibility must be shouldered by us, and we 
may not shirk it; it is unseemly to blame others for the inevit- 
able consequences of our own weaknesses. An authoritarian 
system of government, and especially one that is foreign, must 
encourage a psychology of subservience and try to limit the 
mental oudow and horizon of the people. It must crush much 
that is finest in youth — enterprise, spirit of adventure, origi- 
nality, ‘pep’ — and encourage sne^shness, rigid confbrmity, 
and a desire' to cringe and please the bosses. Su(± a system does 
not bring out the real service mentality, the devotion to public 
service or to ideals; it picks out the least public-spirited persons 
whose sole objective is to get on in life. We see what a class 
the British attract to themselves in India! Some of them are 
intellectually keen and -capable of good work. They drift to 
government service or semi-govemment service because of lack 
of opportunity elsewhere, and gradually they tone down and 
become just parts of the big machine, their minds imprisoned 
by the dull routine of work. They develop the qualities of a 
bureaucracy — “a competent knowledge of clerkship and the 
diplomatic art of keeping office At the highest they have a 

g assive devotion to the public service. There is, or can be, no 
aming enthusiasm. Tnat is not possible^ under a foreign 
government. 

But apa!rt from these, the majority of petty officials are not 
an admirable lot, for they have o:^ learnt to cringe to their 
superiors and bully their inferiors. The fault is not theirs. That 
is the training the system gives them. And if sycophancy and 
nepotism flourish, as they often do, is it to be wondered at? 
They have no ideals in service; the haunting fear of unem- 
ployment and consequent 'starvation pursues them, and thdr 

^ These extracts are from the American poet,- E. Markham’s 
Tpoeax: The Man with the Hoe, 



440 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

chief concern is to hold on to their johs and get other jobs for 
their relatives and friends. Where the spy and that most 
odious of creatures, the informer, always hover in the back- 
ground, it is not easy to develop the more desirable virtues in 
a people. 

Recent developments have made it even more difficult for 
sensitive, public-spirited men to join government service. The 
Government does not want them, and they do not wish to 
associate with it too closely, unless compelled by economic 
circumstance. 

But, as all the world knows, it is the White Man who bears 
the burden of Empire, not the Brown. We have various im- 
perial services to carry on the imperial tradition, and a suffi- 
ciency of safeguards to protect their special privileges, all, we 
are told, in the interests of India. It is remarkable how the 
good of India seems to be tied up with the obvious interests 
and advancement .of these services. If any privilege or prize 
post of the Indian Civil Service is taken away, we are told that 
inefficiency and corruption will result. If the reserved jobs for 
the Indian Medical Service are reduced, this becomes a “ menace 
to India’s health.” And of course if the British element in 
the army is touched, all manner of terrible perils confront us. 

I think there is some truth in this; that if the superior 
officials suddenly went away and left their departments in 
charge of their subordinates there would be a fall in efficiency. 
But that is because the whole system has been built this way, 
and the subordinates are not by any means the best men, nor 
have they ever been made to shoulder responsibility. I feel 
convinced that there is abundant good material in India, and 
it could be available within a feirly short period if proper 
steps were taken. But that means a complete change m our 
governmental and social outlook. It means a new State. 

As it is we are told that whatever changes in the constitu- 
tional apparatus may come our way, the ri^d framework of 
the great services which guard and shelter us will continue as 
before. Hierophants of the sacred mysteries of government, 
they will guard the temple and prevent the vulgar from enter- 
ir^ its holy precincts. Gradually, as we make ourselves worthy 
of the privilege, they will remove the veils one after another, 
tiU, in some future age, even the holy of holies stands un- 
covered to our wondering and reverent eyes. 

Of all these imperial services the Indian Civil Service holds 
first place, and to it must largely go the credit or discredit for 
the, functioning of government in India. We have been fre- 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 44I , 

quently told of the many virtues of this service, and its great- 
ness in the imperial scheme has almost become a maxim. Its 
unchallenged position of authority in India with the almost 
autocratic power that this gives, as well as the praise and 
boosting which it receives in ample measure, cannot be wholly 
good for the mental equilibrium of any individual or group. 
With all my admiration for the Service, I am afraid I must 
admit that it is peculiarly susceptible, both individually and 
as a whole, to that old and yet somewhat modem disease, 
paranoia. 

It would be idle to deny the good qualities of the I.C.S., for 
we are not allowed to forget them, but so much bunkum has 
been and is said about the Service that I sometimes feel that 
a little debunking would be desirable. The American economist, 
Veblen, has called the privileged classes the “kept classes”. I 
think it would be equally true to call the I.C.S., as well as the 
other imperial services, the “ kept services ”. They are a very 
expensive luxury. 

Major D. Graham Pole, formerly a Labour member of the 
British Parliament and one who is greatly interested in Indian 
affairs, writing in the Modem Review some time ago stated 
that “ no one has ever tried to dispute the fact that the I.C.S. 
is a most able and efficient service.” As similar statements are 
frequently made in England and believed, it is worth while 
examining this. It is always unsafe to make such positive and 
definite statements which can easily be disproved, and Major 
Graham Pole is entirely wrong in imagining that the fact has 
not been disputed. It has been frequently mallenged and dis- 
puted, and long ago even Mr. G. K. Gokhale said many hard 
thin» about the I.C.S, The average Indian— Congressman or 
non-Congressman— would certainly join issue with Major 
Graham Pole. And yet it is possible that both may be partly 
right and may be thinking of different qualifications. Ability 
and efficiency for what? If this ability and efficiency are to be 
measured from the point of view of strengthening the British 
Empire in India and helping it to exploit the country, the LC.S. 
may certainly claim to have done well. If however, the test is 
the well-being of the Indian masses, they have signally friled, 
and their faimre becomes even more noticeable wffien one sees 
the enormous distance that separates them in regard to income 
and standards of living from the masses they are meant to 
serve, and from whom ultimately their varied emoluments 
come. 

It is perfectly true that the service has, as a whole, kept up 



443 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

a certain standard, though that standard is necessarily one of 
mediocrity, and has occasionally thrbwn up exceptional men. 
More could hardly be expected of any such service. It em- 
bodied essentially the British Public School spirit, with all its 
good and bad points (though many of the members of the 
LC.S. now are not public school men). Though it kept up a 
good standard, it disapproved strongly of nonconformity with 
the type, and special abilities of individual members lost them- 
selves in the dull routine'of the day’s work, and to some extent 
in the fear of appearing different nrom the others. There were 
many earnest members, many with a conception of service, but 
it was service of the Empire, and India came only as a bad 
second. Trained and circumstanced as they were, they could 
only act in that way. Because they were few in numbers, sur- 
rounded by an alien and often unfriendly people, they held 
together and kept up a certain standard. The prestige both of 
race and office demanded this. And because they had largely 
autocratic powers, they resented all criticism, considered it one 
of the major sins, became more and more intolerant and 
pedagogic, and developed many of the ffillings of irresponsible 
rulers. They were self-satisfied and self-sufficient, narrow and 
fixed minds, static in a changing world, and wholly unsuited to 
a progressive environment. When abler and more adaptable 
minds than theirs tackled the Indian problem they resented 
this, called them offensive names, suppressed them and threw 
every possible obstacle in their way. And when post-war 
changes brought dynamic conditions, they were wholly at sea 
and unable to adapt themselves to them. Their limited hide- 
bound education had not fitted them for such emergencies and 
novel situations. They had been spoilt by a long spell of irres- 
ponsibility. As a group they had practically ^solute power, 
subject only in theory to a control by the British Parliament. 
“Power corrupts,” Lord Acton has told us, "and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely.” 

They were, on the whole, reliable officers in their limited 
way, doing their day-to-day work fairly competently, without • 
brilliance. But their very training was such that a wholly un- 
expected situation found them wanting, although their self- 
confidence, their methodical nature, and their esprit de corps 
helped them to tide over immediate difficulties. The famous 
Mesopotamia muddle exposed the British Indian Government 
for its inefficiency and ‘ woodenness but many a aiTnilar 
muddle does not see the light of day. Even their reaction to 
Civil Disobedience was crude. To shoot and club may dispose of 



TH*. Kji^CORD Ol!' BRITISH RULE 443 

the opponents for a while, bnt it does not solve any problem, 
and it undermines that very feeling of superiority which it is 
meant to protect. It was not surprising that they had recourse 
to violence to meet a growing and aggressive nationalist move- 
ment. That was inevitable, for empires rest on that and they 
had been taught no other way of meeting opposition. But the 
fact that excessive and unnecessary violence was used showed 
that they had lost all grip of the situation, and no longer 

E ossessed the self-control and restraint which they seemed to 
ave in normal times. Nerves frequently gave way and even 
in their public utterances there was a trace of hysteria. The 
calm confidence of other days was gone. A crisis has a pitiless 
way of showing us all up and exposing our innermost weak- 
nesses. Civil Disobedience was such a crisis and test, and very 
few on either side of the barricade — Congress or Government- 
survived fully that test. In a crisis the number of men and 
women of really first-class calibre is found to be small, says 
Mr. Lloyd George, and " the rest do not count in a crisis. The 
hummocks that look like eminences in fine weather are quickly 
submerged in a great flood when the highest peaks alone are 
visible Aove the surfiice of the waters.” 

The I.C.S. were intellectually and emotionally not prepared 
for what happened. The ori^al training of many of their 
members was classical, which gave them a certain culture and 
a certain charm. It was an old-world attitude, suitable fi)r the 
Victorian Age, but utterly out of place under modern condi- 
tions. They lived in a narrow, circumscribed world of their 
own — ^Anglo-Indian— which was neither England nor India. 
They had no appreciation of the forces at work in contem- 
porary society. In spite of their amusing assumption of being 
the trustees and guardians of the Indiw masses, they knew 
little. about them and even less about the new agressive bour- 
geoisie. They judged Indians from the sycophants and office- 
seekers who surrounded them and dismissed others as agitators 
and knaves. Their knowledge of post-war changes all over the 
world, and especially in the economic sphere, was of the 
slightest, and they were too much in the ruts to adjust them- 
selves to changing conditions. They did not realise that the 
order they represented was out of date under modem condi- 
tions, and that they were approaching as a group more and 
more the type which T. S. Emot describes in The Hotlow Men. 

And yet that order will continue so long as British im- 
perialism continues, and this is powerful enough still and has 
-hie and remiiTccfiil leaders. The British Government in India 



444 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

is like a tooth that is decaying, hut is still strongly imhedded. 
It is painful, but it cannot he easily pulled out. The pain is 
likely to continue, and even grow worse, till the tooth is taken 
out or falls out itself. 

The Public School type has had its day even in England, and 
does not occupy the same place as it did, although it is still 
prominent in public aifairs. In India it is still more out of 
place, and it can never fit in or co-operate with an aggressive 
nationalism, much less with those working for social change. 

There are of course many excellent men, both English and 
Indian, in the I.C.S. but, so long as the present system pre- 
vails their excellence will be devoted to objects which are not 
beneficial to the Indian people. Some Indian members of the 
Service are so overcome oy this Public School spirit that they 
become plus royaliste que le roi. I remember meeting a youth- 
ful Indian member of the I.C.S. who had a very high opinion 
of himself which unfortunately I could not share. He pointed 
out to me the many virtues of his Service, and ended up by 
the unanswerable argument in favour of the British Empire — 
was it not better than the Roman Empire and the Empires of 
Chengiz Khan and Timur? 

The underlying assumption of the I.C.S. is that they dis- 
charge their duties most efficiently, and therefore they can lay 
every stress on thdr claims, and the claims are many and 
varied. If India is poor, that is the fault of her social customs, 
her banias and money-lenders, and above all, her enormous 
population. The greatest bania of all, the British Government 
in India, is conveniently ignored. And what they propose to do 
about this population I do not know, for in spite of a great 
deal of help received from famines, epidemics, and a high 
death-rate generally, the population is still overwhelming. Birth-' 
control is proposed and I, for one, am entirely in favour of the 
spread of the knowledge and methods of birth-control. But 
the use of these methods itself requires a much higher standard 
of living for the masses, some measure of general education, 
and innumerable clinics, all over the country. Under present 
conditions birth-control methods are completely out of reach 
for the masses. The middle classes can profit by them as, I 
believe, they are doing to a growing extent. 

But this argument of over-population is deserving of fimher 
notice. The problem to-day all over the world is not one of 
lack of food or lack of other essentials, but actually lack of 
mouths to feed, or, to put it differently, lack of capacity to buy 
food, etc., for those who are in need. Even in India, considered 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 445 

apart, there is no lack of food, and though the population has 
gone up, the food supply has increased and can increase more 
proportionately than the population. Then again the much 
advertised increase of population in India has been (except in 
the last decade) at a much lower rate than in most Western 
countries. It is true that in future the difference will be greater, 
for various forces are tending to lessen or even stop population 
increase in Western countries. But limitin g factors are likely to 
check population increase in India also soon. 

Whenever India becomes free, and in a position to build her 
new life as she wants to, she will necessarily require the best 
of her sons and daughters for this purpose. Good human 
material is always rare, and in India it is rarer still because of 
our lack of opportunities under British rule. We shall want 
the help of many foreign experts in many departments of 
public activity, particularly in those which require special 
technical and scientific knowledge. Among those who have 
served in the I.C.S. or other imperial services there tvill be 
many, Indians or foreigners, who will be necessary and wel- 
come to the new order. But of one thing I am quite sure, that 
no new order can be built up in India so long as the spirit of 
the I.C.S. pervades our administration and our public services. 
That spirit of authoritarianism is the ally of imperialism, and 
it cannot co-exist with freedom. It will either succeed in 
crushing fireedom or will be swept away itself. Only with one 
type of state it is likely to fit in, and that is the fascist type. 
Therefore it seems to me quite essential that the I;C.S. and 
similar services must disappear, completely, as such, before we 
can start real work on a new order. Individual members of 
these services, if they are willing and competent for the new 
job, will be welcome, but only on new conditions. It is quite 
inconceivable that they will get the absurdly high salaries and 
allowances that are paid to them to-day. The new India must 
be served by earnest, efiicient workers who have an ardent faith 
in the cause they serve and are bent on achievement, and who 
work for the joy and glory of it, and not for the attraction of 
high salaries. The money motive must be reduced to a mini- 
mum. The need for foreign helpers will be considerable, but 
I imagine that the least wanted will be civil administrators who 
have no technical knowledge. There will be no lack of such 
people in India. 

I have previously stated how the Indian Liberals, and other 
groups like them, have accepted British ideology with reference 
to the government of India. This is especially noticeable in 



446 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

regard to the Services, for their cry is for ‘ indiaixisation ' and 
not for radical change of the spirit and nature of the Services 
and the State structure. This is a vital matter on which it is 
impossible to give in, for Indian freedom is bound up not only 
with the withdrawal of British Forces and Services, but also 
with the elimination of the authoritarian spirit that inspired 
them, and a levelling down of their salaries and privileges. 
There is a great deal of talk of safeguards in these days of 
constitution-making. If these safeguards are to be in the in- 
terests of India, they should lay down, among other things, that 
the I.C.S, and similar services should cease to exist, in their 
present form and with the powers and privileges they possess, 
and should have nothing to do with the new constitution. 

Even more mysterious and formidable are the so-called 
Defence Services. We may not criticise them, we may not say 
anything about them, for what do we know about such matters ? 
We must only pay and pay heavily without murmuring. A 
short while ago, in September 1934, Sir Philip Chetwode, the 
Commander-in-Chief in India, speaking in the Council of State 
at Simla, told Indian politicians, in pungent military language, 
to mind their own business and not interfere with his. Re- 
ferring to the mover of an amendment to some proposition, he 
said : “ Do he and his friends think that a war-worn and war- 
wise race like the British, who won their Empire at the point 
of the sword and have kept it by the sword ever since, are to 
be talked out of war wisdom which that experience brings to 
a nation by armchair critics. . . ” He made many other intei^ 
esting remarks, and we were informed, lest we might think that 
he had spoken in the heat of the moment, that he had care- 
fully written out his speech and spoke from a manuscript. 

It is, of course, an impertinence for a layman to argue about 
military matters with a Commander-in-Chief, and yet perhaps 
even an armchair critic might be permitted to make a few 
observations. It is conceivable that the interests of those who 
hold the Empire by the sword and those over whose heads 
this shining weapon ever hangs, might differ. It is possible that 
an Indian army might be made to serve Indian interests or to 
serve imperial interests, and the two might differ or even con- 
flict with each other. A politician and an armchair critic might 
also wonder if the claims of eminent generals for freedom from 
interference are valid after the experiences of the World War. 
They had a free field then to a large extent, and from all 
accounts they made a terrible mess of almost everything in 
every army— British, French, German, Austrian, Italian, 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 447 

Russian. Captain Liddell Hart, the distinguished British 
military historian and strategist, writes in his History of the 
World War that at one stage in the War while British soldiers 
fought the enemy, British generals fought one another. The 
national peril did not bring unity of thought or eflfbrt. The 
War, he continues, “ has shattered our faith in idols, our hero- 
worshipping belief that great men are different clay from 
common men. Leaders are still necessary, perhaps more neces- 
sary, but our awakened realisation of their common humanity 
is a safeguard agsunst either expecting from them, or trusting 
in them, too much.*’ 

That arch-politician, Mr. D. Lloyd George, has painted in his 
War Memoirs a terrible picture of the failmgs and blunders of 
the generals and ad m i r al s in the World War, blunders which 
cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of men. England and 
her allies won the War, but it was a “ blood-stained stagger to 
victory the reckless and .unintelligent handling of men and 
situations by the high officers brought England almost to the 
rim of catastrophe, and she and her allies were saved largely 
by the incredible folly of their foes. So writes the great War 
Premier of Btitain, and he explains how he had to undertake 
surgical operations in order to get ideas into Lord Jellicoe's 
head, especially in regard to the proposal for having a convoy 
system. Of the. French Marshal Jofi&e, he seems to think that 
his chief virtue was the possession of a resolute countenance 
which inspired a sense of strength. “That is what harassed 
people instinctively seek in trouble. They make the mistake of 
thinking that the seat of intelligence is in the chin.” 

But Mr. Lloyd George’s main indictment is against the 
British High Command itself, the Commander-in-Chief, Field- 
Marshal Haig, He demonstrates how Lord Haig’s inordinate 
vanity and refusal to listen to politicians and others, made him 
conceal important facts from the British Cabinet itself, and led 
the British Army in France to one of its greatest disasters. 
And even when failure stared him in the face, obstinate to the 
last, he continued his ill-advised offensive for several months 
in that awful mud of Passchendaele and Cambrai, till seventeen 
thousand officers alone lay dead and dying, and four hundred 
thousand gallant British soldiers were ‘casualties’. It is well 
that the ‘ Unknown Soldier ’ is honoured to-day after his death; 
his life was cheap, and he had little consideration when he was 
alive. 

Politicians, like all other people, err frequently, but demo- 
cratic politicians have to be sensitive and responsive to men 



448 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and events, and they usually realise their mistakes and try to 
repair them. The soldier is bred in a different atmosphere, 
where authority reigns and criticism is not tolerated. So he 
resents the advice of others and when he errs, he errs 
thoroughly and persists in error. For him the chin is more 
important than the mind or brain. In India we have the 
advantage of having produced a mixed type, for the civil 
administration itself has grown up and lives in a semi-military 
atmosphere of authority and self-sufficiency, and possesses 
therefore to a great extent the soldier’s chin and other virtues. 

We are told that the process of ‘ indianisation ’ of the army 
is being pushed on, and in another thirty years or more an 
Indian general might even appear on the Indian stage. It is 
possible that in not much more than a hundred years the 
process of indianisation might be considerably advanced. One 
is apt to wonder how, in a moment of crisis, England built up 
a mighty army of millions within a year or two. If it had 
possessed our mentors, perhaps it would have proceeded more 
cautiously and warily. It is possible of course that the War 
would have been over long before this soundly-trained army 
was ready for it. One thinks also of the Russian Soviet armies 
growing out of almost nothing and facing and triunyhing over 
a host of enemies, and to-day constituting one of the most 
efficient fighting machines in the world. They did not appa- 
rently possess “ war-worn and war-wise ” generals to advise them. 

We have now a military academy at Dehra Dun where 
gentlemen cadets are trained to become officers. They are very 
smart on parade, we are told, and they will no doubt make 
admirable officers. But I wonder sometimes what purpose this 
training serves, unless it is accompanied by technical training. 
Infantry and cavalry are about as much use to-day as the 
Roman phalanx, and the rifle is little better than a bow and 
arrow in an age of air warfare, gas bombs, tanks, and powerful 
artillery. No doubt their trainers and mentors realise this. 

What has been the record of British rule in India? Who are 
we to complain of its deficiencies when they were but the 
consequences of our own failings? If we lose touch with the 
river of change and enter a backwater, become self-centred and 
selfsatisfied, and, ostrich-like, ignore what happens elsewhere, 
we do so at our peril. The British came to us on the crrat of 
a wave of new impulse in the world, and represented mighty 
historic forces which they themselves hardly realised. Are we 
to complain of the cyclone that uproots us and hurls us about. 



THE RECORD OK BRITISH RULE 449 

or the cold wind that makes us shiver? T^et us have done with 
the past and its bickering and face the future. To the British 
we must be grateful for one splendid gift of which they were 
the bearers, the gift of science and its rich offspring. It is diffi- 
cult, however, to forget or view with equanimity the efforts of 
the British Government in India to encourage the disruptive, 
obscurantist, reactionary, sectarian, and opportunist elements in 
the country. Perhaps that too is a needed test and challenge 
for us, and before India is reborn it will have to go through 
again and again the fire that cleanses and tempers and bums 
up the weak, the impure and the corrupt. 
