ALIPORE GAOL 


Already how am I so far 
Out of that minute? Must I go 
Still like the thistle-ball, no bar, 

Onward wherever light winds blow. 

Fixed by no friendly star? 

Robert Browning 

That very night I was taken to Calcutta. From Howrah station 
a huge black Maria carried me to Lai Bazaar Police Station. 
I had read much of this famous headquarters of the Calcutta 
police and I looked round with interest. There were large 
numbers of European sergeants and inspectors to be seen, fer 
more than would have been in evidence in any police head- 
quarters in Northern India. The constables seemed to be almost 
all from Behar or the eastern districts of the U.P. During the 
many journeys I made in the big prison lorry, to court and back 
or from one prison to another, a number of these constables 
used to accompany me inside. They looked thoroughly un- 
happy, disliking their job, and obviously full of sympathy for 
me. Sometimes their eyes glistened with tears. 

I was kept in the Presidency Gaol to begin with, and from 
there I was taken for my trial to the Chief Presidency Magis- 
trate’s court. This was a novel experience. The court-room and 
building had more the appearance of a besieged fortress than 
of an open court. Except for a few newspaper men and the 
usual lawyers, no outsiders were allowed anywhere in the neigh- 
bourhood. The police was present in some force. These arrange- 
ments apparently had not been made especiaEy for me; that was 
the daily routine. When I was taken to the court-room I had to 
march through a long passage ^side the room) which was 
closely wired on top and at the side. It was like going through a 
cage. The dock was far from the magistrate’s seat. The court- 
room was crowded with policemen and black-coated and gowned 

used enough to court trials. Many of my previous trials 
had taken place in gaol precincts. But there had always been 
some friends, relatives, familiar faces about, and the whole 
atmosphere had been a little easier. The police had usually 


lawyers 
I was 



494 jawaharlal nishru 

kept in the background and there had never been any cage-like 
structures about. Here it was very different, and I gazed at 
strange, unfamiliar faces between whom and me there was 
nothing in common. It was not an attractive crowd. I am 
afraid gowned lawyers en masse are not beautiful to look at, 
and police-court lawyers seem to develop a peculiarly unlovely 
look. At last I managed to spot one familiar lawyer’s face in 
that black array, but he was lost in that crowd. 

I felt very lonely and isolated even when I sat on the balcony 
outside before the trial began. My pulse must have quickened 
a little, and inwardly I was not quite so composed as I usually 
had been during my previous trials. It struck me then that if 
even I, with so much experience of trials and convictions, could 
react abnormally to that situation, how much more must young 
and inexperienced people feel the tension? 

I felt much better in the dock itself. There was, as usual, no 
defence offered, and I read out a brief statement. The next 
day, February i6th, I was sentenced to two years. My seventh 
term of imprisonment had begun. 

I looked back with some satisfaction to my five and a half 
months’ stay outside. That time had been fairly well occupied, 
and I had managed to get through some useful jobs. My 
mother had turned the corner and was out of immediate 
danger. My younger sister, Krishna, had married.’ My daugh- 
ter's future education had been' fixed up. I had straighten, ed 
out some of my domestic and financial tangles. Many personal 
matters that I had been long neglecting had been attended to. 
In the field of public affairs I knew that no one could do much 
then. I had at least helped a little in stiffening up the Congress 
attitude and in directing it to some extent towards social and 
economic ways of thinking. My Poona correspondence with 
Gandhiji, and later my articles in the Press, had made a differ- 
ence. My articles on the communal question had also done 
some good. And then I had met Gandhiji again after more 
than two years, and many other firiends and comrades, and had 
charged myself with nervous and emotional energy for another 
period. 

One shadow remained to darken my mind—Kamala’s ill- 
health. I had no notion then how very ill she was, for she has a 
habit of carrying on till she collapses. But I was worried. And 
yet I hoped that now I was in prison she would be free to devote 
herself to her treatment. It was more difficult to do so whilst I 
was out and she was not willing to leave me for long. 

I had olie other regret. I was sorry that I had not visited 



ALIPORE GAOL 


495 

even once the rural areas of Allahabad district. Many of my 
young colleagues had recently been arrested there for carrying 
out our instructions, and it seemed almost like disloyalty to 
them not to follow them in the district. 

Again the black Maria carried me back to prison. On our 
way we passed plenty of troops on the march with machine- 
guns, armoured cars, etc. I peeped at them through the tiny 
openings of our prison van. How ugly an armoured car is, I 
thought, and a tank. They reminded me of prehistoric monsters 
— ^the dinosaurs and the like. 

I was transferred from the Presidency Gaol to the Alipore 
Central Gaol, and- there I was given a little cell, about ten feet 
W nine. In front of it was a veranda and a small open yard. 
Tne wall enclosing the yard was a low one, about seven feet, 
and looking over it a strange sight confronted me. All manner 
of odd buildings — single storey, double storey, round, rectangu- 
lar, curious roofings — ^rose all round, some over-topping the 
others. It seemed that the structures had grown one by one, 
being fitted in anyhow to take advantage of all the available 
space. Almost it looked like a jig-saw puzzle or a fiiturist 
attempt at the fantastic. And yet I was told that all the build- 
ings had been arranged very methodically with a tower in the 
centre (which was a church for the Christian prisoners) and 
radiating lines. Being a city gaol, the area was limited and 
every little bit of it had to be utilised. 

I had hardly recovered from my first view of the seemingly 
fantastic structures around me when a terrifying sight greeted 
me. Two chimneys, right in front of my cell and yard, were 
belching forth dense volumes of black smoke, and sometimes 
the wind blew this smoke in my direction, almost suffocating 
me. They were the chimneys of the gaol kitchens. I suggested 
to the Superintendent later that gas-masks might be provided 
to meet this ofiFensive. 

It was not an agreeable start, and the future was not inviting 
—to enjoy the unchanging prospect of the red-brick structures 
of Alipore Gaol and to swallow and inhale the smoke of its 
kitchen chimneys. There were no trees or greenery in my yard. 
It was all paved and puca and dean, except for the daily 
deposit of smoke, but it was also bare and dieerless. I could 
just see the tops of one or two trees in adjoining yards. They 
were barren of leaf or flower when I arrived. But gradually a 
mysterious change came over them and little bits of green 
were peeping out all over their, branches. The leaves were 
coming out of the buds; they grew rapidly and covered the 



496 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

nakedness of the branches with their pleasant green. It was a 
delightful change which made even Alipore Gaol look gay and 
cheerful. 

In one of these trees was a kite’s nest which interested me, 
and I watched it often. The little ones were growing and learn- 
ing the tricks of the trade, and sometimes they would swoop 
down with rapidity and amazing accuracy and snatch the bread 
out of a prisoner’s hand, almost out of his mouth. 

From sunset to sunrise (more or less) we were locked up in 
our cells, and the long winter evenings were not very easy to 
pass. I grew tired of reading or writing hour after hour, and 
would start walking up and down that little cell — ^four or five 
short steps forward and then back again. I remembered the 
bears at the zoo tramping up and down their cages. Some- 
times when I felt particularly bored I took to my favourite 
remedy, the shirshasana — standing on the head I 

The early part of the night was fairly quiet, and city sounds 
used to float in — the noise of the trams, a gramophone, or some 
one singing in the distance. It was pleasant to hear this faint 
and distant music. But there was not much peace at night, for 
the guards on duty tramped up and down, and every hour 
there was some kind of an inspection. Some officer came round 
with a lantern to make sure that none of us had escaped. At 
3 a.m. every day, or rather night, there was a tremendous din, 
and a mighty sound of scraping and scrubbing. The kitchens 
had begun functioning. 

There were vast numbers of warders and guards and officers 
and clerks in the Alipore Gaol, as also in the Presidency. Both 
these prisons housed a population about equal to that of Naini 
Prison— 2200 to 2300 — but the staff in each must have been 
more than double that of Naini. There were many European 
warders and retired Indian Army officers. It was evident that 
die British Empire functioned more intensively and more ex- 
pensively in Calcutta than in the U.P, A sign and a perpetual 
reminder of the might of the Empire was the cry that prisoners 
had to shout out when high officims approached them. “ Sarkar 
Salaam ” was the cry, lengthened out, and it was accompanied 
by certain physical movements of the body. The voices of the 
prisoners shouting out this cry came to me many times a day 
over my yard wall, and especially when the Superintendent 
passed by daily. I could just see over my seven-foot wall the top 
of the huge State umbrella under which the Superintendent 
marched. 

Was this extraordinary cry— salaam — and the move- 



ALIPORE GAOL 


497 

merits that went with it relics of old times, I wondered; or were 
they the invention of some inspired English official? I do not 
know, but I imagine that it was an Ei^lish invention. It has a 
typical Anglo-Indian sound about it. .Fortunately this cry does 
not prevail in the U.P. gaols or probably in any other province 
besides Bengal and Assam. The way this enforced salutation to 
the might of the sarkar is shouted out seemed to me very 
degrading. 

One change for the better I noticed with pleasure in Alipore. 
The food of the ordinary prisoners was far superior to the U.P. 
prison food. In regard to gaol diet the U.P. compares unfavour- 
ably with many provinces. . 

'fne brief winter was soon over, and spring raced by and 
summer began. It grew hotter day by day. I had never been 
fond of the Calcutta climate, and even a few days of it had 
made me stale and flat. In prison conditions were naturally far 
worse, and I did not prosper as the days went by. Lack of space 
for exercise and long lock-up hours in that climate probably 
affected my health a little and I lost weight rapidly. How I 
began to hate all locks and bolts and bars and walls I 

After a tnonth in Alipore I was allowed to take some exercise, 
outside my yard. This was an agreeable change and I could 
walk up and down under the main wall, morning and evening. 
Gradually I got accustomed to Alipore Gaol and the Calcutta 
climate; and even the kitchen, with its smoke and mighty din, 
became a tolerable nuisance. Other matters occupied my mind, 
other worries filled me. News firora outside was not good. 