CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 

Soon after our arrival in Switzerland, the General Strike broke 
out in England. I was vastly excited, and my sympathies were 
naturally all on the strikers’ side. The collapse of the strike, 
after a few days, came almost as a personal blow. Some months 
later I happened to visit England for a few days. The miners’ 
struggle was still on, and London lay in semi-darkness at night. 
I paid a brief visit to a mining area — I think it was somewhere 
in Derbyshire. I saw the haggard and pinched faces of the men 
and women and children and, more revealing still, I saw many 
of the strikers and their wives being tried in the local or coimty 
court. The magistrates were themselves directors or managers 
of the coal mines, and they tried the miners and sentenced them 
for trivial offences under certain emergency regulations. One 
case especially angered me : three or four women, with babies in 
their arms, were brought ^ in the dock for the offence of having 
jeered at the blacklegs. Tne young mothers (and their babie^ 
were obviously miserable and undernourished; the long struggle 
had told upon them and enfeebled them, and embittered them 
against the scabs who seemed to take the bread from their 
mouths. 

One reads often about class justice, and in India nothing is 
commoner than this, but somehow I had not expected to come 
across such a flagrant example of it in England. It came as 
a shock. Another fact that I noticed with some surprise was the 
general atmosphere of fear among the strikers. They had 
definitely been terrorised by the police and the authorities, and 
they put up very meekly, I thought, with rather offensive treat- 
ment. It is true that they were thorougjhly exhausted after a long 
struggle, their spirit was near breaking-point, their comrades of 
other trade unions had long deserted them. But still, compared 
to the poor Indian worker, there was a world of difference. The 
British miners had still a powerful organisation, the sympathy 
of a nation-wide, and indeed world-wide, trade union move- 
ment, publicity, and resources of many kinds. All these were 
•lacking to the Indian worker. And yet that frightened and 
terrorised look in the two had a strange resemblance. 

In In^a that year there were the triennial elections to the 
Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils. I was not 

Iii6 



CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 


> 57 - 

interested in them, but some echoes of fierce controversies 
managed to reach me in Switzerland. I learnt of a new party 
having been formed by Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and 
Lala Lajpat Rai to oppose the Swaraj Party or the regular Con- 
gress Party in the legislature, as it now vras. The Nationalist 
Party, this was called. I could not make out, and I stiU do not 
know, what grounds of principle separated the new party from 
the old. Indeed, most present-day Indian parties in the legis- 
lature are like Tweedledum and Tweedledee; no real principles 
separate them. The Swaraj Party, for the first time, brought a 
new and aggressive element in the Councils, and it stood for a 
more extreme political policy than the others. But the difference 
was one of degree, not of kind. 

The new Nationalist. Party represented a more moderate out- 
look, and was definitely more to the right than was the Swaraj 
Party. It was also wholly a Hindu party working in close co- 
operation with the Hindu Mahasabha. Pandit Malaviya’s leader- 
ship of it was easy to understand, for it represented as nearly as 
possible his own public attitude. He had, because of old associa- 
tions, continued to remain in the Congress, but his intellectual 
outlook was not dissimilar to that of the Liberals or Moderates. 
He had not taken kindly to non-co-operation and the new direct 
action methods of the Congress, and had had no share in shaping 
Congress policy. Although greatly respected and always welcome 
to it, he was not really of the new Congress. He was not a mem- 
ber of its small executive, the Working Committee. He did not 
carry out the Congress mandates, especially in regard to the legis- 
latures. He was also the most popular leader of the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, and, in regard to commimal matters, his policy differed 
from that of the Congress. To Congress he had that sentimental 
attachment to an organisation with which he had been con- 
nected almost from the very begnning, partly to an emotional . 
pull in the direction of the freedom struggle, for he saw that the 
Congress was the only organisation doing anything effective 
about it. His heart was thus often in the Congress camp, especi- 
allj in times of struggle; his head was in other camps. Inevitably 
this led to a continual conflict within him, and occasionally to a 
simultaneous attempt to march in opposite directions. The result 
was public confusion; but nationalism is a confusing medley, and 
Malaviyaji was a nationalist alone and not concerned with 
social or economic change. He was, and is, a supporter of the 
old orthodox order culturally, socially, economically; the Indian 
princes and the taluqadars and big zamindars consider him 
rightly as a benevolent friend. The sole change he desires, and 



IjS . JAWAHARtAL NEHRU 

desires passionately, is the complete elimination of foreign 
control in India. The political training and reading of his youth 
still influence his mind greatly, and he looks upon this dynamic, 
revolutionary, post-war world of the twentieth century with the 
spectacles of a semi-static nineteenth century, of T, H. Green 
and John Stuart Mill and Gladstone and Morley, and a three- or 
four-thousand-year background of old Hindu culture and socio- 
logy, It is a curious combination, brisding with contradictions, 
but he has an amazing confidence in his own capacity to resolve 
contradictions. His long record of public service in various fields 
firom early youth upwards, his success in establishing a grfeat 
institution like the Benares Hindu University, his manifest sin- 
cerity and earnestness, his impressive oratory, and his gentle 
nature and winning personality, have endeared him to the Indian 
public, particularly Ae Hindu public, and though many may not 
agree with him or follow him in politics, they yield him respert 
and affection. Both by his age and his long public record he is 
the Nestor of Indian politics, but a Nestor who seems a little out 
of date, and very much out of touch, with the modern world. 
His voice commands attention, but the language he speaks is no 
longer understood or heeded by many. 

It was natural, therefore, for Malaviyaji not to'join the Swaraj 
Party, which was too advanced politically for him and required 
a disciplined adherence to the Congress policy. He wanted some- 
thing more to the right and grmer latitude, both politically and 
communally, and he got this in a new party, of which he was 
the founder and leader. 

It is not so easy to understand Lala Lajpat Rai’s adherence to 
this new party, though his inclination was also somewhat to the 
right as wdl as towards a more communal orientation. I bad 
met Lalaji in Geneva that summer, and from our talks I had not 
gathered that he contemplated trddng up an aggressive attitude 
against the Congress Party. How this happened I have still no 
idea. But in the course of tibe election campaign, he made certain 
^gue charges, which showed how his mind had been working. 
He accused the Congress leaders of intriguing with people out- 
side India. He further accused them of some such mtrigue in , 
establishing a Congress branch in Kiahul. I do not tbink he ever 
specified his charges or went into any details, in spite of repeated 
requests. ^ 

I remember that when I read in the Indian papers that readbed 
iM m Switzerland about Ijalaji’s charges I was astounded. As 
Confess Secretary, I knew all about our organisation; I had 
myself been instrumental in getting the Kabul Committee affili- 



CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 


159 

atcd (Deshbandhu Das had taken the initiative in the matter); 
and though I did not then know (as I do not now know) the 
details of the charges, I could say from their general nature that 
they could have no foundation so far as the Congress was con- 
cerned. I do not know how Lalaji was misled in the matter. He 
may have relied on various rumours, and I think he must have 
been influenced by the talk he had recently had with Moulvi 
ObeiduUa, although there was nothing in that talk which seemed 
extraordinary to me. But elections are extraordinary phenomena. 
They have a curious way of upsetting tempers and ordinary 
standards. The more I see of them the more I wonder, and a 
wholly undemocratic distaste of them grows vtithin me. 

But, personalities apart, the rise of the Nationalist Party, or 
some such party, was inevitable owing to the growing communal 
temper of the country. On the one side, there were the Muslim 
fears of a Hindu majority; on the other side, Hindu resentment 
at being bullied, as they conceived it, by the Muslims. Many a 
Hindu felt that there was too much of the stand-up-and-deliver 
about the Muslim attitude, too much of an attempt to extort 
special privileges vidth the threat of going over to the other side. 
Because of this, the Hindu Mahasabna rose to some importance, 
representing as it did Hindu nationalism, Hindu communalism 
opposing h&slim communalism. The aggressive activities of the 
Mahasabha acted on and stimulated stul flirther this Muslim 
communalism, and so action and reaction went on, and in the 

g rocess the communal temperature of the country went up. 

IssentiaUy this was a question between the majority group in the 
country and a big minority. But, curiously enough, in some 
parts of the country the position was reversed. In the Punjab 
and Sind the Hindus as well as the Sikhs were in a minority, the 
Muslims in a majority; and these provincial minorities had as 
much fear of being crushed by a hostile majority in those 
provinces as the Muslims had in the whole of India. Or, to be 
more accurate, the middle-class jobseekers in each group were 
afraid of being ousted by the otaier group, and to some extent 
the holders of vested interests were afraid of radical changes 
afEecting those interests. 

The Swaraj, Party suffered because of this growth of com- 
nu^hsm. Some of its Muslim'members dropped off wd joined 
the "communal orgahlsations, and some of its Hindu .inembers 
drifted off to the Nationalist P^ty. Malavi^ji and Lala Lajpat 
Raimade a powerful combinarion so fer as the Hindu electorate 
was concerned, and Lalaji had great influence in thfi„Punjab> the 
storm centre of communalism. On the side of the Swaraj Pany" 



l6o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

or Congress, the chief burden of fighting the elections fell on 
my father. C. R. Das was no longer there to share it with him. 
He enjoyed a fight, or at any rate never shirked it, and the grow- 
ing strength of the opposition made him throw all his great 
energy into the election campaign. He received and gave hard 
blowsj little grace was shown or quarter given by either party. 
That election left a trail of bitter memories. 

The Nationalist Party met with a great measure of success, 
but this success definitely lowered the political tone of the Legis- 
lative Assembly. The centre of gravity moved more to the right. 
The Swaraj Party had itself been the right wing of the Congress. 
In its attempts to add to its strength, it had allowed many a 
doubtful person to creep in, and had suffered in quality because 
of this. The Nationalist Party followed the same policy, only 
on a lowCT plane, and a motley crew of title-];iolders, big land- 
holders, industrialists and others, who had little to do with 
politics, came into its ranks. 

The end of tha.t year 1926 was darkened by a great tragedy, 
which sent a thrill of horror all over India. It showed to what 
depths communal passion could reduce our people. Swami 
Shraddhanand was assassinated by a fanatic as he lay in bed. 
What a death for a man who had bared his chest to the bayonets 
of the Gurkhas and marched to meet their fire I Nearly eight 
years earlier he, an Arya Samajist leader, had stood in the pulpit 
of the great Jame Musjid of Delhi and preached to a mighty 
gathering of Muslims and Hindus of unity and India’s fieedom. 
And that great multitude had greeted him with loud cries of 
Hindu-Musalman-ki-jai, and outside in the streets they had 
jointly sealed that cry with their blood. And now he lay dead, 
killed by a fellow-countryman, who thought, no doubt, that he 
was doing a meritorious deed, which would lead him to paradise. 

Always I have admired sheer physical courage, the coWge to 
face physical suffering in a good cause, even unto death. Most of 
us, I suppose, admire it, Swami Shraddhanand had an 
amount of that fearlessness. His tall and stately figure, wrapped 
m a sanyKin's robe, perfectly erect in spite of advanced yms, 
eyes flasbii^, sometimes a shadow of irritation ot anger at the 
we^ess of others passing over his face— how I remember that 
vivid picture, and how often it has come back to met