ARRESTS. ORDINANCES. PROSCRIPTIONS 


Two days after our arrest Gandhiji landed in Bombay, and it 
was only then that he learnt of the latest developments. He 
had heard in London of the Bengal Ordinance, and had been 
much upset by it. He now found that fresh Christmas gifts 
awaited him in the shape of the U,P. and Frontier Ordinances, 
and some of his closest colleagues in the Frontier Province 
and the U-P. had been arrested. The die seemed to be cast 
and all hope of peace gone, but still he made an effort to find 
a way out, and sought an interview with the Viceroy, Lord Wil- 
lingdon, for the purpose. The interview, he was informed from 
New Delhi, could only take place on certain conditions— these 
conditions being that he must not discuss recent events in 
Bengal, U.P. and the Frontier, the new Ordinances, and the 
arrests under them. (I write from memory, and have not got 
the text of the Viceregal reply before me.) What exactly 
Gandhiji or any Congress leader was officially supposed to dis- 
cuss with tlie Viceroy, apart from these forbidden subjects 
which were agitating the country, passes one’s comprehension. 
It was absolutely dear now that the Government of India had 
determined to crush the Congress, and would have no dealings 
with it. The Working Committee had no choice left but to 
resort to dvil disobedience. They expected arrest at any 
moment, and they wanted to give a lead to the country before 
their enforced departure. Even so, the civil disobedience resolu- 
tion was passed tentatively, and another attempt was made by 
Gandhiji to see the Viceroy, and he sent him a second telegram 
asking for an unconditional interview. The rg)ly of the Govern- 
ment was to arrest Gandhiji as well as the Congress President, 
and to press the button which was to let loose fierce repression 
all over the country. It was dear that whoever else wanted or 
did not want the struggle, the Government was eager and over- 
ready for it. 

We were in gaol, of course, and all this news came to us 
vaguely and disjointedly. Our trial was postponed to the New 
Year, and so we had, as under-trials, more interviews than a 
convict could have. We heard of the great discussion that was 
going on as to whether the Viceroy should or should not have 
agreed to the interview, as if it really mattered either way. 



342 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU ' 

This question of the interview shadowed all other matters. It 
was stated that Lord Irwin would have agreed to the interview, 
and if he and Gandhiji had met all would have been well. I 
was surmised at the extraordinarily superficial view that the 
Indian Press took of the situation and how they ignored 
realities. Was the inevitable struggle between Indian National* 
ism and British Imperialism — in the final analysis, two irrecon- 
ciliables — ^to be reduced to the personal whims of individuals? 
Could the conflict of two historical forces be removed by 
smiles and mutual courtesy? Gandhiji was driven to act in one 
way, because Indian Nationalism could not commit hara-kiri 
or submit willingly to foreign dictation in vital matters; the 
British Viceroy or India had to act in a particular way to meet 
the challenge of this Nationalism and to endeavour to protect 
British interest, and it made not the slightest dif&rence who 
the Viceroy was at the time. Lord Irwm would have acted 
exactly as Lord Willingdon did, for either of them was but the 
instrument of British imperialist policy' and could only make 
some minor deviations fi:om the line laid down. Lord Irwin, 
indeed, was subsequently a member of the British Govenunent, 
and he associated himself folly with the official steps taken in 
India. To praise or condemn individual Viceroys for British 
policy in India seems to me a singularly inept thing to do, and 
our habit of indulging in this pastime can only be due to an 
ignorance of the real issues or to a ddiberate evasion of them. 

January 4th, 193a, was a notable day. It put a stop to argu- 
ment and discussion. Early that morning Gandhiji and me 
Congress President, Vallabhbhai Patel, were arrested and con- 
fined without trial as State prisoners. Four new ordinances were 
promulgated giving the most far-reaching powers to magistrates 
and poUce of&ers. Civil liberty ceased to exist, and both person 
and property could be seizea by the authorities. It was a 
declaration of a kind of state of siege for the whole of India, 
the extent and intensity of application being left to the dis- 
cretion of the local authorities.^ 

On that 4th of January also our trial took place in Naini 
Prison under the UJP, Emergency Powers Ordinance, as it was 
called. Sherwani was sentenced to six months’ rigorous im- 
prisonment and a fine of RB.150; I was sentenced to two years’ 
rigorous imprisonihent and a fine of Rs.500 (in default six 

^ Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State for India, stated in the 
House of Commons on March 24, 1932: "I admit that the Ordi- 
nances that we have approved are drasdc and severe. They 
cover almost every activity of Indian lire.” 



ARRJtSJl'S, ORDINANCES, PROSCRIPTIONS 323 

months more). Our offences were identical; we had been served 
with identical orders of internment in Allahabad city; we had 
committed the same breach of them by attempting to go to- 
gether to Bombay; we had been arrested and tried together 
under the same section, and yet our sentences were very dis- 
similar. There was, however, one difference: I had written to 
the District Magistrate and informed him of my intendon to 
go to Bombay in defiance of the order; Sherwani had given no 
such formal notice, but his proposed departure was equally well 
known, and had been mentioned in the Press. Immecuately 
after the sentence Sherwani asked the trying magistrate, to the 
amusement of those present and the emb^arrassment of the 
magistrate, if his smaller sentence was due to commimal con- 
slderadons. 

Quite a lot happened on that fateful day, January 4th, all 
over the country. Not far from where we were, in Allahabad 
city, huge crowds came in conflict with the police and military, 
and there were the usual lathi charges involving deaths and 
other casualties. The gaols began to fill with civil disobedience 
prisoners. To begin virith, these prisoners went to the district 
gaols, and Naini and the other great central prisons received 
only the overflows. Later, all the gaols filled up, and huge 
tempora^ camp gaols were established. 

Very few came to our little enclosure in Naini. My old 
companion, Narmada Prasad, joined us, and Banjit Pandit and 
my cousin, Mohanlal Nehru. A surorising addition to our little 
brotherhood of Barrack No. 6 was Bernard Aluvihare, a young 
friend from Ceylon, who had just returned from England after 
being called to the Bar. He had been told by my sister not to 
get mixed up with our demonstrations; but, in a moment of 
enthusiasm, he joined a Congress procession — and a Black 
Maria carried him to prison. 

The Congress had been declared illegal— the Working Com- 
mittee at the top, the Provindal Committees, and innumerable 
local committees. Together with the Congress all manner of 
allied or sympathetic or advanced organisations had been 
declared uJ^ti^l — ^kisan sabhas and peasant unions, youth 
leagues, students' associations, advanced political organisations, 
national universities and schools, hospitals, swadeshi concerns, 
libraries. The lists were indeed formidable, and contained 
many hundreds of names for each major province. The all- 
India total must have run into several thousands, and this very 
number of outlawed organisations was in itself a tribute to the 
Congress and the National Movement. 



324 JAWAHARLAL NfcHRU 

My wife lay in Bombay, ill in bed, fretting at her inability to 
take part in civil disobedience. My mother and both my sisters 
threw them.selves into the movement with vigour, and soon 
both the sisters were in gaol with a sentence of a year each. Odd 
bits of news used to reach us through newcomers to prison or 
through the local weekly paper that we were permitted to read. 
We could only guess much that was happening, for the press 
censorship was strict, and the prospect of heavy penalties always 
faced newspapers and news agencies. In some provinces it was 
an oflFence even to mention the name of a person arrested or 
sentenced. 

So we sat in Naini Prison cut off from the strife outside, and 
yet wrapped up in it in a hundred ways; busying ourselves with 
spinning or reading or other activities, talking sometimes of 
other matters, but thinking always of what was happening 
beyond the prison walls. We were out of it, and yet in it. 
Sometimes the strain of expectation was veiy great; or there 
was anger at something wrongly done; disgust at weakness or 
vulgarity. At other times we were strangely detached, and 
could view the scene calmly and dispassionately, and feel that 
petty individual errors or weaknesses mattered little when vast 
forces were at play and the mills of the gods were grinding. 
We would wonder what the morrow would bring of strife and 
tumult, and gallant enthusiasm and cruel repression and hate- 
ful cowardice — and what was all this leading to? Whither were 
we going? The future was hid firom us, and it was as well that 
it was hidden; even the present was partly covered by a veil, 
so far as we were concerned. But this we knew: that there 
was strife and suflFering and sacrifice in the present and on the 
morrow, 

“ Men will renew the battle in the plain 
To-morrow; reel with blood will Xanthua be; 

Hector and Ajax will be there again; 

Helen will come upon the wall to see. 

“ Then we shall rust in shade, or shine in strife, 

And fluctuate ’tween blind hopes and blind despairs. 

And fancy that we put forth all our life. 

And never know how with the soul it fares." ‘ 


* Matthew Arnold. 