DEHRA GAOL AGAIN 

I WAS not flourishing in Alipore Gaol. My weight had gone 
down considerably, and the Calcutta air and increasing heat 
were distressing me. There were rumours of my transfer to a 
better climate. On May 7 th I was told to gather my belongings 
and to march out of the gaol. I was being sent to Dchra Dun 
Gaol. The drive through Calcutta in the cool evening air was 
very pleasant after some months of seclusion, and the crowds at 
the big Howrah station were fascinating. 

1 was glad of my transfer, and looked forward to Dehra Dun 
with its near-by mountains. On arrival I found that all was not 
as it used to be nine months earlier, when I Wd left it &r Naini. 
I was put in a new place, an old cattle-shed cleaned up and 
fitted out. 

As a cell it was not bad, and there was a little veranda 
attached to it. There was also a small yard adjoining, about 
fifty feet in length. The cell was better than the ancient 
one I had had previously in Dehra, but soon I discovered that 
other changes were not for the better. The surroimding wall, 
which had been ten feet high, had just been raised, especially 
for my benefit, by another four or five feet. The view of the 
hills I had so looked forward to was completely cut off and I 
could just see a few tree-tops. I was in this gaol for over three 
months, and I never had even a glimpse of the mountains. I 
was not allowed to walk outside in front of the gaol gate, as I 
used to, and my little yard was considered quite big enough for 
exercise. 

These and other new restrictions were disappointing, and I felt 
irritated. I grew listless and disinclined to take even the little 
exercise that my yard allowed. I had hardly ever felt quite so 
lonely and cut off from the world. The solitary confinement 
began to tell on iny nerves, and physically and mentally I 
declined. On the other side of the wall, only a few feet away, I 
knew there was freshness and firagrance, the cool smell of grass 
and soft earth, and distant vistas. But they were all out of 
reach and my eyes grew weary and heavy, faced always by those 
walls. There was not even the usual movement of prison life, 
for I was kept apart and by myself. 

After six wee^ the monsoon broke and it rained in torrents; 



554 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

we had twelve inches of rain during the first week. There was a 
change in the air and whisperings of new life; the temperature 
came down and the body felt relaxed and relieved. But there 
was no relief for the eyes or the mind. Sometimes the iron door 
of my yard would open to allow a warder to come in or go out, 
and for a few seconds I had a sudden glimpse of the outside 
world — ^green fields and trees, bright with colour and glistening 
with pearly drops of rain— for a moment only, and then it all 
vanished like a flash of lightning. The door was hardly ever 
fully opened. Apparently the warders had instructions not to 
open it if I was anywhere near, and even when they opened it, 
to do so just a little. These brief glimpses of greenery and 
freshness were hardly welcome to me. That sight produced in 
me a kind of nostalgia, a heartache, and I would even avoid 
looking out when the door opened. 

But all this unhappiness was not really the fault of the gaol, 
though it contributed to it. It vras the reaction of outside events 
— Kamala’s illness and my political worries. I was beginning to 
realise that Kamala was again in the grip of her old disease, 
and I felt helpless and unable to be of any service to her. 
I knew that my presence by her side would have made a 
difference. 

Unlike Alipore, Dehra Dun Gaol allowed me a daily news- 
paper, and I could keep in touch with political and other 
developments outside. In Patna the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee met after nearly three years (for most of this time it was 
unlawful), and its proceedings were depressing. It surprised me 
that no attempt was made at this first meeting, after so much 
that had happened in India and the world, to analyse the situa- 
tion, to have full discussions, to try to get out of old ruts. 
Gandhiji seemed to be, from a distance, his old dictatorial self— 
“ If you choose to follow my lead you have to accept my con- 
ditions,” he said. His demand was perfectly natural, for one 
could not both have him and ask him to act against his own 
deeply-felt convictions. But there seemed too much of imposi- 
tion from above and too little of mutual discussion and 
hammering out a policy. It is curious how Gandhiji dominates 
the mind and then complains of the helplessness of people. 
Few people, I suppose, have had more loyal devotion and obedi- 
ence on the mass-scale than he has had, and it seems hardly fair 
to blame the masses for not coming up to the high standard he 
had set for them. At the Patna meeting he did not even stay 
till the end, as he had to continue his Harijan tour. He told the 
A.I.C.C. to be business-like and to adopt the resolutions placed 



DEHRA GAOL AGAIN 


555 

before them by the Working Committee with speed, and then 
he went away. 

It is probably true that prolonged discussions would not have 
improved matters. There was a confusion and want of clarity 
among the members, and though many were prepared to criti- 
cise, there were hardly any, constructive suggestions. Under the 
circumstances this was natural, for the burden of the struggle 
had largely fallen on these leaders from various provinces and 
they were a little tired and mentally not fresh. Dimly it was felt 
that they had to cry halt, civil disobedience had to be stopped; 
but what then? Two groups took shape: one desiring purely 
constitutional activities through the legislatures, the other think- 
ing rather vaguely along socialistic lines. The majority of the 
members belonged to neither of these groups. They disliked a 
reversion to constitutionalism, and at the same time socialism 
frightened them a little and seemed to them to introduce an 
element which might split their ranks. They had no construc- 
tive ideas, and the one hope and sheet-anchor they possessed 
was Gandhiji. As of old, they turned to him and followed his 
lead, even though many of them did not whoUy approve of 
what he said. Gandhi ji’s support of the moderate constitutional 
elements gave them dommance in the Committee and the 
Congress. 

AU this' was to be expected. But the reaction took the Con- 
gress further back than I had thought. At no time during the 
last fifteen years, ever since the advent of non-co-operation, had 
Congress leaders talked in this ultra-constitutional fashion. 
Even the Swaraj Party of the middle 'twenties, which itself was 
the result of a reaction, was far in advance of the new leader- 
ship, and there were no such commanding personalities now as 
the Swaraj Party had. Many persons who had studiously kept 
aloof from the movement so long as it was risky to join it, now 
streamed in and assumed importance. 

The proscription of the Congress was ended by the Govern- 
ment and it became a legal organisation. But many of its asso- 
ciated and subsidiary bodies continued to be illegal, such as its 
volunteer department, the Seva Dal, as also a number of Ejsan 
Sabhas, which were semi-independoxt peasant unions, and 
several educational institutions and youth leagues, including a 
children’s organisation. In ■ particular the ‘IQiiudai Khidmat- 
gars or the Frontier Redshirts, as they are called, were still 
outlawed. This organisation had become a regular part of the 
Congress in 1931, and represrated it in the Frontier Provinai/ 
Thus, although the Congress had completely drawn off the 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


556 

direct action part of the vStruggle and had reverted to constitu- 
tional ways, the Government kept on all the special laws meant 
for civil disobedience, and even continued the proscription of 
important parts of the Congress organisation. Special attention 
was also paid to the suppression of peasant organisations and 
labour unions, while, it was interesting to note, high Govern- 
ment officials went about urging the zamindars and landlords 
to organise themselves. Every fecility was offered to these land- 
lords’ organisations. The two major ones in the United Pro- 
vinces have their subscriptions collected by official agency, 
together with the revenue or taxes. 

I am afraid I have never been partial to the Hindu or 
Moslem communal organisations, but an incident made me feel 
particularly bitter towards the Hindu Mahasabha. One of its 
secretaries actually went out of the way to approve of the 
continuation of the ban on the “ Redshirts ”, and to pat Govern- 
ment on the back for it. This approval of the deprivation 
of the most elementary of civil rights, at a time when there was 
no aggressive movement on, amazed me. Apart from this ques- 
tion of principle, it was well known that these Frontier people 
had behaved wonderfully during these years of struggle; and 
their leader, Rhan Abdul Ghaiffir Khan, one of the bravest and 
straightest men in India, was still in prison— a State prisoner 
kept confined without any trial. It seemed to me that communal 
bias cotild hardly go further, and I expected that more promi- 
nent leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha would hasten to disown 
their colleague on this matter. But, so fax as I could discover, 
not a single one of them said a word about it. 

I was much upset by this Hindu Sabha secretary’s statement. 
It was bad enough in itself, but to my mind it appeared as a 
symbol of the new state of affairs in the country. In the heat of 
that summer afternoon I dozed off and I remember having a 
curious dream. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was being attacked on all 
sides and I was fighting to defend ’.im. I woke up in an ex- 
hausted state, feeling very miserable, and my pillow was wet 
with tears. This surprised me, for in my waking state I was not 
liable to such emotional outbursts. 

My nerves were obviously in a bad way in those days. My 
sleep became troubled and disturbed, which was vexj unusual 
for me, and all manner of nightmares came to me. Sometimes 
I would shout out in my sleep. Once evidently the shouting had 
been more vigorous than usual, and I woke up with a start to 
find two gaol warders standing near my bed, rather worried at 
my noises. I had dreamed that I was being strangled. 



UEHRA GAOL AGAIN 


557 

About this time a resolution of the Congress Working Com- 
mittee had also a painful effect on me. This resolution was 
passed, it was stated, “ in view of the loose talk about the con- 
fiscation of private property and necessity of class war ”, and it 
proceeded to remind Congressmen that the Karachi Resolution 
“ neither contemplates confiscation of private property without 
just cause or compensation, nor advocacy of class war. The 
Working Committee is further of the opinion that confiscation 
and class war are contrary to the Congress creed of non- 
violence ”. The resolution was loosely worded and exhibited a 
certain amount of ignorance on the part of the framers as to 
what class war was. It was obviously aimed at the newly formed 
Congress Socialist Party. There had, as a matter of fact, been 
no talk of confiscation on the part of any responsible member 
of this group; there had, however, been frequent reference to 
the existence of class war under present conditions. The Work- 
ing Committee’s resolution seemed to hint that any person be- 
lieving in the existence of this class conflict could not even be 
an ordinary member of the Congress. Nobody had ever accused 
the Congress of having turned Socialist or of being against 
private property. Some members of it held those opinions, but 
now it aj^peared that they had no place even in the rank and 
file of this all-embracing national organisation. 

It had often been stated that the Congress rCTresented the 
nation, including every group and interest in it, from prince to 
pauper. National movements frequently make that claim, mean- 
ing thereby presumably that they represent the great majority 
of the nation and that their policy is for the good of all in- 
terests. But the claim is on die face of it untenable, for no 
political organisation can represent conflicting interests without 
reducing itself to a flabby and unmeaning mass with no distinc- 
tive and distinguishing features. The Congress is either a 
political party with a definite (or vague) aim and philosophy of 
achieving political power and of utfrising it for the national 
good, or it is just a benevolent and humanitarian organisation 
with no views of its own and wishing well to everybody. It can 
represent only those who are in general agreement with that 
aim and philosophy, and those who oppose this are likely to be 
considered by it as anti-national or anti-social and reactionary 
elements whose influence must be checked or eliminated, in 
order to give effect to its own philosophy. It is true that a 
national anti-imperialist movement offers a wide basis for agree- 
ment, as it does not touch the social conflicts. And so the 
Congress did represent in varying degrees the vast majority of 



558 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

the people of India, and it drew within its fold all manner of 
mutually differing groups who agreed only on the anti- 
imperialist issue, and even in regard to this there were great 
differences in stress. Those who, on this basic issue of anti- 
imperialism, held a contrary opinion kept out of the Congress 
and sided, also in varying degrees, with the British Government. 
The Congress thus became a kind of permanent All-Parties 
Congress, consisting of large numbers of groups shading into 
each other and held together by one common faith and the 
dominating personality of Gandniji. 

The Working Committee subsequently tried to explain its 
resolution on class war. The importance of that resolution lay 
not so much in its language or what it definitely laid down, as 
in the fact that it was yet another indication of the way Con- 
gress was going. The resolution had obviously been inspired by 
the new parliamentary wing of the Congress aiming at gaining 
the support of men of property in the coming election to the 
Legislative Assembly. At their instance the Congress was look- 
ing more and more to the Bight and trying to win over the 
moderate and conservative elements in the country. Soothing 
words were being addressed even to those who had beerx hostile 
to the Congress movements in the past and had sided with the 
Government during the continuance of civil disobedience. A 
clamorous and critical Left wing was felt to be a handicap in 
this process of conciliation and ‘ conversion and the Working 
Committee's resolution, as weU as many other individual utter- 
ances, made it clear that the Congress Executive were not going 
to be moved from their new path by this nibbling from.the Left. 
If the Left did not behave it would be sat upon and eliminated 
from the Congress ranks. The manifesto issued by the Parlia- 
mentary Board of the Congress contained a programme which 
was far more cautious and moderate than any that the Congress 
had sponsored during the past fifteen years. 

The Congress leadership, quite apart even from Gandhiji, con- 
sisted of many well-known persons with bright records in the 
national struggle for freedom, men honoured throughout the 
country for their integrity and fearlessness. But the new orienta- 
tion of policy brought into the second ranks, and even the 
front rank, of Congress many individuals who could hardly be 
described as idealists. In the Congress ranks there were, of 
course, large numbers of idealists, but the door for careerists 
and opportunists was now more open than it had ever been 
before. Apart from Gandhiji’s enigmatical and elusive person- 
ality, which dominated the scene, the Congress seemed to 



x)1!.hra gaol again 559 

possess two faces ; a purely political side was developing like a 
caucus, and the other aspect was that of a prayer meeting, full 
of pietism and sentimentality. 

On the Government side there was an air of triumph, in no 
way concealed, at what they considered the success of their 
policy in suppressing civil disobedience and its oflFshoots. The 
operation had been successful, and for the moment it mattered 
little whether the patient lived or died. They proposed to con- 
tinue the same policy, with minor variations, even though the 
Congress had been for the moment brought round to some 
extent. They knew that such changes in national policy could 
only be temporary so long as the basic problem remained, and 
any relaxation on their part might lead to a more rapid growth 
than otherwise. Perhaps they also thought that in continuing to 
suppress the more advanced elements in the Congress or in the 
labour and peasant ranks, they would not gready offend the 
more cautious leaders of the Congress. 

To some extent my thoughts in Dehra Dun Gaol ran along 
these channels. I was really not in a position to form definite 
opinions about the course of events, for I was out of touch. In 
Alipore I had been almost completely out of touch, in Dehra 
a newspaper of the Government’s choice brought me partial 
and sometimes one-sided news. It is quite possible that contacts 
with my colleagues outside and a closer study of the situation 
would have resulted in my varying my opinions in some degree. 

Distressed with the present, I began thinking of the past, of 
what had happened politically in India since I began to take 
some part in public affairs. How far had we been right in what 
we had done? How far wrong? It struck me that my thinking 
would be more orderly and helpful if I put it down on paper. 
This would also help in engaging my mind in a definite task 
and so diverting it from worry and depression. So in the month 
of Ju ne 1934 I began this ' autobiographical narrative’ in 
Dehra Gaol, and for the last eight months I have continued it 
when the mood to do so has seized me. Often there have been 
intervals when I felt no desire to write; three of these gaps were 
each of them nearly a month long. But I managed to continue, 
and now I am nearing the end of this personal journey. Most 
of this has been written under peculiarly distressing circum- 
stances when I was suffering from depression and emotional 
strain. Perhaps some of this is reflected in what I have written, 
but this very writing helped me greatly to pull myself out of 
the present with all its worries. As I wrote, 1 was hardly think, - 
ing of an outside audience; I was addressing myself, framing 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


560 

questions and answering them for my own benefit, sometimes 
even drawing some amusement from it. I wanted as far as 
possible to think straight, and I imagined that this review of 
the past might help me to do so. 

Towards the end of July, Kamala’s condition rapidly de- 
teriorated, and within a few days became critical. On August 
I ith I was suddenly asked to leave Dehra Gaol, and that night 
I was sent under police escort to Allahabad. The next evening 
we reached Prayag station in Allahabad and there I was in- 
formed by the District Magistrate that I was being released 
temporarily so that I might visit my ailing wife. It was six 
months to a day from the time of my arrest. 