THUNDER IN THE AIR 

The 1929 Congress was going to be held in Lahore. After ten 
years it had come back to the Punjab, and people’s minds leapt 
over that decade and went back to the events of ipig-Jallian- 
wala Bagh, martial law with all its humiliations, the Congress 
sessions at Amritsar, to be followed by the beginnings of non- 
co-operation. Much had happened during this decade and 
India's face had changed, but there was no lack of parallels. 
Political tension was growing; the atmosphere of struggle was 
developing fast. The long shadow of the conflict to come lay 
over the land. 

The Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils had 
long ceased to interest any one, except the handful who moved 
in their sacred orbits. They carried on in their humdrum way, 
providing some kind of a cloak — a torn and tattered affair — 
to the authoritarian and despotic nature of the Government, 
an excuse to some people to talk of India’s parliament, and 
allowances to their members. The last successful effort of the 
Assembly to draw attention to itself was when it passed a 
resolution in 1928 refusing its co-operation to the Simon Com- 
mission. 

There had also been subseq^uently a conflict between the 
Chair and the Government. Vithalbhai Patel, the Swarajist 
President of the Assembly, had become a thorn in the tender 
side of the Government on account of his independence (of 
them) and attempts were made to clip his wings. Such hap- 
penings attracted attention but, on the whole, the public mind 
was now concentrated on events outside. My father was 
thoroughly disillusioned with Council work, and often expressed 
his opinion that nothing more could be got out of the legis- 
latures at that stage. He wanted to get out of them himself 
if an opportunity presented itself. Constitutionally minded as 
he was and used to legal methods and procedure, force of cir- 
cumstances had driven him to the painful conclusion that the 
soolled constitutional methods were ineffective and futile in 
India. He would justify this to his own legalist mind by saying 
that there was no constitution in India, 'nor was there any retd 
rule of law when laws, in the shape of ordinances and the like, 
appeared suddenly, like rabbits from a conjurer’s hat, at the 

IQO 



THUNDER IN THE AIR igt 

will of an indi\'idual or a dictating group. In temperament and 
habit he was far from being a revolutionary, and if there had 
been anything like bourgeois democracy, he would undoubtedly 
have been a pillar of the constitution. But, as it was, talk of 
constitutional agitation in India, with a parade of a sham 
parliament, began to irritate him more and more. 

Gandhiji was still keeping away from politics, except for the 
part he played at the Calcutta Congress. He ivas, however, in 
full touch with developments and was often consulted by the 
Congress leaders. His main activity for some years had been 
Khadi propaganda, and with this object he had undertaken 
extensive tours all over India. He took each province by turn 
and visited every district and almost every town of any conse- 
quence, as well as remote rural areas. Everywhere he attracted 
enormous crowds, and it required a great deal of previous 
staff-work to carry through his programme. In this manner 
he has repeatedly toured India and got to know every bit of 
the vast country from the north to the far south, from the 
eastern mountains to the western sea. I do not think any other 
human being has ever travelled about India as much as he has 
done. 

In the past there were great wanderers who were continually 
on the move, pilgrim souls with the wanderlust, but their means 
of locomotion were slow, and a life-time of such wandering 
could hardly compete with a year by railway and motor-car. 
Gandhiji went by railway and automobile, but he did not con- 
fine himself to them; he tramped also. In this way he gathered 
his unique knowledge of India and her people, and in this way 
also scores of millions saw him and came into personal touch 
with him. ' 

He came to the United Provinces in 1929 on his khadi tour, 
and spent many weeks in these provinces during the hottest 
part of the year. I accompanied him occasionally for a few 
days at a time and, despite previous experience, could not help 
marvelling at the vast crowds he attracted. This was especially 
noticeable in our eastern districts, like Gorakhpur, where the 
swarms of human beings reminded one of hordes of locusts. 
As we motored through the rural areas, we would have gather- 
ings of firom ten thousand to twenty-five thousand every few 
miles, and the principal meeting of the day might even exceed 
a hundred thousand. There were no hroadcasting facilities, 
except rarely in a few big cities, and it was manifestly impos- 
sible to be heard by these crowds. Probably they did not expect 
to hear anything; they were satisfied if they saw the Mahatma. 



igZ JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Gandhiji usually addressed them brlelly, avoiding undue strain; 
it would have been quite impossible to carry on otherwise in 
this fashion horn hour to hour and day to day. 

I did not accompany him throughout his U.P. tour as I could 
be of no special use to him, and there was no point in my 
adding to the number of the touring party. I had no objection 
to crowds, but there was not sufficient inducement to get pushed 
and knocked about and my feet crushed— the usual fate of 
people accompanying Gandhiji. I had plenty of other work to 
do, and had no desire to confine myself to Ichadi propaganda, 
which seemed to me a relatively minor activity in view of the 
developing political situation. To some extent I resented Gand- 
hiji’s pre-occupation with non-political issues,, and I could never 
understand the background of his thought. In those days he 
was collecting funds for khadi work, and he would say fre- 
quently that he Avanted money for Daridranarayan, the ‘ Lord 
of the Poor’, or ‘God that resides in the Poor'; meaning 
thereby, presumably, that he wanted it to help the poor to find 
employment and work in cottage industries. But behind that 
word there seemed to be a glorification of poverty; God Avas 
especially the Lord of the poor; they were His chosen people. 
That, I suppose, is the usual religious attitude everywhere. I 
could not appreciate it, for poverty seemed to me a hateful 
thing, to be fought and rooted out and not to be encouraged 
in any way. This inevitably led to an attack on a system which 
tolerated and produced poverty, and those who shrunk firom 
this had of necessity to jtistify poverty in some way. They 
could only think in terms of scarcity and could not picture a 
world abundantly supplied with the necessaries of IbFe; prob- 
ably, according to them, the rich and the poor would always 
he with us. 

Whenever I had occasion to discuss this with Gandhiji, 
he would lay stress on the rich treating their riches as a 
trust for the people; it was a vicAV-point of considerable 
antiquity, and one comes across it frequently in India as well 
as medieval Europe. I confess that I have always been wholly 
unable to understand how any person can reasonably expect 
this to happen, ot imagine that 'therein lies the solution of the 
social problem. 

The Legislative Assembly, as I have said above, was becoming 
a somnolent affair and few people took interest in its dreary 
activities. A rude awakening came to it one day when Bhagat 
Singh and B. K. Dutt threw two bombs from the visitors* gallery 
on to the floor of the bouse. No one was seriously hurt, and 



THUNDER IN THE AIR I93 

probably the bombs were intended, as was stated by the 
accused later, to make a noise and create a stir, and not to 
injure. 

They did create a stir both in the Assembly and outside. Other 
activities of Terrorists were not so innocuous. A young English 
police officer, who was alleged to have hit Lala Lajpat Rai, 
was shot down and killed in Lahore. In Bengal and elsewhere 
there seemed to be a recrudescence of terrorist activity. A 
number of conspiracy cases were launched, and the number of 
detenus — people kept in prison or otherwise detained without 
trial or conviction — rapidly increased. 

In the Lahore conspiracy case some extraordinary scenes were 
enacted in the court by the police, and a great deal of public 
attention was drawn to the case because of this. As a protest 
against the treatment given to them in court and in prison, 
there was a hunger-strike on the part of most of the prisoners. 
I forget the exact reason why it began, but ultimately the 
question involved became the larger one of treatment of 
prisoners, especially Politicals. This hunger-strike went on from 
week to week and created a stir in the country. Owing to the 
physical weakness of the accused, they could not be taken to 
court, and the proceedings had to be adjourned repeatedly. 
The Government of India thereupon initiated legislation to 
allow court proceedings to continue even in the absence of the 
accused or their counsel. The question of prison treatment had 
also to be considered by them. 

I happened to be in Lahore when the hunger-strike was 
already a month old. I was given permission to visit some of 
the prisoners in the prison, and I availed myself of this. I 
saw Bhagat Singh for the first time, and Jatindranath Das and 
a few others. They were all very weak and bed-ridden, and it 
was hardly possible to talk to them much. Bhagat Singh had 
an attractive, intellectual face, remarkably calm and peaceful. 
There seemed to be no anger in it. He looked and talked with 
great gentleness, but then I suppose that any one who has been 
fasting for a month wiU look spiritual and gentle. Jatin Das 
looked milder still, soft; and gentle like a young girl. He was in 
considerable pain when I saw him. He died later, as a result of 
festing, on the sixty-first day of the hunger-strike, 

Bhagat Singh’s chief ambidon seemed to be to see, or at least 
to have news of, his uncle, Sardar Ajit Singh, who had been 
deported, together with Lala Lajpat Rai, in- 1907. For many 
years he had been an exile abroad. There were some vague 
reports that he had settled in South America, but I do not 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

fhinlf anything definite is known about him. I do not even 
know if he is alive or dead. 

Jatin Das's death created a sensation all over the country. It 
brought the question of the treatment of political prisoners to 
the front, and Government appointed a committee on the sub- 
ject. As a result of the deliberations of this committee, new 
rules were issued creating tliree classes of prisoners. No special 
class of political prisoners was created. These new rules, which 
seemed to promise a change for the better, as a matter of fact 
made little difference, and the position remained, and still 
remains, highly unsatisfactory. 

As the summer and monsoon months gradually shaded off 
into the autumn, the Provincial Coi^ress Committees busied 
themselves with the election of the President for the Lahore 
session of the Congress. This election is a lengthy process, and 
used to go on from August to October. Iij 1929 there was 
almost unanimity in favour of Gandhiji. This desire to have 
him as President for a second time did not, of course, push him 
any higher in the Congress hierarchy, for he had been a kind 
of super-president for many years. It was generally felt, how- 
ever, that as a struggle was impending, and he was bound to be 
the de facto leader of it, he might as well be the de jure head 
of the Congress for the occasion. Besides, there was really no 
other person outstanding enough and obvious enough for the 
presidentship. 

So Gandhiji was recommended for the presidentship by 
the Provincial Committees. But he would have none of 
it. His refusal, though emphatic, seemed to leave some room 
for argument, and it was hoped that he would reconsider it. A 
meeting of the All-India Congress Committee was held in 
Lucknow to decide finally, and almost to the last hour all of us 
thought that he would agree. But he would not do so, and at 
the last moment he pressed my name forward. The A.I.C.C. 
was somewhat taken aback by his final refusal, and a little 
irritated at being placed in a difficult and invidious position. 
For want of any other person, and in a spirit of resignation, 
they finally elected me. 

I have seldom felt quite so annoyed and humiliated as I did 
at that election. It was not that I was not sensible of the 
honour, for it was a great honour, and I would have rejoiced if 
I had been elected in the ordinary way*. But I did not come to 
it by the mmn entrance or even a side entrance; I appeared 
suddenly by a trap-door and bewildered the audience into 
acceptance. They put a brave face on it, and, like a necessary 



THUNDER IN THE AIR I95 

pill, swallowed me. My pride was hurt, and almost I felt like 
handing back the honour. Fortunately I restrained myself from 
making an exhibition of myself, and stole away with a heavy 
heart. 

Probably the person who was happiest about this decision 
was my father. He did not wholly like my politics, but he liked 
me well enough, and any good thing that came my way pleased 
him. Often he would criticise me and speak a little curtly to 
me, but no person who cared to retain lus goodwill could run 
me down in his presence. 

My election was indeed a great honour and a great responsi- 
bility for me; it was unique in that a son was immediately 
following his father in' the presidential chair. It was often said 
that I was the youngest President of the Congress — I was just 
forty when I presided. This was not tme. I think Gokhale was 
about the same age, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (though 
he is a little older than me) was probably just under forty when 
he presided. But Gokhale was considered one of the elder 
statesmen even when he was in his late thirties, and Abul 
Kalam Azad has especially cultivated a look of venerable age 
to give a suitable background to his great learning. As states- 
manship has seldom been considered one of my virtues, and 
no one has accused me of possessing an excess of learning, I 
have escaped so far the accusation of age, though my hair has 
turned grey and my looks betray me. 

The Lahore Congress drew near. Meanwhile events were 
marching, step by step, inevitably, pushed onward, so it seemed, 
by some motive force of their own. Individuals, for all the 
brave show they put up, played a very minor r61e. One had the 
feeling of being a cog in a great machine which swept on 
relentlessly. 

Hoping perhaps to check this onward march of destiny, the 
British Government took a forward step, and the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwin, made an announcement about a forthcoming Round 
Table Conference. It was an ingeijiously worded announcement, 
which could mean much or veiy little, and it seemed to many of 
us obvious that the latter was the more likely contingency. And 
in any event, even if there was more in the announcement, it 
could not be anywhere near what we wanted. Hardly had this 
Viceregal announcement been made when, almost with indecent 
haste, so it seemed, a " Leaders' Conference ” was arranged at 
Delhi, and people foom various groups were in'vited to it. 
Gandhiji was there, so was my fiidier; Vithalbhai Patel (still 
President of the Assembly) was also there, and Moderate leaders. 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

like Sir Tcj Bahadur Sapru and others. A joint resolution or 
manifesto was agreed to, accepting the Viceroy’s declaration 
subject to some conditions, which, it was stated, were vital and 
must be fulfilled. If these conditions were accepted by Govern- 
ment, then co-operation was to be offered. These conditions^ 
were solid enough and would have made a difference. 

It was a triumph to get such a resolution agreed to by repre- 
sentatives of all the groups, moderate and advanced. For the 
Congress it was a come-down; as a common measure of agree- 
ment it was high. But there was a fatal catch in it. The condi- 
tions were looked upon from at least two different view-points. 
The Congress people considered them to be essential, the sine 
qua non, without which there could be no co-OTeration. For 
them they represented the minimum required. This was made 
clear by a subsequent meeting of the Congress Working Com- 
mittee, which further stated that this offer was limited to the date 
of the next Congress. For the Moderate groups they were a 
desirable maximum which should be stated, but which could 
not be insisted on to the point of refusal of co-operation. For 
them the conditions, though called vital, were not really condi- 
tions. 

And so it happened that later on, though none of these 
conditions were satisfied and most of us lay in gaol, together 
with scores of thousands of others, our Moderate and Respon- 
sivist friends, who had signed that manifesto with us, gave their 
full co-operation to our gaolers. 

Most of us suspected that this would happen— though hardly 
to the extent it did happen — ^but there was some hope that this 
joint action, whereby the Congress people had to some extent 
curbed themselves, would also result in curbing the propensities 
of the Liberals and others to indiscriminate and almost invari- 
able co-(meration with the British Government. A more powerfiil 
motive for some of us, who heartily disliked the compromising 
resolution, was to keep our own Congress ranks well knit to- 

‘ The condidons were : 

(i) All discussions at the proposed conference to be on the basis 
of full Dominion Status for India. 

(a) There should be a predominant representation of Congress- 
men at the conference. 

(3) A general amnesty of polidcal prisoners. 

(4) The Government of India to be carried on from now onwards, 
as, far as is possible under existing conditions, on the lines of a 
Dominion government. 



THUNDER IN THE AIR 197 

gether. On the eve of a big struggle we could not afford to split 
up the Congress. It was well known that Government was not 
likely to accept the conditions laid down by us, and our position 
would thus be stronger and we could easily carry our Right Wing 
with us. It was only a question of a few weeks; December and 
the Lahore Congress were near. 

And yet that joint manifesto was a bitter pill for some of us. 
To give up the demand for independence, even in theory and 
even for a short while, was wrong and dangerous: it meant that 
it was just a tactical affair, something to bargain with, not some- 
thing which was essential and without which xve could never be 
content. So I hesitated and refused to sign the manifesto (Subhas 
Bose had definitely refused to sign it), but, as was not unusual 
with me, I allowed myself to be talked into signing. Even so, I 
came away in great distress, and the very next day I thought of 
withdrawing from the Congress presidentship, and wrote accord- 
ingly to Gandhiji. I do not suppose that I meant this seriously, 
though I was sufficiently upset. A soothing letter from Gandhiji 
and three days of reflection calmed me. 

Just prior to the Lahore Congress, a final attempt was made 
to find some basis of agreement between Congress and the 
Government. An interview with Lord Irwin, the Viceroy, was 
arranged. I do not know who took the initiative in arranging 
this interview, but I ima^ne that Vithalbhai Patel was the 
prime mover. Gandhiji and my father were present at the inter- 
view, representing the Congress view-point, and I think also 
present were Mr. Jinnah, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapni and President 
Patel. The interview came to nothing; there was no common 
ground, and the two main parties — ^the Government and Con- 
gress — ^were far apart from each other. So now nothing remained 
but for the Congress to go ahead. The year of grace given at 
Calcutta was ending; independence was to be declared once for 
all the objective of the Congress, and the necessary steps taken 
to carry on the struggle to attain it. 

During these final weeks prior to the Lahore Congress I had 
to attend to important work in another field. The AU-India 
Trade Union Congress was meeting at Nagpur, and, as Presidrait 
for the year, I had to preside over it. It was very unusual for the 
same person to preside over both the National Congress and the 
Trade Union Congress within a few weeks of each other. I had 
hoped that I might be a link between the two and bring them 
closer to eadi other — ^the National Congress to become more 
socialistic, more proletarian, and organised Labour to join the 
national struggle. 



Ip8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was, perhaps, a vain hope, for nationalism can only 
go far in a socialistic or proletarian direction by ceasing to 
be nationalism. Yet I felt that, bourgeois as the outlook of the 
National Congress was, it did represent the only effective revolu- 
tionary force in the country. Ai such, Labour ought to help it 
and co-operate with it and influence it, keeping, however, its own 
identity and ideology distinct and intact. And I hoped that the 
course of events and the participation in direct action would 
inevitably drive the Congress to a more radical ideology and to 
face social and economic issues. The development of the Con- 
gress during recent years had been in the direction of the peasant 
and the village. If this development continued, it might in 
course of time become a vast peasant organisation, or, at 
any rate, an organisation in which the peasant element 
predominated. Already in many of our U.P. District 
Congress Committees the peasantiy were strorfgly represented, 
though the middle-class intelligentsia held the leadership in 
their hands. • 

There was thus a possibility of the eternal conflict between 
the village and the city influencing the relations of the National 
Congress with the T.U.C. The contingency was remote, as the 
present National Congress is run by middle-class people and is 
controlled by the city, and, so long as the question of national 
freedom is not solved, its nation^sm will dominate the field 
and be the most powerful sentiment in the country. Still it 
seemed to me obviously desirable to bring the Congress nearer 
to organised labour, and in the U.P. we even invited delegates 
to our Provincial Congress Committee from the provincial 
branch of the T.U.C. Many Congressmen also took prominent 
part in Labour activities. 

The advanced sections of Labour, however, fought shy of the 
National Congress. They mistrusted its leaders, and considered 
its ideology bourgeois and reactionary, which indeed it was, firom 
the Labour point of view. The Congress was, as its very name 
inmlied, a nationalist organisation. 

Throughout igag Trade Unions in India were agitated over a 
new issue— -the appointment of a Royal Commission on Labour 
in India, known as the Whitley Commission. The Left Wing was 
in fevour of a boycott of the Commission, the Right Wing in 
favouf of co-operation, and the personal factor came in, as some 
of the Right Wing leaders were offered membership of the Com- 
mission. In this matter, as in many others, my sympathies were 
with the Left,' especially as this was also the policy of the 
National Congress. It seemed absurd to co-operate with official 



THUNDER IN THE AIR 199 

Commissions when we were carrying on, or going to carry on, a 
direct action struggle. 

At the Nagpur T.U. Congress, this question of the boycott of 
the Whitley Commission became a major issue, and on this, as 
well as on several other matters in dispute, the Left Wing 
triumphed. I played a very undistinguished role at this Con- 
gress. Being a netvcomer in the Labour field and still feeling 
my way, I was a little hesitant. Generally, I expressed my views 
in favour of the more advanced groups, but I avoided acting 
with any gi'oup, and played the part more of an impartial 
speaker than a directing president. I was thus an almost passive 
spectator of the breaking-up of the T.U.C. and the formation of 
a new moderate organisation. Personally, I felt that the Righr 
groups were not justified in breaking away, and yet some of the 
leaders of the Left had forced the pace and given them every 
pretext to depart. Between the quarrels of the Right and Left, a 
large Centre group felt a litde helpless. Perhaps given a right 
lead, it could have curbed the two and avoided the break-up of 
the T.U.C., and, even if the break came, it would not have had 
the unfortunate consequences which resulted. 

As it was, the Trade Union Movement in India suffered a 
tremendous blow from which it has not yet recovered. The 
Government had already started its campaign against the 
advanced wings of the Labour movement, and die Meerut case 
was among the first fruits thereof. This campaign continued. 
The employers also thought the moment opportune to push their 
advantage home. The world depression had already begun in 
that winter of 1929-30, and buffeted by this, and attacked on 
every side, and with their own trade union organisations at 
their lowest ebb, the Indian working class had a very hard time, 
and were the helpless witnesses of ajprogressive deterioration in 
their owa condition. The Trade Union Congress experienced 
another split in the course of the next year or two, when a Com- 
munist faction broke off. Thus there were in theory three federa- 
tions of Trade Unions in India — a Moderate group, the main 
T.U.C., and a Communist group. In practice they were all weak 
and inefiective, and their mumal quarrels disgusted the rank- 
and-file workers. I was out of all tfiis from 1930 onwards, as I 
was mostly in prison. During my short periods outside I learnt 
that attempte at unity were being made. They were not success- 
ful.* The Moderate group of unions gained strength by the 

* Subsequent efforts to bring about Trade Union unity have been 
more successful, and the various groups are now working in some 
co-operation with each other. 



200 


JAVVAHARLAL NEHRU 

adhesion of railway workers to them. They had one advantage 
over the other groups, as Government recognised them and 
accepted their recommendations for the Labour Conferences at 
Geneva. The lure of a visit to Geneva pulled some Labour 
leaders to them, and they brought their unions with them. 