IN NAINI PRISON 

I HAD gone back to gaol after nearly seven years, and memories 
of prison life had somewhat faded. I was in Naini Central 
Prison, one of the big prisons of the province, and I was to have 
the novel experience of being kept by myself. My enclosure was 
apart from the big enclosure containing the gaol population of 
between aaoo and 2300. It was a small enclosure, circular in 
shape, with a diameter of about one hundred feet, and with a 
circular wall about fifteen feet high surrounding it. In the middle 
of it was a drab and ugly building containing four cells. I was 
given two of these celb, connecting with each other, one to 
serve as a bathroom and lavatory. The others remained un- 
occupied for some time. 

After the exciting and very active life I had been leading 
outside, I felt rather lonely and depressed. I was tired out, and 
for two or three days I slept a great deal. The hot weather had 
already begun, and I was permitted to sleep at night in the open, 
outside my cell in the narrow space between the inner building 
and the enclosing wall. My bed was heavily chained up, lest I 
might take it up and walk away, or, more probably, to avoid 
the hed being used as a kind of scaling ladder to climb the wall 
of the enclosure. The nights were full of strange noises. The 
convict overseers, who guarded the main wall, frequently shouted 
to each other in varying keys, sometimes lengthening out their 
cries till they sounded like the moaning of a distant wind; the 
night-watchmen in the barracks were continually counting away 
in a loud voice the prisoners under their charge and shoutii^ out 
that all was well; and several times a night some gaol official, 
going his rounds, visited our enclosure and shouted an enquiry 
to the warder on duty. As my enclosure was some distance away 
from the others, most of these voices reached me indistinctly, 
and I could not make out at first what they were. At times I felt 
as if I was on the verge of the forest, and the peasantry were 
shouting to keep the wild animals away from their fields; some- 
times if seemed the forest itself and the beasts of the night were 
keeping up their nocturnal chorus. 

Was it my fancy, I wonder, or is it a fact that a circular wall 
reminds one more of captivity than a rectangular one? The 
absence of corners and angles adds to the sense of oppression. 

SI7 



2i8 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

In the daytime that wall even encroached on the sky and only 
allowed a glimpse of a narrow-bounded portion. With a wistful 
eye I looked 

" Upon that little tent of blue 
Which prisoners call the sky, 

And at every drifting cloud that went 
With sails of silver by.” 

At night that wall enclosed me all the more, and I felt as if 
I was at the bottom of a well. Or else that- part of the star-lit sky 
that I saw ceased to be real and seemed part of an artificial 
planetarium. 

My barrack and enclosure were popularly known throughout 
the gaol as the Kuttaghar—ths. Dog House. This was an old 
name which had nothing to do with me. The little barrack had 
been built originally, apart from all others, for especially danger- 
ous criminals who had to be isolated. Latterly it had been used 
for political prisoners, detenus, and the like who could thus be 
kept apart from the rest of the gaol. In front of the enclosure, 
some distance away, was an erection that gave me a shock when 
1 first had a glimpse of it from my barrack. It looked like a 
huge cage, and men went round and round inside it. I found 
out later that it was a water-pump worked by human labour, 
as many as sixteen persons being employed at a time. I got used 
to it as one gets used to everything, but it has always seemed to 
me one of the mast foolish and barbarous ways of utilising 
human labour-power. And whenever I pass iti think of the zoo. 

For some days I was not permitted to go outside my enclosure 
for exercise or any other purpose. I was later allowed to go out 
for half an hour in the early mornings, when it was almost dark, 
and to walk or run under the main wall. That early morning 
hour had been fixed for me so that I might not come in contact 
with, or be seen by, the other prisoners. I liked that outing, and 
it refr^hed nie tremendously. In order to compress as much 
open-air exercise as I could in the short time at my disposal, I 
took to running, and gradually increased this to over two miles 
daily. 

I used to get up very early in the morning, about fijur, or even 
half-past three, when it was quite dark. Partly this was due to 
going to bed early, as the light provided was not good for much 
rea^ng. I liked to watch the stars, and the position of some 
well-known constellation would give me the approximate time. 
From where I lay I could just see the Pole Star peeping over 
the wail, and as it was always there, I found it extraordinarily 



IN NAINI PRISON 


219 

comforting. Surrounded by a revolving sky, it seemed to be a 
symbol of cheerful constancy and perseverence. 

For a month I had no companion, but I was not alone, as I 
had the warder and the convict overseers and a convict cook and 
cleaner in my enclosure. Occasionally other prisoners came there 
on some business, most of them being convict overseers — C.O.’s 
— serving out long sentences. 'Lifers’ — convicts sentenced for 
life — were common. Usually a life-sentence was supposed to ter- 
minate after twenty years, or even less, but there were many in 
prison then who had served more than twenty years already. I 
saw one very remarkable case in Naini. Prisoners carry about, 
attached to their clothes at the shoulder, little wooden boards 
giving information about their convictions and mentioning the 
date when release was due. On the board of one prisoner I read 
that his date of release was 1996! He had already, m 1930, served 
out several years, and he w'as then a person of middle age. Prob- 
ably he had been given several sentences and they had been 
added up one after the other; the total, I think, amounting to 
seventy-five years. 

For years and years many of these ‘ lifers ’ do not see a child 
or woman, or even animals. They lose touch with the out- 
side world completely, and have no human contacts left. They 
brood and wrap themselves in angry thoughts of fear and re- 
venge and hatred; forget the good of the wond, the kindness and 
joy, and live only wrapped up in the evil, till gradually even 
hatred loses its edge and life becomes a soulless thing, a machine- 
like routine. Like automatons they pass their days, each exactly 
like the other, and have few sensations, except one — fear! From 
time to time the prisoner’s body is weighed and measured. But 
how is one to weigh the mind and the spirit which wilt and stunt 
themselves and wither away in this terrible atmosphere of 
oppression? People argue against the death penalty, and their , 
arguments appeal to me greatly. But when I see the long drawn- 
out agony, of a life spent in prison, I feel that it is perhaps 
better to have that penalty rather than to kill a person slowly 
and by degrees. One of the 'lifers’ came up to me once and 
asked me : “ What of us lifers? Will Swaraj take us out of this 
hell? ” 

•Who are these lifers? Many of them come in gang cases, 
when large numbers, as many as fifty or a hundred, may be 
convicted en bloc. Some of these are probably guilty, but I doubt 
if most of those convicted are really guilty; it is easy to get 
people involved in such cases. An approver’s evidence, a little 
identification, is all that is needed. Dacoities are increasing now^ 



J AWAII A 111. At* NEHRU 

adays and the prison population goes up year by year. If people 
starve, wJiat are they to do? Judges and magistrates wax 
eloquent about the increase of crime, but are blind to the 
obvious economic cause.s of it. 

Then there are the agriculturists who have a little village riot 
over some land dispute, lalhis fly about, and somebody dies— 
result, many people in gaol for life or for a long term. Often all 
the menfolk in a family will be imprisoned in this way, leaving 
the women to carry on as best they can. Not one of these is 
a criminal type. Generally they are fine young men, consider- 
ably above the aver.ige villager, both physically and mentally. 
A little training, some diversion of interest to other subjects 
and jobs, and these people would be valuable assets to the 
country. 

Indian prisons contain, of course, hardened criminals, persons 
who are aggressively anti-social and dangerous to the com- 
munity. But I have been amazed to find large numbers of fine 
types in prison, boys and men, whom I would trust unhesi- 
tatingly. I do not know what the proportion of real criminals 
to non<riminal types is, and probably no one in the prison 
department has ever even thought of this distinction. Some 
interesting figures are given on this subject by Lewis E. Lawes, 
the Warden of Sing Sing Prison in New York. He says of his 
prison population, that to his knowledge 50 per cent, are not 
criminally inclined at all; that 115 per cent, are the products of 
circumstances and environment; that of the remaining 35 per 
cent, only a possible half, that is 12 per cent., are aggressively 
anti-sodal. It is a weU-known fact that real criminality flourishes 
more in the big cities and centres of modem civilisation than 
in the undevelcmed countries. American gangsterdom is notori- 
ous, and Sing Sing has a special reputation as a prison where 
some of the worst criminals And yet, according to its 
warden, only 1254 per cent, of its prisoners are really bad. I 
.think it may very safely be said that this proportion is far 
less in an Indian prison, A more sensible economic policy, 
more employment, more education would soon empty out our 
prisons. But of course to make that successful, a radical plan, 
affecting the whole of our social febric, is essential. Tlie only 
other real alternative is what the British Government is doing : 
increasing its police forces and enlarring its prisons in India, 
The number of pEarsons sent to gaol m India is appalling. In 
a recent^ report issued b^ the Secretary of the All-India 
Prisoners Aid Sodety, it is stated that in the Bombay Presi- 
dency alone 128,000 persons were sent to gaol in and tlie 



IN NAINI PRISON 


331 


figure for Bengal for the same year was 124,000.* I do not know 
the figures for all the provinces, but if the total for two 
provinces exceeds a quarter of a million, it is quite possible that 
the All-India total approaches the million mark. This figure 
does not, of course, represent the permanent gaol population, 
for a large number of persons get short sentences. The per- 
manent population will be very much less, but still it must be 
enormous. Some of the major provinces in India are said to 
have the biggest prison administrations in the world. The U.P. 
is among those supposed to have this doubtful honour, and 
very probably it is, or was, one of the most backward and 
reactionary administrations. Not the least effort is made to 
consider the prisoner as an individual, a human being, and to 
improve or look after his mind. The one thing the U.P. 
administration excels in is keeping its prisoners. There are 
remarkably few attempts to escape, and I doubt if one in ten 
thousand succeeds in escaping. 

One of the most saddening features of the prisons is the 
large number of boys, from fifteen upwards, who are to be 
found in them. Most of them are bright-looking lads who, if 
given the chance, might easily make good. Lately some 
beginnings have been made to teach them the elements of 
reading and writing but, as usual, these are absurdly inade- 
quate and inefficient. There arc very few opportunities for 
games or recreation, no newspapers of any kind are permitted 
nor are books encouraged. For twelve hours or more all 
prisoners are kept locked up in their barracks or cells with 
nothing whatever to do in the long evenings. 

Interviews are only permitted once in three months, and so 
arc letters — a monstrously long period. Even so, many 
prisoners cannot take advantage of them. If they are illiterate, 
as most are, they have to rely on some gaol official to write 
on their behalf ; and the latter, not being keen on adding to his 
other work, usually avoids it. Or, if a letter is written, the 
address is not properly given and the letter does not reach. 
Interviews are still more difficult. Almost invariably they de- 
pend on a gratification for some gaol official. Often prisoners 
are transferred to different gaols, and their people cannot trace 
them. I have met many prisoners who had lost complete touch 
with their families for years, and did not know what had 
happened. Interviews, when they do take place after three 
months or more, ate most extraordinary, A number of 


* Statesman, December ii, 1934. 



224 


JAWAIIARLAL NEKHtJ 


prisoners and their interviewers are placed togetlaer on cither 
side of a barrier, and they all try to talk simultaneously. There 
is a great deal of shouting at each other, and the slight human 
touch that might have come from the interview is entirely 
absent. 

A very small number of prisoners, ordinarily not exceeding 
one in a thousand (Europeans excepted), are given some extra 
privileges in the shape of better food and more frequent inter- 
views and letters. During a big political civil resistance move- 
ment, when scores of thousands of political prisoners go to 
gaol, this figure of special class prisoners goes up slightly, but 
even so it is very low. About 95 per cent, of these political 
prisoners, men and women, are treated in the ordinary way 
and are not given even these facilities. 

Some individuals, sentenced for revolutionary activities for 
life or long terms of imprisonment, are often kept in solitary 
confinement for long periods. In the U.P., I believe, all such 
persons are automatically kept in solitary cellular confinement. 
Ordinarily, this solitary confinement is awarded as a special 
punishment for a prison offence. But in the case of these per- 
sons— -usually young boys— they are kept alone although their 
behaviour in gaol might be exemplary. Thus an additional 
and very terrible punishment is added by the Gaol Department 
to the sentence of the court, without any reason therefor. This 
seems very extraordinary, and hardly in conformity with any 
rule of law. Solitary confinement, even for a short period, is 
a most painful affair; for it to be prolonged for years is a 
terrible thing. It means the slow and continuous deterioration 
of the mind, till it begins to border on insanity; and the 
appearance of a look of vacancy, or a frightened animal type 
of expression. It is the lulling of the spirit by degrees, the slow 
vmsection of the soul. Even if a man survives it, he becomes 
abnormal and an absolute misfit in the world. And the question 
always arises — wm this man guilty at all of any act or offence? 
Police methods in India have long been suspect; in political 
matters they are doubly so. 

European or Eurasian prisoners, whatever their crime or 
stams, am automatically placed in a higher class and get better 
food, lighter work and more interviews and letters. A weekly 
visit from a clergyman keeps them b touch with outside affairs, 
ihe parson brmgs them foreign illustrated and humorous 
papers, and communicates with their families when necessary. 

No one grudges the European convicts these privileees, for 
they are few enough, but it is a little painful to see the utter 



IN NAINI PRISON 


223 

absence of any human standard in the treatment of others — 
men and women. The convict is not thought of as an indi- 
vidual human being, and so he or she is seldom treated as such. 
One sees in prison the inhuman side of the State apparatus 
of administrative repression at its worst. It is a machine which 
works away callously and imthinkingly, crushing all that come 
in its grip, and the gaol rules have been purposely framed to- 
keep this machine in evidence. Offered to sensitive men and 
women, this soulless regime is a torture and an anguish of the 
mind. I have seen long-term convicts sometimes breaking down 
at the dreariness of it all, and weeping like little children. And 
a word of sympathy and epcouragement, so rare in this atmos-> 
sphere, has suddenly made their faces light up with joy and 
gratitude. 

And yet among the prisoners themselves there were often 
touching instances of charity and good comradeship. A blind 
‘habitual’ prisoner was once discharged after thirteen years. 
After this long period he was going out, wholly unprovided for, 
into a friendless world. His fellow convicts were eager to help 
him, but they could not do much. One gave his shirt deposited 
in the gaol office, another some other piece of clothing. A third 
had that very morning received a new pair of chappals (leather 
sandals) and he had shown them to me with some pride. It was 
a great acquisition in prison. But when he saw this blind com- 
panion of many years going out bare-footed, he willingly parted 
with his new chappals. I thought then that there appeared to* 
be more charity inside the gaol than outside it. 

That year 1930 was full of dramatic situations and inspiring, 
happenings; what surprised most was the amazing power of 
Gandhiji to inspire and enthuse a whole people. Tnere was 
something almost hypnotic about it, and we remembered the 
words used by Gokhale about him : how he had the power of 
making heroes out of clay. Peaceful civil disobedience as a 
technique of action for achieving great national ends seemed 
to have justified itself, and a quiet confidence grew in the 
country, shared by friend and opponent alike, that we were 
marching towards victory. A strange excitement filled those 
who were active in the movement, and some of this even crept 
inside the gaol. “ Swaraj is coming I ” said the ordinary con- 
victs; and they waited impatiently for it, in the selfish hope 
that it might do them some good. The warders, coming in 
contart with the gossip of the bazaars, also expected that Swaraj 
was near; the petty gaol official grew a little more nervous. 

We had no daily newspapers in prison, but a Hindi weekly 



324 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

brought US some news, and often this news would set our 
imagination afire. Daily lathi charges, sometimes firing, 
martial law at Sholapur with sentences of ten years for 
carrying the national Hag. We felt proud of our people, and 
especially of our womenfolk, all over the country. I had a 
special feeling of satisfaction because of the activities of my 
mother, wife and sisters, as well as many girl cousins and 
friends; and though I was separated from th^em and was in 
prison, we grew nearer to each other, hound by a new sense 
of comradeship in a great cause. The family seemed to merge 
into a larger group, and yet to retain its old flavour and 
intimacy. Kamala surprised me, for her energy and enthusiasm 
overcame her physical ill-health and, for some time at least, 
she kept well in spite of strenuous activities. 

The thought that I was having a relatively easy time in 
prison, at a time when others were facing danger and suffering 
outside, began to oppress me. I longed to go out, and as I could 
not do that, I made my life in prison a hard one, full of work. 

I used to spin daily for nearly three hours on my own cliarkha; 
for another two or three hours I did n^war weaving, which I 
had especially asked for from the gaol authorities. I liked these 
activities. They kept me occupied without undue strain or 
requiring too much attention, and they soothed the fever of 
my mind. I read a great deal, and otherwise busied myself 
with cleaning up, washing my clothes, etc. The manual labour 
I did was of my own choice as my imprisonment was ' simple 
And so, between thought of outside happenings and my 
gaol routine, I passed my days in Naini Prison. Watching the 
working^ of an Indian prison, it struck me that it was not unlike 
the British government of India. There is great efficiency in 
the apparatus of government, which goes to strengthen the 
hold of the Government on the country, and little or no care 
fbi the human material of the country. Outwardly the prison 
must appear efficiently run, and to some extent this was true. 
But no One seemed to think that the main purpose of the 
prison must be to improve and help the unhappy individuals 
who come to it. Break them 1— that is the idea, so that by the 
nme they go out, they may not have the least bit, of spirit left 
in them. And how is the prison controlled, and the convicts 
kept m check and punished? Very largely with the help of the 
themselves, some of whom are made convict-warders 
(G.W s.) or convict-overseers (C-O.’s.), and are induced to co- 
operate with the authorities because of fear, and in the hope 
of rewards and special remissions. There are relatively few 



IN NAINI PRISON 


235 

paid non-convict-warders; most of the guarding inside the 
prison is done by convict-warders and C.O.’s. A widespread 
system of spying pervades the prison, convicts being encouraged 
to become stool pigeons and to spy on each other; and no 
combination or joint action is, of course, permitted among the 
prisoners. This is easy to understand, for only by keeping 
them divided up could they be kept in check. 

Outside, in the government of our country, we see much of 
this duplicated on a larger, though less obvious, scale. ■ But 
there the C.W.’s. or C.O.’s. are known differently. They have 
impressive titles, and their liveries of office are more gorgeous. 
And behind them, as in prison, stands the armed guard with 
weapons ever ready to enrorce conformity. 

How important and essential is a prison to the modern State! 
The prisoner at least begins to think so, and the numerous 
administrative and other functions of the government appear 
almost superficial before the basic functions of the prison, the 
police, the army. In prison one begins to appreciate the 
Marxian theory, that the State is really the coercive apparatus 
meant to enforce the will of a group that controls the govern- 
ment. 

For a month I was alone in my barrack. Then a companion 
came — ^Narmada Prasad Singh — ^and his coming was a relief. 
Two and a half months later, on the last day of June 1930, 
our little enclosure was the scene of unusual excitement. Un- 
expectedly, early in the moraing, my father and Dr. Syed 
Mahmud, were brought there. They had both been arrested 
in Anand Bhawan, while they were actually in their beds, that 
morning. 