RETURN TO INDIA AND PLUNGE BACK 
INTO POLITICS 

I WAS returning from Europe in good physical and mental con- 
dition. My wife was not yet wholly recovered, but she was far 
better, and that relieved me of anxiety on her score. I felt full 
of energy and vitality, and the sense of inner conflict and 
frustration that had oppressed me so often previously was, for 
the time being, absent. My outlook was wider, and nationalism 
by itself seemed to me definitely a narrow and insufficient creed. 
Political freedom, independence, were no doubt essential, but 
they were steps only in the right direction; without social free- 
dom and a socialistic structure of society and the State, neither 
the coimtry nor the individual could develop much. I felt I had 
a clearer perception of world affairs, more grip on the present- 
day world, ever changing as it was. I had read largely, not only 
on current affairs and politics, but on many other subjects that 
interested me, cultural and scientific. I found the vast political, 
economic, and cultural changes going on in Europe and 
America a fascinating study, ^viet Russia, despite certain un- 
pleasant aspects, attracted me greatly, and seemed to hold forth 
a message of hope to the world. Europe, in the middle ’twenties, 
was trying to settle down in a way; the great depression was yet 
to come. But I came back with the conviction that this settling 
down was superficial only, and big eruptions and mighty changes 
were in store for Europe and the world in the near future, 

.To train and prepare our country for these world events — ^to 
keep in readiness for them, as far ^ we could— seemed to be the 
inunediate task. The preparation was largely an ideological one. 
Eiist of all, there should be no doubt about the objective of 
politiral independence. This should be clearly understood as the 
only possible political goal for us; something radically difi^ent 
firom the vague and confusing talk of Dommion Status. Then 
there was the so^ goal. It would he too much, I felt, to expect 
the Congress to go far in this direction just then. The Congress 
was a purely political and nationalistic body, unused to thinking 
on other toes. But a beginning might be made. Outside the 
Congr^s, in labour darcjes and among the young, the idea could 
be pushed on much further. For this purpose I wanted to keep 
myself fiee froin Congress office, and I had a vague idea also of 
spending some months in remote rural areas to study their con- 



RETURN TO INDIA 167 

ditlons. But this was not to be, and events were to drag me 
again into the heart of Congress politics. 

Immediately on our arrival in Madras I was caught in the 
whirl. I presented a bunch of resolutions to the Working Com- 
mittee — ^resolutions on Independence, War Danger, association 
with the League against Imperialism, etc. — and nearly all of 
these were accepted and made into official Working Committee 
resolutions. I had to put them forward at the open session of 
the Congress, and, to my surprise, they were all almost unani- 
mously adopted. The Independence resolution was supported 
even by Mrs. Annie Besant. This all-round support was very 
gratifying, but I had an uncomfortable feeling that the resolu- 
tions were either not imderstood for what they were, or were 
distorted to mean something else. That this was so became 
apparent soon after the Congress, when a controversy arose on 
the meaning of the Independence resolution. 

These resolutions of mine were somewhat different from the 
usual Congress resolutions; they represented a new outlook. 
Many Congressmen no doubt liked them, some had a vague dis- 
like for them, but not enough to make them oppose. Probably 
the latter thought that they were academic resolutions, making 
litde difference either way, and the best way to get rid of them 
was to pass them and move on to something more important. 
The Independence resolution thus did not represent then, as it 
did a year or two later* a vital and irrepressible urge on the part 
of the Congress; it represented a widespread and growing 
sentiment. 

Gandhiji was in Madras and he attended the open Congress 
sessions, but he did not take any part in the shaping of policy. 
He did not attend the meetings of the Working Committee of 
which he was a member. That had been his general political 
attitude in the Congress since the dominance of the Swaraj 
Party. But he was frequently consulted, and little of importance 
was done without his knowledge. I do not know how far the 
resolutions I put before the Congress met with his approval. I 
am inclined to think that he disliked them, not so much because 
of what they said, but because of their general trend and out- 
look. He did not, however, critidse them on any occasion. My 
father was, of course, away in Europe at the time. 

The umreality of the Independence resolution came out in that 
very session of the Congress, when another resolution con- 
demning the Simon Commission and appealing ft>r its boycott 
was considered. As a corollaiy tc this it was proposed to convene 
an All-Parties Conference, which was to draw up a constitution 



i68 


JAAVAHAHLAL NEHRU 


for India. It was manifest that the moderate groups, with whom 
co-operation was sought, could never think in terms of Inde- 
pendence. The A'ery utmost they could go to was some form of 
Dominion Status. 

I stepped back into the Congress secretaryship. There were 
personal considerations — the desire of the President for the year. 
Dr. M. A. Ansari, who was an old and dear friend — and the 
fact that, as many of my resolutions had been passed, I ought 
to see them through. It was true that the resolution on the 
All-Parties Conference had partly neutralised the effect of my 
resolutions. Still, much remained. The real reason for my 
accepting office again was my fear that the Congress might, 
through the instrumentality of the All-Parties Conference, or 
because of other reasons, slide back to a more moderate and 


compromising position. It seemed to be in a hesitant mood, 
swinging alternately from one extreme to another. I wanted to 
prevent, as far as I could, the swing back to Moderation and to 
hold on to the Independence objecuve. 

The National Congress always attracts a large number of 
side-shows at its annual sessions. One of the side-shows at 


Madras was a Republican Conference which held its first (and 
last) sessions that year. I was asked to preside. The idea appealed 
to me, as I considered myself a republican. But I hesitated, as 
I did not know who was at the back of the new venture, and I 
did not want to associate myself with mushroom growths. I 
presided, eventually, but later I repented of this, for the Re- 
publican Conference turned out to be, like so many others, a 
still-bom affair. For several months I tried, and tried in vain, 
to get the text of the resolutions passed by it. It is amazing how 
many of our people love to sponsor new undertakings and then 
ignore them and leave them to shift for themselves. There is 
much in the criticism diat we are not a persevering lot. • 
Before we had dispersed from Madras after the Congress, news 
came of the death of Hakim Ajmal Khan at Delhi. As an 
ex-president of the Congress he was one of its elder statesmen; 
but he was something more also, and he occupied a unique place 
in the Congress leadership. Brought up as he was, entirely in the 
old conservative way, with no touch of modernism in it, and 
steeped in the culture of imperial Delhi of Mog^al days, it was 
a delight to watch his fine courtesy and hear his unhurried voice 
and listen to his dry humour. He was, in his manners, a typical 
aristocrat of the old order, with prinedy look and princely ways, 
and even his face bore a marked resemblance to the miniatures 
of the Moghal sovereigns. Such a person would not ordinarily 



RETURN TO INDIA 


i6g 

take to the rough-and-tumble of politics; and Britishers in India 
have often sighed for persons of this old type when the new 
breed of agitators has troubled them. Hakim Sahab had also 
little to do with politics in his early days. As the head of a 
famous family of physicians, he was busy with his eAormous 
practice. But even during the latter part of the War events, 
and the influence of his old friend and colleague, Dr. M. A. 
Ansari, were driving him to the Congress; and subsequent hap- 
penings — ^Martial Law in the Punjab and the Khilafat question — 
moved him deeply, and he turned with approval to the new 
Gandhian technique of non-co-operation. He brought a rare 
quality and precious gifts to the Congress— he became a link 
between the old order and the new, and gave the support of the 
former to the national movement; and thus he produced 
a harmony between the two, and gave strength and a certain 
stolidity to the advance guard of the movement. He brought 
the Hindus and Muslims much nearer to each other, for both 
honoured him and were influenced by his example. To Gandhiji 
he became a trusted friend, whose advice in regard to Hindu- 
Muslim matters was the final word for him. My father and 
Hakimji had naturally taken to each other. 

Last year I was accused by some leaders of the Hindu 
Mahasabha of my ignorance of Hindu sentiments because of 
my defective education and general background of ‘ Persian ' 
culture. What culture I possess, or whether I possess any at all, 
is a little difficult for me to say. Persian, as a language, un- 
happily, I do not even know. But it is true that my father had 
grown up in an Indo-Persian cultural atmosphere, which was 
the legacy in north India of the old Delhi court, and of which, 
even in these degenerate days, Delhi and Lucknow are the two 
chief centres. Kashmiri Brahmans had a remarkable capacity 
for adaptation, and coming down to the Indian plains and find- 
ing that this Indo-Persian culture was predominant at the time, 
they took to it, and produced, a number of fine scholars in 
Persian and Urdu. Later they adapted themselves with equal 
rapidity to the changing order, when a knowledge of English 
and the elements of European culture became necessary. But 
even now there are many distinguished scholars in Persian 
among the Kashmiris in India — Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and 
Raja Narendra Nath, to mention two of them. 

Hakim Sahab and my ffither had thus much in common, and 
they even discovered old family connections. They became great 
fiiends and addressed each other as Bhai Sahab— brother. 
Politics was the least of their many bonds. In his domestic 



170 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

habits Hakimji was extraordinarily conservative; he could not, 
or his family people could not, get out of old habits, I have 
never seen such amazingly strict purdah, or seclusion of women, 
as existed in his family. And yet Hakimji was firmly convinced 
that no nation advanced unless the women of that country freed 
themselves. He impressed this upon me, and told me how much 
he admired the part Turkish women had played in their free- 
dom struggle. It was chiefly because of Turkish women, he said, 
that Kemal Pasha had succeeded. 

The death of Hakim Ajmal Khan was a great blow to the 
Congress; it meant the removal of one of its stoutest supports. 
For all of us there has been since then something lacking in a 
visit to Delhi, for Delhi was so closely associated with Hakimji 
and his house in Billimaran. 

' Tile year 1928 was, politically, a full year, with plenty of 
activity all over the country. There seemed to be a new impulse 
moving the people forward, a new stir that was equally present 
in the most varied groups. Probably the change had been going 
on gradually during my long absence firom the country; it struck 
me as very considerable on my return. Early in 1926 India was 
still quiescent, passive, perhaps not fully recovered firom the 
effort of 1919-1922; in 1928 she seemed firesh, active, and full 
of suppressed energy. Everywhere there was evidence of this : 
among the industrial workers, the peasantry, middle-class youth, 
and the intelligentsia generally. 

The Trade ^nion movement had grown greatly, and the 
All-India Trade Union Congress, established seven or eight 
years previously, was already a strong and representative body. 
It had not only grown in numbers and in organisation, but its 
ideology was becoming more militant and extreme. Strikes 
were firequent, and class-consciousness was growing. The textile 
industry and the railways were the best organised, and of these 
the strongest and moat advanced unions were the Girtu Kamgar 
Union of Bombay and the G,I.P. Bailway Union. The growth 
of labour organisation had inevitably brought the seeds of in- 
ternal conflict and disruption from the West, and hardly had 
the Indian Trade Union Movement established itself when it 
threatened to split up into rival and hostile camps. There were 
those who adhered to the Second International, and those who 
favoured the Third; those who were moderately reformist in 
their outlook, and those who were firarikly revolutionary and 
out for radical changes. In between the two there were various 
shadra and degrees of opinion and, as is unfortunately the case 
m all mass organisations, of opportunism. 



RETURN TO INDIA 


!7I 

The peas^try was also astir. This was noticeable in the 
United Provinces and especially in Oudh, where large gatherings 
of protesting tenants became common. It was realised that the 
new Oudh tenancy law, which gave a life-tenure and had 
promised a great deal, made little difference to the hard lot of 
the peasant. In .Gujrat a conflict on a big scale developed be- 
tween the peasantry and the Government because of the attempt 
of the latter to increase revenue — Gujrat being an area of 
peasant-proprietors where Government deals directly with the 
peasants. This struggle was the Bardoli Satyagraha under the 
leadership of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. It was gallantly carried 
through to the admiration of the rest of India. The Bardoli 
peasantry met with a considerable measure of success; the real 
success of their campaign, however, lay in the. effect it produced 
amongst the peasantry all over India. Bardoli became a sign 
and a symbol of hope and strength and victory to the Indian 
peasant. 

Another very noticeable feature of the India of 1938 was the 
growjltJaf. the Yo uth M ovement. Everywhere youth leagues 
were being established, youth conferences were being held, "niey 
were a very varied, lot, from semi-religious ^oups to others dis- 
cussing revolutionary ideology and technique; but whatever 
their origin and auspices, such gathering of youth always began 
to discuss the vital social and economic problems of the axj, 
and generally, their tendency was for roqt-and-branch change. 

From the purely political point of view the year was noted for 
the boycott of the Sim^ Commission and ^what was called the 
constructive side of the boycott) the AU-Parties Conference. The 
moderate groups co-operated with the Congress in this boj^cott> 
and it was remarkably successful. Wherever the Commission 
went it was greeted by hostile crowds and the cry of “ Simon go 
back”, and thus vast numbers of the Indian masses became 
acquainted not only with Sir John Simon’s name but with two 
words of the English language, the only two they knew. These 
words must have become a hated obsession for the members of 
the Commission. The story is related that once, when they were 
staying at the Western Hostd in New Delhi, the refrain seemed 
to come to them in the night out of the darkness. They were 
greatly irritated at being pursued in this way, even at night. 
As a matter of fact, the noise that disturbed them came from 
thejackals that infest the waste places of the iinperial capital. 

The All-Parties Conference had no difficulty at all in settling 
the main principles of the constitution; they were to be of the 
demqcsatic paruamentary variety, and almost any one could 



172 JAWAHABLAL NEHKU 

draw them up. The real difficulty, and the only difficulty, came 
from the communal or minorities issue, and as the Conference 
had within its fold the representatives of all the extreme com- 
munal organisations, an agreement became extraordinarily 
difficult. It was a repetition of the old infructuous Unity Con- 
ferences. My father, who had returned from Europe m the 
spring, took great interest in the Conference. Ultimately, as a 
last resource, a small committee was appointed, with my father 
'as chairman, to draft the constitution and make a full report on 
the communal issue. This Committee came to be known as the 
Nehru Committee, and their subsequent report, as the Nehru 
Report. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru was also a member of this Com- 
mittee, and was responsible for part of the Report. 

J, was not a member of this Committee, but as- Congress 
Secretary I had much to do with it. It was an awkward situation 
for me, for I thought it wholly futile to draw up detailed paper 
constitutions when the real problem was the conquest of power. 
Another difficulty for me was the inevitable limitaiions by this 
mixed Committee of our goal to what was called Dominion 
Status and was, in fact, even less. For me the real importance 
of the Committee lay in the possibility of its finding a way out 
of the communal impasse. I did not expect a final solution of 
this question by some pact or agreement — that solution would 
only come by a divertion of interest to social and economic issues 
—but there was the possibility that even a temporary pact, if 
accepted by a sufficient number of people, would help to ease 
the situation and thus succeed in mverting interest to other 
issues. So I did not wish to obstruct the work of the Committee 
and I gave such help as I co'uld. 

Success seemed almost within grasp. Only two or three points 
remained to settle, and of these the really important one was 
the Punjab, where there was the Hindu-Muslim-Sikh triangle. 
The Committee in their report considered the question of the 
Punjab from a novel point of view, and supported their recom- 
mendation with the help of some revealing figures of the dis- 
tribution of population. But all this was in vain. Fear and 
mistrust remained on either side, and the little step to cross the 
short distance that remained was not taken. 

The AD-Parties Conference met at Lucknow to consider the 
r^ort of their Committee. Again some of us were in a 
dilemma, for we did not wish to come in the way of a commimal 
settlement, if ihat was possible, and yet we were not prepared 
to yield on the question of independence. We begged thw the 
conference leave this question open so that each constituent part 



RETURN TO INDIA 


m 

could have liberty of action on this issue — ^the Congress adhering 
to independence and the more moderate groups to Dominion 
Status. But my father had set his heart on the Report and he 
would not yield, nor perhaps could he under the circumstances. 
I was thereupon asked by our Independence group in the 
conference — and this was a large one — ^to make a statement to 
the Conference on its behalf, dissociating ourselves completely 
from everything that lowered the objective of independence. 
But we made it further clear that we would not be obstructive, 
as we did not wish to come in the way of the communal state- 
ment. 

This was not a very effective line to adopt on such a major 
issue; at best it was a negative gesture. A positive side was given 
to our attitude by our founding that very day the Independence 
for India League. 

The All-Parties Conference gave me another and a greater 
shock by adding to the Fundai nenta l Rights in the proposed 
constitution, at the instance of theOudh taluqadars, a clause 
guaranteeing their vested rights in their taluqas. The whole 
constitution was, of course, based on the idea of private prop- 
erty, but it <lid seem to me an outrage to make the property 
rignts in the huge semi-feudal estates one of the irremovable 
foundations of the constitution. This made it clear that the 
Congress leadership, and much more so the non-Congress people, 
prefered the company of the landed magnates to that of the 
sociaRy advanced groups in their own ranks. It was obvious that a 
wide gulf separated us from many of our leaders, and it seemed a 
little absurd for me to carry on as General Secretary of the Con- 
gress imder these circumstances. I offered my resignation on the 
ground of having been one of the foxmders of the Independence 
for India League. But the Working Committee would not agree 
to it and told me (as weU as Subhas Bose, who had also offered 
to resign on the same ground) that we could carry on with the 
League without any con^ct with the Congress policy. Indeed, 
the Congress had already declared for independence. And again 
I.agreed. It was surprising how easy it was to win me over to 
a withdrawal of my resignation. This happened on many 
occasions, and as neither party really liked the idea of a break, 
we clung to every pretext to avoid it. 

Gandhiji took no part in these All-Party Conference or Com- 
mittee meetings. He was not even present at the Lucknow 
Conference. 

Meanwhile the Simon Commission had been moving about, 
pursued by bladt flags and hostile crowds shouting, " Go back.” 



174 • JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Occasionally there .were minor conflicts between the police and 
the crowds. Lahore brought matters to a head and suddenly 
sent a thrill of indignation throughout the country. The anti- 
Simon Commission demonstration there was headed by Lala 
Lajpat Rai, and as he stood by the road-side in &ont of the 
thousands of demonstrators he was assaulted and beaten on his 
chest with a baton by a young English police officer. There had 
been no attempt whatever on the part of the crowd, much less 
on the part of Lalaji, to indulge in any methods of violence. 
Even so, as he stood peacefully by, he and many of his com- 
panions were severely beaten by the police. Any one who takes 
part in street demonstrations runs the risk of a conflict with the 
police, and, though. our demonstrations were almost always per- 
fectly peaceful, Lalaji must have known of this risk and taken 
it consciously. But still, the manner of the assault, the needless 
biutality of it, came as a shock to vast numbers of people in 
India. Those were the days when we were not used to lathi 
charges by the police; our sensitiveness had not been blunted 
by repeated brutality. To find that even the greatest of our 
leaders, the foremost and most popular man in the Punjab, 
could be so treated seemed little short of monstrous, and a dull 
anger spread all over the country, especially in north India. 
How hdpless we were, how despicable when we could not even 
protect the honour of our chosen leaders I 

The physical injury to Lalaji had been serious enough, as he 
had been hit on the chest and he had long suffered from heart 
^ease. Probably, in the case of a healthy young man the 
injury would not have been great, but Lalaji was neither young 
nor healthy. What effect this physical injury had on his death a 
few weeks later it is hardly possible to say definitely, though his 
doctors were of opinion that it hastened the end. But I tbinlf 
that there can be no doubt that the mental shock which accom- 
p^ed the physical injury had a tremendous effect on Lalaji. 
He felt angry and bitter, not so much at the personal humilia- 
tion, as at the national humiliation involved in the assault on 
him. 

It was this sense of national humiliation that weighed on the 
mind^of India, and when Lalaji’s death came soon after, inevit- 
ably it was connected with the assault, and sorrow itself gave 
pride of place to anger and indignation. It is well to appreciate 
this, for only so can we have some understanding of subsequent 
events, of the phenoinenon of Bhagat Singh, and of his sudden 
and ama2ing popularity in north India. It is very easy and very 
fetuous to condemn persons or acts without seeking to tmder- 



RETURN TO INDIA 


175 

Stand the springs of action, the causes that underlie them. 
Bhagat Singh was not previously well known; he did not become 
popular because of an act of violence, an act of terrorism. Ter- 
rorists have flourished in India, off and on, for nearly thirty 
years, and at no time, except in the early days in Bengal, did any 
of them attain a fraction of that popularity which came to 
Bhagat Singh. This is a patent fact which cannot be denied; it 
has to be admitted. And another fact, which is equally obvious, 
is that terrorism, in spite of occasional recrudescence, has no 
longer any real appeal for the youth of India. Fifteen years’ 
stress on non-violence has changed the whole background in 
India and made the masses much more indifferent to, and even 
hostile to, the idea of terrorism as a method of political action. 
Even the classes from which the terrorists are usually drawn, the 
lower middle-classes and intelligentsia, have been powerfully 
affected by the Congress propaganda against methods of 
violence. 'Their active and impatient elements, who think in 
terms of revolutionary action, also realise fully now that revolu- 
tion does not come through terrorism, and that terrorism is an 
outworn and profitless method which comes in the way of real 
revolutionary action. Terrorism is a dying thing in India and 
elsewhere, not because of Government coercion, which can only 
suppress and bottle up, not eradicate, but because of basic causes 
and world events. Terrorism usually represents the infancy of 
a revolutionary turge in a country, "niat stage passes, and with 
it passes terrorism as an important phenomenon. Occasional 
outbursts may continue because of local causes or individual 

S ressions. India has undoubtedly passed that stage, and no 
t even the occasional outbursts will gradually die out. But 
this does not mean that all people in India have ceased to believe 
in methods of violence. They have, very largely, ceased to be- 
lieve in individual violence and terrorism but many, no doubt, 
stiU think that a time may come when organised, violent 
methods may be necessary for gaining fieedom, as they have 
often been necessary in other countries. That is to-day an 
academic issue- which time alone will put to the test; it has 
nothing to do with terroristic methods. 

Bhagat Singh thus did not become popular because of his act 
of terrorism, but because he seemed to vindicate, for the 
moment, the honour of Lala Lajpat Rai, and through him at 
the nation. He became a symbol; the act was flirgotten, the 
symbol remained, and witlun a few months each town and 
village of the Punjab, and to a lesser extent in the rest of 
northern India, resounded with his name. Innumerable songs 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

grew up about him, and the popularity that the man achieved 
was something amazing. 

A short time after the Simon Commission beating, Lala Rajpat 
Rai attended a meeting of the All-India Congress Committee 
in Delhi. He bore marks of injuries, and was still suftering 
from the after-effects. The meeting was held after the Lucknow 
All-Parties Conference, and the question of Independence came 
up for discussion in some form or otlier. I forget the exact point 
that was in issue, but I remember speaking at some length, and 
pointing out that the time had come for the Congress to choose 
between a revolutionary outlook, which involved radical changes 
in our political and social structure, and a reformist objective 
and method. The speech had no importance, and I would have 
forgotten it but for the fact that Lalaji replied to it in the Com- 
mittee, and criticised some parts of it. One of his warnings was 
to the effect that we should expect nothing from the British 
Labour Party. That warning was not necessary so far as I was 
concerned, for I was not an admirer of the official leadership 
of British Labour; the only thing that could surprise me in 
regard to it would have been to find it supporting the struggle 
for India’s fireedom, or doing an3rthing effectively anti-imperialist 
or likely to lead to socialism. 

On returning to Lahore, Lalaji reverted to the subject of my 
speech at the A.I.C.C. meeting, and began a series of articles 
on various issues connected with it in his weekly journal The 
People. Only the first article appeared; before the second could 
come out in the next week’s issue, he was dead. That first un- 
finished article of his, perhaps his last writing for publication, 
has had a melancholy interest for me. 