OUT AGAIN 

One misses many things in prison, but perhaps most of all one 
misses the sound of women’s voices and children’s laughter. 
The sounds one usually hears are not of the pleasantest. The 
voices are harsh and minatory, and the language brutal and 
largely consisting of swear-words. Once I remember being struck 
by a new want. I was in the Lucknow District Gaol and I realised 
suddenly that I had not heard a dog bark for seven or eight 
months. 

On the last day of January 1923 all of us politicals in the 
Lucknow Gaol were discharged. There must have been between 
one hundred and two hundred * special class prisoners in Luck- 
now then. All those who had been sentenced to’ a year or less in 
December 1921 or the beginning of 1922 had already served out 
their sentences. Only those with longer sentences, and a few who 
had come back a second time, remained. This sudden release 
took us by surorise, as there had been no previous intimation of 
an amnesty. The local Provincial Council had passed a resolu- 
tion favouring a political amnesty, but the executive Government 
seldom pays heed to such demands. As it happened, however, 
the time was propitious from the point of view of Government. 
The Congress was doing nothing against the Government, and 
Congressmen were engrossed in mutual squabbles. There were 
not many well-known Congress people left in gaol and so the 
gesture was made. 

•There is always a feeling of relief and a sense of glad excite- 
ment in coming out of the prison gate. The fresh air and open 
expanses, the moving street scene, and the meeting with old 
friends, all go to the head and slightly intoxicate. Almost, there 
is a touch of hysteria in one’s first reactions to the outer world. 
We felt exhilarated, but this was a passing sensation, for the state 
of Congress politics was discouraging enough. In the place of 
ideals mere were intrigues, and various cliques were trying to 
capture the Congress machinery by the usual methods which 
have made politics a hateful word to those who are at all 
sensitive. 

■ My own inclination -was wholly against Council entry, because 
this seemed to lead inevitably to compromising tactics and to 
a continuous watering down of our objective. But there really 



OUT AGAIN 


99 

was no other political programme before the country. The no- 
changers laid stress on a ‘ constructive programme which in 
effect was a programme of social reform, and its chief merit 
was that it brought our workers in touch with the masses- This 
was not likely to satisfy those who believed in political action, 
and it was inevitable that after a wave of direct action, which 
had not succeeded, there should be a phase of parliamentary 
activity. Even this activity was envisaged by Deshbandhu Das 
and my father, the leaders of the new movement, as one of 
obstruction and defiance and not of co-operation and con- 
struction. 

Mr. C. R. Das had always favoured entry into the legislatures 
for the purpose of carrying on the national struggle there also. 
My father had more or less the same outlook, his acceptance of 
the Council boycott in 1920 was partly a subordination of his own 
view-point to Gandhiji’s. He wanted to throw his full weight into 
the struggle, and the only way to do it then was to accept the 
Gandhi formula in toto. The minds of many of the younger 
people were full of the tactics of Sinn Fein in so far as they had 
captured the parliamentary seats and then refused to enter the 
Plouse of Commons. I remember pressing Gandhiji in the sum- 
mer of 1920 to adopt this variant of the boycott, but in such 
matters he was adamant. Mohamad Ali was in Europe then on 
a Khilafat deputation. On his return he also expressed his regret 
at the method of boycott adopted; he would have preferred 
the Sinn Fein way. But it was quite immaterial what other in- 
dividuals thought in the matter, as ultimately Gandhiji’s view 
was bound to prevail. He was the author of the movement, and 
it was felt that he must be given freedom as to the details. His 
chief objections to the Sinn Fein method were (apart fi"om its 
association with violence) that it would not be understood by the 
masses as much as a straight call to boycott the polling-booths 
and the voting. To get elected and then not to go to the Councils 
would create confusion in the mass mind. Further, that once 
our people got elected they would be drawn towards the Councils 
and it would be difficult for them to keep out of them. There 
was not enough discipline and power in our movement to keep 
them out for long, and a demoralising dribble would set in 
towards the many direct and indirect ways of taking advantage 
of Government patronage through the Councils. 

These were weighty arguments and, indeed, we saw many of 
them justified in the middle ’twenties when the Swaraj Party 
went into the Councils. And yet one cannot help wondering 
what would have happened if the Congress had set itself to 



lOO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

capture the legislatures in 1920. There can be no doubt that, 
supported as it was by the Khilafat Committee, it would have 
woti almost every elective seat in the provincial Councils as well 
as in the central Assembly. To-day (August 1934) there is again 
talk of the Congress putting up candidates for the Assembly, 
and a Parliamentary Board has been set up. But much has hap- 
pened since igao to deepen the fissures in our social and 
political fabric, and whatever may be the measure of success 
of the Congress in the coming elections, it can hardly be what 
it might have been in igso. 

On my discharge from gaol I co-operated with a few others who 
were trying to bring about an understanding between the rival 
groups. We met with little success, and I was fed up with the 
pro-changc and no-change politics. As secretary of the U.P. Pro- 
vincial Congress Committee I devoted myself to the work of 
Congress organi-sation. There was much to be done after the 
shake-up of the past year, I worked hard, but I worked with 
little purpose. Mentally I was at a loose end. Soon a new field 
of activity opened out before me. Within a few weeks of my 
release I was pitcljfijfked into the headship of the Allahabad 
Municipality. This election was so uncKpected that forty-five 
minutes before the event no one had mentioned my name, or 
perhaps even thought of me, in this connection. But at the last 
moment it was felt on the Congress side that I was the only 
person of their group who was certain of success. 

It so happened that year that leading Congressmen all over 
the country became presidents of municipalities. Mr. C, R. Das 
became the first Mayor of Calcutta, Mr. Vithalbhai Patel the 
President of Bombay Corporafion, Sardar Vallabbhai Patel of 
Ahmedabad. In the United Provinces most of the big muni- 
cipalities had Congressmen for their chairman. 

Municipal work in all its varied forms began to interest me, 
and I gave more and more time to it. Some of its problems 
fascinated me. I studied the subject and developed ambitious 
notions of municipal reform. I was to find out later that there 
is little room for ambition or startling development in Indian 
munidpalities as they are constituted to-day. Still, there was 
room for work and a cleaning and speeding-up of the machine, 
and I worked hard enough at it Just then my Congress work 
was growing, and in addition to the provincial secretaryship I 
was made the All-India Secretary also. These various jobs often 
made me work fifteen hours a day, and the end of the day found 
me thoroughly exhausted. ‘ 

On my return home firom gaol the first letter that met my eyes 



OUjl again lol 

was one from Sir Grimwood Mears, the then Chief Justice of 
the Allahabad High Court. The letter had been written before 
my discharge, but evidently in the knowledge that it was coming. 
I was a little surprised at the cordiality of his language and his 
invitation to me to visit him frequently. I hardly knew him. 
He had just come to Allahabad in 1919 when I was drifting 
away from legal practice. I think I argued only one case before 
him, and that was my last one in the High Court. For some 
reason or other he developed a partiality for me without knowing 
much about me. He had an idea — ^he told me .so later — that I 
would go far, and he wanted to be a wholesome inffuence on me 
to make me appreciate the British view-point. His method was 
subtle. He was of opinion, and there are many Englishmen who 
still think so, that the average 'extremist' politician in India 
had become anti-British because in the social sphere he had been 
treated badly by Englishmen. This had led to resentment and 
bitterness and extremism. There is a story, which has been 
repeated by responsible persons, to the effect that my father was 
refused election to an English club and this made him anti- 
British and extremist. The story is wholly without foundation 
and is a distortion of an entirely different incident.* But to many 
an Englishman such instances, whether true or not, afford a 
simple and sufficient explanation of the origins of the nationalist 
movement. As a matter of fact neither my father nor I had any 
particular grievance on this score. As individuals we had usually 
met with courtesy from the Englishman and we got on well tvith 
him, though, like all Indians, we were no doubt racially conscious 
of subjection, and resented it bitterly. I must confess that even 
to-day I get on very well with an Englishman, unless he happens 
to be an official and wants to patronise me, and even then there 
is no lack of humour in our contacts. Probably I have more in 
common with him than the Liberals or others who co-operate 
with him politically in India. 

Sir Grimwood's idea was to root out this original cause of 
bitterness by friendly intercourse and frank and courteous treat- 
ment. 1 saw him several times. On the pretext of objecting to 
some municipal tax he would come to see me and discuss other 
matters. On one occasion he made quite an onslaught on the 
Indian Liberals— timid, weak-kneed opportunists wilfr no char- 
acter or backbone, he called them, and his language was stronger 
and full of contempt. " Do you think we have any respect for 
them^ " he said. I wondered why he spoke to me in this way; 

* See the footnote in Chapter XXXVIII for a fuller account of 
th 5 «' 



102 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

probably because he thought that this kind of talk might please 
me. And then he led up the conversation to the new Councils 
and their Ministers and the opportunities these Ministers had 
for serving their country. Education was one of the most vital 
problems before the country. Would not an Education Minister, 
with freedom to act as he chose, have a worthy opportunity to 
mould the destinies of millions, the chance of a lifetime? Sup- 
pose, he went on, a man like you, ivith intelligence, character, 
ideals, and the energy to push them through, was in charge of 
education for the province, could you not perform wonders? 
And he assured me, adding that he had seen the Governor 
recently, that I would be given perfect freedom to work out my 
policy. Then realising, perhaps, that he had gone too far, he 
said that he could not, of course, commit anybody officially, and 
the suggestion he had made was a personal one. 

I was diverted by Sir Grimwood’s diplomatic and roundabout 
approach to the proposal he had made. The idea of my associat- 
ing myself with the Government as a Ministei* was unthinkable 
for me i indeed, it was hateful to me. But I have often yearned, 
then as well as in later years, for a chance to do some solid, 
positive, constructive work. Destruction and agitation and non- 
co-operation are hardly normal activities for human beings. And 
yet, such is our fate, that we can only reach the land where we 
can build after passing through the deserts of conflict and 
destruction. And it may be that most of us will spend our 
energies and our lives in struggling and panting through those 
shifting sands, and the building will have to be done by our 
children or our children’s children. 

Ministries were going cheap in those days, in the United Pro- 
vinces at least. The two Liberal Ministers, who had functioned 
throughout the non<o-operation period, had gone. When the 
Congress movement threatened the existing order, the Govern- 
ment tried to exploit the Liberal Ministers in fighting Congress. 
They were respected then and treated with honour by the 
executive government, for it was something to hold them ^ in 
those days of trouble, as supporters of the Government, "ftey 
thought, perhaps, that this respect and honour were due to them 
as of right, not realising that this was but a reaction on the part 
of Government to the mass attack of the Congress. When that 
attack was drawn off the value of the Liberal Ministers fell 
heavily in the eyes of Government, and the respea and honour 
were suddenly conspicuous by their absence. The Ministers re- 
sented this^ but this availed them little, and soon they were 
forced to resign. Then began a search for new Ministers, and 



OUT AGAIN 


103 

this was not immediately successful. The handful of Liberals 
in the Council kept aloof in sympathy with their colleagues 
who had been unceremoniously thrown out. Of the others, 
mostly zamindars, there were few who could be called even 
moderately educated. The Congress having boycotted the 
Councils, a curious assortment of people had got in. 

There is a story of a person who was offered a ministership in 
the U.P. about this time, or perhaps a little later. He is reported 
to have replied that he was not vain enough to consider himself 
an unusually clever man, but he did think himself to be moder- 
ately intelligent and, perhaps, a little above the average, and he 
hoped that he had that reputation. Did the Government want 
him to accept a ministership and thus proclaim himself to the 
world to be a damned fool? 

This protest had some justification. The Liberal Ministers had 
been narrow-minded with no broad vision of politics or social 
affairs, but that was the fault of the sterile Liberal creed. They 
had, however, the ability of professional men, and they did their 
routine work conscientiously. Some of those who followed them 
in office came from the ranks of the zamindars, and their edu- 
cation, even in the formal sense, had been strictly limited. I 
think they might justly have been called literate, and nothing 
more. It almost seemed that the Governor chose these gentle- 
men and put them in high office to display the utter incapacity 
of Indians. Of them it might well have been said that : 

“ Fortune advanced thee that all might aver 
That nothing is impossible to her.” ‘ 

Educated or not, these Ministera had the zamindar vote with 
them, and they could give delightful garden parties to the high 
officials. What worthier use could be made of the money that 
came to them from their starving tenantry? 


‘ Richard Garnett. 