LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 

Imprisonment for political offences was not a new thing in the 
India of 1921. From the time of the Bengal partition agitation 
especially, there had always been a continuous stream of men 
going to prison, sentenced often to very long terms. There had 
been internments without trial also. The greatest Indian leader 
of the day, Lokamanya Tilak, was sentenced in his declining 
years to six years’ imprisonment. The Great War speeded up 
this process of internment and imprisonment, and conspiracy 
cases became frequent, usually resulting in death sentences or 
life terms. The Ali brothers and M. Abulkalam Azad -were 
among the war-time internees. Soon after the war, martial law in 
the Punjab took a heavy toll, and large numbers were sentenced 
in conspiracy cases or summary trials. So political imprisonment 
had become a frequent enough occurrence in India, but so far it 
had not been deliberately courted. It had come in the course of 
a person’s activities, or perhaps because the secret police did not 
fancy him, and every effort was made to avoid it by means of 
a defence in the law court. In South Africa, of course, a different 
example had been set by Gandhiji and thousands of his fol- 
lowers in their campaign of Sat^agraha. 

But still in 1921 prison was an almost unknown place, and 
very few knew what happened behind the grim gates that swal- 
lowed the new convict. Vaguely we imagined that its inhabitants 
were desperate people and dangerous criminals. In our minds 
the place was associated with isolation, humiliation, and suffer- 
ing, and, above all, the fear of the unknown. Frequent references 
to gaol-going from 1920 onwards, and the march of many of our 
comrades to prbon, gradually accustomed us to the idea and 
took away the edge from that almost involtmtary feeling of re- 
pugnance and reluctance. But no amount of previous mental 
preparation could prevent the tension and nervous excitement 
that filled us when we first entered the iron gates. Since those 
days, thirteen years ago, I imagine that at least three hundred 
thousand men and women of India have entered those gates for 
political offences, although often enough the actual charge has 
been under some other section of the criminal code. Thousands 
of these have gone in and out many a time; they have got to 
know well what to expect inside; they have tried to adapt them- 

oo 



LUCKNOW DISTKICT GAOL gi 

selves to the strange life there, as far as one can adapt oneself to 
an existence full of abnormality and a dull suffering and a dread- 
ful monotony. We grow accustomed to it, as one grows ac- 
customed to almost anything; and yet every time that we 
enter those gates again, there is a bit of the old excitement, a 
feeling of tension, a quickening of the pulse. And the eyes 
turn back involuntarily to take a last good look outside at the 
greenery and wide spaces, and people and conveyances moving 
about, and familiar faces that they may not see again for a long 
time. 

My first term in gaol, which ended rather suddenly after three 
months, was a hectic period both for us' and the gaol staff. The 
gaol officials were half paralysed by the influx of the new type 
of convict. The number itself of these newcomers, added to 
from day to day, was extraordinary and created an impression 
of a flood which might sweep away the old traditional land- 
marks. More upsetting still was the type of the newcomer. It 
belonged to all classes, but had a high proportion of the middle 
class. All these classes, however, had this in common; they 
differed entirely from the ordinary convict, and it was not easy 
to treat them in the old way. This was recognised by the authori- 
ties, but there vras nothing to take the place of the existing 
rules; there were no precedents and no experience. The average 
Congress prisoner was not very meek and mild, and even inside 
the gaol walls numbers gave him a feeling of strength. The agita- 
tion outside, and the new interest of the public in what trans- 
pired inside the prisons, added to this. In spite of this somewhat 
aggressive attitude, our general policy was one of co-operation 
wi3i the gaol authorities. But for our help, the troubles of the 
officials would have been far greater. The gaoler would come to 
us frequently and ask u? to visit some of the barracks containing 
our volimteers in order to soothe them or get them to agree to 
something. 

We had come to prison of our own accord, many of the volun- 
teers indeed having pushed their way in almost uninvited. There 
was thus hardly any question of any one of them trying to 
escape. If he had any desire to go out, he could do so easily by 
expressing regret for his action or giving an undertaking that he 
would refrain from such acdvity in future. An attempt to escape 
would only bring a measure of ignominy, and in itself was tan- 
tamount to a withdrawal from political acdvity of the civil 
resistance variety. The superintendent of our prison in Lucknow 
fully appreciated this and used to tell the gaoler (who was a Khan 
Samb) that if he could succeed in allowing some of the Congress 



92 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

prisoners to escape he, the superintendent, would recommend 
him to Government for the title of Khan Bahadur. 

Most of our fellow-prisoners were kept in huge barracks in the 
inner circle of the prison. About eighteen of us, selected I sup- 
pose for better treatment, were kept in an old weaving shed with 
a large open space attached. My fether, two of my cousins, and I 
had a small shed to ourselves, about 20 feet by 16. We had con- 
siderable freedom in moving about from one barrack to another. 
Frequent interviews with relatives outside were allowed. News- 
papers came, and the daily news of fresh arrests and the develop- 
ments of our struggle kept up an atmosphere of excitement. 
Mutual discussions and talks took up a lot of time, and I could 
do little reading or other solid work. I spent the mornings in a 
thorough cleaning and washing of our shed, in washing father’s 
and my own clothes, and in spinning. It was winter, the best 
time of year in North India. For the first ftw .weeks we were 
allowed to open classes for our volunteers, or such of them as 
were illiterate, to teach them Hindi and Urdu and other elemen- 
tary subjects. In the afternoons we played volley-ball.* 

Gradually restrictions grew. We were stopped from going out- 
side our enclosure and visiting the part of the gaol where most 
of our volunteers were kept. The classes naturally stopped. I 
was discharged about that time. 

I went out early in March, and six or seven weeks later, in 
April, I returned. I found that the conditions had greatly 
changed. Father had been transferred to the Naini Tal Gaol and, 
soon after his departure, new rules were enforced. All the 
prisoners in the big weaving shed, where I had been kept pre- 
viously, were transferred to the inner gaol and kept in the bar- 
racks (single halls) there. Each barrack was practically a gaol 
within a gaol, and no communications were allowed between 
different barracks. Interviews and letters were now restricted to 
one a month. The food was much simpler, though we were 
allowed to supplement it firom outside. 

In the barrack in which I was kept there must have been about 

* A ridiculous story has appeared in the Press, and, though con- 
tradicted, condnues to appear from time to dme. According to this. 
Sir Harcourt Butler, the men Governor of the U.P., sent champagne 
to my father in prison. Sir Harcourt sent ray father nothing at all 
in prison; nobody sent him champagne or any other alcoholic drink; 
and indeed he had given up alcohol in 1930 after the Congress took 
to non-co-operation, and was not taking any such drinks at that 
time, 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 93 

fifty persons. We were all crowded together, our beds being 
about three or four feet from each other. Fortunately almost 
everybody in that barrack was known to me, and there were 
many friends. But the utter want of privacy, all day and night, 
became more and more difficult to endure. Always the same 
crowd looking on, the same petty annoyances and irritations, 
and no escape fi:om them to a quiet nook. We bathed in public 
and washed our clothes in public, and ran round and round the 
barrack for exercise, and talked and argued till we had largely 
exhausted each other’s capacity for intelligent conversation. It 
was the dull side of family life, magnified a hundred-fold, with 
few of its graces and compensations, and all this among people 
of all kinds and tastes. It was a great nervous strain for all of us, 
and often I yearned for solitude. In later years I was to have 
enough of this solitude and privacy in prison, when for months 
I would see no one except an occasional gaol official. Again I 
lived in a state of nervous tension, but this time I longed for 
suitable company. I thought then sometimes, almost with envy, 
of my crowded existence in the Lucknow District Gaol in 1922, 
and yet I knew well enough that of the two I preferred the 
solitude, provided at least that I could read and write. 

And yet I must say that the company was unusually decent 
and pleasant, and we got on well together. But all of us, I sup* 
pose, got a little bored with the others occasionally and wanted 
to be away from them and have a little privacy. The nearest 
approach to privacy that I could get was by leaving my barrack 
and sitting in the open part of the enclosure. It was the monsoon 
season and it was usually possible to do so because of the clouds. 
I braved the heat and an occasional drizzle even, and spent as 
much time as possible outside the barrack. 

Lying there in the open, I watched the skies and the clouds 
and I realised, better than I had ever done before, how amaz- 
ingly beautiful were their changing hues. 

" To watch the changing douds, like clime in clime; 

, Oh! sweet to lie and bless the luxury of time.” 

Time was not a luxury for to, it was more of a burden. But 
the time I spent in watching those ever-shifting monsoon clouds 
was filled with delight and a sense of relief. I had the joy of 
having made almost a discovery, and a feeling of escape firom 
confinement, I do not know why that particular monsoon had 
that great effect on me; no previous or subsequent one has moved 
me in that way. I had seen and admired many a fine sunrise 
and sunset in the mountains and over the sea, and bathed in its 



94 JAWAHARLAL KEHRU 

glory, and felt stirred for the time being by its magnificence. 
Having seen it, I had almost taken it for granted and passed on 
to other things. But in gaol there were no sunrises or sunsets to 
be seen, the horizon was hidden from us, and late in the morning 
the hot-rayed sun emerged over our guardian walls. There were 
no colours anywhere, and our eyes hardened and grew dull at 
seeing always that same drab view of mud-coloured wall and 
barrack. They must have hungered for some light and shade 
and colouring, and when the monsoon clouds sailed gaily by, 
assuming fantastic shapes, and playing in a riot of colour, . I 
gasped in surprised delight and watched them almost as if I 
was in a trance. Sometimes the clouds would break, and one saw 
through an opening in them that wonderful monsoon phenome- 
non, a dark blue of an amazing depth, which seemed to be a 
portion of infinity. 

The restrictions on us gradually grew in number, and stricter 
rules were enforced. The Government, having got the measure 
of our movement, wanted us to experience the full extent of its 
displeasure with our temerity in having dared to challenge it. 
The introduction of new rules or the manner of their enforce- 
ment led to friction between the gaol authorities and the political 
prisoners. For several months nearly all of us — ^we were some 
hundreds at the time in that particular gaol — gave up our inter- 
views as a protest. Evidently it was thought that some of us 
were the trouble-makers, and so seven of us were transferred to a 
distant part of the gaol, quite cut off from the main barracks. 
Among those who were thus separated were Purushottam Das 
Tandon, Mahadev Desai, George Joseph, Balkrishna Sharma, 
Devadas Gandhi and 1. 

We were sent to a smaller enclosure, and there were some dis- 
advantages in living there. But on the whole I was glad of the 
change. There was no crowdiiw here; we could live in greater 

a uiet and with more privacy. There was more time to read or 
o other work. We were cut off completely from our colleagues 
in other parts of ihe gaol as well as firom the outside world, for 
newspapers were now stopped for all political prisoners. 

Newspapers did not come to us, but some news firom outside 
trickled through, as it always manages to trickle through in 
prison. Our monthly interviews and letters also brought us odd 
bits of information. We saw; that our movement was at -a low 
ebb outside. The magic moment had passed and success seemed 
to retire into the dim future. Outside, the Congress was split into 
two factions— the pro-changers and no-changers. The former, 
under the leadership of Deshbandhu Das and my father, wanted 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 95 

the Congress to take part in the new elections to the central and 
provincial councils and, if possible, to capture these legislatures; 
the latter, led by C. Rajagopalachari, opposed any change 
of the old programme of non-co-operation. Gandhiji was, 
of course, in prison at the time. The fine ideals of tlie move- 
ment which had carried us forward, as on the crest of an 
advancing tide, were being swamped by petty squabbles and 
intrigues for power. We realised how much easier it was to 
do great and venturesome deeds in moments of enthusiasm 
and excitement than to carry on fi'om day to day when the 
glow was past. Our spirits were damped by the news from 
outside, and this, added to the various humours that prison 
produces, increased the strain of life there. But still there re- 
mained within- us an inner feeling of satisfaction, that we had 
preserved our self-respect and dignity, that we had acted rightly 
whatever the consequences. The future was dim, but, whatever 
shape it might take, it seemed that it would be the lot of many 
of us to spend a great part of our lives in prison. So we talked 
amongst ourselves, and I remember particularly a conversation 
with George Joseph in which we came to this conclusion. Since 
those days Joseph has drifted far apart from us and has even 
become a vigorous critic of our doings. I wonder if he ever 
remembers that talk we had on an autumn evening in the Civil 
Ward of the Lucknow District Gaol? 

We settled down to a routine of work and exercise. For exer- 
cise we used to run round and round the little enclosure, or two 
of us would draw water, like two bullocks yoked together, pull- 
ing a huge leather bucket from a well in our yard. In this way 
we watered a small vegetable garden in our enclosure. Most of 
us used to spin a little daily. But reading was my principal occu- 
pation during those winter days and long evenings. Almost 
always, whenever the superintendent visited us, he found me 
reading. This devotion to reading seemed to get on his nerves a 
little, and he remarked on it once, adding that, so fer as he was 
concerned, he had practically finished his general reading at the 
age of twelve I No doubt this abstention on his part had been of 
use to that gallant English colonel in avoiding troublesome 
thoughts, and perhaps it helped him subsequently in rising to 
the position of Inspector-General of Prisons in the United 
Provinces. 

The long winter evenings and the clear Indian sky attracted us 
to the stars and, with the help of some charts, we spotted many 
of them. Nightly we would await their appearance and greet 
them with the satisfacion of seeing old acquaintances. 



96 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

So we passed our time, and the days lengthened themselves 
into weeks, and the weeks became months. We grew accustomed 
to our routine existence. But in the world outside the real burden 
fell on our womenfolk, our mothers and wives and sisters. They 
wearied with the long waiting, and their very freedom seemed a 
reproach to them when their loved ones were behind prison bars. 

Soon after our first arrest in December 1931 the police started 
paying frequent visits to Anand Bhawan, our house in Allaha- 
bad. They came to realise the fines which had been imposed on 
father and me. It was the Congress policy not to pay fines. So 
the police came day after day and attached and carried away 
bits of furniture. Indira, my four-year-old daughter, was greatly 
annoyed at this continuous process of despoilation and protested 
to the police and expressed her strong displeasure. I am afraid 
those early impressions are likely to colour her future views 
about the police force generally. 

In the gaol every effort was made to keep us apart from the 
ordinary non-political convicts, special gaols being as a rule re- 
served for politicals. But complete segregation was impossible, 
and we often came into touch with those prisoners and learnt 
from them, as well as directly, the realities of prison life in those 
days. It was a story of violence and widespread graft and corrup- 
tion. The food was quite amazingly bad; I tried it repeatedly 
and found it quite uneatable. The staff was usually wholly 
incompetent and was paid very low salaries, but it had every 
opportunity to add to its income by extorting money on every 
conceivable occasion from the prisoners or their relatives. The 
duties and responsibilities of the gaoler and his assistants and the 
warders, as laid down by the Gaol Manual, were so many and so 
various that it was quite impossible for any person to discharge 
them conscientiously or competently. The general policy of the 
prison administration in the United Provinces (and probably in 
other provinces) had absolutely nothing to do with the reform 
of the prisoner or of teaching him good habits and useful trades. 
The object of prison labour was to harass the convict.^ He was 

• ^ Article 987 of the United Provinces Gaol Manual, which has now 
been removed from the new edition, stated that : 

“ Labour in a gaol should be considered primarily as a means of 
punishment and not of employment only; neither should the ques- 
tion of its being highly remunerative have much weight, the object 
of paramount importance being that prison work should be irksome 
and laborious and a cause of dread to evil-doers." 

This might be compared with the following articles of the Russian 

rntnin-l Podi-- 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 97 

to be frightened and broken into blind submission; the idea was 
that he should carry away from prison a fear and a horror of it, 
so that he might avoid crime and a return to prison in the 
future. 

There have been some changes in recent years for the better. 
Food has improved a little, so also clothing and other matters. 
This was largely due to the agitation carried on outside by poli- 
tical prisoners after their discharge. Non-co-operation also 
resulted in a substantial increase in the warders’ salaries to give 
them an additional inducement to remain loyal to the Sarkar. 
A feeble effort is also made now to teach reading and writing to 
the boys and younger prisoners. But all these changes, welcome 
as they are, barely scratch the problem, and the old spirit remains 
much the same. 

The great majority of the political prisoners had to put up 
with this regular treatment for ordinary prisoners. They liad no 
special privileges or other treatment, but being more aggressive 
and intelligent than the others, they could not easily be ex- 
ploited, nor could money be made out of them. Because of this 
they were naturally not popular with the staff, and when occasion 
offered itself a breach of gaol discipline by any of tliem was 
punished severely. For such a breach a young boy of fifteen or 
sixteen, who called himself Azad, was ordered to be flogged. 
He was stripped and tied to the whipping triangle, and as each 
stripe fell on him and cut into his flesh, he shouted “ Mahatma 
Gandhi ki Jai Every stripe brought forth the slogan till the 
boy fainted. Later, that boy was to beepme one of the leaders 
of the group of Terrorists in North India. 


Article 9 . — “ The measures of social defence do not have for their 
object the infliction of physical suffering nor the lowering of human 
dignity, nor are they meant to avenge or to punish." 

Artide 26 . — " Sentences, being a measure of protection, must be 
free from any element of torture, and must not cause the criminal 
needless or superfluous suffering.” 