 BACK HOME AND WAR-TIME POLITICS 
IN INDIA 

Towards the end of  India was, politically, very dull. Tilak 
was in gaol, the Extremists had been sat upon and were lying low 
without any effective leadership, Bengal was quiet after the un- 
settling of the partition of the province, and the Moderates had 
been eliectively " rallied ” to the Minto-Morley scheme of coun- 
cils. There was some interest in Indians overseas, especially in the 
condition of Indians in South Africa. The Congress was a 
moderate group, meeting annually, passing some feeble resolu- 
tions, and attracting little attention. 

I visited, as a delegate, the Bankipore Congress during Christ- 
mas . It was very much an English-knowing upper class affiiir 
where morning coats and well-pressed trousers were greatly in 
evidence. Essentially it was a social gathering with no political 
excitement or tension. Gokhale, fresh from South Africa, at- 
tended it and was the outstanding person of the session. High- 
strung, full of earnestness and a nervous energy, he seemed to be 
one of the few persons present who took politics and public affairs 
seriously and felt deeply about them. I was impressed by him. 

A characteristic incident occurred when Gokhale was leaving 
Bankipore. He was a member of the Public Services Commission 
at the time and, as such, was entitled to a first class railway com- 
partment to himself. . He was not well and crowds and uncon- 
genial company upset him. He liked to be left alone by himself 
and, after me stram of the Congress session, he was looking for- 
ward to a quiet journey by train. He got his compartment but 
the rest of the train was crowded with delegates returning to 
Calcutta. After a litde while, Bhupendra Nath Basy, who later 
became a member of the India, Council, came up to Gokhale and 
casually asked him if he could travel in his compartment. Mr. 
Gokhale was a little taken aback as Mr. Basu was an aggressive 
talker, but naturally he agreed. A few minutes later Mr. Basu 
again came up to Gokhale and asked him if he would mind if a 
fnend of his also travelled in the same compartment. Mr. Gok- 
hale again mild ly agreed. A little before the train left, Mr. Basu 
mentioned casually that both he and his fidend would find it 
very rmcomfortable to sleep in the upper berths, so would Gok- 
hale mind occupying an upper berth so that the two lower berths 

* 



 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

might be taken by them? And that, I think, was the arrangement 
arrived at and poor Mr. Gokhale had to climb up and spend a bad 
night. 

I took to the law and joined the High Court. The work in- 
terested me to a certain extent. The early months after my return 
from Europe were pleasant. I was glad to be back home and to 
pick up old threads. But gradually the life I led, in common with 
most others of my kind, began to lose all its freshness and I felt 
that I was‘ being engulfed in a dull routine of a pointless and 
futile existence. I suppose my mongrel, or at least mixed, educa- 
tion was responsible for this feeling of dissatisfaction with my 
surroundings. The habits and the ideas that had grown in me 
during my seven years in England did not fit in with things as I 
found them. Fortunately my home atmosphere was fairly con- 
genial and that was some help, but it was not enough. For the 
rest there was the Bar Library and the club and the same people 
were to be found in both, discussing the same old topics, usually 
connected with the legal profession, over and over again. De- 
cidedly the atmosphere was not intellectually stimulating and a 
sense of the utter insipidity of life grew upon me. There were 
not even worthwhile amusements or diversions. 

G. Lowes Dickinson is reported 'by E, M. Forster, in his recent 
life of him, to have once said about India : “ And why can’t the 
taces meet? Simply because the Indians hore the English. That 
is the simple adam^tine fact.” It is possible that most English- 
men fed that way"and it is not surprising. To quote Forster 
again (from another book), every En^ishman in India feds and 
behaves, and rightly, as if he was a member) of an army of occu- 
pation, and it is quite impossible for natural and unrestrained 
relations between the two races to grow under these circum- 
stances. The Englishman and the Indian are always posing to 
each other and naturally they feel uncomfortable in each other’s 
company. Each bores the other and is glad to get away from him 
to breathe e^ and move naturally again. 

Usually the Englishman meets the same set of Indians, those 
connected mth the. official world, and he seldom reaches really 
interesting people, and if he reached them he would not easily 
draw them out. The British regime in India has pushbd im into 
prominence, even sodally, the offidal class, both British and 
Indian, and this class is rfiost singularly dull and narrow-minded. 
Even a bright young Englishman on coming out to India will 
soon relapse into a kind of intellectual and cultural torpor and 
will get cut off from all live ideas and movements. After a day in 
office, dealing with the ever-rotating and never-ending files, he 



WAR-TIME POLITICS IN INDIA 


. 

will have some exerdse and then go to his dub to mix with his 
kind, drink whisky and read Punch and the illustrated weeklies 
from England. He hardly reads books and if he does he will 
probably go bade to an old favourite. And for this gradual de- 
terioration of mind he will blame India, curse the cUmate, and 
generally anathematise the tribe of agitators who add to his 
troubles, not realising that the cause of intellectual and cultural 
decay lies in the hide-bound bureaucratic and despotic system of 
government which flourishes in India and of which he is a tiny 
part. 

If that is the fate of the English official, in spite of his leaves 
and furloughs, the Indian official working with him or under him 
is not likely to fare better, for he tries to model himself on the 
English type. Few experiences are more dreary than sitting with 
high-placed officials, both English and Indian, in that seat of 
Empire, New Delhi, and listening to their unending talk about 
promotions, leave rules, furloughs, transfers, and little tit-bits of 
Service scandal. 

This official and Service atmosphere invaded and set the tone 
for almost all Indian middle-class life, especially the English- 
knowing intelligentsia, except to some extent in cities like Cal- 
cutta and Bombay. Professional men, lawyers, doctors and 
others, succumbed to it, and even the academic halls of the semi- 
official universities were full of it. All these people lived in a 
world apart, cut off from the masses and even the lower middle 
class. Politics was confined to this upper strata. The nationalist 
movement in Bengal from  onwards had for the first time 
shaken this up and infused a new life in the Bengal lower middle- 
class and to a small extent even tihe masses. This process was.to 
grow rapidly in later years under Gandhiji’s^ leadership, but a 
nationalist struggle though life-giving is a narrow creed and ab- 
sorbs too much energy and attrition to allow of other activities. 

^ I have referred to Mr. Gandhi or Mahatma Gandhi as " Gandhiji” 
throughout these pages as he himself prefers this to the addition of 
‘ Mahatma ’ to his name. But I have seen some extraordinary ex- 
planations of this ' ji ’ in books and articles by EngKsh writers. Some 
nave imagined that it is a term of endearment-^andhiji meaning 
'dear little Gandhi’! This is perfecdy absurd and shows colossal 
ignorance of Indian life. ‘ Ji ’ is one of the commonest additions to a 
name in India being wplied indiscrimmatingly to all kinds of people 
and to men, women, boys, girls and children. It conveys an idea of 
respect, something equivalent to Mr., Mrs., or Miss. Hindustani is 
rich in courtly phrases and prefixes and suffixes to names and hono- 
rific titles. ' Ji ’ is the simplest of these and the least formal of th^, 



 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


I felt, therefore, dissatisfied with life in those early years after 
my return from England. My profession did not fill me with a 
whole-hearted enthusiasm. Politics, which to me meant aggres- 
sive nationalist activity against foreign rule, offered no scope for 
this. , I joined the Congress and took part in its occasional meet- 
ings. \^en a special occasion arose, like the agitation against the 
Fiji indenture system for Indian workers, or the South African 
Indian question, I threw myself into it with energy and worked 
hard. But these were only temporary occupations, 

I indulged in some diversions like shikar but I had no special 
aptitude or inclination for it. I liked the outings and the jungle 
and cared little for the killing. Indeed my reputation was a 
singularly bloodless one, although I once succeeded, more or less 
by a fluke, in killing a bear in Kashmir. An incident with a little 
antelope damped even the little ardour that I possessed for shikar. 
This harmless little animal fell down at my feet, wounded to 
death, and looked up at me with its great big eyes full of tears. 
Those eyes have often haunted me since. 

I was attracted in those early years to Mr. Gokhale’s Servants 
of India Society. I never thought of joining it, partly because its 
politics were too moderate for me, and partly because I had no 
intention then of giving up my profession. But I had a great 
admiration for the members of the society who had devoted 
themselves for a bare pittance to the country’s service. Here at 
least, I thought, was straight and single-minded and continuous 
work even though this might not be on wholly right lines. 

Mr. Srinivas Sastri, however, gave me a great shock in a little 
matter quite unconnected with politics. He was addressing a 
students meeting in Allahabad and he told them to be respectful 
and obedient to their teachers and professors and to observe care- 
fully all the rides and regulations laid down by constituted autho- 
rity. All this goody-goody talk did not appeal to me much; it 
seemed very platitudinous and somewhat undesirable, with all its 
stress on authoritarianism. I thought that this was perhaps due to 
the semi-official atmosphere which was so prevalent in India, Mr, 
&stn wrat on and called upon the boys to report each other’s sins 
of omission and commission immediately to the authorities. In 
other words they were to spy on each other and play the part of 


though perfectly correct, I learn from my hrothcr-in-law, Ranjit S. 

^ honourable ancestry. It is de- 

Sansknt meaning a gentleman or noble-born 

U to tetoTto p Prakrit 



WAR-TIMi, POLITICS IN INDIA 

informers. These hard words were not used hy Mr. Sastri but their 
meaning seemed to me clear, and I listened aghast to this friendly 
counsel of a great leader. I had freshly returned from England 
and the lesson that had been most impressed upon my mind in 
school and college was never to betray a colleague. There was no 
greater sin against the canons of good form than to sneak and 
inform and thus get a companion into trouble. A sudden and 
complete reversal of this principle upset me and I felt that there 
was a great diflference between Mr. Sastri’s morality and the mor- 
ality that had been taught to me. 

The World War absorbed our attention. It was far off and 
did not at first affect our lives much, and India never felt the 
full horror of it. Politics petered out and sank into insi^ifi- 
cance. The Defence of India Act (the equivalent of the British 
D.O.R.A.) held the country in its grip. From the second year 
onwards news of conspiracies and shootings came to us, and of 
press-gang methods to enrol recruits in the Punjab. 

There was little sympathy with the British in spite of loud 
professions of loyalty. Moderate and Extremist alike learnt with 
satisfaction of German victories. There was no love for Germany 
of course, only the desire to see our own rulers humbled. It was 
the weak and helpless man’s idea of vicarious revenge. I suppose 
most of us viewed the struggle with mixed feelings. Of all the 
nations involved my smipathies were probably most with France. 
The ceaseless and unabashed propaganda on behalf of the Allies 
had some effect, although we tried to discount it greatly. 

Gradually political life grew again. Lokamanya Tilak came out 
of prison and Home Rule Leagues were started by him and Mrs. 
Besant. I joined both but I worked especially for Mrs. Besant’s 
League. Mrs. Besant began to play an ever increasing part in the 
Indian political scene. The annual sessions of the Congress be- 
came a litde more exciting and the Moslem League began to 
march with the Congress. The atmosphere became electric and 
most of us young men felt exhilarated and expected big things 
in the near fiiture. Mrs. Besant’s internment added greatly to the 
excitement of the intelligentsia and vitalised the Home Rule 
Movement all over the country. The Home Rule Leagues were 
attracting not only all the old Extremists who had been kept out 
of the Congress since  but large numbers of newcomers 
from the middle classes. They did not touch the masses. 

Mrs. Besant’s interginent , stirred leven the older generation, 
including many of tEe "Moderate leaders. Just before the intern- 
ment I remember how moved we used to be by the eloquent 
speeches of Mr. Srinivasa Sastri which we read in the papers. 



yi JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

But just before or after the internment suddenly Mr. Sastri 
became silent. He failed us completely when the time for action 
came and there was considerable disappointment and resentment 
at his silence when most of all a lead was needed. I am afraid 
that ever since then the conviction has grown upon me that Mr. 
Sastri is not a man of action and a crisis does not suit his genius. 

Other Moderate leaders, however, went ahead, some to draw 
back later, some to remain in the new position. I remember tliat 
there was a great deal of discussion in those days about tlie new 
Indian Defence Force which the Government was organising 
from the middle classes on the lines of the European defence 
forces in India. This Indian force was treated very differently 
from the European force m a variety of ways, and many of us 
felt that we should not co-operate with it till these humiliating 
distinctions were removed. After much discussion, however, we 
decided to co-operate in the U.P. as it was considered worth while 
for our young men to have military training even under these 
conditions.  sent my application to join the new force, and we 
formed a committee in Allahabad to push the scheme on. Just 
then came Mrs. Besant’s internment and in the excitement of 
the moment I managed to get the committee members — they in- 
cluded my father, Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru, Mr. C. Y. Chintamani 
and other Moderate leaders — ^to agree to cancel our meeting and 
,all other work in connection with the Defence Force as a protest 
against the Government’s action. A public notice was issued im- 
mediately to this effect. I think some of the signatories regretted 
later this aggressive act in war time. 

Mrs. Besant’s internment also resulted in my father, and other 
Moderate leaders joining the Home Rule League. Some months 
later most of these Moderate members resigned from the League. 
My father remained in it and became the president of the Ala- 
habad branch. 

Gradually my father had been drifting atVay from the orthodox 
Moderate position. His nature rebelled against too much sub- 
mission and appeal to an authority which ignored us and treated 
us disdainfully. But the old Extremist leaders did not attract 
him; their language and methods jarred upon him. The episode 
of Mrs. Besant’s internment and subsequent events influenced 
him considerably but still he hesitated before ' definitely com- 
mitting himself to a forward line. Often he used to say in those 
days that moderate tactics were no good, but nothing effective 
could be done till some solution for die Hindu-Muslim question 
was found. If this was found then he promised to go ahead with 
the youngest of us. The adoption by the Congress at Lucknow in 



WAR-TIMfi POLITICS IN INDIA 


 

 of the Joint Congress-League Scheme, which had been 
drawn up at a meeting of the All India Congress Committee in 
our house, pleased him greatly as it opened the way to a joint 
effort and he was prepared to go ahead then even at the cost of 
breaking with his old colleagues of the Moderate group. They 
pulled together till and during Edwin Montagu’s visit to India as 
Secretary of State. Differences arose soon after the publication 
of the Montagu-Chelmsford Report, and the final break in the 
United Provinces came in the summer of  at a special pro- 
vincial conference held at Lucknow over which my fether pre- 
sided. The Moderates, expecting that this conference would 
adopt a strong line against the Montagu-Chehnsford proposals, 
boycotted the conference. Later they also boycotted the special 
session of the Congress held to consider these proposals. Since 
then they have been out of the Congress. 

This Moderate practice of quietly dropping out and keeping 
away from the Congress sessions and other public gatherings and 
not even presenting their viewpoint and fighting for it, even 
though the majority might be against them, struck me as 
peculiarly undi^ified and unbecoming in public workers. I 
think that was the general sense of large numbers of people in 
the coimtry and I am sure that the almost total coUapse of the 
Moderates in Indian politics was partly due to this timid attitude. 
Mr. Sastri was, I think, the only Moderate leader who attended 
some of the -early sessions of the Congress, which had been boy- 
cotted by the Moderates as a group, and put forward his solitary 
viewpoint. He went up in public estimation because of it. 

My own political and public activities in the early war years 
were modest and I kept away from addressing public gatherings. 
I was stiU diffident and terrified of public speaking. Partly also 
I felt that public speeches should not be in English and I doubted 
my capacity to speak at any length in Hindustani, I remember 
a little incident when I was indeed to deliver my first public 
speech in Allahabad. Probably it was in  but I am not clear 
about dates and am rather mixed up about the order of events. 
The occasion was a protest meeting against a new Act muzzling 
the press. I spoke briefly and in English. As soon as the meeting 
was over Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru, to my great embarrassment, 
embraced and kissed me in public on the dais. This was not be- 
cause of what I had said or how I had said it. His efiusive joy 
was caused by the mere fact that I had spoken in public and thus 
a new recruit had been obtained for public work, fer this work 
consisted in those days practically of speaking only. 

I remember that many of us young men. m Allahabad then 



 JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 

had a faint hope that perhaps Dr. Sapru might take up a more 
advanced attitude in politics. Of all the Moderate group in the 
city he seemed to he die most likely to do so because he was 
emotional and could occasionally be carried by enthusiasm. Com- 
pared to him my father seemed cold-bloodedness itself, though 
underneath this outer cover there was fire enough. But father’s 
strengdi of will left us little hope and for a brief while we actu- 
ally had greater expectations from Dr. Sapru. Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya, with his long record of public work, attracted 
us of course and we used to have long talks with him, pressing 
him to give a brave lead to the country. 

At home, in those early years, political questions were not 
peaceful subjects for discussion, and references to them, which 
were frequent, immediately produced a tense atmosphere. Father 
had been closely watching my growing drift towards Extremism, 
my continual criticism of the politics of talk and my insistent 
demand for action. What action it should be Was not clear, and 
sometimes father imagined that I was heading straight for the 
violent courses adopted by some of the young men of Bengal. 
This worried him very much. As a matter of faa I was not 
attracted that way, but the idea that we must not tamely submit 
to existing conditions and that something must be done began to 
obsess me more and more. Successful action, from the national 
point of view, did not seem to be at all easy, but I felt that both 
individual and national honour demanded a more aggressive and 
fighting attitude to foreign rule. Father himself was dissatisfied 
with the Moderate philosophy, and a mental conflict was going on 
inside him. He was too obstinate to change from one position to 
another until he was absolutely convinced that there was no other 
way. Each step forward meant for him a hard and bitter tussle in 
hia mind, and when the step was taken after tliat struggle with 
part of lumsel^ there was no going back. He had not taken it in 
a fit of enthusiasm but as a result of intellectual conviction, and 
then, having done so, all his pride prevented him from looking 
back. 

The outward change in his politics came about the time of 
Mrs, Besant’s internment and ftom that time onwards step by 
step he went ahead, leaving his old Moderate colleagues far be- 
hind, till the tragic happenings in the Punjab in  finally led 
him to cut adrift from his old life and his profession, and throw 
in his lot with the new movement started by Gandhi ji. 

But thatwM still to be, and fi:omiito  he was still unsure 
of what to do, and the doubts in him, added to his worries about 
meC' did not make him a peaceful talker on the public issues of 



WAR-TIME POLITICS IN INDIA 


.,? 

the day. Often enough our talks ended abruptly by his losing his 
temper with us. 

My first meeting with Gandhiji was about the time of the 
Ludtnow Congress during Christmas . All of us admired 
him for his heroic fight in South Africa, but he seemed very dis- 
tant and different and unpolitical to many of us young men. He 
refused to take part in Congress or national politics then and con- 
fined himself to the South African Indian question. Soon after- 
wards his adventures and victory in Champaran, on behalf of 
the tenants of the planters, filled us with enthusiasm. We saw 
that he was prepared to apply his methods in India also and they 
promised success. 

I remember being moved also, in those days after the Lucknow 
Congress, by a number of eloquent speeches delivered by Sarojini 
Naidu in Allahabad. It was all nationalism and patriotism and I 
was a pure nationalist, my vague socialist ideas of college days 
having sunk into the background. Roger Casement’s wonderful 
speech at his trial in  seemed to point out exactly how a 
member of a subject nation should feel. The Easter Week rising 
in Ireland by its very failure attracted, for was that not true 
courage which mocked at almost certain failure and proclaimed 
to the world that no physical might could crush the invincible 
spirit of a nation? 

Such were my thoughts then, and yet fresh reading was again 
stirring the embers of socialistic ideas in my head. They were 
vague ideas, more humanitarian and utopian than scientific. A 
favourite writer of mine during the war years and after was 
Bertrand Russell. 

These thoughts and desires produced a growing conflict within 
me and a dissatisfaction with my profession of the law. I carried 
on with it because there was nothing else to be done, but I felt 
more and more that it was not possible to reconcile public work, 
especially of the aggressive type which appealed to me, with the 
lawyer’s job. It was not a question of pnnciple but of time and 
energy. Sir Rash Behary Ghosh, the eminent Calcutta lawyer, 
who for some unknown reason took a fancy to me, gave me a lot 
of good advice as to how to get on in the profession. He especially 
advised me to write a book on a legal subject of my choice, as he 
said that this was the best way for a junior to train himself. He 
offered to help me with ideas in the writing of it and to revise it. 
But all his well meant interest in my legal career was in vain, and 
few things could be more distasteful to me than to spend my time 
and energy in writing legal books. 

Sir Rash Behary in to old age was extraordinarily irritahl«nd 



 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

short of temper and a terror for his juniors. I rather liked him, 
however, and his very failings and wes^knesses were not wholly 
unattractive. Father and I were once his guests in Simla. It was 
in  ,  think, just when the Montagil-Chclmsford report came 
out. He invited to dinner a few friends one evening and among 
them was old Mr. Khaparde. After dinner Sir Rash Behary 
and Mr. Khaparde became loud and aggressive in their argu- 
ments for they belonged to rival schools of politics, Sir Rash 
Behary being a confirmed Moderate and Mr. Khaparde was then 
supposed to be a leading Tilakite, although in later years he be- 
came as mild as a dove and too moderate even for the Moderates. 
Mr. Khaparde began criticising Mr. Gokhale (who had died 
some years previously), saying that he had been a British agent 
who had spied on him in London. This was too much for Sir 
Rash Behary and he shouted that Gokhale had been the best of 
men and a particular friend of his and that he would not 
permit any one to say a word against him. Mr. Khaparde then 
branched off to Mr. Srinivas Sastri. Sir Rash Behary did not 
like this but he did not resent it quite so much. Apparently he 
was not such an admirer of Mr. Sastri’s as he had been of 
Gokhale’s. Indeed he said that so long as Gokhale had been alive 
he had helped the Servants of India Society financially but since 
his death he had stopped his contribution. Mr. Khaparde then, 
as a contrast, began praising Tilak. Here was a truly great man, 
he said; a wonderful person, a saint. “A saint! " retorted Sir 
Rash Behary, “ I hate saints, I want to have nothing to do with 
them.”  MY WEDDING AND AN ADVENTURE IN 
THE HIMALAYAS 

My marriage took place in  in the city of Delhi. It was on 
the Vasanta Panchavvi day which heralds the coming of spring 
in India. That summer we spent some months in Kashmir. I left 
my family in the valley and, together with a cousin of mine, 
wandered for several weeks in the mountains and went up the 
Ladakh road. 

This was my first experience of the narrow and lonely 
valleys, high up in the world, which lead to the Tibetan 
plateau. From the top of the Zoji-la pass we saw the rich verdant 
mountain sides below us on one side and the bare bleak rock on 
the other. We went up and up the narrow valley bottom Hanked 
on each side by mountains, with the snow-covered tops gleaming 
on one side and little glaciers creeping down to meet us. The 
wind was cold and bitter but the sun was warm in the day time, 
and the air was so clear that often we were misled about the dis- 
tance of objects, thinking them much nearer than they actually 
were. The loneliness grew ; there were not even trees or vegetation 
to keep us company — only me bare rock and the snow and ice 
and, sometimes, very welcome flowers. Yet I found a strange 
satisfaction in these wild and desolate haunts of nature; I was 
full of energy and a feeling of exaltation. 

I had an exciting experience during this visit. At one place on 
our march beyond the Zoji-la pass— I think it was called Matayan 
— ^we were told that the cave of Amaranath was only eight miles 
away. It was true that an enormous mountain all covered vidth 
ice and snow lay in between and had to be grossed, but what did 
that matter? Eight miles seemed so little. In our enthusiasm and 
inexperience we decided to make the attempt. So we left our 
camp (which was situated at about , feet altitude) and with 
a small party went up the moimtain. We had a local shepherd 
for a guide. 

We crossed and climbed several gladers, roping ourselves 
up, and our troubles increased and breathing became a little 
difficult. Some of our porters, lightly laden as they were, began 
to bring up blood. It began to snow and the glaciers became 
terribly slippery; we were fa^ed our and every step meant 
a special effort. But still we persisted in our foolhardy attempt. 

 ? 



 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

We had left our camp at four in the morning and alter twelve 
hours’ almost continuous climbing we were rewarded by the 
sight of a huge ice-field. This was a magnificent sight, surrounded 
as it was by snow-peaks, like a diadem or an amphitheatre of the 
gods. But fresh snow and mists soon hid the sight from us. I do 
not know what our Jiltitude was but I think it must have been 
about , to , feet, as we were considerably higher than 
the cave of Amaranath. We had now to cross this ice-field, a 
distance probably of half a mile, and then go down on the other 
side to the cave. We thought that as the climbing was over, our 
principal difficulties had also been surmounted, and so, very 
tired but in good humour, we Iregan this stage of the journey. It 
was a tricky business as there were many crevasses and the fresh 
snow often covered a dangerous spot. It was this frc.sh snow that 
almost proved to be my undoing, for I stepped upon it and it 
gave way and down I went a huge and yawning crevasse. It was 
a tremendous fissure and anything that went right down it could 
be assured of safe keeping and preservation for some geological 
ages. But the rope held and I clutched to the side of the crevasse 
«ad was pulled out. We were shaken up by this but still we per- 
sisted in going on. The crevasses, however, increased in number 
and width and we had no equipment or means of crossing some 
of them. And so at last we turned back, weary and disappointed, 
and the cave of Amaranath remained unvisited. 

The higher valleys and mountains of Kashmir fascinated me 
so much that I resolved to come back again soon. I made many 
a plan and worked out many a tom, and one, the very thought of 
which filled me with delight, was a visit to Manasarovar, the 
wonder lake of Tibet, and snow-covered Kailas near by. That was 
eighteen years ago, and I am still as far tis ever from Kailas and 
Manasarovar. I have not even been to visit Kashmir again, much 
as I have longed to, and ever more and more I have got en- 
tangled in the coils of politics and public affairs. Instead of 
going up mountains or crossing the seas I have to satisfy my 
wanderlust by coming to prison. But still I plan, for that is a joy 
that no one can deny even in prison, and besides what else can 
one do in prison? And I dream of the day when I shall wander 
about the Himalayas and cross them to reach that lake and 
mountain of my desire. But meanwhile the sands of life run on 
and youth passes into middle age and that will give place 
to something worse, and sometimes I think that I may grow 
too old to reach Kailas and Manasarovar. But the journey 
is always worth the making even though the end may not be 
in siRht. 



MY WEDUING AND AN ADVENTURE 

“ Yea, in tny mind these mountains rise. 
Their perils dyed with evening’s rose ; 
And still my ghost sits at my eyes 
And thirsts for their unirouhlcd snows.” 
 BACK TO PRISON 

Shadow is itself unrestrained in its path while sunshine, 
as an incident of its very nature, is pursued a hundredfold 
by nuance. Thus is sorrow from happiness a thing apart; 
the scope of happiness, however, is hampered by the aches 
and hurts of endless sorrows. 

Rajatarangini.^ 

I WAS back again in Naini Prison, and I felt as if I was starting 
a fresh term of imprisonment. In and out, out and in; what a 
shuttlecock I had become I This switching on and oflf shook 
up the whole system emotionally and it was not easy to adjust 
onself to repeated changes. I had expected to be put in my old 
cell at Naini to which a previous long stay had accustomed 
me. There were some flowers there; originally planted by my 
brother-in-law, Ranjit Pandit, and a good veranda. But this 
old Barrack No.  was occupied by a detenu, a State prisoner, 
kept confined without trial or conviction. It was not considered 
desirable for me to associate with him, and I was therefore 
placed in another part of the gaol which was much more closed 
m and was devoid of flowers or greenery. 

But the place where I spent my days and nights mattered 
little, for my mind was elsewhere. I feared that the little im- 
provement that had taken place in Kamala’s condition would 
not stand the shock of my re-arrest. And so it happened. For 
some days it was arranged to supply me in prison with a very 
brief doctor’s bulletin daily. This came by a devious route. The 
doctor had to telephone it to the police headquarters and the 
latter then sent it on to the prison. It was not considered 
desirable to have any direct contacts between the doctors 
and the gaol staff. For two weeks these bulletins came to 
me, sometimes rather irregularly, and then they were stopped 
although there was a progressive deterioration in Kamala's 
condition. 

Bad news and the waiting fer news made the days intolerably 
long and the nights were sometimes worse. Time seemed almost 
to stand still or to move with desperate slowness, and every 

^ R. S. Pandit’s translation. (“River of Kings.” Taranga, ym 
verse, .) 


 



KA.MALA NEHRU 



BACK TO PRISON 


 

hour was a burden and a horror. I had never before had 
this feeling in this acute degree. I thought then that I 
was likely to be released within two months or so, after the 
Bombay Congress Session, but those two months seemed an 
eternity. 

Exactly a month after my re-arrest a police ofBcer took me 
from prison on a brief visit to my wife, I was told that I would 
be allowed to visit her in this way twice a week, and even the 
time for it was fixed. I waited on the fourth day— no one came 
for me; and on the fifth, sixth, seventh. I became weary of wait- 
ing. News reached me that her condition was becoming critical 
again. What a joke it was, I thought, to tell me that I would 
be taken to see her twice a week. 

At last the month of September was over. They were the 
longest and most damnable thirty days that I had ever 
experienced. 

Suggestions were made to me through various intermediaries 
that if I could give an assurance, even an informal assurance, 
to keep away from politics for the rest of my term I would 
be released to attend on Kamala. Politics were far enough from 
my thoughts just then, and the politics I had seen during my 
eleven days outside had disgusted me, but to give an assurance! 
And to be disloyal to my pledges, to the cause, to my col- 
leagues, to myself  It was an impossible condition, whatever 
happened. To do so meant inflicting a mortal injury on the 
roots of my being, on almost everything I held sacred. I was 
told that Kamala’s condition was becoming worse and worse 
and my presence by her side might make all the difforence 
between Ufe and death. Was my personal conceit and pride 
greater than my desire to give her this chance? It might have 
been a terrible predicament for me, but fortunately that 
dilemma did not face me in that way at least. I knew that 
Kamala herself would strongly disapprove of my giving any 
undertaking, and if I did anything of the kind it would shock 
her and harm her. 

Early in October I was taken to see her again. She was lying 
almost in a daze with a high temperature. She longed to have 
me by her, but as I was leaving her, to go back to prison, she 
smiled at me bravely and beckoned to me to bend down. When 
I did so, she whispered : " What is this about your giving an 
assurance to Government? Do not pve it! ” 

During the eleven days I was out of prison it had been de- 
cided to send Kamala, as soon as she was a little better,, to a 
more suitable place for treatment. Ever since then we had 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


 


waited for her to get better, but instead she had gone down- 
hill, and now, six weeks later, the change for the worse was 
very marked. It was futile to continue waiting and watching 
this process of deterioration, and it was decided to send her to 
Bhowali in the hills even in her present condition. 

The day before she was to leave for Bhowali I was taken from 
prison to bid her good-bye. When will I see her again? I 
wondered. And will I see her at all? But she looked bright 
and cheerful that day, and I felt happier than I had done 
for long. 

Nearly three weeks later I was transferred from Naini Prison 
to Almora District Gaol so as to be nearer to Kamala. Bhowali 
was on the way, and my police escort and I spent a few hours 
there. I was greatly pleased to note the improvement in Kamala, 
and I left her, to continue my journey to Almora, with a light 
heart. Indeed, even before I had reached her, the mountains had 
filled me with joy. 

I was glad to be back in these mountains, and as our car sped 
along the winding road the cold morning air and the unfolding 
panorama brought a sense of exhilaration. Higher and higher 
we went: the 'gorges deepened: the peaks lost themselves in the 
clouds : the vegetation changed till the firs and pines covered 
the hill-sides. A turn of the road would bring to our eyes sud- 
denly a new expanse of hills and valleys with a little river 
gurgling in the depths below. I could not have my fill of the 
sight and I looked on hungrily, storing my memory with it, so 
that I might revive it in my mind when actual sight was 
denied. 


Clusters of little mountain huts clung to the hill-sides, and 


from a distance, huge steps iraich sometimes went from the 
valley below right up almost to the mountain top. What 
enormous labour had gone to make nature yield a little food 
to the sparse population! How they toiled unceasingly only to 
get barely enough for their needs! Those ploughed terraces 
gave a domesticated look to the hillsides and they contrasted 
strangely with the bleaker or the more wooded slopes. 

It was very pleasant in the daytime and, as the sun rose 
higher, the growing warmth brought life to the mountains and 
they seemed to lose their remoteness and become friendly and 
companionable. But how they change their aspect with the pass- 
ing of day ! How cold and grim they become when “ Night with 
giant strides stalks o'er the world " and life hides and protects 



BACK TO PRISON 


 

itself and leaves wild nature to its own. In the semi-darkness 
of the moonlight or starlight the mountains loom up mys- 
terious, threatening, overwhelming, and yet almost insub- 
stantial, and through the valleys can be heard the moaning 
of the wind. The poor traveller shivers as he goes his lonely 
way and senses hostility everywhere. Even the voice of the 
wind seems to mock him and challenge him. And at other 
times there is no breath of wind or other sound, and there is 
an absolute silence that is oppres.sive in its intensity. Only the 
telegraph wires perhaps hum faintly, and the stars seem 
brighter and nearer than ever. The mountains look down 
grimly, and one seems to be face to face with a mystery that 
terrifies. With Pascal one thinks: “La silence dternel de ces 
espaces infini m'effraie”. In the plains the nights are never 
quite so soundless; life is still audible there, and the murmuring 
and humming of various animals and insects break the stillness 
of the night. 

But the night with its chill and inhospitable message was yet 
distant as we motored along to Almora. As we neared the end 
of our journey, a turn in the road and a sudden lifting of the 
clouds Ijrought a new sight which I saw with a gasp of sur- 
prised delight. The snowy peaks of the Himalayas stood glisten- 
ing in the far distance, high above the wooded motmtains that 
intervened. Calm and inscmtable they seemed, with all the 
wisdom of past ages, mighty sentinels over the vast Indian 
plain. The very sight of them cooled the fever in the brain, 
and the petty conflicts and intrigues, the lusts and falsehoods 
of the plains and the cities seemed trivial and far away before 
their eternal ways. 

The little gaol of Almora was perched up on a ridge. I was 
given a lordly barrack to live in. This consisted of one huge 
hall, fifty-one feet by seventeen, with a katcha, very uneven floor, 
and a worm-eaten roof which was continually coming down in 
little bits. There were fifteen windows and a door, or rather 
there were so many barred openings in the walls, for there were 
no doors or windows. There was thus no lack of fresh air. As 
it grew colder some of the window-openings were covered with 
coir matting. In this vast expanse (which was bigger than any 
yard at D^ra Dun) I lived in solitary grandeur. But I was 
not quite alone, for at least two score sparrows had made 
their home in the broken-down roof. Sometimes a wandering 
cloud would visit me, its many arms creeping in through 
the numerous openings and filling the . place with a damp 
m}»i* 



 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Here I was locked up every evening at about five, after I had 
taken my last meal, a kind of high tea, at four-thirty; and at 
seven in the morning my barred door would be unlocked. In 
the daytime I would sit either in my barrack or outside in an 
adjoining yard, warming myself in the sun. I could just see 
over the enclosing walls the top of a mountain a mile or so 
away, and above me I had a vast expanse of blue sky dotted 
with clouds. Wonderflil shapes these clouds assumed, and I 
never grew tired of watching them. I fancied I saw them take 
the shape of all manner of animals, and sometimes they would 
join together and look like a mighty ocean. Or they would be 
like a beach, and the rustling of the breeze through the deodars 
would sound like the coming in of the tide on a distant sea- 
front. Sometimes a cloud would advance boldly on us, seem- 
ingly solid and compact, and then dissolve in mist as it came 
near and finally enveloped us- 

I preferred the wide expanse of my barrack to a narrow cell, 
though it was lonelier than a smaller place would have been. 
Even when it rained outside I could walk about in it. But as 
it grew colder its cheerlessness became more marked, and my 
love for fresh air and the open abated when the temperature 
hovered about the freezing-point. The new year brought a 
good fall of snow to my delight, and even the drab surround- 
ings of prison became beautiful. Especially beautiful and fairy- 
like were the deodar trees just outside the gaol walls with their 
garment of snow, 

I was worried by the ups and downs of Kamala’s condition, 
and a piece of bad news would upset me for a while, but the 
hill air calmed me and soothed me and I reverted to my habit 
of sleeping soundly. As I was on the verge of sleep I often 
thought what a wonderful and mysterious thing was sleep. 
Why should one wake up fi:om it? Suppose I did not wake 
at all? 

Yet the desire to be out gaol was strong in me, more than I 
had ever felt before. The Bombay Congress was over, and 
November came and went by and the excitement of the As- 
sembly elections also passed away. I half expected that I might 
be released soon. 

But then came the surprising news .of the arrest and con- 
viction of Khan Abdul Ghaffiir Khan and the amazing 
orders passed on Subhas Bose during his brief visit to India. 
These orders in themselves were devoid of aU humanity 
and consideration; they were applied to one who was held 
in affection and esteem by vast numbers of his country- 



BACK TO PRISON 


  

men, and who had hastened home, in spite of his own 
illness, to the death-bed of his father — to arrive too late. If 
that was the outlook of the Government there could be no 
chance of my premature release. Official announcements later 
made this perfectly clear. 

After I had been a month in Almora gaol I was taken to 
Bhoivali to see Kamala. Since then I have visited her approxi- 
mately every third week. Sir Samuel Hoare, the Secretary of 
State for India, has repeatedly stated that I am allowed to visit 
my wife once or twice a week. He would have been more cor- 
rect if he had said once or twice a month. During the last 
three and a half months that I have been at Almora I have 
paid five visits to her. I do not mention this as a grievance, 
because I think that in this matter the Government have been 
very 'considerate to me and have given me quite unusual 
facilities to visit Kamala. I am grateful to them for this. The 
brief visits I have paid her have been very precious to me and 
perhaps to her also. The doctors suspended their regime for 
the day of my visit to some extent, and I was permitted to 
have fairly long talks with her. We came ever nearer to each 
other, and to leave her was a wrench. We met only to be 
parted. And sometimes I thought with anguish that a day 
might come when the parting was for good. 

My mother had gone to Bombay for treatment, for she had 
not recovered ftom her ailment. She seemed to be progressing. 
One morning in mid-January a telegram brought a wholly un- 
expected shock. She had had a stroke of paralysis. There was 
a possibility of my being transferred to a Bombay prison to 
enable me to see her, but as there was a little improvement in 
her condition I was not sent. 

January has given place to February, and there is the whisper 
of spring in the air. The bulbul and other birds arc again to 
be seen and heard, and tiny shoots are mysteriously bursting 
out of the ground and gazing at this strange world. Rhododen- 
drons make blood-red patches on the hiU-sides, and peace and 
plum blossoms are peeping out. The days pass and I count 
them as they go, thinking of my next visit to Bhowali. I won- 
der what truth there is in the saying that life's rich gifts follow 
frustration and cruelty and sedation. Perhaps the gifts would 
not be appreciated otherwise. Perhaps suffering is necessary for 
clear thought, but excess of it may cloud the brain. Gaol 
encourages introspection, and my long years in prison have 
forced me to look more and more withm myself. I was not by 
namre an introvert, but prison life, like strong coffee or 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


 ^ 

Strychnine, leads to introversion. Sometimes, to amuse myself, 
I draw an outline of Professor McDougall's cube for the 
measurement of introversion and extroversion, and I gaze at 
it to find out how frequent are the changes from one interpreta- 
tion to another. They seem to be rapid. 