Skip to main content
 
Search
 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS 
VIDEO 
AUDIO 
SOFTWARE 
IMAGES
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
 Search Metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived websites
Advanced Search
Sign up for free
Log in
Full text of "Jawaharlal Nehru An Autobiography(1936)"
See other formats
, . /I 








JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
an autobiography 




THE AUTHOR S FATHER 
Pandit Motilal Nehru 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

WITH MUSINGS ON REGENT EVENTS 
IN INDIA 


ILLUSTRATED 


JOHN LANE 


THE BODLEY HEAD 


LONOON 



First Published 

Keprinted 

Reprinted 

Reprinted . 

Reprinted 

Reprinted 

Reprinted . 

Reprinted 

Reprinted 

Reprinted 

Reprinted 

Reprinted 

Cheap Edition 


. April 1936 
• April 1936 
. May 1936 

■ June 1936 
. June 1936 

■ July 1936 
• July 1936 
August 1936 
August 1936 
October 1930 

February 1937 
. April 1937 
MarcJi 1938 


i’ji'l ; 


■’.it' ■ 

. . V'-. 

' J * ’ .1 . . 




;^--nrrsTr^ s •. 

(• vv., .. 

, 1 ..,; ' . 

Jtf’C, 'H.'I iJ On, 





TO 

KAMALA, 

WHO IS NO MORE 




PREFACE 

This book was written entirely in prison, except for the 
postscript and certain minor changes, from June 1934 to 
February 1935. The primary object in writing these pages 
was to occupy myself with a definite, task, so necessary in 
the long solitudes of gaol life, as well as to review past 
events in India, with which I had been connected, to enable 
myself to think clearly about them. I began the task in a 
mood of selfiquestionmg and, to a large extent, this per- 
sisted throughout. I was not writing deliberately for an 
audience, but if I thought of an audience, it was one of my 
own countrymen and countrywomen. For foreign readers 
I would have probably written differently, or witla a differ- 
ent emphasis, stressing certain aspects which have been 
slurred over in the narrative and passing over lightly certain 
other aspects which I have treated at some length. Many 
of these latter aspects may not interest the non-Indian 
reader, and he may consider them unimportant or too 
obvious for discussion or debate; but I felt that in the India 
of to-day they had a certain importance. A number of 
references to our internal politics and personalities may also 
be of little interest to the outsider. 

The reader will, I hope, remember that the book was 
written during a particularly distressful period of my exist- 
ence. It bears obvious traces of this. If the writing had 
been done under more normal conditions, it would have 
been different and perhaps occasionally more restrained. 
Yet I have decided to leave it as it is, for it may have some 
interest for others in so far as it represents what I felt at the 
time of writing. 

My attempt was to trace, as far as I could, my own 
mental development, and not to write a survey of recent 
Indian history. The fact that this account resembles super- 
ficially such a survey is apt to mislead the reader and lead 
him to attach a wider importance to it than it deserves. 
I must warn him, therefore, that this account is wholly one- 
sided and, inevitably, egotistical; many important happen- 
ings have been completely ignored and many important 



7U1 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

S ersons, who shaped events, have hardly been mentioned, 
n a real survey of past events this would have been inex- 
cusable, but a personal account can claim this indulgence. 
Those who want to make a proper study of our recent past 
will have to go to other sources. It may be, however, that 
this and other personal narradves will help them to fill the 
gaps and to provide a background for the study of hard 
fact. 

I have discussed firankly some of my colleagues with 
whom I have been privileged to work for many years and 
for whom I have the greatest regard and affection; I have 
also criticized groups and individuals, sometimes perhaps 
rather severely. That criticism does not take away from 
my respect for many of them. But I have felt that those 
who meddle in pubhc affairs must be firank with each other 
and with the public they claim to serve. A superficial 
courtesy and an avoidance of embarrassing and sometimes 
distressing questions do not help in bringing about a true 
understanding of each other or of the problems that face 
us. Real co-operation must be based on an appreciation of 
differences as well as common points, and a facing of facts, 
however inconvenient they might be. I trust, however, that 
nothing that I have written bears a trace of ’malice or ill- 
will against any individual. 

I have purposely avoided discussing the issues in India 
to-day, except vaguely and indirect^. I was not in a 
position to go into them with any thoroughness in prison, 
or even to decide in my own mind what should be done. 
Even after my release I did not think it worth while to add 
anything on subject. It did not seem to fit in with what 
I had already written. And so this ‘autobiographical 
narrative’ remains a sketchy, personal, and incomplete 
account of the past, verging on the present, but cautiously 
avoiding contact with it. 

Jawaharlai. Nrhru. 

BAnENWErC.ER, 

January 2nd, 1936. 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I Descent from Kashmir .... i 

II Childhood 6 

ni Theosophy la 

IV Harrow and Cambridge . . . . 17 

V Back Home and War-time Politics in 

India 37 

VI My Wedding and an Adventure in the 

Himalayas 37 

VII The Coming of Gandhiji; Satyagraha 

and Amritsar 40 

VIII I am Externed and the Consequences 

thereof 48 

IX Wanderings Among the Kisans . . 56 

X Non-Co-operation 63 

XI Nineteen Twenty-one and the First 

Imprisonment 75 

XII Non-Violence and the Doctrine of the 

Sword 83 

xm Lucknow District Gaol .... 90 

XIV Out Again 98 

XV Doubt and Conflict 104 

XVI An Interlude at Nabha .... 109 

xvn Coconada and M, Mohamad Ali . . 117 

xvra My Father and Gandhiji . . . .134 

xtx Communalism Rampant . . • *34 

XX Municipal Work 143 

XXI In Europe 148 

xxn Controversies in India . . . , 156 

XXIII The Oppressed Meet at Brussels . . 161 

iv 



.X JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

CHAnXR " pace 

XXIV Return to India and Plunge Back into 

Politics 166 

XXV Experience of Lathi Charges . . . 177 

XXVI Trade Union Congress . . . .182 

XXVII Thunder in the Air 190 

XXVIII Independence and After . . . .201 

XXIX Civil Disobedience Begins .... 209 

XXX In Naini Prison 217 

XXXI Negotiations at Yeravda .... 226 

xxxii The No-Tax Campaign in the United 

Provinces 235 

xxxin Death of My Father 245 

XXXIV The Delhi Pact 249 

XXXV Karachi Congress 260 

XXXVI A Southern Holiday 271 

XXXVII Friction During Truce Period . . . 275 

xxxvra The Round Table Conference . . . 286 

XXXIX Agrarian Troubles in the United Pro- 
vinces 297 

XL The End of the Truce . . . *313 

xLi Arrests, Ordinances, Proscriptions . -321 

xLii Ballyhoo 325 

xLin In Bareilly and Dehra Dun Gaols . . 336 

XLiv Prison Humours 346 

XLv Animals in Prison 353 

XLVi Struggle 360 

XLvn What is Religion? 370 

XLvin The ‘ Dual Policy ’ of the British 

Government 381 

xLix The End of a Long Term . . . 395 

L A Visit to Gandhiji 399 

, LI The Liberal Outlook 409 

LIT Dominion Status and Independence . 416 

Lui India Old and New 426 



CONTENTS XI 

CHAPTER PACE 

Liv The Record of British Rule . . . 433 

Lv A Civil Marriage and a Question of 

Script 450 

LVi Communalism and Reaction . . ’ . 458 

Lvii Impasse 473 

Lvm Earthquake 481 

Lix Alipore Gaol 493 

LX Democracy in East and West . . . 498 

Lxi Desolation 504 

Lxn Paradoxes 515 

Lxni Conversion or Compulsion . . -537 

Lxiv Dehra Gaol Again 553 

Lxv Eleven Days 561 

Lxvi Back to Prison 566 

Lxvii Some Recent Happenings . . . 573 

Lxvm Epilogue 596 

Postscript 599 

Appendices 

A Pledge taken on Independence Day, 

January 26 , 1930 601 

B Letter dated August 15, 1930, sent by Con- 
gress leaders in Yeravda Prison to Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru and Mr. M. R. Jayakar, 
containing suggestions for peace . . '603 

C Resolution of Remembrance, January 26 , 

1931 606 

Index 609 




ILLUSTRATIONS 

TACINO PAGE 

THE author’s father 

Pandit Motilal Nehru Frontispiece 

the author’s mother 

Swamp Rani Nehru . . . . . , . 8 

SPEAKING AT A PUBLIC MEETING 78 

LAHORE CONGRESS 1929 

Nehru as President-Elect 20a 


INDIRA PRIYADARSHINI 

Jawaharlal's daughter .272 

1932 

Aphotonaph taken atChheoki station when Jawaharlal was 
leaving for Bombay to meet Mahatma Gandhi on his return 
from the Round Table Conference. Jawaharlal and Mr. 
Sherwani (standing next to him in the photograph) were 
arrested at the next station and brought back to Allahabad 3 1 8 

THE AUTHOR 486 

KAMALA NEHRU . ^66 


• •• 
XUl 




JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
an autobiography 




I 


DESCENT FROM KASHMIR 

“ It is a hard and nice subject for a man to write of himself : 
it grates his own heart to say anything of disparagement, and 
the reader’s ears to hear anything of praise for him.’* 

— Abraham- Cowley. 

An only son of prosperous parents is apt to be spoilt, especially 
so in India. And when that son happens to have been an only 
child for the first eleven years of his existence there is little hope 
for him to escape this spoiling. My two sisters are very much 
younger than I am, and between each two of us there is a long 
stretch of years. And so I grew up and spent my early years as a 
somewhat lonely child with no companions of my age. I did not 
even have the companionship of children at school for I was not 
sent to any kindergarten or primary school. Governesses or 
private tutors were supposed to be in charge of my education. 

Our house itself was far from being a lonely place, fi)r it shel- 
tered a large family of cousins and near relations, after the 
manner of Hindu families. But all my cousins were much older 
than I was and were students at the high school or the university 
and considered me far too young for their work or their play. 
And so in the midst of that big family I felt rather lonely andtj 
was left a great deal to my own fancies and solitary games. 

We were Kashmiris. Over two hundred years ago, early in the 
eighteenth century, our ancestor came down from that mountain 
valley to seek fame and fortune in the rich plains below. Those 
were the days of the decline of the Moghal Empire after the 
death of Aurungzeb, and Farrukhsiar was the Emperor. Raj 
Kaul was the name of that ancestor of ours and he had gained 
eminence as a Sanskrit and Persian scholar in Kashmir. He 
attracted the notice of Farrukhsiar during the latter’s visit to 
Kashmir, and, probably at the Emperor’s instance, the family 
migrated to Demi, the imperial capital, about the year 1716. A 
jagtr with a house situated on the banks of a canal had been 
granted to Raj Kaul, and, firom the fact of. this residence, 
°Nehru ’ (firom nahar, a canal) came to be attached to his name. 
Kaul had been the family name; this changed to Kaul-Nehru; 
and, in later years, Kaul dropped out and we became simply 
Nehrus. 

B 


1 



2 JAVnAitARLAL NtHBU 

The family experienced many vicissitudes of fortune during 
the unsettled times that followed and the ja^r dwindled and 
vanished away. My great grandfather, Lakshmi Narayan Nehru, 
became the first Vakil of the ‘ Sarkar Company ’ at the shadow 
court of the Emperor of Delhi. My grandfather, Ganga Dhar 
Nehru, was Kotwal of Delhi for some time before the great 
Revolt of 1857. He died at the early age of 34 in i Sd i . 

The Revolt of 1857 put an end to our family’s connection with 
Delhi, and all our old family papers and documents were de- 
stroyed in the course of it. TTie family, having lost nearly all it 
possessed, joined the numerous fugitives who were leaving the old 
imperial city and went to Agra. My father was not bom then 
but my two uncles were already young men and possessed some 
knowledge of English. This knowledge saved the younger of the 
two uncles, as well as some other members of the family, from a 
sudden and ignominious end. He was journeying from Delhi 
with some family members, among whom was his young sister, 
a little girl who was very fair, as some Kashmiri children are. 
Some English soldiers met them on the way and they suspected 
this little aunt of mine to be an English girl and accused my 
uncle of kidnapping her. From an accusation, to summary justice 
and punishment, was usually a matter of minutes in those days, 
and my uncle and others of the family might well have found 
themselves hanging on the nearest tree. Fortunately for them, 
my xmcle’s knowledge of English delayed matters a Uttle and 
then some one who knew him passed that way and rescued him 
and the others. 

For some years the family lived in Agra, and it was in Agra on 
the sixth qf May 1861 that my father was born.* But he was a 
posthumous child as my grandfather had died three months 
earlier. In a little painting that we have of my grandfather, he 
' wears the Moghal court dress with a curved sword in his hand, 
and might w^ be taken for a Moghal nobleman, although his 
features are distinctly Kashmiri. 

The burden of the family then fell on my two uncles who were 
very much older than my fiither. The elder unde. Bans! Dhar 
Nehru, soon after entered the judicial department of the British 
Government and, being appointed successively to various places, 
was .partly cut off ftom the rest of the family. The, younger 
uncle, Nand Lai Nehru, entered the service of an Indian State 
and was Diwan of Khepri State in Rajputana for ten years. Later 
he studied law and settled down as a practising lawyer in Agra. 

* A curious and interesting coinddence; The poet Rabindranath 
Tagore was also bom on this very day, month and year. 



UtSCttNT FROM KASHMIR 


3 

My father lived with him and grew up under his sheltering care. 
The two were greatly attached to each other and their relation 
with each other was a strange mixture of the brotherly and the 
paternal and filial. My father, being the last comer, was of 
course my grandmother’s favourite son, and she was an old lady 
with a tremendous will of her own who was not accustomed to be 
ignored. It is now nearly half a century since her death but she is 
still remembered amongst old Kashmiri ladies as a most dominat- 
ing old woman and quite a terror if her will was flouted. 

My uncle attached himself to the newly established High 
Court and when this court moved to Allahabad from Agra, the 
famUy moved with it. Since then Allahabad has been our home 
and it was there, many years later, that I was born. My uncle 
gradually developed an extensive practice and became one of the 
leaders of the High Court Bar. Meanwhile my father was going 
through school and college in Cawnpore and A l lahabad. His 
early education was confined entirely to Persian and Arabic and 
he only began learning English in his early ’teens. But at that 
age he was considered to be a good Persian scholar, and knew 
some Arabic also, and because of this knowledge was treated with 
respect by much older people. But in spite of this early precocity 
his school and college career was chiefly notable for his numerous 
pranks and escapades. He was very far from being a model pupil 
and took more interest in games and novel adventures than in 
study. He was looked upon as one of the leaders of the rowdy 
element in the college. He was attracted to Western dress and 
other Western ways at a time when it was uncommon for Indians 
to take to them except in big cities like Calcutta and Bombay. 
Though he was a little wild in his behaviour, his Englisl^ro- 
fessors were fond of him and often got him out of a scrape. 'Iney 
liked his spirit and he was intelligent, and with an occasionsu 
spurt he managed to do fairly well even in class. In later years, 
long afterwards, he used to talk to us of one of these professors, 
Mr. Harrison, the principal of the Muir Central College at 
Allahabad, with affection, and had carefully preserved a letter of 
his, dating from the old student days. 

He got through his various university examinations without 
any special distinction, and then he appeared for his final, the 
B.A. He had not taken the trouble to work much for it and he 
was greatly dissatisfied with the way he had done the first paper. 
Not expecting to pass the examination, as he thought he had 
spoiled the first paper, he decided to boycott the rest of the ex- 
amination and he spent his time instead at the Taj Mahal. (The 
university examinations were held then at Agra.) Subsequently 



4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

his professor sent for him and was very angry with him for he 
said that he (my father) had done the first paper fairly well and 
he had been a fool for not appearing for the other papers. Any- 
how this ended my father’s university career. He never Gradu- 
ated. 

He was keen on getting on in life and establishing himself in a 
profession. Naturally he looked to the law as that was the only 
profession then, in India, which offered any opening for talent and 
prizes for the successful. He also had his brother’s example be- 
fore him. He appeared for the High Court Vakils’ examination 
and not only passed it but topped the list and got a gold medal 
for it. He had found the subject after his own heart, or rather, he 
was intent on succe.s.s in the profession of his choice. 

He started practice in the district courts of Cawnpore and, 
being eager to succeed, worked hard at it and soon got on well. 
But his love for games and other amusements and diversions con- 
tinued and still took up part of his time. In particular, he was 
keen on wrestling and dangals. Cawnpore was famous for these 
public wrestling matches in those days. 

After serving his apprenticeship for three years at Cawnpore, 
father inoved to Allahabad to work in the High Court. Not long 
after this his brother, Pandit Nand Lai, suddenly died. That 
was a terrible blow for my father; it was a personal loss of a 
dearly loved brother who had almost been a father to him, and 
the removal of the head and principal earning member of the 
family. Henceforward the burden of carrying on a large family 
mainly fell on his young shoulders. 

He plunged into his work, bent on success, and for many 
months cut himself off fi:om everything else. Nearly all of my 
uncle’s briefs came to him, and as he happened to do well in them 
the professional success that he so ardently desired soon came 
his tvay and brought him both additional work and money. At 
an early age he had established himself as a successful lawyer and 
he paid the price for this by becoming more and more a slave 
to his jealous mistress — ^the law. He had no time for any other 
activity, public or private, and even his vacations and holidays 
were devoted to his legal pracdt^. The National Congress was 
just then attracting the attention of the English-knowing init i dio 
classes and he visited some of its early sessions and gave it a 
theoretical allegiance. But in those days he took no great interest 
in its work. He was too busy with his profession. Besides, he felt 
unsure of his ground in politics and public affairs; he had paid 
no great attention to these subjects till then and knew little aWt 
thcnif He had no wish to join any nxovement or organization 



UjiiaUJSNl cjvUM is.A>3HMIR 


where he would have to play second fiddle. The aggressive spirit 
of his childhood and early youth had been outwardly curbed, 
but it had taken a new form, a new will to power. Directed to his 
profession it brought success and increased his pride and self- 
reliance. He loved a fight, a struggle against odds and yet, 
curiously, in those days he avoided the political field. It is true 
that there was little of fight then in the politics of the National 
Congress. However, the groimd was unfamiliar, and his mind 
was full of the hard work that his profession involved. He had 
taken firm grip of the ladder of success and rung by rung he 
mounted higher, not by any one’s favour, as he felt, not by any 
service of another, but by his own will and intellect. 

He was, of course, a nationalist in a vague sense of tire word, 
but he admired Englishmen and their ways. He had a feeling 
that his own countrymen had fallen low and almost deserved 
what they had got. And there was just a trace of contempt in his 
mind for the politicians who talked and talked without doing 
anything, though he had no idea at all as to what else they could 
do. Also there was the thought, bom in the pride of his own 
success, that many— certainlj not all— of those who took to 
politics had been inures in Ine. 

An ever-increasing income brought many changes in our ways 
of living, for an increasing income meant increasing expenditure. 
The idea of hoarding money seemed to my father a slight on his 
own edacity ,to earn whenever he liked and as much as he de- 
sired. Full of the spirit of play and fond of good living in every 
way, he found no difficulty in spending what he earned. And 
gradually our ways became more and more Westernized. 

Such was our home in the early days of my childhood.* 

* I was bom in Allahabad on the 14th November 1889, or, accord- 
ing to the Samvat calendar, Margshirsh Badi 7, 1946. 



II 


CHILDHOOD 

My childhood was thus a sheltered and uneventful one. I 
listened to the grown-up talk of my cousins without always un- 
derstanding all of it. Often this talk related to the overbearing 
character and insulting manners of the English people, as well as 
Eurasians, towards Indians, and how it was the duty of every 
Indian to stand up to this and not to tolerate it. Instances of con- 
flicts between the rulers and the ruled were common and were 
fully discussed. It was a notorious fact that whenever an English- 
man killed an Indian he was acquitted by a jury of his own 
countrymen. In railway trains compartments .were reserved for 
Europeans and however crowded the train might be— and they 
used to be terribly crowded — ^no Indian was allowed to travel in 
them, even though they were empty. Even an unreserved com- 
partment would be taken possession of by an Englishman and he 
would not allow any Indian to enter it. Benches and chairs were 
also reserved for Europeans in public parks and other places. I 
was filled vnth resentment against the alien rulers of my country 
who misbehaved in this manner, and whenever an Indian hit back 
I was glad. Not infrequently one of my cousins or one of their 
fiiends became personally involved in these individual encounters 
and then of course we all got very excited over it. One of the 
cousins was the strong man of the family and he loved to pick a 
quarrd with an Englishman, or more frequently with Eurasians, 
who, perhaps to show off their oneness with the ruling race, were 
often even more offensive than the English official or merchant. 
Such quarrels took place especially during railway journeys. 

Mudx as I began to resent the presence and behaviour of the 
alien rulers, I had no feeling whatever, so far as I can remember, 
against individual Englishmen. I had had English governesses 
and occasionally I saw English friends of my father's visiting 
lum. In my heart I rather admired the English. 

In the evenings usually many fiiends came to visit ftither and 
he would relax after the tension of the day and the house would 
resound with his tremendous laughter. His laugh became ftmous 
in Allahabad. Sometimes I would peep at him arid his friends 
from behind a curtain, trying to m^e out what these great big 
people said to each other. If I was caught in the act I would be 
dragged out and, rather firigbtened, made to sit for a while on 



(JHILUuUUU 


7 

father’s knee. Once I saw him drinking claret or some other red 
wine. Whisky I knew. 1 had often seen him and his hiends drink 
it. But the new red stuff filled me with horror and I rushed to 
my mother to tell her that father was drinking blood. 

I admired father tremendously. He seemed to me the embodi- 
ment of strength and courage and cleverness, far above all the 
other men I saw, and I treasured the hope that when I grew up 
I would be rather like him. But much as I admired him and 
loved him I feared him also. I had seen him losing his temper at 
servants and others and he seemed to me terrible then and I 
shivered with fright, mixed sometimes with resentment, at the 
treatment of a servant. His temper was indeed an awful thing 
and even in after years I do not think I ever came across anything 
to match it in its own line. But, fortunately, he had a strong 
sense of humour also and an iron will, and he could control 
himself as a rule. As he grew older this power of control grew- 
and it was very rare for him to indulge in anything like his old 
temper. 

One of my earliest recollections is of this temper, for I was the 
victim of it. I must have been about five or six then. I noticed 
one day two fountain-pens on his office table and I looked at them 
with greed. I argued with myself that father could not require 
both at the same time and so I helped myself to one of them. 
Later I foimd that a mighty search was being made for the lost 
pen and I grew frightened at what I had done, but I did not 
confess. The pen was discovered and my guilt proclaimed to the 
world. Father was very angry and he gave me a tremendous 
thrashing. Almost blind with pain and mortification at my 
disgrace 1 rushed to mother, and for several days various creams 
and ointments were applied to my aching and quivering little 
body. 

I do not remember bearing any ill-will towards my father be- 
cause of this punishment. I think I must have felt tliat it was a 
just punishment, though perhaps overdone. But though my 
admiration and affection for him remained as strong as ever, fear 
formed a part of them. Not so with my mother. I had no fear of 
her, for I knew that she would condpne everythii^ I did, and, 
because of her excessive and indiscriminating love for me, I tried 
to dominate over her a little. I saw much more of her than I 
did of father and she seemed nearer to me and I would confide 
in her when I would not dream of doing so to father. She was 
petite and short of stature and soon I was almost as tall a$ she 
waT and felt more of an equal with her. I admired her beauty 
and loved her amazingly small and beautiful hands and feet. 



8 JAWAHARLAL NEH.RU 

She belonged to a fresher stock from Kashmir and her people 
had only left the homeland two generations back. 

Another of my early confidants was a munshi of my father’s, 
Munshi Mubarak Ali. He came from a well-to-do family of 
Badaun. The Revolt of 1857 had ruined the family and the 
English troops had partly exterminated it. This affliction had 
made h im gentle and forbearing with everybody, especially with 
r hi l rlren, and for me he was a sure haven of refuge whenever I 
was unhappy or in trouble. With his fine grey beard he seemed 
to my young eyes very ancient and full of old-time lore, and I 
used to snuggle up to him and listen, wide-eyed, by the hour to 
his innumerable stories — old tales from the Arabian Nights or 
other sources, or accounts of the happenings in 1857 and 1858. 
It was many years later, when I was grown up, that “ Munshiji ” 
died, and the memory of him still remains with me as a dear 
and precious possession. 

There were other stories also that I listened to, stories from the 
old Hindu mythology, from the epics, the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata, that my mother and aunt used to tell us. My 
aunt, the widow of Pandit Nand Lai, was learned in the old 
Indian books and had an inexhaustible simply of these tales, and 
my knowledge of Indian mythology and folklore became quite 
considerable. 

Of religion I had very hazy notions. It seemed to be a woman’s 
affair. Father and my older cousins treated the question humor- 
ously and refused to take it seriously. The women of the family 
indulged in various ceremonies and pujas from time to time and 
I rather enjoyed them, though I tried to imitate to some extent 
the casual attitude of the grown-up men of the family. Some- 
times I accompanied my mother or aunt to the Ganges for a dip, 
sometimes we visited temples in Allahabad itself or in Benares 
or elsewhere, or went to sec a sanyasi reputed to be very holy. 
But all this left little impression on my mind. 

Then there were the great festival days — ^the Holi, when all 
over the city there was a spirit of revelry and we could squirt 
water at each other; the Divali, the festival of light, when all the 
houses were lit up with thousands of dim lights in earthen 
cups; the Janmashtami to celebrate the birth in prison of 
Kmhna at the midnight hour (but it was veiy difficult for us to 
keep awake till then); the Dasehra and Ram Lila when tableaux 
and processions re-enacted the old story of Ramachandra and his 
conquest of Lanka and vast crowds assembled to see them. All 
the children also went to see the Mohurrum processions with 
their silken alums and their sorrowful celebration of the tragic 





CtllLUUOOU 


Story of Hasan and Husain in distant Arabia. And on the two Id 
days Muiishiji would'dress up in his best attire and go to the big 
mosque for prayers, and I would go to his house and consume 
sweet vermicelli and other dainties. And then there were the 
smaller festivals of which there are many in the Hindu calendar, 
Rakshabandhan, Bhayya duj, etc. 

Amongst us and the other Kashmiris there were also some 
special celebrations which were not observed by most of the 
other Hindus. Chief of these was the Naoroz, the New Year’s 
Day according to the Samvat calendar. This was always a special 
day for us when all of us wore new clothes, and the young people 
of the house got small sums of money as tips. 

But more than all these festivals I was interested in one annual 
event in which I played the central part^ — ^the celebration of the 
anniversary of my birth. This was a day of great excitement for 
me. Early in the morning I was weighed in a huge balance 
against some bagfuls of wheat and other articles which were then 
distributed to the poor ; and then I arrayed myself in new clothes 
and received presents, and later in the day there was a party. I 
felt the hero of the occasion. My chief grievance was that my 
birthday came so rarely. Indeed I tried to start an agitation for 
more frequent birthdays. I did not realize then that a time would 
come when birthdays would become unpleasant reminders of 
advancing age. 

Sometimes the whole family journeyed to a distant town to 
attend a marriage, either of a cousin of mine or of some more 
distant relation or fiiriend. Those were exciting journeys for us, 
children, for all rules were relaxed during these marriage festivi- 
ties and we had the free run of the place. Numerous frunilies 
usually lived crowded together in the shadi-khana, the marriage 
house, where the party stayed, and there were many boys and 
girls and children. On these occasions I could not complain of 
loneliness and we had our heart’s fill of play and mischief, with 
an occasional scolding from our elders. 

Indian marriages, biDth among the rich and the poor, have had 
their full share of condemnation as wasteful and extravagant 
display. They deserve all this, fiven apart from the waste, it is 
most painful to see the vulgar display which has no artistic or 
aesthetic value of any kind. (Needless to say there are excep- 
tions.) For all this the really guilty people are the middle classes. 
The poor are also extrava^mt, even at the cost of burdensome 
debts, but it is the height of absurdity' to say, as some people do, 
that their poverty is due to their social customs! It is often for- 
gotten that the life of the poor is terribly dull and monotonodsi. 



10 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and an occasional marriage celebration, bringing with it sortie 
feasting and singing, comes to them as an oasis in a desert of 
soulless toil, a refuge from domesticity and the prosaic business 
of life. Who would be cruel enough to deny this consolation to 
them, who have such few occasions for laughter? Stop waste by 
all means, lessen the extravagance (big and foolish words to use 
for the little show that the poor put up in their poverty I), but 
do not make their life more drab and cheerless than it is. 

So also for the middle classes. Waste and extravagance apart 
these marriages are big social reunions where distant relations 
and old friends meet after long intervals. India is a big country 
and it is not easy for friends to meet, and for many to meet 
together at the same time is stiU more difficult. Hence the popu- 
larity of the marriage celebrations. The only rival to them, and 
it has already excelled them in many ways even as a social 
reunion, is the political gathering, the various conferences, or 
the Qmgressl 

Kashmiris have had one advantage over many others in India, 
especially in the north. They have never had any purdah, or 
seclusion of women, among themselves. Finding this custom 
prevailing in the Indian plains, when they came down, they 
adopted it, but only partly and in so far as their relations with 
others and non-Kashmiris were concerned. That was considered 
then in northern India, where most of the Kashmiris stayed, an 
inevitable sign of social status. But among themselves they stuck 
to the free social life of men and women, and every. Kashmiri 
had the free entree into any Kashmiri house. In Kashmiri feasts 
and ceremonies men and women met together and sat together, 
though often the women would sit in one bunch. Boys and 
girls used to meet on a more or less equal footing. They did not, 
of course, have the freedom of the modem West. 

So passed my early years. Sometimes, as was inevitable in a 
large family, there were family squabbles. When these happened 
to assume unusual proportions they reached my father’s ears and 
he was angry and seemed to think that aU such happenings were 
due to the folly of women. I did not understand what exactly 
had happened but I saw that something was very wrong as 
people seemed to speak in a peculiarly disagreeable way or to 
avoid each other. I felt very unhappy. Father’s intervention, 
when it took place, shook us all up. 

One little incident of those early days stands out in my 
memory. I must have been about seven or eight then. I used to 
go out every day for a ride accompanied by a sowar from 
cavalry imit then stationed in Allahabad. One evening I had ^ 



CJHILUHUUI} 


1 1 

fall and my pony — a pretty animal, partly Arab — returned home 
without me. Father was giving a tennis party. There was great 
consternation and all the members of the party, headed by 
father, formed a procession in all kinds of vehicles, and set out 
in search of me. They met me on the way and I was treated as 
if I had performed some heroic deedl 



Ill 


THEOSOPHY 

When I was ten years old we changed over to a new and much 
bigger house which my father named ' Anand Bhawan This 
house had a big garden and a swimming pool and I was full of 
excitement at the fresh discoveries I was continually making. 
Additional buildings were put up and there was a great deal of 
digging and construction and I loved to watch the labourers at 
work. 

There was a large swimming pool in the house and. soon I 
learnt to swim and felt completely at home in and under the 
water. During the long and hot summer days I would go for a 
dip at all odd hours, many times a day. In the evening many 
fiiends of my father’s came to the pool. It was a novelty, and the 
electric light that had been installed there and in the house was an 
innovation for Allahabad in those days. I enjoyed myself hugely 
during these bathing parties and an unfailing joy was to frighten, 
by pushing or pullmg, those who did not know how to swim. 
I remember, particularly. Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru who was then 
a junior at Ae Allahabad Bar. He knew no swimming and had 
no intention of learning it. He would sit on the first step in 
fifteen inches of water, refusing absolutely to go forward even to 
the second step, and shouting loudly if anyone tried to move him. 
My father himsdf was no swimmer, but he could just manage 
to go the length of the pool with set teeth and violent and 
exhausting effort. 

The Boer War was then going on and this interested me and 
all my sympathies were with the Boers. I began to read .the 
newspapers to get news of the fighting. 

A domestic event, however, just then absorbed my attention. 
This was the birth of a little sister. I had long n ou ri s hed a secret 
grievance at not having any brothers or sisters when everybody 
else seemed to have them, and the prospect of having at last a 
baby brother or sister all to myself was exhilarating. Father was 
then in Europe. I remember waiting anxiously in the verandah 
for the event. One of the doctors came and told me of it and 
added, presumably as a jokfe, that I must be glad that it was not 
a boy who would have taken a share in my patrimony., I felt 
bitter and angry at the thought that any one should imagine 
that I could harbour such a vile notion. 

19 



THEOSOPHY 


13 

Father's visits to Europe led to an internal storm in the Kash- 
miri Brahman comm-unity in india. He refused to perform any 
prayashchit or purification ceremony on his return. Some years 
previously another Kashmiri Brahman, Pandit Bishan Narayan 
Dar, who later became a President of the Congress, had gone 
to England to be called to the Bar. On his return the orthodox 
members of the community had refused to have anything to 
do with him and he was outcast, although he performed the 
prayashchit ceremony. This had resulted in the splitting up of 
the community into two more or less equal halves. Many Kash- 
miri young men went subsequently to Europe for their studies 
and on their return joined the reformist section, but only after 
a formal ceremony of purification. This ceremony itself was a 
bit of a farce and there was little of religion in it. It merely 
signified an outward conformity and a submission to the group 
will. Having done so, each person indulged in all manner of 
heterodox activities and mixed and fed with non-Brahmans and 
non-Hindus. 

Father went a step further and refused to go through any 
ceremony or to submit in any way, even outwartfiy and formally, 
to a so-called purification. A great deal of beat was generated, 
chiefly becaiae of father’s aggressive and rather disd^mfiil atti- 
tude, and ultimately a consid^ble number of Kashmiris joined 
father and so a third group was formed. .Within a few years 
these groups gradually merged into one another as ideas changed 
and the old restrictions fell. Large numbers of Kashmiri young 
men and girls have visited Europe or America for their studies 
and no question has arisen of their performing any ceremonies 
on their return. Food restrictions have almost entirely gone, 
except in the case of a handful of orthodox people, chiefly old 
ladies, and inter-dining with non-Kashmiris, Muslims and non- 
Indians is conunon. Purdah, the seclusion of women, has dis- 
appeared among Kashmiris even as regards other communities. 
The last push to this was given by the political upheaval of 1930. 
Inter-marriage with other communities is still not popular, 
although (increasingly) instances occur. Both my sisters have 
married non-Kashn^s and a young member of our family has 
recently married a Hungarian girl. The objection to inter- 
marriage with others is not based on rdigion; it is largely racial. 
There is a desire among many Kashimris to preserve our group 
identity and our distinctive Aryan features, and a fear that we 
shall lose these in the sea of Indian and non-Indian humanity. 
We are small in numbers in this vast country. 

Probably the first Kashmiri Brahman in modem times to visit 



H JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Western countries was Mirza Mohan Lai ‘ Kashmerian ’ (as he 
called himself) about a hundred years ago. He was a bright and 
handsome young man, a student of the Mission College at Delhi, 
and he was chosen to accompany a British mission to Kabul as 
Persian interpreter. Later he travelled all over Central Asia and 
Persia and wherever he went he managed to take a new wife 
unto himself, usually marrying in the highest circles. He became 
a Muslim and in Persia married a girl of the royal family, hence 
his title of Mirza. He visited Europe also and was presented to 
the young Queen Victoria. He has written delightful memoirs 
and accounts of his travels. 

When I was about eleven a new resident tutor, Ferdinand T. 
Brooks, came and took charge of me. He was partly Irish (on his 
father’s side) and his mother had been a Frenchwoman or a 
Belgian. He was a keen theosophist who had been recommended 
to my father by Mrs. Annie Besant. For nearly three years he 
was with me and in many ways he influenced me greatly. The 
only other tutor I had at the time was a dear old Pandit who was 
sMposed to teach me Hindi and Sanskrit. After many years’ 
effort the Pandit managed to teach me extraordinarily little, so 
little that I can only measure my pitiful knowledge of Sanskrit 
with the Latin I learnt subsequently at Harrow. The fault no 
doubt was mine. I am not good at languages, and grammar has 
had no attraction for me whatever. 

F. T. Brooks developed in me a taste for reading and I read a 
great many English books, though rather aimlessly. I was well 
up m children’s and boys’ literature; the Lewis Carroll books 
were great favourites, and The Jungle Books and Kim. I was 
^_mated by Gustave Dora’s illustrations to Don Quixote, and 
Fridtjof hJansens Farthest North opened out a new realm of 
adventure to me. I remember reading many of the novels of 
wott, Dickens and Thackeray, H. G. Wells’s romances, Mark 
Twain, and the Sherlock Hohnes stories. I was thrilled by the 
Prtsoner of Zenda, and Jerome K. Jerome’.s Three Men in a Boat 
WM for me the last word in humour. Another book stands out 
niemory; it was Du Maurier’s Trilby, also Peter 
Ibbetson. I also developed a liking for poetry, a liking which has 
to S(^e extent radured and survived the many other changes 
to which I have been subject. ° 

Brooks also initiated me into the mysteries of science. Wc 
rigged up a little laboratory and there I used to spend long and 
SASdst^*^* working out experiments in elementary physics 

Apart from my studies, F. T. Brooks brought a new influence 



THEOSOPHY 


*5 

to bear upon me which affected me powerfully for a while. This 
was Theosophy. He used to have weekly meetings of theoso- 
phists in his rooms and I attended them and gradually imbibed 
theosophical phraseology and ideas. There were metaphysical 
arguments, and discussions about reincarnation and the astral 
and other super-natural bodies, and auras, and the doctrine of 
Karma, and references not only to big books by Madame 
Blavatsky and other Theoaophists but to the Hindu scriptures, 
the Buddhist “ Dhamma-pada’*, Pythagoras, Apollonius of 
Tyana, and various philosophers and mystics. I did not under- 
stand much that was said but it all sounded very mysterious and 
fascinating and I felt that here was the key to the secrets of the 
tmiverse. For the first time I began to think, consciously and 
deliberately, of religion and other worlds. The Hindu religion 
especially went up in my estimation; not the ritual or ceremonial 
part, but its great books, the " Upanishads" and the "Bhagavad 
Gita ”. I did not understand them, of course, but they seemed very 
wonderful. I dreamt of astral bodies and imagined myself flying 
vast distances. This dream of flying high up in the air (without 
any appliance) has indeed been a frequent one throughout my 
life; and sometimes it has been vivid and realistic and the country- 
side seemed to lie underneath me in a vast panorama. I do not 
know how the modem interpreters of dreams, Freud and others, 
would interpret this dream. 

Mrs. Annie Besant visited Allahabad in those days and 
delivered several addresses on theosophical subjects. I was deeply 
moved by her oratory and returned from her speeches dazed 
and as in a dream. I decided to join the Theosophical Society, 
although I was only thirteen then. When I went to ask father’s 
permission he laughingly gave it; he did not seem to attach 
importance to the subject either way. I was a little hurt by his 
lack of feeling. Great as he was in many ways in my eyes, I felt 
that he was lacking in spirituality. As a matter of fact he was 
an old theosophist, having joined the Sodety in its early days 
when Madame Blavatsky was in India. Curiosity probably led 
him to it more than religion, and he soon dropped out of it, but 
some of his friends, who had joined with him, persevered and 
rose high in the spiritual hierarchy of the Society. 

So I became a member of the Theosophical Sodety at thirteen 
and Mrs. Besant herself performed the ceremony of initiation, 
which consisted of good advice and instruction in some mys- 
terious signs, pmbably a relic of freemasonry. I was thrilled. I 
attended the Theosophical Convention at Benares and saw old 
Colonel Olrott with hi® fine beard. 



l6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It is difficult to realise what one looked like or felt like in one’s 
boyhood, thirty years ago. But I have a fairly strong impression 
that during these theosophical days of mine I developed the 
flat and insipid look which sometimes denotes piety and which 
is (or was) often to be seen among theosophist men and women. 
I was smug, with a feeUng of being one-of-the-elect, and alto- 
gether I must have been a thoroughly undesirable and unpleasant 
companion for any boy or girl of my age. 

Soon after F. T. Brooks left me I lost touch with Theosophy, 
and in a remarkably short time (partly because I went to school 
in England) Theosophy left my life completely. But I have no 
doubt that those years with F. T. Brooks left a deep impress upon 
me and I feel that I owe a debt to him and to Theosophy. But 
I am afraid that theosophists have since then gone down in my 
estimation. Instead of the chosen ones they seem to be very 
ordinary folk, liking security better than risk, a soft job more 
than the martyr’s lot. But, for Mrs. Besant, I always had the 
warmest admiration. 

The next important event that I remember affecting me was 
the Russo-Japanese War. Japanese victories stirred up my 
enthusiasm and I waited eagerly for the papers for fresh news 
daily. I invested in a large number of books on Japan and tried 
to read some of them. I felt rather lost in Japanese history, but 
I liked the knightly tales of old Japan and the pleasant prose of 
Lafeadio Hearn. 

Nationalistic ideas filled my mind. I mused of Indian freedom 
and Asiatic freedom fi:om the thraldom of Europe. I dreamt of 
brave deeds, of how, sword in hand, I would fight for India and 
help in fireeing her. 

I was fourteen. Changes were taking place in our house. My 
older cousins, having become professional men, were leaving the 
common home and setting up their own households separately. 
Fresh thoughts and vague fandes were floating in my mind and 
I began to take a little more interest in the opposite sex. I still 
preferred the company of boys and tliought it a little beneath 
my dignity to mix with groups of girls. But sometimes at 
Kashmiti parties, where pretty girls were not lacking, or else- 
where, a glance or a touch would thrill me. 

In May 1905, when I was fifteen, we set sail for England. 
Father and mother, my baby sister and I, we all went together. 



IV 


HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 

On a May day, towards the end of the month, we reached 
London, reading in the train from Dover of the great Japanese 
sea victory at Tsushima. I was in high good humour. The very 
next day happened to be Derby day and we went to see the race. 
I remember meeting, soon after our arrival in London, M. A. 
Ansari, who was then a smart and clever young man with a 
record of brilliant academical achievement behind him. He was 
a house surgeon at the time in a London hospital. 

I was a lutle fortunate in finding a vacancy at Harrow for I 
was slightly above the usual age mr entry, being fifteen. My 
famil y went to the Continent and after some months they 
returned to India. 

Nevg: before had I been left among strangers all by myself 
and I felt lonely and homesick, but not for long. I managed to 
fit' in to some extent in the life at school and work and play kept 
me busy. I was never an exact fit. Always I had a feehng that I 
was not one of them, and the others must have felt the same 
way about me. I was left a little to myself. But on the whole I 
took my full share in the games, without in any way shining at 
them, and it was, I believe, recognised that I was no shirker. 

I was put, to begin with, in a low form because of my small 
knowledge of Latin, but I was pushed higher up soon. In many 
subjects probably, and especially in general knowledge, I was in 
advance of those of my age. My interests were certainly wider, 
and I read both books and newspapers more than most of my 
feUow-students. I remember writing to my father how dull most 
of the English boys were as they could talk about nothing but 
their games. But there were exceptions, especially when I reached 
the upper forms. 

I was greatly interested in the General Election, which took 
place, as far as I remember, at the end of 1905 and which ended 
m a great Liberal victory. Early in 1906 our form master, asked 
us about the new Government and, much to his surprise, I was 
the only boy in his form who could gi'^e him much information 
on the subject, including , almost a complete list of members of 
Campbell-Bannerman’s Cabinet. 

Apart from politics another subject that fascinated ihe was the 
early growth of aviation. Those were the dgys of the Wright 

c *7 



l8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Brothers and Santos Dumont (to be followed soon by Farman, 
Latham and Bleriot), and I wrote to father from Harrow, in my 
enthusiasm, that soon I might be able to pay him a week-end 
visit in India by air. 

There were mur or five Indian boys at Harrow in my time, I 
seldom came across those at other houses, but in our own house — 
the Headmaster’s— we had one of the son’s of the Gaekwar of 
Baroda. He was much senior to me and was popular because of 
his cricket. He left soon after my arrival. Later came the eldest 
son of the Maharaja of Kapurthala, Paramjit Singh, now the 
Tikka Sahab. He was a complete misfit and was unhappy and 
could not mix at all with the other boys, who often made fun of 
him and his ways. This irritated him greatly and sometimes he 
used to tell them what he would do to thetn if they came to 
Kapurthala. Needless to say, this did not improve matters for 
him. He had previously spent some time in France and could 
speak French fluendy but, oddly enough, such were the methods 
of teaching foreign languages in English public schools, that this 
hardly helped him in the French classes. 

A curious incident took place once when, in the middle of the 
night, the house-master suddenly visited our rooms and made a 
thorough search all over the house. We learnt that Paramjit 
Singh had lost his beautiful gold-mounted cane. The search was 
not successful. Two or three days later the Eton and Harrow 
match took place at Lord’s, and immediately afterwards the cane 
was discovered in the owner’s room. Evidently some one had 
used it at Lord’s and then returned it. 

There were a few Jews in our house and in odaer houses. They 

f ot on fairly well but there was always a background of anti- 
emitic feeling. They were the ‘ damned Jews ’, and soon, almost 
unconsciously, I began to think that it was the proper thing to 
have this feeUng. I never really felt anti-Semitic in the least, and, 
in later years, I had many good friends among the Jews. 

I got used to Harrow and liked the place, and yet somehow I 
began to feel that I was outgrowing it. The university attracted 
me. Right through the years tpoo and 1907 news from India 
had been agitating me. I got meagre enough accounts from the 
English papers ; but even that little showed that big events were 
happening at home, in Bengal, Punjab and the Maharashtra. 
There was Lala Lajpat Rai’s and S. Ajit Singh’s deportation, and 
Bengal seemed to be in an uproar, and Tilak’s ijame was often 
flashed from Poona, and there was Swadeshi and boycott. All 
this stirred me tremendously ; but there was not a soul in Harrow 
to whom I could talk about it. During the holidays I met some of 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE IQ 

my cousins or other Indian friends and then had a chance of 
relieving my mind. 

A prize I got for good work at school was one of G, M, 
Trevelyan’s Garibaldi books. This fascinated me and soon I 
obtained the other two volumes of the series and studied the 
whole Garibaldi story in them carefully. Visions of similar deeds 
in India came before me, of a gallant fight for freedom, and in 
my mind India and Italy got strangely mixed together. Harrow 
seemed a rather small and restricted place for these ideas and I 
wanted to go to the wider sphere of the university. So I induced 
father to agree to this and left Harrow after only two years’ stay, 
which was much less than the usual period. 

I was leaving Harrow because I wanted to do so myself and 
yet, I well remember, that when the time came to part I felt 
unhappy and tears came to my eyes. I had grown rather fond of 
the place and my departure for good put an end to one period 
in my life. And yet, 1 wonder, how far I was really sorry at 
leaving Harrow. Was it not partly a feeling that I ought to be 
unhappy because Harrow tradition and song demanded it? I was 
susceptible to, these traditions for I had deliberately not resisted 
them so as to' be in harmony "with the place. 

Cambridge, Trinity College, the beginning of October 1907, 
my age seventeen, or rather approaching eighteen, I felt elated 
at being an undergraduate with a great deal of fireedom, com- 
pared to school, to do what I chose. I had got out of the shackles 
of boyhood and felt at last that I could claim to be a grown-up. 
With a self-conscious air I wandered about the big coiuts and 
narrow streets of Cambridge, delighted to meet a person I knew. 

Three years I was at Cambridge, three quiet years with little 
of disturbance in them, moving slowly on like the sluggish Cam. 
They were pleasant years, with many friends and some work and 
some play and a gradual widening of the intellectual horizon. 
I took the Natural Sciences Tripos, my subjects being chemistry, 
geology and botany, but my interests were not confined to these. 
Many of the people I met at Cambridge or during the vacations 
in London or elsewhere talked learnedly about books and litera- 
ture and history and politics and economics. I felt a little at sea 
at first in this semi-highbrow talk, but I read a few books and 
soon got the bang of it and could at least keep my end up and 
not betray too great an ignorance on any of me usual subjects. 
So we discussed Nietzsche (he was all the rage in Cambridge , 
then) and Bernard Shaw’s prefaces and the latest book by Lowes 
Dickinson. We considered ourselves very sophisticated and 
talked of -sex and morality in a superior way, rwerring casually 



20 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

to Ivan Block, Havelock Ellis, Kraft Ebbing or Otto Weininger. 
We felt that we knew about as much of the theory of the subject 
as anyone who was not a specialist need know. 

As a matter of fact, in spite of our brave talk, most of us were 
rather timid where sex was concerned. At any rate I was so, 
and my knowledge for many years, till after I had left Cam- 
bridge, remained confined to theory. Why this was so it is a little 
difficult to say. Most of us were strongly attracted by sex and I 
doubt if any of us attached any idea of sin to it. Certainly I 
did not; there was no religious inhibition. We talked of its 
being amoral, neither moral nor immoral. Yet in spite of all 
this a certain shyness kept me away, as well as a distaste for the 
usual methods adopted. For I was in those days definitely a 
shy lad, perhaps because of my lonely childhood. 

My general attitude to life at the time was a vague kind of 
cyrenaicism, partly natural to youth, partly the influence of 
Oscar Wilde and Walter Pater, It is easy and gratifying to give 
a long Greek name to the desire for a soft life and pleasant ex- 
periences. But there was something more in it than that for I was 
not particularly attracted to a soft life. Not having the religious 
temper and disliking the repressions of religion, it was natural 
for me to seek some other standard. I was superficial and did 
not go deep down into anything. And so the aesthetic side of 
life appealed to me, and the idea of going through life worthily, 
not indulging it in the vulgar way, but still making the most of 
it and living a full and many-sided life attracted me. I enjoyed 
life and I roused to see why I should consider it a thing of sin. 
At the same time risk and adventure fascinated me; I was always, 
like my father, a bit of a gambler, at first with money and then 
for higher stakes, with the bigger issues of life, Indian politics 
in 1907 and 1908 were in a state of upheaval and I wanted to 
play a brave part in them, and. this was not likely to lead to a 
soft life. All these mixed and sometimes conflicting desires led 
to a medley in my mind. Vague and confused it was but I did 
not worry, for the time for any decision was yet far distant. 
Meanwhile, life was pleasant, both physically and intellectually, 
firesh horizons were ever coming into sight, there was so much 
to be done, so much to be seen, so many fresh avenues to explore. 
And we would sit by the fireside in the long winter evenings and 
talk and discuss unhurriedly deep into the night till the dying 
fire drove us shivermg to our beds. And sometimes, during our 
discussions, our voices would lose their even tenor and would 
grow, loud and excited in heated argument. But it was all make- 
believe, We played with the problems of human fife in a mock- 



HARROW ANO CAMBRIDGE 


21 


serious way, for they had not become real problems for us yet, 
and we had not been caught in the coils of the world’s affairs. 
It was the pre-war world of the early twentieth century. Soon 
this world was to die, yielding place to another, full of death and 
destruction and anguish and heart-sickness for the world’s youth. 
But the veil of the future hid tliis and we saw around us an 
assured and advancing order of things and this was pleasant for 
those who could afford it. 

I write of cyrenaidsm and the like and of various ideas that 
influenced me then. But it would be wrong to imagine that I 
thought clearly on these subjects then or even that I thought it 
necessary to try to be clear and definite about them. They were 
just va^ue fancies that floated in my mind and in this process 
left their impress in a greater or less degi-ee. I did not worry 
myself at all about these speculations. Work and games and 
amusements filled my life and the only thing that disturbed me 
sometimes was the political struggle in India. Among the books 
that influenced me politically at Cambridge was Meredith 
Townsend’s Asia and Europe. 

Frpm 1907 onwards for several years India was seething with 
unre^ and trouble. For the first time since the Revolt of 1857 
India was showing fight and not submitting tamely to foreign 
rule. News of Tilak’s activities and his conviction, of Aravindo 
Ghose and the way the masses of Bengal were taking the 
swadeshi and boycott pledge stirred all of us Indians in England. 
Almost without an exception we were Tilakites or Extremists, as 
the new party was caUed in India. 

The Indians in Cambridge had a society called the ‘ Majlis '. 
We discussed political problems there oftbn but in somewhat 
unreal debates. More eflbrt was spent in copying Parliamentary 
and the University Union style and mannerisms thaii in grap- 
pling with the subject. Frequently I went to the Majlis but 
during my three years I har^ spoke there. I could not get ovex 
my shyness and diffidence. Inis same difficulty pursued me in 
my college debating society, “ The Magpie and Stump ”, where 
there was a rule tliat a member not speaking for a whole term 
ha 4 to pay a fine. Often 1 paid the fine. 

I remember Edwin Montagu, who later became Secretary of 
State for India, often visiting “The Maroie and Stumjfi.” He 
was an old Trinity man and was then Member of Parliament 
for Chmbridge. It was from him that I first heard the modem 
definition of :^th : to believe in something which your reason 
tells you cannot be true, for if your reason approved of it there 
could be no question of blind faith. I was mfluenced by my 



12 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

scientific studies in the university and had some of the assurance 
which science then possessed. For the science of the nineteenth 
and the early twentieth centuries, unlike that of to-day, was very 
sure of itself and the world. 

In the Majlis and in private talks Indian students often used 
the most extreme language when discussing Indian politics. They 
even talked in terms of admiration of the acts of violence that 
were then beginning in Bengal. Later I was to find that these 
very persons were to become members of the Indian Civil Service, 
High Court judges, very staid and sober lawyers, and the like. 
Few of these parlour-firebi’ahds took any eifective part in Indian 
political movements subsequently. 

Some of the noted Indian politicians of the day visited us at 
Cambridge. We respected them but there was also a trace of 
superiority in our attitude. We felt that ours was a wider culture 
and we could take a broader view of things. Among those who 
came to us were Bepin Chandra Pal, Lajpat Rai and G. K. 
Gokhale. We met Bepin Pal in one of our sitting-rooms. There 
were only a dozen of us present but he thundered at us as if he 
was addressing a mass meeting of ten thousand. The volume of 
noise was so terrific that I could hardly follow what he was 
saying. Lalaji spoke to ua in a more reasonable way and I was 
impressed by his talk. I wrote to father that I preferred Lalaji’s 
address to Bepin Pal’s and this pleased him for he had no liking 
in those days for the firebrands of Bengal. Gokhale addressed 
a public meeting in Cambridge and my diief recollection of this 
meeting is of a question that was put by A. M. Khwaja at the 
end of it. Khwaja got up from the body of the hall and put 
an interminable question, which went on and on, till most of us 
had forgotten how it began tmd what it was about. 

Har Dayal had a great reputation among the Indians but he 
was at Oarord a little before my time at Cambridge. I met him 
once or twice in London during my Harrow days. 

Among my contemporaries at Cambridge there were several 
who played a prominent part in Indian Congress politics in later 
years. J. M. Sen Gupta left Cambridge soon after I went up. Saif- 
ud-Din Kitchlew, Syed Mahmud and Tasadduk Ahmad Sher- 
wani were more or less my contemporaries. S, M. Sulaiman, 
who is now the Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court, was 
also at Cambridge in my time. Other contemporaries have 
blossomed out as ihinisters and members of the Indian Civil 
Service. 

In London we used to hear also of Shyamji Krishnavarma and 
his India House but I never met him or visited that house. fJoinp. 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 23 

times we saw his Indian Sociologist. Long afterwards, in 1936, 
I saw Shyamji in Geneva. His pockets still bulged with ancient 
copies of the Indian Sociologist, and he regarded almost every 
Indian who came near him as a spy sent by the British Govern- 
ment. 

In London also there was the student centre opened by the 
India Office. This was universally regarded by Indians, with a 
great deal of justification, as a device to spy on Indian students. 
Many Indians, however, had to put up with it, whether they 
wanted to or not, as it became almost impossible to enter a 
university without its recommendation. 

The political situation in India had drawn ray father into more 
active politics and I was pleased at this although I did not agree 
with his politics. He had, naturally enough, joined the Moderates 
whom he knew and many of whom were his colleagues in his 
profession. He presided over a provincial conference in his pro- 
vince and took up a strong line against the Extremists of Bengal 
and Maharashtra. He also became president of the U.P. Provin- 
cial Congress Committee, He was present at Surat in 1907 when 
the Congress broke up in disorder and later emerged as a purely 
moderate group. 

Soon after Surat, H. W. Nevinson stopped with him at Allaha- 
bad as his guest for a while and, in his book on India, he referred 
to father as Being “ moderate in everything except his generosity.” 
This was a very wrong estimate, for father was never moderate 
in anything except his politics, and step by step his nature drove 
him mom even that remnant of moderation. A man of strong 
feelings, strong passions, tremendous pride and great strength 
of will, he was very far from the moderate type. And yet in 
1907 and 1908 and for some years afterwards, he was undoubtedly 
a moderate of Moderates and he was bitter against the 
Extremists, though I believe he admired Tilak. 

Why was this so? It was natural for him with his grounding 
in law and constitutionalism to take a lawyer’s and a constitu- 
tional view of politics. His clear thinking led him to see that 
hard and extreme words lead nowhere unless they are followed by 
action appropriate to the language. He saw no raective action in 
prospect. The swadeshi and boycott movements did not seem 
to him to carry matters far. And then the background of these 
movements was a religious nationalism which was alien to his 
nature. He did not look back to a revival in India of ancient 
times. He had no sympathy or understanding of them and 
utterly disliked many old social customs, caste and the like, 
which he considered reactionary. He looked to the West and 



24 


JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 


felt greatly attracted by Western progress, and thought that this 
could come through an association with England. 

Socially speaking, the revival of Indian nationalism in 1907 
was definitely reactionary. Inevitably, a new nationalism in India, 
as elsewhere in the East, was a religious nationalism. The 
Moderates thus represented a more advanced social outlook but 
they were a mere handful on the top with no touch with the 
masses. They did not think much in terms of economics, except 
in terms of the new upper middle class whicli they partly repre- 
sented and which wanted room for expansion. They advocated 
also petty social reforms to weaken caste and (lo away with old 
social customs which hindered growth. 

Having cast his lot with the Moderates, father took an aggres- 
sive line. Most of the Extremists, apart from a few leaders in 
Bengal and Poona, were young men and it irritated him to find 
that these youngsters dared to go their own way. Impatient and 
intolerant of opposition, and not suffering people whom he con- 
sidered fools, gladly, he pitched into them and hit out whenever 
he could. I remember, I think it was after I left Cambridge, 
reading an article of his which annoyed me greatly. I wrote him 
rather an inmertinent letter in which I suggested that no doubt 
the British Government was gready pleased with his political 
activities. This was just the kind of suggestion which would 
make him wild, and he was very angry. He almost thought of 
asking me to return from England immediately. 

During my stay at Cambridge the question had arisen as to 
what career I should take up. For a little while the Indian Civil 
Service was conteinplated; there was a glamour about it still in 
those days. But this idea was dropped as neither my father nor 
I were keen on it. The principal reason, I think, was that I was 
still under age for it, and if I was to appear for it I would have 
to stay three to four years more after taking my degree. I was 
twenty when I took my degree at Cambridge and the age-limit 
fijr the I.C.S, in those days was aa to 24. If successful an extra 
year had to be spent in England. My people were a little tired 
of my long stay in England and wanted me back soon. Another 
reason which weighed with father was that in case I was 
^pointed to the LC.S. I would be posted in various distant places 
fi:om home. Both father and mother wanted me neaf them 
after my long absence. So the die was cast in favour of the 
paternal profession, the Bar, and I joined the Inner Temple. 

It IS curious that in spite of my grovring extremism in politics, 
T strong disfavour the idea of joining 

the I.C,S. and thus becoming a cog in the British Government’s 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 25 

administrative machine in India. Such an idea in later years 
would have been repellent to me. 

I left Cambridge after taking my degree in 1910. I was only 
moderately successful in my saence tripos examination, obtain- 
ing second class honours. For the next two years I hovered 
about London. My law studies did not take up much time and 
I got through the Bar examinations, one after the other, with 
neither glory nor ignominy. Fox the rest I simply drifted, doing 
some general reatSng, vaguely attracted to the Fabians and 
socialistic ideas, and interested m the political movements of the 
day. Ireland and the woman suffrage movement interested me 
especially. I remember also how, during a visit to Ireland in the 
summer of 1910, the early beginnings of Sinn Fein had attracted 
me. 

I came across some old Harrow friends and developed expensive 
habits in their company. Often I exceeded the handsome allow- 
ance that father made me and he was greatly worried on my 
account fearing that I was rapidly going to the devil. But as a 
matter of fact I was not doing anything so notable. I was merely 
trying to ape to some extent the prosperous but somewhat 
empty-headed Englishman who is caQed a ‘ man about town.’ 
This soft and pointless existence, needless to say, did not improve 
me in any way. My early enthusiasms began to tone down and 
the only thing that seemed to go up was my conceit. 

During my vacations I had sometimes travelled on the Con- 
tinent. m the summer of 1909 my father and I happened to be 
in Berlin when Count Zeppdin arrived flying in his new airship 
from Friederichshafen on Lake Constance. I believe that was 
his first long flight and the occasion was celebrated by a huge 
demonstration and a fiirmal welcome by the Kaiser. A vast 
multitude, estimated at between one and two millions, gathered 
in the Tempdhof Field in Berlin, and the Zeppelin arrived to 
time and circled gracefully above us. The Hotel Adlon presented 
all its residents that day with a fine picture of Coimt Zeppelin, 
and I have still got that picture. 

About two months later we saw in Paris the first aeroplane to 
fly all over the city and to cirde round the Eiffel Tower. The 
aviator’s name was, I think, Comte de Lambert. Eighteen years 
later I was again in Paris when Lindbergh came like a shining 
arrow from across the Atlantic. 

I had a narrow escape once in Norway where I had gone on a 
pleasure cruise soon after taking my degree at Cainbridge in 
1910. We were tramping across the mountainous country. Hot 
and weary we readied oui destination, a little hotel, arid 



J6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

demanded baths. Such a thing had not been heard of there and 
there was no provision for it in the building. We were told 
however that we could wash ourselves in a neighbouring stream. 
So, armed with table napkins or perhaps small face towels, which 
the hotel generously gave, two of us, a young Englishman and 
I, went to this roaring torrent which was coming from a glacier 
near by. I entered the water; it was not deep but it was freezing 
and the bottom was terribly slippery. I slipped and fell and the 
ice-cold water numbed me and made me lose all sensation or 
power of controlling my limbs. I could not regain my foothold 
and was swept rapidly along by the torrent. My companion, 
the Englishman, however, managed to get out and he ran along 
the side and ultimately, succeeding in catching my leg, dragged 
me out. Later we realized the danger we were in for about two 
or three hundred yards ahead of us this mountain torrent 
tumbled over an enormous precipice, forming a waterfall which 
was one of the sights of the place. 

In the summer of 191a I was called to the Bar, and in the 
autumn of that year I returned to India finally after a stay of 
over seven years in England. Tvrice, in between, I had gone home 
during my holidays. But now I returned for good, and I am 
afraid, as I landed at Bombay, I was a bit of a prig with little 
to commend me. 



V 


BACK HOME AND WAR-TIME POLITICS 
IN INDIA 

Towards the end of 1912 India was, politically, very dull. Tilak 
was in gaol, the Extremists had been sat upon and were lying low 
without any effective leadership, Bengal was quiet after the un- 
settling of the partition of the province, and the Moderates had 
been eliectively " rallied ” to the Minto-Morley scheme of coun- 
cils. There was some interest in Indians overseas, especially in the 
condition of Indians in South Africa. The Congress was a 
moderate group, meeting annually, passing some feeble resolu- 
tions, and attracting little attention. 

I visited, as a delegate, the Bankipore Congress during Christ- 
mas 1912. It was very much an English-knowing upper class affiiir 
where morning coats and well-pressed trousers were greatly in 
evidence. Essentially it was a social gathering with no political 
excitement or tension. Gokhale, fresh from South Africa, at- 
tended it and was the outstanding person of the session. High- 
strung, full of earnestness and a nervous energy, he seemed to be 
one of the few persons present who took politics and public affairs 
seriously and felt deeply about them. I was impressed by him. 

A characteristic incident occurred when Gokhale was leaving 
Bankipore. He was a member of the Public Services Commission 
at the time and, as such, was entitled to a first class railway com- 
partment to himself. . He was not well and crowds and uncon- 
genial company upset him. He liked to be left alone by himself 
and, after me stram of the Congress session, he was looking for- 
ward to a quiet journey by train. He got his compartment but 
the rest of the train was crowded with delegates returning to 
Calcutta. After a litde while, Bhupendra Nath Basy, who later 
became a member of the India, Council, came up to Gokhale and 
casually asked him if he could travel in his compartment. Mr. 
Gokhale was a little taken aback as Mr. Basu was an aggressive 
talker, but naturally he agreed. A few minutes later Mr. Basu 
again came up to Gokhale and asked him if he would mind if a 
fnend of his also travelled in the same compartment. Mr. Gok- 
hale again mild ly agreed. A little before the train left, Mr. Basu 
mentioned casually that both he and his fidend would find it 
very rmcomfortable to sleep in the upper berths, so would Gok- 
hale mind occupying an upper berth so that the two lower berths 

*7 



28 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

might be taken by them? And that, I think, was the arrangement 
arrived at and poor Mr. Gokhale had to climb up and spend a bad 
night. 

I took to the law and joined the High Court. The work in- 
terested me to a certain extent. The early months after my return 
from Europe were pleasant. I was glad to be back home and to 
pick up old threads. But gradually the life I led, in common with 
most others of my kind, began to lose all its freshness and I felt 
that I was‘ being engulfed in a dull routine of a pointless and 
futile existence. I suppose my mongrel, or at least mixed, educa- 
tion was responsible for this feeling of dissatisfaction with my 
surroundings. The habits and the ideas that had grown in me 
during my seven years in England did not fit in with things as I 
found them. Fortunately my home atmosphere was fairly con- 
genial and that was some help, but it was not enough. For the 
rest there was the Bar Library and the club and the same people 
were to be found in both, discussing the same old topics, usually 
connected with the legal profession, over and over again. De- 
cidedly the atmosphere was not intellectually stimulating and a 
sense of the utter insipidity of life grew upon me. There were 
not even worthwhile amusements or diversions. 

G. Lowes Dickinson is reported 'by E, M. Forster, in his recent 
life of him, to have once said about India : “ And why can’t the 
taces meet? Simply because the Indians hore the English. That 
is the simple adam^tine fact.” It is possible that most English- 
men fed that way"and it is not surprising. To quote Forster 
again (from another book), every En^ishman in India feds and 
behaves, and rightly, as if he was a member) of an army of occu- 
pation, and it is quite impossible for natural and unrestrained 
relations between the two races to grow under these circum- 
stances. The Englishman and the Indian are always posing to 
each other and naturally they feel uncomfortable in each other’s 
company. Each bores the other and is glad to get away from him 
to breathe 6e^ and move naturally again. 

Usually the Englishman meets the same set of Indians, those 
connected mth the. official world, and he seldom reaches really 
interesting people, and if he reached them he would not easily 
draw them out. The British regime in India has pushbd im into 
prominence, even sodally, the offidal class, both British and 
Indian, and this class is rfiost singularly dull and narrow-minded. 
Even a bright young Englishman on coming out to India will 
soon relapse into a kind of intellectual and cultural torpor and 
will get cut off from all live ideas and movements. After a day in 
office, dealing with the ever-rotating and never-ending files, he 



WAR-TIME POLITICS IN INDIA 


29. 

will have some exerdse and then go to his dub to mix with his 
kind, drink whisky and read Punch and the illustrated weeklies 
from England. He hardly reads books and if he does he will 
probably go bade to an old favourite. And for this gradual de- 
terioration of mind he will blame India, curse the cUmate, and 
generally anathematise the tribe of agitators who add to his 
troubles, not realising that the cause of intellectual and cultural 
decay lies in the hide-bound bureaucratic and despotic system of 
government which flourishes in India and of which he is a tiny 
part. 

If that is the fate of the English official, in spite of his leaves 
and furloughs, the Indian official working with him or under him 
is not likely to fare better, for he tries to model himself on the 
English type. Few experiences are more dreary than sitting with 
high-placed officials, both English and Indian, in that seat of 
Empire, New Delhi, and listening to their unending talk about 
promotions, leave rules, furloughs, transfers, and little tit-bits of 
Service scandal. 

This official and Service atmosphere invaded and set the tone 
for almost all Indian middle-class life, especially the English- 
knowing intelligentsia, except to some extent in cities like Cal- 
cutta and Bombay. Professional men, lawyers, doctors and 
others, succumbed to it, and even the academic halls of the semi- 
official universities were full of it. All these people lived in a 
world apart, cut off from the masses and even the lower middle 
class. Politics was confined to this upper strata. The nationalist 
movement in Bengal from 1906 onwards had for the first time 
shaken this up and infused a new life in the Bengal lower middle- 
class and to a small extent even tihe masses. This process was.to 
grow rapidly in later years under Gandhiji’s^ leadership, but a 
nationalist struggle though life-giving is a narrow creed and ab- 
sorbs too much energy and attrition to allow of other activities. 

^ I have referred to Mr. Gandhi or Mahatma Gandhi as " Gandhiji” 
throughout these pages as he himself prefers this to the addition of 
‘ Mahatma ’ to his name. But I have seen some extraordinary ex- 
planations of this ' ji ’ in books and articles by EngKsh writers. Some 
nave imagined that it is a term of endearment-^andhiji meaning 
'dear little Gandhi’! This is perfecdy absurd and shows colossal 
ignorance of Indian life. ‘ Ji ’ is one of the commonest additions to a 
name in India being wplied indiscrimmatingly to all kinds of people 
and to men, women, boys, girls and children. It conveys an idea of 
respect, something equivalent to Mr., Mrs., or Miss. Hindustani is 
rich in courtly phrases and prefixes and suffixes to names and hono- 
rific titles. ' Ji ’ is the simplest of these and the least formal of th^, 



30 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


I felt, therefore, dissatisfied with life in those early years after 
my return from England. My profession did not fill me with a 
whole-hearted enthusiasm. Politics, which to me meant aggres- 
sive nationalist activity against foreign rule, offered no scope for 
this. , I joined the Congress and took part in its occasional meet- 
ings. \^en a special occasion arose, like the agitation against the 
Fiji indenture system for Indian workers, or the South African 
Indian question, I threw myself into it with energy and worked 
hard. But these were only temporary occupations, 

I indulged in some diversions like shikar but I had no special 
aptitude or inclination for it. I liked the outings and the jungle 
and cared little for the killing. Indeed my reputation was a 
singularly bloodless one, although I once succeeded, more or less 
by a fluke, in killing a bear in Kashmir. An incident with a little 
antelope damped even the little ardour that I possessed for shikar. 
This harmless little animal fell down at my feet, wounded to 
death, and looked up at me with its great big eyes full of tears. 
Those eyes have often haunted me since. 

I was attracted in those early years to Mr. Gokhale’s Servants 
of India Society. I never thought of joining it, partly because its 
politics were too moderate for me, and partly because I had no 
intention then of giving up my profession. But I had a great 
admiration for the members of the society who had devoted 
themselves for a bare pittance to the country’s service. Here at 
least, I thought, was straight and single-minded and continuous 
work even though this might not be on wholly right lines. 

Mr. Srinivas Sastri, however, gave me a great shock in a little 
matter quite unconnected with politics. He was addressing a 
students meeting in Allahabad and he told them to be respectful 
and obedient to their teachers and professors and to observe care- 
fully all the rides and regulations laid down by constituted autho- 
rity. All this goody-goody talk did not appeal to me much; it 
seemed very platitudinous and somewhat undesirable, with all its 
stress on authoritarianism. I thought that this was perhaps due to 
the semi-official atmosphere which was so prevalent in India, Mr, 
&stn wrat on and called upon the boys to report each other’s sins 
of omission and commission immediately to the authorities. In 
other words they were to spy on each other and play the part of 


though perfectly correct, I learn from my hrothcr-in-law, Ranjit S. 

^ honourable ancestry. It is de- 

Sansknt meaning a gentleman or noble-born 

U to tetoTto 5p2 Prakrit 



WAR-TIMi, POLITICS IN INDIA 

informers. These hard words were not used hy Mr. Sastri but their 
meaning seemed to me clear, and I listened aghast to this friendly 
counsel of a great leader. I had freshly returned from England 
and the lesson that had been most impressed upon my mind in 
school and college was never to betray a colleague. There was no 
greater sin against the canons of good form than to sneak and 
inform and thus get a companion into trouble. A sudden and 
complete reversal of this principle upset me and I felt that there 
was a great diflference between Mr. Sastri’s morality and the mor- 
ality that had been taught to me. 

The World War absorbed our attention. It was far off and 
did not at first affect our lives much, and India never felt the 
full horror of it. Politics petered out and sank into insi^ifi- 
cance. The Defence of India Act (the equivalent of the British 
D.O.R.A.) held the country in its grip. From the second year 
onwards news of conspiracies and shootings came to us, and of 
press-gang methods to enrol recruits in the Punjab. 

There was little sympathy with the British in spite of loud 
professions of loyalty. Moderate and Extremist alike learnt with 
satisfaction of German victories. There was no love for Germany 
of course, only the desire to see our own rulers humbled. It was 
the weak and helpless man’s idea of vicarious revenge. I suppose 
most of us viewed the struggle with mixed feelings. Of all the 
nations involved my s5mipathies were probably most with France. 
The ceaseless and unabashed propaganda on behalf of the Allies 
had some effect, although we tried to discount it greatly. 

Gradually political life grew again. Lokamanya Tilak came out 
of prison and Home Rule Leagues were started by him and Mrs. 
Besant. I joined both but I worked especially for Mrs. Besant’s 
League. Mrs. Besant began to play an ever increasing part in the 
Indian political scene. The annual sessions of the Congress be- 
came a litde more exciting and the Moslem League began to 
march with the Congress. The atmosphere became electric and 
most of us young men felt exhilarated and expected big things 
in the near fiiture. Mrs. Besant’s internment added greatly to the 
excitement of the intelligentsia and vitalised the Home Rule 
Movement all over the country. The Home Rule Leagues were 
attracting not only all the old Extremists who had been kept out 
of the Congress since 1907 but large numbers of newcomers 
from the middle classes. They did not touch the masses. 

Mrs. Besant’s interginent , stirred leven the older generation, 
including many of tEe "Moderate leaders. Just before the intern- 
ment I remember how moved we used to be by the eloquent 
speeches of Mr. Srinivasa Sastri which we read in the papers. 



yi JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

But just before or after the internment suddenly Mr. Sastri 
became silent. He failed us completely when the time for action 
came and there was considerable disappointment and resentment 
at his silence when most of all a lead was needed. I am afraid 
that ever since then the conviction has grown upon me that Mr. 
Sastri is not a man of action and a crisis does not suit his genius. 

Other Moderate leaders, however, went ahead, some to draw 
back later, some to remain in the new position. I remember tliat 
there was a great deal of discussion in those days about tlie new 
Indian Defence Force which the Government was organising 
from the middle classes on the lines of the European defence 
forces in India. This Indian force was treated very differently 
from the European force m a variety of ways, and many of us 
felt that we should not co-operate with it till these humiliating 
distinctions were removed. After much discussion, however, we 
decided to co-operate in the U.P. as it was considered worth while 
for our young men to have military training even under these 
conditions. 1 sent my application to join the new force, and we 
formed a committee in Allahabad to push the scheme on. Just 
then came Mrs. Besant’s internment and in the excitement of 
the moment I managed to get the committee members — they in- 
cluded my father, Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru, Mr. C. Y. Chintamani 
and other Moderate leaders — ^to agree to cancel our meeting and 
,all other work in connection with the Defence Force as a protest 
against the Government’s action. A public notice was issued im- 
mediately to this effect. I think some of the signatories regretted 
later this aggressive act in war time. 

Mrs. Besant’s internment also resulted in my father, and other 
Moderate leaders joining the Home Rule League. Some months 
later most of these Moderate members resigned from the League. 
My father remained in it and became the president of the Ala- 
habad branch. 

Gradually my father had been drifting atVay from the orthodox 
Moderate position. His nature rebelled against too much sub- 
mission and appeal to an authority which ignored us and treated 
us disdainfully. But the old Extremist leaders did not attract 
him; their language and methods jarred upon him. The episode 
of Mrs. Besant’s internment and subsequent events influenced 
him considerably but still he hesitated before ' definitely com- 
mitting himself to a forward line. Often he used to say in those 
days that moderate tactics were no good, but nothing effective 
could be done till some solution for die Hindu-Muslim question 
was found. If this was found then he promised to go ahead with 
the youngest of us. The adoption by the Congress at Lucknow in 



WAR-TIMfi POLITICS IN INDIA 


33 

1916 of the Joint Congress-League Scheme, which had been 
drawn up at a meeting of the All India Congress Committee in 
our house, pleased him greatly as it opened the way to a joint 
effort and he was prepared to go ahead then even at the cost of 
breaking with his old colleagues of the Moderate group. They 
pulled together till and during Edwin Montagu’s visit to India as 
Secretary of State. Differences arose soon after the publication 
of the Montagu-Chelmsford Report, and the final break in the 
United Provinces came in the summer of 1918 at a special pro- 
vincial conference held at Lucknow over which my fether pre- 
sided. The Moderates, expecting that this conference would 
adopt a strong line against the Montagu-Chehnsford proposals, 
boycotted the conference. Later they also boycotted the special 
session of the Congress held to consider these proposals. Since 
then they have been out of the Congress. 

This Moderate practice of quietly dropping out and keeping 
away from the Congress sessions and other public gatherings and 
not even presenting their viewpoint and fighting for it, even 
though the majority might be against them, struck me as 
peculiarly undi^ified and unbecoming in public workers. I 
think that was the general sense of large numbers of people in 
the coimtry and I am sure that the almost total coUapse of the 
Moderates in Indian politics was partly due to this timid attitude. 
Mr. Sastri was, I think, the only Moderate leader who attended 
some of the -early sessions of the Congress, which had been boy- 
cotted by the Moderates as a group, and put forward his solitary 
viewpoint. He went up in public estimation because of it. 

My own political and public activities in the early war years 
were modest and I kept away from addressing public gatherings. 
I was stiU diffident and terrified of public speaking. Partly also 
I felt that public speeches should not be in English and I doubted 
my capacity to speak at any length in Hindustani, I remember 
a little incident when I was indeed to deliver my first public 
speech in Allahabad. Probably it was in 1915 but I am not clear 
about dates and am rather mixed up about the order of events. 
The occasion was a protest meeting against a new Act muzzling 
the press. I spoke briefly and in English. As soon as the meeting 
was over Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru, to my great embarrassment, 
embraced and kissed me in public on the dais. This was not be- 
cause of what I had said or how I had said it. His efiusive joy 
was caused by the mere fact that I had spoken in public and thus 
a new recruit had been obtained for public work, fer this work 
consisted in those days practically of speaking only. 

I remember that many of us young men. m Allahabad then 



34 JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 

had a faint hope that perhaps Dr. Sapru might take up a more 
advanced attitude in politics. Of all the Moderate group in the 
city he seemed to he die most likely to do so because he was 
emotional and could occasionally be carried by enthusiasm. Com- 
pared to him my father seemed cold-bloodedness itself, though 
underneath this outer cover there was fire enough. But father’s 
strengdi of will left us little hope and for a brief while we actu- 
ally had greater expectations from Dr. Sapru. Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya, with his long record of public work, attracted 
us of course and we used to have long talks with him, pressing 
him to give a brave lead to the country. 

At home, in those early years, political questions were not 
peaceful subjects for discussion, and references to them, which 
were frequent, immediately produced a tense atmosphere. Father 
had been closely watching my growing drift towards Extremism, 
my continual criticism of the politics of talk and my insistent 
demand for action. What action it should be Was not clear, and 
sometimes father imagined that I was heading straight for the 
violent courses adopted by some of the young men of Bengal. 
This worried him very much. As a matter of faa I was not 
attracted that way, but the idea that we must not tamely submit 
to existing conditions and that something must be done began to 
obsess me more and more. Successful action, from the national 
point of view, did not seem to be at all easy, but I felt that both 
individual and national honour demanded a more aggressive and 
fighting attitude to foreign rule. Father himself was dissatisfied 
with the Moderate philosophy, and a mental conflict was going on 
inside him. He was too obstinate to change from one position to 
another until he was absolutely convinced that there was no other 
way. Each step forward meant for him a hard and bitter tussle in 
hia mind, and when the step was taken after tliat struggle with 
part of lumsel^ there was no going back. He had not taken it in 
a fit of enthusiasm but as a result of intellectual conviction, and 
then, having done so, all his pride prevented him from looking 
back. 

The outward change in his politics came about the time of 
Mrs, Besant’s internment and ftom that time onwards step by 
step he went ahead, leaving his old Moderate colleagues far be- 
hind, till the tragic happenings in the Punjab in 1919 finally led 
him to cut adrift from his old life and his profession, and throw 
in his lot with the new movement started by Gandhi ji. 

But thatwM still to be, and fi:omi9i5to 1917 he was still unsure 
of what to do, and the doubts in him, added to his worries about 
meC' did not make him a peaceful talker on the public issues of 



WAR-TIME POLITICS IN INDIA 


.,1? 

the day. Often enough our talks ended abruptly by his losing his 
temper with us. 

My first meeting with Gandhiji was about the time of the 
Ludtnow Congress during Christmas 1916. All of us admired 
him for his heroic fight in South Africa, but he seemed very dis- 
tant and different and unpolitical to many of us young men. He 
refused to take part in Congress or national politics then and con- 
fined himself to the South African Indian question. Soon after- 
wards his adventures and victory in Champaran, on behalf of 
the tenants of the planters, filled us with enthusiasm. We saw 
that he was prepared to apply his methods in India also and they 
promised success. 

I remember being moved also, in those days after the Lucknow 
Congress, by a number of eloquent speeches delivered by Sarojini 
Naidu in Allahabad. It was all nationalism and patriotism and I 
was a pure nationalist, my vague socialist ideas of college days 
having sunk into the background. Roger Casement’s wonderful 
speech at his trial in 1916 seemed to point out exactly how a 
member of a subject nation should feel. The Easter Week rising 
in Ireland by its very failure attracted, for was that not true 
courage which mocked at almost certain failure and proclaimed 
to the world that no physical might could crush the invincible 
spirit of a nation? 

Such were my thoughts then, and yet fresh reading was again 
stirring the embers of socialistic ideas in my head. They were 
vague ideas, more humanitarian and utopian than scientific. A 
favourite writer of mine during the war years and after was 
Bertrand Russell. 

These thoughts and desires produced a growing conflict within 
me and a dissatisfaction with my profession of the law. I carried 
on with it because there was nothing else to be done, but I felt 
more and more that it was not possible to reconcile public work, 
especially of the aggressive type which appealed to me, with the 
lawyer’s job. It was not a question of pnnciple but of time and 
energy. Sir Rash Behary Ghosh, the eminent Calcutta lawyer, 
who for some unknown reason took a fancy to me, gave me a lot 
of good advice as to how to get on in the profession. He especially 
advised me to write a book on a legal subject of my choice, as he 
said that this was the best way for a junior to train himself. He 
offered to help me with ideas in the writing of it and to revise it. 
But all his well meant interest in my legal career was in vain, and 
few things could be more distasteful to me than to spend my time 
and energy in writing legal books. 

Sir Rash Behary in to old age was extraordinarily irritahl6«nd 



36 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

short of temper and a terror for his juniors. I rather liked him, 
however, and his very failings and wes^knesses were not wholly 
unattractive. Father and I were once his guests in Simla. It was 
in 1918 , 1 think, just when the Montagil-Chclmsford report came 
out. He invited to dinner a few friends one evening and among 
them was old Mr. Khaparde. After dinner Sir Rash Behary 
and Mr. Khaparde became loud and aggressive in their argu- 
ments for they belonged to rival schools of politics, Sir Rash 
Behary being a confirmed Moderate and Mr. Khaparde was then 
supposed to be a leading Tilakite, although in later years he be- 
came as mild as a dove and too moderate even for the Moderates. 
Mr. Khaparde began criticising Mr. Gokhale (who had died 
some years previously), saying that he had been a British agent 
who had spied on him in London. This was too much for Sir 
Rash Behary and he shouted that Gokhale had been the best of 
men and a particular friend of his and that he would not 
permit any one to say a word against him. Mr. Khaparde then 
branched off to Mr. Srinivas Sastri. Sir Rash Behary did not 
like this but he did not resent it quite so much. Apparently he 
was not such an admirer of Mr. Sastri’s as he had been of 
Gokhale’s. Indeed he said that so long as Gokhale had been alive 
he had helped the Servants of India Society financially but since 
his death he had stopped his contribution. Mr. Khaparde then, 
as a contrast, began praising Tilak. Here was a truly great man, 
he said; a wonderful person, a saint. “A saint! " retorted Sir 
Rash Behary, “ I hate saints, I want to have nothing to do with 
them.” 



VI 


MY WEDDING AND AN ADVENTURE IN 
THE HIMALAYAS 

My marriage took place in 1916 in the city of Delhi. It was on 
the Vasanta Panchavvi day which heralds the coming of spring 
in India. That summer we spent some months in Kashmir. I left 
my family in the valley and, together with a cousin of mine, 
wandered for several weeks in the mountains and went up the 
Ladakh road. 

This was my first experience of the narrow and lonely 
valleys, high up in the world, which lead to the Tibetan 
plateau. From the top of the Zoji-la pass we saw the rich verdant 
mountain sides below us on one side and the bare bleak rock on 
the other. We went up and up the narrow valley bottom Hanked 
on each side by mountains, with the snow-covered tops gleaming 
on one side and little glaciers creeping down to meet us. The 
wind was cold and bitter but the sun was warm in the day time, 
and the air was so clear that often we were misled about the dis- 
tance of objects, thinking them much nearer than they actually 
were. The loneliness grew ; there were not even trees or vegetation 
to keep us company — only me bare rock and the snow and ice 
and, sometimes, very welcome flowers. Yet I found a strange 
satisfaction in these wild and desolate haunts of nature; I was 
full of energy and a feeling of exaltation. 

I had an exciting experience during this visit. At one place on 
our march beyond the Zoji-la pass— I think it was called Matayan 
— ^we were told that the cave of Amaranath was only eight miles 
away. It was true that an enormous mountain all covered vidth 
ice and snow lay in between and had to be grossed, but what did 
that matter? Eight miles seemed so little. In our enthusiasm and 
inexperience we decided to make the attempt. So we left our 
camp (which was situated at about 11,500 feet altitude) and with 
a small party went up the moimtain. We had a local shepherd 
for a guide. 

We crossed and climbed several gladers, roping ourselves 
up, and our troubles increased and breathing became a little 
difficult. Some of our porters, lightly laden as they were, began 
to bring up blood. It began to snow and the glaciers became 
terribly slippery; we were fa^ed our and every step meant 
a special effort. But still we persisted in our foolhardy attempt. 

8 ? 



38 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

We had left our camp at four in the morning and alter twelve 
hours’ almost continuous climbing we were rewarded by the 
sight of a huge ice-field. This was a magnificent sight, surrounded 
as it was by snow-peaks, like a diadem or an amphitheatre of the 
gods. But fresh snow and mists soon hid the sight from us. I do 
not know what our Jiltitude was but I think it must have been 
about 15,000 to 16,000 feet, as we were considerably higher than 
the cave of Amaranath. We had now to cross this ice-field, a 
distance probably of half a mile, and then go down on the other 
side to the cave. We thought that as the climbing was over, our 
principal difficulties had also been surmounted, and so, very 
tired but in good humour, we Iregan this stage of the journey. It 
was a tricky business as there were many crevasses and the fresh 
snow often covered a dangerous spot. It was this frc.sh snow that 
almost proved to be my undoing, for I stepped upon it and it 
gave way and down I went a huge and yawning crevasse. It was 
a tremendous fissure and anything that went right down it could 
be assured of safe keeping and preservation for some geological 
ages. But the rope held and I clutched to the side of the crevasse 
«ad was pulled out. We were shaken up by this but still we per- 
sisted in going on. The crevasses, however, increased in number 
and width and we had no equipment or means of crossing some 
of them. And so at last we turned back, weary and disappointed, 
and the cave of Amaranath remained unvisited. 

The higher valleys and mountains of Kashmir fascinated me 
so much that I resolved to come back again soon. I made many 
a plan and worked out many a tom, and one, the very thought of 
which filled me with delight, was a visit to Manasarovar, the 
wonder lake of Tibet, and snow-covered Kailas near by. That was 
eighteen years ago, and I am still as far tis ever from Kailas and 
Manasarovar. I have not even been to visit Kashmir again, much 
as I have longed to, and ever more and more I have got en- 
tangled in the coils of politics and public affairs. Instead of 
going up mountains or crossing the seas I have to satisfy my 
wanderlust by coming to prison. But still I plan, for that is a joy 
that no one can deny even in prison, and besides what else can 
one do in prison? And I dream of the day when I shall wander 
about the Himalayas and cross them to reach that lake and 
mountain of my desire. But meanwhile the sands of life run on 
and youth passes into middle age and that will give place 
to something worse, and sometimes I think that I may grow 
too old to reach Kailas and Manasarovar. But the journey 
is always worth the making even though the end may not be 
in siRht. 



MY WEDUING AND AN ADVENTURE 

“ Yea, in tny mind these mountains rise. 
Their perils dyed with evening’s rose ; 
And still my ghost sits at my eyes 
And thirsts for their unirouhlcd snows.” 


^ Walter de la Marc. 



VII 


THE COMING OF GANDHIJf: SATYAGRAHA 
AND AMRITSAR 

The end of the World War found India in a state of suppressed 
excitement. Industrialisation had spread and the capitalist class 
had grown in wealth and power. This handful at the top had 
prospered and were greedy for more power and opportunity to 
invest their savings and add to their wealth.' The great majority, 
however, were not so fortunate and looked forward to a lighten- 
ing of the burdens that crushed them. Among the middle classes 
there was everywhere an expectation of great constitutional 
changes which would bring a large measure of self-rule and thus 
better their lot by opening out many fresh avenues of growth to 
them. Political agitation, peacefiil and wholly constitutional as 
it was, seemed to be working itself to a head and people talked 
with assurance of self-determination and self-government. Some 
of this unrest was visible alsp among the masses, especially the 
peasantry. In the rural areas of the Punjab the forcible methods 
of recruitment were still bitterly remembered, and the fierce 
suppression of the ‘ Komagata Maru ' people and others by con- 
spiracy trials added to the widespread resentment. The soldiers 
back fi-om active service on distant fronts were no longer the 
subservient robots that they^ used to be. They had grown men- 
tally and there was much discontent among them. 

Among the Muslims there was anger over the treatment of 
Turkey and the Kliilafat question and an agitation was growing. 
The treaty with Turkey had not been signed yet, but the whole 
situation was ominous. So, while they agitated, they waited. 

The dominant note all over India was one of waiting and 
expectation, full of hope and yet tinged with fear and anxiety. 
Theii came the Rowlatt Bills with their drastic provisions for 
arrest and trial without any of the checks and formalities which 
the law is supposed to provide. A wave of anger greeted them 
aU over India and even the Moderates joined in this and opposed 
the measures with all their might. Indeed there was universal 
opposition on the part of Indians of all shades of opinion. Still 
the Bills were pushed through by the officials and became law, 
the principal concession made bemg to limit them for three 
years. 

It is instructive to look back after fifteen years to these Bills 

40 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 4I 

and the upheaval they caused. They were made into law and yet, 
so far as I know, they were never used even once during the three 
years of their life — ^three years 'which were not quiet years hut 
were the most troubled years that India had known since the 
Revolt of 1857. Thus the British Government, in the teeth of 
un anim ous public opinion, pushed through a law which they 
themselves never used afterwards, and thus invited an upheaval. 
One might almost think that the object of the measure was to 
bring trouble. 

Another interesting ftict is this. To-day, fifteen years later, we 
have any number of laws on the statute book, functioning ftom 
day to day, which are far harsher than the Rowlatt Bills were. 
Compared to these new laws and ordinances, under which we 
now enjoy the blessings of British rule, the Rowlatt Bills might 
almost be considered a charter of liberty. There is this difference, 
of course: since 1919 we have had a large instalment of what 
is called self-government, known as the Montagu-Chelmsford 
scheme, and now we are told that we are on the verge of another 
big instalment. We progress. 

Gandhiji had passed through a serious illness early in 1919. 
Almost ftom his sick bed he begged the Viceroy not to give his 
consent to the Rowlatt Bills. That appeal was ignored as others 
had been and then, almost against his will, Gandhiji took the 
leadership in his first all-India agitation. He started the Satyag- 
raha Sabha, the members of wmch were pledged to disobey the 
Rowlatt Act, if it was applied to them, as well as other objection- 
able laws to be specified from time to time. In other words they 
were to court gaol openly and deliberately. 

When I first read about this proposal in the newspapers my 
reaction was one of tremendous reuef. Here at last was a way 
out of the tangle, a method of action which was straight and 
open and possmly effective. I was , afire with enthusiasm and 
wanted to join the Satyagraha Sabha immediately.^ I hardly 
thought of the consequences— -law-breaking, gaol-going, etc. — 
and if I thought of them I did not care. But suddenly my ardour 
was damped and I realised that all was not plain sailing. My 
father was dead against this new idea. He was not in the habit 
of being swept away by new proposals; he thought carefully of 
the consequences before he took any fresh step. And the more he 
thought of the Satyagraha Sabha and its prominme, the lew he 
liked it. *What good would the gaol-going of a number of indi- 
viduals do, what pressure could it bring on the Government? 
Apart jftom these general considerations, what really moved him 
was the personal issue. .It seemed to him preposterous that I 



42 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

should go to prison. The trek to prison had not then begun and 
the idea was most repulsive. Father was intensely attached to his 
children. He was not showy in his affection, but behind his 
restraint there was a great love. 

For many days there was this mental conflict, and because 
both of us felt that big issues were at stake involving a complete 
upsetting of our lives, we tried hard to be as considerate to each 
other as possible. I wanted to lessen his obvious suffering if I 
could, but I had no doubt in my mind that I had to go the way 
of Satyagraha. Both of us had a distressing time, and night alter 
night I wandered about alone, tortured in mind and trying to 
grope my way out. Father — discovered later— actually tried 
sleeping on the floor to find out what it was like, as he thought 
that this would be my lot in prison. 

Gandhiji came to Allahabad at father’s request and they had 
long talks at which I was not present. As a result Gandhiji 
advised me not to precipitate matters or to do anything which 
might upset father. I was not happy at this, but other events 
took place in India which changed the whole situation, and the 
Satyagraha Sabha stopped its activities. 

Satyagraha Day — all-India hartals and complete’suspension of 
business — ^firing by the police and military at Delhi andt Amritsar, 
and the killing of many people — ^mob violence in Amritsar and 
Ahmedabad— the massacre of Jallianwala Bagh — ^the long horror 
and terrible indignity of martial law in the Punjab. The Punjab 
was isolated, cut off from the rest of India; a thick veil seemed 
to cover it and hide it firom outside eyes. There was hardly 
any news, and people could not go there or come out from 
there. 

Odd individuals, who managed to escape from that inferno, 
were so terror-struck that they could give no clear account. Help- 
lessly and impotently, we, who were outside, waited for scraps of 
news and bitterness fflled our hearts. Some of us wanted to go 
openly to the affected parts of the Punjab and defy the martial 
law regulations. But we were kept ba^, and meanwhile a big 
orgamsation for relief and enquiry was set up on behalf of the 
Congress. 

As soon as martial law was vnthdratyn from the principal areas 
and outsiders were allowed to come in, prominent Congressmen 
and others poured into the Punjab offering their services for 
relief or enquiry work. The relief work was largely directed by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and Swami Shraddhananda; the 
enquiry part was mainly under the direction of my father and 
Mr. C. R. Dm, with Gandhiji taking a great deal of interest in 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 43 

it and often being consulted by the others. Deshbandhu Das 
especially took the Amritsar area under his charge and I was 
deputed to accompany him there and assist him in any way he 
desired. That was the first occasion 1 had of working with him 
and under him and I valued that experience very much and my 
admiration for him grew. Most of the evidence relating to 
Jallianwala Bagh and that terrible lane where human beings were 
made to crawl on their bellies, that subsequently appeared in the 
Congress Inquiry Report, was taken down in our presence. We 
paid numerous visits to the so-called Bagh itself and examined 
every bit of it carefully. 

A suggestion has been made, I think by Mr. Edward Thomp- 
son, that General Dyer was under the impression that there were 
other exits from the Bagh and it was because of this that he 
continued his firing for so long. Even if that was Dyer’s impres- 
sion, and there were in fact some exits, that would hardly lessen 
his responsibility. But it seems very strange that he should have 
such an impression. Any person, standing on the raised ground 
where he stood, could have a good view of the entire space and 
could see how shut in it was on all sides by houses several storeys 
high. Only on one side, for a hundred met or so, there was no 
house, but a low wall about five feet high. With a murderous 
fire mowing them down and unable to find a way out, thousands 
of people rushed to this wall and tried to climb over it. The 
fire was then directed, it appears (both from our evidence and the 
innumerable bullet-marks on the wall itself) towards this wall to 
prevent people from escaping over it. And when all was over, 
some of the biggest heaps of dead and wounded lay on either 
side of this wall. 

Towards the end of that year (t9*9) ^ travelled fi:om Amritsar 
to Delhi by the night train. The compartment I entered was 
almost full and aU the berths, except one upper one, were occu- 
pied by sleeping passengers. I took the vacant upper berth. In 
the morning I discovered that aU my fellow-passengers were 
military officers. They conversed with each other in loud voices 
which I could not help overhearing. One of them was holding 
forth in an aggressive and triumphant tone and soon I discovered 
that he was Dyer, the hero of Jallianwala Bagh, and he was 
describing his Amritsar experiences. He pointed out how he had 
the whole town at his mercy and he had felt like reducing the 
rebellious city to a heap of ashes, but he took pity on it and 
refirained. Hfe was evidently coming back from, Lahore after 
giving his evidence before the Hunter Committee of Inqmiy. 
I was greatly shocked to hear his conversatton and to observe his 



44 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

callous manner. He descended at Delhi station in pyjamas with 
bright pink stripes, and a dressing-gown. 

During the Punjab inquiry I saw a great deal of Gandhiji. 
Very often his proposals seemed novel to our committee and it 
did not approve of them. But almost always he argued his way 
to their acceptance and subsequent events showed the wisdom of 
his advice. Faith in his political insight grew in me. 

The Punjab happenings and the inquiry into them had a 
profound effect on father. His whole legal and constitutional 
foundations were shaken by them and his mind was gradually 
prepared for that change which was to come a year later. He had 
mready moved far from his old moderate position. Dissatisfied 
with the leading Moderate newspaper, the Leader of Allahabad, 
he had started another daily, the Independent, from Allahabad 
early in 1919. This paper met with great success, but firom the 
verjr beginning it was handicapped by quite an amazing degree 
of mcompetencc in the running of it. Almost everybody con- 
nected with it — directors, editors, managerial staff— had ' their 
share. of responsibility for this. I was one of the directors, with- 
out the least experience of the job, and the troubles and the 
squabbles of the paper became quite a nightmare to me. Both 
my father and I were, however, soon dragged away to the Punjab, 
and during our long absence the paper deteriorated greatly and 
became involved in financial diflBculties. It never recovered from 
them, and, although it had bright patches in 1920 and 1921, it 
began to go to pieces as soon as we went to gaol. It expired finally 
early in 1923. This experience of newspaper proprietorship gave 
me a fright and ever smee I have refused to assume responwbility 
as a director of any newspaper. Indeed I could not do so because 
of my preoccupations in pnson and outside. 

Fa&er presided over the Amritsar Congress during Christmas 
1919. He issued a moving appeal to the Moderate leaders or the 
liberals, as they were now calling themselves, to join this session 
because of the new situation created by the horrors of martial 
law. “ The lacerated heart of the Punjab " called to them, he 
wrote. Would they not answer that call? But they did not 
answer it in the way he wanted, ^d refused to join. Their eyes 
were on the new reforms that were coming as a result of the 
Montagu-Chehnsford recommendations. Tms refusal hurt father 
and widened the^lf between him and the Liberals. 

The Amritsar Congress was the first Gandhi Congress. Loka- 
manya Tilak was also present and took a prominent part in the 
deliberations, but there could be no doubt about it that the 
majority of the, delegates, and even more so the great crowds 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 45 

outside, looked to Gandhi for leadership. The slogan Mahatma 
Gandhi ki jai began to dominate the Indian political horizon. 
The Ali Brothers, recently discharged from internment, imme- 
diately joined the Congress, and the national movement began 
to take a new shape and develop a new orientation. 

M. Mohammad Ali went off soon on a Khilafat deputarion to 
Europe. In India the KhilaBtt Committee came more and more 
under Gandhiji’s influence and began to flirt with his ideas of 
non-violent non-co-operation. I remember one of the earliest 
meetings of the Khilafat leaders and Moulvies and Ulemas in 
Delhi in January 1920. A Khilafat deputation was going to wait 
on the Viceroy, and Gandhiji was to join it. Before he reached 
Delhi, however, a draft of the proposed address was, according 
to custom, sent to the Viceroy. When Gandhiji arrived and read 
this draft, he strongly disapproved of it and even said that he 
could not be a party to the deputation, if this draft was not 
materially altered. His objection was that the draft was vague 
and wordy and there was no clear indication in it of the abso- 
lute minimum demands which the Muslims must have. He 
said that this was not ftiir to the Viceroy and the British Govern- 
ment, or to the people, or to themselves. They must not make 
exaggerated clemands which they were not going to press, but 
should state the minimum clearly and without possibility of 
doubt, and stand by it to the death. If they were serious, this 
was the only right and honourable course to adopt. 

This argument was a novel one in political or other circles in 
India. "We were used to vague exaggerations and flowery lan- 
guage and always there was an idea of a bargain in our minds. 
Gandhiji, however, carried his point and he wrote to the Private 
Secretary of the Viceroy, pointing out the defects and vagueness 
of the draft address sent, and forwarding a few additional para- 
graphs to be added to it. These paragraphs gave the minimum 
demands. The Viceroy’s reply was interesting. He refused to 
accept the new paragraphs and said that the previous draft.was, 
in his opinion, quite proper. Gandhiji felt that this corres- 
pondence had made his own position and that of the Khilafat 
Committee clear, and so he joined the deputation after all. 

It was obvious that the Government were not going to accept 
the demands of the Khilafet Committee and a struggle was 
therefore bound to come. There were long talks with the 
Moulvies and the Ulemas, and non-violence and non-co-operation 
were discussed, especially non-violence. Gandhiji told them that 
he was theirs to command, but on the delate understanding 
that they accepted non-violence with aU its implications. There 



46 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was to be no weakening on that, no temporising, no mental 
reservations. It was not easy for the Moulvies to grasp this idea 
but they agreed, making it clear that they did so as a policy 
only and not as a creed, for their religion did not prohibit the 
use of violence in a righteous cause. 

The political and the Khilafat movements developed side by 
side during that year igao, both going in the same direction and 
eventually joining hands with the adoption by the Congress of 
Gandhiji’s non-violent non-co-operation. The Khilafat Com- 
mittee adopted this programme first, and August ist was fixed 
for the commencement of the campaign. 

Earlier in the year a Muslim meeting (I think it was the Council 
of the Moslem League) was held in Allahabad to consider this 
programme. The meeting took place in Syed Raza Ali’s house. 
M. Mohammad Ali was still in Europe but M. Shaukat Ali was 
present. I remember that meeting because it thoroughly dis- 
appointed me. Shaukat AU was, of course, full of enthusiasm 
but almost all the others looked thoroughly unhappy and uncom- 
fortable. They did not have the courage to disagree and yet 
they obviously had no intention of doing anything ra.sh. Were 
these the people to lead a revolutionary movement, I thought, 
and to challenge the British Empire? .Gandhiji addressed them 
and after hearing him they looked even more frmhtencd than 
before. He spoke well in his best dictatorial vein. He was humble 
but also clear-cut and hard as a diamond, pleasant and soft- 
spoken but inflexible and terribly earnest. His eyes were mild 
and deep, yet out of them blazed out a fierce energy and deter- 
mination. This is going to be a great struggle, he said, with a 
very powerful adversary. If you want to take it up, you must 
be prepared to lose everything, and you must subject yourself 
to the strictest non-violence and discipline. When war is declared 
martial law prevails, and in our non-violent struggle there will 
also have to be dictatorship and martial law on our side, if we 
are to win. You have every right to kick me out, to demand my 
head, or to pimish me whenever and howsoever you choose. But 
so long as you choose to keep me as your leader you must accept 
nw conditions, you must accept dictatorship and the discipline 
of martial law. But that dictatorship will always be subject to 
your goodwill and to your accqitance arid to your co-operailon. 
The moment you have had enough of me, throw me out, 
trample upon me, and I shall not complain. 

Something to this effect he said and these military analogies 
and the unyielding earnestness of the man made the flesh of 
most of bis hearm creep. But Shaukat Ali was there to keep 



THE COMING OF GANDHIJI 47 

the waverers up to the mark, and when the time for voting came 
the great majority of them quietly and shamefacedly voted for 
the proposition, that is for warl 

As vve were coming home from the meeting I asked Gandhiji 
if this was the way to start a great struggle. I had expected 
enthusiasm, spirited language and a flashing of eyes; instead we 
saw a very tame gathering of timid, middle-aged folk. And yet 
these people, such was the pressure of mass opinion, voted for 
the struggle. Of course, very few of these members of the 
Moslem League joined the struggle later. Many of them found 
a safe sanctuary in Government jobs. The Moslem League did 
not represent, then or later, any considerable section of Moslem 
opinion. It was the Khilafet Committee of 1920 that was a 
powerful and far more representative body, and it was this Com- 
mittee that entered upon the struggle with enthusiasm. 

The ist of August had been fixed by Gandhiji for the 
inauguration of non-co-operation, although the Congress had 
not considered or accepted the proposal so far. On that dajr 
Lokamanya Tilak died m Bombay. That very morning Gandhiji 
had reached Bombay after a tour in Sindh. I was with him and 
we joined that mighty demonstration in which the whole of 
Bombay’s million population seemed to have poured out to do 
reverence to the great leader whom' they had loved so well. 



VIII 


I AM EXTERNED AND THE CONSEQUENCES 
THEREOF 

My politics had been those of my class, the bourgeoisie. Indeed 
all vocal politics then (and to a great extent even now) were those 
of the middle classes, and Moderate and Extremist alike repre- 
sented them and, in different keys, sought their betterment. The 
Moderate represented especially the handful of the upper middle 
class who had on the whole prospered under British rule and 
wanted no sudden changes which might endanger their present 
position and interests. They had close relations with the British 
Government and the big landlord class. The Extremist repre- 
sented also the lower ranks of the middle class. The industrial 
workers, their number swollen up by the war, were only locally 
organised in some places and had little influence. The peasantiy 
were a blind, poverty-stricken, suffering mass, resigned to their 
miserable fate and sat upon and exploited by all who came in 
contact with them— -the Government, landlords, money-lenders, 
petty ofl&cials, police, lawyers, priests. 

A reader of the newsp^ers would hardly imagine that a vast 
peasantry and millions of workers existed in India or bad any 
importance. The British-owned Anglo-Indian newspapers were 
fun of the doings of high ofidcials; English social life in the big 
dties and in the hill stations was described at great length with 
its parties, fancy-dress balls and amateur theatricals. Indian 
politics, fiom the Indian point of view-, were almost completely 
Ignored by them, even the Confess sessions being disposed of 
in a few lines on a back page. They were not considered news 
of any value except when some Indian, prominent or otherwise, 
slanged or criticised the Congress and its pretensions. Occasion- 
ally there was a brief referents to a strike, and the rural areas 
only came into prominence when there was a riot. 

Indian newspapers tried to model themselves on the Anglo- 
Indian ones but gave much greater prominence to the nationalist 
movetnent. For the rest they were interested in the appointment 
bf Indians to important or unimportant oflSces, their promotions 
and transfers — ^when there was always a party given to the out- 
going ofl&cer at which "great enthusiasm prevailed At the 
tiine of a flesh Government settlement of an agricultural area, 

, which almost always resulted in an increase of Government 



I AM EXTERKEO 


49 

revenue, there was an outcry because the landlord’s pocket was 
affected. The poor tenant was nowhere in tlie picture. These 
newspapers were owned and controlled chiefly by the landlords 
and the industrialists. Such was that which was called the 
“nationalist ” press. 

One of the persistent demands of the Congress itself, during 
its early years, was a permanent settlement of the land in the 
non-settled areas, in order that the rights of the landlords might 
be protected. No mention was made of the tenant. 

Conditions have changed greatly during the last twenty years 
because of the growth of the nationalist movement, and now 
even the British-owned newspapers have to give space to Indian 
political problems if they are to retain their Indian readers. 
But they do so in their own peculiar way. Indian newspapers 
have developed a slightly wider outlook and talk benevolently of 
the worker and the peasant, because that is the fashion, and there 
is a growing interest in industrial and rural problems among their 
readers. But essentially now, as before, they voice the interests 
of the Indian capitalist and landlord class which owns them. 
Many Indian princes have also taken to investing money in these 
newspapers and they see to it that they get their money’s worth. 
Yet many of these newspapers arc called " Congress ” news- 
papers, although many of those who control them are not even 
members of the Congress. But the Congress is a popular word 
with the public and many an individual and a group exploit it 
to their advantage.. Newspapers which are prepared to take up 
a more advanced position have, of course, always to live in fear 
of big fines or even of suppression under the stringent press 
laws and censorship. 

In igao I was totally ignorant of labour conditions in fiictories 
or fields, and my politied outlook was entirely bourgeois. I knew, 
of course, that there was terrible poverty and misery, and I felt 
that the first aim of a politically free India must be to tackle 
this problem of poverty. But political fireedom, with the 
inevitable dominance of the middle class, seemed to me the 
obvious next step. I was paying a little more attention to the 
peasant problem since Gandhiji’s agrarian movements in Cham- 
paran ffiehar) and Kaira (Gujrat). But my mind was full of 
politiou developments in 1920 and of the coming of non- 
co-operation which was looming on the horizon. 

Just then a new interest devdoped in my life which was to 
play an important part in later years. I was thrown, almost 
without any will of my own, into contact with the peasantiy. 
This came about in a tnirious way. 



50 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

My mother and Kamala (my wife) were both unwell, and early 
in May 1920 I took them up to Mussoorie. My father was busy 
then in a big raj case in which he was opposing Mr. C. R. Das. 
We stopped at the Savoy Hotel in Mussoorie. At that time, peace 
negotiations were proceeding between the Afghan and British 
envoys (this was after the brief Afghan War in 1919 when 
Amanullah came to the throne) at Mussoorie, and the Afghan 
delegation were stopping at the Savoy Hotel. They kept to them- 
selves, however, fed separately, and did not appear in the 
common rooms. I was not particularly interested in them, and 
for a whole month I did not see a single member of their delega- 
tion, and if I saw them I did not recognise them. Suddenly one 
evening I had a visit &om the Superintendent of Police and 
he showed me a letter from the local Government asking him to 
get an undertaking from me that I would not have any dealings 
or contacts with the Afghan delegation. This struck me as extra- 
ordinary since I had not even seen them during a month’s stay 
and there was little chance of my doing so. The Superintendent 
knew this, as he was closely watching the delegation, and there 
were literally crowds of secret service men about. But to give 
any undertaking went against the grain and I told him so. He 
asked me to see the District Magistrate, the Superintendent of 
the Dun, and I did so. As I persisted in my refusal to give an 
undertaking an order of extemment was served on me, calling 
upon me to leave the district of Dehra Dun within twenty-four 
hours, which really meant within a few hours from Mussoorie. 
I did not like the idea of leaving my mother and wife, both 
of whom were ailing; and yet 1 did not think it right to break 
the order. There was no civil disobedience then. So I left 
Mussoorie. 

My father had known Sir Harcourt Butler, who was then 
Governor of the United Provinces, fairly well, and he wrote to 
him a friendly letter saying that he was sure that he (Sir 
Harcourt) could not have issued such a stupid order; it must 
be some bright person in Simla who was responsible for it. Sir 
Harcourt replied that the order was quite a harmless one and 
Jawaharlal could easily have complied with it without any injury 
to his dignity. Father, in reply, disagreed with this and added 
that, although there was no intention of deliberately breaking 
the order, if my mother’s or wife's health demanded it, I would 
certainly return to Mussoorie, order or no order. As it happened, 
my mother’s condition took a tpm for the worse, and both father 
and I immediatdy started for Mussoorie. Just before starting, 
we reedved a telegram resdnding the order. 



I AM EXTERNED 


51 

When we reached Mussoorie the next morning the first person 
I noticed in the courtyard of the hotel was an Afghan who had 
my baby daughter in his arms! I learnt that he was a minister 
and a member of the Afghan delegation. It transpired that 
immediately after my externment the Afghans had read about 
it in the newspapers, and they were so much interested that the 
head of the delegation took to sending my mother a basket of 
fruit and flowers every day. 

Father and I met one or two members of the delegation later 
and we were cordially invited to visit Afghanistan. Unhappily 
we were unable to take advantage of this offer, and I do not 
know if the invitation stands under the new dispensation in that 
country. 

As. a result of the externment order from Mussoorie I spent 
about two weeks in Allahabad, and it was during this period that 
I got entangled in theXiron (peasant) movement. That entangle- 
ment grew in later years and influenced my mental outlook 
greatly. I have sometimes wondered what would have happened 
if I had not been externed and had not been in Allahabad just 
then with no other engagements. Very probably I would have 
been drawn to the kisans anyhow, sooner or later, but the manner 
of my going to them would have been different and the eflfect 
on me might also have been different. 

Early in June 1920 (so far as I can remember) about two 
hundred kisans marched fifty miles from the interior of Partab- 
garh district to Allahabad city with the intention of drawing 
the attention of the prominent politicians there to their woe- 
begone condition. They were led by a man named Ramachandra, 
1^0 himself was not a local peasant. I learnt that these kisans 
were squatting on the river bank, on one of the Jumna ghats, 
and, accompanied by some friends, went to see them. They told 
us of the crushing exactions of the taluqadars, of inhuman 
treatment, and that their condition had become , wholly in- 
tolerable. They begged us to acconmany them back to make 
inquiries as weU as to protect them from the vengeance of the 
taluqadars who were angry at thdr having come to Allaha- 
bad on this mission. They would accept no denial and literally 
clung on to us. At last I promised to visit them two days or so 
later. 

I went there with some colleagues and we spent three daw in 
the villages far from the railway and even the pucca road. That 
visit was a revdation to me. We found the whole counti^side 
afire with enthusiasm and full of a strange excitement. Enor- 
mous gatherings would take place at the briefest notice by word 



53 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of mouth. One village would communicate with another, and 
the second with the third, and so on, and presently whole villages 
would empty out, and all over the fields there would be men and 
women and children on the march to the meeting-place. Or, 
more swiftly still, the cry of Sita Ram — Sita Ra-a-a-a-m — would 
fill the air, and travel far in aU directions and be echoed back 
firom other villages, and then people would come streaming out 
or even running as fast as they could. They were in miserable 
rags, men and women, but their faces were full of excitement 
and their eyes glistened and seemed to expect strange happen- 
ings which would, as if by a miracle, put an end to their long 
misery. 

They showered their affection on us and looked on us with 
loving and hopeful eyes, as if we were the bearers of good tidings, 
the guides who were to lead them to the promised land. Looking 
at them and their misery and overflowing gratitude, I was filled 
with shame and sorrow, shame at my own easy-going and com- 
fortable life and our petty politics of the city which ignored this 
vast multitude of semi-naked sons and daughters of India, sorrow 
at the degradation and overwhelming poverty of India. A new 
picture of India seemed to rise before me, naked, starving, 
crushed, and utterly miserable. And their faith, in us, casual 
visitors from the distant dt^, embarrassed me and filled me with 
a new responsibility that firightened me. 

I listened to their innumerable tales of sorrow, their crushing 
and ever-growing burden of rent, illegal exactions, ejectments 
firom land and mud hut, beatings; surrounded on all sides by 
vultures who preyed on them — ^zamindar’s agents, money-lenders, 
police; toiling all day to find that what they produced was not 
theirs and their reward was kicks and curses and a hungry 
stomach. Many of those who were present were landless people 
who had been ejected by the landlords, and had no land or hut 
to faU back upon. The land was rich but the burden on it was 
very heavy, the holdings were small and there were too many 
people after them. Tafing advantage of this land hunger the 
landlords, unable under the law to enhance their rents he- 
TOnd a certain percentage, charged huge illegal premiums, 
^e tenant, knowing of no other alternative, bprrowed money 
ftom the money-lender and paid the premium, and then, un- 
able to pay his debt or even the rent, was ejected and lost all 
he had. 

This process was an old one and the progressive pauperisation 
of the peasantry had been going on for a long time. What had 
happened to hnng matters to a head and rouse up the country- 



I AM EXTERNED 


53 

side? Economic conditions, of course, but these conditions were 
similar all over Oudh, while the agrarian upheaval of 1920 and 
1921 was largely confined to three districts— Partabgarh, Rae 
Bareli and Fyzabad. This was partly due to the leadership of a 
remarkable person, Ramachandra, Baba Ramachandra as he was 
called. 

Ramachandra was a man fiom Maharashtra in western 
India and he had been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. On 
his return he had gradually drifted to these districts of Oudh 
and wandered about reciting Tulsidas’s Ramayana and listening 
to tenants’ grievances. He had little education and to some 
extent he exploited the tenantry for his own benefit, but he 
showed remarkable powers of organisation. He taught the 
peasants to meet firequently in sabhas (meetings) to discuss their 
own troubles and thus gave them a feeling of solidarity. Occa- 
sionally huge mass meetings were held and this produced a sense 
of power. Slta-Ram was an old and cominon cry but he gave it 
an almost warlike significance and made it a signal for emer- 

f encies as well as a bond between different villages. Fyzabad, 
artabgarh and Rae Bareli are full of the old legends of 
Ramacnandra and Sita — ^thesc districts formed part of the king- 
dom of Ayodhya — and the favourite book of the masses is 
Tulsidas’s Hindt Ramayana. Many people knew htmdreds of 
verses from this by heart. A recitation of this book and 
appropriate quotations from it was a favourite practice of 
Ramachandra. Having organised the peasantry to some extent 
he made all manner of promises to them, vague and nebulous 
but full of hope for them. He had no programme of any kind 
and when he had brought them to a pitch of exdtement he tried 
to shift the responsibuity to others. This led him to bring a 
number of peasants' to Allahabad to interest people there in the 
movement. 

Ramachandra continued to take a prominent part in the 
agrarian movement for another year and served two or three 
sentences in, prison, but he turned out later to be a very irres- 
ponsible and unrefiable person. 

Oudh was a particularly good area for an agrarian agitation. 
It was, and is, the land of the taluqadars — ^the "Barons of 
Oudh ’’ they call themselves— and the zamindari system at its 
worst flourished there. The exactions of the landlords were 
becoming unbearable and the number of landless labourers was 
growing. There was on the whole only one class of tenant and 
this heq>ed united action. 

■ India may be roughly divided into two parts— the zamindui 



54 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

area with its big landlords, and the area containing peasant pro- 
prietors, but there is a measure of overlapping. The three 
provinces of Bengal, Behar, and the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh, form the zamindari area. The peasant proprietors are 
comparatively better off, although even their condition is often 
pitiable. The mass of the peasantry in the Punjab or Gujrat 
(where there are peasant proprietors) is far better off than the 
tenants of the zamindari areas. In the greater part of these 
zamindari areas there were many kinds of tenancies — occupancy 
tenants, non-occupancy tenants, sub-tenancies, etc. The interests 
of various tenants often conflict against each other and this mili- 
tates against joint action. In Oudh, however, there were no 
occuptmcy tenants or even life tenants in 1920. There were only 
short-term tenants who were continually being ejected in favour 
of some one who was willing to pay a higher premium. Because 
there was principally one class of tenant, it was easier to organise 
them for joint action. 

In practice there was no guarantee in Oudh for even the short 
term of the contract. A landlord hardly ever gave a! receipt for 
rent received, and he could always say that the rent had not been 
paid and eject the tenant, for whom it was impossible to prove 
the contra^. Besides the rent there were an extraordinary num- 
ber of illegal exactions. In one taluqa I was told that there had 
been as many as fifty different kinds of such exactions. Probably 
this number was exaggerated but it is notorious how taluqadars 
often make their tenants pay for every special expenditure — a 
marriage in the family, cost of the son’s education in foreign 
countries, a party to the Governor or other high official, a pur- 
chase of a car or an elephant. Indeed these exactions have got 
special names — motrauna (tax for pmehase of motor), hathauna 
(tax for purchase of elephant), etc. 

It was not surprising therefore that a big agrarian agitation 
should develop in Oudh. What was surprising to me then was 
that this should have developed quite spontaneously without any 
dty help or intervention of politicians and the like. The agrarian 
movement was entirely separate firom the Congress and it had 
nothing to do with the non-co-operation that was taking shape. 
Or perhaps it will be more correct to say that both these wide- 
spread and powerful movements were due to the same funda- 
mental causes. The peasantry had of course taken part in 
the great hartals that Gandhiji had proclaimed in 1919 and 
later, his name was becoming a charm for the man in the 
village. 

What mnazed me still more was our total ignorance in the 



I AM EXTERNED 


55 

cities of this great agrarian movement. No newspaper had con- 
tained a line about it; they were not interested in rural areas. I 
realised more than ever how cut off we were &om our people and 
how we lived and worked and agitated in a little world apart 
from them. 



IX 


WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 

I SPENT three days in the villages, came back to Allahabad, and 
then went again. During these brief visits we wandered about a 
great deal from village to village, feeding with the peasants, living 
with them in their mud huts, talking to them for long hours, 
and often addressing meetings, big and small. We had originally 
gone in a light car and the peasants were so keen that hundreds 
of them, working overnight, built temporary roads across the 
fields so that our car could go right into the interior. Often the 
car got stuck and was bodily lifted out by scores of willing hands. 
But we had to leave the car eventually and to do most of our 
journeying by foot. Everywhere we went we were accompanied 
by pohcemen,C.I.D. men, and a Deputy Collector from Lucknow. 
I am afraid we gave them a bad time with our continuous march- 
ing across fields and they were quite tired out and fed up with us 
and the kisans. The Deputy Collector was a somewhat effeminate 
youth from Lucknow and he had turned up in patent leather 

ra l He begged us sometimes to restrain our ardour and 
a he ultimately dropped out, being unable to keep up 
with us. 

It was the hottest time of the year, June, just before the mon- 
soon. The sun scorched and blinded. I was quite unused to 
going out in the sun and ever since my return from England I 
had gone to the hills for part of every summer^ And now I was 
wandering about all day in the open sun with not even a sun-hat, 
my head being wrapped in a small towel. So full was I of other 
matters that I quite forgot about the heat and it was only on my 
return to Allahabad, when I noticed the rich tan I had developed, 
that I remembered what I had gone through. I was pleased with 
myself for I realised that I could stand the heat with the best 
of them and my fear of it was wholly unjustified. I have found 
that I can bear both extreme heat and great cold.vnthout much 
discomfort, and this has stood me in good stead in my work as 
well as in my periods in prison. This was no doubt due to my 
general physical fitness and my habit of taking exercise, a lesson 
I learnt from my father, who was a bit of an athlete and, almost 
to the end of his days, continued his daily exercise. His head be- 
came covered with silvery hair, his face was deeply furrowed and 
looked old and weary with thought, but the rest of his body, to 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 57 

within a year or two of his death, seemed to be twenty years 
younger. 

Even before my visit to Partabgarh in June 1920 , 1 had often 
passed through villages, stopped there and talked to the peasants. 
I had seen them in their scores of thousands on the banks of the 
Ganges during the big melas and we had taken our Home Rule 
propaganda to them. But someliow I had not fully realised what 
they were and what they meant to India, Like most of us, I 
took them for granted. This realisation came to me during these 
Partabgarh visits and ever since then my mental picture of 
India always contains this naked, hungry mass. Perhaps there 
was some kind of electricity in the air, perhaps I was in a recep- 
tive frame of mind and the pictures I saw and the impressions I 
gathered were indelibly impressed on my mind. 

These peasants took away the shyness from me and taught me 
to speak in public. Till then I hardly spoke at a public gathering ; 
I was frightened at the prospect, espeaally if the speaking was to 
be done m Hindustani, as it almost always was. But I could not 
possib^ avoid addressing these peasant gatherings, and how 
could I be shy of these poor tmsophisticated people? I did not 
know the arts of oratory and so I spoke to them, man to man, 
and told them what I had in my mind and in my heart. Whether 
the gathering consisted of a few persons or of ten thousand or 
more I stuck to my conversational and rather personal method 
of speaking, and I found that, whatever might be lacking in 
it, I could at least go on. I was fluent enough. Perh^s many of 
them could not tmderstand a great deal of what I said. My 
language or my thought was not simple enough for them. Many 
did not hear me when the gathering was very large for my voice 
did not carry far. But all this did not matter much to them when 
once they had given their confidence and faith to a person, 

I went back to Mussoorie to my mother and wife but my mind 
was full of the hisans and I was eager to be back. As soon as I 
returned I resumed my visits to the villages and watched the 
agrarian movement grow in strength. The down-trodden kisan 
began to gain a new confidence in himself and walked straighter 
with head up. His fear of the landlords’ agents and the police 
lessened, and when there was an ejectment from a holding no 
other kisan would make an offer for that land. Physical violence 
on the part of the zamindars’ servants and illegal exactions be- 
came infrequent, and whenever an instance occurred, it was im- 
mediately reported and an attempt at an inquiry was held. This 
checked the zamindars’ agents as well as the police. The talu- 
qadars were frightened and . were on the defensive and the 



58 JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 

provincial government promised an ainendment of the Oudh 
Tenancy Law. 

The taluqadars and the big zamindars, the lords of the land, 
the " natural leaders of the people ”, as they are proud of calling 
themselves, had been the spoilt children of the British Govern- 
ment, but that Government had succeeded, by the special educa- 
tion and upbringing it provided or failed to provide for them, in 
reducing them, as a class, to a state of complete intellectual 
impotence. They did nothing at all for their tenantry, such as 
landlords in other countries have to some little extent often 
done, and became complete parasites on the land and the people. 
Their chief activity lay in endeavouring to placate the local 
officials, without whose favour they could not exist for long, and 
demanding ceaselessly a protection of their special interests and 
privileges. 

The word ‘ zamindar ’ is rather deceptive, and one is apt to 
think that all zamindars are big landlords. In the ryotwari pro- 
vinces it means the peasant proprietor. Even in the typical 
zamindari provinces, it includes in its fold the relatively few big 
landlords, thousands of middle landowners, and hundreds of 
thousands of persons who live in extreme poverty and are no 
better than tenants. In the United Provinces, so far as I can re- 
member, there are a million and a half persons classed as zamin- 
dars. Probably over ninety per cent, of these are almost on the 
same level as the poorest tenants, and another nine per cent, are 
only moderately well off. The biggish landowners are not more 
than five thousand in the whole province, and of this number, 
about one-tenth might be considered the really big zamindars 
and taluqadars. In some instances the bigger tenants are better 
off than the destitute petty landowners. Both these poor land- 
owners and the middle landlords, though often intellectually 
backward, are as a whole a fine body of men and women, and, 
with proper education and training, can be made into excellent 
citizens. They have taken a considerable part in the nationalist 
movement. Not so the taluqadars and the big zamindars, barring 
a few notable exceptions. They have not even the virtues of an 
aristocracy. As a class they are physically and intellectually 
degenerate and have outlived their day; they will continue only 
so long as an external power like the British Government props 
them up. 

Right through the year 192* I'continued my visits to the rural 
areas, but my field of activity grew till it comprised the whole of 
the United Provinces. Non-co-operation had begun in earnest 
and its message had reached the remotest village. A host of 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 59 

Congress workers in each district went about the rural areas with 
the new message to which they often added, rather vaguely, a 
removal of kisan grievances. Swaraj was an all-embracing word 
to cover everything. Yet the two movements — ^non-co-operation 
and the agrarian — ^wcre quite separate, though they overlapped 
and influenced each other greatly in our province. As a result of 
Congress preaching, litigation went down with a rush and 
villages established their pancliayats to deal with their disputes. 
Especially powerful was the influence of the Congress in favour 
of peace, for the new creed of non-violence was stressed wherever 
the Congress worker went. This may not have been fully appreci- 
ated or understood but it did prevent the peasantry ftom taking 
to violence. 

This was no small result. Agrarian upheavals are notoriously 
violent, leading to jacqueries, and the peasants of part of Oudh 
in those days were desperate and at white heat. A spark would 
have lighted a flame. Yet they remained amazingly peaceful. 
The only instance of physical violence on a taluqadar that I 
remember was when a peasant went up to him as he was sitting 
in his own house, surrounded by his Mends, and slapped him on 
the face on the ground that he was immoral and inconsiderate 
to his own wifel 

There was violence of another kind later which led to conflicts 
with the Government. But this conflict was bound to come, for 
the Government could not tolerate this growing power of a 
united peasantry. The kisans took to travelling in railway trains 
in large numbers without tickets, especially when they had to 
attend their periodical big mass meetings which sometimes con- 
sisted of sixty or seventy thousand persons. It was difficult to 
move them and, unheard of thing, they openly defied the rail- 
way authorities, telling them that tlie old days were gone. At 
whose instigation they took to the free mass travelling i do not 
know. We had not suggested it to them. We suddenly heard that 
they were doing it. Striaer railway control prevented this later. 

In the autumn of igao (when I was aww in Calcutta attending 
the special session of the Conmess) a few kisan leaders were 
arrested for some petty offence, ^ey were to be tried in Partab- 
garh town but on the day of the trial a huge concourse of 
peasants filled the court compound and lined the route to the 
gaol where the accused leaders were kept. The magistrate’s nerve 
gave way and he postponed the trial to the next day. But the 
crowd grew and almost surrounded the gaol. The kisans can 
easily carry on for a few days on a handfiil of parched nam. 
Ultimately the kisan leaders wfere discharged, perhaps after a 



6o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

formal trial inside the gaol. I forget how this came about but for 
the hisans this was a great triumph and they began to- think that 
they could always have their way by weight of numbers alone. 
To the Government this position was intolerable and soon after 
a similar occasion arose and this time it ended differently. 

It was at the beginning of January 19a i . I had just returned to 
Allahabad from the Nagpur Congress when I received a telegram 
from Rae Bareli asking me to go there immediately as trouble 
was expected. I left the next day. I discovered that some leading 
kisans had been arrested some days back and had been lodged in 
the local gaol. Remembering their success at Partabgarh and the 
tactics they had then adopted, the peasants marched to Rae 
Bareli town for a mass demonstration. But this time the Govern-, 
ment was not going to permit it and additional police and mili- 
tary had been collected to stop the kisans. Just outside the town 
on the other side of a little river, the main body of the kisans 
was stopped. Many of them, however, streamed in from other 
directions. On arrival at the station I learnt of this situation and 
immediately I proceeded straight to the river where the military 
were said to face the peasants. On the way I received a hurriedly 
written note from the District Magistrate asking me to go back. 
I wrote my reply on the back of it enquiring under what law and 
what section he was was asking me to go back and till I heard 
from him I proposed to go on. As I reached the river sounds of 
firing could be heard from the other side. I was stopped at the 
bridge by the military and as I waited there I was suddenly sur- 
rounded by large numbers of frightened kis,ans who had been 
hiding in the fields on this side ofthe river. So I held a meeting 
of about a couple of thousand peasants on the spot and tried to 
remove their fear and lessen their excitement. It was rather an 
unusual situation with firing going on on their brethren within 
a stone’s throw across a little stream and the military in evidence 
eve^ujhere. But the meeting was quite successful and took away 
, the edge from the kisans^ fear. The District Magistrate then re- 
turned from the firing line and, at his request, I accompanied 
■ him to his bouse. There he kept me, under some pretm or other, 
jfor over two hours, evidently wanting to keep me away from the 
kisans and my colleagues in the city. 

We found later that many-men had been killed in the firing. 
The kisans had refused to msperse or to go back but otherwise 
they had been perfectly peaceful. I am quite sure that if I or 
some one else they trusted had been there and had asked them to 
do so they would have dispersed. They refused to take th eir 
orders from men they did ndt trust. Some one actually suggested 



WANDERINGS AMONG THE KISANS 6l 

to the Magistrate to wait for me a little but he refused. He could 
Dot permit an agitator to succeed where he had failed. That is 
not the way of foreign governments depending on prestige. 

Firing on kisans took place on two occasions in Rae Bareli 
district about that time and then began, what was much worse, a 
reign of terror for every prominent kisan worker or member of a 
panchayat. Government had decided to crush the movement. 
Hand-spinning on the charkha was then spreading among the 
peasantry at the instance of the Congress. A charkha therefore 
became the symbol of sedition and its owner got into trouble, 
the charkha itself being often burnt. Thus the Government tried 
to crush by hundreds of arrests and other methods both the 
agrarian and the Congress movements in the rural areas of Rae 
Bareli and Partabgarh. Most of the principal workers were com- 
mon to the two movements. 

A little later, in the year ipai, Fyzabad district had its dose of 
widespread repression. The trouble started there in a peculiar 
way. The peasants of some villages went and looted the property 
of a taluqadar. It transpired subsequently that they had been in- 
cited to do so by the servants of another zamindar who had some 
kind of feud with the taluqadar. The poor ignorant peasants 
were actually told that it was the wish of Mahatma Gandhi that 
they should loot and they vrillingly agreed to carry out this be- 
hest, shouting ‘‘ Mahatma Gandhi ki jai ” in the process. 

I was very angry when I heard of this and within a day or two 
of the occurrence I was on the spot, somewhere near Akbarpur 
in Fyzabad district. On arrival I called a meeting for the same 
day and within a few hours five or six thousand persons had 
collected from numerous villages within a radius of ten miles. I 
spoke harshly to them for the shame they had brought on them- 
selves and our cause and said that the guilty persons must confess 
publicly. (I was full in those days of what I conceived to be the 
spirit of Gandhi ji’s Satyagraha). I called upon those who had par- 
ticipated in the looting to raise their hands, and strange to say, 
there, in the presence of numerous police officials, about two 
dozen hands went up. That meant certain trouble for them. 

When I spoke to many of them privately later and heard their 
artless story of how they had been misled, I felt vtxj sorry for 
tlipm and I began to regret having exposed these foolish and 
sinmle folk to long terms of imprisonment. But the people who 
sufifoed were not just two or three dozen. The chance w^ too 
good to be lost and full advantage was tak^ of the occasion to 
crush the agrarian movement in that district. Over a thousand 
arrests were made, and the district gaol was overcrowded, wd the 



63 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

trial went on for the best part of a year- Many died in prison 
during the trial. Many others received long sentences and in later 
years, when I went to prison, I came across some of them, boys 
and young men, spending their youth in prison. 

The Indian kisans have little staying power, little energy to 
resist for long. Famines and epidemics come and slay them in 
their millions. It was surprising that they had shown for a whole 
year great powers of resistance against the combined pressure of 
government and landlord. But they began to weary a little and 
the determined attack of the Government on their movement 
ultimately broke its spirit for the time being. But it continued 
still in a lower key. There were not such vast demonstrations 
as before, but most villages contained old workers who had not 
been terrorised and who carried on the work in a small way. All 
this, it must be remembered, was prior to the gaol-going which 
the Congress started at the end of 1921. Even in this the kisans 
took a considerable part, in spite of all they had suffered during 
the previous year. 

Frightened by the agrarian movement, the Government had 
hurried on with tenancy legislation. This promised some im- 
provement in the lot of the kisan but the measure was toned 
down when it was found that the movement was already under 
control. The principal change it affected was to give a life ten- 
ancy to the kisan in Oudh. This sounded attractive to him but, 
as he has found out subsequently, his lot is in no way better. 

Agrarian troubles continued to crop up in Oudh but on a 
smaller scale. The world depression which began in 1939, how- 
ever, again created a great crisis owing to the fall in prices. 



X 


NON-CO-OPERATION 

I HAVE dealt with the Oudh agrarian upheaval in some little 
detail because it lifted the veil and disclosed a fundamental 
aspect of the Indian problem to me to which nationalists had 
paid hardly any attention. Agrarian troubles arc frequently 
taking place in various parts of India, symptoms of a deep- 
seated unrest, and the kisan agitation in certain parts of Oudh 
in 1930 and 1931 was but one of them, though it was, in its own 
way, a remarkable and a revealing one. In its origin it was en- 
tirely unconnected with politics or politicians, and right through 
its course the influence of outsiders and politicians was of tie 
slightest. From an all-India point of view, however, it was a 
local affair and very little attention was paid to it. Even the 
newspapers of the United Provinces largely ignored it. For their 
editors and the majority of their town-dwelling readers, the 
doings of mobs of semi-naked peasants had no real political or 
other significance. 

The Punjab and the Khilafat wrongs were the topics of the 
day, and non-co-operation, which was to attempt to bring about a 
righting of these wrongs, was the all-absorbing subject. The 
larger issue of national freedom or Swaraj was for the moment 
not stressed. Gandhiji disliked vague and big objectives, he 
always preferred concentrating on something specific and defi- 
nite. Nevertheless, Swaraj was very much in the air and in 
people’s thoughts, and frequent reference was made to it in 
innumerable gatherings and conferences. 

In the autumn of 1930 a special session of the Congress met 
at Calcutta to consider what steps should be taken and, in par- 
ticular, to decide about non-co-operation, Lala LajpatRai, freshly 
back from the United States after a long absence from home, 
was the President. He' disliked the new-fangled proposal of non- 
co-operation and opposed it. He was usually considered an 
Extremist in Indian politics, hut his general outlook was defi- 
nitely constitutional and moderate. Force of drcumstances and 
not <moice or convictions had made him an ally of Lokamanya 
Tilak and other Extremists in the early days of the century. 
But he had a social and economic outlook, strengthened by his 
long residence abroad, and this gave him a broader vision than 
that of most Indian leaders. 

e* 



64 JAWAHARI-AL NEHRU 

Wilfrid Scawen Blunt in his “ Diaries ” describes an interview 
he had (about 1909) with Gokhale and Lalaji. He is very hard 
on both, considering them far too cautious and afraid of facing 
realities. And yet Lalaji feced them far more than most Indian 
leaders. Blunt’s impressions make us realise how low was the 
temper of our politics and our leaders at that time, and how 
an able and experienced foreigner was struck by them. But a 
decade had made a great difference to that temper. 

Lala Lajpat Rai was not alone in his opposition; he had a 
great and impressive company with him. Indeed, almost the 
entire Old Guard of the Conmess opposed Gandhiji’s resolution 
of non-co-operation. Mr. C. R. Das led the opposition, not be- 
cause he disapproved of the spirit behind the resolution, for he 
was prepared to go as far or even farther, but chiefly because 
he objected to the boycott of the new legislatures. 

Of the prominent leaders of the older generation my father 
was the only one to take his stand by Gandhiji at that time. It 
was no easy matter for him to do so. He sensed and was much 
influenced by the objections that had led most of his old col- 
leagues to oppose. He hesitated, as they did, to take a novel 
step towards an xmknown re^bn, where it was hardly possible 
to keep one’s old bearings. Yet he was inevitably drawn to 8om6 
form of effective action, and the proposal did embody definite 
action, though not exactly on the lines of his thought. It took 
hikn a long time to make up his mind. He had long talks with 
Gandhiji and Mr. C. R. Das. Mr. Das and he were thrown a 
great deal together just then as they were both appearing, on 
opposite sides, in a big thofussil case. 'They looked at the problem 
ftom much the same point of view and there was very little 
difference between them even as regards the conclusion. Yet 
that little difference was just enough to keep them on either side 
of the main resolution at the Special Congress. Three months 
later they met again at the Nagpur Congress, and from then 
onwards they pulled together, ever coming nearer to ekeh 
other. - 

I saw very little of father in those days before the Calcutta 
Special Congress.' But whenever I met him, I noticed, how he 
was continually grappling with this problem. Quite apart from 
the national aspect of the q^uestion there was the personal aspect. 
Non-co-operation meant his withdrawing firom his legal practice; 
it meant a total break with his past life and a new 
of it— not an easy matter when one is on the eve of one's sixties 
birthday. It was a break from old political colleagues, firom Hs 
profession, firom the sodal life to which he had grown accus- 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


65 

tomed, and a giving up of many an expensive habit which he 
had grown into. For the financial aspect of the question was 
not an unimportant one, and it was obvious that he would have 
to reduce his standard of living if his income from his pro- 
fession vanished. 

But his reason, his strong sense of self-respect, and his pride, 
all led him step by step to throw in his lot wholeheartedly with 
the new movement. The accumulated anger with which a series 
of events, duminating in the Punjab tragedy and its aftermath, 
filled him; the sense of utter wrong-doing and injustice, the 
bitterness of national humiliation, had to find some way out. 
But he was not to be swept away by a wave of enthusiasm. It 
was only when his reason, backed by the trained mind of a 
lawyer, had weighed all the pros and cons that he\ook the final 
decision and joined Gandhiji in his campaign. 

He was attracted by Gandhiji as a man, and that no doubt was 
a factor which influenced him. Nothing could have made him 
a close associate of a person he disliked, for he was always strong 
in his likes and dislikes. But it was a strange combination — the 
saint, the stoic, the man of religion, one who went through life 
rejecting what it offers in the way of sensation and physical 
pleasure, and one who had been a bit of an epicure, who 
accepted life and welcomed and enjoyed its many sensations, 
and cared little for what may come in the hereafter. In the 
language of psychoanalysis it was a meeting of an introvert with 
an extrovert. Yet there were common bonds, common in- 
terests, which drew the two together and kept up, even when, 
in later years, their politics diverged, a close friendship between 
them. 

Walter Pater, in one of his books, mentipns how the saint and 
the epicure, starting from opposed points, travelling different 
paths, one with a rdigious teir^r, the other opposed to it, and 
yet both with an outlook which, in its stress and earnestness, is 
very unlike any lower development of temper, often understand 
ea<±i other better than either would understand the mere man 
of the world— and sometimes they actually touch. 

This Special Session at Calcutta began the Gandhi era in Con- 
gress politics which has lasted since then, except for a period 
in the twenties when he kept in the background and allowed the 
Swaraj Party, under the leadership of Deshbandhu C. R. Das 
and my father, to fill the picture. The whole look of the Con- 
gress changed; European dothes vanished and soon only khadi 
was to be seen; a new class of delegate, chiefly drawn firom the 
lower middle classes became the type of Congressman; the 



66 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

language used became increasingly Hindustani, or sometimes 
the language of the province where the session was held, as 
many of the delegates did not understand English, and there 
was also a growing prejudice against using a foreign language 
in our national work ; and a new life and enthusiasm and earnest- 
ness became evident in Congress gatherings. 

After the Congress was over Gandhiji paid a visit to the 
veteran editor of the Amrit Bazaar Patrika, Syt Motilal Ghose, 
who was lying on his death-bed. I accompanied him. Motilal 
Bahu blessed Gandhiji and his movement, and he added that, 
as for himself, he was going away to other regions, and wherever 
these might be, he had one great satisfaction — ^lie would be some- 
where where the British Empire did not exist. At last he would 
be beyond the reach of this Empire ! 

On our way back from the Calcutta Special Congress I accom- 
panied Gandhiji to Santiniketan on a visit to Rabindra Nath 
Tagore and his most lovahlc elder brother ‘ Boro Dada ’. We 
spent some days there, and I remember C. E. Andrews giving 
me some books which interested and influenced me greatly. 
They dealt with the economic aspects of inmerialism in Africa. 
One of these hooks — ^Morell’s Black Man's Burden — amoved me 
greatly. 

About this time or a little later, C. F. Andrews wrote a pam- 
phlet advocating independence for India. I think it was called 
Independence — the Immediate Need. This was a brilliant essay 
based on some of Seeley’s writings on India, and it seemed to 
me not only to make out an unanswerable case for independence 
but also to mirror the inmost recesses of our hearts. The deep 
urge that moved us and our halflformed desires seemed to take 
clear shape in. his simple and earnest language. There was no 
economic background or socialism in what he had written; it 
was nationalism pure and simple, the feeling of the humiliation 
of India and a fierce desire to be rid of it and to put 
an end to our continuing degradation. It was wonderful that 
C. F. Andrews, a foreigner and one belonging to the dominant 
race in India, should echo that cry of our inmost being. Non- 
co-operation was essentially, as Seeley had said long ago, " the 
notion that it was shameful to assist the foreigner in maintain- 
ing his domination ”. And Andrews had written that " the only 
way of self-recovery was through some vital upheaval &om 
wimin. The explosive force needed for such an upheaval must, 
be generated vdthin the soul of India itself. It could not come 
through loans and gifts and grants and concessions and pro- 
clamations ftom without. It must come from. within . 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


67 

Therefore, it was with the intense joy of mental and spiritual 
deliverance from an intolerable burden, that I watched the 
actual outbreak of such an inner explosive force, as that which 
actually occurred when Mahatma Gandhi spoke to the heart 
of India the mantram . — ‘Be free I Be slaves no more! ’ and 
the heart of India responded. In a sudden moveinent her 
fetters began to be loosened, and the pathway of freedom 
was opened.” 

The next three months witnessed the advancing tide of non- 
co-operation all over the country. The appeal for a boycott of 
the elections to the new legislatures was remarkably successful. 
It did not and could not prevent everybody from going to these 
councils and thus keep the seats vacant. Even a handful of 
voters could elect or there might be an unopposed election. But 
the great majority of voters aljstained from voting, and all who 
cared for the vehemently expressed sense of the country re- 
frained from standing as candidates. Sir Valentine Chirol 
happened to he in Allahabad on the election day, and he made 
a round of the polling booths. He returned amazed at the 
efficiency of the boycott. At one rural polling station, about 
fifteen miles from Allahabad city, he found that not a single 
voter had appeared. He gives an account of his experiences in 
one of his books on India. 

The wisdom of this boycott had been questioned by Mr. C. R. 
Das and others at the Calcutta session, but they stood by the 
Congress decision. The elections being over, this point of dif 
ference was removed, and the next full session of the Congress 
at Nagpur in December 1920 saw a reunion of many of the old 
Congress leaders on the plank of non-co-operation. The very 
success of the movement had convinced many a doubter and 
waverer, 

A few old leaders, however, dropped out of the Congress after 
Calcutta, and among these a popular and well-known figure was 
that of Mr. M. A. Jinnah. Sarojini Naidu had called him the 
“Ambassador of Hindu-Muslim unity”, and he had been 
largely responsible in the past fer bringing the Moslem League 
nearer to the Congress. But the new devdopments in the Con- 
gress — ^non-co-operation and the new constitution which made it 
more of a popular and mass organization — were thoroughly dis- 
approved of by him. He disagreed on political grounds, but it 
was not politics iii the main diat kept him away. There were 
still many people m the Congress who were politically even less 
advanced than he was. But temperamentally he did not fit in 
at all with the new Congress. He felt completely out of his 



68 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

element in the khadi-dad crowd demanding speeches in Hindu- 
stani. The enthusiasm of the people outside struck him as 
mob-hysteria. There was as much difference between him and 
the Indian masses as between Savile Row and Bond Street and 
the Indian village with its mud-huts. He suggested once 
privately that only matriculates should he taken into the Con- 
gress. I do not know if he wa.s serious in making this remarkable 
suggestion, but it was in harmony with his general outlook. So 
he drifted away from the Congress and became a rather solitary 
figure in Indian politics. Later, unhappily, the old Ambassador 
of Unity associated himself with the most reactionary elements 
in Muslim communalism. 

The Moderates or Liberals had, of course, nothing to do with 
the Congress, They not only kept away from it; they merged 
themselves in the Government, became ministers and high 
officials under the new scheme, and helped in fighting non- 
co-operation and the Congress. They had obtained almost what 
they desired, some reforms had been granted, and so there was 
no need for them to agitate. While the country was seething 
with excitement and becoming more and more revolutionary, 
they became frankly counter-revolutionary, a part of the Govern- 
ment itself. They were completely cut off from the people and 
developed a habit, which has persisted since, of looking at prob- 
lems firom the official point of view. They ceased to be a party 
in any real sense and became a small number of individuals 
dotted about in a few big cities. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri became an 
Imperial Envoy, visiting, at the instance of the British Govern- 
ment, various British dominions as well as the United States of 
America, and strongly criticising the Congress and his own 
cotmtrymen for the struggle they were carrying on against that 
Government. 

And yet the Liberals were far from happy. It is not a pleasant 
experience to be cut off from one’s own people, to sense hostility 
even though one may not see it or hear it. A mass upheaval is 
not kind to the non-conformists, though Gandhiji’s repeated 
warnings made non<o-operation far milder and gentler to its 
opponents than it otherwise would have been. But even so, the 
very atmosphere stifled those who opposed the movement, just 
as it invigor^e,d and filled with life and energy those who sup- 
ported itr^mass upheavals and real revolutionary movements 
always have this double effect : they encourage and bring out 
the personality of those whp constitute the masses or side with 
them, and at the same time they suppress psycholoeicallv and 
stifle those who differ from them 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


69 

This was the reason why some people complained that non- 
co-operation was intolerant and tended to introduce a dead 
uniformity of opinion and action. There was truth in this 
complaint, but the truth lay in this, that non-co-operation was 
a mass movement, and it was led by a man of commanding 
personality who inspired devotion in India’s millions. A more 
vital truth, however, lay in its effect on the masses. There was a 
tremendous feeling of release there, a throwing-olf of a great 
burden, a new sense of freedom. The fear that had crushed 
them retired into tlie background, and they straightened their 
backs and raised their heads. Even in remote bazaars the 
common folk talked of the Congress and Swaraj (for the Nagpur 
Congress had finally made Swaraj the goal), and what had hap- 
pened in the Punjab, and the Khilafat — ^but the word ‘ Khilafat ’ 
bore a strange meaning in most of the rural areas. People 
thought it came from Wiilaf, an Urdu word meaning ‘ against ' 
or ‘ opposed to ’, and so they took it to mean : opposed to Govern- 
ment ! They discussed, of course, especially their own particular 
economic grievances. Innumerable meetings and conferences 
added greatly to their political education. 

Many of us who worked for the Congress programme lived 
in a kind of intoxication during the year ipai. We were full of 
excitement and optimism and a buoyant enthusiasm. We §cnsed 
the happiness of a person , crusading for a cause. We were not 
troubled with doubts or hesitation; our path seemed to lie glear 
in front of us and we marched ahead-, lifted up by the en- 
thusiasm of others, and helping to push on others. We worked 
hard, harder than we had ever done before, for we knew 
that the conflict with the Government would come soon, 
and we wanted to do as much as possible before we were 
removed. 

Above all, we had a sense of fireedom and a pride in that firee- 
dom. The old feeling of oppression and frustration was 
completely gone. There was no more whispering, no round- 
about legal phraseology to avoid getting into trouble with the 
authorities. We said what we felt and shouted it out firom the 
house-tops. What did we care for the consequences? Prison? We 
looked forward to it ; that would help our cause still further. The 
irmumerable spies and secret-service men who used to surround 
us and follow us about became rather pitiable individuals as there 
was nothing secret for them to discover. All our cards were 
always on ihe table. 

We had not only a feeling of satisfaction at doing efiective 
political work which was changing the face of India before our 



70 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

eyes and, as wc believed, bringing Indian freedom very near, 
but also an agreeable sense of moral superiority over our 
opponents, both in regard to our goal and our methods. We 
were proud of our leader and of the unique method he had 
evolved, and often we indulged in fits of self-righteousness. In 
the midst of strife, and while we ourselves encouraged that 
strife, we had a sense of inner peace. 

As our moral grew, that of the Government went down. They 
did not understand what was happening; it seemed that the 
old world they knew in India was toppling down. There was a 
new aggressive spirit abroad and self-reliance and fearlessness, 
and the great prop of British rule in India — prestige — was 
visibly wilting. Repression in a small way only strengthened 
the movement, and the Government hesitated for long before 
it would take action against the big leaders. It did not know 
what the consequences might be. Was the Indian Army 
reliable? Would the police carry out orders? As Lord Reading, 
the Viceroy, said in December 1921, they were "puzzled and 
perplexed 

An interesting circular was sent confidentially by the 
U.P. Government to its district officers in the summer of 
1921. This circular, which was published later in a newspaper, 
stated with sorrow that the “ initiative ” was always with the 
"enemy”, meaning the Congress, and this was an unfortu- 
nate state of affairs. Various methods were then suggested to 
regain the initiative, among them being the starting of those 
ludicrous bodies, the “ Aman Sabhas It was believed that this 
particular method of combating non-co-operation was adopted 
at the suggestion of the Liberal Ministers. 

The nerves of many a British official began to give way. The 
strain was great. There was this ever-growing opposition and 
spirit of defiance which overshadowed official India like a vast 
monsoon cloud, and yet because of its peaceful methods it 
offered no handle, no grip, no opportunity for forcible sup- 
pression. The average En^ishman did not believe in the hona- 
fides of non-violence; he thought that all this was camouflage, 
a cloak to cover some vast secret design which would burst out 
in violent upheaval one day. Nurtured from childhood in the 
wide-spread belief that the East is a mysterious place, and in its 
bazaars and narrow lanes secret conspiracies are being continu- 
ally hatched, the Englishman can seldom think straight on 
matters relating to these lands of supposed mystery! He never 
makes an 'attempt to understand that somewhat obvious and 
very unmysterious person the Easterner. He keeps well away 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


71 

from him, gets his ideas about him from tales abounding in spies 
and secret societies, and then allows his imagination to run riot. 
So it was in the Punjab early in April 1919 when a sudden fear 
overwhelmed the authorities and the English people generally, 
made them see danger everywhere, a widespread rising, a second 
mutiny with its frightful massacres, and, in a blind, instinctive 
attempt at self-preservation at any cost, led them to that 
frightfulness, of which Jallianwala and the Crawling Lane of 
Amritsar have become symbols and byw'ords. 

The year 1921 was a year of great tension, and there was much 
to irritate and annoy and unnerve the official. What was actu- 
ally happening was bad enough, but what was imagined was 
far worse. I remember an instance which illustrates this riot of 
the imagination. My sister Swarup’s wedding, which was taking 
place at Allahabad, was fixed for the loth May, 1921, the actual 
date having been calculated, as usual on such occasions, by a 
reference to the Samvat calendar, and an auspicious day chosen. 
Gandhiji and a number of leading Congressmen, including the 
Ali brothers, had been invited, and to suit their convenience, 
a meeting of the Congress Working Committee was fixed at 
Allahabad about that time. The local Congressmen wanted to 
profit by the presence of famous leaders from outside, and so 
they organised a district conference on a big scale, expect- 
ing a large number of peasants from the surrounding rural 
areas. 

There was a great deal of bustle and excitement in Allahabad 
on account of Uiese political gatherings. This had a remarkable 
effect on the nerves of some people. I learnt one day through a 
barrister ffiend that many English people were thoroughly upset 
and expected some sudden upheaval in the city. They distrusted 
their Indian servants, and carried about revolvers in their 

E ockets. It was even said privately that the Allahabad Fort was 
ept in readiness for the English colony to retire tliere in case 
of need. I was much surprised and could not make out why 
any one should contemplate the possibility of a rising in the 
sleepy and peaceful city of Allahabad just when the very apostle 
of non-violence was going to visit us. Oh, it was said. May loth 
(the day accidentally fixed for my sister’s marriage) was the anni- 
versary of the outbreak of the Mutiny at Meerut in 1857 and 
tliis was going to be celebrated I 
Owing to the prominence given to the Khilafat movement in 
1921 a large number of Moulyies and Muslim religious leaders 
took a prominent part in the political struggle. They gave a 
definite religious tinge to the movement, and Muslims generally 



72 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were greatly influenced by it. Many a Westernised Muslim, who 
was not of a particularly religious turn of mind, began to grow 
a beard and otherwise conform to the tenets of Orthodoxy. The 
influence and prestige of the Moulvics, which had been gradu- 
ally declining owing to new ideas and a progressive Westernisa- 
tion, began to grow again and dominate the Muslim community. 
The Ali brothers, themselves of a religious turn of mind, helped 
in this process, and so did Gandhiji, who paid the greatest regard 
to the Moulvies and the Maulanas. 

Gandhiji, indeed, was continually laying stress on the religious 
and spiritual side of the movement. His religion was not dog- 
matic, but it did mean a definitely religious outlook on life, and 
the whole movement was strongly influenced by this and took 
on a revivalist character so far as the masses were concerned. 
The great majority of Congress workers naturally tried to model 
themselves alter their leader and even repeated his language. 
And yet Gandhiji's leading colleagues in the Working Com- 
mittee— my father, Deshbandhu Das, Lala Lajpat Rai, and 
others— were nor men of religion in the ordinary sense of the 
word, and they considered political problems on the political 
plane only. In their public utterances they did not bring in 
religion. But whatever they said had far less influence than the 
force of their personal example — ^had they not given up a great 
deal that the world values and taken to simpler ways of living? 
This in itself was taken as a sign "of religion and helped in 
spreading the atmosphere of revivalism. 

I used to be troubled sometimes at the growth of this religious 
element in our politics, both on the Hindu and the Muslim side. 
I did not like it at all. Much that Moulvies and Maulanas and 
Swamis and the like said in their public addresses seemed to me 
most unfortunate. Their history and sociology and economics 
appeared to me all wrong, and the religious twist that was given 
to everjrthing prevented all clear thinking. Even some of 
Gandhiji’s phrases sometimes jarred upon me— thus his frequent 
reference to Rama Raj as a golden age which was to return. But 
I was powerless to intervene, and I consoled myself with the 
thought that Gandhiji used the words because they were well 
known and understood by the masses. He had an amazing knack 
of reaching the heart of the people. — • . 

But I did not worry myself much over these matters. I was 
too full of my work and the progress of our movement to care 
for such trifles, as I thought at the time they were. A vast move- 
ment had all sorts and kinds of people in it, and so long as our 
main direction was correct, a few eddies and bac^^waters did not 



NON-CO-OPERATION 


73 

matter. As for Gandhiji himself, he was a very difficult person 
to understand, sometimes his language was almost incom- 
prehensible to an average modern. But we felt that we knew 
him quite well enough to realise that he was a great and unique 
man and a glorious leader, and having put our faith in him we 
gave him an almost blank cheque, for the time being at least. 
Often we discussed his fads and peculiarities among ourselves 
and said, half-humorously, that when Swaraj came these fads 
must not be encouraged. 

Many of us, however, were too much under his influence in 
political and other matters to remain wholly immune even in 
the sphere of religion. Where a direct attack might not have 
succeeded, many an indirect approach went a long way to under- 
mine the defences. The outward ways of religion did not appeal 
to me, and above all I disliked the exploitation of the people by 
the so-called men of religion, but still I toned down towards it. 
I came nearer to a religious frame of mind in 1921 than at any 
other time since my early boyhood. Even so I did not come very 
near. 

What I admired was the moral and ethical side of our 
movement and of satyagraha. I did not give an absolute 
allegiance to the doctrine of non-violence or accept it for ever, 
but it attracted me more and more, and the belief grew upon 
me that, situated as we were in India and with our background 
and traditions, it was the right policy for us. The spiritualisation 
of politics, using the word not in its narrow religious sense, 
seemed to me a fine idea. A worthy end should have worthy 
means leading up to it. That seemed not only a good ethical 
doctrine but sound, practical politics, for the means that are not 
good often defeat the end in view and raise new problems and 
difficulties. And then it seemed so unbecoming, so degrading 
to the self-respect of an individual or a nation to submit to such 
means, to go through the mire. How can one escape being sullied 
by it? How can we march ahead swiftly and with dignity if we 
stoop or crawl? 

Such were my thoughts then. And the non<o-operation move- 
ment offered me what I wanted— the goal of national freedom 
and (as I thought) the ending of the exploitation of the under- 
dog, and the means which satisfied my moral sense and gave me 
a sense of personal freedom. So great was this personal satis- 
ftiction that even a possibility of failure did not count for much, 
for such failure could only be temporary. I did not understand 
dr feel drawn to the metaphysical part of the Bhagavad Gita, 
but I l^ff to read the verses— recited every evening in Gandhiji’s 



74 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ashram prayers — which say what a man should be like : Calm 
of purpose, serene and unmoved, doing his job and not caring 
overmuch for the result of his action. Not being very calm or 
detached myself, I suppose, this ideal appealed to me all the 
more. 



XI 


NINETEEN TWENTY-ONE AND THE FIRST 
IMPRISONMENT 

Nineteen twenty-one was an extraordinary year for us. There 
was a strange mixture of nationalism and politics and religion 
and mysticism and fanaticism. Behind all this was agrarian 
trouble and, in the big cities, a rising working-class movement. 
Nationalism and a vague but intense country-wide idealism 
sought to bring together all these various, and sometimes mutu- 
ally contradictory, discontents, and succeeded to a remarkable 
degree. And yet this nationalism itself was a composite force, 
and behind it could be distinguished a Hindu nationalism, a 
Muslim nationalism partly looking beyond the frontiers of 
India, and, what was more in consonance with the spirit of the 
times, an Indian nationalism. For the time being they over- 
lapped and all pulled together. It was Hindu-Musalman hi Jai 
everywhere. It was remarkable how Gandhiji seemed to cast a 
spell on all classes and groups of people and drew them into 
one motley crowd strug^ing in one direction. He became, in- 
deed (to use a phrase which has been applied to another leader), 
" a symbolic expression of the confused desires of the people ”. 

Even more remarkable was the fact that these desires and 
passions were relatively free from hatred of the alien rulers 
against whom they were directed. Nationalism is essentially an 
anti-feeling, and it feeds and fattens on hatred and anger against 
other national groups, and especially against the foreign rulers 
of a subject country. There was certainly this hatred and anger 
in India in 1931 against the British but, in comparison with 
other countries similarly situated, it was extraordinarily litde. 
Undoubtedly this was due to Gandhiji’s insistence on the impli- 
cations of non-violence. It was also due to the feeling of release 
and power that came to the whole country with the inaugura- 
tion of the movement and the wide^read belief in success in 
the near fiiture. Why be angry and full of hate when we were 
doing so well and were likely to win through' soon? We felt that 
we could afford to be generous. 

We were not so generous in our hearts, though our actions 
were circumspect and proper, towards the handfel of our own 
countrymen who took sides against us and opposed the national 
movement. It was not a question of hatred or anger, for they 

.7fi 



76 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

carried no weight whatever and we could ignore them. But deep 
within us was contempt for their weakness and opportunism and 
betrayal of national honour and self-respect. 

So we went on, vaguely hut intensely, the exhilaration of 
action holding us in its grip. But about our goal there was an 
entire absence of clear thinking. It seems surprising now, how 
completely we ignored the theoretical aspects, the philosophy of 
our movement as well as the definite objective that we should 
have. Of course we all grew eloquent about Swaraj, but each one 
of us probably interpreted the word in his or her own way. To 
most of the younger men it meant political independence, or 
something like it, and a democratic form of government, and 
we said so in our public utterances. Many of us also thought 
that inevitably this would result in a lessening of the burdens 
that crushed the workers and the peasantry. But it was obvious 
that to, most of our leaders Swaraj meant something much less 
than independence. Gandhiji was delightfully vague on the 
subject, and he did not encourage clear thinking about it either. 
But he always spoke, vaguely but definitely, m terms of the 
under-dog, and this brought great comfort to many of us, 
although, at the same time, he was full of assurances to the top- 
dog also. Gandhiji’s stress was never on the intellectual approatm 
to a problem but on character and piety. He did succeed amaz- 
ingly in giving backbone and character to the Indian people. 
There were many, however, who developed neither much back- 
bone nor character, but who imagined that a limp body and a 
flabby look might be the outward semblance of piety. 

It was this extraordinary stiffening-up of the masses that filled 
us with confidence. A demoralized, backward, and broken-up 
people suddenly straightened their backs and lifted their heads 
and took part in disciplined, joint action on a country-wide scale. 
This action itself, we felt, would give irresistahle power to the 
masses. We ignored the necessity of thought behind the action; 
we forgot that without a conscious ideology and objective the 
energy and enthusiasm of the masses must end largely in smoke. 
To some extent the revivalist element in our movement carried 
us on; a feeling that non-violence as concrived for political or 
economic movements or for righting wrongs was a new message 
which our people were destined to mve to the world. We be- 
came victims to the curious illusion of all peoples and all nations 
that in some way they are a chosen race. Non-violence was the 
moral equivalent of war and of aU violent struggle. It was not 
merely ethical alternative, but it was efeitive also. Few of 
us, I think, accepted Gandhiji’s old ideas about machinery 



■JIHE FIRS'i IMPRISONMENT 77 

and modern civilization. We thought that even he looked upon 
them as utopian and as largely mapplicable to modern con- 
ditions. Certainly most of us were not prepared to reject the 
achievements of modern civilization, although we may have 
felt that some variation to suit Indian conditions was possible. 
Personally, I have always felt attracted towards big machinery 
and fast travelling. Still there can be no doubt that Gandhiji’s 
ideology influenced many people and made them critical of the 
machine and all its consequences. So, while some looked to the 
future, others looked back to the past. And, curiously, both felt 
that the joint action they were indulging in was worth while, 
and this made it easy to bear sacrifice and face self-denial. 

I became wholly absorbed and wrapt in the movement, and 
large numbers of other people did likewise. I gave up all my 
other associations and contacts, old friends, books, even news- 
papers, except in so far as they dealt with the work in hand. 
I had kept up till then some reading of current books and had 
tried to follow the developments of world affairs. But there 
was no time for this now. In spite of the strength of my family 
bonds, I almost forgot my family, my wife, my daughter. It 
was only long afterwards that I realised what a burden and a 
trial I must have been to them in those days, and what amazing 
patience and tolerance my wife had shown towards me. I lived 
in offices and committee meetings and crowds. “Go to the 
villages ” was the slogan, and we trudged many a mile across 
fields and visited distant villages and addressed peasant meetings. 
I experienced the thrill of mass-feeling, the power of influencing 
the mass. I began to understand a little the psychology of 
the crowd, the difference between the city masses and the 
peasantry, and I felt at home in the dust and discomfort, the 
pushing and jostling of large gatherings, though their want of 
discipline often irritated me. Since those days I have sometimes 
had to face hostile and angry crowds, worked up to a state when 
a spark would light a flame, and I found that that early ex- 
perience and the confidence it begot in me stood me in good 
stead. Always I went straight to the crowd and trusted it, and 
so far I have always had courtesy and appreciation ftom it, even 
though there was no agreement. But crowds axe fickle, and the 
future may have different experiences in store for me. 

, I took to the crowd and the crowd took to me, and yet I never 
lost myself in it; always I felt apart from it. From my separate 
mental perch I looked at it critically, and I never ceased to 
wonder how I, who was so, different in every way from those 
thousands who surrounded me, different in -habits, in desires. 



y8 JAWAHAELAL NEHRU 

in mental and spiritual outlook, how I had managed to gain 
goodwill and a measure of confidence from these people. Was 
it because they took me for something other than I was? 
Would they bear with me when they knew me better? Was I 
gaining their goodwill under false pretences? I tried to be frank 
and straightforward to them; I even spoke harshly to them 
sometimes and criticised many of their pet beliefs and customs, 
but still they put up with me. And yet I could not get rid of 
the idea that their affection was meant not for me as 1 was, but 
for some fanciful image of me that they had formed. How long 
could that false image endure? And why should it be allowed 
to endure? And when it fell down and they saw the reality, 
what then? 

I am vain enough in many ways, but there could be no question 
of vanity with these crowds of simple folk. There was no' posing 
about them, no vulgarity, as in the case of many of us of the 
middle classes who consider ourselves their betters. They were 
dull certainly, uninteresting individually, but in the mass they 
produced a feeling of overwhelming pity and a sense of ever- 
impending tragedy. 

■very different were our conferences where our chosen workers, 
including myself, performed on the platform. There was suffi- 
cient posing there and no lack of vulgarity in our flamboyant 
addresses. All of us must have been to some extent guilty of 
this, but some of the minor Khilafat leaders probably led the 
rest. It is not easy to behave naturally on a platform before 
a large audience, and few of us had previous experience of such 
publicity. So we tried to look as, we imagined, leaders should 
look, thoughtful and serious, with no trace of levity or frivolity. 
"When we walked or talked or smiled we were conscious of 
thousands of eyes staring at us and we reacted accordingly. Our 
speeches were often very eloquent but, equally often, singularly 
pointless. It is difficult to see oneself as others see one. And so, 
unable to criticise myself, I took to watching carefully the ways 
of others, and I found considerable amusement in tnis occupa- 
tion. And then the terrible thought would strike me that I might 
perhaps appear equally ludicrous to others. 

Right through the year igai individual Congress workers were 
being arrested and sentenced, but there were no mass arrests. 
The All Brothers had received long sentences for inciting the 
Indian Army to disaffection. Their words, for which they had 
been sentenced, were repeated at hundreds of platforms by 
thousands of persons. I was threatened in the summer with 
proceedings for sedition because of some speeches I had de- 






THE FIRST IMPRISONMENT 79 

livered. No such step, however, was taken then. The end of the 
year brought matters to a head. The Prince of Wales was 
coming to India, and the Congress had proclaimed a boycott 
of all the functions in connection with his visit. Towards the 
end of November the Congress volunteers in Bengal were de' 
dared illegal and this was Allowed by a similar declaration for 
the United Provinces. Deshbandhu Das gave a stirring message 
to Bengal : “ I feel the handcuffs on my wrists and the weight 
of iron chains on my body. It is the agony of bondage. The 
whole of India is a vast prison. The work of the Congress must 
be carried on. What matters it whether I am taken or left? 
What matters it whether I am dead or alive? ” In the U.P. we 
took up the challenge and not only announced that our volun- 
teer organisation would continue to function, but published lists 
of names of volunteers in the daily newspapers. The first list 
was headed by my father s name. He was not a volunteer but, 
simply for the purpose of defying the Government order, he 
joined and gave his name. Early in December, a few days before 
the Prince came to our province, mass arrests began. 

We knew that matters had at last come to a head; the inevit- 
able conflict between the Congress and the Government was 
about to break out. Prison was still an unknown place, the idea 
of going there still a novelty. I was sitting rather late one day 
in me Congress office at Allahabad trying to clear up arrears 
of work. An excited clerk told me that the police had come 
with a search warrant and were surrounding the office building. 
I was, of course, a little excited also, for it was my first experience 
of the kind, but the desire to show off was strong, the wish to 
appear perfectly cool and collected, unaffected by the comings 
and goii^s of the police. So I asked a clerk to accompany the 
police officer in his search round the office rooms, and insisted 
on the rest of the staff carrying on their usual work and ignoring 
the police. A little later a fiicnd and a colleague, who had been 
arrested just outside the office, came to me, accompanied by 
a policeman,’ to bid me good-bye. I was so full of the conceit that 
I must treat these novel occurrences as everyday happenings 
that I treated my colleague in a most unfeeling manner. Casu- 
ally I asked him and the policeman to wait till I had finished 
the letter I was writing. Soon news came of other arrests in 
the city. I decided at last to go home and see what was happen- 
ing there. I found tlie inevitable police searching part of the 
large house and learnt that they had come to arrest both father 
and me. • ^ 

Nothing that we could have done would have fitted in so well 



8o 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


with our programme of boycotting the Prince’s visit. Where- 
ever he was taken he was met with hartals and deserted streets. 
Allahabad, when he came, seemed to be a city of the dead; 
Calcutta, a few days later, suddenly put a temporary stop to all 
the activities of a great city. It was hard on the Prince of Wales; 
he was not to blame, and ^ere was no feeling against him what- 
ever. But the Government of India had tried to exploit his 
personality to prop up their decaying prestige. 

There was an orgy of arrests and convictions, especially in the 
United Provinces and in Bengal. All the prominent Congress 
leaders and workers in these provinces were arrested, and or- 
dinary volunteers by the thousand went to prison. They were, 
at first, largely city men and there seemed to be an inexhaustible 
supply of volunteers for prison. The U.P. Provincial Congress 
Committee was arrested en bloc (55 members) as they were actu- 
ally holding a committee meeting. Many people, who had so far 
taken no part in any Congress or political activity, were carried 
away by the wave of enthusiasm and insisted on being arrested. 
There were cases of Government clerks, returning fiom thnr 
ofiices in the evening, being swept away by this current and 
landing in gaol instead of their homes. Young men and boys 
would crowd inside the police lorries and refuse to come out. 
Every evening we could near firom inside the gaol, lorry after 
lorry arriving outside heralded by our slogans and shouts. The 
gaols were crowded and the gaol officials were at their wits’ ends 
at jhis extraordinary phenomenon. It happened sometimes that 
a police lorry would bring, according to the warrant accom- 
panying it, a certain number of prisoners— no names were or 
could be mentioned. Actually, a larger number than that men- 
tioned would emerge firom the lor^ and the gaol officials did 
not know how to meet this novel situation. There was nothing 
in the Jail Manual about it. 

Gradually the Government gave up the policy of indis- 
criminate arrests; only noted workers were picked out. Gradu- 
ally also the ffist flush of enthusiasm of the people cooled 
down and, owing to the absence in prison of all the trusted 
workers, a feeling of indecision and helplessness spread. But 
the change was superflcial only, and there was stiU thunder in 
the air ^d the atmosphere was tense and pregnant with 
revolutionary possibilities. During the months of December 10a i 
and January igaa it is estimated that about thirty thousand 
perstjns were sentenced to imprisonment in connection with the 
non-co-operation movement. W though most of the prominent 
men and , workers were in prison, the leader of die whole 



THE FIRST IMPRISONMENT 


8l 

Struggle, Mahatma Gandhi, was still out, issuing from day to 
day messages and directions which inspired the people, as well 
as checking many an undesirable activity. The Government 
had not touched him so far, for they feared the consequences, 
the reactions on the Indian Army and the police. 

Suddenly, early in February 1932, the whole scene shifted, 
and we in prison learnt, to our amazement and consternation, 
that Gandhiji had stopped the aggressive aspects of our struggle, 
that he had suspended civil resistance. We read that this was 
because of what had happened near the village of Chauri 
Chaura where a mob of villagers had retaliated on some police- 
men by setting fire to the police-station and burning half a 
dozen or so policemen in it. 

We were angry when we learnt of this stoppage of our struggle 
at a time when we seemed to be consolidating our position and 
advancing on all fronts. But our disappointment and anger in 
prison could do little good to any one, and civil resistance stopped 
and non-co-operation wilted away. After many months of strain 
and anxiety the Government breathed again, and for the first 
time had the opportunity of taking the initiative. A few weeks 
later they arrested Gandhiji and sentenced him for a long term 
of imprisonment. 



NON-VIOLENClL AND THE DOCTRINE OF 
THE SWORD 

The sudden suspension of our movement after the Chauri 
Chaura incident was resented, I think, by almost all the promi- 
nent Congress leaders— other than Gandhiji of course. My father 
(who was in gaol at the time) was much upset by it. The younger 
people were naturally even more agitated. Our mounting hopes 
tumbled to the ground, and this mental reaction was to be 
expected. What troubled us even more were the reasons given 
for this suspension and the consequences that seemed to flow 
from them. Chauri Chaura may have been and was a deplorable 
occurrence and wholly opposed to the spirit of the non-violent 
movement; but were a remote village and a mob of excited 
peasants in an out-of-the-way place going to put an end, for 
some time at least, to our national struggle for tteedom? If this 
was the inevitable consequence of a sporadic act of violence, 
then surely there was something lacking in the philosophy and 
technitjue of a non-violent struggle. For it seemed to us to be 
impossible to ^arantee against the occurrence of some such 
imtoward incident. Must we train the three hundred and odd 
millions of India in the theory and practice of non-violent 
action before we could go forward? And, even so, how many of 
us could, say that imder extreme provocation from the police 
we would be able to remain perfectly peaceful? But even if we 
succeeded, what of the numerous agents provocateurs, stool 
pigeons, and the like who crept into our movement and indulged 
in violence themselves or induced others to do so? If this was 
the sole condition of its function, then the non-violent method 
of resistance would always fail. 

We had accepted that method, the Congress had made that 
method its own, because of a belief in its effectiveness. Gandhiji 
had placed it before the coimt^ not only as the right method 
but as the most effective one tor our purpose. In spite of its 
negative naine it was a dynamic method, the very opposite of 
a meek submission to a tyrant’s will. It was not a coward’s refuge 
frorn action, but the brave m an’s defiance of evil and national 
subjection. But what was the use of the bravest and the strongest 
if a few odd persons— maybe even our opponents in the guise of 
friends — ^had the power to upset or end our movement bv their 
rash behaviour? , ^ 



NON-VIOLENCE 


83 

Gandhiji had pleaded fo? the adoption of the way of non- 
violence, of peaceful non-co-operation, with all the eloquence 
and persuasive power which he so abundantly possessed. His 
language had been simple and tmadorned, his voice and appear- 
ance cool and clear and devoid of all emotion, but behind that 
outward covering of ice there was the heat of a blazing fire and 
concentrated passion, and the words he uttered winged their 
way to the innermost recesses of our minds and hearts, and 
created a strange ferment there. The way he pointed out was 
hard and difficult, but it was a brave path, and it seemed to 
lead to the promised land of freedom. Because of that promise 
we pledged our faith and marched ahead. In a famous article — 
“ The Doctrine of the Sword he had written in 1920 : 

"I do believe that when there is only a choice between 
cowardice and violence, I would advise violence. ... I would 
rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honour 
than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain 
a helpless victim to her own dishonour. But I believe that non- 
violence is infinitely superior to violence, forgiveness is more 
manly than punishment Bpti 

" Forgiveness adorns a soldier. But abstinence is forgiveness 
only when there is power to punish; it is meaningless when 
it pretends to proceed from a helpless creature. A mouse hardly 
forgives a cat when it allows itself to be tom to pieces by 
her- . . . But I do not believe India to be helpless, I do not 
believe myself to be a helpless creature. . . . 

“ Let me not be misunderstood. Strength does not come from 
physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will. . . . 

“ I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. The 
religion of non-violence is not meant merely for the Rishis 
and saints. It is meant for the common people as well. Non- 
violence is the law of our species as violence is the law of the 
brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute and he knows no 
law but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires 
obedience to a higher law — to the strength of the spirit. 

“ I have therefore ventured to place before India the ancient 
law of self-sacrifice. For Satyagrahjand its off-shoots, non-co- 
operation and civil resistance, are nothing but new names for 
the law of suffering. The Rishis who discovered the law of 
non-violence in the midst of violoice, were greater geniuses than 
Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Welling- 
ton. Having themselves known the use of arms, they realised 
their uselessness and taught a weary world that its salvation 
lay not through violence but through non-violence. 



84 JAWAHARLAI. NEHRU 

“Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscious 
suffering. It does not mean meek submission to the will of 
the evil-doer, but it means the putting of one’s whole soul 
against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
being, it is possible for a single individual to defy the whole 
might of an unjust empire to save his honour, his religion, his 
soul and lay the foundation for that empire’s fall or regenera- 
tion. 

“ And so I am not pleading for India to practise non-violence 
because it is weak. I want her to practise non-violence being 
conscious of her strength and power. ... I want India to 
recognise that she has a soul that cannot perish, and that can 
rise triumphant above any physical weakness and defy the 
physical combination of a whole world. . . . 

“ I isolate this non-co-operation from Sinn Feinism, for, it is 
so conceived as to be incapable of being offered side by side 
with violence. But I invite even the school of violence to give 
this peaceful non-co-operation a trial. It will not fail through 
its inherent weakness. It may fail because of poverty of 
response. Then will be the time for real danger. The high- 
s’ouled men, who are unable to suffer national humiliation any 
longer, will want to vent their wrath. They will take to violence. 
So far as I know, they must perish without delivering them- 
selves or their country from the wrong. If India takes up the 
doctrine of the sword, she may gain momentary victory. Then 
India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to 
India because I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she 
has a mission for the world.” 

We were moved by these argmnents, but for us and for the 
National Congress as a whole the non-violent method was not, 
and could not be, a religion or an unchallengeable creed or 
dogma. It could only be a policy and a method promising 
certain results, and by those results it would have to be finally 
judged. Individuals might make of it a religion or incontro- 
vertible creed. But no political organisation, so long as it 
remained political, could do so. 

Chauri Chaura and its consequences made us examine these 
implications of non-violence as a method, and we felt that, if 
Gandhiji’s argument for the suspension of civil resistance was 
, correct, our opponents would always have the power to create 
circumstances which would necessarily result in our abandoning 
the struggle. Was this the fault of the non-violent method itself 
or of Gandhiji’s interpretation of it? After all, he was the 
author and originator of it, and who could be a better judge of 



NON-VIOLENCE 85 

what it was and what it was not? And without him where was 
our movement? 

Many years later, just before the 1930 Civil Disobedience 
movement began, Gandhiji, much to our satisfaction, made this 
point clear. He stated that the movement should not be aban- 
doned because of the occurrence of sporadic acts of violence. 
If the non-violent method of struggle could not function 
because of such almost inevitable happenings, then it was 
obvious that it was not an ideal method for all occasions, and 
this he was not prepared to admit. For him the method, being 
the right method, should suit all circumstances and should be 
able to function, at any rate in a restricted way, even in a hostile 
atmosphere. Whether this interpretation, which widened the 
scope of non-violent action, represented an evolution in his own 
mind or not I do not know. 

As a matter of fact even the suspension of civil resistance in 
February 1922 was certainly not due to Chauri Chaura alone, 
although most people imagined so. That was only the last straw. 
Gandhiji has offen acted almost by instinct; by long and close 
association with the masses he appears to have developed, as 
great popular leaders often do, a new sense which tells him how 
the mass feels, what it does and what it can do. He reacts to 
this instinctive feeling and fashions his action accordingly, and 
later, for the benefit of his surprised and resentful colleagues, 
tries to clothe his decision with reasons. This covering is often 
very inadequate, as it seemed after Chauri Chaura. At that time 
our movement, in spite of its apparent power and the widespread 
enthusiasm, was going to pieces. All organisation and discipline 
was disappearing; almost all our good men were in prison, and 
the masses had so fer received little training to carry on by them- 
selves. Any unknown man who wanted to do so could take 
charge of a Congress Committee and, as a matter of fact, large 
numbers of undesirable men, including agents provocateurs, 
came to die front and even controlled some local Congress and 
Khilafat organisations. There was no way of checking them. 

This kind of thing is, of course, to some extent almost 
inevitable in such a struggle. The leaders must take the lead in 
going to prison, and trust to others to carry on. All that can be 
done is to train the masses in some simple kinds of activity and, 
even more so, to abstain from certain other kinds of activity. 
In 1930 we had already spent several years in ^ving some such 
training, and the Civil Disobedience movement then and in 1932 
was a very powerful and organised a£^. This was lacking in 
1921 and iQaa, and there was little behind the excitement and 



86 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

enthusiasm of the people. There is little doubt that if the move- 
men had continued there would have been growing sporadic 
violence in many places. This would have been crushed by 
Government in a bloody manner and a reign of terror estab- 
lished which would have thoroughly demoralised the people. 

These were probably the reasons and influences that worked in 
Gandhiji’s mind, and granting his premises and the desirability 
of carrying on with the technique of non-violence, his decision 
was right. He had to stop the rot and build anew. From another 
and an entirely different view-point his decision might be con- 
sidered wrong, but that view-point had nothing to do with the 
non-violent method. It was not possible to have it both ways. To 
invite a bloody suppression of the movement in that pardculai 
sporadic way and at that stage would not, of course, have put an 
end to the national movement, for such movements have a way 
of rising from their ashes. Temporary set-backs are often helpful 
in clarifying issues and in giving backbone; what matters is not 
a set-back or apparent defeat, but the principles and ideals: If 
these principles can be kept untarnished by the masses, then re- 
covery comes soon. But what were our principles and objectives 
in I pa I and ipaa? A vague Swaraj with no dear ideology behind 
it and a particular technique of non-violent struggle. %ie latter 
method would naturally have gone if the country had taken to 
sporadic violence on any big scale, and as to the former, there 
was little to hold on to. The people generally were not strong 
enough to carry on the struggle for long and, in spite of almost 
universal discontent with foreign rule and sympathy with the 
Congress, there was not enough backbone or organisation. They 
could not last. Even the crowds that went to prison did so on the 
spur of the moment, expecting the whole thing to be over very 
soon. 

It may be, therefore, that the dedsion to suspend civil resist- 
ance in ipaa was a right one, though the manner of doing it left 
much to be desired and brought about a certain demoralisation. 

It is possible, however, that this sudden bottling up of a great 
movement contributed to a tragic development in Ae country. 
The drift to sporadic and futile violence in the political struggle 
was stopped, but the suppressed violence had to find a way out, 
and in the following years this perhaps aggravated the com- 
munal trouble. The communalists of various denominations, 
mostly political reactionaries, had been forced to lie low because 
of the overwhelming mass support for the non-co-operation and 
civil disobedience movemmt. They emerged now from their 
retirement. Many others, secret service agents and people who 



NON-VIOLENCE 


87 

sought to please the authorities by creating communal friction, 
also worked on the same theme. The Moplah rising and its extra- 
ordinarily cruel suppression — ^what a horrible thing was the 
baking to death of the Moplah prisoners in the closed railway 
vansl — ^had already given a handle to those who stirred the 
waters of communal discord. It is just possible that if civil 
resistance had not been stopped and the movement had been 
crushed by Government, there would have been less communal 
bitterness and less superfluous energy left for the subsequent 
communal riots. 

Before civil resistance was called off an incident occurred which 
might have led to different results. The first wave of civil resist- 
ance amazed and frightened the Government. It was then that 
Lord Reading, the Viceroy, said in a public speech that he was 
troubled and perplexed. The Prince of Wales was in India, and 
his presence added greatly to the Government's responsibility. 
An attempt was made by the Government in December ipai, 
soon after the mass arrests at the beginning of the month, to 
come to some understanding with the Congress. This was especi- 
ally in view of the Prince’s forthcoming visit to Calcutta. There 
were some informal talks between representatives of the Bengal 
Government and Deshbandhu Das, who was in gaol then. A 
proposal seems to have been made, that a small round table con- 
ference might take place between the Government and the Con- 
gress. This proposal appears to have fallen through because 
Gandhiji insisted that Maulana Mohamad Ali, who was then in 
prison in Karachi, should be present at this conference. Govern- 
ment would not agree to thite. 

Mr. C. R. Das ^d not approve of Gandhiji’s attitude in this 
matter and, when he came out of prison later, he publicly criti- 
cised him and said that he had blundered. Most of us (we were 
in gaol) do not know the details of what took place then, and it 
is difficult to judge without all the facts. It seems, however, that 
little good could have come out of the conference at that stage. 
It was an effort on the part of Government to tide over somehow 
the period of the Prince’s visit to Calcutta. The basic problems 
that faced us would have remained. Nine years later, when the 
nation and the Congress were fer stronger, such a conference 
took place without any great results. But apart firom this, it seems 
to me that Gandhiji’s insistence on Mohamad Ali’s presence was 
perfectly justified. Not only as a Congress leader but as the leader 
of the Khilafat movement — and the Khilafat question was then 
an important plank in the Congress programme— his presence 
was essential. No policy or manoeuvre can ever be a right one if 



88 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it involves the forsaking of a colleague. The fact that Govern- 
ment were not prepared to release him from gaol itself shows 
that there was no likelihood of any results from a conference. 

Both my father and I had been sentenced to six months’ im- 
prisonment on different charges and by different courts. The 
trials were farcical and, as was our custom, we took no part in 
them. Il was easy enough, of course, to find enough material in 
our speeches or other activities for a conviction. But the actual 
choice was amusing. Father was tried as a member of an illegal 
organisation, the Congress Volunteers, and to prove this a form 
with his signature in Hindi was produced. The signature was 
certainly his, but, as it happened, he had hardly ever signed in 
Hindi before, and very few persons could recognise his Hindi 
signature. A tattered gentleman was then produced who swore 
to the signature. The man was quite illiterate, and he held the 
signature upside down when he examined it. My daughter, 
aged four at the time, had her first experience of the dock during 
father's trial, as he held her in his arms throughout. 

My offence was distributing notices for a hartal. This was no 
oflfence under the law then, though I believe it is one now, for 
we are rapidly advancing towards Dominion Status. However, I 
was sentenced. Three months later I was informed in the prison, 
where I was with my father and others, that some revising 
authority had come to the conclusion that I was wrongly sen- 
tenced and I was to be discharged. I was surprised, as no one had 
taken any step on my behalf. The suspension of civil resistance 
had apparently galvanised the revising judges into activity. I was 
sorry to go out, leaving my father behind. 

I decided to go almost immediately to Gandhiji in Ahmeda- 
bad. Before I arrived there he had been arrested, and my inter- 
view with him took place in Sabarmati Prison. I was present at 
his trial. It was a memorable occasion, and those of us who were 
present are not likely ever to forget it. The judge, an English- 
man, behaved with dignity and feeling. Gandhiji’s statement to 
the court was a most moving one, and we came away, emotion- 
ally stirred, and with the impress of his vivid phrases and 
striking images in our mind. 

I came badt to Allahabad. I felt unhappy and lonely outside 
the prison when so many of my friends and colleagues were 
behind prison bars. I found that the Congress organisation was 
not functioning well and I tried to put it straight. In particular 
I interested myself in the boycott of foreign cloth. This item of 
our programme still continued in spite of the withdrawal of 
civil resistance. Nearly all the cloth merchants in Allahabad had 



NON-VIOLENCE 


89 

pledged themselves not to import or purchase foreign cloth, and 
had formed an association for the purpose. The rules of this 
association laid dovm that any infringement would be punished 
by a fine. I found that several of the big dealers had broken 
their pledges and were importing foreign cloth. This was very 
unfair to those who stuck to their pledges. We remonstrated 
with little result, and the cloth dealers’ association seemed to be 
powerless to take action. So we decided to picket the shops of the 
erring merchants. Even a hint of picketing was enough for our 
purpose. Fines were paid, pledges were taken afresh. The money 
from the fines went to the clofri merchants’ association. 

Two or three days later I was arrested, together with a number 
of colleagues who had taken part in the negotiations with the 
merchants. We were charged with criminal intimidation and 
extortion 1 I was further charged with some other offences, in- 
cluding sedition. I did not d^end myself, but I made a long 
statement in court. I was sentenced on at least three counts, 
including intimidation and extortion, but the sedition charge 
was not proceeded with, as it was probably considered that I had 
already got as much as I deserved. As far as I remember there 
were three sentences, two of which were for eighteen months 
and were concurrent- In all, I think, I was sentenced to a year 
and nine months. That was my second sentence. I went back to 
prison after about six weeks spent outside it. 



XIII 


LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 

Imprisonment for political offences was not a new thing in the 
India of 1921. From the time of the Bengal partition agitation 
especially, there had always been a continuous stream of men 
going to prison, sentenced often to very long terms. There had 
been internments without trial also. The greatest Indian leader 
of the day, Lokamanya Tilak, was sentenced in his declining 
years to six years’ imprisonment. The Great War speeded up 
this process of internment and imprisonment, and conspiracy 
cases became frequent, usually resulting in death sentences or 
life terms. The Ali brothers and M. Abulkalam Azad -were 
among the war-time internees. Soon after the war, martial law in 
the Punjab took a heavy toll, and large numbers were sentenced 
in conspiracy cases or summary trials. So political imprisonment 
had become a frequent enough occurrence in India, but so far it 
had not been deliberately courted. It had come in the course of 
a person’s activities, or perhaps because the secret police did not 
fancy him, and every effort was made to avoid it by means of 
a defence in the law court. In South Africa, of course, a different 
example had been set by Gandhiji and thousands of his fol- 
lowers in their campaign of Sat^agraha. 

But still in 1921 prison was an almost unknown place, and 
very few knew what happened behind the grim gates that swal- 
lowed the new convict. Vaguely we imagined that its inhabitants 
were desperate people and dangerous criminals. In our minds 
the place was associated with isolation, humiliation, and suffer- 
ing, and, above all, the fear of the unknown. Frequent references 
to gaol-going from 1920 onwards, and the march of many of our 
comrades to prbon, gradually accustomed us to the idea and 
took away the edge from that almost involtmtary feeling of re- 
pugnance and reluctance. But no amount of previous mental 
preparation could prevent the tension and nervous excitement 
that filled us when we first entered the iron gates. Since those 
days, thirteen years ago, I imagine that at least three hundred 
thousand men and women of India have entered those gates for 
political offences, although often enough the actual charge has 
been under some other section of the criminal code. Thousands 
of these have gone in and out many a time; they have got to 
know well what to expect inside; they have tried to adapt them- 

oo 



LUCKNOW DISTKICT GAOL gi 

selves to the strange life there, as far as one can adapt oneself to 
an existence full of abnormality and a dull suffering and a dread- 
ful monotony. We grow accustomed to it, as one grows ac- 
customed to almost anything; and yet every time that we 
enter those gates again, there is a bit of the old excitement, a 
feeling of tension, a quickening of the pulse. And the eyes 
turn back involuntarily to take a last good look outside at the 
greenery and wide spaces, and people and conveyances moving 
about, and familiar faces that they may not see again for a long 
time. 

My first term in gaol, which ended rather suddenly after three 
months, was a hectic period both for us' and the gaol staff. The 
gaol officials were half paralysed by the influx of the new type 
of convict. The number itself of these newcomers, added to 
from day to day, was extraordinary and created an impression 
of a flood which might sweep away the old traditional land- 
marks. More upsetting still was the type of the newcomer. It 
belonged to all classes, but had a high proportion of the middle 
class. All these classes, however, had this in common; they 
differed entirely from the ordinary convict, and it was not easy 
to treat them in the old way. This was recognised by the authori- 
ties, but there vras nothing to take the place of the existing 
rules; there were no precedents and no experience. The average 
Congress prisoner was not very meek and mild, and even inside 
the gaol walls numbers gave him a feeling of strength. The agita- 
tion outside, and the new interest of the public in what trans- 
pired inside the prisons, added to this. In spite of this somewhat 
aggressive attitude, our general policy was one of co-operation 
wi3i the gaol authorities. But for our help, the troubles of the 
officials would have been far greater. The gaoler would come to 
us frequently and ask u? to visit some of the barracks containing 
our volimteers in order to soothe them or get them to agree to 
something. 

We had come to prison of our own accord, many of the volun- 
teers indeed having pushed their way in almost uninvited. There 
was thus hardly any question of any one of them trying to 
escape. If he had any desire to go out, he could do so easily by 
expressing regret for his action or giving an undertaking that he 
would refrain from such acdvity in future. An attempt to escape 
would only bring a measure of ignominy, and in itself was tan- 
tamount to a withdrawal from political acdvity of the civil 
resistance variety. The superintendent of our prison in Lucknow 
fully appreciated this and used to tell the gaoler (who was a Khan 
Samb) that if he could succeed in allowing some of the Congress 



92 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

prisoners to escape he, the superintendent, would recommend 
him to Government for the title of Khan Bahadur. 

Most of our fellow-prisoners were kept in huge barracks in the 
inner circle of the prison. About eighteen of us, selected I sup- 
pose for better treatment, were kept in an old weaving shed with 
a large open space attached. My fether, two of my cousins, and I 
had a small shed to ourselves, about 20 feet by 16. We had con- 
siderable freedom in moving about from one barrack to another. 
Frequent interviews with relatives outside were allowed. News- 
papers came, and the daily news of fresh arrests and the develop- 
ments of our struggle kept up an atmosphere of excitement. 
Mutual discussions and talks took up a lot of time, and I could 
do little reading or other solid work. I spent the mornings in a 
thorough cleaning and washing of our shed, in washing father’s 
and my own clothes, and in spinning. It was winter, the best 
time of year in North India. For the first ftw .weeks we were 
allowed to open classes for our volunteers, or such of them as 
were illiterate, to teach them Hindi and Urdu and other elemen- 
tary subjects. In the afternoons we played volley-ball.* 

Gradually restrictions grew. We were stopped from going out- 
side our enclosure and visiting the part of the gaol where most 
of our volunteers were kept. The classes naturally stopped. I 
was discharged about that time. 

I went out early in March, and six or seven weeks later, in 
April, I returned. I found that the conditions had greatly 
changed. Father had been transferred to the Naini Tal Gaol and, 
soon after his departure, new rules were enforced. All the 
prisoners in the big weaving shed, where I had been kept pre- 
viously, were transferred to the inner gaol and kept in the bar- 
racks (single halls) there. Each barrack was practically a gaol 
within a gaol, and no communications were allowed between 
different barracks. Interviews and letters were now restricted to 
one a month. The food was much simpler, though we were 
allowed to supplement it firom outside. 

In the barrack in which I was kept there must have been about 

* A ridiculous story has appeared in the Press, and, though con- 
tradicted, condnues to appear from time to dme. According to this. 
Sir Harcourt Butler, the men Governor of the U.P., sent champagne 
to my father in prison. Sir Harcourt sent ray father nothing at all 
in prison; nobody sent him champagne or any other alcoholic drink; 
and indeed he had given up alcohol in 1930 after the Congress took 
to non-co-operation, and was not taking any such drinks at that 
time, 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 93 

fifty persons. We were all crowded together, our beds being 
about three or four feet from each other. Fortunately almost 
everybody in that barrack was known to me, and there were 
many friends. But the utter want of privacy, all day and night, 
became more and more difficult to endure. Always the same 
crowd looking on, the same petty annoyances and irritations, 
and no escape fi:om them to a quiet nook. We bathed in public 
and washed our clothes in public, and ran round and round the 
barrack for exercise, and talked and argued till we had largely 
exhausted each other’s capacity for intelligent conversation. It 
was the dull side of family life, magnified a hundred-fold, with 
few of its graces and compensations, and all this among people 
of all kinds and tastes. It was a great nervous strain for all of us, 
and often I yearned for solitude. In later years I was to have 
enough of this solitude and privacy in prison, when for months 
I would see no one except an occasional gaol official. Again I 
lived in a state of nervous tension, but this time I longed for 
suitable company. I thought then sometimes, almost with envy, 
of my crowded existence in the Lucknow District Gaol in 1922, 
and yet I knew well enough that of the two I preferred the 
solitude, provided at least that I could read and write. 

And yet I must say that the company was unusually decent 
and pleasant, and we got on well together. But all of us, I sup* 
pose, got a little bored with the others occasionally and wanted 
to be away from them and have a little privacy. The nearest 
approach to privacy that I could get was by leaving my barrack 
and sitting in the open part of the enclosure. It was the monsoon 
season and it was usually possible to do so because of the clouds. 
I braved the heat and an occasional drizzle even, and spent as 
much time as possible outside the barrack. 

Lying there in the open, I watched the skies and the clouds 
and I realised, better than I had ever done before, how amaz- 
ingly beautiful were their changing hues. 

" To watch the changing douds, like clime in clime; 

, Oh! sweet to lie and bless the luxury of time.” 

Time was not a luxury for to, it was more of a burden. But 
the time I spent in watching those ever-shifting monsoon clouds 
was filled with delight and a sense of relief. I had the joy of 
having made almost a discovery, and a feeling of escape firom 
confinement, I do not know why that particular monsoon had 
that great effect on me; no previous or subsequent one has moved 
me in that way. I had seen and admired many a fine sunrise 
and sunset in the mountains and over the sea, and bathed in its 



94 JAWAHARLAL KEHRU 

glory, and felt stirred for the time being by its magnificence. 
Having seen it, I had almost taken it for granted and passed on 
to other things. But in gaol there were no sunrises or sunsets to 
be seen, the horizon was hidden from us, and late in the morning 
the hot-rayed sun emerged over our guardian walls. There were 
no colours anywhere, and our eyes hardened and grew dull at 
seeing always that same drab view of mud-coloured wall and 
barrack. They must have hungered for some light and shade 
and colouring, and when the monsoon clouds sailed gaily by, 
assuming fantastic shapes, and playing in a riot of colour, . I 
gasped in surprised delight and watched them almost as if I 
was in a trance. Sometimes the clouds would break, and one saw 
through an opening in them that wonderful monsoon phenome- 
non, a dark blue of an amazing depth, which seemed to be a 
portion of infinity. 

The restrictions on us gradually grew in number, and stricter 
rules were enforced. The Government, having got the measure 
of our movement, wanted us to experience the full extent of its 
displeasure with our temerity in having dared to challenge it. 
The introduction of new rules or the manner of their enforce- 
ment led to friction between the gaol authorities and the political 
prisoners. For several months nearly all of us — ^we were some 
hundreds at the time in that particular gaol — gave up our inter- 
views as a protest. Evidently it was thought that some of us 
were the trouble-makers, and so seven of us were transferred to a 
distant part of the gaol, quite cut off from the main barracks. 
Among those who were thus separated were Purushottam Das 
Tandon, Mahadev Desai, George Joseph, Balkrishna Sharma, 
Devadas Gandhi and 1. 

We were sent to a smaller enclosure, and there were some dis- 
advantages in living there. But on the whole I was glad of the 
change. There was no crowdiiw here; we could live in greater 

a uiet and with more privacy. There was more time to read or 
o other work. We were cut off completely from our colleagues 
in other parts of ihe gaol as well as firom the outside world, for 
newspapers were now stopped for all political prisoners. 

Newspapers did not come to us, but some news firom outside 
trickled through, as it always manages to trickle through in 
prison. Our monthly interviews and letters also brought us odd 
bits of information. We saw; that our movement was at -a low 
ebb outside. The magic moment had passed and success seemed 
to retire into the dim future. Outside, the Congress was split into 
two factions— the pro-changers and no-changers. The former, 
under the leadership of Deshbandhu Das and my father, wanted 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 95 

the Congress to take part in the new elections to the central and 
provincial councils and, if possible, to capture these legislatures; 
the latter, led by C. Rajagopalachari, opposed any change 
of the old programme of non-co-operation. Gandhiji was, 
of course, in prison at the time. The fine ideals of tlie move- 
ment which had carried us forward, as on the crest of an 
advancing tide, were being swamped by petty squabbles and 
intrigues for power. We realised how much easier it was to 
do great and venturesome deeds in moments of enthusiasm 
and excitement than to carry on fi'om day to day when the 
glow was past. Our spirits were damped by the news from 
outside, and this, added to the various humours that prison 
produces, increased the strain of life there. But still there re- 
mained within- us an inner feeling of satisfaction, that we had 
preserved our self-respect and dignity, that we had acted rightly 
whatever the consequences. The future was dim, but, whatever 
shape it might take, it seemed that it would be the lot of many 
of us to spend a great part of our lives in prison. So we talked 
amongst ourselves, and I remember particularly a conversation 
with George Joseph in which we came to this conclusion. Since 
those days Joseph has drifted far apart from us and has even 
become a vigorous critic of our doings. I wonder if he ever 
remembers that talk we had on an autumn evening in the Civil 
Ward of the Lucknow District Gaol? 

We settled down to a routine of work and exercise. For exer- 
cise we used to run round and round the little enclosure, or two 
of us would draw water, like two bullocks yoked together, pull- 
ing a huge leather bucket from a well in our yard. In this way 
we watered a small vegetable garden in our enclosure. Most of 
us used to spin a little daily. But reading was my principal occu- 
pation during those winter days and long evenings. Almost 
always, whenever the superintendent visited us, he found me 
reading. This devotion to reading seemed to get on his nerves a 
little, and he remarked on it once, adding that, so fer as he was 
concerned, he had practically finished his general reading at the 
age of twelve I No doubt this abstention on his part had been of 
use to that gallant English colonel in avoiding troublesome 
thoughts, and perhaps it helped him subsequently in rising to 
the position of Inspector-General of Prisons in the United 
Provinces. 

The long winter evenings and the clear Indian sky attracted us 
to the stars and, with the help of some charts, we spotted many 
of them. Nightly we would await their appearance and greet 
them with the satisfacion of seeing old acquaintances. 



96 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

So we passed our time, and the days lengthened themselves 
into weeks, and the weeks became months. We grew accustomed 
to our routine existence. But in the world outside the real burden 
fell on our womenfolk, our mothers and wives and sisters. They 
wearied with the long waiting, and their very freedom seemed a 
reproach to them when their loved ones were behind prison bars. 

Soon after our first arrest in December 1931 the police started 
paying frequent visits to Anand Bhawan, our house in Allaha- 
bad. They came to realise the fines which had been imposed on 
father and me. It was the Congress policy not to pay fines. So 
the police came day after day and attached and carried away 
bits of furniture. Indira, my four-year-old daughter, was greatly 
annoyed at this continuous process of despoilation and protested 
to the police and expressed her strong displeasure. I am afraid 
those early impressions are likely to colour her future views 
about the police force generally. 

In the gaol every effort was made to keep us apart from the 
ordinary non-political convicts, special gaols being as a rule re- 
served for politicals. But complete segregation was impossible, 
and we often came into touch with those prisoners and learnt 
from them, as well as directly, the realities of prison life in those 
days. It was a story of violence and widespread graft and corrup- 
tion. The food was quite amazingly bad; I tried it repeatedly 
and found it quite uneatable. The staff was usually wholly 
incompetent and was paid very low salaries, but it had every 
opportunity to add to its income by extorting money on every 
conceivable occasion from the prisoners or their relatives. The 
duties and responsibilities of the gaoler and his assistants and the 
warders, as laid down by the Gaol Manual, were so many and so 
various that it was quite impossible for any person to discharge 
them conscientiously or competently. The general policy of the 
prison administration in the United Provinces (and probably in 
other provinces) had absolutely nothing to do with the reform 
of the prisoner or of teaching him good habits and useful trades. 
The object of prison labour was to harass the convict.^ He was 

• ^ Article 987 of the United Provinces Gaol Manual, which has now 
been removed from the new edition, stated that : 

“ Labour in a gaol should be considered primarily as a means of 
punishment and not of employment only; neither should the ques- 
tion of its being highly remunerative have much weight, the object 
of paramount importance being that prison work should be irksome 
and laborious and a cause of dread to evil-doers." 

This might be compared with the following articles of the Russian 

rntnin-l Podi-- 



LUCKNOW DISTRICT GAOL 97 

to be frightened and broken into blind submission; the idea was 
that he should carry away from prison a fear and a horror of it, 
so that he might avoid crime and a return to prison in the 
future. 

There have been some changes in recent years for the better. 
Food has improved a little, so also clothing and other matters. 
This was largely due to the agitation carried on outside by poli- 
tical prisoners after their discharge. Non-co-operation also 
resulted in a substantial increase in the warders’ salaries to give 
them an additional inducement to remain loyal to the Sarkar. 
A feeble effort is also made now to teach reading and writing to 
the boys and younger prisoners. But all these changes, welcome 
as they are, barely scratch the problem, and the old spirit remains 
much the same. 

The great majority of the political prisoners had to put up 
with this regular treatment for ordinary prisoners. They liad no 
special privileges or other treatment, but being more aggressive 
and intelligent than the others, they could not easily be ex- 
ploited, nor could money be made out of them. Because of this 
they were naturally not popular with the staff, and when occasion 
offered itself a breach of gaol discipline by any of tliem was 
punished severely. For such a breach a young boy of fifteen or 
sixteen, who called himself Azad, was ordered to be flogged. 
He was stripped and tied to the whipping triangle, and as each 
stripe fell on him and cut into his flesh, he shouted “ Mahatma 
Gandhi ki Jai Every stripe brought forth the slogan till the 
boy fainted. Later, that boy was to beepme one of the leaders 
of the group of Terrorists in North India. 


Article 9 . — “ The measures of social defence do not have for their 
object the infliction of physical suffering nor the lowering of human 
dignity, nor are they meant to avenge or to punish." 

Artide 26 . — " Sentences, being a measure of protection, must be 
free from any element of torture, and must not cause the criminal 
needless or superfluous suffering.” 


B 



XIV 


OUT AGAIN 

One misses many things in prison, but perhaps most of all one 
misses the sound of women’s voices and children’s laughter. 
The sounds one usually hears are not of the pleasantest. The 
voices are harsh and minatory, and the language brutal and 
largely consisting of swear-words. Once I remember being struck 
by a new want. I was in the Lucknow District Gaol and I realised 
suddenly that I had not heard a dog bark for seven or eight 
months. 

On the last day of January 1923 all of us politicals in the 
Lucknow Gaol were discharged. There must have been between 
one hundred and two hundred * special class prisoners in Luck- 
now then. All those who had been sentenced to’ a year or less in 
December 1921 or the beginning of 1922 had already served out 
their sentences. Only those with longer sentences, and a few who 
had come back a second time, remained. This sudden release 
took us by surorise, as there had been no previous intimation of 
an amnesty. The local Provincial Council had passed a resolu- 
tion favouring a political amnesty, but the executive Government 
seldom pays heed to such demands. As it happened, however, 
the time was propitious from the point of view of Government. 
The Congress was doing nothing against the Government, and 
Congressmen were engrossed in mutual squabbles. There were 
not many well-known Congress people left in gaol and so the 
gesture was made. 

•There is always a feeling of relief and a sense of glad excite- 
ment in coming out of the prison gate. The fresh air and open 
expanses, the moving street scene, and the meeting with old 
friends, all go to the head and slightly intoxicate. Almost, there 
is a touch of hysteria in one’s first reactions to the outer world. 
We felt exhilarated, but this was a passing sensation, for the state 
of Congress politics was discouraging enough. In the place of 
ideals mere were intrigues, and various cliques were trying to 
capture the Congress machinery by the usual methods which 
have made politics a hateful word to those who are at all 
sensitive. 

■ My own inclination -was wholly against Council entry, because 
this seemed to lead inevitably to compromising tactics and to 
a continuous watering down of our objective. But there really 



OUT AGAIN 


99 

was no other political programme before the country. The no- 
changers laid stress on a ‘ constructive programme which in 
effect was a programme of social reform, and its chief merit 
was that it brought our workers in touch with the masses- This 
was not likely to satisfy those who believed in political action, 
and it was inevitable that after a wave of direct action, which 
had not succeeded, there should be a phase of parliamentary 
activity. Even this activity was envisaged by Deshbandhu Das 
and my father, the leaders of the new movement, as one of 
obstruction and defiance and not of co-operation and con- 
struction. 

Mr. C. R. Das had always favoured entry into the legislatures 
for the purpose of carrying on the national struggle there also. 
My father had more or less the same outlook, his acceptance of 
the Council boycott in 1920 was partly a subordination of his own 
view-point to Gandhiji’s. He wanted to throw his full weight into 
the struggle, and the only way to do it then was to accept the 
Gandhi formula in toto. The minds of many of the younger 
people were full of the tactics of Sinn Fein in so far as they had 
captured the parliamentary seats and then refused to enter the 
Plouse of Commons. I remember pressing Gandhiji in the sum- 
mer of 1920 to adopt this variant of the boycott, but in such 
matters he was adamant. Mohamad Ali was in Europe then on 
a Khilafat deputation. On his return he also expressed his regret 
at the method of boycott adopted; he would have preferred 
the Sinn Fein way. But it was quite immaterial what other in- 
dividuals thought in the matter, as ultimately Gandhiji’s view 
was bound to prevail. He was the author of the movement, and 
it was felt that he must be given freedom as to the details. His 
chief objections to the Sinn Fein method were (apart fi"om its 
association with violence) that it would not be understood by the 
masses as much as a straight call to boycott the polling-booths 
and the voting. To get elected and then not to go to the Councils 
would create confusion in the mass mind. Further, that once 
our people got elected they would be drawn towards the Councils 
and it would be difficult for them to keep out of them. There 
was not enough discipline and power in our movement to keep 
them out for long, and a demoralising dribble would set in 
towards the many direct and indirect ways of taking advantage 
of Government patronage through the Councils. 

These were weighty arguments and, indeed, we saw many of 
them justified in the middle ’twenties when the Swaraj Party 
went into the Councils. And yet one cannot help wondering 
what would have happened if the Congress had set itself to 



lOO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

capture the legislatures in 1920. There can be no doubt that, 
supported as it was by the Khilafat Committee, it would have 
woti almost every elective seat in the provincial Councils as well 
as in the central Assembly. To-day (August 1934) there is again 
talk of the Congress putting up candidates for the Assembly, 
and a Parliamentary Board has been set up. But much has hap- 
pened since igao to deepen the fissures in our social and 
political fabric, and whatever may be the measure of success 
of the Congress in the coming elections, it can hardly be what 
it might have been in igso. 

On my discharge from gaol I co-operated with a few others who 
were trying to bring about an understanding between the rival 
groups. We met with little success, and I was fed up with the 
pro-changc and no-change politics. As secretary of the U.P. Pro- 
vincial Congress Committee I devoted myself to the work of 
Congress organi-sation. There was much to be done after the 
shake-up of the past year, I worked hard, but I worked with 
little purpose. Mentally I was at a loose end. Soon a new field 
of activity opened out before me. Within a few weeks of my 
release I was pitcljfijfked into the headship of the Allahabad 
Municipality. This election was so uncKpected that forty-five 
minutes before the event no one had mentioned my name, or 
perhaps even thought of me, in this connection. But at the last 
moment it was felt on the Congress side that I was the only 
person of their group who was certain of success. 

It so happened that year that leading Congressmen all over 
the country became presidents of municipalities. Mr. C, R. Das 
became the first Mayor of Calcutta, Mr. Vithalbhai Patel the 
President of Bombay Corporafion, Sardar Vallabbhai Patel of 
Ahmedabad. In the United Provinces most of the big muni- 
cipalities had Congressmen for their chairman. 

Municipal work in all its varied forms began to interest me, 
and I gave more and more time to it. Some of its problems 
fascinated me. I studied the subject and developed ambitious 
notions of municipal reform. I was to find out later that there 
is little room for ambition or startling development in Indian 
munidpalities as they are constituted to-day. Still, there was 
room for work and a cleaning and speeding-up of the machine, 
and I worked hard enough at it Just then my Congress work 
was growing, and in addition to the provincial secretaryship I 
was made the All-India Secretary also. These various jobs often 
made me work fifteen hours a day, and the end of the day found 
me thoroughly exhausted. ‘ 

On my return home firom gaol the first letter that met my eyes 



OUjl again lol 

was one from Sir Grimwood Mears, the then Chief Justice of 
the Allahabad High Court. The letter had been written before 
my discharge, but evidently in the knowledge that it was coming. 
I was a little surprised at the cordiality of his language and his 
invitation to me to visit him frequently. I hardly knew him. 
He had just come to Allahabad in 1919 when I was drifting 
away from legal practice. I think I argued only one case before 
him, and that was my last one in the High Court. For some 
reason or other he developed a partiality for me without knowing 
much about me. He had an idea — ^he told me .so later — that I 
would go far, and he wanted to be a wholesome inffuence on me 
to make me appreciate the British view-point. His method was 
subtle. He was of opinion, and there are many Englishmen who 
still think so, that the average 'extremist' politician in India 
had become anti-British because in the social sphere he had been 
treated badly by Englishmen. This had led to resentment and 
bitterness and extremism. There is a story, which has been 
repeated by responsible persons, to the effect that my father was 
refused election to an English club and this made him anti- 
British and extremist. The story is wholly without foundation 
and is a distortion of an entirely different incident.* But to many 
an Englishman such instances, whether true or not, afford a 
simple and sufficient explanation of the origins of the nationalist 
movement. As a matter of fact neither my father nor I had any 
particular grievance on this score. As individuals we had usually 
met with courtesy from the Englishman and we got on well tvith 
him, though, like all Indians, we were no doubt racially conscious 
of subjection, and resented it bitterly. I must confess that even 
to-day I get on very well with an Englishman, unless he happens 
to be an official and wants to patronise me, and even then there 
is no lack of humour in our contacts. Probably I have more in 
common with him than the Liberals or others who co-operate 
with him politically in India. 

Sir Grimwood's idea was to root out this original cause of 
bitterness by friendly intercourse and frank and courteous treat- 
ment. 1 saw him several times. On the pretext of objecting to 
some municipal tax he would come to see me and discuss other 
matters. On one occasion he made quite an onslaught on the 
Indian Liberals— timid, weak-kneed opportunists wilfr no char- 
acter or backbone, he called them, and his language was stronger 
and full of contempt. " Do you think we have any respect for 
them^ " he said. I wondered why he spoke to me in this way; 

* See the footnote in Chapter XXXVIII for a fuller account of 
th 5 «' 



102 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

probably because he thought that this kind of talk might please 
me. And then he led up the conversation to the new Councils 
and their Ministers and the opportunities these Ministers had 
for serving their country. Education was one of the most vital 
problems before the country. Would not an Education Minister, 
with freedom to act as he chose, have a worthy opportunity to 
mould the destinies of millions, the chance of a lifetime? Sup- 
pose, he went on, a man like you, ivith intelligence, character, 
ideals, and the energy to push them through, was in charge of 
education for the province, could you not perform wonders? 
And he assured me, adding that he had seen the Governor 
recently, that I would be given perfect freedom to work out my 
policy. Then realising, perhaps, that he had gone too far, he 
said that he could not, of course, commit anybody officially, and 
the suggestion he had made was a personal one. 

I was diverted by Sir Grimwood’s diplomatic and roundabout 
approach to the proposal he had made. The idea of my associat- 
ing myself with the Government as a Ministei* was unthinkable 
for me i indeed, it was hateful to me. But I have often yearned, 
then as well as in later years, for a chance to do some solid, 
positive, constructive work. Destruction and agitation and non- 
co-operation are hardly normal activities for human beings. And 
yet, such is our fate, that we can only reach the land where we 
can build after passing through the deserts of conflict and 
destruction. And it may be that most of us will spend our 
energies and our lives in struggling and panting through those 
shifting sands, and the building will have to be done by our 
children or our children’s children. 

Ministries were going cheap in those days, in the United Pro- 
vinces at least. The two Liberal Ministers, who had functioned 
throughout the non<o-operation period, had gone. When the 
Congress movement threatened the existing order, the Govern- 
ment tried to exploit the Liberal Ministers in fighting Congress. 
They were respected then and treated with honour by the 
executive government, for it was something to hold them ^ in 
those days of trouble, as supporters of the Government, "ftey 
thought, perhaps, that this respect and honour were due to them 
as of right, not realising that this was but a reaction on the part 
of Government to the mass attack of the Congress. When that 
attack was drawn off the value of the Liberal Ministers fell 
heavily in the eyes of Government, and the respea and honour 
were suddenly conspicuous by their absence. The Ministers re- 
sented this^ but this availed them little, and soon they were 
forced to resign. Then began a search for new Ministers, and 



OUT AGAIN 


103 

this was not immediately successful. The handful of Liberals 
in the Council kept aloof in sympathy with their colleagues 
who had been unceremoniously thrown out. Of the others, 
mostly zamindars, there were few who could be called even 
moderately educated. The Congress having boycotted the 
Councils, a curious assortment of people had got in. 

There is a story of a person who was offered a ministership in 
the U.P. about this time, or perhaps a little later. He is reported 
to have replied that he was not vain enough to consider himself 
an unusually clever man, but he did think himself to be moder- 
ately intelligent and, perhaps, a little above the average, and he 
hoped that he had that reputation. Did the Government want 
him to accept a ministership and thus proclaim himself to the 
world to be a damned fool? 

This protest had some justification. The Liberal Ministers had 
been narrow-minded with no broad vision of politics or social 
affairs, but that was the fault of the sterile Liberal creed. They 
had, however, the ability of professional men, and they did their 
routine work conscientiously. Some of those who followed them 
in office came from the ranks of the zamindars, and their edu- 
cation, even in the formal sense, had been strictly limited. I 
think they might justly have been called literate, and nothing 
more. It almost seemed that the Governor chose these gentle- 
men and put them in high office to display the utter incapacity 
of Indians. Of them it might well have been said that : 

“ Fortune advanced thee that all might aver 
That nothing is impossible to her.” ‘ 

Educated or not, these Ministera had the zamindar vote with 
them, and they could give delightful garden parties to the high 
officials. What worthier use could be made of the money that 
came to them from their starving tenantry? 


‘ Richard Garnett. 



XV 


DOUBT AND CONFLICT 

I OCCUPIED myself with many activities and sought thereby to 
keep away from the problems that troubled me. But there was 
no escape from them, no getting away from the questions that 
were always being formed in my mind and to which I could 
find no satisfactory answer. Action now was partly an attempt to 
run away from myself ; no longer was it a wholehearted expres- 
sion of the self as it had been in 1920 and 1921. I came out of the 
shell that had protected me then and looked round at the Indian 
scene as well as at the world outside. I found many changes that 
I had not so far noticed, new ideas, new conflicts, and instead of 
light I saw a growing confusion. My faith in Gandhiji’s leader- 
ship remained, but I began to examine some parts of his pro- 
gramme more critically. But he was in prison and beyond our 
reach, and his advice could not be taken. Neither of the two 
Congress parties then functioning~the Council party and the 
No-changers — attracted me. The former was obviously veering 
towards reformism and constitutionalism, and these seemed to 
me to lead to a blind alley. The No-changers were supposed to 
he the ardent followers of the Mahatma, but like most disciples 
of the great, they prized the letter of the teaching more than 
the spirit. There was nothing dynamic about them, and in 
practice most of them were inoffensive and pious social re- 
formers. But they had one advantage. They kept in touch with 
the peasant masses, while the Swarajists in the Councils were 
wholly occupied with parliamentary tactics. 

Deshbandhu Das tried, soon after my discharge from prison, 
to convert me to the Swarajist creed. I did not succumb to his 
advocacy, though I was by no means clear as to what I should do. 
It is curious and rather remarkable, but characteristic of him, 
that my father, who was at the time very keen on the Swaraj 
Party, never tried to press me or influence me in that direction. 
It was obvious that be would have been very pleased if I had 
joined him in his campaign, but with extraordinary considera- 
tion for me, he left me to myself so far as this subject was 
concerned. 

During this period there grew up a close friendship between 
my father and Mr. C. R. Das. It was something much more 
than political camaraderie. There was a warmth and intimacy 

104 



DOUBT AND CONFLICT IO5 

in it that I was not a little surprised to notice, since intimate 
friendships are perhaps rarely formed at advanced ages. My 
father had a host of acquaintances, and. had the gift of laughing 
his way through them, but he was chary of friendship, and 
in later years he had grown rather cynical. And yet between 
him and Deshbandhu the barriers seemed to fall, and they took 
each other to heart. My father was nine years older, but was, 
physically, probably the stronger and the healthier of the two. 
Though both had the same background of legal training and 
success at the Bar, they differed in many ways. Mr. Das, in spite 
of being a lawyer, was a poet and had a poet’s emotional 
outlook — believe he has written fine poetry in Bengali. He was 
an orator, and he had a religious temperament. My father was 
more practical and prosaic; he was a great organiser, and he had 
little of religion in him. He had always been a fighter, reac^ to 
receive and give hard blows. Those whom he considered mols 
he suffered not at all, or at any rate not gladly ; and opposition 
he could not tolerate. It seemed to him a challenge requiring 
the use of a broom. The two, my fether and Deshbandhu, unlike 
in some ways as they were, fitted in and made a remarkable and 
efective combination for the leadership of a party, each in 
some measure supplying the other’s deficiencies. And between 
the two of them there was absolute .confidence, so much so 
that each had authorised the other to use his name for any 
statement or declaration, even without previous referoice or 
consultation. 

It was this personal factor that went a long way to establish 
the Swaraj Party firmly and give it strength and prestige in the 
country. From the earliest days there were fissiparous tendencies 
in it, for many careerists and opportunists had been drawn into 
it by the possibilities of personal advancement through the 
Councils. There were also some genuine moderates in it who 
were inclined to more co-operation with the Government. As 
soon as these tendencies appeared on tlie surface after the 
elections, they were denounced by the Party leadership. My 
father declared that he would not hesitate ‘ to cut off a diseased 
limb ’ firom the Party, he acted up to this declaration. 

From 1933 onwards I found a great deal of solace and happi- 
ness in family life, though I gave little time to it. I have been 
fortunate in my family relatitmships, and in times of strain and 
difficulty they have soothed me and sheltered me. I realised, 
with some shame at my own unworthiness in this respect, how 
much I owed to my wife for her splendid behaviour since ipao. 
Proud and sensitive as she was, she had not only pat up with 



lo6 JAWAHARLAU NEHRU 

my vagaries but brought me comfort and solace when I needed 
them most. 

Our style of living had undergone some change since 1920. 
It was much simpler, and the number of servants had been 
greatly reduced. Even so, it was not lacking in any essential 
comfort. Partly to get rid of superfluities and partly to raise 
money for current expenditure, many things had been sold off- 
horses and carriages, and household articles which did not fit in 
with our new style of living. Part of our furniture had been 
seized and sold by the police. For lack of furniture and gar- 
deners, our house lost its prim and clean appearance, and the 
garden went wild. For nearly three years little attention had 
been paid to house or garden. Having become accustomed to a 
lavish scale of expenditure, father disliked many economies. He 
decided therefore to go in for chamber practice in his spare time 
and thus earn some money. He had very little spare tune, but, 
even so, he managed to earn a fair amount. 

I felt uncomfortable and a little unhappy at having to depend 
financially on father. Ever since I had given up my legal practice 
I had practically no income of my own, except 'a trifle from 
some dividends on shares. My wife and I did not spend much. 
Indeed, I was quite surprised to find how little we spent. This 
was one of the discoveries made by me in 1921 which brought 
me wear satisfaction. Khadi clothes and third-class railway 
travdling demand little money. I did not fully realise then, living 
as we did with father, that tnere are innumerable other house- 
hold expenses which mount up to a considerable figure. Anyhow, 
the fear of not having money has never troubled me ; I sup- 
pose I could earn enough in case of necessity, and we can do 
with relatively little. 

We were not much of a burden on father, and even a hint of 
this kind would have pained him greatly. Yet I disliked my 
position, and for the next three years 1 thought over the problem 
without finding a solution. There was no great difficulty in my 
finding paying work, but the acceptance of any such work 
necessitated my giving up or, at any rate, my curtailing the 
public work I was doing. So far I had given all my working time 
to Congress work and Municipal work. I did noc like to with- 
draw from them for the sake of making money. So I refused 
offen, financially very advantageous, fi:om big industrial firms. 
Probably they were willing to pay heavily, not so much for 
my competence as for the opportunity to exploit my name. I did 
not lite the idea of being associated with big-industry in this 
way. To go back to the profession of law was also out of the 



DOUBT AKD CONFLICT IO7 

question for me. My dislike for it had grown and kept on 
growing. 

A suggestion was made in the 1934 Congress that the General 
Secretaries should be paid. I happened to be one of the secre- 
taries then, and I welcomed the proposal. It seemed to me quite 
wrong to expect whole-time work from any one without paying 
him a maintenance allowance at least. Otherwise some person 
with private means has to be chosen, and such gentlemen of 
leisure are not perhaps always politically desirable, nor can they 
be held responsible for the work. The Congress would not have 
paid much; our rates of payment were low enough. But there 
is in India an extraordinary and thoroughly unjustified preju- 
dice against receiving salaries from public funds (though not 
from the State), and my father strongly objected to my doing so. 
My co-secretary, who was himself in great need of money, also 
considered it below his dignity to accept it from the Congress. 
And so I, who had no dignity in the matter and was perfectly 
prepared to accept a salary, had to do without it. 

Once only I spoke to father on the subject and told him how 
I disliked the idea of my financial dependence, I put it to him 
as gently and indirectly as possible so as not to hurt him. He 
pointed out to me how foolish it would be of me to spend my 
tinie, or most of it, in earning a little money, instead of doing 
public work. It was far easier for him to earn with a few days’ 
work all that my wife and I would require for a year. The argu- 
ment was weighty, but it left me unsatisfied. However, I con- 
tinued to act in consonance tvith it. 

These family affairs and financial worries carried us from the 
beginning of 1933 to the end of 1925. Meanwhile the political 
situation had been changing and, almost against my will, I was 
dragged into various combinations and acceptance of responsible 
office in the All-India Congress. The position in 1923 was a 
peculiar one. Mr. C. R, Das had been the President of tire 
preceding Congress at Gaya. As such, he was the ex-officio 
Chairman of me All-India Congress Committee for the year 
1933. But in this Committee there was a majority against him 
and the Swarajist policy, though the majority was a small one, 
and the two groups were pretty evenly balanced. Matters came 
to a head in the early summer of 1933 at a meeting of the 
A,I.C,C. in Bombay, Mr. Das resigned from the chairmanship, 
and a small centre group emerged and formed the new Working 
Committee. This centre group had no backing whatever in the 
A.I.C.C., and could only exist with the goodwill of one of the 
two main parties. Allied to either, it could just defeat the other. 



I08 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Dr. Ansari was the new President, and I was one of the 
secretaries. 

We soon got into trouble on both sides. Gujrat, which was a 
no-change stronghold, refused to carry out some of the directions 
of the central oflBce. Late in the summer of the same year 
another meeting of the A.I.C.C. was held, this time in Nagpur, 
where the National Flag Satyagraha was being carried on. 
Our Working Committee, representing the unfortunate Centre 
Group, came to an end here after a brief and inglorious career. 
It had to go because it repre.sented nobody in particular, and it 
tried to boss it over those who held the real power in the Con- 
gress organisation. The resignation was brought about by the 
failure of an attempt to censure Gujrat for its indiscipline. I 
remember how gladly I sent in my resignation and how relieved 
I felt. Even a short experience of party manoeuvres had been too 
much for me, and I was quite shocked at the way some promi- 
nent Congressmen could intrigue. 

At this meeting Mr. C. R. Das accused me of being 'cold- 
blooded ’. I suppose he was right ; it depends on the standard 
used for comparison. Compared to many of my friends and 
colleagues I am cold-blooded. And yet I have always been afraid 
of being submerged in or swept away by too much sentiment 
or emotion or temper. For years I have tried my hardest to 
become 'cold-blooded’, and I fear that the success that has 
attended me in this respect has been superficial only. 



XVI 


AN INTERLUDE AT NABHA 

The tug-of-war between the Swarajists and the No-changers 
went on, the former gradually gaining. Another stage, marking 
a Swarajist advance, was reached at a special session of the 
Congress held at Delhi in the autumn of 1933. It was 
immediately after this Congress that I had a strange and un- 
expected adventure. 

The Sikhs, and especially the Akalis among them, had been 
coming into repeated conflict with the Government in the Pun- 
jab. A revivalist movement among them had taken it upon 
Itself to purge their Gurdwaras by driving out corrupt Mahants 
and taking possession of the places of worship and the property 
belonging to them.' The Government intervened and there was 
conflict. The Gurdwara movenient was partly due to the general 
awakening caused by non-co-operation, and the methods of the 
Akalis were modelled on non-violent Satyagraha. Many incidents 
took place, but chief among them was the famous Guru-ka-Bagh 
struggle, where scores of Sikhs, many of them eac-soldiers, 
allovired themselves to be brutally beaten by the police without 
raising their hands or turning back flom their mission. India 
was startled by this amazing display of tenacity and courage. ‘ 
The Gurdwara Committee was declared illegal oy the Govern- 
ment, and the struggle continued for some years and ended in 
the victory of the Sikhs. The Congress was naturally sympa- 
thetic, and for some time it had a special liaison officer in 
Amritsar to keep in close touch with the Akali movement. 

The incident to which I am going to refer had little to do with 
this general Sikh movement, but there is no doubt that it 
occurred because of this Sikh upheaval. The rulers of two Sikh 
States in the Punjab, Patiala, and Nabha, had a bitter, personal 
quarrel which resulted ultimately in the deposition of the 
Maharaja of Nabha by the Government of India. A British 
Administrator was appointed to rule the Nabha State. This 
deposition was resented by the Sikhs, and they agitated against 
it both in Nabha and outside. In the course of diis agitation, 
a religious ceremony, at a place called Jaito in Nabha State, was 
stopped by the new Administrator. To protest against this, and 
with the declared object of continuing the interrupted cere- 
mony, the Sikhs began sending jathas (batches of men) to Jaito; 

ICO 



no JAWAHARLAL NEHBU 

These jathas were stopped, beaten by the police, arrested, and 
usually carried to an out-oTthe-way place in the jungle and left 
there. I had been reading accounts of these beatings from, time 
to time, and when I learnt at Delhi, immediately after the 
Special Congress, that another jatha was going and I was in- 
vited to come and see what happened, I gladly accepted the 
invitation. It meant the loss of only a day to me, as Jaito was 
near Delhi. Two of my Congre.ss colleagues — ^A. T. Gidwani and 
K, Santanum of Madras — accompanied me. The jatha marched 
most of the way. It was arranged that we should go to the 
nearest railway station and then try to reach by road the Nabha 
boundary near Jaito just when the jatiin was due to arrive there. 
We arrived in time, having come in a country cart, and followed 
the jatha, keeping apart from it. On arrival at Jaito the jatha 
was stopped by the police, and immediately an order was served 
on me, signed by the English Administrator, calling upon me 
not to enter Nabha territory, and if I had entered it, to leave it 
immediately, A similar order was served on Gidwani and 
Santanum, but without their names being mentioned, as the 
Nabha authorities did not know them. My colleagues and I told 
the police officer that we were there not as part of the jatha but 
as spectators, and it was not our intention to break any of the 
Nabha laws. Besides, when we were already in the Nabha ter- 
ritories there could be no question of our not entering them, 
and obviously we could not vanish suddenly into thin air. 
Probably the next train from Jaito went many hours later. So 
for the present, we told him, we proposed to remain there. We 
were immediately arrested and taken to the lock-up. After our 
removal the jatha was dealt with in the usual manner. 

We were kept the whole day in the lock-up and in the evening 
we were marched to the station. Santanum and I were hand- 
cuffed together, his left wrist to my right one, and a 
attached to the handcuff was held by the policeman leading us. 
Gidwani, also handcuffed and chained, brought up the rear. 
This march of ours down the streets of Jaito town reminded me 
forably of a dog being led on by a chain. We felt somewhat 
Irritated to begin with, but the humour of the situation dawned 
upon us, and on the whole we enjoyed the experience. We did 
not OTjoy night that followed. This was partly spent in 
crowded third-class compartments in slow-moving trains, with 
A « S’ midnight, and partly in a lock-up at Nabha. 

this ttme, till the forenoon of next day, when we were finally 
delivered up at the Nabha Gaol, the joint handcuff and the 
heavy chain kept us company. Neither of us could move at all 



AN INTaxiLDUK AT NABhA 


III 


without the other’s co-operation. To be bandcufi'ed to another 
person for a whole night and part of a day is not an experience 
I should like to repeat. 

In Nabha Gaol we were all three kept in a most unwholesome 
and insanitary cell. It was small and damp, with a low ceiling 
which we could almost touch. At night we slept on the floor, 
and I would wake up with a start, full of horror, to find that a 
rat or a mouse had just' passed over my face. 

Two or three days later we were taken to court for our case, 
and the most extraordinary and Gilbertian proceedings went on 
there from day to day. The magistrate or judge seemed to he 
wholly uneducated. He knew no English, of course, but I doubt 
if he knew how to write the court language, Urdu. We watched 
him for over a week, and during all this time he never wrote a 
line. If he wanted to write anything he made the court reader 
do it. We put in a number of small applications. He did not 
pass any orders on them at the time. He kept them and pro- 
duced them the next day with a note written by somebody else 
on them. We did not formally defend ourselves. We had got 
so used to not defending cases in court during the non-co- 
operation movement that the idea of defence, even when 
it was manifestly permissible, seemed almost indecent. But 
I gave the court a long statement containing the facts, as well 
as my own opinion about Nahha ways, especially under British 
administration. 

Our case was dragging on firom day to day although it was a 
simple enough affair. Suddenly there was a diversion. One after- 
noon after the court had risen for the day we were kept waiting 
in the building; and late in the evening, at about 7 p.ra., we were 
taken to another room where a person was sitting by a table 
and there were some other people about. One man, our old friend 
the police officer who had arrested us at Jaito, was there, and he 
got up and began making a statement, I inquired where we 
were and what was happening. I was informed that it was a 
court-room .and we were being tried for conspiracy. This was an 
entirely different proceeding firom the one we had so for at- 
tended, which was for breadi of the order not to enter Nabha 
territory. It was evidently thought that the maximum sentence 
for this breach being only six months was not enough punish- 
ment for us and a more serious charge was necessary. Apparently 
three were not enough for conspiracy, and so a fourth man, who 
had absolutely nothing to do with us, was arrested and put on his 
trial with us. This unhapj^y man, a Sikh, was not known to us, 
but we had just seen him m the fields on our Way to Jaito. 



II2 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The lawyer in me was rather taken aback by the casu alness 
with which a conspiracy trial had been started. The case t^s a 
totally false oheTiJUt decency required that some formalities 
should be observed. I pointedout to the judge that we had had 
no notice whatever and that we might have wanted to make 
arrangements for our defence. This did not worry him at all. It 
was the Nabha way. If we wanted to engage a lawyer for our 
defence we could chose some one in Nabha. When I suggested 
that I might want some lawyer from outside I was told that this 
was not permitted under the Nabha rules. We were fiirther 
enlightened about the peculiarities of Nabha procedure. In 
some disgust we told the judge to do what he liked, but so far 
as we were concerned we would take no part in the proceedings. 
I could not wholly adhere to this resolve. It was difficult to listen 
to the most astounding lies about us and remain silent, and so 
occasionally we expressed our opinion, briefly but pointedly, 
about the witnesses. We also gave the court a statement in writ- 
ing about the facts. This second judge, who tried the conspiracy 
case, was more educated and intelligent than the other one. 

Both these cases went on and we looked forward to our daily 
visits to the two courts-rooms, for that meant a temporary escape 
from the foul cell in gaol. Meanwhile, we were approached, on 
behalf of the Administrator, by the Superintendent of the'gaol, 
and told that if we would express our regret and give an under- 
taking to go away from Nabha, the proceedings against us would 
be dropped. We replied that there was nothing to express regret 
about, so far as we were concerned; it was for the administra- 
tion to apologise to us. We were also not prepared to give any 
undertaking. ® ^ 

About a fortnight after our arrest the two trials at last ended. 
All this lime had been, taken up by the prosecution, for we were 
not defending. Much of it had been wasted in long waits, for 
every little difficulty that arose necessitated an adjournment or 
a reference to^ some authority behind the scenes — ^probably the 
English Administrator. On the last day when the prosecution 
case was closed we handed in our written statements. The first 
com adjourned and, to our surprise, returned a little later with 
a bulky judgment written out in Urdu. Obviously this huge 
pdgment could not have been written during the interval. It 
Md been prepared before our statements had been handed in. 
Ihe judgment was not read out; we were merely told that we 
had been awarded the maximum sentence of six months for 
breach of the order to leave Nabha territory. 

In the conspiracy case we were sentenced the same day to 



AN INTiHLUOJi, AT NABtlA 1 I 3 

either eighteen months or two years, I forget which. This was to 
be in addition to the sentence for six months. Thus we were 
given in all either two years or two and a half years. 

Right through our trial there had been any number of 
remarkable incidents which gave us some insight into the re- 
alities of Indian State administration, or rather the British 
administration of an Indian State. TTie whole procedure was 
farcical. Because of this I suppose no newspaperman or outsider 
was allowed in court. The police did what they pleased, and 
often ignored the judge or magistrate and actually disobeyed 
his directions. The poor magistrate meekly put up with this, 
but we saw no reason why we should do so. On several occasions 
I had to stand up and insist on the police behaving and obeying 
the magistrate. Sometimes there was an unseemly snatching of 
papers hy the police, and the magistrate, being incapable of 
action or of introducing order in his own court, we had partly 
to do his job ! The poor magistrate was in an imhappy position. 
He was afraid of the police, and he seemed to be a little 
frightened of us, too, for our arrest had been noised in the 
press. If this was the state of affairs when more or less pro- 
minent politicians like us w^e concerned, what, I wonder, would 
be the fate of others less known? 

My father knew something of Indian States, and so he was 
greatly upset at my tmexpected arrest in Nabha. Only the fact 
of arrest was known; little else in the way of news could leak 
out. In his distress he even telegraphed to the Viceroy for news 
of me. Difficulties were put in the way of his visiting me in 
Nabha, but he was’ allowed at last to interview me in prison. He 
could not be of any help to me, as I was not defending myself, 
and I begged him to go back to Allahabad and not to worry. He 
returned, but he left a young lawyer colleague of ours, Kapil 
Dev Malaviya, in Nabha to watch the proceedings. Kapil Dev’s 
knowledge of law and procedure must have been considerably 
augmented by his brief experience of the Nabha Courts. The 
poHce tried to deprive him forcibly in open court of some papers 
that he had. ' 

Most of the Indian States are well known for their, back- 
wardness and their semi-ffiudal conditions. They are personal 
autocracies, devoid even of competence or benevolence. Many 
a strange thing occurs there whida never receives publidty. And 
yet their very inefficiency lessens the evil in some ways and 
lightens the burden, on. their unhappy people. For this is re- 
flected in a weak executive, and it results in making even tyranny 
and injustice inefficient. That does not make tyranny more 



1 14 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

bearable, but it does make it less far-reaching and widespread. 
Ihe assumption of direct British control over an Indian State 
has a curious result in changing this equilibrium. The semi- 
feudal conditions are retained, autberaejr is kept, the old laws 
and procedure are still supposed to function, all the restrictions 
on personal liberty and association and expression of opinion 
(and these are all-embracing) continue, but one change is made 
which alters the whole background. The executive becomes 
stronger and a measure of effiaency is introduced, and this leads 
to a tightening-up of all the feudal and autocratic bonds. In 
course of time the British administration would no doubt 
change some of the archaic customs and methods, for they come 
in the way of efficient government as well as commercial pene- 
tration. But to begin with they take full advantage of them to 
tighten their hold on the people who have now to put up not 
only with feudalism and autocracy, but with an efficient enforce- 
ment of them by a strong executive. 

I saw something of this in Nabha. The State was under a 
British Administrator, a member of the Indian Civil Service, 
and he had the full powers of an autocrat, subject only to the 
Government of India. And yet at every turn we were referred 
to Nabha laws and procedure to justify the denial of the most 
ordinary rights. We had to face a combination of feudalism 
and the modem bureaucratic machine with the disadvantages of 
of both and the advantages of neither. 

So our trial was over and we had been sentenced. We did not 
know what the judgments contained, but the solid fact of a long 
sentence had a sobering effect. We asked for copies of the 
jud^ents, and were told to apply formally for them. 

Tnat evening in gaol the Superintendent sent for us and 
showed us an order of the Administrator under the Criminal 
Procedure Code suspending our sentences. There was no con- 
dition attached, and the legal result of that order was that the 
sentences ended so far as we were concerned. The Superintendent 
then produced a separate order called an Executive Order, also 
issued by the Administrator, asking us to leave Nabha and not to 
return to the State without special permission. I asked for the 
copies of the two orders, but they were refused. We were then 
escorted to the railway station and released there. We did not 
know a soul in Nabha, and even the city gates had been closed 
for the night. We found that a train was leaving soon for 
Ambala, and'we took this. From Ambala I went on to Delhi and 
Allahabad. 

From Allahabad I wrote to the Administrator requesting him 



AN INTERLUDE AT NABHA II5 

to send me copies of his two orders, so that I might know exactly 
what they were, also copies of the two judgments. He refused 
to supply any of these copies. I pointed out that I might decide 
to file an ^peal, but he persisted in his refusal. In spite of 
repeated efforts I have never had the opportunity to read these 
judgments, wrhich sentenced me and my two colleagues to two 
years or two and a half years. For aught I know, these sentences 
may still be hanging over me, and may take effect whenever 
the Nabha authorities or the British Government so choose. 

The three of us were discharged in this ‘ suspended ' way, but 
I could never find out what had happened to the fourth mem- 
ber of the alleged consjpiracy, the Sikh who had been tacked on 
to us for the second trial. Very likely he was not discharged. 
He had no powerful friends or public interest to help him and, 
like many another person, he sank into the oblivion of a State 
prison. He was not forgotten by us. We did what we could and 
this was very little, and, I believe, the Gurdwara Committee 
interested itself in his case also. We found out that he was one 
of the old ‘ Komagata Maru ’ lot, and he had only recently come 
out of prison after a long period. The police do not believe in 
leaving such people out, and so they tacked him on to the 
trumped-up charge against us. 

All three of us — Gidwani, Samamim and I — ^brought an un- 
pleasant companion with us firom our cell in Nabha Gaol. This 
was the typhus germ, and each one of us had an attack of 
typhoid. Mine was severe and for a while dangerous enough, 
but it was the lightest of the three, and I was only bed-ridden 
for about three or four weeks, but the other two were very 
seriously ill for long periods. 

There was yet another sequel to this Nabha episode. Probably 
six months, or more, later Gidwani was acting as the Congress 
representative in Amritsar, keeping in touch with the Sikh 
Gurdwara Committee. The Committee sent a special jatha of 
five hundred persons to Jaito, and Gidwani decided to accom- 
pany it as an observer to the Nabha border. He had no intention 
of entering Nabha territory. The jatha was fired on by the 
police near the border, and many persons were, I believe, killed 
and wounded. Gidwani went to die help of the wounded when 
he was pounced upon by the police and taken away. No pro- 
ceedings in court were taken against him. He was simply kept 
in prison for the best part of a year when, utterly broken in 
health, he was discharged, 

Gidwani’s arrest and confinement seemed to me to be a mon- 
strous abuse of executive authority. I wrote to , the Adminis- 



JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 


Il6 

trator (who was still the same English member of the I.C.S.) 
and asked him why Gidwani had been treated in this way. He 
replied that Gidwani had been imprisoned because he had 
broken the order not to enter Nabha territory without per- 
mission. I challenged the legality of this as well as, of course, 
the propriety of arresting a man who was giving succour to 
the wounded, and I asked the Administrator to send me or pub- 
lish a copy of the order in question. He refused to do so. I felt 
inclined to go to Nabha myself and allow the Administrator 
to treat me as he had treated Gidwani. Loyalty to a colleague 
seemed to demand it. But many friends thought otherwise and 
dissuaded me. I took shelter behind the advice of friends, and 
made of it a pretext to cover my own weakness. For, after all, 
it was my weakness and disinclination to go to Nabha Gaol again 
that kept me away, and I have always felt a little ashamed of 
thus deserting a colleague. As often with us all, discretion was 
preferred to valour. 



XVII 


COCONADA AND M. MOHAMAD ALI 

In December 1933 the annual session of the Congress was held 
at Coconada in the South. Maulana Mohamad Ali was the 
President and, as was his wont, he delivered an enormously long 
presidential address. But it was an interesting one. He traced 
the growth of political and communal feeling amon^ the Mos- 
lems and showed how the famous Moslem deputation to the 
Viceroy in 1908, under the leadership of the Aga Khan, which 
led to the first official declaration in favour of separate elector- 
ates, was a command performance and had been engineered by 
the Government itself. 

Mohamad Ali induced me, much against my will, to accept 
the All-India Congress secretaryship for his year of president- 
ship. I had no desire to accept executive responsibQity, when 
I was not clear about future policy. But I could not resist 
Mohamad Ali, and both of us felt that some other secretary 
might not be able to work as harmoniously with the new Presi- 
dent as I could. He had strong Ukes and dislikes, and I was 
fortunate enough to be included in his ‘likes’. A bond of 
affection and mutual appreciation tied us to each other. He was 
deeply and, as I considered, most irrationally religious, and I was 
not, but I was attracted by his earnestness, his over-flowing 
energy and keen intelligence. He had a nimble wit, but some- 
times his devastating sarcasm hurt, and he lost many a fiiend 
thereby. It was quite impossible for him to keep a clever remark 
to himself, whatever the consequences might be. 

We got on well together during his year of office, though we 
had many little points of difierence. I introduced in our A.I.C.C. 
office a practice of addressing all our members by their names 
only, without any prefixes or suffixes, honorific titles and the like. 
There ate so many of these m India — Mahatma, Maulana, Pan- 
dit, Shaikh, Syed, Mimshi, Kfoulvi, and latterly Sriyut and Shri, 
and, of course, Mr. and Esquire — and they are so abhndantly 
and often unnecessarily used that 1 wanted to set a good example. 
But I was not to have my way. Mohamed Ali sent me a frantic 
telegram directing me 'as:pr«ident’ to revert to our old prac- 
tice and, in particular, always to address Gandhi ji as Mahatma. 

Another firequent subject for argum^t between us was the 
Almighty. Mohamed Afi had an extrfiordinary way of hrin^g 

117 



Il8 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

in some reference to God even in Congress resolutions, either by 
way of expressing gratitude or some kind of prayer. I used to 
protest, and then he would shout at me for my irreligion. And 
yet, curiously enough, he would tell me later that he was quite 
•sure that I was fundamentally religious, in spite of my super- 
ficial behaviour or my declaradons to the contrary, I have often 
wondered how much truth there was in his statement. Perhaps 
it depends on what is meant by religion and religious. 

I avoided discussing this subject of religion with him, because 
I knew we would only irritate each other, and I might hurt him. 
It is always a difficult subject to discuss with convinced believers 
of any creed. With most Moslems it is probably an even harder 
matter for discussion, since no latitude of thought is officially 
permitted to them. Ideologically, theirs is a straight and narrow 
path, and the believer must not swerve to the right or the 
left. Hindus are somewhat different, though not always so. In 
practice they may be very orthodox; they may, and do, indulge 
in the most out-or-date, reactionary and even pernicious customs, 
and yet they will usually be prepared to discuss the most radical 
ideas about religion. I imagine the modern Arya Samajists have 
not, as a rule, this wide intellectual approach. Like the Moslems, 
they follow their own straight and narrow path. There is a 
certain philosophical tradition among the intelligent Hindus, 
which, though it does not affect practice, does make a difference 
to the ideological approach to a religious question. Partly, I 
suppose, this is due to the wide and often conflicting variety 
of opinions and customs that are included in the Hindu fold. 
It has, indeed, often been remarked that Hinduism is hardly 
a religion in the usual sense of the word. And yet, what amazing 
tenacity it has got, what tremendous power of survival I One 
may even be a professing atheist — as the old Hindu philosopher, 
Charvaka, was — and yet no one dare say that he has ceased to 
be a Hindu. Hinduism clings on to its children, almost despite 
them. A Brahman I was bom, and a Brahman I seem to remain 
whatever I might say or do in regard to religion or social cus- 
tom. To the Indian world I am ‘ Pandit ’ so and so, in spite of 
my desire not to have this or any other honorific title attached 
to niy name. I remember meeting a Turkish scholar once in 
Switprland, to whom I had sent previously a letter of intro- 
duction in which I had been referred to as ‘ Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehm He was surprised and a little disappointed to see me 
for, as he told me, the ' Pandit ’ had led him to expect a reverend 
and scholarly gentleman of advanced years. 

So Mohamad Ali and 1 did not discuss religion. But he did 



COCONADA AND M- MOHAMAD ALI I Ip 

not possess the virtue of silence, and some years later (I think 
this was in 1925 or early in 1926) he could not repress himself 
on this subject any more. He burst out one day, as I was visiting 
him in his house in Delhi, and said that he insisted on discussing 
religion with me. I tried to dissuade him, pointing out that our 
view-points were very different, and we were not likely to make 
much impression on each other. But he was not going to be 
diverted. “ We must have it out,” he said. “ I suppose you think 
that I am a fanatic. Well, I am going to show you that I am 
not.” He told me that he had studied the subject of religion 
deeply and extensively. He pointed out shelves full of books 
on various religions, especially Islam and Christianity, and 
including some modern books like H. G. Wells’s God, the 
Invisible King. During the long years of his war-time intern- 
ment, he had gone through the Quran repeatedly, and consulted 
all the commentaries on it. As a result of this study he found 
out, so he told me, that about 97 per cent, of what was contained 
in the Quran was entirely reasonable, and could be justified 
even apart from the Quran. The remaining 3 per cent, was 
not prima facie acceptable to his reason. But was it more likely 
that the Quran, which was obviously right in regard to 97 per 
cent., was also right in regard to the remaining 3 per cent,, 
than that his feeble reasoning feculty was right and the Quran 
wrong? He came to the conclusion that the chances were 
heavily in favour of the Quran, and so he accepted it as 100 per 
cent, correct. 

The logic of this argument was not obvious, but I had no 
wish to argue. What rollowed really surprised me. Mohamad 
Ali said that he was quite certain that if any one read the 
Quran with an open and receptive mind, he would be convinced 
of its truth. He knew (he added) that Bapu (Gandhiji) had 
read it carefuUy, and he must, therefore, have been convinced 
of the truth of Islam. But his pride of heart had kept him 
fi:om declaring this. 

After his year of presidentship, Mohamad Ali gradually 
drifted away from the Congress, or, perhaps, as he would have 
put it, the Congress drifted away from him. The process was 
a slow one, and he continued to attend Congress and A.I.C.C. 
meeting, and take vigorous part in them for several years 
more. But the rift widened, estrangement grew. Perhaps no 
particular individual or individuals were to blame for this; it 
was an inevitable result of certain objective conditions in the 
country. But it was an unfortunate result, which hurt many 
of us. For, whatever the differences on the communal question 



120 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

might have been, there were very few differences on the political 
issue. He was devoted to the idea of Indian independence. And 
because of this common political outlook, it was always possible 
to come to some mutually satisfactory arrangement with him 
on the communal issue. There was nothing in common, poli- 
tically, between him and the reactionaries who pose as the 
champions of communal interests. 

It was a misfortune for India that he left the country for 
Europe in the summer of 1928. A great effort was then made 
to solve the communal problem, and it came very near success. 
If Mohamad Ali had been here then, it is just conceivable that 
matters would have shaped differently. But by the time he 
came back the break had already taken place and, inevitably, 
he found himself on the other side. 

Two years later, in 1930, when large numbers of our people 
were in prison and the Civil Disobedience movement was in full 
swing, Mohamad Ali ignored the Congress decision, and at- 
tended the Round Table Conference. I was hurt by his going. 
I believe that in his own heart he was tmhappy about it, and 
there is enough evidence of this in his activities in London. He 
felt that his real place was in the fight in India, not in the 
futile conference chamber in London. And if he had returned 
to his country he would, I feel sure, have joined that struggle. 
Physically, he was a doomed man, and for years past the grip of 
disease was tightening upon him. In London his overwhelming 
anxiety to achieve, to do something worth while, when rest and 
treatment was what he needed, hastened his end. The news of 
his death came to me in Naini Prison as a blow. 

I met him for the last time on the occasion of the Lahore 
Congress in December 1929. He was not pleased with some 
parts of my presidential address, and he criticised it vigorously. 
He saw that the Congress was going ahead, and becoming poli- 
tically more aggressive. He was aggressive enough himself, and, 
being so, he disliked taking a back-seat and allowing others to 
be in the front. He gave me solemn warning : " I warn you, 
Jawahar, that your present colleagues will desert you. Tliey 
will leave you in the lurch in a crisis. Your own Congressmen 
will send you to the gallows." A dismal prophecy 1 

The Coconada Congress, held in Deceinber 1923, had a special 
interest for me, because the foundations of an aU-India volun- 
teer organisation, the Hindustani Seva Dal, were laid there. 
There had been no lack of volunteer organisations even before, 
both fi>r or^nisatlonal work and for gaol-going. But there was 
little disciplme, little cohesion. Dr. N. S. Hardii^pr conreivpd 



COCONAUA AND M. MOHAMAU ALI I2I 

the idea of having a well-disciplined all-India corps trained to do 
national work under the general guidance of the Congress, He 
pressed me to co-operate with him in this, and I gladly did so, 
for the idea appealed to me. The beginnings were made at 
Coconada. We were surprised to find later how much opposition 
there was to the Seva Dal among leading Congressmen. Some 
said that this was a dangerous departure, as it meant introducing 
a military element in the Congress, and the military arm might 
over-power the civil authority I Others seemed to think that 
the only discipline necessary was for the volunteer to obey orders 
issued from above, and for the rest it was hardly desirable for 
volunteers even to walk in step. At the back of the mind of some 
was the notion that the idea of having trained and drilled 
volunteers was somehow inconsistent with the Congress prin- 
ciple of non-violence. Hardiker, however, devoted himself to 
this task, and by the patient labour of years he demonstrated 
how much more efficient and even non-violent our trained 
volunteers could be. 

Soon after my return from Coconada, in January 1924 , 1 had 
a new kind of experience in Allahabad. I write from memory, 
and I am likely to get mixed up about dates. But I think that 
was the year of the Kumbh, or the Ardh-Kumbh, the great bath- 
ing mela held on the banks of the Ganges at Allahabad. Vast 
numbers of pilgrims usually turn up, and most of them bathe 
at the confluence of the Ganges and the Jumna— the Triveni, it 
is called, as the mydiical Saraswati is also supposed to join the 
other two. The Ganges river-bed is about a mile wide, but in 
winter the river shrinks and leaves a wide expanse of sand 
exposed, which is very useful for the camps of the pilgrims. 
Within this river-bed, the Ganges frequently changes its course. 
In 1924 the current of the Ganges was such that it was un- 
doubtedly dangerous for crowds to bathe at the Triveni. With 
certain precautions, and the control of the numbers bathing at 
a time, the danger could be greatly lessened. 

I was not at all interested in this question, as I did not pro- 
pose to acquire merit by bathing in the river on the auspicious 
days. But I noticed in the Press that a controversy was |;oing 
on between Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and the Provindd 
Government, the latter (or the local authorities) having issued 
orders prohibiting all bathing at the junction of the rivers. 
This was objected to by Malaviyaji, as, from the religious point 
of view, the whole point was to bathe at that confluence. The 
Government was perfectly justified in taking precautions to pre- 
vent accidents and possible serious loss of life, but, as usual. 



123 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it set about its work in the most wobden and irritating way 
possible. 

On the big day of the Kumbh, I went down to the river early 
in the morning to see the mela, with no intention of bathing. 
On arrival at the river bank, I learnt that Malaviyaji had sent 
some kinti of polite ultimatum to the District Magistrate, ask- 
ing him fer permission to bathe at the Triveni. Malaviyaji was 
agitated, and the atmosphere was tense. The Magistrate refused 
permission. TTbiereupon Malaviyaji decided to offer Satyagraha, 
and, accompanied by about two hundred others, he marched 
towards the junction of the rivers. I was interested in these 
developments and, on the spur of the moment, joined the 
Satyagraha band. A tremendous barrier had been erected right 
across the open space, to keep away people from the confluence. 
When we reached this high palisade, we were stopped by the 
police, and a ladder we had was taken aw^ from us. Being 
non-violent Satyagrahis, we sat down peacefully on the sands 
near the palisade. And there we sat for the whole morning and 
part of the afternoon. Hour after hour went by, the sim became 
stronger, the sand hotter, and all of us hungrier. Foot and 
mounted police stood by on both sides of us. I think the 
regular cavalry was also there. Most of us grew impatient, and 
said that something should be done. I believe the authorities 
also grew impatient, and decided to force the pace. Some order 
was given to the cavalry, who mounted their horses. It struck 
me ^ do not know if I was right) that they were going to 
charge us and drive us away in this fashion. I did not fency 
the idea of being chased by mounted troopers, and, anyhow, 
I was fed up with sitting there. So I suggested to those sitting 
near me that we might as well cross over the palisade, and 
I motmted it. Immediately scores of others did likewise, and 
some even pulled out a few stakes, thus making a passage-way. 
Somebody gave me a national flag, and I stuck it on top of the 
palisade, where I continued to sit. I grew rather excited, and 
thoroughly enjoyed myself, watching the people clambering up 
or going through and the mounted troopers trying to push them 
away. I must say that the cavalry did their work as harmlessly 
as possible. They waved about thm wooden stafi^, and pushed 
people with them, but reflrained from causing much injury. 
Faint memories of revolutionary barricades came to me. 

At last I got down on the other side and, feeling very hot after 
my exertions, decided to have a dip in the Ganges. On coming 
back, I was amazed to find that Malaviyaji and many others 
were still sitting on the other side of the palisade as before. But 



COCONADA AND M. MOHAMAD AH 133 

the mounted troopers and the foot police now stood shoulder 
to shoulder between the Satyagrahis and the palisade. So I 
went (having got out by a roundabout way) and sat down again 
near Malaviyaji. For some time we sat on, and I noticed that 
Malaviyaji was greatly agitated; he seemed to be trying to con- 
trol some strong emotion. Suddenly, without a hint to any one, 
he dived in the most extraordinary way through the policemen 
and the horses. For any one, that would have been a surprising 
dive, but for an old and physically weak person like Malaviyaji, 
it was astounding. Anyhow, we all followed him; we all dived. 
After some effort to keep us back the cavalry and the police 
did not interfere. A little later they were withdrawn. 

We half expected some proceedings to be taken against us 
by the Government, but nothing of the kind happened. Govern- 
ment probably did not wish to lake any steps against Malaviyaji, 
and so the smaller fry got off too. 



XVIII 


MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 

Early in 1924 there came suddenly the news of the serious 
illness of Gandhiji in prison, followed by his removal to a 
hospital and an operation. India was numbed with anxiety; we 
held our breaths almost and waited, full of fear. The crisis 
passed, and a stream of people began to reach Poona from all 
parts of the country to see him. He was still in hospital, a 
prisoner under guard, but he was permitted to see a limited 
number of friends. Father and I visited him in the hospital. 

He was not taken back from the hospital to the prison. As 
he xvas convalescing, Government remitted the rest of his sen- 
tence and discharged him. He had then served about two years 
out of the six years to which he had been sentenced. He went 
to Juhu, by the sea-side near Bombay, to recuperate. 

Ohr family also trekked to Juhu, and established itself in a 
tiny little cottage by the sea. We spent some weeks there, and 
I had, after a long gap, a holiday after my heart, for I could 
indulge in swimming and running and riding on the beach. 
The main purpose of our stay, however, was not holiday-makingi 
but discussions with Gandhiji. Father wanted to explain to him 
the Swarajist position, and to gain his passive co-operation at 
least, if not his active sympathy. I was also anxious to have 
some light thrown on the problems that were troubling me. I 
wanted to know what his future programme of action was going 
to be. 

The Juhu talks, so far as the Swarajists were concerned, did 
not succeed in winning Gandhiji, or even in influencing him to 
any extent. Behind all the friendly talk, and the courteous 
gestures, the fact remained that there was no compromise. They 
agreed to differ, and statements to this effect were issued to the 
Press. 

I also returned from Juhu a little disappointed, for Gandhiji 
did not resolve a single one of my doubts. As is usual with Mm, 
he refused to look into the future, or lay down any long-distance 
promamme. We were to carry on patiently * serving ’ the people, 
working ft)r the constructive and social reform programme of 
the Congress, and await the time for aggressive activity. The 
real difficulty, of course, was that even when that time came, 
would not some incident like Chauri Chaura upset all our calcu- 

IS4 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 125' 

lations and again hold us up? To that he gave no answer then. 
Nor was he at all definite in regard to our objective. Many of 
us wanted to be clear in our own minds what we were driving at, 
although the Congress did not then need to make a formal de- 
claration on the subject. Were we going to hold out for indepen- 
dence and some measure of social change, or were our leaders 
going to compromise for something very much less? Only a few 
months before, I had stressed independence in my presidential 
address at the U.P. Provincial Conference. This Conference was 
held in the autumn of 1923, a little after my return from Nabha. 
I was just recovering from the illness with which Nabha Gaol had 
presented me and I was unable to attend the Conference; but my 
address, written under fever in bed, went to it. 

While some of us wanted to make the issue of independence 
clear in the Congress, our friends the Liberals had drifted so far 
from us — or perhaps the drifting had been done by us — that they 
publicly gloried in the pomp and power of the Empire, although 
that Empire might treat our countrymen as a doormat, and its 
dominions keep our countrymen as helots or refuse them all 
admittance. Mr. Sastri had become an Imperial Envoy, and Sir 
Tej Bahadur Sapru had proudly declared at the Imperial Con- 
ference in London in 1923: "I can say with pride that it is my 
country that makes the Empire imperial.” 

A vast ocean seemed to separate us from these Liberal leaders; 
we lived in different worlds, we spoke in different languages, and 
our dreams — ^if they ever had dreams — ^had nothing in common. 
Was it not necessary then to be clear and precise about our goal? 

But such thoughts were then confined to a few. Precision is not 
loved by most people, especially in a nationalist movement which 
by its very nature is vague and somewhat mystical. In the early 
months of 1924, public attention was largely concentrated on the 
Swarajists in the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Coun- 
cils. Wiat were these groups going to do after their brave talk 
about "opposition from within” and wrecking the Councils? 
Some fine gestures took place. The budget for the year was re- 
jected by the Assembly; a resolution demanding a round-table 
discussion to settle the terms of Indian freedom was passed. The 
Bengal Council, under Deshbandhu’s leadership, also bravely 
voted down supplies. But both in the Assembly and in the pro- 
•vinces, the Viceroy or the Governor certified the budgets and 
they became law. There were some speeches, some excitement 
in the legislatures, a momentary feeling of triumph among the 
Swarajists, headlines in the Press, and nothing more. What else 
could they do? Tltey could repeat their tactics, but the novelty. 



126 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

wore oftj the excitement vanished, and the public mind grew 
accustomed to budgets and laws being certified by tlie Viceroy 
or Governor, The next step, of course, was beyond the compe- 
tence of the Swarajists inside the Councils. It lay outside the 
Council chamber. 

Some time in the middle of that year (1924) a meeting of the 
All-India Congress Committee was held at Ahmedabad. At this 
meeting, unexpectedly, a sharp conflict appeared between 
Gandhiji and the Swarajists, and there were some dramatic situa- 
tions. The initiative was taken by Gandhiji. He proposed a fun- 
damental alteration in the Congress constitution, changing the 
franchise and the rules for membership. So far, every one who 
subscribed to the first article of the Congress constitution, which 
laid down the objective of Swaraj and peacefiil methods, and 
paid four annas could become a member. He now wanted to 
limit membership to those who gave a certain amount of self- 
spun yam instead of the four annas. This was a serious limita- 
tion of the franchise, and the A.I.C.C. was certainly not com- 
petent to do this. But Gandhiji has seldom cared for the letter 
of a constitution when this has come in his way, I was shocked 
at what I considered a violence to oin constitution, and I offered 
to the Working Committee my resignation from the secretary- 
ship. But some new developments took place and I did not press 
it. In the A.I.C,C. the proposal was fiercely resisted by my father 
and Mr. Das, and ultimately, to show their entire disapproval of 
it, they marched out with a goodly number of their followers 
just before the voting. Even then some people, opposed to the 
resolution, still remained present in the Committee. The resolu- 
tion was passed by a majority, but ultimately it was withdrawn. 
For Gandhiji had been tremendously affected by the walk-out 
of the Swarajists and the unbending attitude on this subject of 
Deshbandhu and my father. He was emotionally wo rked up . 
and a chance remark of a member upset him and he broae 
do^. It was obvious that he had been cut to the quick. He 
addressed the Committee in a most feeling inanner and reduced 
a number of members to tears. It was a moving and extra- 
ordinary sight.* 

* The above account was written in prison from memory. I find 
now that my memory was defective antf I had overlooked an impor- 
tant aspect of the A.I.C.C. discussions, thus giving a wrong impres- 
sion of what happened. What moved Gandhiji was a resolution 
relating to a , young Bengali terrorist (Gopinath Saha) which was 
moved m the meeting and was ultimately lost. The resolution, so 
tar as I remember, condemned his deed but expressed sympathy for 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 127 

I could never make out why he was so keen on that exclusive 
form of spuming franchise then, for he must have known that it 
would be bitterly opposed. Probably he wanted the Congress to 
consist only of people who were believers in his constructive 
programme of Khadi, etc., and was prepared to drive out the 
others or make them conform. But although he had the majority 
with him, he weakened in his resolve and began to compromise 
with the others. During the next three or four months, to my 
amazement, he changed several times on this question. He 
seemed to be completely at sea, unable to find his bearings. That 
was the one idea that I did not associate with him, and hence 
my surprise. The question itself was not, so it seemed to me, a 
very vital one. The idea of labour being made the qualification 
for franchise was a very desirable one, but in the restricted form 
in which it came up, it lost some of its meaning. 

I came to the conclusion that Gandhiji’s difficulties had been 
caused because he was moving in an unfamiliar medium. He was 
superb in his special field of Satyagrahic direct acdon, and his 
instinct unerringly led him to take the right steps. He was also 


his motives. More than the resolution itself, the speeches accom- 
panying it distressed Gandhiji, and it was this feeling that many 
people in the Congress were not serious about its profession of non- 
violence that upset him. Writing of this meeting in Young India 
soon after, he said : " I had a bare majority always for the four reso- 
lutions. But it must be regarded by me as a minority. The house 
was fairly evenly divided. The Gopinath Saha resolution clinched 
the issue. The speeches, the result and the scenes I wimessed after 
were a perfect eye-opener. . . . Dignity vanished after the Gopinath 
Saha resolution. It was before this house that 1 had to put my last 
resolution. As the proceedings went on, I must have become more 
and more serious. I felt like runifing away from the oppressive scene. 
I dreaded having to move a resolution m my charge. ... I do not 
know ffiat 1 have made it dear that no speaker had any malice in 
him. What preyed upon my mind was the fact of unconsdous 
irresponsibility and disregard of the Congress creed or policy of non- 
violence. . . . That there were seventy Congress representatives to 
support the resolution was a staggering levdation.” This inddent, 
•with Gandhiji’s commentary on it, is vary agnificant, as it shows 
the extreme importance attached by Gan&ji to non-violence, and 
the reactions on him of any attempt, even though this might be 
unconsdous and indirect, to challenge it. Much that he has subse- 
quently done is probably due fundamentally to some such reactions. 
Non-violence has been, and is, the sheet-anchor of his policy and 
artivitie" 




128 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

very good in working himself and making others work quietly 
for social reform among the masses. He could understand abso- 
lute war or absolute peace. Anything in between he did not 
appreciate. The Swarajist programme, of struggle and opposi- 
tion inside Councils, left him cold. If a person wants to go to 
the legislature, let him do so with the object of co-operating 
with the authorities for better legislation, etc., and not for the 
sake of opposition. If he does not want to do so, let him stay 
out. The Swarajists adopted neither of these positions, and hence 
his difficulty in dealing with them. 

Ultimately he adjusted himself to them. Tlie spinning fran- 
chise became an alternative form, the old four-anna fianchise 
remaining. He almost blessed the Swarajist work in the legis- 
latures, but for himself he kept severely aloof. It was said that 
he had retired from politics, and the British Government and its 
officers believed that his popularity was waning and that he was 
a spent force. Das and Nehru, it was said, had driven Gandhi 
into the badkground; they seemed to dominate the political 
scene. Such remarks, with suitable variations, have been repeated 
many times in the course of the last fifteen years, and they have 
demonstrated evety time how singularly ignorant our rulers are 
about the feelings of the Indian people. Ever since Gandhiji 
appeared on the Indian political scene, there has been no going 
back in popularity for him, so far as the masses are concerned. 
There has been a progressive increase in his popularity, and this 
process still continues. They may not carry out his wishes, for 
human nature is often weak, but Aeir hearts are full of goodwill 
for him. When objective conditions help they rise in huge mass 
movements, otherwise they lie low. A leader does not create a 
mass movement out of nothing, as if by a stroke of the magi- 
cian’s wand. He can take advantage of the conditions themsdves 
when they arise; he can prepare for them, but not create them. 

But it is true to say that there is a waning and a waxing of 
Gandhiji’s popularity among the intelligentsia. In moments of 
forward-going enthusiasm they follow him; when the inevitable 
reaction comes they grow criticaL But even so the great majority 
of them bow down to him. Partly this has been due to the 
absence of any other effective programme. The Liberals and 
various groups resembling them, like the Responsivists, do not 
count; those who believe in terroristic violence are completely 
out of court in the modem world and are considered ineffective 
,and out of date. The socialist programme is still little known, 
and it ftightens the upper-class members of the Congress. 

After a brief political estrangement in the middle of 1024, the 



Mi jjATHJiR ANiJ GANDHIJI 129 

old relations between my father and Gandhiji were resumed and 
they grew even more cordial. However much they differed from 
one another, each had the warmest regard and respect for the 
other. What was it that they so respected? Father has given us 
a glimpse into his mind in a brief Foreword he contributed to a 
booklet called Thought Currents, containing selections horn 
Gandhi ji’s writings : 

" I have heard,” he writes, “ of saints and supermen, hut have 
never had the pleasure of meeting them, and must confess to a 
feeling of scepticism about their real existence. I believe in men 
and things manly. The ‘ Thought Currents ’ preserved in this 
volume have emanated fiom a man and are things manly. They 
are illustrative of two great attributes of human nature — ^Faith 
and Strength. . . . 

“ ‘ What is all this going to lead to? ' asks the man with neither 
faith nor strength in him. The answer ‘ to victory or death ' does 
not appeal to him. . . . Meanwhile the humble and lowly figure 
standing erect ... on the firm footholds of faith unshakable 
and strength imconquerable, continues to send out to his country- 
men his message of sacrifice and suffering for the motherland. 
That message finds echo in millions of hearts. . . .” 

And he finishes up by quoting Swinburne’s lines : 

Have we not men with us royal. 

Men the masters of things? . . . 

Evidently he wanted to stress the fact that he did not admire 
Gandhiji as a saint or a Mahatma, but as a man. Strong and 
unbending himself, he admired strength of spirit in him. For it 
was dear that this little man of poor physique had something 
of steel in him, sometliing rock-like which did not yield to 
physical powers, however great they might be. And in spile of 
his unimpressive features, his Ioin<ioth and bare body, there was 
a royalty and a kingiigess in him which compelled a willing 
obdsance fiom others. Consdously and deliberately meek and 
humble, yet he was full of power and authority, and he knew it, 
and at times he was imperious enough, issuing commands which 
had to be obeyed. His calm, deep eyes would hold one and 
gently probe into the depfhs; his voice, clear and limpid, would 
purr its way into the heart and evoke an emotional response. 
Whether his audience consisted of one person or a thousand, the 
charm and magnetism of the man passed on to it, and each one 
had a &eling of communion with the speaker. This feeling had 
little to do with the mind, though the appeal to the mind was 
not wholly ignored. But mind and reason definitely had second 



1^0 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

place. This process of ‘ spell-binding ' was not brought about by 
oratory or the hypnotism of silken phrases. The language was 
always simple and to the point and seldom was an unnecessary 
word used. It was the utter sincerity of the man and his person- 
ality that gripped; he gave the impression of tremendous inner 
reserves of power. Perhaps also it was a tradition that had grown 
up about him which helped in creating a suitable atmosphere. 
A stranger, ignorant of this tradition and not in harmony with 
the surroundings, would probably not have been touched by 
that spell, or, at any rate, not to the same extent. And yet one 
of the most remarkable things about Gandhiji was, and is, his 
capacity to win over, or at least to disarm, his opponents. 

Gandhiji had litde sense of beauty or artistry in man-made 
objects, though he admired natural beauty. The Taj Mahal was 
for him an embodiment of forced labour and little more. His 
sense of smell was feeble. And yet in his own way he had dis- 
covered the art of living and had made of his life an artistic 
whole. Every gesture had meaning and grace; without a false 
touch. There were no rough edges or sharp corners about him, 
no trace of vulgarity or commonness, in which, unhappily, our 
middle classes excel. Having found an inner peace, he radiated 
it to others and marched tlirough life’s tortuous ways with firm 
and undaunted step. 

How different was my father from him 1 But in him too there 
was strength of personality and a measure of kingliness, and the 
lines of Swinburne he had quoted would apply to him also. In 
any gathering in which he was present he would inevitably be 
the centre and the hub. Whatever the place where he sat at table 
it would become, as an eminent English judge said later, the 
head of the table. He was neither meek nor mild, and, again 
unlike Gandhiji, he seldom spared those who differed firom him , 
Consciously imperious, he evoked great loyalty as well as bitter 
opposition. It was difficult to feel neutral about him; one had to 
like him or dislike him. With a broad forehead, tight lips and a 
determined chin, he had a marked resemblance to the busts of 
the Roman Emperors in the museums in Italy. Many friends in 
Italy who saw his photograph with us remarked on this resem- 
blance. In later years especially, when his head was covered with 
silver hair— unlike me, he kept his hair to the end— -there was a 
magmficence about him and a grand manner, which is sadly to 
seek in this world of to-day. I suppose I am partial to him, but 
I miss his noble presence in a world full of pettiness and weak- 
ness. I look round in vain for that grand manner and splendid 
strength that was his. r « 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 13I 

I remember showing Gandhiji a photograph of father’s some 
time in 1924, when he was having a tug-of-war with the Swaraj 
Party. In this photograph father had no moustache, and, till 
then, Gandhiji had always seen him with a fine moustache. He 
started almost on seeing this photograph and gazed long at it, 
for the absence of the moustache brought out the hardness of 
the mouth and the chin, and he said, widi a somewhat dry smile, 
that now he realised what he had to contend against, Ine face 
was softened, however, by the eyes and by the lines that frequent 
la^hter had made. But sometimes the eyes glittered. 

father had taken to the work in the Assembly like a duck to 
water. It suited his legal and constitutional training, and, unlike 
Satyagraha and its offshoots, he knew the rules of this game. 
He kept his party strictly disciplined and even induced other 
groups and individuals to give support. But soon he had to face 
difficulties with his own people. During the early days of the 
Swaraj Party, it had to contend against the No-changers in the 
Congress, and many undesirables were taken in to increase its 
strength within the Congress. Then came the elections, and these 
demanded funds which had to come from the rich. So these rich 
folk had to be kept in good humour, and some were even asked 
to become Swarajist candidates. “Politics,” says an American 
socialist (quoted by Sir Stafforcl Cripps), "is the gentle art of 
getting votes from the poor and campaign funds from the rich 
by promising to protect each fixim the other.” 

All these elements weakened the Party from the very begin- 
ning. Work in the Assembly and the Councils necessitated daily 
compromises with other and more moderate groups, and no 
crusading spirit or principles could long survive this. Gradually a 
decline in the discipline and temper of the Party set in, and the 
weaker elements and the opportunists began to give trouble. The 
Swaraj Party had invaded the legislatures • with the declared 
object of “ opposition from within But two could play at this 
game, and the Government decided to have a hand in it by 
creating opposition and disruption within the ranks of the 
Swarajists. High office and patronage in innumerable ways was 
placed in the way of the westker brethren. They had just to pick 
them up. Their ability and their qualities of statesmanship and 
sweet reasonableness were praised. A pleasant and agreeable 
atmosphere was created round them — so different from the dust 
and tumult of the field and market-place. 

The general tone of the Swarajists went down. Individuals 
here and there began to slip away to the other side. My father 
shouted and thundered and talked about cutting ‘ the mscased 



1^2 JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

limb But this threat has no great eflfect when the limb is eager 
to walk away by itself. Some Swarajists became ministers, some 
became Executive Councillors in the provinces later. A number 
formed a separate group calling themselves ' Responsivists ’ or 
‘Responsive Co-operators’, a name ori^nally used by Loka- 
manya Tilak in entirely different circumstances. As used now it 
seemed to mean : take a job when you have the chance and make 
the best of it. The Swaraj Party carried on in spite of these 
defections, but father and Mr. Das became a little disgusted with 
the turn of events and somewhat weary of what seemed to be 
their profitless work in the legislatures. To add to this weariness 
of spirit was the growing Hindu-Muslim tension in North India, 
leading occasionally to riots. 

Some Congressmen who had been to prison with us in 1921 
and ipaa were now ministers and holders of high offices in the 
Government. In 1921 we had had the satisfaction of being de- 
clared unlawful and being sentenced to prison by a Government 
of which some Liberals (also old-time Congressmen) were mem- 
bers. In future we were going to have the additional solace of 
being imprisoned and outlawed by some of our own old col- 
leagues in some provinces at least. These new ministers and 
Executive councillors were far more efficient for this job than the 
Liberals had been. They knew us and our weaknesses and how 
to exploit them; they were well acquainted with our methods; 
and they had some e^erience of crowds and the feelings of 
the masses. Like the Nazis, they had flirted with revolutionary 
methods before changing sides, and could apply this knowledge 
to suppress more efficiently their old colleagues of the Congress 
tlian either the official hierarchy or the Liberal ministers in their 
ignorance could have done. 

In December 1924 the Congress session was held at Belgaum, 
and Gandliiji was President. For him to become the Congress 
President was something.in the nature of an anticlimax, for he 
had long been the permanent super-president. I did not like his 
presidential address. It struck me as being very uninspiring. At 
the end of the session I was again elected, at Gandhiji’s instance, 
the working secretary of the A.I.G.C. for the next year. In spite 
of my own wishes in the matter, I was gradually becoming a 
semi-permanent secretary of the Congress. 

In the summer of 1925 my father was unwell and his asthma 
troubled him greatly. He went vnth the family to Dalhousie in 
the Himalayas, and I joined him for a short while later; We 
made a Uttle trip from Dalhousie to Chamba in the interior of 
the Himalayas. It was a June day when we arrive^ and we were 



MY FATHF.R AND GANDIIIJI 133 

a little tired after our journey by mountain paths. A telegram 
came. It told us that Chitta Ranjan Das had died. For a long 
time father sat .still without a word, bowed down with grief. It 
was a cruel blow to him, and I had seldom seen him so affected. 
The one person who had grown to be a closer and dearer comrade 
to him than any one else had suddenly gone and left him to 
shoulder the burden alone. That burden had been growing, and 
both he and Deshbandhu had grown aweary of it and of the 
weakness of their people. Deshbandhu’s last speech at the 
Faridpur Conference was the speech of a person who is a little 
tired. 

We left Chamba the next morning and tramped back over the 
mountains to Dalhousie, and from there to the distant railhead 
by car, and then to Allahabad and Calcutta. 



XIX 


COMMUNALISM RAMPANT 

My illness in the autumn of 1923. after my return from Nabha 
prison, when I had a bout with the typhus germ, was a novel 
experience for me. I was unused to illness or lying in bed with 
fever or physical weakness. I was a little proud of my health, 
and I objected to the general valetudinarian attitude that was 
fairly common in India. My youth aiid good constitution pulled 
me through, but, after the crisis was over, I lay long in bed in an 
enfeebled condition, slowly working my way to health. And 
during this period I felt a strange detachment from my surround- 
ings and my day-to-day work, and I' viewed all this from a 
distance, apart. I felt as if I had extricated myself from the trees 
and could see the wood as a whole; my mind seemed clearer and 
more peaceful than it had previously been. I suppose this experi- 
ence, or something like it, is common enough to those who have 
passed through severe illness. But for me it was in the nature of 
a spiritual experiencc-^I use the word not in a narrow religious 
sense — and it influenced me considerably. I felt lifted out or the 
emotional atmosphere of our politics and could view the objec- 
tives and the springs that had moved me to action more clearly. 
With this clarification came further questioning for which I had 
no satisfactory answer. But more and more I moved away from 
the religious outlook on life and politics. I cannot write much 
about that experience of mine; it was a feeling I cannot easily 
express. It was eleven years ago, and only a faded impression 
of it remains in the mind now. But I remember'well that it 
had 'a lasting effect on me and on my way of thinking, and for 
the next two years or more I went about my work with some-' 
thing of that aif of detachment. 

Pardy, no doubt, this was due to developments which were 
wholly outside my control and with which I did not fit in. I have 
referred already to some of the political dianges. Far more im- 
portant was die progressive deterioration of Hindu-Mudim 
relations, in North India especially. In the bigger cities a nunaber 
of riots took place, brutal and callous in die extreme. The 
atmosphere of distrust and anger bred new causes of dispute 
which most of us had never heard of before. Previously a fruitful 
source of discord had been the question of cow sacrifice, especi- 
ally on the Baki^id day. There was also tension when Hindu and 

m 



COMMUNALISM RAMPANT 135 

Muslim festivals clashed, as, for instance, when the Moharrara 
fell on the days when the Ram Lila was celebrated. The Mohar- 
ram revived the memory of a past tragedy and brought sorrow 
and tears; the Ram Lila was a festival of joy and the celebration 
of the victory of good over evil. The two did not fit in. For- 
tunately they came together only once in about thirty years, for 
the Ram Lila is celebrated according to the solar calendar at a 
fixed time of the year, while the Moharram moves round the 
seasons, following a lunar year. 

But now a fresh cause of fnction arose, something that was 
ever present, ever recurring. This was the question of music 
before mosques. Objection was taken by the Muslims to music 
or any noise which interfered with their prayers in their 
mosques. In every city there are many mosques, and five times 
every day they have prayers, and there is no lack of noises and 
processions (including marriage and funeral processions). So the 
chances of friction were always present. In particular, objection 
was taken to processions and noises at the time of the sunset 
prayer in the mosques. As it happens, this is just the time when 
evening worship takes place in the Hindu temples, and gongs 
are sounded and the temple bells ring. Arti, this is called, and 
arti-namaz disputes now assumed major proportions. 

It seems amazing that a question which could be settled with 
mutual consideration for each other’s feelings and a little adjust- 
ment should give rise to great bitterness and rioting. But reli- 
gious passions have little to do with reason or consideration or 
adjustments, and they are easy to fan when a third party in 
control can play oflT one group against another. 

One is apt to exaggerate the sigiuficance of these riots in a few 
northern cities. Most of the towns and cities and the whole of 
rural India carried on peacefully, little affected by these happen- 
ings, but the newspapers, naturally gave great prominence to 
every petty communal disturbance. It is perfectly true, however, 
that communal tension and bitterness increased in the city 
masses. This was pushed on by the communal leaders at the 
top, and it was reflected in the stiffening up of the political 
communal demands. Because of the communal tension, Muslim 
political reactionaries, who had taken a back seat during all these 
years of non-co-operation, emerged into prominence, helped in 
the process by the British Government. From day to day new 
and more fer-reaching communal demands appeared on their 
behalf, striking at the very root of national unitf and Indian 
freedom. On the Hindu side also political reactionaries were 
among the principal communal leaders, and, iik the name of 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

guarding Hindu interests, they played definitely into the hands 
of the Government. They did not succeed, and indeed they 
could not, however much they tried by. their methods, in gaining 
any of the points on which they laid stress ; they succeeded only 
in raising the communal temper of the country. 

The Congress was in a quandary. Sensitive to and represen- 
tative of national feeling as it was, these communal passions were 
bound to affect it. Many a Congressman was a communalist 
under his national cloak. But the Congress leadership stood firm 
and, on the whole, refused to side with either communal party, 
or rather with any communal group, for now the Sikhs and other 
smaller minorities were also loudly voicing their particular 
demands. Inevitably this led to denunciation from both the 
extremes. 

Long ago, right at the commencement of non-co-operation or 
even earlier, Gandhiji had laid down his formula for solving the 
communal problem. According to hiiti, it could only be solved 
by goodwill and the generosity of the majority group, and so he 
was prepared to agree to everything that the Muslims might 
demand. He wanted to win them over, not to bargain with them. 
With foresight and a true sense of values he grasped at the 
reality that was worth while; but others who thought they knew 
the market price of everything, and were ignorant of the true 
value of anything, stuck to the methods of the market-place. 
They saw the cost of purchase tvith painful clearness, but they 
had no appreciation of the worth of the article they might have 
bought. 

It is easy to criticise and blame others, and the temptation is 
almost irresistible to find some excuse for the failure of one’s 
plans. Was not the failure due to the deliberate thwarting of 
others, rather than to an error in one’s own way of thinking or 
acting? We cast the blame on the Govenmient and the com- 
mtmalists, the latter blame tlie Congress. Of course, there was 
thwarting of us, deliberate and persistent thwarting, by the 
Government and their allies. Of course, British governments in 
the' past and the present have based their policy on creating 
divisions in our raius. Divide and rule has always been the way 
of empires, and the measure of their success in this policy has 
been also the measure of their superiority over those whom they 
thus exploit. We cannot complain of this or, at any rate, w« 
ought not to be surprised at it. To ignore it and not to provide 
against it is in itself a mistake in one's thought. 

How are we to provide against it? Not surely by bargaining 
and haggling and generally adopting ihe tactics of the market 



COMMUNALISM RAMPANT J37 

place, for whatever oiFer we make, however high our bid might 
be, there is always a third party which can bid higher and, what 
is more, give substance to its w’ords. If there is no common 
national or social outlook, there will not be common action 
against the common adversary. If we think in terms of the 
existing political and economic structure and merely wish to 
tamper with it here and there, to reform it, to 'Indianise’ it, 
then all real inducement for joint action is lacking. The object 
then becomes one of sharing in the spoils, and the third and 
controlling party inevitably plays the dominant r 61 e and hands 
out its gifts to the prize boys of its choice. Only by thinking in 
terms of a different political framework — ^and even more so a 
different social framework — can we build up a stable foundation 
for joint action. The whole idea underlying the demand for in- 
dependence was this: to make people realise that we were 
struggling for an entirely different political structure and not just 
an Indianised edition (with British control behind the scenes) of 
the present order, which Dominion Status signifies. Political in- 
pendence meant, of course, political freedom only, and did not 
include any social change or economic freedom for the masses. 
But it did dgnify the removal of the financial and economic 
chains which bind us to the City of London, and this would 
have made it easier for us to change the social structure. So I 
thought then. I would add now that I do not think it is likely 
that real political freedom will come to us by itself. When it 
comes it will bring a large measure of social freedom also. 

But almost all our leaders continued to think within the narrow 
steel frame of the existing political, and of course the social, 
structure. They faced every problem — communal or constitu- 
tional— with this background and, inevitably, they played into 
the hands of the British Government, which controlled com- 
pletely that struemre. They could not do otherwise, for their 
whole outlook was essentially reformist and not revolutionary, 
in spite of occasional experiments with direct action. But the 
time had gone by when any political or economic or communal 
problem in India could be satisfactorily solved by reformist 
methods. Revolutionary outlook and planning and revolutionary 
solutions were demanded by the situation. But there was no one 
among the leaders to ofrer these. 

The want of dear ideals and objectives in our struggle for 
freedom undoubtedly helped the spread of communalism. The 
masses saw no clear connection between their day-to-day suffer- 
ings and the fight for swaraj. They fought well enough at times 
by instinct, but that was a feeble weapon whidi could be easily 



138 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

blunted or even turned aside for other purposes. There was no 
reason behind it, and in peribds of reaction it was not difficult 
for the communalists to play upon this feeling and exploit it in 
the name of religion. It is nevertheless extraordinary how the 
bourgeois classes, both among the Hindus and the Muslims, suc- 
ceeded, in the sacred name of religion, in getting a measure of 
mass sympathy and support for programmes and demands 
which had absolutely nothing to do with the masses, or even the 
lower middle class. Every one of the communal demands put 
forward by any communal group is, in the final analysis, a 
demand for jobs, and these jobs could only go to a handful of 
the upper middle class. There is also, of course, the demand for 
special and additional seats in the legislatures, as symbolising 
political power, but this too is looked upon chiefly as the power 
to exercise patronage. These narrow political demands, benefit- 
ing at the most a small number of the upper middle classes, and 
often creating barriers in the way of national unity and progress, 
were cleverly made to appear the demands of the masses of that 
particular religious group. Religious passion was hitched on to 
them in order to hide their barrenness. 

In this way political reactionaries came back to the political 
field in the guise of communal leaders, and the real explanation 
of the various steps they took was not so much their communal 
bias as their desire to obstruct political advance. We could only 
expect opposition from them politically, but still it was a pecu- 
liarly distressing feature of an unsavoury situation to find to 
what lengths they would go in this respect. Muslim communal 
leaders said the most amazing things and seemed to care not at 
all for Indian nationalism or Indian freedom; Hindu communal 
leaders, though always speaking apparently in the name of 
nationalism, had little to do with it in practice and, incapable of 
any real action, sought to humble themselves before the Govern- 
ment, and did that too in vain. Both agreed in condemning 
socialistic and such-like "subversive” movements; there was a 
touching unanimity in regard to any proposal affecting vested 
interests. Muslim communal leaders said and did many things, 
harmful to political and econormc freedom, but as a group and 
individually they conducted themselves before the Government 
and the public with some dignity. That could hardly be said of 
the Hindu communal leaders. 

There were many Muslims in the Congress, Thdr numbers 
were large, and included many able men, and the best-known 
and mopt popular Muslim leaders in India were in it. Many of 
those Congress Muslims organised themselves into a group called 



communalism rampant 139 

the * Nationalist Muslim Party and they combated the com- 
munal Muslim leaders. They did so with some success to begin 
with, and a large part of the Muslim intelligentsia seemed to be 
with them. But they were all upper middle-class folk, and there 
were no dynamic personalities amongst them. They took to their 
professions and their businesses, and lost touch with the masses. 
Indeed, they never went to their masses. Their method was one 
of drawing-room meetings and mutual arrangements and pacts, 
and at this game their rivals, the communal leaders, were greater 
adepts. Slowly the latter drove the Nationalist Muslims from 
one position to another, made them give up, one by one, the 
principles for which they stood. Always the Nationalist Muslims 
tried to ward oiF further retreat and to consolidate their position 
by adopting the policy of the ‘ lesser evil ’, but always this led 
to another retreat and another choice of the ‘ lesser evil There 
came a time when they had nothing left to call their own, no 
fundamental principle on which they stood except one, and 
that had been the very sheet-anchor of their group: joint 
electorates. But again the policy of the lesser evil presented the 
fatal choice to them, and they emerged from the ordeal minus 
that sheet-anchor. So to-day they stand divested of every shred 
of principle or practice on the basis of which they formed their 
group, and which they had proudly nailed to their masthead— 
of everything, all, except their namel 

The collapse and elimination of the Nationalist Muslims as 
a group — as individuals they are, of course, still important 
leaders of the Congress — ^forms a pitiful story. It took many 
years, and the last chapter has only been written this year 
(1934). In 1933 and subsequent years they were a strong group, 
and they took up an aggressive attitude against the Muslim 
communalists. Indeed, on several occasions, Gandhiji was pre- 
pared to agree to some of the latter’s demands, much as he 
disliked them, but his own collea^es, the Muslim Nationalist 
leaders, prevented this and were bitter in their opposition. 

During the .middle 'twenties many attempts were made to 
settle the communal problem by mutual talks and discussions — 
‘Unity Conferences' they were called. The most notable of 
these was the conference convened by M. Moham&d Ali, the 
Congress president for the year, in 1924, and held in Delhi under 
the shadow of Gandhiji’s twenty-one-day fast. There were many 
earnest and well-meaning people at these conferences, and they 
tried hard to come to an agreement. Some pious and good 
resolutions were passed, .but the basic problem remained un- 
solved. It could hot be solved by those conferences, for a solution 



140 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

could not be reached by a majority of votes but by virtual 
unanimity, and there were always extremists of various groups 
present whose idea of a solution was a complete submission of 
all others to their views. Indeed, one was led to doubt whether 
some of the prominent communalists desired a solution at all. 
Many of them were political reactionaries, and there was no 
common ground between them and those who desired radical 
political change. 

But the real difficulties went deeper and were not just the 
result of Individual back-sliding. The Sikhs were now loudly 
advancing their communal demands, and an extraordinarily 
complicated triangle was created in the Punjab. The Punjab, 
indeed, became the crux of the matter, and the fear of each 
group of the others produced a background of passion and 
prejudice. In some provinces agrarian trouble — Hindu zamin- 
dars and Muslim tenants in Bengal— appeared under communal 
guise. In the Punjab and Sind, the banker and richer classes' 
generally were Hindus, the debtors were Muslim agriculturists, 
and all the feeling of the impoverished debtors against the 
creditor, out for his pound of flesh, went to swell the com- 
munal tide. As a rule, the Muslims were the poorer com- 
munity, and the Muslim communal leaders managed to exploit 
the antagonism of the have-nots against the haves ior communal 
purposes, though, strangely enough, these purposes had nothing 
whatever to do with the betterment of those have-nots. Because 
of this, these Muslim communal leaders did represent some 
mass elements, and gained strength thereby. The Hindu com- 
munal leaders, in an economic sense, represented the rich banker 
and professional classes; they had little backing among the 
Hindu masses although, on occasions, they had their sympathy. 

The problem, therefore, is getting a little mixed up with 
economic groupings, though uMappuy this fact is not realised. 
It may develop into more obvious conflicts between economic 
classes, but if that time comes, the present-day communal 
leaders, representing the upper classes of all groups, will hasten 
to patch up their differences in order to face jointly the common 
class foe. Even under [present conditions it should not he dif- 
ficult to arrive at a political solution, but only if, and it is a big 
if, the third party was not present. 

The Delhi Uiiity Conference of 1924 was hardly over when a 
I^du-Muslim riot broke out in Allahabad, It was not a big 
riot, as such riots go, in so far as casualties were concerned, hut 
it was pamful to have these troubles in one’s home town. I 
rushed back with ot 3 \ers from Delhi to find that the actu*'l riot- 



communalism rampant 141 

ing was over; but the aftermath, in the shape of bad blood 
and court cases, lasted a long time. I forget why the riot had 
begun. That year, or perhaps later, there was also some trouble 
over the Ram Lila celebrations at Allahabad. Probably because 
of restrictions about music before mosques, these celebrations, 
involving huge processions as they did, were abandoned as a 
protest. For about eight years now the Ram Lila has not been 
held in Allahabad, and the greatest festival of the year for htm- 
dreds of thousands in the Allahabad district has almost become 
a painful memory. How well I remember my visits to it when 
I was a child I How excited we used to get I And the vast crowds 
that came to see it from all over the district and even from other 
towns. It was a Hindu festival, but it was an open-air affair, 
and Muslims also swelled the crowds, and there was joy and 
lightheartedness everywhere. Trade flourished. Many years 
afterwards when, as a grown-up, I visited it I was not excited, 
and the procession and the tableaux rather bored me. My 
standards of art and amusement had gone up. But even then, 
I saw how the great crowds appreciated and enjoyed the show. 
It was carnival time for them. And now, for eight or nine years, 
the children of Allahabad, not to mention the grown-ups, have 
had no chance of seeing this show and having a bright day of 
joyful excitement in the dull routine of their lives. And all be- 
cause of trivial disputes and conflicts I Surely religion and the 
spirit of religion have much to answer for. What kill-joys they 
have beenl 



XX 


MUNICIPAL WORK 

For two years I carried on, but with an ever-increasing reluc- 
tance, with the Allahabad Municipality. My term of office as 
chairman was for three years. Before the second year was well 
begun, I was trying to rid myself of the responsibility. I had 
liked the work, and given a great deal of my time and thought 
to it. I had met with a measure of success and gained the good- 
will of all my colleagues. Even the Provincial Government had 
overcome its political dislike of me to the extent of commend- 
ing some of my municipal activities. And yet I found myself 
hedged in, obstructed and prevented from doing anything really 
worth while. 

It was not deliberate obstruction on anybody’s part; indeed, 
I had a surprising amount of willing co-operation. But 
on the one side, there was the Government machine; on the 
other, the apathy of the members of the municipality as 
well as the public. The whole steel-frame of municipal adminis- 
tration, as erected by Government, prevented radical growth or 
innovation. The financial policy was such that the municipality 
was always dependent on the Government. Most radical schemes 
of taxation or social development were not permissible under 
the existing municipal laws. Even such schemes as were legally 
permissible had to be sanctioned by Government, and only the 
optimists, vnth a long stretch of years before them, could con- 
fidently ask for and await this sanction. It amazed me to find 
out how slowly and laboriously and inefficiently the machinery 
of Government moved when any job of social construction, or 
of nation building was concerned. There was no slowness or 
inefficiency, however, when a political opponent had to be 
curbed or struck down. The contrast was marked. 

The d^aftment of the Provindal Government dealing with 
Local Self-government was presided over by a Minister; but, as 
a rule, this presiding genius was supremely ignorant of muui- 
apal a^irs or, indeed, of any public afiTaixs. Indeed, he counted 
for little and was largely ignored by his own department, which 
ws run by the permanent officials of the Indian Civil Service, 
^ese officials were influenced by the prevailing conception of 
high officials in India that government was primarily a police 
function. Some idea of authoritarian paternalism coloured this 

* 4 * 



MUNICIPAL VSfOiv.*. 


H3 

conception, but there was hardly any appreciation of the neces- 
sity of social services on a large scale. 

Government is always a creditor of the municipalities, and, 
next to the police view, it is the creditor’s view that it takes of 
them. Are the debt instalments paid regularly? Is the munici- 
pality thoroughly solvent, and has it got a substantial balance in 
hand? All very necessary and relevant questions, but it is often 
overlooked that the municipality has some positive functions to 
perform— education, sanitation, etc.— and that it is not merely 
an organisation for borrowing money and paying it back at 
regular intervals. The social services provided by Indian muni- 
cipalities are few enough, but even these are curtailed where 
there is financial stringency, and usually the first to suffer is 
education. The ruling classes are not personally interested in 
municipal schools ; their children go to more up-to-date and 
expensive private schools, often receiving grants-in-aid from the 
State. 

Most Indian cities can be divided into two parts : the densely 
crowded city proper, and the widespread area with bungalows 
and cottages, each with a fairly extensive compound or garden, 
usually referred to by the English as the ‘ Civil Lines It is in 
these Civil Lines that the English offidals and business-men, as 
well as many upper middle-class Indians, professional men, 
officials, etc., live. The income of the municipality from the 
city proper is greater than that from the Civil Line.s, but the 
expenditure on the latter far exceeds the city expenditure. For 
the far wider area covered by the Civil Lines requires more 
roads, and they have to he repaired, cleaned-up, watered, and 
lighted; and the drainage, the water supply, and the sanitation 
system have to he more widespread. The city part is always 
grossly neglected, and, of course, the poorer parts of the '•ity 
are almost ignored; it has few good roads, and most of the 
narrow lanes are ill-lit and have no proper drainage or sanitation 
system. It puts up with all these disabilities patiently and seldom 
complains; and when it does complain, nothing much happens. 
Nearly all the Big Noises and Little Noises live in the Civil 
lines. 

To equalise the burden a little and to encourage improvements, 
I wanted to introduce a tax on land values. But- hardly had I 
made the suggestion when a protest came from a Government 
official, I think it was the Distria Magistrate, who pointed our 
that this would be in contravention of various enactments or. 
conditions of land tenure. Such a tax would obviously have 
fallen more heavily on the owners of the bungalows in the Civil 



144 jawahahlal nehru 

Lines. But Government approves thoroughly of an indirect 
tax like the octroi which crushes trade, raises prices of all goods, 
including foodstuffs, and falls most heavily on the poor. And 
this most unsocial and harmful levy has been the mainstay of 
most Indian municipalities, though, I believe, it is very slowly 
disappearing in the larger cities. ^ 

As chairman of the Municipality I had thus to deal with, on 
the one side, an impersonal authoritarian government machine 
which jogged along laboriously in the old ruts and obstinately 
refused either to move faster or in a different direction; and on 
the other, were my colleagues, the members, most of whom 
were equally in the ruts. Some of them were idealists, and took 
to their work with enthusiasm, but taken as a whole there was 
no vision, no passion for change or betterment. The old ways 
were good enough, why try experiments which might not come 
off? Even the idealists and enthusiasts gradually succumbed to 
the narcotic effects of dull routine. But one subject could alwa5rs 
be relied upon to infuse vigour into the members — ^the subject 
of patronage and appointments. This interest did not always 
result in greater efficiency. 

Year after year government resolutions and officials and some 
newspapers criticise municipalities and local boards, and point 
out their many failings. And from this the moral is drawn that 
democratic institutions are not suited to India. Their failings 
are obvious enough, but little attention is mid to the frame- 
work within whioi they have to function. This framework is 
neither democratic nor autocratic; it is a cross between the 
two, and has the disadvantages of both. That a central govern- 
ment should have certain powers of supervision and control may 
be admitted, but this can only fit in with a popular local body 
if the central government itsdf is democratic and responsive to 
public needs. Where this is not so, there will either be a tussle 
between the two or a tame submission to the will of the central 
authority, which thus exercises power without in any way 
shouldering responsibility. This is obviously unsatisfactory, and 
it takes away from the reality of popular control. Even the 
members of the Municipal Board look more to the central 
authority than to their constituents, and the public also often 
ignores the Board. Real social issues hardly ever come before 
the Board, chiefly because they lie outside its functions, and its 
most obvious activities are tax-collecting, which do not maV^ it 
excessively popular. 

The franchise for flbie focal bodies is also limited, and should 
be greatly lowered and extended. Even a great city corporation 



MUNiCIPAL WORK 


H5 

like the Bombay Corporation is, I believe, elected on a very re- 
stricted franchise. Some time back a resolution asking for wider 
franchise was actually defeated in the Corporation itself. Evi- 
dently the majority of councillors were satisfied with their lot 
and saw no reason to change it or risk it. 

Whatever the reasons, the fact remains that our local bodies 
are not, as a rule, shining examples of success and efficiency, 
though they might, even so, compare with some municipalities 
in advanced democratic countries. They are not usually corrupt ; 
they are just inefficient, and their weak point is nepotism, and 
their perspectives are all wrong. All this is natural enough ; for, 
democracy to be successful, must have a background of in- 
formed public opinion and a sense of responsibility. Instead, we 
have an aU-pervading atmosphere of authoritarianism, and the 
accompaniments of democracy are lacking. There is no mass 
educational system, no effort to build up public opinion based 
on knowledge. Inevitably public attention turns to personal or 
communal or other petty issues. 

The main interest of Government in municipal administra- 
tion is that ‘ politics ’ should be kept out. Any resolution of 
sympathy with the national movement is frowned upon; text- 
boolu which might have a nationalist flavour are not permitted 
in the municipal schools, even pictures of national leaders are 
not allowed there. A national fla^ has to be pulled down on pain 
of suppression of the municipality. Lately a concerted attempt ■ 
seems to have been made by several Provincial Governments to 
hound out Congressmen from the service of the municipal cor- 
porations and boards. Usually, pressure was enough to bring this 
about, accompanied as it was with the threat of withholding 
various Government grants for municipal education or other 
purposes. But in some cases, notably that of the Calcutta Cor- 
poration,^ l^slation has been promoted to keep out all persons 
who may have gone to prison in connection with civil dis- 
obedience or any other political movement against the Govern- 
ment. The object was purely political ; there was no question 
of incompetence or unfimess for the job. 

These few instances show how much freedom our municipal 
and district boards have, how little democratic they are. The 
attempt to keep out political opponents from all municipal and 
local services — of course they dxd not go in for direct govern- 
ment service — deserves a little attention. It is esrimated that 
about three htmdred thousand persons have gone to prison at 
various times during the past fourteen years; and there can he 
no doubt that, politics apart, these three hundred thousand 

i 



146 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

included some of the most dynamic and idealistic, the most 
socially minded and selfless people in India. They had push 
and energy and the ideal of service to a cause. They were thus 
the best material from which a public department or utility 
service could draw its employees. And yet Government has 
made every effort, even to the extent of passing laws, to keep 
out these people, and so to punish them and those who sym- 
pathised with them. It prefers and pushes on the lap-dog breed, 
and then complains of the inefficiency of our local bodies. And 
although politics are said to be outside the province of local 
bodies, Government has no objection whatever to their indulg- 
ing in politics in support of itself. Teachers in local board schools 
have been practically compelled, for fear of losing their jobs, 
to go out in the villages to do propaganda on behalf of Govern- 
ment. 

During the last fifteen years Congress workers have had to face 
many difficult positions; they have shouldered heavy responsi- 
bilities; they have, after all, combated, not without success, a 
powerful and entrenched Government. This hard course of 
training has given them self-reliance and efficiency and strength 
to persevere; it has provided them with the very qualities of 
which a long and emasculating course of authoritarian govern- 
ment had deprived the Indian people. Of course, the Congress 
movement, like all mass movements, had, and has, many un- 
desirables— fixils, inefficients, and worse people. But I have no 
doubt whatevCT that an average Congress worker is likely to be 
far more efficient and dynamic than another person of aitnil^ir 
qualifications. 

There is one aspect of this matter which Government and its 
advisers perhaps do not appreciate. The attempt to deprive 
Congress workers of all jobs and to shut avenues of employ- 
ment to them is welcomed by the real revolutionary. The 
average Congressman is notoriously not a revolutionary, and 
after a period of semi-revolutionary action he resumes his hum- 
drum life ^d activities. He gets entangled either in his business 
or profession or in the mazes of local politics. Larger issues 
^m to fade off in his mind, and revolutionary ardour, such as 
it was, subsides. Muscle turns to fat, and spirit to a love of 
security. Because of this inevitable tendency of middle-class 
workers, it has always been the effort of advanced and revolu- 
tiona^-minded Congressmen to prevent their comrades ftom 
entering the constitutional mazes of the legislatures and the 
meal bodies, or accepting whole-time jobs which prevent them 
from effective action. The Government has, however, now romp 



MUNICIPAL WORK 


147 

to their help to some extent by making it a little more difEcult 
for the Congress worker to get a job^ and it is thus likely that he 
will retain some of his revolutionary ardour or even add to it. 

After a year or more of fnunidpal work I felt that I was not 
utilising my energies to the best advantage there. The most I 
could do was to speed-up work and make it a little more efficient. 
I could not push through any worth-while change. I wanted to 
resign from the chairmanship, but all the members of the Board 
pressed me to stay. I had received uniform kindness and courtesy 
from them, and I found it hard to refuse. At the end of my 
second year, however, I finally resigned. 

This was in 1925. In the autumn of that year my wife fell 
seriously ill, and for many months she lay in a Lucknow hospital. 
The Congress was held that year at Cawnpore, and, somewhat 
distracted, I rushed backwards and forwards between Allahabad, 
Cawnpore, and Lucknow. (I was still General Secretary of the 
Congress.) 

Further treatment in Switzerland was recommended for my 
wife. I welcomed the idea, for I wanted an excuse to go out of 
India myself. My mind was befogged, and no dear path was 
visible; and I thought that, perhaps, if I was far from India I 
could see .things in better perspective and lighten up the dark 
comers of my mind. 

At the beginning of March 1926 we sailed, my wife, our 
daughter and I, from Bombay for Venice. With us on the same 
boat went also my sister and brother-in-law, Ranjit S. Pandit. 
They had planned thdr European trip long before the question 
of our going had arisen. 



XXI 


IN EUROPE 

I was going back to Europe after more than thirteen years — 
years of war, and revolution, and tremendous change. The old 
world I knew had expired in the hlood and horror of the War 
and a new world awaited me. I expected to remain in Europe for 
six or seven months or, at most, till the end of the year. Actually 
our stay lengthened out to a year and nine months. 

It was a quiet and restful period for both my mind and body. 
We spent it chiefly in Switzerland, in Geneva, and in a mountain 
sanatorium at Montana. My yoimger sister, Krishna, came from 
India and joined us early in Ae summer of 1926, and remained 
with us till the end of our stay in Europe. I could not leave my 
wife for long, and so I could only pay brief visits to other places. 
Later, when my wife was better, we travelled a little in France, 
England, and Germany. On our mountain-top, surrounded by 
the winter snow, I felt completely cut off ftom India as well as 
the European world. India, and Indian happenings, seemed 
especially far away. I was a distant onlooker, reading, watching, 
following events, gazing at the new Europe, its politics, eco- 
nomics, and the &r freer human relationships, and trying to 
understand them. When we were in Geneva I was naturally 
interested in the activities of the I,eague of Nations and the 
International Labour Office. 

But with the coming of winter, the winter sports absorbed 
my attention ; for some months they were ray chief occupation 
and interest. I had done ice-skating previously, but sld-ing was 
a new experimee, and I succumbed to its fascination. It was a 
painful experience for a long time, but I persisted bravely, in 
spite of innumerable falls, and I came to enjoy it. 

Life was very uneventful on the whole. The days went by and 
my wife gradually gained strength and health. We saw few 
Inffians ; indeed, we saw few people apart from the little colony 
hvmg in that mountain resort. But in the course of the year 

Spent in Europe, we came across some 
mdian exiles and old revolutionaries whosfe names had been 
familiar to me. 

There was Shyamaji Krishnavarma living with his ailing wife 
high up the top floor of a house in Geneva. The aged couple 
lived by themselves with no whole-time servants, and their rooms 



IN EUROPE 


149 

were musty and suffocating, and everything had a thick layer 
of dust, Shyamaji had plenty of money, but he did not believe 
in spending it. He would even save a few centimes by walking 
instead of taking the tram. He was suspicious of all comers, 
presuming them, until the contrary was proved, to be either 
British agents or after his money. His pockets bulged with 
ancient copies of his old paper, the Indian Sociolo^t, and he 
would pull them out and point with some excitement to some 
article he had written a dozen years previously. His talk was 
of the old days, of India House at Hampstead, of the various 
persons that the British Government had sent to spy on him, and 
how he had spotted them and outwitted them. The walls of his 
rooms were covered with shelves full of old books, dust-laden 
and neglected, looking down sorrowfully on the intruder. Books 
and papers also littered the floor; they seemed to have remained 
so for days and weeks, and even months past. Over the whole 
place there hung an atmosphere -of gloom, an air of decay; 
life seemed to be an unwelcome stranger there, and, as one 
walked through the dark and silent corridors, one almost ex- 
pected to come across, round the comer, the shadow of death. 
With relief one came out , of that flat and breathed the air 
outside. 

Shyamaji desired to make some arrangement about his money, 
to create some trust for a public purpose, preferably for the edu- 
cation of Indians in foreign countries. He suggested that I 
might be one of the trustees, but I showed no keenness for 
shouldering this responsibility. I had no desire to get mixed up 
with his financial affairs; and, besides, I felt that if I showed any 
undue interest he would immediately suspect me of coveting his 
money. No one knew how much he had. It was rumoured that 
he had lost greatly in the German inflation. 

Occasionally prominent Indians used to pass through Geneva. 
Those who came to the League of Nations were of the official 
variety, ^d Shyamaji would not, of coune, go anywhere near 
them. But the Labour Office sometimes brought non-officiab 
of note, even prominent Congressmen, and Shyamaji would try 
to meet them. It was interesting to watch their reactions to him. 
Invariably they felt uncomfortable, and tried to avoid him in 
public, and excused themselves, whenever they could, in private. 
He was not considered a safo person with whom to be associated 
or seen "with. 

And so Shyamaji and his wife lived their lonely life without 
children or relatives or friends, with hardly any associations, 
hardly any human contacts. He was a relic of the past, and had 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


really outlived his day. He did not fit in with the present, and 
the world passed him by, ignoring him. But there was still some 
of the old fire in his eyes, and though there was little in common 
between him and me, I could not withhold my sympathy and 
consideration for him. 

Recently the newspapers reported his death, followed soon 
after by the death of the gentle Gujrati old lady who had been 
his life-long companion in exile in foreign lands. It was stated 
that a large sum of money was left by her for the training of 
Indian women abroad. 

Another well-known person whose name I had often heard, 
but whom I met for the first time in Switzerland, was Raja 
Mahendra Pratap. He was (and, I suppose, is still) a delightful 
optimist, living completely in the air and refusing to have any- 
thing to do with realities. 1 was a little taken aback when I first 
saw him. He appeared in strange composite attire, which might 
have been suit^le in the highlands of Tibet or in the Siberian 
plains, but was completely out of place at Montreux in the sum- 
mer. It was a kind of semi-military costume, with high Russian 
boots, and there were numerous large pockets, all biuring with 
papers, photographs, etc. There was a letter from Bethman- 
HoUweg, the German Chancellor, an autographed picture of* 
the Kaiser, a fine scroll from the Dalai Lama of Tibet, and 
innumerahle documents and pictures. It was amazing how much 
those various pockets contained. He’ told us that once he had 
lost a dispatch-box, containing valuable papers, in China, and 
ever since then he had considered it safer to carry his papers on 
his person! Hence the numerous pockets. 

Mahendra Pratap was full of stories of his wanderings and 
adventure in Japan, China, Tibet, and Afghanistan. He had 
led a varied life, and the record of it was an interesting one. 
His latest enthusiasm was 'for a 'Happiness Society’ which 
he had himself founded, and which had for its motto : ” Be 
Apparently this society had met with greatest success 
in Latvia (or was it Lithuania?). 

His idea of propaganda was to send out periodically large 
numbers of post cards containing a printed message from 
to members of various conferences that met in Geneva or else- 
where. These messages were signed by him, but the name given 
was an extraordinary one— long and varied. * Mahendra Pratap ’ 
had been reduced to initials,- but many other names had been 
added, each addition representing apparently some favoured 
country he had visited. In this way he emphasized his inter- 
national and cosmopolitan character, and, fittingly, the final 



IN EUROPE 


151 

description below this unique name was " Servant of Mankind 
It was difficult to take Mahendra Pratap seriously. He seemed 
to be a character out of medieval -romance, a Don Quixote who 
had strayed into the twentieth century. But he was absolutely 
straight and thoroughly earnest. 

In Paris we saw old Madame Cama, rather fierce and terri- 
fying as she came up to you and peered into your face, and, 
pointing at you, asked abruptly who you were. The answer 
made no difference (probably she was too deaf to hear it) for she 
formed her own impressions and stuck to them, despite facts to 
the contrary. 

Then there was Moulvi Obeidulla, whom I met for a short 
while in Italy. He seemed to me to be clever, but rather in the 
sense of possessing an ability for old-style political manoeuvring. 
He was not in touch with modern ideas. He had produced a 
scheme for the ' United States ’ or ‘ United Republics of India 
which was quite an able attempt to solve the commvmal prob- 
lem. He tdld me of some of his pasi activities in Istanbul (it 
was still called Constantinople then) and, not attaching mu^ 
importance to them, I soon ffirgot about them. Some months 
later he met Lala Lajpat Rai and, apparently, repeated the 
same story to him. Lalaji was vastly impressed and exercised 
about it, and that story, with many unjustifiable inferences 
and amazing deductions, played an important part in the 
Indian Council elections that year. Moulvi Obeidulla later went 
to the Hedjaz, and for years past no news of him has come my 
way. 

Another Moulvi, but a different type entirely, was Barkatulla 
whom I first met in Berlin. He was a ddightml old man, very 
enthusiastic and very likeable. He was ramer simple, not very 
intelligent, but still trying to imbibe new ideas and to under- 
stand the present-day world. He died in San Francisco in 1927, 
while we were in Switzerland. I was grieved to learn of his 
passing away. 

In Berlin there was quite a number of those who had ffirmed 
an Indian group in war-time, but the group had long gone to 
pieces. They had feUen out and quarreUed amongst themselves, 
each suspecting the other of betrayal. That seems to be the 
fate of political exiles everywhere. Many of these Berlin Indians 
had settled down to sedate middle-class occupations— when these 
could be had, and that was not often in post-war Germany— -and 
had ceased to be in any way revolutionary. They even avoided 
politics. 

The story of this old war-time group was interesting. Most of 



153 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

them were students in various German universities in that 
feteful summer of 1914. They lived a common life with the 
German students, sang their songs, joined in their games, drank 
beer with them, and approached their culture with sympathy 
and consideration. The War was no concern of theirs, but they 
could not help being moved to some extent by the wave, of 
nationalistic hysteria that swept over Germany. Their feeling 
was really anti-British, and not pro-German, and their Indian 
nationalism inclined them to the enemies of Britain. Soon after 
the outbreak of the War a few other Indians, more consciously 
revolutionary, drifted into Germany through Switzerland. These 
people formed themselves into a committee, and sent for Har- 
dayal, who was on the west coast of the United States at the 
time. Hardayal came some months later, but meanwhile the 
Committee had become quite important. This importance had 
been thrust upon them by the German Government, who were, 
naturally, anxious to exploit all anti-British feelings to their 
own advantage. The Indians, on their part, wanted to take 
advantage of the international simation for their own national- 
istic purposes, and had no intention of allowing themselves to 
be exploited purely for Germany’s advantage. They did not 
have much choice in the matter, but they felt 'that they had 
something to give which the German authorities were keen on 
haying, and this gave them a handle to bargain with. They 
insist^ on assurances and pledges for Indian freedom. The 
German Foreign Office seems to have entered into a regular 
treaty with them, in which it pledged itself to acknowledge 
Indian independence in case of victory, and it was on this pledge 
and condition, and many other minor conditions, that the Indian 
^oup promised support in the war. The Committee was offi- 
cially honoured in every way, md its representatives were treated 
almost on the footing of foreign ambassadors. 

This sudden importance, thrust on a small group consisting 
mainly of inexperienced young men, went to the heads of some 
of them. They felt that they were playing a historic rdle, that 
they were involved in great and epoch-making undertaHngs. 
Many of them had exciting adventures, hair-breadth escapes. 
In the later stages of the war, their importance visibly lessened, 
rad they began to be ignored. Hardayal, who had come over 
nrom America, had long been discarded. He did not fit in with 
the Committee at all, and both the Committee and the German 
Goveanment considered him unreliable, and quietly pushed 
him aside. Years later, when I was in Europe in ipafi and 
i 9 * 7 » I surprised to find with what bitterness and resent- 



IN EUROPE 


«53 

mem most of the old Indian residents in Europe thought of 
Hardayal. He lived at the time In Sweden. I did not meet 
him. 

The War ended, and with it ended finally the Indian Com- 
mittee in Berlin. Life became a dreary affair for them after the 
failure of all their hopes. They had gambled for high stakes 
and lost. In any event, life would have seemed a humdrum 
affair after the nigh adventure and importance of those war- 
time years. But even a secure, humdrum life was not to be had 
for the asking. They could not return to India, and defeated 
Germany after the War was not an easy place to live in. It was 
a hard struggle. A few of them were later allowed by the 
British Government to return to India, but many had to stay 
on in Germany. Their position was peculiar. They were, 
apparently, citizens of no State. They had no proper passports. 
Travel outside Germany was hardly possible, even residence in 
Germany was full of difficulties and was at the mercy of the 
local police. It was a life of insecurity and hardship, and day-to- 
day worry; of continual anxiety to find the wherewithal to eat 
and live. 

The Nazi regime since early in 1933 has added to their mis- 
fortunes, unless they fall in completely with the Nazi doctrine. 
Non-Nordic, and especially Asiatic, foreigners are not welcome 
in Germany; they are only suffered to exist so long as they 
behave. Hitler has pointedly declared himself in favour of 
British imperialist rule in Inffia, no doubt because he wants to 
gain the goodwill of Britain, and he does not wish to encourage 
any Indians who may have displeased the British Government. 

One of the exiles in Berlin whom we met, a prominent mem- 
ber of the old war-time group, was Champakraman Pillai. He 
was rather pompous, and young Indian students had given him 
an irreverent title. He could think in terms of nationalism only, 
and shrunk away from the social or economic approach to a 
question. With the German Nationalists, the Steelhelmets, he 
was perfectly at home. He was one of the very few Indians in 
Germany who got on w:th the Nazis. A few months bade, in 
gaol, I read of his death in Berlin. 

An entirely different type of person was Virendranath Chat - 
topadhvava . member of a famous family in India. PopuIa:ff v 
knovm as Chatto . he was a very able and a very deliglit^l 
person. He was always hard up, his dothes were very much 
the worse for wear, and often he found it difficult to raise the 
wherewithal for a meal. But his humour and lightheartedness 
never left him. He had been some years senior to me during my 



1^4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

educational days in England. He was at Oxford when I went 
to Harrow. Since those days he had jiot returned to India, and, 
sometimes, a fit of homesickness came to him, when he longed 
to be back. All his home-ties had long been severed, and it is 
quite certain that if he came to India he would soon feel un- 
happy and out of joint. But in spite of the passage of many 
years and long wandering, the pull of the home remains. No 
exile can escape the malady of his tribe, that consumption of 
the soul, as Mazzini called it. 

I must say that I was not greatly impressed by most of the 
Indian political exiles that I met abroad, although I admired 
their sacrifice, and sympathised with their sulferings and present 
difficulties, which are very real. I did not meet many of them; 
there are so many spread out all over the world. Only a few 
are known to us even by reputation, and the others have dropped 
out of the Indian world and been forgotten by thrir countrymen 
whom they sought to serve. Of the few I met, the only persons 
who impressed me intellectually were V. Chattopadhyaya and 
M. N. Roy. Roy I met for a brief half-hour in Moscow. He was 
a leading Communist then, although, subsequently, his com- 
munism drifted away from the orthodox Comintern brand, 
Chatto was not, I believe, a regular Communist, but he was 
communistically inclined. Roy has been in an Indian prison 
for more than three years now. 

There were many other Indians floating about the face of 
Europe, talking a revolutionary language, making daring and 
fimtasdc suggestions, asking curious questions. They seemed 
to have the impress of the British Secret Service upon them. 

We met, of course, many Europeans and Americans. From 
Geneva we went on a pilgrimage many a time (the first time 
with a letter of introduction ftom Gandhijl) to the ViUa Olga 
at Villeneuve, to see Romain RoUand. Another precious 
memory is that of Ernst Toller, the young German poet and 
dramatist, now, under Nazi rule, no longer a German; and of 
Roger Baldwin, of the Civil liberties Union of New York. In 
Geneva we also made fiiends with Dhan Gopal Mukerji, the 
author, who has settled down in America. 

Before going to Europe I had met Frank Buchman, of the 
Oxfmd Group Movement, in India. He had given me some of 
the literature of his movement, and I had read it with amaze- 
ment. Sudden conversions and confessions, and a reidvalist 
atmosphere generally, seemed to me to go ill with intellectuality. 
I could not make out how some persons, who seemed obviouriy 
intelligent, should experience these strange emotions and be 



IN EUROPE 


155 

affected by them to a great extent. I grew curious. I met Frank 
Buchman again, in Geneva, and he invited me to one of his 
international house-parties, somewhere in Rumania, I think, this 
otie was. I was sorry I could not go and look at this new emo- 
tionalism at close quarters. My curiosity has thus remained 
unsatisfied, and the more I read of the growth of the Oxford 
Group Movement, the more I wonder. 



XXII 


CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 

Soon after our arrival in Switzerland, the General Strike broke 
out in England. I was vastly excited, and my sympathies were 
naturally all on the strikers’ side. The collapse of the strike, 
after a few days, came almost as a personal blow. Some months 
later I happened to visit England for a few days. The miners’ 
struggle was still on, and London lay in semi-darkness at night. 
I paid a brief visit to a mining area — I think it was somewhere 
in Derbyshire. I saw the haggard and pinched faces of the men 
and women and children and, more revealing still, I saw many 
of the strikers and their wives being tried in the local or coimty 
court. The magistrates were themselves directors or managers 
of the coal mines, and they tried the miners and sentenced them 
for trivial offences under certain emergency regulations. One 
case especially angered me : three or four women, with babies in 
their arms, were brought ^ in the dock for the offence of having 
jeered at the blacklegs. Tne young mothers (and their babie^ 
were obviously miserable and undernourished; the long struggle 
had told upon them and enfeebled them, and embittered them 
against the scabs who seemed to take the bread from their 
mouths. 

One reads often about class justice, and in India nothing is 
commoner than this, but somehow I had not expected to come 
across such a flagrant example of it in England. It came as 
a shock. Another fact that I noticed with some surprise was the 
general atmosphere of fear among the strikers. They had 
definitely been terrorised by the police and the authorities, and 
they put up very meekly, I thought, with rather offensive treat- 
ment. It is true that they were thorougjhly exhausted after a long 
struggle, their spirit was near breaking-point, their comrades of 
other trade unions had long deserted them. But still, compared 
to the poor Indian worker, there was a world of difference. The 
British miners had still a powerful organisation, the sympathy 
of a nation-wide, and indeed world-wide, trade union move- 
ment, publicity, and resources of many kinds. All these were 
•lacking to the Indian worker. And yet that frightened and 
terrorised look in the two had a strange resemblance. 

In In^a that year there were the triennial elections to the 
Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils. I was not 

Iii6 



CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 


> 57 - 

interested in them, but some echoes of fierce controversies 
managed to reach me in Switzerland. I learnt of a new party 
having been formed by Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and 
Lala Lajpat Rai to oppose the Swaraj Party or the regular Con- 
gress Party in the legislature, as it now vras. The Nationalist 
Party, this was called. I could not make out, and I stiU do not 
know, what grounds of principle separated the new party from 
the old. Indeed, most present-day Indian parties in the legis- 
lature are like Tweedledum and Tweedledee; no real principles 
separate them. The Swaraj Party, for the first time, brought a 
new and aggressive element in the Councils, and it stood for a 
more extreme political policy than the others. But the difference 
was one of degree, not of kind. 

The new Nationalist. Party represented a more moderate out- 
look, and was definitely more to the right than was the Swaraj 
Party. It was also wholly a Hindu party working in close co- 
operation with the Hindu Mahasabha. Pandit Malaviya’s leader- 
ship of it was easy to understand, for it represented as nearly as 
possible his own public attitude. He had, because of old associa- 
tions, continued to remain in the Congress, but his intellectual 
outlook was not dissimilar to that of the Liberals or Moderates. 
He had not taken kindly to non-co-operation and the new direct 
action methods of the Congress, and had had no share in shaping 
Congress policy. Although greatly respected and always welcome 
to it, he was not really of the new Congress. He was not a mem- 
ber of its small executive, the Working Committee. He did not 
carry out the Congress mandates, especially in regard to the legis- 
latures. He was also the most popular leader of the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, and, in regard to commimal matters, his policy differed 
from that of the Congress. To Congress he had that sentimental 
attachment to an organisation with which he had been con- 
nected almost from the very begnning, partly to an emotional . 
pull in the direction of the freedom struggle, for he saw that the 
Congress was the only organisation doing anything effective 
about it. His heart was thus often in the Congress camp, especi- 
allj in times of struggle; his head was in other camps. Inevitably 
this led to a continual conflict within him, and occasionally to a 
simultaneous attempt to march in opposite directions. The result 
was public confusion; but nationalism is a confusing medley, and 
Malaviyaji was a nationalist alone and not concerned with 
social or economic change. He was, and is, a supporter of the 
old orthodox order culturally, socially, economically; the Indian 
princes and the taluqadars and big zamindars consider him 
rightly as a benevolent friend. The sole change he desires, and 



IjS . JAWAHARtAL NEHRU 

desires passionately, is the complete elimination of foreign 
control in India. The political training and reading of his youth 
still influence his mind greatly, and he looks upon this dynamic, 
revolutionary, post-war world of the twentieth century with the 
spectacles of a semi-static nineteenth century, of T, H. Green 
and John Stuart Mill and Gladstone and Morley, and a three- or 
four-thousand-year background of old Hindu culture and socio- 
logy, It is a curious combination, brisding with contradictions, 
but he has an amazing confidence in his own capacity to resolve 
contradictions. His long record of public service in various fields 
firom early youth upwards, his success in establishing a grfeat 
institution like the Benares Hindu University, his manifest sin- 
cerity and earnestness, his impressive oratory, and his gentle 
nature and winning personality, have endeared him to the Indian 
public, particularly Ae Hindu public, and though many may not 
agree with him or follow him in politics, they yield him respert 
and affection. Both by his age and his long public record he is 
the Nestor of Indian politics, but a Nestor who seems a little out 
of date, and very much out of touch, with the modern world. 
His voice commands attention, but the language he speaks is no 
longer understood or heeded by many. 

It was natural, therefore, for Malaviyaji not to'join the Swaraj 
Party, which was too advanced politically for him and required 
a disciplined adherence to the Congress policy. He wanted some- 
thing more to the right and grmer latitude, both politically and 
communally, and he got this in a new party, of which he was 
the founder and leader. 

It is not so easy to understand Lala Lajpat Rai’s adherence to 
this new party, though his inclination was also somewhat to the 
right as wdl as towards a more communal orientation. I bad 
met Lalaji in Geneva that summer, and from our talks I had not 
gathered that he contemplated trddng up an aggressive attitude 
against the Congress Party. How this happened I have still no 
idea. But in the course of tibe election campaign, he made certain 
^gue charges, which showed how his mind had been working. 
He accused the Congress leaders of intriguing with people out- 
side India. He further accused them of some such mtrigue in , 
establishing a Congress branch in Kiahul. I do not tbink he ever 
specified his charges or went into any details, in spite of repeated 
requests. ^ 

I remember that when I read in the Indian papers that readbed 
iM m Switzerland about Ijalaji’s charges I was astounded. As 
Confess Secretary, I knew all about our organisation; I had 
myself been instrumental in getting the Kabul Committee affili- 



CONTROVERSIES IN INDIA 


159 

atcd (Deshbandhu Das had taken the initiative in the matter); 
and though I did not then know (as I do not now know) the 
details of the charges, I could say from their general nature that 
they could have no foundation so far as the Congress was con- 
cerned. I do not know how Lalaji was misled in the matter. He 
may have relied on various rumours, and I think he must have 
been influenced by the talk he had recently had with Moulvi 
ObeiduUa, although there was nothing in that talk which seemed 
extraordinary to me. But elections are extraordinary phenomena. 
They have a curious way of upsetting tempers and ordinary 
standards. The more I see of them the more I wonder, and a 
wholly undemocratic distaste of them grows vtithin me. 

But, personalities apart, the rise of the Nationalist Party, or 
some such party, was inevitable owing to the growing communal 
temper of the country. On the one side, there were the Muslim 
fears of a Hindu majority; on the other side, Hindu resentment 
at being bullied, as they conceived it, by the Muslims. Many a 
Hindu felt that there was too much of the stand-up-and-deliver 
about the Muslim attitude, too much of an attempt to extort 
special privileges vidth the threat of going over to the other side. 
Because of this, the Hindu Mahasabna rose to some importance, 
representing as it did Hindu nationalism, Hindu communalism 
opposing h&slim communalism. The aggressive activities of the 
Mahasabha acted on and stimulated stul flirther this Muslim 
communalism, and so action and reaction went on, and in the 

g rocess the communal temperature of the country went up. 

IssentiaUy this was a question between the majority group in the 
country and a big minority. But, curiously enough, in some 
parts of the country the position was reversed. In the Punjab 
and Sind the Hindus as well as the Sikhs were in a minority, the 
Muslims in a majority; and these provincial minorities had as 
much fear of being crushed by a hostile majority in those 
provinces as the Muslims had in the whole of India. Or, to be 
more accurate, the middle-class jobseekers in each group were 
afraid of being ousted by the otaier group, and to some extent 
the holders of vested interests were afraid of radical changes 
afEecting those interests. 

The Swaraj, Party suffered because of this growth of com- 
nu^hsm. Some of its Muslim'members dropped off wd joined 
the "communal orgahlsations, and some of its Hindu .inembers 
drifted off to the Nationalist P^ty. Malavi^ji and Lala Lajpat 
Raimade a powerful combinarion so fer as the Hindu electorate 
was concerned, and Lalaji had great influence in thfi„Punjab> the 
storm centre of communalism. On the side of the Swaraj Pany" 



l6o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

or Congress, the chief burden of fighting the elections fell on 
my father. C. R. Das was no longer there to share it with him. 
He enjoyed a fight, or at any rate never shirked it, and the grow- 
ing strength of the opposition made him throw all his great 
energy into the election campaign. He received and gave hard 
blowsj little grace was shown or quarter given by either party. 
That election left a trail of bitter memories. 

The Nationalist Party met with a great measure of success, 
but this success definitely lowered the political tone of the Legis- 
lative Assembly. The centre of gravity moved more to the right. 
The Swaraj Party had itself been the right wing of the Congress. 
In its attempts to add to its strength, it had allowed many a 
doubtful person to creep in, and had suffered in quality because 
of this. The Nationalist Party followed the same policy, only 
on a lowCT plane, and a motley crew of title-];iolders, big land- 
holders, industrialists and others, who had little to do with 
politics, came into its ranks. 

The end of tha.t year 1926 was darkened by a great tragedy, 
which sent a thrill of horror all over India. It showed to what 
depths communal passion could reduce our people. Swami 
Shraddhanand was assassinated by a fanatic as he lay in bed. 
What a death for a man who had bared his chest to the bayonets 
of the Gurkhas and marched to meet their fire I Nearly eight 
years earlier he, an Arya Samajist leader, had stood in the pulpit 
of the great Jame Musjid of Delhi and preached to a mighty 
gathering of Muslims and Hindus of unity and India’s fieedom. 
And that great multitude had greeted him with loud cries of 
Hindu-Musalman-ki-jai, and outside in the streets they had 
jointly sealed that cry with their blood. And now he lay dead, 
killed by a fellow-countryman, who thought, no doubt, that he 
was doing a meritorious deed, which would lead him to paradise. 

Always I have admired sheer physical courage, the coWge to 
face physical suffering in a good cause, even unto death. Most of 
us, I suppose, admire it, Swami Shraddhanand had an 
amount of that fearlessness. His tall and stately figure, wrapped 
m a sanyKin's robe, perfectly erect in spite of advanced yms, 
eyes flasbii^, sometimes a shadow of irritation ot anger at the 
we^ess of others passing over his face— how I remember that 
vivid picture, and how often it has come back to met 



XXIII 


THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 

Towards the end of 1926 1 happened to be in Berlin, and I learnt 
there of a forthcoming Congress of Oppressed Nationalities, 
which was to be held at Brussels. The idea appealed to ine, and 
I wrote home, suggesting that the Indian National Congress 
might take official part in the Brussels Congress. My suggestion 
was approved, and I was appointed the Indian Congress repre- 
sentative for this purpose. 

The Brussels Congress was held early in February 1927. I do 
not know who originated the idea. Berlin was at the time a centre 
which attracted political exiles and radical elements from abroad; 
it was gradually catching up Paris in that respect. The Com- 
munist element was also strong there. Ideas of some common 
action between oppressed nations inter $e, as well as between 
them and the Labour left wing, were very much in the air. It 
was felt more and more that ffie struggle for freedom was a 
common one against the thing that was imperialism, and joint 
deliberation and, where possmle, joint acuon were desirable. 
The colonial Powers— England, France, Italy, etc., were natur- 
ally hostile to any such attempts being made, but Germany was, 
since the War, no longer a colonial Power, and the German 
Government viewed wiui a benevolent neutrality the growth of 
agitation in the colonies and dependencies of other Powers. This 
was one of the reasons which made Berlin a centre for advanced 
and disaftected elements from abroad. Among these the most 
prominent and active were the Chinese belonging to the left wing 
of the Kuo-Min-Tang, which was then sweeping across China, 
and the old feudal elements seemed to be rollmg down befere its 
irresistible advance. Even the Imperialist powers lost their 
aggressive habits and minatory tone befere this new phenome- 
non. It appeared that the solution of the problem of China's 
unity and freedom could not long be delayed. The Kuo-Min- 
Tang was flushed with success, but it knew the difficulties that 
lay ahead, and it wanted to stiaigthen itself by international 
propaganda. Probably it was the left wring of the party, co- 
operating with . Communists and near-Commimists abroad, that 
laid stress on this propaganda, both to strengthen China’s 
national position abroad and its own position in the Party ranks 
at home. The Party had not split up at the time into two or 

ii/T .161 



l62 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

more rival and bitterly hostile groups, and presented, to all out- 
ward seeming, a united front. 

The European representatives of the Kuo-Min-Tang, there- 
fore, welcomed the idea of the Congress of Oppressed Nationali- 
ties; perhaps they even originated the idea jointly with some 
other people. Some Communists and near-Communists were also 
at the back of the proposal right from the beginning, but, as a 
whole, the Communist element kept in the backgroimd. Active 
support and help also came from Latin America, which was 
chafing at the time at the economic imperialism of the United 
States. Mexico, with a radical President and policy, was eager 
to take the lead in a Latin American bloc against the United 
States; and Mexico, therefore, took great interest in the Brussels 
Congress. Officially the Government could not take part, but it 
sent one of its leading diplomats to be present as a benevolent 
observer. 

There were also present at Brussels representatives from the 
national organisations of Java, Indo-China, Palestine, Syria, 
Egypt, Arabs from North Africa, and African Negroes. Then 
there were many left-wing Labour organisations represented, and 
several well-known men, who had played a leading part in Euro- 
pean Labour struggles .for a generation, were present. Com- 
munists were there also, and they took an important part in the 
jiroceedings; they came not as Communists, but as representa- 
tives of trade umon or similar organisations. 

George Lansbury was elected president, and he delivered an 
eloquent address. That in itself was proof that the Congress 
was not so rabid after all, nor was it merely hitched on to the star 
of Communism. But there is no doubt that the gathering was 
friendly towards the Communists, and, even though agreement 
might be lacking on some matters, there appeared to be several 
common grounds for aaion. 

Mr. Lansbury agreed to be president also of the permanent 
organisation that was formed— the League Against Imperialism. 
But he repented of his rash behaviour soon, or perhaps his 
colleagues of the British Labour Party did not approve of it. 
The Labour Party was ‘ His Majesty’s Opposition ' then, soon to 
blossom out as ‘ Ifrs Majesty’s Government ’, and future Cabinet 
Ministers cannot dabble in risky and revolutionary politics. Mr. 
Lansbury resigned from the presidentship on the ground ' of 
being too busy &r it; he even resigned from the membership of 
the League.. I was hurt by this sudden change in a person whose 
speech I had admired only two or three months earlier. 

The League Against Imperialism had, however, quite a num- 



THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 163 

ber of distinguished persons as its patrons, Einstein was one of 
them, and Madame Sun Yat Sen and, I think, Remain Rolland. 
Many months later Einstein resigned, as he disagreed with the 
pro-Arab policy of the League in the Arab-Jewish quarrels in 
Palestine. 

The Brussels Congress, as well as the subsequent Committee 
meetings of the League, which were held in various places from 
time to time, helped me to understand some of the problems of 
colonial and dependent countries. They gave me also an insight 
into the inner conflicts of the Western Labour world. I knew 
something about them already; I had read about them, but there 
was no reality behind my knowledge, as there had been no per- 
sonal contacts. I had some such contacts now, and sometimes 
had to face problems which reflected these inner conflicts. As 
between the Labour worlds of the Second International and the 
Third International, my sympathies were with the latter. The 
whole record of the Second International from the War onwards 
filled me with distaste, and we in India had had sufficient per- 
sonal experience of the methods of one of its strongest supports 
— the British Labour Party. So I turned inevitably with good- 
will towards Communism, for, whatever its faults, it was at least 
not hypocritical and not imperialistic. It was not a doctrinal 
adherence, as I did not know much about the fine points of 
Communism, my acquaintance being limited at the time to its 
broad features. These attracted me, as also the tremendous 
changes taking place in Russia. But Communists-often irritated 
me by their dictatorial ways, their aggressive and rather vulgar 
methods, their habit of denouncing everybody who did not agree 
with them. This reaction was no doubt due, as they would say, 
to my own bourgeois education and up-bringing. 

It was curious how, in our League Against Imperialism Com- 
mittee meetings, I would usually be on the side of the Anglo- 
American members on petty matters of argument. There was a 
certain similarity in our outlook in regard to method at least. 
We would both object to declamatory and long-winded resolu- 
tions, which resembled manifestos. We preferred something 
simpler and shorter, but the Continental tradition was against 
this. There was often difference of opinion between the Com- 
munist elements and the non-Communists. Usually we agreed 
on a compromise. Later on, some of us returned to our homes 
and could not attend any further Committee meetings. 

The Brussels Congress was viewed with some consternation by 
the Foreign and Colonial Offices of the Imperialist powers. 
'Angur’, the well-known writer of the British Foreign Office, 



164 JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 

has given a somewhat sensational, and occasionally ludicrous, 
account of it in one of his books. The Congress itself was 
probably full of international spies, mahy of the delegates even 
representing various secret services. We had an amusing instance 
of this. An American friend of mine, who was in Paris, had a 
visit from a Frenchman who belonged to the French secret 
service. It was quite a friendly visit to enquire about certain 
matters. When he had finished his enquiries he asked the 
American if he did not recognise him, for they had met 
previously. The American looked hard, but he had to admit 
that he could not place him at aU. The secret service agent then 
told him that he had met him at the Brussels Congress as a 
Negro delegate, with his face, hands, etc., all blacked overl 

One of the meetings of the Committee of the League Against 
Imperialism took place at Cologne, and I attended it. After the 
meeting was over we were asked to go to Dusseldorf, near by, to 
attend a Saccho-Vanzetti meeting. As we were returning from 
that meeting, we were asked to show our passports to the police. 
Most of the people had their passports with them, but I had 
left mine at the hotel in Cologne, as we had only come for a few 
hours to Dusseldorf. I was thereupon marched to a police^tation. 
Fortunately for me I had companions in distress— an English- 
man and his wife, who also had left their passport in Cologne. 
After about an hour’s wait, during which probably tdephonic 
enquiries were made, the police chief was graciously pleased to 
allow us to depart. 

The League Against Imperialism veered more towards Com- 
munism in later years, though at no time, so far as I know, did 
it lose its individual character. I could only remain in distant 
touch with it Iw means of correspondence. In 1931, because of 
my part in the Delhi truce between the Congress and the Govern- 
ment of India, it grew exceedingly angry witib me, and excom- 
municated me with bell, book, and candle — or to be more accu- 
rate, it expelled me by some kind of a resolution. I must confess 
that it had great provocation, but it might have given me some 
chance of explaining my position. 

In the summer of 1917 my father came to Europe. I met biTvi 
at Venice, and during the next few months we were often 
together. All of us — ^my father, my wife, my young sister, and 
I — paid a brief visit to Moscow in November during the tenth 
anniversary celebrations of the Soviet. It was a very brief visit, 
just three or four days in Moscow, decided upon at the last 
moment. But we were glad we went, for even that glimpse 
was worth while. It did not, and could not, tearb ns much about 



THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 165 

the new Russia, but it did give us a background for our reading. 
To my father all such Soviet and collectivist ideas were wholly 
novel. His whole training had been legal and constitutional, and 
he could not easily get out of that framew'ork. But he was 
definitely impressed by what he saw in Moscow. 

We were in Moscow when the announcement about the Simon 
Commission was first made. We first read about it in a Moscow 
sheet. A few days' aftenvards, fether was appearing in the Prity 
Council in London in an Indian appeal with Sir John Simon 
as a colleague. It was an old zamindari case in the earlier stages 
of which, many years previously, I had also appeared. I had 
no further interest in it, but at Sir John Simon’s suggestion I 
accompanied my father on one occasion to Sir John’s chambers 
for a consultation. 

The year 1937 was drawing to an end, and our stay in Europe 
had been unduly prolonged. Probably we would have returned 
home sooner but ror father visiting Europe. It was our intention 
to spend some lime in south-eastern Europe and Turkey and 
Egypt on our way back. But there was no time for this then, 
and I was eager to be back in time for the next Congress session 
which was going to be held in Madras at Christma.s-time. We 
sailed firom Marseilles, my wife, sister, daughter and I, early in 
December for Colombo. My fiither remained in Europe for 
another three months. 



XXIV 


RETURN TO INDIA AND PLUNGE BACK 
INTO POLITICS 

I WAS returning from Europe in good physical and mental con- 
dition. My wife was not yet wholly recovered, but she was far 
better, and that relieved me of anxiety on her score. I felt full 
of energy and vitality, and the sense of inner conflict and 
frustration that had oppressed me so often previously was, for 
the time being, absent. My outlook was wider, and nationalism 
by itself seemed to me definitely a narrow and insufficient creed. 
Political freedom, independence, were no doubt essential, but 
they were steps only in the right direction; without social free- 
dom and a socialistic structure of society and the State, neither 
the coimtry nor the individual could develop much. I felt I had 
a clearer perception of world affairs, more grip on the present- 
day world, ever changing as it was. I had read largely, not only 
on current affairs and politics, but on many other subjects that 
interested me, cultural and scientific. I found the vast political, 
economic, and cultural changes going on in Europe and 
America a fascinating study, ^viet Russia, despite certain un- 
pleasant aspects, attracted me greatly, and seemed to hold forth 
a message of hope to the world. Europe, in the middle ’twenties, 
was trying to settle down in a way; the great depression was yet 
to come. But I came back with the conviction that this settling 
down was superficial only, and big eruptions and mighty changes 
were in store for Europe and the world in the near future, 

.To train and prepare our country for these world events — ^to 
keep in readiness for them, as far ^ we could— seemed to be the 
inunediate task. The preparation was largely an ideological one. 
Eiist of all, there should be no doubt about the objective of 
politiral independence. This should be clearly understood as the 
only possible political goal for us; something radically difi^ent 
firom the vague and confusing talk of Dommion Status. Then 
there was the so^ goal. It would he too much, I felt, to expect 
the Congress to go far in this direction just then. The Congress 
was a purely political and nationalistic body, unused to thinking 
on other toes. But a beginning might be made. Outside the 
Congr^s, in labour darcjes and among the young, the idea could 
be pushed on much further. For this purpose I wanted to keep 
myself fiee froin Congress office, and I had a vague idea also of 
spending some months in remote rural areas to study their con- 



RETURN TO INDIA 167 

ditlons. But this was not to be, and events were to drag me 
again into the heart of Congress politics. 

Immediately on our arrival in Madras I was caught in the 
whirl. I presented a bunch of resolutions to the Working Com- 
mittee — ^resolutions on Independence, War Danger, association 
with the League against Imperialism, etc. — and nearly all of 
these were accepted and made into official Working Committee 
resolutions. I had to put them forward at the open session of 
the Congress, and, to my surprise, they were all almost unani- 
mously adopted. The Independence resolution was supported 
even by Mrs. Annie Besant. This all-round support was very 
gratifying, but I had an uncomfortable feeling that the resolu- 
tions were either not imderstood for what they were, or were 
distorted to mean something else. That this was so became 
apparent soon after the Congress, when a controversy arose on 
the meaning of the Independence resolution. 

These resolutions of mine were somewhat different from the 
usual Congress resolutions; they represented a new outlook. 
Many Congressmen no doubt liked them, some had a vague dis- 
like for them, but not enough to make them oppose. Probably 
the latter thought that they were academic resolutions, making 
litde difference either way, and the best way to get rid of them 
was to pass them and move on to something more important. 
The Independence resolution thus did not represent then, as it 
did a year or two later* a vital and irrepressible urge on the part 
of the Congress; it represented a widespread and growing 
sentiment. 

Gandhiji was in Madras and he attended the open Congress 
sessions, but he did not take any part in the shaping of policy. 
He did not attend the meetings of the Working Committee of 
which he was a member. That had been his general political 
attitude in the Congress since the dominance of the Swaraj 
Party. But he was frequently consulted, and little of importance 
was done without his knowledge. I do not know how far the 
resolutions I put before the Congress met with his approval. I 
am inclined to think that he disliked them, not so much because 
of what they said, but because of their general trend and out- 
look. He did not, however, critidse them on any occasion. My 
father was, of course, away in Europe at the time. 

The umreality of the Independence resolution came out in that 
very session of the Congress, when another resolution con- 
demning the Simon Commission and appealing ft>r its boycott 
was considered. As a corollaiy tc this it was proposed to convene 
an All-Parties Conference, which was to draw up a constitution 



i68 


JAAVAHAHLAL NEHRU 


for India. It was manifest that the moderate groups, with whom 
co-operation was sought, could never think in terms of Inde- 
pendence. The A'ery utmost they could go to was some form of 
Dominion Status. 

I stepped back into the Congress secretaryship. There were 
personal considerations — the desire of the President for the year. 
Dr. M. A. Ansari, who was an old and dear friend — and the 
fact that, as many of my resolutions had been passed, I ought 
to see them through. It was true that the resolution on the 
All-Parties Conference had partly neutralised the effect of my 
resolutions. Still, much remained. The real reason for my 
accepting office again was my fear that the Congress might, 
through the instrumentality of the All-Parties Conference, or 
because of other reasons, slide back to a more moderate and 


compromising position. It seemed to be in a hesitant mood, 
swinging alternately from one extreme to another. I wanted to 
prevent, as far as I could, the swing back to Moderation and to 
hold on to the Independence objecuve. 

The National Congress always attracts a large number of 
side-shows at its annual sessions. One of the side-shows at 


Madras was a Republican Conference which held its first (and 
last) sessions that year. I was asked to preside. The idea appealed 
to me, as I considered myself a republican. But I hesitated, as 
I did not know who was at the back of the new venture, and I 
did not want to associate myself with mushroom growths. I 
presided, eventually, but later I repented of this, for the Re- 
publican Conference turned out to be, like so many others, a 
still-bom affair. For several months I tried, and tried in vain, 
to get the text of the resolutions passed by it. It is amazing how 
many of our people love to sponsor new undertakings and then 
ignore them and leave them to shift for themselves. There is 
much in the criticism diat we are not a persevering lot. • 
Before we had dispersed from Madras after the Congress, news 
came of the death of Hakim Ajmal Khan at Delhi. As an 
ex-president of the Congress he was one of its elder statesmen; 
but he was something more also, and he occupied a unique place 
in the Congress leadership. Brought up as he was, entirely in the 
old conservative way, with no touch of modernism in it, and 
steeped in the culture of imperial Delhi of Mog^al days, it was 
a delight to watch his fine courtesy and hear his unhurried voice 
and listen to his dry humour. He was, in his manners, a typical 
aristocrat of the old order, with prinedy look and princely ways, 
and even his face bore a marked resemblance to the miniatures 
of the Moghal sovereigns. Such a person would not ordinarily 



RETURN TO INDIA 


i6g 

take to the rough-and-tumble of politics; and Britishers in India 
have often sighed for persons of this old type when the new 
breed of agitators has troubled them. Hakim Sahab had also 
little to do with politics in his early days. As the head of a 
famous family of physicians, he was busy with his eAormous 
practice. But even during the latter part of the War events, 
and the influence of his old friend and colleague, Dr. M. A. 
Ansari, were driving him to the Congress; and subsequent hap- 
penings — ^Martial Law in the Punjab and the Khilafat question — 
moved him deeply, and he turned with approval to the new 
Gandhian technique of non-co-operation. He brought a rare 
quality and precious gifts to the Congress— he became a link 
between the old order and the new, and gave the support of the 
former to the national movement; and thus he produced 
a harmony between the two, and gave strength and a certain 
stolidity to the advance guard of the movement. He brought 
the Hindus and Muslims much nearer to each other, for both 
honoured him and were influenced by his example. To Gandhiji 
he became a trusted friend, whose advice in regard to Hindu- 
Muslim matters was the final word for him. My father and 
Hakimji had naturally taken to each other. 

Last year I was accused by some leaders of the Hindu 
Mahasabha of my ignorance of Hindu sentiments because of 
my defective education and general background of ‘ Persian ' 
culture. What culture I possess, or whether I possess any at all, 
is a little difficult for me to say. Persian, as a language, un- 
happily, I do not even know. But it is true that my father had 
grown up in an Indo-Persian cultural atmosphere, which was 
the legacy in north India of the old Delhi court, and of which, 
even in these degenerate days, Delhi and Lucknow are the two 
chief centres. Kashmiri Brahmans had a remarkable capacity 
for adaptation, and coming down to the Indian plains and find- 
ing that this Indo-Persian culture was predominant at the time, 
they took to it, and produced, a number of fine scholars in 
Persian and Urdu. Later they adapted themselves with equal 
rapidity to the changing order, when a knowledge of English 
and the elements of European culture became necessary. But 
even now there are many distinguished scholars in Persian 
among the Kashmiris in India — Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and 
Raja Narendra Nath, to mention two of them. 

Hakim Sahab and my ffither had thus much in common, and 
they even discovered old family connections. They became great 
fiiends and addressed each other as Bhai Sahab— brother. 
Politics was the least of their many bonds. In his domestic 



170 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

habits Hakimji was extraordinarily conservative; he could not, 
or his family people could not, get out of old habits, I have 
never seen such amazingly strict purdah, or seclusion of women, 
as existed in his family. And yet Hakimji was firmly convinced 
that no nation advanced unless the women of that country freed 
themselves. He impressed this upon me, and told me how much 
he admired the part Turkish women had played in their free- 
dom struggle. It was chiefly because of Turkish women, he said, 
that Kemal Pasha had succeeded. 

The death of Hakim Ajmal Khan was a great blow to the 
Congress; it meant the removal of one of its stoutest supports. 
For all of us there has been since then something lacking in a 
visit to Delhi, for Delhi was so closely associated with Hakimji 
and his house in Billimaran. 

' Tile year 1928 was, politically, a full year, with plenty of 
activity all over the country. There seemed to be a new impulse 
moving the people forward, a new stir that was equally present 
in the most varied groups. Probably the change had been going 
on gradually during my long absence firom the country; it struck 
me as very considerable on my return. Early in 1926 India was 
still quiescent, passive, perhaps not fully recovered firom the 
effort of 1919-1922; in 1928 she seemed firesh, active, and full 
of suppressed energy. Everywhere there was evidence of this : 
among the industrial workers, the peasantry, middle-class youth, 
and the intelligentsia generally. 

The Trade ^nion movement had grown greatly, and the 
All-India Trade Union Congress, established seven or eight 
years previously, was already a strong and representative body. 
It had not only grown in numbers and in organisation, but its 
ideology was becoming more militant and extreme. Strikes 
were firequent, and class-consciousness was growing. The textile 
industry and the railways were the best organised, and of these 
the strongest and moat advanced unions were the Girtu Kamgar 
Union of Bombay and the G,I.P. Bailway Union. The growth 
of labour organisation had inevitably brought the seeds of in- 
ternal conflict and disruption from the West, and hardly had 
the Indian Trade Union Movement established itself when it 
threatened to split up into rival and hostile camps. There were 
those who adhered to the Second International, and those who 
favoured the Third; those who were moderately reformist in 
their outlook, and those who were firarikly revolutionary and 
out for radical changes. In between the two there were various 
shadra and degrees of opinion and, as is unfortunately the case 
m all mass organisations, of opportunism. 



RETURN TO INDIA 


!7I 

The peas^try was also astir. This was noticeable in the 
United Provinces and especially in Oudh, where large gatherings 
of protesting tenants became common. It was realised that the 
new Oudh tenancy law, which gave a life-tenure and had 
promised a great deal, made little difference to the hard lot of 
the peasant. In .Gujrat a conflict on a big scale developed be- 
tween the peasantry and the Government because of the attempt 
of the latter to increase revenue — Gujrat being an area of 
peasant-proprietors where Government deals directly with the 
peasants. This struggle was the Bardoli Satyagraha under the 
leadership of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. It was gallantly carried 
through to the admiration of the rest of India. The Bardoli 
peasantry met with a considerable measure of success; the real 
success of their campaign, however, lay in the. effect it produced 
amongst the peasantry all over India. Bardoli became a sign 
and a symbol of hope and strength and victory to the Indian 
peasant. 

Another very noticeable feature of the India of 1938 was the 
growjltJaf. the Yo uth M ovement. Everywhere youth leagues 
were being established, youth conferences were being held, "niey 
were a very varied, lot, from semi-religious ^oups to others dis- 
cussing revolutionary ideology and technique; but whatever 
their origin and auspices, such gathering of youth always began 
to discuss the vital social and economic problems of the axj, 
and generally, their tendency was for roqt-and-branch change. 

From the purely political point of view the year was noted for 
the boycott of the Sim^ Commission and ^what was called the 
constructive side of the boycott) the AU-Parties Conference. The 
moderate groups co-operated with the Congress in this boj^cott> 
and it was remarkably successful. Wherever the Commission 
went it was greeted by hostile crowds and the cry of “ Simon go 
back”, and thus vast numbers of the Indian masses became 
acquainted not only with Sir John Simon’s name but with two 
words of the English language, the only two they knew. These 
words must have become a hated obsession for the members of 
the Commission. The story is related that once, when they were 
staying at the Western Hostd in New Delhi, the refrain seemed 
to come to them in the night out of the darkness. They were 
greatly irritated at being pursued in this way, even at night. 
As a matter of fact, the noise that disturbed them came from 
thejackals that infest the waste places of the iinperial capital. 

The All-Parties Conference had no difficulty at all in settling 
the main principles of the constitution; they were to be of the 
demqcsatic paruamentary variety, and almost any one could 



172 JAWAHABLAL NEHKU 

draw them up. The real difficulty, and the only difficulty, came 
from the communal or minorities issue, and as the Conference 
had within its fold the representatives of all the extreme com- 
munal organisations, an agreement became extraordinarily 
difficult. It was a repetition of the old infructuous Unity Con- 
ferences. My father, who had returned from Europe m the 
spring, took great interest in the Conference. Ultimately, as a 
last resource, a small committee was appointed, with my father 
'as chairman, to draft the constitution and make a full report on 
the communal issue. This Committee came to be known as the 
Nehru Committee, and their subsequent report, as the Nehru 
Report. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru was also a member of this Com- 
mittee, and was responsible for part of the Report. 

J, was not a member of this Committee, but as- Congress 
Secretary I had much to do with it. It was an awkward situation 
for me, for I thought it wholly futile to draw up detailed paper 
constitutions when the real problem was the conquest of power. 
Another difficulty for me was the inevitable limitaiions by this 
mixed Committee of our goal to what was called Dominion 
Status and was, in fact, even less. For me the real importance 
of the Committee lay in the possibility of its finding a way out 
of the communal impasse. I did not expect a final solution of 
this question by some pact or agreement — that solution would 
only come by a divertion of interest to social and economic issues 
—but there was the possibility that even a temporary pact, if 
accepted by a sufficient number of people, would help to ease 
the situation and thus succeed in mverting interest to other 
issues. So I did not wish to obstruct the work of the Committee 
and I gave such help as I co'uld. 

Success seemed almost within grasp. Only two or three points 
remained to settle, and of these the really important one was 
the Punjab, where there was the Hindu-Muslim-Sikh triangle. 
The Committee in their report considered the question of the 
Punjab from a novel point of view, and supported their recom- 
mendation with the help of some revealing figures of the dis- 
tribution of population. But all this was in vain. Fear and 
mistrust remained on either side, and the little step to cross the 
short distance that remained was not taken. 

The AD-Parties Conference met at Lucknow to consider the 
r^ort of their Committee. Again some of us were in a 
dilemma, for we did not wish to come in the way of a commimal 
settlement, if ihat was possible, and yet we were not prepared 
to yield on the question of independence. We begged thw the 
conference leave this question open so that each constituent part 



RETURN TO INDIA 


m 

could have liberty of action on this issue — ^the Congress adhering 
to independence and the more moderate groups to Dominion 
Status. But my father had set his heart on the Report and he 
would not yield, nor perhaps could he under the circumstances. 
I was thereupon asked by our Independence group in the 
conference — and this was a large one — ^to make a statement to 
the Conference on its behalf, dissociating ourselves completely 
from everything that lowered the objective of independence. 
But we made it further clear that we would not be obstructive, 
as we did not wish to come in the way of the communal state- 
ment. 

This was not a very effective line to adopt on such a major 
issue; at best it was a negative gesture. A positive side was given 
to our attitude by our founding that very day the Independence 
for India League. 

The All-Parties Conference gave me another and a greater 
shock by adding to the Fundai nenta l Rights in the proposed 
constitution, at the instance of theOudh taluqadars, a clause 
guaranteeing their vested rights in their taluqas. The whole 
constitution was, of course, based on the idea of private prop- 
erty, but it <lid seem to me an outrage to make the property 
rignts in the huge semi-feudal estates one of the irremovable 
foundations of the constitution. This made it clear that the 
Congress leadership, and much more so the non-Congress people, 
prefered the company of the landed magnates to that of the 
sociaRy advanced groups in their own ranks. It was obvious that a 
wide gulf separated us from many of our leaders, and it seemed a 
little absurd for me to carry on as General Secretary of the Con- 
gress imder these circumstances. I offered my resignation on the 
ground of having been one of the foxmders of the Independence 
for India League. But the Working Committee would not agree 
to it and told me (as weU as Subhas Bose, who had also offered 
to resign on the same ground) that we could carry on with the 
League without any con^ct with the Congress policy. Indeed, 
the Congress had already declared for independence. And again 
I.agreed. It was surprising how easy it was to win me over to 
a withdrawal of my resignation. This happened on many 
occasions, and as neither party really liked the idea of a break, 
we clung to every pretext to avoid it. 

Gandhiji took no part in these All-Party Conference or Com- 
mittee meetings. He was not even present at the Lucknow 
Conference. 

Meanwhile the Simon Commission had been moving about, 
pursued by bladt flags and hostile crowds shouting, " Go back.” 



174 • JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Occasionally there .were minor conflicts between the police and 
the crowds. Lahore brought matters to a head and suddenly 
sent a thrill of indignation throughout the country. The anti- 
Simon Commission demonstration there was headed by Lala 
Lajpat Rai, and as he stood by the road-side in &ont of the 
thousands of demonstrators he was assaulted and beaten on his 
chest with a baton by a young English police officer. There had 
been no attempt whatever on the part of the crowd, much less 
on the part of Lalaji, to indulge in any methods of violence. 
Even so, as he stood peacefully by, he and many of his com- 
panions were severely beaten by the police. Any one who takes 
part in street demonstrations runs the risk of a conflict with the 
police, and, though. our demonstrations were almost always per- 
fectly peaceful, Lalaji must have known of this risk and taken 
it consciously. But still, the manner of the assault, the needless 
biutality of it, came as a shock to vast numbers of people in 
India. Those were the days when we were not used to lathi 
charges by the police; our sensitiveness had not been blunted 
by repeated brutality. To find that even the greatest of our 
leaders, the foremost and most popular man in the Punjab, 
could be so treated seemed little short of monstrous, and a dull 
anger spread all over the country, especially in north India. 
How hdpless we were, how despicable when we could not even 
protect the honour of our chosen leaders I 

The physical injury to Lalaji had been serious enough, as he 
had been hit on the chest and he had long suffered from heart 
^ease. Probably, in the case of a healthy young man the 
injury would not have been great, but Lalaji was neither young 
nor healthy. What effect this physical injury had on his death a 
few weeks later it is hardly possible to say definitely, though his 
doctors were of opinion that it hastened the end. But I tbinlf 
that there can be no doubt that the mental shock which accom- 
p^ed the physical injury had a tremendous effect on Lalaji. 
He felt angry and bitter, not so much at the personal humilia- 
tion, as at the national humiliation involved in the assault on 
him. 

It was this sense of national humiliation that weighed on the 
mind^of India, and when Lalaji’s death came soon after, inevit- 
ably it was connected with the assault, and sorrow itself gave 
pride of place to anger and indignation. It is well to appreciate 
this, for only so can we have some understanding of subsequent 
events, of the phenoinenon of Bhagat Singh, and of his sudden 
and ama2ing popularity in north India. It is very easy and very 
fetuous to condemn persons or acts without seeking to tmder- 



RETURN TO INDIA 


175 

Stand the springs of action, the causes that underlie them. 
Bhagat Singh was not previously well known; he did not become 
popular because of an act of violence, an act of terrorism. Ter- 
rorists have flourished in India, off and on, for nearly thirty 
years, and at no time, except in the early days in Bengal, did any 
of them attain a fraction of that popularity which came to 
Bhagat Singh. This is a patent fact which cannot be denied; it 
has to be admitted. And another fact, which is equally obvious, 
is that terrorism, in spite of occasional recrudescence, has no 
longer any real appeal for the youth of India. Fifteen years’ 
stress on non-violence has changed the whole background in 
India and made the masses much more indifferent to, and even 
hostile to, the idea of terrorism as a method of political action. 
Even the classes from which the terrorists are usually drawn, the 
lower middle-classes and intelligentsia, have been powerfully 
affected by the Congress propaganda against methods of 
violence. 'Their active and impatient elements, who think in 
terms of revolutionary action, also realise fully now that revolu- 
tion does not come through terrorism, and that terrorism is an 
outworn and profitless method which comes in the way of real 
revolutionary action. Terrorism is a dying thing in India and 
elsewhere, not because of Government coercion, which can only 
suppress and bottle up, not eradicate, but because of basic causes 
and world events. Terrorism usually represents the infancy of 
a revolutionary turge in a country, "niat stage passes, and with 
it passes terrorism as an important phenomenon. Occasional 
outbursts may continue because of local causes or individual 

S ressions. India has undoubtedly passed that stage, and no 
t even the occasional outbursts will gradually die out. But 
this does not mean that all people in India have ceased to believe 
in methods of violence. They have, very largely, ceased to be- 
lieve in individual violence and terrorism but many, no doubt, 
stiU think that a time may come when organised, violent 
methods may be necessary for gaining fieedom, as they have 
often been necessary in other countries. That is to-day an 
academic issue- which time alone will put to the test; it has 
nothing to do with terroristic methods. 

Bhagat Singh thus did not become popular because of his act 
of terrorism, but because he seemed to vindicate, for the 
moment, the honour of Lala Lajpat Rai, and through him at 
the nation. He became a symbol; the act was flirgotten, the 
symbol remained, and witlun a few months each town and 
village of the Punjab, and to a lesser extent in the rest of 
northern India, resounded with his name. Innumerable songs 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

grew up about him, and the popularity that the man achieved 
was something amazing. 

A short time after the Simon Commission beating, Lala Rajpat 
Rai attended a meeting of the All-India Congress Committee 
in Delhi. He bore marks of injuries, and was still suftering 
from the after-effects. The meeting was held after the Lucknow 
All-Parties Conference, and the question of Independence came 
up for discussion in some form or otlier. I forget the exact point 
that was in issue, but I remember speaking at some length, and 
pointing out that the time had come for the Congress to choose 
between a revolutionary outlook, which involved radical changes 
in our political and social structure, and a reformist objective 
and method. The speech had no importance, and I would have 
forgotten it but for the fact that Lalaji replied to it in the Com- 
mittee, and criticised some parts of it. One of his warnings was 
to the effect that we should expect nothing from the British 
Labour Party. That warning was not necessary so far as I was 
concerned, for I was not an admirer of the official leadership 
of British Labour; the only thing that could surprise me in 
regard to it would have been to find it supporting the struggle 
for India’s fireedom, or doing an3rthing effectively anti-imperialist 
or likely to lead to socialism. 

On returning to Lahore, Lalaji reverted to the subject of my 
speech at the A.I.C.C. meeting, and began a series of articles 
on various issues connected with it in his weekly journal The 
People. Only the first article appeared; before the second could 
come out in the next week’s issue, he was dead. That first un- 
finished article of his, perhaps his last writing for publication, 
has had a melancholy interest for me. 



XXV 


EXPERIENCE OF LATHI CHARGES 

The assault on Lala Lajpat Rai, and his subsequent death, 
increased the vigour of the demonstrations against the Simon 
Commission in the places which it subsequently visited. It was 
due in Lucknow, and the local Congress Committee made 
extensive preparations for its ‘reception’. Huge processions, 
meetings, and demonstrations were organised many days in 
advance, both as propaganda and as rehearsals for the actual 
show. I went to Lucknow, and was present at some of these. 
The success of these preliminary demonstrations, which were 
perfecdy orderly and peaceful, evidently nettled the authorities, 
and they began to obstruct and issue orders against the taking 
out of processions in certain areas. It was in this connection 
that I had a new experience, and my body felt the baton and 
lathi blows of the police. 

Processions had been prohibited, ostensibly to avoid any inter- 
ference vidth the traffic. We decided to give no cause for com- 
plaint on this score, and arranged for small groups of sixteen, 
as far as I can remember, to go separately, along unfeequoited 
routes to the meeting place. Technically, this was no doubt a 
breach of the order, for sixteen with a Sag were a procession. 
I led one of the groups of sixteen and, after a big gap, came 
another such group under the leadership of my colleague, 
Govind BaUabh Pant. My group had gone perhaps about two 
hundred yards, the road was a deserted one, when we heard 
the datter of horses’ hoofs behind us. We looked back to find 
a bunch of mounted police, probably two or three dozen in 
number, bearing down upon us at a rapid pace. They were soon 
right upon us, and the impact of the horses broke up our little 
cwumn of sixteen. The moimted polic^en then started 
belabouring our volunteers with huge batons or truncheons and, 
insfmctivdy, the volunteers sought refuge on the side-walks, and 
some even entered the petty shops. 'They were pursued and 
beaten down. My own instinct had urged me to seek safety when 
I saw the horses charging down upon us; it was a discouraging 
sight. But then, I suppose, some other instinct held me to my 
place and I survived the first charge, which had been chedcra 
by the volunteers behind me. Suddenly I ffiund myself alone in 
the middle of the road; a few yards away from me, in various 

N m 



iy8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

direaions, were the policemen beating down our volunteers. 
Automatically, I began moving slowly to the side of the road 
to be less conspicuous, but again I stopped and had a little argu- 
ment vvith myself, and decided that it would be unbecoming 
for me to move away. All this was a matter of a few seconds 
only, but I have the clearest recollections of that conflict within 
me and the decision, prompted by my pride, I suppose, which 
could not tolerate the idea of my behaving like a coward. Yet 
the line between cowardice and courage was a thin one, and I 
might well have been on the other side. Hardly had I so decided, 
when I looked round to find that a mounted policeman was 
trotting up to me, brandishing his long new baton. I told him 
to go ahead, and turned my head away— -again an instinctive 
effort to save the head and face. He gave me two resounding 
blows on the back. I felt stunned, and my body quivered all 
over but, to my surprise and satisfaction, I found that I. was still 
standing. The police force was withdrawn soon after, and made 
to block the road in front of us. Our volunteers gathered 
together again, many of them bleeding and with split skulls, 
and we were joined by Pant and his lot, who had also been 
belaboured, and all of us sat down facing the police. So we sat 
for an hour or so, and it became dark. On the one side, various 
high officials gathered; on the other, large crowds began to 
assemble as the news spread. Ultimately, the officials agreed to 
allow us to go by our original route, and we went that way 
with the mounted policemen, who had charged us and belab- 
oured us, going ahead of us as a kind of escort. 

I have written about this petty incident in some detail because 
of its effect on me. The bodily pain I felt was quite forgotten 
in a feeling of exhilaration that I was physically strong enough 
to foce and bear lathi blows. And a thing that surprised me was 
that right through the incident, even when I was being beaten, 
my mind was quite dear and I was consdously analysing my 
feelings. This rehearsal stood me in good stead the next 
morning, when a stiffer trial was in store for us. For the next 
morning was the time when the Simon Commission was due 
to arrive, and our great demonstration was going' to take place. 

My fother was at Allahabad at the time, and I was afraid 
that the news of the assault on me, when he read about it in 
the next morning's papers, would upset, him and the rest of 
the family. So I telephoned to him late in the evening to assure 
him that all was well, and that he should not worjy. But 1^ 
did worrjr and, finding it difficult to sleep over it, he dedded at 
about midnight to come over to Lucknow. The last train had 



EXPERIENCE OP -LATHI CHARGES 179 

gone, and so he started by motor-car. He had some bad luck 
on the way, and it was nearly five in the morning by the time 
he had covered the journey of 146 miles and reached Lucknow, 
tired out and exhausted. 

That was about the time when we were getting ready to go 
in procession to the station. The previous evening’s incidents 
had the effect of rousing up Lucknow more than anything that 
we could have done, and even before the sun was out, vast 
numbers of people made their way to the station. Innumerable 
little processions came from various parts of the city, and from 
the Congress office started the main procession, consisting of 
several thousands, marching in fours. We were in this main 
procession. We were stopped by the police as we approached 
the station. There was a huge open space, about half a mile 
square, in front of the station (this has now been built over by 
the new station) and we were made to line up on one side of 
this maidan, and there our procession remained, making no 
attempt to push our way forward. The place was full of foot 
and mounted police, as well as the military. The crowd of 
sympathetic onlookers swelled up, and many of these persons 
managed to spread out in twos and threes in the open space. 
Suddenly we saw in the far distance a moving mass. They 
were two or three long lines of cavalry or mounted police, 
covering the entire area, galloping dotvn towards us, and 
striking and riding down the numerous stragglers that dotted 
the maidan. That charge of galloping horsemen was a fine 
sight, but for the tragedies that were being enacted on the 
way, as harmless and very much surprised sightseers went 
under the horses’ hoofs. Beliind the charging lines these people 
lay on the ground, some still unable to move, others wnthing 
in pain, and the whole appearance of that maidan was that of 
a battlefield. But we did not have much time for gazing on 
that scene or for reflections; the horsemen were soon upon us, 
and their front line clashed almost at a gallop with the massed 
ranks of our processionists. We held our ground, and, as we 
appeared to be unyielding, the horses had to pull up at the 
last moment and reared up on their hind legs with their front 
hoofs quivering in the air over our heads. And then began 
a beating of us, and battering with lathis and long batons 
both by the mounted and the foot police. It was a tremendous 
hammering, and the dearness of vision that I had had the 
evening before left me. All I knew was that I had to stay 
where I was, and must not yield or go back. I felt half blinded 
with the blows, and sometimes a oull anger seized me and a 



l8o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

desire to hit out. I thought how easy it would be to pull down 
the police officer in front of me from his horse and to mount 
up myself, but long training and discipline held and I did not 
raise a hand, except to protect my face from a blow. Besides, 
I knew well enough that any aggression on our part would 
result in a ghastly tragedy, the firing and shooting down of 
large numbers of our men. 

After what seemed a tremendous length of time, but was 
probably only a few minutes, our line began to yield slowly, 
step by step, without breaking up. This left me somewhat 
isolated, and more exposed at the sides. More blows came, and 
then I was suddenly lifted off iny feet from behind and carried 
off, to my great annoyance. Some of my young colleagues, 
thinking that a dead-set was being made at me, had decided to 
protect me in this summary fashion. 

Our processionists lined up again about a hundred feet behind 
our original line. The police also withdrew and stood in a line, 
fifty feet apart from us. So we remained, when the cause of 
all this trouble, the Simon Commission, secretly crept away 
firom the station in the far distance, more than half a mile 
away. But, even so, they did not escape the back flags or demon- 
strators. Soon after, we came back in full procession to the 
Congress office, and there dispersed, and I went on to father, 
who was anxiously waiting for us. 

Now that the excitement of the moment had passed, I felt 
pains all over my body and great fatigue. Almost every part 
of me seemed to ache, and I was covered with contused wounds 
and marks of blows. But fortunately I was not injured in any 
vital spot. M^y of our companions were less fortunate, and 
were badly injured. Govind Ballabh Pant, who stood by me, 
offered a much biggw target, being six foot odd in height, and 
the injuries he received then have resulted in a painful at<d 
persistent malady which prevented him for a long tirop firom 
straightening his back or leading an active life. I emerged with 
a somewhat peater conceit or my physical conditton and 
powers of endurance. But the memory that endures with me, 
mr more than that of the beating itself, is that of many of 
the feces of those policemen, and especially of the officers, who 
were attacking us. Most of the real beating and battering was 
done by European sergeants, the Indian rank and file were 
milder in their methods. And those faces, full of hate and 
blood-liMt, almost mad, with no trace of sympathy or touch of 
humamtyl Probably the feces on our side just then were 
equally hateful to look at, and the feet that we were mostly 



EXPERIENCE OF LATHI CHARGES l8l 

passive did not fill our minds and hearts with love for our 
opponents, or add to the beauty of our countenances. And yet, 
we had no grievance against each other; no quarrel that was 
personal, no ill-will. We happened to represent, for the time 
being, strange and powerful forces which held us in thrall and 
cast us hither and thither, and, subtly gripping our minds and 
hearts, roused our desires and passions and made us their blind 
tools. Blindly we struggled, not knowing what we struggled for 
and whither we went. The excitement of action held us; but, 
as it passed, immediately the question arose : To what end was 
all this? To what end? 



XXVI 


TRADE UNION CONGRESS 

The Simon Commission boycott and the All Parties Conference 
bulked largely politically in the country that year, but my own 
interest and activities lay largely in other directions. As working 
General Secretary of the Confess, I was busy in looking after 
and strengthening its organisation, and I was particularly in- 
terested in directmg people’s attention to social and economic 
changes. The position gained in Madras in regard to Inde- 
pendence had also to be consolidated, especially as the tendency 
of the All Parties Conference was to pull us back. With this 
purpose in view I travelled a great deal and addressed many im- 
portant gatherings. I presided, I think, over four provincial 
conferences in igaS — ^in the Punjab, in Nl^abar in the South, in 
Delhi, and in the United Provinces — as well as over Youth 
Leagues and Students’ Conferences in Bengal and Bombay. From 
time to time I visited rural areas in the U.P. and occasionally I 
addressed industrial workers. The burden of my speeches was 
always much the same though the fiirm varied according to local 
circumstances and the stress draended on the kind of audience I 
happened to be addressing. Everywhere I spoke on political 
.hidependence and social freedom and made the former a step 
towards the attainment of the latter. I wanted to spread the 
ideology^f .socia lism especially among Congress workers and 
the intelligentsia, for these people, who were the backbone of the 
national movement, thought largely in terms of the narrowest 
nationalism. Their speeches laid stress on the glories of old 
times; the injuries, material and spiritual, caused by alien rule; 
the sufrerings of our people; the indignity of foreign domination 
over us and our national honour demanding that we should be 
free; the necessi^ for sacrifice at the altar of the motherland. 
They were familiar themes which found an echo in every Indian 
heart, and the nationalist in me responded to them and was 
moved by them (though I was never a blind admirer of ancient 
times in India or elsewhere). But though the truth in them re- 
mained, they seemed to grow a little thin and thread-bare with 
ranstant use, and their ceaseless repetition prevented the con- 
sideration of other problems and vital aspects of our struggle. 
They only fostered emotion and did not encourage thought. 
y I was by no means a pioneer in the socialist field in India. In- 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 183 

deed I was rather backward and I had only advanced painfully, 
step by step, where many others had gone ahead blazing a trail. 
The workers' trade union movement was, ideologically, definitely 
socialist, and so were the majority of the Youth Leagues. A 
vague confused socialism was already part of the atmosphere of 
India when I returned from Europe in December 1927, and even 
earlier than that there were many individual soci^sts. Mostly 
they thought along utopian lines, but Marxian theory was in* 
fluencing them increasingly, and a few considered themselves as 
hundred per cent. Marxists. This tendency was strengthened in 
India, as in Europe and America, by developments in the Soviet 
Union, and particularly the Five-Year Plan. 

Such inmortance as I possessed as a socialist worker lay in the 
fact that X happened to be a prominent Congressman holding 
important Congress offices. There were many other well-known 
Congressmen who were beginning to think likewise. This was 
most marked in the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, and in 
this Committee we even tried, as early as 1936, to draw up a mild 
socialist programme. We are a zamindari and taluqadari pro- 
vince, and the first question we had to face was that of the 
land. We declared that the existing land system must go and 
that there should be no intermediaries between the State and the 
cultivator. We had to proceed cautiously, as we were moving in 
an atmosphere which was, till then, unusued to such ideas. 

The next year, 1939, the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee 
went a step further and made a recommendation, definitdy on 
socialist lines, to the All-India Congress Committee. This latter 
Committee, meeting in Bombay in the summer of 1939, adopted 
the preamble of the U.P. resolution and thus accepted the prin- 
ciple of socialism underlying the whole resolution. The con- 
sideration of the detailed programme given in the UJP. resolution 
was postponed for a later date. Most people seem to have for- 
gotten these resolutions of the A.I.C.C. and the U.P.P.C.G. and 
imagine that the subject of socialism has suddenly cropped up in 
the Congress during the last year or so. It is true, however, that 
the A.I.C,C. passed that resolution without giving much thought 
to it and most members probably did not realise what they were 
doing. 

The U.P. branch of the Independence for India League (con- 
sisting entirely of principal Congress workers in the province) 
was definitely sociahstic and it went a little further than a mixed 
body like the Congress Conunittee could go. Indeed one of the 
objects of the Independence League was socialfisedom. We had 
hoped to build up a strong League organisation all over India 



184 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and utilize it for propaganda in favour of independence and 
socialism. Unhappily, and much to my disappointment, the 
League never got going except to some extent in the U,P. This 
was not because of lack of support in the country. But most of 
our workers were also prominent workers in the Congress, and, 
the Congress having adopted Independence in theory at least, 
they could always work through the Congress organisation. 
Another reason was that some of the original sponsors of the 
League did not take it seriously enough as an organisation to be 
developed. They looked upon it as something to be used for 
bringing pressure to bear on the Congress executive, or even for 
influencing the elections for the Congress Working Committee. 
So the Independence League languished, and as the Congress 
grew more aggressive, it drew all the dynamic elements towards 
Itself and the League grew weaker. With the coming of the Civil 
Disobedience struggle in J930, the League got merged into the 
Congress and disappeared. 

In the second hilf of 1918 and in 1939 there was frequent talk 
of my arrest. I do not know what reality lay behind the press 
references and the numerous private warnings I received from 
friends who seemed to be in the know, but the warnings pro- 
duced a feeling of uncertainty in me and I felt I was always on 
the verge of it. I did not mind this parricularly as I knew that, 
whatever the fiimre held for me, it could not be a settled life of 
routine. The sooner I got used to uncertainty and sudden changes 
and visits to prison the better. And I think that on the whole I 
succeeded in getting used to the idea (and to a much lesser extent 
my people also succeeded) and whenever arrest came I took it 
more casually than I might otherwise have done. So rumours of 
arrest were not without compensation; they gave a certain ex- 
citement and a bite to my daily existence. Every day of freedom 
was something precious, a day gained. As a matter of fact I 
had a long innings in 1928 and 1929, and arrest came at last as 
Tate as April 1930. Since then my brief periods outside prison 
have had a measure of unreality about them, and I have lived in 
my house as a stranger on a short visit, or moved about uncer- 
tamly, not knowing what the morrow would hold for me, and 
with the constant expectation of a call back, to gaol. 

As 1928 approached its appointed end, the Calcutta Congress 
drew near. My fether was to preside over it. He was full of the 
All Parties Conference and of his Report to it and wanted to 
push this through the Congress. To this he knew that I was not 
agreeable, because I , was not prepared to compromise on the 
Independence issue, and this irritated him. We did not argue 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 1S5 

about the matter much, but there was a definite feeling of mental 
conflict between us, an attempt to pull tlifFerent w'ays. Dif- 
ferences of opinion we had often had before, vital differences 
which had kept us in different political camps. But I do not 
think that at any previous or subsequent occasion the tension had 
been so great. Both of us were rather unhappy about it. In 
Calcutta matters came to this, that my father made it known 
that if he could not have his way in the Congress — ^that is, if he 
could not have a majority for the resolution in favour of the 
All Parties Report — ^he would refuse to preside over the Congress, 
That was a perfectly reasonable and constitutional course to 
adopt. None the less it was disconcerting to many of his oppo- 
nents who did not wish to force the issue to this extent. There 
has often been a tendency in the Congress, and elsewhere, I 
suppose, to criticise and condemn and yet shrink from accepting 
responsibility; there is always a hope that the criticism will make 
the other party change its course to our advantage without cast- 
ing on us the burden of piloting the boat. Where responsibility 
is withheld from us and there is an irremovable and irresponsible 
executive, as there is in the Government of India to-day, criticism 
is all that is open to us (apart, of course, from action), and that 
criticism is bound to be negative criticism. Even so, if that 
negative criticism is to be effective, there must he behind it 
the mental preparation and preparedness to assume full con- 
trol and responsibility whenever the opportunity offers itself 
— control over every department of government, civil and mili- 
tary, internal and foreign. To ask for partial control only, as, 
for instance, the Liberals do in the matter of the army, is to 
confess our inability to run the show and to take the sting out 
of the criticism. 

This attitude of criticism and condemnation and yet a shrink- 
ing back fiom the natural consequences thereof, has been frequent 
in the case of Gandhiji’s critics. There have been a number of 
people in the Congress who dislike many of his activities and 
criticise them strongly but who are not prepared to drive him out 
of the Congress. This attitude is easy to understand but it is 
hardly fair to either party. 

Some such difficulties arose at the Calcutta Congress. There 
were negotiations between the two groups, and a compromise 
formula was announced, and then this fell through. It was all 
rather confusing and not very edifying. The main resolution of 
the Congress, as it was finally adopted, accepted the All Parties 
Report -but intimated that if the British Government did not 
agree to that constitution within a year, the Congress would 



l86 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

revert to Independence. It was an otter of a year’s grace and a 
' polite ultimatum. The resolution was no doubt a come-down 
from the ideal of independence, for the All Parties Report did 
not even ask for full Dominion Status. And yet it was probably 
a wise resolution in the sense that it prevented a split when no 
one was ready for it, and kept the Congress together for the 
struggle that began in 1930. It was clear enough that the British 
Government were not going to accept the All Parties Constitu- 
tion within a year. The struggle was inevitable and, as matters 
stood in the country, no such struggle could be at all effective 
without Gandhiji’s lead. 

I had opposed the resolution in the open Congress, though I 
did so half-heartedly. And yet I was again elected General 
Secretary 1 Whatever happened I managed to stick on to the 
secretaryship, and in the Congress sphere I seemed to act the 
part of the famous Vicar of Bray. Whatever president sat on 
the Congress throne, still I was secretary in charge of the organi- 
sation. 

A few days before the Calcutta Congress, the All-India Trade 
Union Congress was held at Jhaiia, the centre of the coal mine 
area. I attended and participated in it for the first two days and 
then had to go away to Calcutta. It was my first Trade Union 
Congress and I was practically an outsider, though my activities 
amonrat the peasantry, and lately amongst the workers, had 
gained for me a measure of popularity with the masses. I found 
the old tussle going on between the reformists and the more 
advanced and revolutionary elements. The main points in issue 
were the question of afiiliation to one of the Internationals, as 
well as to the League against Imperialism and the Pan-Pacific 
Union, and the desirabuity of sending representatives to the 
International Labour Office Conference at Geneva. More impor- 
tant than these questions was the vast difference in outlook 
between the two sections of the Congress. There was the old 
trade union group, moderate in politics and indeed disprusting 
ihe intrusion of politics in industrial matters. They believed in 
industrial action only and that too of a cautious character, and 
aimed at the gradual betterment of workers’ conditions. „The 
leader of this grotro was N. M. Joshi, who had often represented 
In^an labour at Geneva. Hie other group was more militant, 
believed in political action, and opemy proclaimed its revolu- 
tionary outlook. It was influencea, though by no means con- 
trolled, by some Communists and near-Communists. Bombay 
textile labour had been captured by this group, and under their 
leadership there, had been a great, and partly successful, textile 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 187 

Strike in Bombay. A new and powerful textile union had risen 
in Bombay, the Girni Kamgar Union, which dominated the 
labour situation in Bombay. Another powerful imion under 
the influence of the advanced group was the G.I.P. Railway 
Union. 

Ever since the inception of the Trade Union Congress the 
executive and the office had been in the control of N. M. Joshi 
and his close colleagues, and Joshi had been responsible for 
building up the movement. The radical group, though more 
powerful in the rank and file, had little opportunity of in- 
fluencing policy at the top. This was an unsatisfactory position 
and it did not reflect the true state of affairs. There was dissatis- 
faction and friction and a desire on the part of the radical 
elements to seize power in the T.U.C. At the same time there 
was a disinclination to carry matters too far, for a split was 
feared. The trade union movement was still in its early youth in 
India; it was weak and was largely being run by non-worker 
leaders. Always, under such circumstances, there is a tendency 
for outsiders to exploit workers and this was obvious enough in 
the Indian T.U.C. and labour unions. N. M. Joshi had, however, 
proved himself, by years of work, a sound and earnest trade 
unionist, and even those who considered him politically back- 
ward and moderate, acknowledged the worth or his services to 
the Indian Labour movement. This could be said of few others, 
moderate or advanced. 

My own sympathies at Jharia were with the advanced group 
but, being a newcomer, I felt a little at sea in these domestic 
conflicts of the T.U.C. and I decided to keep aloof from them. 
After I had left Jharia the annual T.U.C, elections took place, 
and I learnt at Cdcutta that I had been elected president for the 
next year. I had been put forward by the moderate group, 
probably because they felt that I stood the best chance of defeat- 
ing the other candidate who was an actual worker (on the 
railways) and who had been put forward by the radical group. 
If I had bem present at Jharia on the day of the election I 
am sure that I would have withdrawn in favour of the worker 
candidate. It seemed to me positively indecent that a newcomer 
and a non-worker should be suddenly thrust into the president- 
ship. , This was in itself a measure ot the infancy and weakness 
of the trade union movement in India. 

Nineteen twenty-eight had been full of labour disputes and 
strikes; nineteen twenty-nine carried on likewise. Bombay textile 
labour, miserable and militant, took the lead in these strikes. 
There was a big general strike in the Bengal Jute Mills. There? 



j88 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were also strikes in the Iron Works at Jamshedpur, and, I think, 
on the railways. A long drawn out struggle, bravely carried on 
for many months, took place in the Tin Plate Works in Jam- 
shedpur. In spite of great public sympathy, the workers were 
crushed by the powerful company (connected with the Burma 
Oil Company) ow'ning these works. 

Altogether the two years were fiiU of industrial unrest, and 
the conditions of labour were deteriorating. The post-war years 
had been boom years for industry in India and the most 
stupendous profits had been made. For five or six years the 
average dividend in the jute or cotton mills exceeded a hundred 
per cent, and was often 1 50 per cent, per annum. All these huge 
profits went to the owners and shareholders, and the workers 
continued as before. The slight rise in wages was usually counter- 
balanced by a rise in prices. During these days when millions 
were being made feverishly, most of the workers continued to 
live in the most miserable of hovels, and even their women- 
folk had hardly clothes to wear. The conditions in Bombay 
were bad enough, but perhaps even worse was the lot of the 
jute workers, within an hour’s drive of the palaces of Calcutta. 
Semi-naked women, wild and unkempt, working away for the 
barest pittance, so that a broad river of wealth should flow 
ceaselessly to Glasgow and Dundee, as well as to some pockets 
in India. 

In the boom years all went well for industry, though the 
workers carried on as before and profited little. But when the 
boom passed and it was not so easy to make large profits, the 
burden, of course, fell on thC' workers. The old profits were 
forgotten; they had been consumed. And if profits were not now 
sufficient, how could industry run? And so there was industrial 
unrest and labour troubles and the gigantic strikes in Bombay 
which impressed everybody and fidghtened both the employers 
and Government. The Labour Movement was becoming class- 
conscious, militant and dangerous, both in ideology and in 
organisation. The political situation was also developing fast, 
and, though the two were separate and unconnected, they were 
partly parallel, and the Government could not contemplate the 
future with any satisfaaion. 

In March 1939 the Government struck suddenly at organised 
labour by arresting some of its most prominent workers firom the 
advanced groups. The leaders of the Bombay Girni Kamgar 
Union were taken, as well as labour leaders horn Bengal, the 
U.P. and the Punjab. Some of these were communists, others 
were near-communists, yet others were just trade unionists. This 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 1S9 

was the beginning of the famous Meerut trial which lasted for 
four years and a half. 

A defence committee was formed for the Meerut accused, of 
which my father was chairman. Dr. Ansari and others, including 
myself, were members. We had a difficult task. Money 
was not easy to collect; it seemed that the moneyed people had 
no great .sympathy for commtmists and socialists and labour 
agitators. And lawyers would only sell their services for a full 
pound of somebody’s flesh. We had some eminent lawyers on 
our Committee, my father and others, and they were always 
available for consultation and general guidance. That did not 
cost us anything, but it was not possible for them to sit down in 
Meerut for months at a time. The other lawyers whom we 
approached seemed to look upon the case as a means of making 
as much money as possible. 

Apart firom the Meerut Case I have been connected with some 
other defence com m ittees — ^in M. N. Roy’s case and others. On 
each occasion I have marvelled at the cupidity of men of my own 
profession. My first big shock came during the Punjab Martial 
Law trials in 1919 when a very eminent leader of the profession 
insisted on his full fee—and it was a huge fee — firom the victims 
of Martial Law, one of them even a fdlow-lawyer, and many 
of these people had to borrow money or sell property to pay him. 
My later experiences were even more painful. We had to collect 
money, often in coppers from the poorest workers, and pay 
out ftit cheques to lawyers. It went against the grain. And 
the whole process seemed so futile for, whether we defended a 
political or labour case or not, the result was likely to be the 
same. In a case like the Meerut trial a defence was, of course, 
obviously called for from many points of view. 

The Meerut Case Defence Committee did not have an easy 
time with the accused. There were different kinds of people 
among these, with different types of defences, and often there was 
an utter absence of harmony among them. After some months 
we wound up the formal committee, but we continued to help 
in our individual capacities. The development of the political 
situation was absorbing more and more of our attention, and in 
1930 all of us were ourselves in gaol. 



XXVII 


THUNDER IN THE AIR 

The 1929 Congress was going to be held in Lahore. After ten 
years it had come back to the Punjab, and people’s minds leapt 
over that decade and went back to the events of ipig-Jallian- 
wala Bagh, martial law with all its humiliations, the Congress 
sessions at Amritsar, to be followed by the beginnings of non- 
co-operation. Much had happened during this decade and 
India's face had changed, but there was no lack of parallels. 
Political tension was growing; the atmosphere of struggle was 
developing fast. The long shadow of the conflict to come lay 
over the land. 

The Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils had 
long ceased to interest any one, except the handful who moved 
in their sacred orbits. They carried on in their humdrum way, 
providing some kind of a cloak — a torn and tattered affair — 
to the authoritarian and despotic nature of the Government, 
an excuse to some people to talk of India’s parliament, and 
allowances to their members. The last successful effort of the 
Assembly to draw attention to itself was when it passed a 
resolution in 1928 refusing its co-operation to the Simon Com- 
mission. 

There had also been subseq^uently a conflict between the 
Chair and the Government. Vithalbhai Patel, the Swarajist 
President of the Assembly, had become a thorn in the tender 
side of the Government on account of his independence (of 
them) and attempts were made to clip his wings. Such hap- 
penings attracted attention but, on the whole, the public mind 
was now concentrated on events outside. My father was 
thoroughly disillusioned with Council work, and often expressed 
his opinion that nothing more could be got out of the legis- 
latures at that stage. He wanted to get out of them himself 
if an opportunity presented itself. Constitutionally minded as 
he was and used to legal methods and procedure, force of cir- 
cumstances had driven him to the painful conclusion that the 
soolled constitutional methods were ineffective and futile in 
India. He would justify this to his own legalist mind by saying 
that there was no constitution in India, 'nor was there any retd 
rule of law when laws, in the shape of ordinances and the like, 
appeared suddenly, like rabbits from a conjurer’s hat, at the 

IQO 



THUNDER IN THE AIR igt 

will of an indi\'idual or a dictating group. In temperament and 
habit he was far from being a revolutionary, and if there had 
been anything like bourgeois democracy, he would undoubtedly 
have been a pillar of the constitution. But, as it was, talk of 
constitutional agitation in India, with a parade of a sham 
parliament, began to irritate him more and more. 

Gandhiji was still keeping away from politics, except for the 
part he played at the Calcutta Congress. He ivas, however, in 
full touch with developments and was often consulted by the 
Congress leaders. His main activity for some years had been 
Khadi propaganda, and with this object he had undertaken 
extensive tours all over India. He took each province by turn 
and visited every district and almost every town of any conse- 
quence, as well as remote rural areas. Everywhere he attracted 
enormous crowds, and it required a great deal of previous 
staff-work to carry through his programme. In this manner 
he has repeatedly toured India and got to know every bit of 
the vast country from the north to the far south, from the 
eastern mountains to the western sea. I do not think any other 
human being has ever travelled about India as much as he has 
done. 

In the past there were great wanderers who were continually 
on the move, pilgrim souls with the wanderlust, but their means 
of locomotion were slow, and a life-time of such wandering 
could hardly compete with a year by railway and motor-car. 
Gandhiji went by railway and automobile, but he did not con- 
fine himself to them; he tramped also. In this way he gathered 
his unique knowledge of India and her people, and in this way 
also scores of millions saw him and came into personal touch 
with him. ' 

He came to the United Provinces in 1929 on his khadi tour, 
and spent many weeks in these provinces during the hottest 
part of the year. I accompanied him occasionally for a few 
days at a time and, despite previous experience, could not help 
marvelling at the vast crowds he attracted. This was especially 
noticeable in our eastern districts, like Gorakhpur, where the 
swarms of human beings reminded one of hordes of locusts. 
As we motored through the rural areas, we would have gather- 
ings of firom ten thousand to twenty-five thousand every few 
miles, and the principal meeting of the day might even exceed 
a hundred thousand. There were no hroadcasting facilities, 
except rarely in a few big cities, and it was manifestly impos- 
sible to be heard by these crowds. Probably they did not expect 
to hear anything; they were satisfied if they saw the Mahatma. 



igZ JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Gandhiji usually addressed them brlelly, avoiding undue strain; 
it would have been quite impossible to carry on otherwise in 
this fashion horn hour to hour and day to day. 

I did not accompany him throughout his U.P. tour as I could 
be of no special use to him, and there was no point in my 
adding to the number of the touring party. I had no objection 
to crowds, but there was not sufficient inducement to get pushed 
and knocked about and my feet crushed— the usual fate of 
people accompanying Gandhiji. I had plenty of other work to 
do, and had no desire to confine myself to Ichadi propaganda, 
which seemed to me a relatively minor activity in view of the 
developing political situation. To some extent I resented Gand- 
hiji’s pre-occupation with non-political issues,, and I could never 
understand the background of his thought. In those days he 
was collecting funds for khadi work, and he would say fre- 
quently that he Avanted money for Daridranarayan, the ‘ Lord 
of the Poor’, or ‘God that resides in the Poor'; meaning 
thereby, presumably, that he wanted it to help the poor to find 
employment and work in cottage industries. But behind that 
word there seemed to be a glorification of poverty; God Avas 
especially the Lord of the poor; they were His chosen people. 
That, I suppose, is the usual religious attitude everywhere. I 
could not appreciate it, for poverty seemed to me a hateful 
thing, to be fought and rooted out and not to be encouraged 
in any way. This inevitably led to an attack on a system which 
tolerated and produced poverty, and those who shrunk firom 
this had of necessity to jtistify poverty in some way. They 
could only think in terms of scarcity and could not picture a 
world abundantly supplied with the necessaries of IbFe; prob- 
ably, according to them, the rich and the poor would always 
he with us. 

Whenever I had occasion to discuss this with Gandhiji, 
he would lay stress on the rich treating their riches as a 
trust for the people; it was a vicAV-point of considerable 
antiquity, and one comes across it frequently in India as well 
as medieval Europe. I confess that I have always been wholly 
unable to understand how any person can reasonably expect 
this to happen, ot imagine that 'therein lies the solution of the 
social problem. 

The Legislative Assembly, as I have said above, was becoming 
a somnolent affair and few people took interest in its dreary 
activities. A rude awakening came to it one day when Bhagat 
Singh and B. K. Dutt threw two bombs from the visitors* gallery 
on to the floor of the bouse. No one was seriously hurt, and 



THUNDER IN THE AIR I93 

probably the bombs were intended, as was stated by the 
accused later, to make a noise and create a stir, and not to 
injure. 

They did create a stir both in the Assembly and outside. Other 
activities of Terrorists were not so innocuous. A young English 
police officer, who was alleged to have hit Lala Lajpat Rai, 
was shot down and killed in Lahore. In Bengal and elsewhere 
there seemed to be a recrudescence of terrorist activity. A 
number of conspiracy cases were launched, and the number of 
detenus — people kept in prison or otherwise detained without 
trial or conviction — rapidly increased. 

In the Lahore conspiracy case some extraordinary scenes were 
enacted in the court by the police, and a great deal of public 
attention was drawn to the case because of this. As a protest 
against the treatment given to them in court and in prison, 
there was a hunger-strike on the part of most of the prisoners. 
I forget the exact reason why it began, but ultimately the 
question involved became the larger one of treatment of 
prisoners, especially Politicals. This hunger-strike went on from 
week to week and created a stir in the country. Owing to the 
physical weakness of the accused, they could not be taken to 
court, and the proceedings had to be adjourned repeatedly. 
The Government of India thereupon initiated legislation to 
allow court proceedings to continue even in the absence of the 
accused or their counsel. The question of prison treatment had 
also to be considered by them. 

I happened to be in Lahore when the hunger-strike was 
already a month old. I was given permission to visit some of 
the prisoners in the prison, and I availed myself of this. I 
saw Bhagat Singh for the first time, and Jatindranath Das and 
a few others. They were all very weak and bed-ridden, and it 
was hardly possible to talk to them much. Bhagat Singh had 
an attractive, intellectual face, remarkably calm and peaceful. 
There seemed to be no anger in it. He looked and talked with 
great gentleness, but then I suppose that any one who has been 
fasting for a month wiU look spiritual and gentle. Jatin Das 
looked milder still, soft; and gentle like a young girl. He was in 
considerable pain when I saw him. He died later, as a result of 
festing, on the sixty-first day of the hunger-strike, 

Bhagat Singh’s chief ambidon seemed to be to see, or at least 
to have news of, his uncle, Sardar Ajit Singh, who had been 
deported, together with Lala Lajpat Rai, in- 1907. For many 
years he had been an exile abroad. There were some vague 
reports that he had settled in South America, but I do not 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

fhinlf anything definite is known about him. I do not even 
know if he is alive or dead. 

Jatin Das's death created a sensation all over the country. It 
brought the question of the treatment of political prisoners to 
the front, and Government appointed a committee on the sub- 
ject. As a result of the deliberations of this committee, new 
rules were issued creating tliree classes of prisoners. No special 
class of political prisoners was created. These new rules, which 
seemed to promise a change for the better, as a matter of fact 
made little difference, and the position remained, and still 
remains, highly unsatisfactory. 

As the summer and monsoon months gradually shaded off 
into the autumn, the Provincial Coi^ress Committees busied 
themselves with the election of the President for the Lahore 
session of the Congress. This election is a lengthy process, and 
used to go on from August to October. Iij 1929 there was 
almost unanimity in favour of Gandhiji. This desire to have 
him as President for a second time did not, of course, push him 
any higher in the Congress hierarchy, for he had been a kind 
of super-president for many years. It was generally felt, how- 
ever, that as a struggle was impending, and he was bound to be 
the de facto leader of it, he might as well be the de jure head 
of the Congress for the occasion. Besides, there was really no 
other person outstanding enough and obvious enough for the 
presidentship. 

So Gandhiji was recommended for the presidentship by 
the Provincial Committees. But he would have none of 
it. His refusal, though emphatic, seemed to leave some room 
for argument, and it was hoped that he would reconsider it. A 
meeting of the All-India Congress Committee was held in 
Lucknow to decide finally, and almost to the last hour all of us 
thought that he would agree. But he would not do so, and at 
the last moment he pressed my name forward. The A.I.C.C. 
was somewhat taken aback by his final refusal, and a little 
irritated at being placed in a difficult and invidious position. 
For want of any other person, and in a spirit of resignation, 
they finally elected me. 

I have seldom felt quite so annoyed and humiliated as I did 
at that election. It was not that I was not sensible of the 
honour, for it was a great honour, and I would have rejoiced if 
I had been elected in the ordinary way*. But I did not come to 
it by the mmn entrance or even a side entrance; I appeared 
suddenly by a trap-door and bewildered the audience into 
acceptance. They put a brave face on it, and, like a necessary 



THUNDER IN THE AIR I95 

pill, swallowed me. My pride was hurt, and almost I felt like 
handing back the honour. Fortunately I restrained myself from 
making an exhibition of myself, and stole away with a heavy 
heart. 

Probably the person who was happiest about this decision 
was my father. He did not wholly like my politics, but he liked 
me well enough, and any good thing that came my way pleased 
him. Often he would criticise me and speak a little curtly to 
me, but no person who cared to retain lus goodwill could run 
me down in his presence. 

My election was indeed a great honour and a great responsi- 
bility for me; it was unique in that a son was immediately 
following his father in' the presidential chair. It was often said 
that I was the youngest President of the Congress — I was just 
forty when I presided. This was not tme. I think Gokhale was 
about the same age, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (though 
he is a little older than me) was probably just under forty when 
he presided. But Gokhale was considered one of the elder 
statesmen even when he was in his late thirties, and Abul 
Kalam Azad has especially cultivated a look of venerable age 
to give a suitable background to his great learning. As states- 
manship has seldom been considered one of my virtues, and 
no one has accused me of possessing an excess of learning, I 
have escaped so far the accusation of age, though my hair has 
turned grey and my looks betray me. 

The Lahore Congress drew near. Meanwhile events were 
marching, step by step, inevitably, pushed onward, so it seemed, 
by some motive force of their own. Individuals, for all the 
brave show they put up, played a very minor r61e. One had the 
feeling of being a cog in a great machine which swept on 
relentlessly. 

Hoping perhaps to check this onward march of destiny, the 
British Government took a forward step, and the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwin, made an announcement about a forthcoming Round 
Table Conference. It was an ingeijiously worded announcement, 
which could mean much or veiy little, and it seemed to many of 
us obvious that the latter was the more likely contingency. And 
in any event, even if there was more in the announcement, it 
could not be anywhere near what we wanted. Hardly had this 
Viceregal announcement been made when, almost with indecent 
haste, so it seemed, a " Leaders' Conference ” was arranged at 
Delhi, and people foom various groups were in'vited to it. 
Gandhiji was there, so was my fiidier; Vithalbhai Patel (still 
President of the Assembly) was also there, and Moderate leaders. 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

like Sir Tcj Bahadur Sapru and others. A joint resolution or 
manifesto was agreed to, accepting the Viceroy’s declaration 
subject to some conditions, which, it was stated, were vital and 
must be fulfilled. If these conditions were accepted by Govern- 
ment, then co-operation was to be offered. These conditions^ 
were solid enough and would have made a difference. 

It was a triumph to get such a resolution agreed to by repre- 
sentatives of all the groups, moderate and advanced. For the 
Congress it was a come-down; as a common measure of agree- 
ment it was high. But there was a fatal catch in it. The condi- 
tions were looked upon from at least two different view-points. 
The Congress people considered them to be essential, the sine 
qua non, without which there could be no co-OTeration. For 
them they represented the minimum required. This was made 
clear by a subsequent meeting of the Congress Working Com- 
mittee, which further stated that this offer was limited to the date 
of the next Congress. For the Moderate groups they were a 
desirable maximum which should be stated, but which could 
not be insisted on to the point of refusal of co-operation. For 
them the conditions, though called vital, were not really condi- 
tions. 

And so it happened that later on, though none of these 
conditions were satisfied and most of us lay in gaol, together 
with scores of thousands of others, our Moderate and Respon- 
sivist friends, who had signed that manifesto with us, gave their 
full co-operation to our gaolers. 

Most of us suspected that this would happen— though hardly 
to the extent it did happen — ^but there was some hope that this 
joint action, whereby the Congress people had to some extent 
curbed themselves, would also result in curbing the propensities 
of the Liberals and others to indiscriminate and almost invari- 
able co-(meration with the British Government. A more powerfiil 
motive for some of us, who heartily disliked the compromising 
resolution, was to keep our own Congress ranks well knit to- 

‘ The condidons were : 

(i) All discussions at the proposed conference to be on the basis 
of full Dominion Status for India. 

(a) There should be a predominant representation of Congress- 
men at the conference. 

(3) A general amnesty of polidcal prisoners. 

(4) The Government of India to be carried on from now onwards, 
as, far as is possible under existing conditions, on the lines of a 
Dominion government. 



THUNDER IN THE AIR 197 

gether. On the eve of a big struggle we could not afford to split 
up the Congress. It was well known that Government was not 
likely to accept the conditions laid down by us, and our position 
would thus be stronger and we could easily carry our Right Wing 
with us. It was only a question of a few weeks; December and 
the Lahore Congress were near. 

And yet that joint manifesto was a bitter pill for some of us. 
To give up the demand for independence, even in theory and 
even for a short while, was wrong and dangerous: it meant that 
it was just a tactical affair, something to bargain with, not some- 
thing which was essential and without which xve could never be 
content. So I hesitated and refused to sign the manifesto (Subhas 
Bose had definitely refused to sign it), but, as was not unusual 
with me, I allowed myself to be talked into signing. Even so, I 
came away in great distress, and the very next day I thought of 
withdrawing from the Congress presidentship, and wrote accord- 
ingly to Gandhiji. I do not suppose that I meant this seriously, 
though I was sufficiently upset. A soothing letter from Gandhiji 
and three days of reflection calmed me. 

Just prior to the Lahore Congress, a final attempt was made 
to find some basis of agreement between Congress and the 
Government. An interview with Lord Irwin, the Viceroy, was 
arranged. I do not know who took the initiative in arranging 
this interview, but I ima^ne that Vithalbhai Patel was the 
prime mover. Gandhiji and my father were present at the inter- 
view, representing the Congress view-point, and I think also 
present were Mr. Jinnah, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapni and President 
Patel. The interview came to nothing; there was no common 
ground, and the two main parties — ^the Government and Con- 
gress — ^were far apart from each other. So now nothing remained 
but for the Congress to go ahead. The year of grace given at 
Calcutta was ending; independence was to be declared once for 
all the objective of the Congress, and the necessary steps taken 
to carry on the struggle to attain it. 

During these final weeks prior to the Lahore Congress I had 
to attend to important work in another field. The AU-India 
Trade Union Congress was meeting at Nagpur, and, as Presidrait 
for the year, I had to preside over it. It was very unusual for the 
same person to preside over both the National Congress and the 
Trade Union Congress within a few weeks of each other. I had 
hoped that I might be a link between the two and bring them 
closer to eadi other — ^the National Congress to become more 
socialistic, more proletarian, and organised Labour to join the 
national struggle. 



Ip8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was, perhaps, a vain hope, for nationalism can only 
go far in a socialistic or proletarian direction by ceasing to 
be nationalism. Yet I felt that, bourgeois as the outlook of the 
National Congress was, it did represent the only effective revolu- 
tionary force in the country. Ai such, Labour ought to help it 
and co-operate with it and influence it, keeping, however, its own 
identity and ideology distinct and intact. And I hoped that the 
course of events and the participation in direct action would 
inevitably drive the Congress to a more radical ideology and to 
face social and economic issues. The development of the Con- 
gress during recent years had been in the direction of the peasant 
and the village. If this development continued, it might in 
course of time become a vast peasant organisation, or, at 
any rate, an organisation in which the peasant element 
predominated. Already in many of our U.P. District 
Congress Committees the peasantiy were strorfgly represented, 
though the middle-class intelligentsia held the leadership in 
their hands. • 

There was thus a possibility of the eternal conflict between 
the village and the city influencing the relations of the National 
Congress with the T.U.C. The contingency was remote, as the 
present National Congress is run by middle-class people and is 
controlled by the city, and, so long as the question of national 
freedom is not solved, its nation^sm will dominate the field 
and be the most powerful sentiment in the country. Still it 
seemed to me obviously desirable to bring the Congress nearer 
to organised labour, and in the U.P. we even invited delegates 
to our Provincial Congress Committee from the provincial 
branch of the T.U.C. Many Congressmen also took prominent 
part in Labour activities. 

The advanced sections of Labour, however, fought shy of the 
National Congress. They mistrusted its leaders, and considered 
its ideology bourgeois and reactionary, which indeed it was, firom 
the Labour point of view. The Congress was, as its very name 
inmlied, a nationalist organisation. 

Throughout igag Trade Unions in India were agitated over a 
new issue— -the appointment of a Royal Commission on Labour 
in India, known as the Whitley Commission. The Left Wing was 
in fevour of a boycott of the Commission, the Right Wing in 
favouf of co-operation, and the personal factor came in, as some 
of the Right Wing leaders were offered membership of the Com- 
mission. In this matter, as in many others, my sympathies were 
with the Left,' especially as this was also the policy of the 
National Congress. It seemed absurd to co-operate with official 



THUNDER IN THE AIR 199 

Commissions when we were carrying on, or going to carry on, a 
direct action struggle. 

At the Nagpur T.U. Congress, this question of the boycott of 
the Whitley Commission became a major issue, and on this, as 
well as on several other matters in dispute, the Left Wing 
triumphed. I played a very undistinguished role at this Con- 
gress. Being a netvcomer in the Labour field and still feeling 
my way, I was a little hesitant. Generally, I expressed my views 
in favour of the more advanced groups, but I avoided acting 
with any gi'oup, and played the part more of an impartial 
speaker than a directing president. I was thus an almost passive 
spectator of the breaking-up of the T.U.C. and the formation of 
a new moderate organisation. Personally, I felt that the Righr 
groups were not justified in breaking away, and yet some of the 
leaders of the Left had forced the pace and given them every 
pretext to depart. Between the quarrels of the Right and Left, a 
large Centre group felt a litde helpless. Perhaps given a right 
lead, it could have curbed the two and avoided the break-up of 
the T.U.C., and, even if the break came, it would not have had 
the unfortunate consequences which resulted. 

As it was, the Trade Union Movement in India suffered a 
tremendous blow from which it has not yet recovered. The 
Government had already started its campaign against the 
advanced wings of the Labour movement, and die Meerut case 
was among the first fruits thereof. This campaign continued. 
The employers also thought the moment opportune to push their 
advantage home. The world depression had already begun in 
that winter of 1929-30, and buffeted by this, and attacked on 
every side, and with their own trade union organisations at 
their lowest ebb, the Indian working class had a very hard time, 
and were the helpless witnesses of ajprogressive deterioration in 
their owa condition. The Trade Union Congress experienced 
another split in the course of the next year or two, when a Com- 
munist faction broke off. Thus there were in theory three federa- 
tions of Trade Unions in India — a Moderate group, the main 
T.U.C., and a Communist group. In practice they were all weak 
and inefiective, and their mumal quarrels disgusted the rank- 
and-file workers. I was out of all tfiis from 1930 onwards, as I 
was mostly in prison. During my short periods outside I learnt 
that attempte at unity were being made. They were not success- 
ful.* The Moderate group of unions gained strength by the 

* Subsequent efforts to bring about Trade Union unity have been 
more successful, and the various groups are now working in some 
co-operation with each other. 



200 


JAVVAHARLAL NEHRU 

adhesion of railway workers to them. They had one advantage 
over the other groups, as Government recognised them and 
accepted their recommendations for the Labour Conferences at 
Geneva. The lure of a visit to Geneva pulled some Labour 
leaders to them, and they brought their unions with them. 



XXVIII 


INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 

The Lahore Congress remains firesh in my memory — a vivid 
patch. That is natural, for I played a leading r&le there, and, for 
a moment, occupied the centre of the stage; and I like to think 
sometimes of the emotions that filled me during those crowded 
days. I can never forget the magnificent welcome that the people 
of Lahore gave me, tremendous in its volume and its intensity. 
I knew well that this overflowing enthusiasm was for a symbol 
and an idea, not for me personally; yet it was no little thing for 
a person to become that symbol, even for a while, in the eyes 
and hearts of great numbers of people, and I felt exhila- 
rated and lifted out of myself. But my personal reactions 
were of little account, and there were big issues at stake. The 
whole atmosphere was electric and surcharged with the gravity 
of the occasion. Our decisions were not going to be mere criti- 
cisms or protests or expressions of opinion, but a call to action 
which was bound to convulse the country and affect the lives of 
millions. 

What the distant future held for us and our country, none 
dare prophesy; the immediate future was clear enough, and 
it held the promise of strife and suflfering for us and those who 
were dear to us. This thought sobered our enthusiasms and 
made us very conscious of our responsibility. Every vote that 
we gave became a message of farewell to ease and comfort and 
domestic happiness and the intercourse of fiiends, and an 
invitation to lonely days and nights and physical and mental 
distress. 

The main resolution on Independence, and the action to be 
taken in furtherance of our freedom struggle, was passed almost 
unanimously, barely a score of persons, out of many thousands, 
voting against it. The real voting took place on a side issue, 
which came in the form of an amendment. This amendment 
was defeated and the voting figures were announced and the 
main resolution declared carried, by a curious coincidence, at the 
stroke of midnight on December 3 ist, as the old year yielded 
place to the new. Thus even as the year of grace, fixed by the 
Calcutta Congress, expired; the new dedsion was i^en and pre- 
parations for the struggle laundied. The wheels had been set 
moving, but we were stiU in darkness as to how and when we 

SOI 



302 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were to begin. The All-India Congress Committee had been 
authorised to plan and carry out our campaign, but all knew 
that the retd decision lay with Gandhiji. 

The Lahore Congress was attended by large numbers of people 
from the Frontier Province near by. Individual delegates from 
this province had always come to the Congress sessions, and for 
some years past Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan had been attending 
and t^ing part in our deliberations. In Lahore for the first time 
''a large batch of earnest young men from the Frontier came into 
touch with all-India political currents. Their fresh minds were 
impressed, and they returned with a sense of unity with the rest 
of India in the struggle for freedom and full of enthusiasm for 
it. They were simple but effective men of action, less given to 
talk and quibbling than the people of any other province in 
India, and they started organising their people and spreading 
the new ideas. They met with success, and the men and women 
' of the Frontier, the latest to join m India's struggle, played an 
outstanding and remarkable part from 1930 onwards. 

Immediately after the Lahore Congress, and in obedience to 
its mandate, my father called upon the Congress members of 
the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Councils to resign 
from their seats. Nearly all of them came out in a body, a very 
few refusing to do so, although this involved a breach of their 
election promises. 

^ Still we were vague about the future. In spite of the enthu- 
siasm shown at the Congress session, no one knew- what the 
response of the country would be to a programme of action. 
We had burned our boats and could not go back, but the country 
ahead of us was an almost strange and uncharted land. To give 
a start to our campaign, and partly also to judge the temper 
of the country, January 26th was fixed as Independence Day, 
when a pledge of independence was to be taken all over the 
country. 

And so, full of doubt about our programme, but pushed on 
by enthusiasm and the desire to do something effective, we 
waited for the march of events. I was in Allahabad during the 
early part of January; my father was mostly away. It was the 
dime of the great annual fair, the Magh Mela; probably it was 
the special Kumbh year, and hundreds of thousands of men 
and women were continually streaming into Allahabad, or holy 
Prayag, as it was to the pilgrims. They were all kinds of people, 
chiefly peasants, also labourers, shopkeepers, artisans, merchants, 
business men, professional people— indeed, it was a cross-section 
of Hindu India. As I lyatehed these great crowds and the un- 




LAHORE CONGRESS 1 929 
Nehru (standing on right) as President Elert 





INDtPENDENCt AND AFTER ^03 

ending streams of people going to and from the river, I won- 
dered how they would react to the call for civil resistance and 
peaceful direct action. How many of them knew or cared for 
the Lahore decisions? How amazingly powerful was that faith 
which had for thousand.s of years brought them and their for- 
bears from ever;^ corner of India to bathe in the holy Gan^a I 
Could they not divert some of this tremendous energy to political 
and economic action to better their own lot? Or were their 
minds too full of the trappings and traditions of their religion 
to leave room for other thought? I knew, of course, that these 
other thoughts were already there, stirring the placid stillness of 
ages. It was the movement of these vague ideas and desires 
among the masses that had caused the upheavals of the past 
dozen years and had changed the face of India. There was no 
doubt about their existence and of the dynamic energy behind 
them. But still doubt came and questions arose to which there 
was no immediate answer. How far had these ideas spread? 
What strength lay behind them, what capacity for organised 
action, for long endurance? 

Our house attracted crowds of pilgrims. It lay conveniently 
situated near one of the places of pilgrimage, Bharadwaj, where 
in olden times there was a primitive university, and on me days 
of the mela an endless stream of visitors would come to us from 
dawn to dusk. Curiosity, I suppose, brought most of them, and 
the desire to see well-known persona they had heard of, especi- 
ally my father. But a large proportion of those who came were 
politically inclined, and asked questions about the Congress and 
what it had decided and what was going to happen; and they 
were full of their own economic troubles and wanted to know 
what they should do about them. Our political slogans they 
knew well, and aU day the house resounded with them. I started 
the day by saying a few words to each group of twenty or fifty 
or a hundred as it came, one after the other, but soon this proved 
an impossible undertaking, and I silently saluted them whrai 
they came. There was a limit to this, too, and then I tried to 
lijd e myself. It was all in vain. The slogans became louder and 
louder, the verandas of the house were full of these visitors of 
ours, each door and vrindow had a collection of prying eyes. It 
was impossible to work or talk or feed or, indeed, do anything. 
This was not only embarrassing, it was annoying and irritating. 
Yet there they were, these people looking up vwth shining eyes 
full of affection, with generations of poverty and suffering 
behind them, and still pouring out their gratitude and love and 
asking for little in return, except fellow-feeling and sympathy. 



204 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was impossible not to feel humbled and awed by this abun- 
dance of affection and devotion. 

A dear friend of ours was staying with us at the time, and 
often it became impossible to carry on any conversation with 
her, for every five minutes or less T had to go out to say a word 
or two to a crowd that had assembled, and in between we listened 
to the slogans and shouting oucside. She was amused at my 
plight and a little impressed, I think, by what she considered my 
great popularity with the masses. (As a matter of fact the prin- 
cipal attraction was my father, but, as he was away, I had to 
face the music.) She turned to me suddenly and asked me how 
I liked this hero-worship. Did I not feel proud of it? I hesitated 
a little before answering, and this led her to think that she had, 
perhaps, embarrassed me by too personal a question. She apolo- 
gised. She had not embarrassed me in the least, but I found the 
question difficult to answer. My mind wandered away, and I 
began to analyse my own feelings and reactions. They were very 
mixed. 

It was true that I had achieved, almost accidentally as it 
were, an unusual degree of popularity with the masses; I was 
appreciated by the intelligentsia; and to young men and women 
I was a bit of a hero, and a halo of romance seemed to surround 
me in their eyes. Songs had been written about me, and the 
most impossible and ridiculous legends had grown up. Even my 
opponents had often put in a good word for me and patronis- 
ingly admitted that I was not lacldng in competence or in good 
faith. 

Onljr a saint, perhaps, or an inhuman monster could survive 
all this, tmscathed and unaffected, and I can place myself in 
neither of these categories. It went to my head, intoxicated me a 
little, and gave me confidence and strength. I became ^I imagine 
80, for it is a difficult task to look at oneself from outside) just a 
little bit autocratic in my ways, just a shade dictatorial. And 
yet I do not think that mj conceit increased markedly. I had a 
fair measure of my abilities, I thought, and I was by no means 
humble about them. But 1 knew well enough that there was 
nothing at all remarkable about them, and I was very conscious 
of my Failings. A habit of introspection probably helped me to 
retain my balance and view many happenings connected with 
myself in a detached manner. Experience of public life showed 
me that popularity was often the handmaiden of undesirable 
persons; it was certainly not an invariable sign of virtue or 
intelligence. Was I popular then because of my failings or my 
accomplishments? Why indeed was I popular? 



INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 205 

Not because of intellectual attainments, for they were not 
extraordinary, and, in any event, they do not make for popu- 
larity. Not because of so-called sacrifices, for it is patent that 
hundreds and thousands in our own day in India have suffered 
infinitely more, even to the point of the last sacrifice. My repu- 
tation as a hero is entirely a bogus one, and I do not feel at all 
heroic, and generally the heroic attitude or the dramatic pose in 
life strikes me as silly. As for romance, 1 should say that I am 
the least romantic of individuals. It is true that I have some 
physical and mental courage, but the background of that is 
probably pride ; personal, group, and national, and a reluctance * 
to be coerced into anything. 

I had no satisfactory answer to my question. Then I proceeded 
along a diflerent line of inquiry. I found that one of the most 
persistent legends about my father and myself was to the effect 
that we used to send our linen weekly from India to a Paris 
laundry. We have repeatedly contradicted this, but the legend 
persists. Anything more fantastic and absurd it is difficult for 
me to imagine, and if anyone is foolish enough to indulge in 
this wasteml snobbery, I should have thought he would get a 
special mention for being a prize fool. 

Another equally persistent legend, often repeated in spite of 
denial, is that I was at school with the Prince of Wales. The 
story goes on to say that when the Prince came to India in iqai 
he asked for me; I was then in gaol. As a matter of fact, 1 was 
not only not at school with him, but I have never had the advan- 
tage of meeting him or speaking to him. 

I do not mean to imply that my reputation or popularity, such 
as they are, depend on these or similar legends. They may have 
a more secure foundation, but there is no doubt that the super- 
structure has a thick covering of snobbery, as is evidenced by 
these stories. At any rate, there is the idea of mixing in high 
society and living a life of luxury and then renouncing it all, 
and renunciation has always appemed to the Indian mind. As a 
basis for a reputation this does not at all appeal to me. I prefer 
the active virtues to the passive ones, and renunciation and sacri- 
fice for their own sakes have litde appeal for me. I do value 
them &om another point of view— that of mental and spiritual 
training— just as a simple and regular life is necessary for the 
athlete to keep in good physical condition. And die capacity for 
endurance and perseverance in spite of hard knocks is essential 
for those who wish to dabble in great undertakings. But I have 
no liking or attraction for the ascetic view of life, the negation 
of life, the terrified abstention firom its joys a.nd sensadons. I 



2o6 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


have not consciously renounced anything that I really valued; 
but then values change. 

The question that my friend had asked me still remained un- 
answered; did I not feel proud of this hero-worship of the 
crowd? I disliked it and wanted to run atvay from it, and yet I 
had got used to it, and when it was wholly absent, I rather missed 
it. Neither way brought .satisfaction, but, on the whole, the 
crowd had filled some inner need of mine. The notion that I 
could influence them and move them to action gave me a sense 
of authority over their minds and hearts; and this satisfied, to 
some extent, my tvill to power. On their part, they exercised a 
subtle tyranny over me, for their confidence and affection moved 
inner depths within me and evoked emotional responses. 
Individualist as I was, sometimes the barriers of individuality 
seemed to melt away, and I felt that it would be better to be 
accursed with these unhappy people than to be saved alone. But 
the barriers were too solid to disappear, and I peeped over them 
virith wondering eyes at this phenomenon which I railed to under- 
stand. 


Conceit, like fat on the human body, grows imperceptibly, 
Iwer upon layer, and the person whom it affects is unconscious 
of the daily accretion. Fortunately the hard knocks of a mad 
world tone it down or even squash it completely, and there has 
been no lack of these hard knocks for us in India during recent 
years. The school of life has been a difficult one for us, and 
suffering is a hard taskmaster. 

I have been fortunate in another respect also — the possession 
of family members and friends and comrades, who have helped 
me to retain a proper perspective and not to lose my mental 
equilibrium. Public funaions, addresses by municipalities and 
local boards and other public bodies!, processions and the like, 
used to be a great strain on my nerves and my sense of humour 
wd reality. The most extravagant and pompous language would 
w used, Md everybody would look so solemn and pious that I 
felt an almost uncontrollable desire to laugh, or to stick out 
my tongue, or stand on my head, just for the pleasure of shock- 
ing and w«ching the reacrions on the faces at that august 
assetnblyl Fortunately for my reputation and for the sober res- 
pcrabihty of public life in India, I have suppressed this mad 
and usually behaved with due propriety. But not always 
oom^es there has been an exhibition on my part in a crowded 

in processions, which I find extra- 
ordt^y trymg. I have sudd^y left a procession, arranged in 
our honour, and disappeared in the crowd, leaving my wife or 



INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER 207 

some Other person to carry on, perched up in a car or carriage, 
with that procession. 

This continuous effort to suppress one’s feelings and behave 
in public is a bit of a strain, and the usual result is that one puts 
on a glum and solid look on public occasions. Perhaps because 
of this I was once described in an article in a Hindu magazine 
as resembling a Hindu widow! I must say that, much as I 
admire Hindu widows of the old type, this gave me a shock. 
The author evidently meant to praise me for some qualities he 
thought I possessed — a spirit of gentle resignation and renuncia- 
tion and a smileless devotion to work. I had hoped that I pos- 
sessed — and, indeed, I wish that Hindu tvidows would possess — 
more active and aggressive qualities and the capacity for humour 
and laughter. Gandhiji once told an interviewer that if he had 
not had the gift of humour he might have committed suicide, 
or something to this effect. I would not presume to go so far, 
but life certainly w'ould have been almost intolerable for me but 
for the humour and light touches that .some people gave to it, 

My vety popularity and the brave addresses that came my way, 
foil (as is, indeed, the custom of all such addresses in India) of 
choice and flowery language and extravagant conceits, became 
subjects for raillery in the circle of my family and intimate 
friends. The high-sounding and pompous words and titles that 
were often used for all those prominent in the national move- 
ment, were picked out by my wife and sisters and others and 
bandied about irreverently. I was addressed as Bharat Bhushan — 
‘Jewel of India’ Tyagamurti — ^‘O Embodiment of Sacrifice’; 
and this light-hearted treatment soothed me, and the tension 
of those solemn public gatherings, where I had to remain on my 
best behaviour, gradually relaxed. Even my little daughter 
joined in the game. Only my mother insisted on taking me 
seriously, and she never wholly approved of any sarcasm or 
raillery at the expense of her darling boy. Father was amused; 
he had a way of quietly expressing his deep understanding and 
sympathy. 

But aU these shouting crowds, and dull and wearying public 
functions, and interminable arguments, and the dust and tumble 
of politics touched me on the surface only, though sometimes 
the touch was sharp and pointed. My real conflict lay within 
me, a conflict of ideas, desires and loyalties, of subconscious 
depths struggling with outer circumstances, of an inner hunger 
unsatisfied. I became a battleground, where various forces 
struggled for mastery. I sought an escape from this; I tried to 
find harmony and equilibrium, and in this, attempt I rushed 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


ao8 

into action. That gave me some peace; outer conflict relieved 
the strain of the inner struggle. 

Why am I writing all this sitting here in prison? The quest 
i.? stiirthe .same, in prison or outside, and I write down my past 
feelings and experiences in the hope that this may bring me 
some peace and psychic satisfaction. 



XXIX 


CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 

Independence Day came, January a6th. 1930, and it revealed to 
us, as in a flash, the earnest and enthusiastic mood of the 
country. There was something vastly impressive about the great 
gatherings everywhere, peacefully and solemnly taking the 
pledge of independence * without any speeches or exhortation. 
This celebration gave the necessary impetus to Gandhiji, and he 
felt, with his sure touch on the pulse of the people, that the 
time was ripe for action. Events followed then in quick suc- 
cession, like a drama w-orking up to its climax. 

As Civil Disobedience approached and electrified the atmo- 
sphere, our thoughts went back to the movement of 1921-22 and 
the manner of its sudden suspension after Qiauri Chaura. The 
country was more disciplined now, and there was a clearer 
appreciation of the nature of the struggle. The technique was 
understood to some extent, but more important still from 
Gandhiji’s point of view, it was fully realised by every one that 
he was terribly in earnest about non-violence. There could be 
no doubt about that now as there probably was in the minds of 
some people ten years before. Despite all this, how could we 
possibly be certain that an outbreak of violence might not occur 
in some locality either spontaneously or as the result of an in- 
trigue? And if such an incident occurred, what would be its 
effect on our civil disobedience movement? Would it be suddenly 
wound up as before? That prospect w^as most disconcerting. 

Gandhiji probably thought over this question also in his own 
way, though the problem that seemed to trouble him, as far as 
I could gather from scraps of conversation, was put differently. 

The non-violent method of action to bring about a change for 
the better was to him the only right method and. if rightly 
pursued, an infallible method. Must it be said that this method 
required a specially favourable atmosphere for its functioning 
and succe.ss, and that it should not be tried if outward conditions 
were not suited to it? That led to the conclusion that the non- 
violent method was not meant for all contingencies, and was 
thus neither a universal nor an infallible method. This con- 
clusion was intolerable for Gandhiji, for be firmly believed that 
it was a universal and infallible method. Therefore, necessarily, 

* This pledge is given in Appendix A. (p. 6or). 
aoo 



210 


JAWAHARLAL NRHRU 

it must fuiiciioii even tlmugh the external conditions were un- 
favourable. and even in the midst of strife and violence. The 
way of its functioning might be varied to suit varying circum- 
stances, but to stop it would be a confession of failure of the 
method itself. 

Perhaps his mind worked in some such way, but I cannot be 
sure of his thoughts. He did ^ve us the impression that there 
was a slightly diffei'cnt orientation to his thinking, and that Civil 
Disobedience, when it came, need not be stopped because of a 
sporadic act of violence. If, however, the violence became in 
any way part of the movement itself, then it ceased to be a 
peaceful civil disobedience movement, and its activities had to 
be curtailed or varied. This assurance went a long way in satis- 
fying many of us. The great question that hung in the air 
now was — how? How were vve to begin? What irorm of civil 
disobedience should we take up that would be effective, suited 
to the circumstances, and popular with the masses? And then 
the Mahatma gave the hint. 

Salt suddenly became a mysterious word, a word of power. 
The Salt Tax was to be attacked, the salt laws were to be broken. 
We were bewildered and could not quite fit in a national 
struggle with common .salt. Anodier surprising development was 
Gandhiji’s announcement of his ‘ Eleven Points What was the 
point of making a list of some political and social refiirms — good 
m themselves, no doubt — when we were talking in terms of 
independence? Did Gandhiji mean the same thing when he used 
this term as we did, or did we speak a different ^guage? We 
had no time to argue for events were on the move. They were 
moving politically before our eyes from day to day in India; and, 
hardly realised by us at the time, they were moving fast in the 
world and holding it in the grip of a terrible depression. Prices 
were falling, and the city dwellers welcomed this as a sign of 
the plenty to come, but the farmer and the tenant saw the pros- 
pect with alarm. 

Then came Gandhiji’s correspondence with the Viceroy and 
the beginning of the Dandi Salt Mardi ffom the Ashram at 
Sabarmati^ As people followed the fertimes of this marching 
column of pilgrims from day to day, the temperature of the 
country went up. A meeting of the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee was held at Alimedabad to make final arrangements fi)r 
the struggle that was now almost upon us. The Leader in the 
struggle was not present, for he was already tramping with his 
pilgrim hand to the sea, and he refused to return. The A,I.C.C. 
planned what should be done in case of arrests, and large powers 



CIVIL i^laUuLUlLNCj-^ Bi:.UlNo 


1 


were given to the President to act on behalf of the Committee, 
in case it could not meet, to nominate members of the Working 
Committee in place of those arrested, and to nominate a suc- 
cessor for himself with the same powers. Similar powers were 
given by Provincial and local Congress Committee.s to their 
presidents. 

Thus was inaugurated a regime when so-called ‘ dictators ’ 
flourished and controlled the struggle on behalf of the Congress. 
Secretaries of State for India and Viceroys and Governors have 
held up their hands in horror and proclaimed how vicious and 
degraded was the Congress because it believed in dictatorships; 
they, of course, being convinced adherents of democracy. 
Occasionally the Moderate Press in India has also preached to 
us the virtues of democracy. We listened to all this in silence 
(because we were in prison) and in amazement. Brazen-faced 
hypocrisy could hardly go further. Here was India being 
governed forcibly under an absolute dictatorship with Ordinance 
laws and suppression of every kind of civil liberty, and yet our 
rulers talked unctuously of democracy. Even normally, where 
was the shadow of democracy in India? It was no doubt natural 
for the British Government to defend its power and vested in- 
terests in India and to suppress those who sought to challenge 
its authority. But its assertion that all this was the democratic 
method was worthy of record for future generations to admire 
and ponder over. 

The Congress had to face a situation when it would be impos- 
sible for it to function normally; when it would be declared an 
unlawful organisation, and its committees could not meet for 
consultation or any action, except secretly. Secrecy was not 
encouraged by us, as tve wanted to keep our struggle a perfectly 
open one, and thus to keep up oiu: tone and influence the masses. 
But even secret work did not take us far. All our leading men 
and women at the centre, as well as in the provinces and in local 
areas, were botmd to be arrested. Who was then to carry on? 
The only course open to us was, after the fashion of an army 
in action, to make arrangements for new commanders to be 
appointed as old ones were disabled. We could not sit down in 
the field of battle and hold committee meetings. Indeed, we did 
so sometimes, but the object of this, and the inevitable result, 
was to have the whole committee arrested en bloc. We did not 
even have the advantage of a general staff sitting safely behind 
the lines, or a dvilian cabinet in still greater saety elsewhere. 
Our general staffs and cabinets had to keep, by the very nature of 
our struggle, in the most advanced and exposed positions, and 



212 


JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

they were arrested and removed in the early stages. And what 
was the power we conferred on our ‘ dictators ’? It was an honour 
for them to be put forward as symbols of the national determina- 
tion to carry on the struggle: but the actual authority they had 
wa.s largely confined to ' dictating ’ thera.selves to prison. They 
could only function at all when the committee they represented 
could not meet on account of force majeure-, and wherever and 
whenever that committee could meet, the 'dictator’ -lost his 
individual authority, such as it was. He or she could not tackle 
any basic problems or principles; only minor and superficial 
phases of the movement could be affected by the ‘dictator’. 
Congress ‘ dictatorships ’ were really stepping-stones to prison; 
and from day to day this proces.s went on, new persons taking 
the place of those who were disabled. 

And so, having made our final preparations, we bade good-bye 
to our comrades of the All-India Congress Committee at 
Ahmedabad, for none knew when or how we would meet again, 
or whether we would meet at all. We hastened back to our posts 
to give the finishing touches to our local arrangements, in 
accordance with the new directions of the A.I.C.C., and, as 
Sarojini Naidu said, to p^ck up our toothbrushes for the journey 
to prison. 

On our way back, father and I went to see Gandhiji. He was 
at Jambusar with his’pilgrim band and we spent a few hours 
with him there, and then saw him stride away with his party 
to the next stage in the journey to the salt sea. That was my 
last glimpse of him then as I saw him, staff in hand, marching 
along at the head of his followers, with firm step and a peaceful 
but undaunted look. It was a moving sight. 

At Jambusar my father had decided, in consultation with 
Gandhiji, to make a gift of his old house in Allahabad to the 
nation and to rename this Swaraj Bhawan. On his return to 
Allahabad he made the announcement, and actually handed 
over charge to the Congress people; part of the large house being 
converted into a hospital. He was unable to go through the legal 
formalities at the time, and, a year and half later, I created a 
trust of the property, in accordrace with his wishes. 

April came, and Gandhiji drew near to the sea, and we waited 
for the word to begin civil disobedience by an attack on the salt 
laws. For months past we had been drilling our volunteers, and 
Kamala and Krishna (my wife and sister) had both joined them 
and donned male attire for the purpose. The volunteers had, of 
course, no arms or even sticks. The object of training them was 
to make them more efficient in their work and capable of dealing 



CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 


213 

with large crowds. The 6th of April was the first day of the 
National Week, which is celebrated annually in memory of the 
happenings in 1919, Irom Satyagraha Day to Jallianwala Bagh. 
On that day Gandhiji began the breach of the salt laws at Dandi 
beach, and three or four days later permission was given to all 
Congress organisations to do likewise and begin Civil Dis- 
obedience in their own areas. 

It seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released; and 
all over the country, in town and village, salt manufacture was 
the topic of the day, and many curious expedients were adopted 
to produce salt. We knew precious little about it, and so we read 
it up where we could, and issued leaflets giving directions, and 
collected pots and pans and ultimately succeeded in producing 
some unwholesome stuff, which we waved about in triumph, 
and often auctioned for fancy prices. It was really immaterial 
whether the stuff was good or bad; the main thing was to commit 
a breach of the obnoxious Salt I..aw, and we were successful 
in that, even though the quality of our salt was poor. As we saw 
the abounding enthusiasm or the people and the way salt- 
making was spreading like a prairie fire, we felt a little abashed 
and ashamed for having questioned the efficacy of this method 
when it was first proposed by Gandhiji. And we marvelled at 
the amazing knack of the man to impress the multitude and 
make it act in an organised way. 

I was arrested on the 14th of April as I was entraining for 
Raipur in the Central Provinces, where I was going to attend 
a conference. That very day I was tried in prison and sentenced 
to six months’ imprisonment under the Salt Act. In anticipation 
of arrest I had nominated (under the new powers given to me 
by the A.I.C.) Gandhiji to act as Congress President in ray 
absence, but, fearing his refusal, my second nomination was for 
father. As I expected, Gandhiji would not agree, and so father 
became the acting-President of the Congress. He was in poor 
health, nevertheless he threw himself into the campaign with 
great energy; and, during those early months, his strong 

f uidance and enforcement of discipline was of tremendous 
enefit to the movement. The movement benefited greatly, but 
it was at the cost of such health and physical fitness as had 
remained in him. 

Those were days of stirring news— processions and lathi 
charges and firing, frequent hartals to celebrate noted arrests, 
and special observances, like Peshawar Day, Garhwali Day, etc. 
For the time being the boycott of foreign cloth and all British 
goods was almost complete. When I heard that my aged mother 



214 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and, of course, my sisters used to stand under the hot summer 
sun picketing before foreign cloth shops, I was greatly moved. 
Kamala did so also, but she did something more. She threw 
herself into the movement in Allahabad city and district with 
an energy and determination which amazed me. who thought 
I had known her so well for so many years. She forgot 
her ill-health and rushed about the whole day in the sun, and 
showed remarkable powers of organisation. I heard of this 
vaguely in gaol. Later, when my father joined me there, I was 
to learn from him how much he had himself appreciated 
Kamala’s work, and especially her organising capacity. He did 
not at all fancy my mother or the girls rushing about in the hot 
sun, but, except for an occasional remonstrance, he did not 
interfere. 

The biggest news of all that came to us in those early days 
was of the ocairrences in Peshawar on April 23rd, and sub- 
sequently all over the Frontier Province. Anywhere in India 
such a. remarkable exhibition of disciplined and peacefiil courage 
before machine-gun firing would have stirred the country. In 
the Frontier Province it had an additional significance, for the 
Pathans, noted for their courage, were not noted for their peace- 
ful nature; and these Pathans had set an example which was 
unique in India. In the Frontier Province also occurred the 
famous incident of the refusal to fire on the civil population by 
the Garhwali soldiers. They refused to fire because of a soldier's 
distaste for firing on an unarmed crowd, and because, no doubt, 
of sympathy with the crowd. But even sympathy is not usually 
enough to induce a soldier to take the grave step of refusing to 
obey his officer’s orders. He knows the consequences. The 
Garhwalis probably did so (in common with some other regi- 
ments elsewhere whose disobedience did not receive publicity) 
because of a mistaken notion that the British power was collaps- 
ing. Only when such an idea takes possession of the soldier does 
he dare to act according to his own sympathies and inclinations. 
Probably for a few days or weeks the general commotion and 
civil disobedience led some people to think that the last days 
of British rule had come, and this influenced part of the Indian 
Army. Soon it became obvious that no such thing was going to 
happen in the near future, and then there was no more dis- 
obedience in rile army. Care was also taken not to put them in 
coxnpromising positions. 

Ntoy strange things happened in those days, hut undoubtedly 
the most striking was the part of the women in the national 
struggle. They came out in large numbers from the sedusion 



CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 3IJ 

of tlieir homes and, though imusued to public activity, threv? 
themselves into the heart of the struggle. The picketing of 
foreign cloth and liquor shops they made their preserve. 
Enormous processions consisting of women alone were taken 
out in all the cities; and, generally, the attitude of the women 
was more unyielding than that of the men. Often they became 
Congress ‘ dictators ’ in provinces and in local areas. 

The breach of the Salt Act soon became jmt one activity, and 
civil resistance spread to other fields. This was facilitated by the 
promulgation of various ordinances by the Viceroy prohibiting 
a number of activities. As these ordinances and prohibitions 
grew, the opportunities for breaking them also grew, and civil 
resistance took the form of doing the very thing that the ordi- 
nance tvas intended to stop. The initiative definitely remained 
with the Congress and the people, and as each ordinance law 
failed to control the situation from the point of vietv of govern- 
ment, fresh ordinances were issued by the Viceroy. Many of the 
Congress Working Committee members had been arrested, but 
it continued to function with new members added on to it, 
and each official ordinance was countered by a resolution of the 
Working Committee giving directions as to how to meet it. 
These directions were carried out with surprising uniformity all 
over this country — with one exception, the one relating to the 
publication of newspapers. 

When an ordinance was issued for the further control of the 
Press and the demand of security from newspapers, the Working 
Committee called upon the Nationalist Press to refuse to give 
any security, and to stop publication instead. This was a hard 
pill to swallow for the newspapermen, for just then the public 
demand for news was very great. Still the great majority of 
newspapers — some Moderate papers excepted — stopped publica- 
tion, with the result that all manner of rumours began to spread. 
But they could not hold out for long, the temptation was too 
great, and the sight of their moderate rivals picking up their 
business too irritating. So most of them drifted back to pub- 
lication. 

Gandhiji had been arrested on May 5th. After his arrest big 
raids on the salt pans and depots were organized on the west 
coast. There were very painful incidents of police brutality 
during these raids. Bombay then occupied the centre of the 
picture with its tremendous hartals and processions and lathi 
charges. Several emergency hospitals grew up to treat the vic- 
tims of these lathi charges. Much that was remarkable happened 
in Bombay, and being a great city it had the advantage or pub* 



2I(J JAWAHAUI.AL NtHRU 

licity. OccurrencYs of equal importance in small towns and the 
rural areas received no publicity. 

In the latter half of June my father went to Bombay; and 
with him went my mother and Kamala. They had a great 
reception, and during their stay there occurred some of the 
fiercest of the lathi charges. These were, indeed, becoming 
frequent occurrences in Bombay. A fortnight or so later an 
extraordinary all-night ordeal took place there, when Malaviyaji 
and members of the Working Committee, at the head of a huge 
crowd, spent the night facing the police, who blocked their way. 

On his return from Bombay father was arrested on June 30th, 
and Syed JVIahmud was arrested tvith him. They were arrested 
as acting-president and Secretary of the Working Committee, 
which was declared unlawful. Both of them were sentenced to 
six months. My father's arrest was probably due to his having 
issued a statement defining the duties of a soldier or policeman 
in the event of an order to fire on civil populations being given. 
The statement was st];ictly a legal affair, and contained the 
present British Indian law on this point. Nevertheless, it was 
considered a provocative and dangerous document. 

The Bombay visit had been a great strain on father, and from 
early morning to late at night he was kept busy, and he had to 
take the responsibility for every important decision. He had 
long been unwell, but now he returned fagged out, and decided, 
at the urgent advice of his doctors, to take complete rest 
immediately. He arranged to go to Mussoorie and packed up 
for it, but the day before he intended leaving for Mussoorie, he 
appeared before us in our barrack in Naini Central Prison. 



XXX 


IN NAINI PRISON 

I HAD gone back to gaol after nearly seven years, and memories 
of prison life had somewhat faded. I was in Naini Central 
Prison, one of the big prisons of the province, and I was to have 
the novel experience of being kept by myself. My enclosure was 
apart from the big enclosure containing the gaol population of 
between aaoo and 2300. It was a small enclosure, circular in 
shape, with a diameter of about one hundred feet, and with a 
circular wall about fifteen feet high surrounding it. In the middle 
of it was a drab and ugly building containing four cells. I was 
given two of these celb, connecting with each other, one to 
serve as a bathroom and lavatory. The others remained un- 
occupied for some time. 

After the exciting and very active life I had been leading 
outside, I felt rather lonely and depressed. I was tired out, and 
for two or three days I slept a great deal. The hot weather had 
already begun, and I was permitted to sleep at night in the open, 
outside my cell in the narrow space between the inner building 
and the enclosing wall. My bed was heavily chained up, lest I 
might take it up and walk away, or, more probably, to avoid 
the hed being used as a kind of scaling ladder to climb the wall 
of the enclosure. The nights were full of strange noises. The 
convict overseers, who guarded the main wall, frequently shouted 
to each other in varying keys, sometimes lengthening out their 
cries till they sounded like the moaning of a distant wind; the 
night-watchmen in the barracks were continually counting away 
in a loud voice the prisoners under their charge and shoutii^ out 
that all was well; and several times a night some gaol official, 
going his rounds, visited our enclosure and shouted an enquiry 
to the warder on duty. As my enclosure was some distance away 
from the others, most of these voices reached me indistinctly, 
and I could not make out at first what they were. At times I felt 
as if I was on the verge of the forest, and the peasantry were 
shouting to keep the wild animals away from their fields; some- 
times if seemed the forest itself and the beasts of the night were 
keeping up their nocturnal chorus. 

Was it my fancy, I wonder, or is it a fact that a circular wall 
reminds one more of captivity than a rectangular one? The 
absence of corners and angles adds to the sense of oppression. 

SI7 



2i8 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

In the daytime that wall even encroached on the sky and only 
allowed a glimpse of a narrow-bounded portion. With a wistful 
eye I looked 

" Upon that little tent of blue 
Which prisoners call the sky, 

And at every drifting cloud that went 
With sails of silver by.” 

At night that wall enclosed me all the more, and I felt as if 
I was at the bottom of a well. Or else that- part of the star-lit sky 
that I saw ceased to be real and seemed part of an artificial 
planetarium. 

My barrack and enclosure were popularly known throughout 
the gaol as the Kuttaghar—ths. Dog House. This was an old 
name which had nothing to do with me. The little barrack had 
been built originally, apart from all others, for especially danger- 
ous criminals who had to be isolated. Latterly it had been used 
for political prisoners, detenus, and the like who could thus be 
kept apart from the rest of the gaol. In front of the enclosure, 
some distance away, was an erection that gave me a shock when 
1 first had a glimpse of it from my barrack. It looked like a 
huge cage, and men went round and round inside it. I found 
out later that it was a water-pump worked by human labour, 
as many as sixteen persons being employed at a time. I got used 
to it as one gets used to everything, but it has always seemed to 
me one of the mast foolish and barbarous ways of utilising 
human labour-power. And whenever I pass iti think of the zoo. 

For some days I was not permitted to go outside my enclosure 
for exercise or any other purpose. I was later allowed to go out 
for half an hour in the early mornings, when it was almost dark, 
and to walk or run under the main wall. That early morning 
hour had been fixed for me so that I might not come in contact 
with, or be seen by, the other prisoners. I liked that outing, and 
it refr^hed nie tremendously. In order to compress as much 
open-air exercise as I could in the short time at my disposal, I 
took to running, and gradually increased this to over two miles 
daily. 

I used to get up very early in the morning, about fijur, or even 
half-past three, when it was quite dark. Partly this was due to 
going to bed early, as the light provided was not good for much 
rea^ng. I liked to watch the stars, and the position of some 
well-known constellation would give me the approximate time. 
From where I lay I could just see the Pole Star peeping over 
the wail, and as it was always there, I found it extraordinarily 



IN NAINI PRISON 


219 

comforting. Surrounded by a revolving sky, it seemed to be a 
symbol of cheerful constancy and perseverence. 

For a month I had no companion, but I was not alone, as I 
had the warder and the convict overseers and a convict cook and 
cleaner in my enclosure. Occasionally other prisoners came there 
on some business, most of them being convict overseers — C.O.’s 
— serving out long sentences. 'Lifers’ — convicts sentenced for 
life — were common. Usually a life-sentence was supposed to ter- 
minate after twenty years, or even less, but there were many in 
prison then who had served more than twenty years already. I 
saw one very remarkable case in Naini. Prisoners carry about, 
attached to their clothes at the shoulder, little wooden boards 
giving information about their convictions and mentioning the 
date when release was due. On the board of one prisoner I read 
that his date of release was 1996! He had already, m 1930, served 
out several years, and he w'as then a person of middle age. Prob- 
ably he had been given several sentences and they had been 
added up one after the other; the total, I think, amounting to 
seventy-five years. 

For years and years many of these ‘ lifers ’ do not see a child 
or woman, or even animals. They lose touch with the out- 
side world completely, and have no human contacts left. They 
brood and wrap themselves in angry thoughts of fear and re- 
venge and hatred; forget the good of the wond, the kindness and 
joy, and live only wrapped up in the evil, till gradually even 
hatred loses its edge and life becomes a soulless thing, a machine- 
like routine. Like automatons they pass their days, each exactly 
like the other, and have few sensations, except one — fear! From 
time to time the prisoner’s body is weighed and measured. But 
how is one to weigh the mind and the spirit which wilt and stunt 
themselves and wither away in this terrible atmosphere of 
oppression? People argue against the death penalty, and their , 
arguments appeal to me greatly. But when I see the long drawn- 
out agony, of a life spent in prison, I feel that it is perhaps 
better to have that penalty rather than to kill a person slowly 
and by degrees. One of the 'lifers’ came up to me once and 
asked me : “ What of us lifers? Will Swaraj take us out of this 
hell? ” 

•Who are these lifers? Many of them come in gang cases, 
when large numbers, as many as fifty or a hundred, may be 
convicted en bloc. Some of these are probably guilty, but I doubt 
if most of those convicted are really guilty; it is easy to get 
people involved in such cases. An approver’s evidence, a little 
identification, is all that is needed. Dacoities are increasing now^ 



J AWAII A 111. At* NEHRU 

adays and the prison population goes up year by year. If people 
starve, wJiat are they to do? Judges and magistrates wax 
eloquent about the increase of crime, but are blind to the 
obvious economic cause.s of it. 

Then there are the agriculturists who have a little village riot 
over some land dispute, lalhis fly about, and somebody dies— 
result, many people in gaol for life or for a long term. Often all 
the menfolk in a family will be imprisoned in this way, leaving 
the women to carry on as best they can. Not one of these is 
a criminal type. Generally they are fine young men, consider- 
ably above the aver.ige villager, both physically and mentally. 
A little training, some diversion of interest to other subjects 
and jobs, and these people would be valuable assets to the 
country. 

Indian prisons contain, of course, hardened criminals, persons 
who are aggressively anti-social and dangerous to the com- 
munity. But I have been amazed to find large numbers of fine 
types in prison, boys and men, whom I would trust unhesi- 
tatingly. I do not know what the proportion of real criminals 
to non<riminal types is, and probably no one in the prison 
department has ever even thought of this distinction. Some 
interesting figures are given on this subject by Lewis E. Lawes, 
the Warden of Sing Sing Prison in New York. He says of his 
prison population, that to his knowledge 50 per cent, are not 
criminally inclined at all; that 115 per cent, are the products of 
circumstances and environment; that of the remaining 35 per 
cent, only a possible half, that is 12 per cent., are aggressively 
anti-sodal. It is a weU-known fact that real criminality flourishes 
more in the big cities and centres of modem civilisation than 
in the undevelcmed countries. American gangsterdom is notori- 
ous, and Sing Sing has a special reputation as a prison where 
some of the worst criminals And yet, according to its 
warden, only 1254 per cent, of its prisoners are really bad. I 
.think it may very safely be said that this proportion is far 
less in an Indian prison, A more sensible economic policy, 
more employment, more education would soon empty out our 
prisons. But of course to make that successful, a radical plan, 
affecting the whole of our social febric, is essential. Tlie only 
other real alternative is what the British Government is doing : 
increasing its police forces and enlarring its prisons in India, 
The number of pEarsons sent to gaol m India is appalling. In 
a recent^ report issued b^ the Secretary of the All-India 
Prisoners Aid Sodety, it is stated that in the Bombay Presi- 
dency alone 128,000 persons were sent to gaol in and tlie 



IN NAINI PRISON 


331 


figure for Bengal for the same year was 124,000.* I do not know 
the figures for all the provinces, but if the total for two 
provinces exceeds a quarter of a million, it is quite possible that 
the All-India total approaches the million mark. This figure 
does not, of course, represent the permanent gaol population, 
for a large number of persons get short sentences. The per- 
manent population will be very much less, but still it must be 
enormous. Some of the major provinces in India are said to 
have the biggest prison administrations in the world. The U.P. 
is among those supposed to have this doubtful honour, and 
very probably it is, or was, one of the most backward and 
reactionary administrations. Not the least effort is made to 
consider the prisoner as an individual, a human being, and to 
improve or look after his mind. The one thing the U.P. 
administration excels in is keeping its prisoners. There are 
remarkably few attempts to escape, and I doubt if one in ten 
thousand succeeds in escaping. 

One of the most saddening features of the prisons is the 
large number of boys, from fifteen upwards, who are to be 
found in them. Most of them are bright-looking lads who, if 
given the chance, might easily make good. Lately some 
beginnings have been made to teach them the elements of 
reading and writing but, as usual, these are absurdly inade- 
quate and inefficient. There arc very few opportunities for 
games or recreation, no newspapers of any kind are permitted 
nor are books encouraged. For twelve hours or more all 
prisoners are kept locked up in their barracks or cells with 
nothing whatever to do in the long evenings. 

Interviews are only permitted once in three months, and so 
arc letters — a monstrously long period. Even so, many 
prisoners cannot take advantage of them. If they are illiterate, 
as most are, they have to rely on some gaol official to write 
on their behalf ; and the latter, not being keen on adding to his 
other work, usually avoids it. Or, if a letter is written, the 
address is not properly given and the letter does not reach. 
Interviews are still more difficult. Almost invariably they de- 
pend on a gratification for some gaol official. Often prisoners 
are transferred to different gaols, and their people cannot trace 
them. I have met many prisoners who had lost complete touch 
with their families for years, and did not know what had 
happened. Interviews, when they do take place after three 
months or more, ate most extraordinary, A number of 


* Statesman, December ii, 1934. 



224 


JAWAIIARLAL NEKHtJ 


prisoners and their interviewers are placed togetlaer on cither 
side of a barrier, and they all try to talk simultaneously. There 
is a great deal of shouting at each other, and the slight human 
touch that might have come from the interview is entirely 
absent. 

A very small number of prisoners, ordinarily not exceeding 
one in a thousand (Europeans excepted), are given some extra 
privileges in the shape of better food and more frequent inter- 
views and letters. During a big political civil resistance move- 
ment, when scores of thousands of political prisoners go to 
gaol, this figure of special class prisoners goes up slightly, but 
even so it is very low. About 95 per cent, of these political 
prisoners, men and women, are treated in the ordinary way 
and are not given even these facilities. 

Some individuals, sentenced for revolutionary activities for 
life or long terms of imprisonment, are often kept in solitary 
confinement for long periods. In the U.P., I believe, all such 
persons are automatically kept in solitary cellular confinement. 
Ordinarily, this solitary confinement is awarded as a special 
punishment for a prison offence. But in the case of these per- 
sons— -usually young boys— they are kept alone although their 
behaviour in gaol might be exemplary. Thus an additional 
and very terrible punishment is added by the Gaol Department 
to the sentence of the court, without any reason therefor. This 
seems very extraordinary, and hardly in conformity with any 
rule of law. Solitary confinement, even for a short period, is 
a most painful affair; for it to be prolonged for years is a 
terrible thing. It means the slow and continuous deterioration 
of the mind, till it begins to border on insanity; and the 
appearance of a look of vacancy, or a frightened animal type 
of expression. It is the lulling of the spirit by degrees, the slow 
vmsection of the soul. Even if a man survives it, he becomes 
abnormal and an absolute misfit in the world. And the question 
always arises — wm this man guilty at all of any act or offence? 
Police methods in India have long been suspect; in political 
matters they are doubly so. 

European or Eurasian prisoners, whatever their crime or 
stams, am automatically placed in a higher class and get better 
food, lighter work and more interviews and letters. A weekly 
visit from a clergyman keeps them b touch with outside affairs, 
ihe parson brmgs them foreign illustrated and humorous 
papers, and communicates with their families when necessary. 

No one grudges the European convicts these privileees, for 
they are few enough, but it is a little painful to see the utter 



IN NAINI PRISON 


223 

absence of any human standard in the treatment of others — 
men and women. The convict is not thought of as an indi- 
vidual human being, and so he or she is seldom treated as such. 
One sees in prison the inhuman side of the State apparatus 
of administrative repression at its worst. It is a machine which 
works away callously and imthinkingly, crushing all that come 
in its grip, and the gaol rules have been purposely framed to- 
keep this machine in evidence. Offered to sensitive men and 
women, this soulless regime is a torture and an anguish of the 
mind. I have seen long-term convicts sometimes breaking down 
at the dreariness of it all, and weeping like little children. And 
a word of sympathy and epcouragement, so rare in this atmos-> 
sphere, has suddenly made their faces light up with joy and 
gratitude. 

And yet among the prisoners themselves there were often 
touching instances of charity and good comradeship. A blind 
‘habitual’ prisoner was once discharged after thirteen years. 
After this long period he was going out, wholly unprovided for, 
into a friendless world. His fellow convicts were eager to help 
him, but they could not do much. One gave his shirt deposited 
in the gaol office, another some other piece of clothing. A third 
had that very morning received a new pair of chappals (leather 
sandals) and he had shown them to me with some pride. It was 
a great acquisition in prison. But when he saw this blind com- 
panion of many years going out bare-footed, he willingly parted 
with his new chappals. I thought then that there appeared to* 
be more charity inside the gaol than outside it. 

That year 1930 was full of dramatic situations and inspiring, 
happenings; what surprised most was the amazing power of 
Gandhiji to inspire and enthuse a whole people. Tnere was 
something almost hypnotic about it, and we remembered the 
words used by Gokhale about him : how he had the power of 
making heroes out of clay. Peaceful civil disobedience as a 
technique of action for achieving great national ends seemed 
to have justified itself, and a quiet confidence grew in the 
country, shared by friend and opponent alike, that we were 
marching towards victory. A strange excitement filled those 
who were active in the movement, and some of this even crept 
inside the gaol. “ Swaraj is coming I ” said the ordinary con- 
victs; and they waited impatiently for it, in the selfish hope 
that it might do them some good. The warders, coming in 
contart with the gossip of the bazaars, also expected that Swaraj 
was near; the petty gaol official grew a little more nervous. 

We had no daily newspapers in prison, but a Hindi weekly 



324 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

brought US some news, and often this news would set our 
imagination afire. Daily lathi charges, sometimes firing, 
martial law at Sholapur with sentences of ten years for 
carrying the national Hag. We felt proud of our people, and 
especially of our womenfolk, all over the country. I had a 
special feeling of satisfaction because of the activities of my 
mother, wife and sisters, as well as many girl cousins and 
friends; and though I was separated from th^em and was in 
prison, we grew nearer to each other, hound by a new sense 
of comradeship in a great cause. The family seemed to merge 
into a larger group, and yet to retain its old flavour and 
intimacy. Kamala surprised me, for her energy and enthusiasm 
overcame her physical ill-health and, for some time at least, 
she kept well in spite of strenuous activities. 

The thought that I was having a relatively easy time in 
prison, at a time when others were facing danger and suffering 
outside, began to oppress me. I longed to go out, and as I could 
not do that, I made my life in prison a hard one, full of work. 

I used to spin daily for nearly three hours on my own cliarkha; 
for another two or three hours I did n^war weaving, which I 
had especially asked for from the gaol authorities. I liked these 
activities. They kept me occupied without undue strain or 
requiring too much attention, and they soothed the fever of 
my mind. I read a great deal, and otherwise busied myself 
with cleaning up, washing my clothes, etc. The manual labour 
I did was of my own choice as my imprisonment was ' simple 
And so, between thought of outside happenings and my 
gaol routine, I passed my days in Naini Prison. Watching the 
working^ of an Indian prison, it struck me that it was not unlike 
the British government of India. There is great efficiency in 
the apparatus of government, which goes to strengthen the 
hold of the Government on the country, and little or no care 
fbi the human material of the country. Outwardly the prison 
must appear efficiently run, and to some extent this was true. 
But no One seemed to think that the main purpose of the 
prison must be to improve and help the unhappy individuals 
who come to it. Break them 1— that is the idea, so that by the 
nme they go out, they may not have the least bit, of spirit left 
in them. And how is the prison controlled, and the convicts 
kept m check and punished? Very largely with the help of the 
themselves, some of whom are made convict-warders 
(G.W s.) or convict-overseers (C-O.’s.), and are induced to co- 
operate with the authorities because of fear, and in the hope 
of rewards and special remissions. There are relatively few 



IN NAINI PRISON 


235 

paid non-convict-warders; most of the guarding inside the 
prison is done by convict-warders and C.O.’s. A widespread 
system of spying pervades the prison, convicts being encouraged 
to become stool pigeons and to spy on each other; and no 
combination or joint action is, of course, permitted among the 
prisoners. This is easy to understand, for only by keeping 
them divided up could they be kept in check. 

Outside, in the government of our country, we see much of 
this duplicated on a larger, though less obvious, scale. ■ But 
there the C.W.’s. or C.O.’s. are known differently. They have 
impressive titles, and their liveries of office are more gorgeous. 
And behind them, as in prison, stands the armed guard with 
weapons ever ready to enrorce conformity. 

How important and essential is a prison to the modern State! 
The prisoner at least begins to think so, and the numerous 
administrative and other functions of the government appear 
almost superficial before the basic functions of the prison, the 
police, the army. In prison one begins to appreciate the 
Marxian theory, that the State is really the coercive apparatus 
meant to enforce the will of a group that controls the govern- 
ment. 

For a month I was alone in my barrack. Then a companion 
came — ^Narmada Prasad Singh — ^and his coming was a relief. 
Two and a half months later, on the last day of June 1930, 
our little enclosure was the scene of unusual excitement. Un- 
expectedly, early in the moraing, my father and Dr. Syed 
Mahmud, were brought there. They had both been arrested 
in Anand Bhawan, while they were actually in their beds, that 
morning. 



XXXI 


NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 

My father’s arrest was accompanied by, or immediately preceded 
by, the declaration of the Congress Working Committee as an 
unlawful body. This led to a new development outside — the 
Committee would be arrested en bloc when it was having a 
meeting. Substitute members were added to it, under the 
authority given to the Acting-Presidents, and in this way 
several women became acting members. Kamala was one of 
them. 

Father was in very poor health when he came to gaol, and 
the conditions in which he was kept there were of extreme 
discomfort. This was not intentional on the part of the Govern- 
ment, for they were prepared to do what they could to lessen 
those discomforts. But they could not do much in Naini Prison. 
Four of us were now crowded together in the four tiny cells of 
my barrack. It was suggested by the superintendent of the 
prison that father might be kept in some other part of the gaol 
where he might have a little more room, but we preferred to 
be together, so that some of us could attend personally to his 
comforts. 

The monsoon was just beginning and it wa.H not particularly 
easy to keep perfectly dry even inside the cells, for the raim 
water came through the roof occasionally and dripped in 
various places. At night it was alw^s a problem where to put 
father’s bed, in the little loft. by jft. veranda attached to our 
cell, in order to avoid the rain. Sometimes he had fever. The 
gaol authorities ultimately decided to build an additional 
veranda, a fine broad one, attached to our cell. This veranda 
was built and it was a great improvement, but father did not 
profit by it much, as he was disenarged soon after it was ready. 
Those of us who continued to live in that barrack took full 
advantage of it later. 

Towards the end of July there was a great deal of talk about 
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr, M. R. Jayakar, endeavouring 
to bnng about peace between the Congress and the Goverm 
ment. We read about it in a daily newspaper, which was sup- 
plied as a special favour to father. We read in this paper the 
correspondence that had passed between the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwm, and Messrs. Sapru and Jayakar, and then we learnt that 

»a6 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 2*7 

the so-called ‘ peacemakers ’ had visited Gandhiji. We did not 
know at all what had induced them to take this initiative, or 
what they were driving at. Later we were told by them that 
they had been encouraged to proceed in the matter because of 
a brief statement that father had agreed to in Bombay a few 
days before his arrest. The statement had been drafted by Mr. 
Slocombe (a correspondent of the London Daily Herald then 
in India) after a conversation with my father, and had been 
approved by the latter. This statement^ considered the possi- 
bility of the Congress withdrawing the civil disobedience cam- 
paign, subject to the Government agreeing to a number of 
conditions. It was a vague and tentative affair, and it made it 
quite clear that even those vague conditions could not be con- 
sidered till father had a chance of consulting Gandhiji and me. 
I came in as the President of the Congress for the year. I 
remember father mentioning it to me in Naini, after his arrest, 
and adding that he was rather sorry that he had given such a 
vague statement in a huriy, as it was possible that it might be 
misunderstood. It was indeed misunderstood, as even the most 
exact and explicit statements are likely to be, by people whose 
way of thinking is entirely different. 

Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar suddenly descended 
on us in Naini Prison, on July 27th, with a note from Gandhiji. 

* Statement, dated Bombay, June 25, 1930, agreed to by Pandit 
Motilal Nehru: “If in certain drcurastances die British Govern- 
ment and the Government of India, although unable to anticipate 
the recommendations that may in perfect freedom be made by the 
Round Table Conference or the attitude which the British Parlia- 
ment may reserve for such recommendations, would nevertheless 
be willing to give a private assurance that they would support 'the 
demand for full responsible government for India, subject to such 
mutual adjustments and terms of transfer as are required by the 
special needs ^nd conditions of India and by her long association 
with Great Britain and as may be decided by the Round Table 
Conference! Pandit Motilal Nehru would undertake to take per- 
sonally stich an assurance — or the indication rcceiv^ from a 
responsible third party that such an assurance wouldbe forth- 
coming — to Mr. Gandhi and to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. If such 
an assurance were offered and accepted it would render possible 
a general measure of conciliation which would entail the simul- 
taneous calling off of the dvil disobedience movement, the cessation 
of the Government’s present repressive policy and a general 
measure of amnesty for political prisoners, and would be followed 
by Congress participation in the Round Table Conference on terms 
to be mutually agreed upon.” '' 



228 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

On that day and the next we had long interviews with them, 
which were very exhausting for father as he was actually 
feverish then. We talked and argued in a circle, hardly under- 
standing each other’s language or thought, so great was the 
difference in political outlook. It was obvious to us that there 
was not the faintest chance of any peace between the Congress 
. and the Government as matters stood. We refused to make any 
suggestions without first consulting our colleagues of the Work- 
ing Committee, especially Gandhiji. And we wrote something 
to this effect to Gandhiji. 

Eleven days later, on August 8th, Dr. Saprii came to see us 
again with the Viceroy’s reply. The Viceroy had no objection 
to our going to Yeravda (the prison in Poona where Gandhiji 
was kept) but he and his Council could not allow us to meet 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and other 
members of the Working Committee who were outside and 
were still carrying on an active campaign against the Govern- 
ment. Dr. Sapru asked us if we were prepared to go to Yeravda 
under these circumstances. We told him that we had and could 
have no objection to going to see Gandhiji at any time, but as 
we could not meet our other colleagues there was no chance of 
our deciding anything finally. That very day’s paper (or perhaps 
that of the day before) had given the news of a fierce lathi 
charge in Bombay, and the arrest there of Vallabhbhai Patel, 
Malaviyaji, Tasadduk Sherwani and others as permanent or 
acting members of the Working Committee. We pointed out 
to Dr. Sapru that this had not improved matters, and we asked 
him to make the position quite clear to the Viceroy. Dr. Sapru, 
however, said that there would be no harm, in our meeting 
Gandhiji as soon as possible. Wc had previously pointed out 
to him that in case we were sent to Yeravda, our colleague. 
Dr. Syed Mahmud, who was with us at Naini, should also go 
there as he was the Congress secretary. 

Two days later, on August loth, the three of us— father, 
Mahmud and I— were sent by a special train from Naini to 
Poon^ Our train did not stop at the big stations; we rushed 
past them, stopping at the small wayside ones. Still news of us 
travelled ahead, and large crowds gathered both at the stations 
where we stopped and at those where we did not stop. We 
reached Kirkee, near Poona, late at night on the i ith. 

We expected to be kept in the same barrack as Gandhiji or, at 
least, to see him soon. That was the arrangement made by the 
Supenntendent of Yeravda prison, but at the last moment he 
had to change his arrangements because of some instructions 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 


329 


received through the police officer who had accompanied us 
from Naini. Lt.-Col. Martin, the Superintendent, would not 
tell us the secret, but a little subtle questioning by fatlier made 
it clear to us that the idea was that we should not meet Gand- 
hiji (for the first time, at least) except in the presence of Messrs. 
Sapru and Jayakar. It was feared that a previous meeting 
between us might stiffen our attitude, or make us hold together 
more firmly than otherwise. So that night and the whole of 
the next day and night, we were kept apart in a separate 
barrack, and father was exceedingly irritated at this. It was 
tantalising and annoying to be there and not to be allowed to 
see Candhiji, to meet whom he had come all the way from 
Naini. On the forenoon of the 13th we were told that Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar had arrived, and Mr. Gandhi 
had joined them in the prison office, and we were asked to go 
there ourselves. Father refused to go, and only agreed after 
various explanations and apologies, and on condition that we 
should see Gandhiji alone first. At our joint request later, 
Vallabhbhai Patel and Jairamdas Doulatram, who had both 
been brought to Yeravda, as well as Sarojini Naidu, who was 
kept in the Women’s Prison opposite, were allowed to join our 
conference. Tliat evening father, Mahmud and I were moved 
to Gandhiji’s enclosure and there we remained for the rest of 
our stay in Yeravda. Vallabhbhai Patel and Jairamdas Doulat* 
ram were also brought there for those few days to enable us to 
consult together. 

Our conferences in the prison office with Messrs. Sapru and 
Jayakar lasted three days, the 13th, 14th and 15th August, and 
we exchanged letters giving expression to our views and indi- 
cating the minimum conditions necessary to enable us to 
withmaw civil disobedience and offer co-operation to the 
Government. Thbse letters were subsequently published in the 
newspapers.^ 

The strain of these conferences had told on father, and on 
the 1 6th he suddenly got high fever. This delayed our return, 
and we started back on the night of the rpth, again by special 
train, for Naini. Every effort was made by the Boinbay Govern- 
ment to provide a comfortable journey for father, and even in 
Yeravda, during our brief stay there, his comforts were studied. 
I remember an amusing incident on the night of our arrival at 
Yeravda, Colonel Martin, the Superintendent, asked ffither 

^ The letter containing these nunimum conditions is given in 
Appendix B. (p. 603). 



230 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

what kind of food he would like. Father told him that he look 
very simple and light food, and then he enumerated his various 
requirements from early morning tea in bed to dinner at night. 
(In Naini we used to get food for him daily from home.) The 
list father gave in all innocence and simplicity consisted cer- 
tainly of light foods, but it was impressive. Very probably at 
the Ritz or the Savoy it would have been considered simple 
and ordinary food, as father himself was convinced that it was. 
But in Yeravda Prison it seemed strange and far away and most 
inappropriate. Mahmud and I were highly amused to watch 
the expression on Colonel Martin’s face as he listened to father’s 
numerous and expensive requirements in the way of food. For 
a long time he had had in his keeping the greatest and most 
famous of India’s leaders, and all that he had required in the 
way of food was goat’s milk, dates, and perhaps oranges occa- 
sionally. The new type of leader that had come to him was 
very dilferent. 

During our journey back from Poona to Naini we again 
rushed by the big stations and stopped in out-of-the-way places. 
But the crowds were larger still, filling the platfo'rms and some- 
times even swarming over the railway lines, especially at Harda, 
Itarsi and SohagpUr. Accidents were narrowly averted. 

Father’s condition was rapidly deteriorating. Many doctors 
came to examine him, his own doctors as well as doctors sent 
on behalf of ^e Provincial Government. It was obvious that 
gaol was the worst place for him and there could be no proper 
treatment there. And yet, when a suggestion was made by 
some friend in the Press that he should be released because of 
his illness, he was irritated, as he thought that people might 
think that the suggestion came from him. He even went to the 
length of sending a telegram to Lord Irwin, saying that he did 
hot want to be released as a special favour. But his condition 
was growing worse from day to day; he was losing weight 
rapidly, and , physically he was a shadow of himself On the 
8th September he was discharged after exactly ten weeks of 
prison. 

Our barrack became a dull and Ufrless place after his depar- 
ture. There was so much to be done when he was with us, 
little services to add to his comfort, and all of us— -Mahmud, 
Narmada. Prasad and I — filled our days with this joyful service, 
I had given up newar weaving, I spun very little, and I did not 
have much time for books either. And now that he was gone, 
we reverted rather heavily and joylessly to the old routine. 
Even the daily newspaper stopped after father's release. Four 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 331 

or five days later my brother-in-law, Ranjit S. Pandit, was 
arrested, and he joined us in our barrack. 

A month later, on October iith, I was discharged on the 
expiry of six months’ sentence. I knew I would have little fi^ee- 
dom, for the struggle was going on and becoming more intense. 
The attempts of the ' peacemakers ’ — ^Messrs. Sapru and Jaya- 
kar — ^had failed. On the very day I was discharged one or two 
more ordinances were announced. I was glad to be out and 
eager to do something effective during my short spell of free- 
dom. 

Kamala was in Allahabad then, busy with her Congress work; 
father was under treatment at Mussoorie, and my mother and 
sisters were with him. I spent a busy day and a half in Alla- 
habad before going up to Mussoorie myself with Kamala. The 
great question before us then, was whether a no-tax campaign . 
in the rural areas should be started or not. The time for rent 
collection and payment of revenue was close at hand, and, in 
any event, collections were going to be difficult because of the 
tremendous fall in the prices of agricultural produce. The 
world slump was now very evident in India. 

It seemed an ideal opjjortunity for a no-tax campaign, both as 
a part of the general civil disobedience movement and, iridepen- 
dently, on its own merits. It was manifestly impossible both for 
landlords and tenants to pay up the full demand out of that 
year’s produce. They had to fell back on old reserves, if they 
had any, or borrow. The zamindars usually had something to 
fell back upon, or could borrow more easily. The average 
tenant, always on the verge of destitution and starvation, had 
nothing to fall back upon. In any democratic country, or where 
the agriculturists were properly organised and had influence, it 
would have been quite impossible, under those circumstances, 
to make them pay much. In India their influence was negli- 
gible, except in so far as the Congress, in some parts of me 
country, stood for them; and except, of course, for the ever- 
present fear of peasant risings when the situation became in- 
tolerable for them. But they had been trained for generations 
past to stand almost anything without much murmuring. 

In Gujrat, and in some other parts, there were no-tax cam- 
paigns in progress at the time, but they were almost wholly , 
political canmaigns, started as parts of the civil disobedience' 
movement. 'These were areas where the ryotwari system pre- 
,. vailed and the peasant proprietors dealt directly with the 
Government. Their non-payment of revenue affected the State 
immediately. The United Provinces were different, for we were 



JAWAHARLAL NICIIRU 


■> no 
"J" 

a zamindari and tahiqadari area, and there were middlemen 
between the cultivator and the State. If the tenants stopped 
paying their rent the landlord suffered immediately. A class 
issue also was thus raised. The Congress, as a whole, was a 
purely nationalist body, and included many middling zamin- 
dars and a few of the larger ones also. Its leaders were terribly 
afraid of doing anything which might raise this class issue or 
irritate the zamindar elements. So, right through the first six 
months of civil disobedience, they avoided calling for a general 
no-tax campaign in the rural areas, although conditions for this 
seemed to me to be ripe. I was not afraid of raising the class 
issue in this way or any other way, but I recognised that the 
Congress, being what it was, could not then patronise class 
conflict. It could, however, call upon both parties, zamindars 
and tenants, not to pay. The average zamindar would probably 
pay up the revenue demanded from him by the Government, 
but that would be his fault. 

When I came out of gaol in October, both political and 
economic conditions seemed to me to be crying out for a no-tax 
campaign in rural areas. The economic difliculties of the agri- 
culturists were obvious enough. Politically, our civil disobedi- 
ence activities, though still flourishing everywhere, were getting 
a bit stale. People went on going to gaol in small numbers, and 
sometimes in large groups, but the sting had gone from the 
atmosphere. The cities and the middle classes were a bit tired 
of the hartals and processions. Obviously something was needed 
to liven things up, a fresh infusion of blood was necessary. 
Where could this come from except from the peasantry?— and 
the reserve stocks there were enormous. It would again become 
a mass movement touching the vital interests of the masses, 
and, what was to me very important, would raise social issues. 

We discussed these matters, my colleagues and I, during tlte 
brief day and a half I was at Allahabad. At short notice we 
convened a meeting there of the executive of our Provincial 
Congress Committee, and, after long debate, we decided to 
^nction a^no-tax campaign, making it permissive for any dis- 
trict to take it up. We did not declare it ourselves in any part 
of the province, and the Executive Council made it apply to 
zammdars as well as tenants, to avoid the class issue if possible. 
We knew, of course, that the main response would come from 
, the peasantry. 

Having got this permission to go ahead, our district of Alla- 
habad wanted to take the first step. We decided to convene a 
representative kisan or peasants’ conference of the district a 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 


333 

week later, to give the new campaign a push. I felt that I had 
done a good first day’s work alter release from gaol. I added to 
it a big mass meeting in Allahabad city, where I spoke at 
length. It was for this speech that I was subsequently convicted 
again. 

And then, on October 13th, Kamala and I went off to Mus- 
soorie to spend three days with father. He was looking just a 
little better, and I was happy to think that he had turned the 
corner and was getting well. I. remember those quiet and de- 
lightful three days well; it was good to be back in the family. 
Indira, my daughter, was there; and my three little nieces, my 
sister’s daughters. I would play with the children and some- 
times we would march bravely round the house in a stately 
procession, led, flag in hand, Ijy the youngest, aged three or 
four, singing Jhanda uncha rahe hamara, our flag song. And 
those three days were the last I was to have with father before 
his fatal illness came to snatch him away from me. 

Expecting my re-arrest soon, and desiring perhaps to see a 
little more pf me, father suddenly decided to return to Alla- 
habad also. Kamala and I were going down from Mussoorie on 
the 17 th October to be in time for the Peasant Conference at 
Allahabad on the 19th. Father arranged to start with the 
others on the i8th, the day after us. 

We had a somewhat exciting journey back, Kamala and I. 
At Dchra Dun an order under Section 144 Criminal Procedure 
Code was served on me almost as I was leaving. At Lucknow 
we got off for a few hours, and I learnt that another order under 
Section 144 awaited me there, but it was not actually served on 
me, as the police officer could not reach me owing to the large 
crowds. I was presented with an address by the Municipality, 
and then we left by car for Allahabad, stopping at various places 
en route to address some peasant gatherings. We reached Alla- 
habad on the night of the i8th. 

The morning of the 19th brought yet another order under 
Section 144 for me I The Government was evidently hot on my 
trail and my hours were numbered. I was anxious to attend 
the kisan conference before my re-arrest. We called this confer- 
ence a private one of delegates only, and so it was, and did 
not allow outsiders to come in. It was very representative of 
Allahabad District, and, as far as I remember, about 1,600 dele- 
gates were present. The conference decided very enthusiastic- 
ally to start the no-tax campaign in the district. There was 
some hesitation among our prinapal workers, some doubt about 
the success of such a yenture, for the influence and the power 



334 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of the big zamiudars to terrorise, backed as this was by the 
Government, was very great, and they wondered if the 
peasantry would be able to withstand this. But there was no 
hesitation or doubt in the minds of the sixteen hundred and 
odd peasants of all degrees who were present, or at any rate it 
was not apparent. I was one of the speakers at the conference. 
I do not know if thereby I committed a breach of the Section 
144 order which had forbidden me from speaking in public. 

I then went to the station to receive my father and the rest 
of the famhy. The train was late, and, immediately after their 
arrival, I left them to attend a public meeting, a joint affair of 
the peasants, who had come from the surrounding villages, and 
the townspeople. Kamala and I were returning from this meet- 
ing, thoroughly tired out, after 8 p,m. I was looking forward 
to a talk with father, and I knew that he was waiting for me, 
for we had hardly spoken to each other since his return. On 
our way back our car was stopped almost in sight of our 
house, and I was arrested and carried off across the river Jumna 
to my old quarters in Naini. Kamala went on, alqne, to Anand 
Bhawan to inform the waiting family of this new development; 
and, at the stroke of nine, I re-entered the great gate of Naini 
Prison. 



XXXIT 


THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN IN THE 
UNITED PROVINCES 

After eight clays’ absence I was back again in Naini, and I 
rejoined Syed Mahmucl, Narmada Prasad and Ranjit Pandit in 
the same old barrack. Some days afterwards I was tried in 
prison on a number of charges, all based on various parts of 
that one speech I had delivered at Allahabad, the day after my 
discharge. As usual with us, I did not defend myself, but made 
a brief statement in court. I was sentenced for sedition under 
Section 124. A to 18 months’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine 
of Rs.500; under the Salt Act of 1882 to six months and a fine 
of Rs.ioo; and under Ordinance VT of 1930 (I forget what this 
Ordinance was about) also to six months and a fine of Rs. 100. 
As the last two were concurrent, the total sentence was two years' 
rigorous imprisonment and, in addition, five months in default 
of fines. This was my fifth term. 

My re-arrest and conviction had some effect on the tempo of 
the civil disobedience movement for a while; it put on a little 
spurt and showed greater energy. This was largely due to 
father. When news was brought to him by Kamala of my 
arrest, he had a slightly unpleasant shock. Almost immediately 
he pulled himself together and banged a table in front of him, 
saying that he had made up his mind to be an invalid no 
longer. He was going to be well and to do a man’s work, and 
not to submit weakly to illness. It was a brave resolve, but un- 
happily no strength of will could overcome ^d crush that 
deep-seated disease that was eating into him. Yet for a few days 
it worked a marked change, to ihe surprise of those who saw 
him. For some months past, ever since he was at Yeravda, he 
had been bringing up blood in his sputum. This stopped quite 
suddenly after this resolve of his, and for some days it did not 
reappear. He was pleased' about it, and he came to see me in , 
prison and mentioned this feet to me in some triumph. It was •' 
unfortunately a brief respite, for the blood came later in greater 
quantities and the disease reasserted itself. During this interval 
he worked with his old energy and gave a push to the civil 
disobedience movement all over India. He conferred with many 
people from various places and issued detailed instructions. He 
fixed one day (it was my birthday in November 1 ) fijr an all- 



336 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


India celebration at which the offending passages from my 
speech, for which I had been convicted, were read out at public 
meetings. On that day there were numerous lathi charges and 
forcible dispersals of processions and meetings, and it was esti- 
mated that, on that day alone, about five thousand arrests were 
made all over the country. It was a unique birthday celebra- 
tion. 

Ill as he was, this assumption of responsibility and pouring 
out of energy was very bad for father, and I begged of him to 
take absolute rest. I realised that such rest might not be pos- 
sible for him in India, for his mind would always be occupied 
with the ups and downs of our struggle and, inevitably, people 
would go to him for advice. So I suggested to him to go for a 
short sea voyage towards Rangoon, Singapore, and the Dutch 
Indies, and he rather liked the idea. It was arranged that a 
doctor friend might accompany him on the voyage. With this 
object in view he went to Calcutta, but his condition grew 
slowly worse and he was unable to go far. In a Calcutta suburb 
he remained for seven weeks, and the whole family joined him 
there, except Kamala, who remained in Allahabad for most of 
the time, doing Congress work. 

My re-arrest had probably been hastened because of my 
activities in connection with the no-tax campaign. As a matter 
of fact few things could have been better for that campaign 
than my arrest on that particular day, immediately after the 
kisan conference, while the peasant delegates were still in Alla- 
habad. Their enthusiasm grew because of it, and they carried 
the decisions of the conference to almost every village in the 
district. Within a couple of days the whole district laiew that 
the no-tax campaign had been maugurated, and everywhere 
there was a joyml response to it. 

Our Aief difficulty in those days was one of communication, 
of getting people to know what we were doing or what we 
wanted them to do. Newspapers would not publish our news for 
fear of being penalised and suppressed by Government; print- 
mg presses would not print our leaflets and notices; letters and 
telemams were censored and often stopped. The only reliable 
method of communication open to us was to send couriers with 
despat^es, and even so oin: messengers were sometimes 
arrested. T^e method was an expensive one and required a 
great deal of organisation. It was organised with some success, 
and the provmcial centres were in constant touch with hcad- 
quartera as well as with their principal district centres. It was 
not difficult to spread any information in the cities. Many of 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 237 

these issued unauthorised news-sheets, usually cyclostyled, daily 
or weekly, and there was always a great demand for thenv 
For our public notifications, one of the city methods was by 
beat of drum; this resulted usually in the arrest of the drum- 
mer. This did not matter, as arrests were sought, not avoided. 
All these methods suited the cities and were not easily appli- 
cable to the rural areas. Some kind of touch was kept up with 
principal village centres by means of messengers and cyclo- 
styled notices, but this was not satisfactory, and it took time for 
our instructions to percolate to distant villages. 

The kisan conference at Allahabad got over this difficulty. 
Delegates had come to it from practically every impoiTant vil- 
lage in the district and, when they dispersed, they carried the 
news of the fresh decisions affecting the peasantry, and of my 
arrest in connection with them, to every part of the district. 
They became, sixteen hundred of them, effective and enthusi- 
astic propagandists for the no-tax campaign. The initial success 
of the movement thus became assured, and there was no doubt 
that the peasantry as a whole in that area would not pay their 
rent to begin with, and not at all unless they were frightened 
into doing so. No one, of course, could say what their powers 
of endurance would be in face of official or zamindari violence 
and terrorism. 

Our appeal had been addressed both to zamindars and tenants 
not to pay; in theory it was not a class appeal. In practice most 
of the zamindars did pay their revenue, even some who sympa- 
thised with the national struggle. The pressure on them was 
great and they had more to lose. The tenantry, however, stood 
firm and did not pay, and our campaign thus became prac- 
tically a no-rent campaign. From the Allahabad district it 
spread ta some other districts of the United Provinces. In 
many districts it was not formally adopted or declared, but in 
effect tenants withheld their rents or, in many cases, were 
wholly unable to pay them owing to the fall in prices. As it 
happened, neither Government nor the big zamindars took any 
widespread action to terrorise the recalcitrant tenantry for 
several months. They were not sure of their ground, as they 
had the political struggle with civil disobedience on the one 
side, and the economic slump, resultingTn agricultural distress, 
on the other. The two merged into each other, and the Govern- 
ment was alw^s afiraid of an agrarian upheaval. With the 
Round Table Gonference in session in London, they^ were not 
keen on adding to their troubles in India or on giving a still 
more striking demonstration of ‘ strong ’ government. 



3^8 JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 

The no-tax movement in the United Provinces had one im- 
portant result so far as this province was concerned. It shifted 
the centre of gravity of our struggle from the urban to the 
rural areas, and it thereby revitalised the movement and put it 
on a broader and more enduring basis. Though our city people 
became bored and tired, and our middle-class workers were 
obviously rather stale, the movement itself in the U.P. was as 
strong, or even stronger, than it had been at any other time. 
In the other provinces this change-over from urban to rural, 
from political to economic issues, did not take place to the same 
extent, and consequently they continued to be dominated by 
the cities and to suffer increasingly from the weariness of the 
middle-class elements. Even the city of Bombay, which had all 
along played a prominent part in the movement, began to grow 
a little stale. Defiance of authority would go on there and else- 
where, and arrests would continue, but all this seemed some- 
what artificial. The organic element had gone. This was 
natural enough, as it is impossible to keep the masses at a cer- 
tain revolutionary pitch for long periods. Ordinarily, this was a 
question of days, but civil disobedience had the remarkable 
capacity for lengthening this period to many months, and even 
then of carrying on at a lower pitch for an indefinite period. 

Government repression grew. Local Congress Committees, 
Youth Leagues, etc., which had rather surprisingly carried on 
so far, were declared illegal and suppressed. The treatment of 
political prisoners in gaols became worse. Government was 
especially irritated when people retturned to gaol for a second 
sentence soon after their discharge. This failure to bend in 
spite of punishment hurt the morale of the rulers. In Novem- 
ber or early December 1930 there were some cases of flogging 
of political prisoners in U.P. prisons, apparently for offences 
against gaol discipline. News of this reached us in Naini Prison 
and upset us-— since then we have got used to this, as well as 
many worse happenings in India— for flogging seemed to me to 
be an undesirable infliction, even on hardened criminals of the 
worst type. For young, sensitive boys and for technical offences 
of disapline, it was barbarous. 'We four in our barrack wrote 
to the Government about it, and, not receiving any reply for 
about two weeks, we decided to take some definite step to mark 
our protest at the floggings and our sympathy with the victims 
of this barbarity. We undertook a complete fast for three days 
— 7* hours. This was not much as fasts go, but none of us was 
accustomed to fasting, and did not know how we would stand 
it. My previous fasts had seldom exceeded 24 hours|. 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 239 

We went through that fast without any great difficulty, and T 
was glad to find out that it was not sucli an ordeal as I feared. 
Very foolishly I carried on my strenuous exercises — ^running, 
jerks, etc.— -right through that fest. I do not think that did me 
much good, especially as I had been feeling a little unwell pre- 
viously. Each ope of us lost seven to eight pounds in weight 
during those three days. This was in adffition to the fifteen to 
twenty-six pounds that each had lost in the previous months in 
Naini. 

Quite apart from our fasting, there was a fair amount of 
agitation outside against the flogging, and I believe that the 
U.P. Government issued orders to its Gaol Department not to 
indulge in it in future. But these orders were not to remain un- 
changed for long, and a little more than a ye.ar later there was 
going to be no lack of flogging in the gaols of the United 
Provinces and the other provinces. 

Except for these occasional alarms, we lived a quiet life in 
prison. The weather was agreeable, for winter in Allahabad is 
very pleasant. Ranjit Pandit was an acquisition to our barrack, 
for he, knew much about gardening, and soon that dismal en- 
closure of ours was full of flowers and was gay with colour. 
He even arranged in that narrow, restricted space a miniature 
golf course I 

One of the welcome excitements of our prison existence at 
Naini was the passage of aeroplanes over oiu: heads. Allahabad 
is one of the ports of call for all the great air lines between 
East and West, and the giant planes going to Australia, Java, 
and French Indo-China would pass almost directly above our 
heads at Naini. Most stately of all were the Dutch liners flying 
to and from Batavia. Sometimes, if we were lucky, we saw a 
plane in the early winter morning, when it was still dark and 
the stars were visible. The great Bner was brightly lit up, and 
at both ends it had red lights. It was a beautiful sight, as it 
sailed by, against the dark background of the early morning 

Pandit Madan Moh'an Malaviya was also transferred to Naini 
from some other gaol. He was kept separately, not in qur 
barrack, but we met him daily, and perhaps I saw more of him 
there than I had done outside. He was a delightful companion, 
full of vitality and a youthful interest in things. He even 
started, with Ranjit’s help, to learn German, and he showed 
quite a remarkable memory. He was in Naini when news of 
the floggings came, and he was greatly upset and wrote to the 
Acting-Governor of Ae Province. Soon afterwards he fell ill. 



■ 240 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


He was unable to bear the cold in the conditions that prevailed 
in prison. His illness grew serious, and he had to be reniovcd 
to the city hospital, and later to be discharged before his term 
was over. Happily, he recovered in hospital. 

• The New Year’s Day, the first of January 1931, brought us 
the news of Kamala’s arrest. I was pleased, for she had so 
longed to follow many of her comrades to prison. Ordinarily, 
if they had been men, both she and my sister and many other 
women would have been arrested long ago. But at that time 
the Government avoided, as far as possible, arresting women, 
and so they had escaped for so long. And now she had her 
heart’s desire I How glad she must be, I thought. But I was 
apprehensive, for she was always in weak health, and I feared 
that prison conditions might cause her much suffering. 

As she was arrested, a pressman who was present asked her 
for a message, and, on the spur of the moment and almost un- 
consciously, she gave a little message that was characteristic of 
her : " I am happy beyond measure and proud to follow in the 
footsteps of my husband. I hope the people will keep the flag 
flying.” Probably she would not have said just that if she had 
thought over the matter, for she considers herself a champion 
of woman’s right against the tyranny of man. But at that 
moment the Hindu wife in her came uppermost and even man’s 


tyranny was forgotten. 

My father was in Calcutta and was far from well, but news 
of Kamala’s arrest and conviction shook him up, and he de- 
cided to return to Allahabad. He sent on my sister Krishna 
immediately to Allahabad, and fisllowed himself, with the rest 
of the family, a few days later. On the 12th of January he 
came to see me in Naini. I saw him after nearly two months, 
and I had a shock which I could conceal with difficulty. He 
seemed to be unaware of the dismay that his appearance had 

E reduced in me, and told me that he was much better than he 
ad lately been in Calcutta. His face was swollen up, and he 
seemed to think that this was due to some temporary cause. 

That face of his haunted me. It was so utterly unlike him. 
For the first time a fear began to creep in my mind that there 
was real danger for him ahead. I had always associated him 
with strength and health, and I could not think of death in 
connection with him. He had always laughed at the idea of 
death, made fun of it, and told us that he proposed to live for 
a further long term of years. Latterly I had noticed that when- 
ever an old friend of his youth died, he had a sense of lone- 
4 iness, of being left by himself in strange company, and even a 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 


241 

hint of an approaching end. But generally this mood passed 
and his overflowing vitality asserted itself, and we of his family 
had grown so used to his rich personality and the all-embracing 
warmth of his affection, that it was difiicult for us to think of 
the world without him. 

1 was troubled by that look of his and my mind was full of 
forebodings. Yet I did not think that any danger to him lay in 
the near fiiture. I was myself, for some imknown reason, keep- 
ing poor health just then. 

Those were the last days of the first Round Table Confer- 
ence, and we were a little amused — and I am afraid our amuse- 
ment had a touch of disdain in it — at the final flourishes and 
gestures. Those speeches and platitudes and discussions seemed 
unreal and futile, but one reality stood out: that even in the 
hour of our country’s sorest trial, and when our men and 
women had behaved so wonderfully, there were some of our 
countrymen who were prepared to ignore our struggle and give 
their moral support to the other side. It became clearer to us 
than it had been before how, under the deceptive cover of 
nationalism', conflicting economic interests were at work, and 
how those with vested interests were trying to preserve them 
for the future in the name of this very nationalism. The Round 
Table Conference was an obvious collection of these vested 
interests. Many of them had opposed our struggle; some had 
silently stood aside, reminding us, however, from time to time 
that " they also serve who only stand and wait.” But the wait- 
ing period came to a sudden end when London beckoned, and 
they trooped up to ensure the safety of their own particular 
interests and to share in such further spoils as might be forth- 
coming. This general lining up in London was hastened by a 
realisation that the Congress was going increasingly to the Left 
and the masses were influencing it more and more. Instinc- 
tively, it was felt that if a root and branch political change 
came in India, it would mean the dominance, or at least the 
emergence into importance, of various mass elements, and these 
would inevitably press towards radical social changes and thus 
endanger those vested interests. The Indian vested interests 
drew back from this, to them, alarming prospect, and this led 
them to oppose any far-reaching political change. They wanted 
the British to remain in India as a deciding factor, to preserve 
the existing social structure and the existing vested interestsf^ 
This was the real thought that underlay the insistence on 
Dominion Status. A well-known Indian Liberal leader once got 
rather“'irritated with me fiar insistiiig j:hat, as an essential.part 
■ a 



343 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

of a settlement with Great Britain, the British Army should 
withdraw immediately from India and the Indian Army must 
be put under Indian dcmociratic control. He went to the length 
of saying that even if the British Government agreed to do this, 
he would oppose it with all his might. He opposed this obvious 
and essential preliminary to any Icind of national freedom, 
therefore, not because it was difficult of achievement under 
existing circumstances, but because he considered it undesirable. 
Partly, it may be thought, this was due to fear of external 
invasion, and he wanted the British Army to protect us from 
this. Quite apart from the possibility or otherwise of such an 
invasion, it seems a humiliating thought for any Indian of 
spirit to ask for an outsider’s protection. But I do not think this 
is the real reason behind the desire to keep the strong arm of 
the British in India; the British are required to preserve Indian 
vested interests against Indians themselves, against undiluted 
democracy, against an upsurge of the masses. 

So the Indian Round Table Delegates, not only the declared 
reacribnaries and communalists, but even those who called them- 
selves progressives and nationalists, found much in common 
between themselves and the British Government. Nationalistn in- 
deed seemed to us a term of wide and varied reach, if it included 
in its embrace both those who went to gaol hi India in further- 
ance of the struggle for freedom and those who shook hands and 
lined up with our gaolers and discussed a common policy with 
them. There were others also in our country, brave nationalists, 
fluent of speech, who encouraged the Swadeshi movement in 
eve:y way, telling us that therem lay the heart of Swaraj, and 
calling upon their countrymen to further it even at a sacrifice. 
Fortunately the movement brought no sacrifice to them; it in- 
creased their busmesses and their dividends. And while many 
went to prison or faced the lathi, they sat in their counting 
houses counting out their money. Later, when aggressive 
nationalism became a little more risky, they toned down their 
speeches, and condemned the ‘extremists and made pacts and 
agreements with the other party. 

We did not really mind or care what the Round Table Con- 
ference did. It was far away, unreal and shadowy, and the 
struggle lay here in our towns and villages. We had no illusions 
about the speedy termination of our struggle or about the 
dangers ahead, and yet the events of 1930 had given us a cer- 
tain confidence in our national strength and stamina, and with 
that confidence we faced the future. 

One incident in December or early January had pained us 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 


343 

greatly. Mr. Srinivas Sastri, in a speech at Edinburgh (where, 
I think, the freedom of the city was firesented to him), referred 
with some contempt to those who were going to prison in India 
in the civil disobedience movement. That speech, and especi- 
ally the occasion for it, hurt us to the quick. For though we 
differed from Mr. Sastri greatly in politics, we respected him. 

Mr. Ramsay MacDonald had wound up the Round Table 
Conference with one of his usual brotherly speeches, and this 
seemed to contain an implied appeal to the Congress to give up 
its evil ways and join the happy throng. Just about that time— 
the middle of January 1931 — ^the Congress Worldng Committee 
met at Allahabad, and, among other matters, this speech and 
appeal were also considered. I was in Naini Prison then, and I 
heard of the proceedings on my release. Father had Just re- 
turned from Calcutta, and, though he was very ill, he insisted 
on the members gathering round his bed and discussing this 
subject there. Some one made a suggestion in favour of a 
gesture to Mr. MacDonald and toning down civil disobedience. 
This excited father greatly, and he sat up in bed and declared 
that he would not compromise till the national objective had 
been gained, and that he would cany on the struggle, even if 
he was the sole person left to do so. This excitement was very 
bad for him, and as his temperature shot up, the doctors suc' 
ceeded at last in removing the visitors and leaving him alone. 

Largely at his instance, the Working Committee passed an 
uncompromising resolution. Before this was published, a cable 
came from Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Srinivas Sastri ad- 
dressed to father, requesting the Congress, through him, not to 
come to any decision till they had had an opportunity of a 
discussion. They were already on their way home. A reply was 
sent to the effect that a resolution had already been passed by 
the Working Committee, but this would be withheld fi'om the 
Press till Messrs. Sapru and Sastri had arrived and had a dis- 
cussion. 

Inside the prison we did not know of these developments 
outside. But we knew that something was afoot and we were 
rather worried. What filled our minds much more was the 
approach of Januwy a6th, the first anniversary of Indepen- 
dence Day, and we wondered how this would be celebrated. It 
was observed, as we learnt subsequently, all over the country 
by the holding of mass meetings which confirmed the resolu- 
tion of independence, and passed an identical resolution called 
the “ Resolution of Remenibrance The organisation of this 
' This resolution is given in Appendix C. (p. 606). 



244 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

celebration was a remarkable feat, for newspapers and printing 
presses were not available, nor could the post or telegraph be 
utilised. And yet an identical resolution, in the particular lan- 
guage of the province concerned, was passed at large gatherings 
held at more or less the same times at innumerable places, 
urban and rural, throughout the country. Most of these 
gatherings were held in defiance of the law and were, forcibly 
di^ersed by the police. 

January 36th found us in Naini Prison musing of the year 
that was past and of the year that was to come. In the fore- 
noon I was told suddenly that my father’s condition was serious 
and that I must go home immediately. On enquiry, I was in- 
formed that I was being discharged. Ranjit also accompanied 
me. 

That evening, many other persons were discharged from 
various prisons throughout India. These were the original and 
substitute members of the Congress Working Committee. The 
Government was giving us a chance to meet and consider the 
situation. So, in any event, I would have been discharged that 
evening. Father’s condition hastened my release by a few hours. 
Kamala also was discharged that day from her Lucknow pri.son 
after a brief gaol life of a6 days. She too was a substitute 
member of the Working Committee. 



XXXIII 


DEATtI OF MY FATHER 

I SAW father after two weeks, for he had visited me at Naini 
on January lath when his appearance had given me a shock. 
He had now changed for the worse, and his irace was even more 
swollen. He had some little difiRculty in speaking, and his mind 
was not always quite clear. But his old will remained, and this 
held on and kept the body and mind functioning. 

He was pleased to see Ranjit and me. A A&y or two later 
Ranjit (who did not come in tihe category of Working Com- 
mittee members) was taken back to Naini Prison. This lipset 
father, and he was continually asking for him and complaining 
that when so many people were coming to see him from dis- 
tant parts of India, his own son-in-law was kept away. The 
doctors were worried by this insistence, and it was obvious that 
it was dqing father no good. After three or four days, I think 
at the doctors’ suggestion, the U.P. Government released Ranjit. 

On January a6th, the same day that I was discharged, Gandhiji 
was also discharged from Yeravda Prison. I was anxious to 
have him in Allahabad, and when I mentioned his release to 
father, I found that he was eager to see him. The very next 
day Gandhiji started from Bombay after a stupendous mass 
meeting of welcome there, such as even Bombay had not seen 
before. He arrived at Allahabad late at night, but father was 
lying awake, waiting for him, and his presence and the few 
words he uttered had a markedly soothing effect on father. To 
my mother also his coming brought solace and relief. 

The various Working Committee members, original and sub- 
stitute, who had been released, were meanwhile at a loose end 
and were waiting for directions about a meeting. Many of 
them, anxious about fkther, wanted to come to Allahabad im- 
mediately. It was decided therefore to summon them all forth- 
with to a meeting at Allahabad. Two days later thir^ or forty 
of them arrived, and their meetings took place in Swaraj 
Bhawan next to our house. I went to these meetings from time 
to time, but I was much too distraught to take any efectiye 
part in them, and I have at present no recollection whatever 
of what their decisions were. 1 suppose they were in favour of 
a continuance of the civil disobedience movement. 

All these old friends and colleagues who had come, many of 



246 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

them freshly out of prison and expecting to go back again soon, 
wanted to visit father and to have what was likely to be a last 
glimpse and a last farewell of him. They came to him in twos 
and threes in the mornings and evenings, and father insisted 
on sitting up in an easy-chair to receive his old comrades. There 
he sat, massively and rather expressionlessly, for the swelling 
on his face prevented much play of expression. But as one old 
friend came after another and comrade succeeded comrade, 
there was a glitter in his eye and recognition of them, and his 
head bowed a little and his hands joined in salutation. And 
though he could not speak much, sometimes he would say a 
few words, and even then liis old humour did not leave him. 
There he sat like an old lion mortally wounded and with his 
physical strength almost gone, but still very leonine and kingly. 
As I watched him, I wondered what thoughts passed through 
his head, or was he past taking interest in our activities? He 
was evidently often struggling with himself, trying to keep a 
grip of things which threatened to slip away from his grasp. 
To the end this struggle continued, and he did not give in, 
occasionally speaking to us with extreme clarity. Even when 
a constriction in his throat made it difficult for him to make 
himself understood, he took to writing on slips of paper what 
he wanted to say. 

He took practically no interest in the Working Committee 
meetings which were taking place next door. A fortnight earlier 
they would have excited him, but now he felt that he was 
already far away from such happenings. “I am going soon, 
Mahatmaji,” he said to Gandhiji, “ and I shall not be here to 
see Swaraj. But I know that you have won it and will soon 
have it.” 

Most of the people who had come from other cities and pro- 
vinces departed. Gandhiji remained, and a few intimate friends 
and near relatives, and the three eminent doctors, old friends 
of his, to whom, he used to say, he had handed over his body 
for s^e keeping— M. A. Ansari, Bidhan Chandra Roy, and 
Jivraj Mehta. On the morning of February 4th he seemed to 
be a little better, and it was decided to take advantage of this 
and remove him to Lucknow, where there were facilities for 
deep X-ray treatment which AlIaha^d did not possess. That 
very day we took him by car, Gandhiji and a large party fol- 
lowing us. We went slowly, but he was nevertheless exhausted. 
The next day he seemed to be getting over the fatigue, and yet 
there were some disquieting symptoms. Early next morning, 
February 6th, I was watching by his bedside. He had had a 



DEATH OP MY FATHER 247 

troublesome and restless night; suddenly I noticed that his face 
grew calm and the sense of struggle vanished from it. I thought 
that he had fallen asleep, and I was glad of it. But my mother’s 
perceptions were keener, and she uttered a cry. I turned to her 
and begged her not to disturb him as he had fallen asleep. But 
that sleep was his last long sleep, and from it there was no 
awakening. 

We brought his body that very day by car to Allahabad. I 
sat in that car and Ranjit drove it, and there was Hari, father’s 
favourite personal servant. Behind us came another car con- 
taining my mother and Gandhiji, and then other cars. I was 
dazed all that day, hardly realising what had happened, and a 
succession of events and large crowds kept me from thinking. 
Great crowds in Lucknow, gathered together at brief notice— 
the swift dash from Lucknow to Allahabad sitting by the body, 
wrapped in our national flag, and with a big flag flying above— 
the arrival at Allahabad, and the huge crowds that had gathered 
for miles to'pay homage to his memo^. There were some 
ceremonies at home, and then the last journey to the Ganga 
with a mighty concourse of people. As evening fell on the 
river bank on that winter day, the great flames leapt up and 
consumed that body which had meant so much to us who were 
close to him as well as to millions m India. Gandhiji said a few 
moving words to the multitude, and then all of tis crept silently 
home. The stars were out and shining brightly when we re- 
turned, lonely and desolate. 

Many thousands of messages of sympatliy came to my 
mother and to me. Lord and Lady Irwin also sent my inother 
a courteous message. This tremendous volume of goodwill and 
sympathy took, away somewhat the sting from our sorrow, but 
it was, above all, the wonderfully soothing and healing presence 
of Gandhiji that helped my mother and all of us to face that 
crisis in our hves, 

I found it difiBcult to realise that he had gone. Three months 
later I was in Ceylon with my wife and daughter, and we were 
spending a few quiet and restful days at Nuwara Eliya. I liked 
the place, and it struck me suddenly that it would suit fether. 
Why not send for him? He must be tired out, and rest would 
do him good I was on the point of sending a telegram to him 
to Allahabad. 

On our return to Allahabad from Ceylon the post brought 
one day a remarkable letter. The envelope was addressed to 
me in fether’s handwriting, and it bore innumerable marks and 
stamps of different post offices, I opened it in amazement to 



248 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

find that it was, indeed, a letter from father to me, only it was 
dated the 28th February, 1926. It was delivered to me in the 
summer of 1931, thus taking five and a half years in its 
journey. The letter had been written by father at Ahmedabad' 
on the eve of my departure for Europe with Kamala in 1926. 
It was addressed to me to Bombay care of the Italian Lloyd 
steamer on which we were travelling. Apparently it just missed 
us there, and then it visited various places, and perhaps lay in 
many pigeon-holes till some enterprising person sent it on to 
me. Curiously enough, it was a letter df farewell. 



XXXIV 


THE DELHI PACT 

On the day and almost at the very hour of my father’s death, 
a large group of the Indian members of the Round Table Con- 
ference landed in Bombay. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri and Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru, and perhaps some others whom I do not re- 
member, came direct to Allahabad. Gandhiji and some mem- 
bers of the Congress Working Committee were already there. 
There were some private meetings at our house at which an 
account ivas given of what the R.T.C. had done. At the very 
commencement, however, there was a little incident. Mr. Sastri, 
entirely of his own accord, expressed regret for what he had 
said at Edinburgh. He added that he was much influenced 
always by his surroundings and his ‘ exuberant verbosity ’ was 
apt to run away with him. 

The Round Table Delegates.did not tell us anything of impor- 
tance about the R.T.C. that we did not know already. They did 
tell us of various intrigues behind the scenes, of what Lord So- 
and-So said or Sir Somebody did in private. Our Liberal friends 
in India have always seemed to me to attach more importance 
to private talks and gossip with and about high officials than 
to principles or to the realities of the Indian situation. Our 
informal discussions with the Liberal leaders did not lead to 
anything, and our previous opinions were only confirmed that 
the R.T.C. decisions had not the least value. Some one then 
suggested — forget who he was — ^that Gandhiji should write to 
the Viceroy and ask for an interview and have a frank talk 
with him. He agreed to do so, although I do not think that he 
expected much in the way of result. But, on principle, he was 
always willing to go out of his way to meet and discuss any- 
thing with his opponents. Being absolutely convinced of the 
rightness of his own position he hoped to convince the other 
parly; but it was jperhaps something more than intellectual con- 
viction that he aimed at. He was always after a psychological 
change, a breaking of the barriers of anger and distrust, an 
approach to the other’s goodwill and fine feelings. He knew 
that if this change took place, conviction became far easier, or 
even if there was no conviction, opposition was toned down 
and the sting was taken out of the conflict. In his personal 
dealings with .individuals hostile to him, he had gained many 



250 JAVVAHARLAL NEHRU 

a victory; it was remarkable how, by sheer force of personality, 
he would win over an opponent. Many a critic and a scoffer 
had been overwhelmed by this personality and became an 
admirer, and even though the criticism continued, it could 
never again have a trace of mockery. 

Conscious of this power, Gandhiji always welcomed a meet- 
ing with those who disagreed with him. But it was one thijig 
to deal with individuals on personal or minor issues; it was 
<^uite another matter to come up against an impersonal thing 
like the British Government representing triumphant imperial- 
ism. Realising this, Gandhiji went to the interview with 
Lord Irwin with no high expectation. The Civil Disobedience 
movement was still going on. though it had toned down because 
there was much talk of pourparlers with Government. 

The interview was arranged without delay, and Gandhiji 
went oflf to Delhi, telling us that if there were any serious 
conversations with the Viceroy regarding a provisional settle- 
ment, he would send for the members of the Working Com- 
mittee. A few days later we were all summoned to Delhi. For 
three weeks we remained there, meeting daily and having long 
and exhausting discussions. Gandhiji had frequent interviews 
with Lord Irwin, but sometimes there was a gap of three or 
four da^s, probably because the Government of India was 
communicatmg with the India Office in London. Sometimes 
apparently small matters or even certain words would hold up 
progress. One such word was ‘ suspension ’ of civil disobedience. 
Gandhiji had all along made it clear that civil disobedience 
could not be finally stopped or given up, as it was the only 
weapon in the hands of uie people. It could, however, be sus- 
pended. Lord Irwin objected to this word and wanted finality 
ab()ut the word, to which Gandhiji would not agree. Ultimately 
the word ‘discontinued’ was used. There were also prolonged 
discussions about the picketing of foreign cloth and liquor 
shops. Most of our time was spent on considering pro- 
visional arrangements for a pact, and little attention was given 
to fundamental matters. Probably it was thought that these 
basw matters could be considered later under more favourable 
conditions when a provisional settlement had been made and 
the day-to-day struggle discontinued. We looked upon those 
talks M Iwding up to an armistice, which might then be fol- 
lowed by further conversations on the real matters in issue. 

Delhi attracted in those days all manner of people. There 
were many foreign journalists, especially Americans, and they 
were somewhat annoyed with us for our reticence. They would 



■I’nE DELHI PACT 


251 

tell US that they got much more news about the Gandhiji-Irwin 
conversations from the New Delhi Secretariat than from us, 
which was a fact. Then there were many people of high degree 
who hurried to pay their respects to Gandhiji, for was not the 
Mahatma’s star in the ascendant? It was very amusing to see 
these people, who had kept far away from Gandhiji and the 
Congress and often condemned them, now hastening to make 
amends. The Congress seemed to have made good, and.no one 
knew what the future might hold. Anyway, it was safer to keep 
on good terms with the Congress and its leaders. A year later 
yet another change was wimessed in them, and they were 
shouting their deep abhorrence of the Congress and all its 
works and their utter dissociation from it. 

Even the communalists were stirred by events, and sensed 
with some apprehension that they might not occupy a very 
prominent place in the coming order. And so, many of them 
came to the Mahatma and assured him that they were per- 
fectly willing to come to terms on the communal issue ana, if 
only he would take the initiative, there would be no difficulty 
about a settlement. 

A ceaseless stream of people, of high and low degree, came 
to Dr. Ansari’s house, where Gandhjji and most of us were 
staying, and in our leisure moments wc watched them with 
interest and profit. For some years our chief contacts had been 
with the poor in towns and villages and those who were down 
and out in gaols. The very prosperous gentlemen who came 
to visit Gan&iji showed us another side of human nature, and 
a vciy adaptable side, for wherever they sensed power and 
success, they turned to it and welcomed it with the sunshine 
of their smiles. Many of them were staunch pillars of the 
British Government in India. It was comforting to know that 
they would become equally staunch pillars of any other 
government that might flourish in India. 

Often in those days I used to accompany Gandhiji in his 
early morning walks in New Delhi. That was usually the only 
time one had a chance of talking to him, for the rest of the 
day was cut up into little bits, each minute allotted to some- 
body or something. Even the early morning walk was some- 
times given over to an interviewer, usually firom abroad, or 
to a friend, come for a personal consultation. We talked of 
many matters, of the past, of the present, and especially of the 
future. I remember how he surprised me with one of his ideas 
about the foture of the Congress. I had imag^ed that the 
Congress, as such, would automatically cease to exist with the 



2^2 JAWAHARtAL NEHRU 

coming of freedom. He thought that the Congress should 
continue, hut on one condition : that it passed a self-denying 
ordinance, laying it down that none of its members could 
accept a paid job under the State, and if any one wanted such 
a post of authority in the State, he would have to leave the 
Congress. I do not at present remember how he worked this 
out, but the whole idea underlying it was that the Congress 
by its detachment and having no axe to grind, could exercise 
tremendous moral pressure on the Executive as well as other 
departments of the Government, and thus keep them on the 
right track. 

Now this is ait extraordinary idea which I find it difficult 
to grasp, and innumerable difficulties present themselves. It 
seems to me that such an assembly, if it could be conceived, 
would be exploited by some vested interest. But practicality 
apart, it does help one to understand a little the background of 
Gandhiji’s thought. It is the very opposite of the modern idea 
of a party which is built up to seize the State power in order 
to refashion the political and economic structure according to 
certain pre-conceived ideas; or that kind of party, found often 
enough nowadays, whose function seems to be (to quote 
Mr. R. H. Tawney) to offer the largest possible number of 
carrots to the largest number of donkeys. 

Gandhiji’s conception of democracy is definitely a meta- 
physical one. It has nothing to do with numbers or majority 
or representation in the ordinary sense. It is based on service 
and sacrifice, and it uses moral pressure. In a recent statement ^ 
he defines a democrat. He claims to be ‘a born democrat’. 
“I make that claim, if complete identification with the poorest 
of mankind, longing to live no better than they, and a cor- 
responding conscious effort to approach that level to the best 
of one’s ability, can entitle one to make it.” He fiirther dis- 
cusses democracy: 

“Let U3 recognise the fact that the Congress enjoys the 
prestige of a democratic character and influence not by the 
number of delegates and visitors it has drawn to its annual 
function, but by an ever-increasing amount of service it has 
rendered. Western democracy is on its trial, if it has not al- 
ready proved a failure. May it be reserved to Indja to evolve 
the true science of democracy by giving a visible demonstration 
of its success, 

“Corruption and hypocrisy ought not to be the inevitable 
products of democracy, as they undoubtedly are to-day. Nor 
' Dated September 17, iq'54. , 



THE DELHI PACT 


253 


is bulk a true test of democracy. True democracy is not in- 
consistent with a few persons representing the spirit, the hope 
and the aspirations of those whom they claim to represent. 
I hold that democracy cannot be evolved by forcible methods. 
The spirit of democracy cannot be imposed &om without; it 
has to come from within.” 

This is certainly not Western democracy, as he himself says; 
but, curiously enough, there is some similarity to the com- 
munist conception of democracy, for that, too, has a meta- 
physical touch. A few communists will claim to represent the 
real needs and desires of the masses, even though the latter 
may themselves be unaware of them. The mass will become 
a metaphysical conception with them, and it is this that they 
claim to represent. The similarity, however, is slight and does 
not take us far; the differences in outlook and approach are far 
greater, notably in regard to methods and force. 

Whether Gandhiji is a democrat or not, he does represent the 
peasant inasscs of India; he is the quintessence of the conscious 
and’suhcbnsdous will of those millions. It is perhaps something 
more than representation; for he is the idealised personification 
of those vast millions. Of course, he is not the average peasant. 
A man of the keenest intellect, of fine feeling and good taste, 
wide vision; very human, and yet essentially the ascetic who 
has suppressed his passions and emotions, sublimated them 
and directed them in spiritual channels; a tremendous person- 
ality, drawing people to himself like a magnet, and calling out 
fierce loyalties and attachments — all this so utterly unlike and 
beyond a peasant. And yet withal he is the great peasant, with 
a peasant’s outlook on arairs, and with a peasant’s blindness to 
some aspects of life. But India is peasant India, and so he 
knows his India well and reacts to her lightest tremors, and 
gauges a situation accurately and almost instinctively, and has 
a knack of acting at the psychological moment. 

What a problem and a puzzle he has been not only to the 
British Government but to his own people and his closest 
associates! Perhaps in every other country he would be out of 
place to-day, but India still seems to understand, or at least 
appreciate, the prophetic-religious type of man, talking of sin 
and salvation and non-violence. Indian mythology is full of 
stories of great ascetics, who, by the rigour of their sacrifices 
and .self-imposed penance, built up a ‘ mountain of merit ’ which 
threatened the dominion of some of the lesser gods and upset 
the established order. > These myths have often come to my 
mind when I have watched the amazing energy and inner 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

power of Gandhiji, coming out of some inexhaustible spiritual 
reservoir. He was obviously not of the world’s ordinary coin- 
age; he was minted of a difterent and rare variety, and often 
the ui^nown stared at us through his eyes. 

India, even urban India, even the new industrial India, had 
the impress of the peasant upon her, and it was natural enough 
for her to make this son of hers, so like her and yet so unlike, 
an idol and a beloved leader. He revived ancient and half- 
forgotten memories, and gave her glimpses of her own soul. 
Crushed in the dark misery of the present, she had tried to find 
relief in helpless muttering and in vague dreams of the past 
and the future, but he came and gave hope to her mind and 
strength to her much-battered body, and the future became 
an alluring vision. Two-faced like Janus, she looked both back- 
wards into the past and forward into the future, and tried to 
combine the two. 

Many of us had cut adrift from this peasant outlook, and 
the old ways of thought and custom and religion had become 
alien to us. We called ourselves moderns, and thought in terms 
of ‘ progress ’, and industrialisation and a higher standard of 
living and collectivisation. We considered the peasant’s view- 
point reactionary, and some, and a growing number, looked with 
favour towards socialism and communism. How came we to 
associate ourselves with Gandhiji political^, and to become, in 
many instances, his devoted followers? The question is hard 
to answer, and to one who docs not know Gandhiji, no answer 
is likely to satisfy. Personality is an indefinable thing, a strange 
force that has power over the souls of men, and he possesses 
this in ample measure, and to all who come to him he often 
apj^ears in a different aspect. He attracted people, but it was 
ultimately intellectual conviction that brought them to him and 
kept them there. They did not agree with his philosophy of 
life, or even with many of his ideals. Often they did not 
understand him. But the action that he proposed was some- 
thing tangible which could be understood and appreciated 
inteflectuaUj. Any action would have been welcome after the 
long tradition of inaction which our spineless politics had 
nurtured; brave and effective action with an ethical halo about 
it had an irresistible appeal, botli to the intellect and the 
emotions. Step by step he convinced us of the rightness of the 
^.-action, and we went with him, although we did not accept his 
philosophy. To divorce action from the thought underlying it 
was not perhaps a proper procedure and was bound to lead to 
mental conflict and trouble later. Vaguely wc hoped that 



THE DELHI PACT 


255 

Gandhiji, being essentially a man of action and very sensitive 
to changing conditions, would advance along the line that 
seemed to us to be right. And in any event the road he was 
following was the right one thus far, and if the future meant 
a parting it would be folly to anticipate it. 

All this shows that we were by no means dear or certain in 
our minds. Always we had the feeling that while we might 
be more logical, Gandhiji knew India far better than we did, 
and a man who could command such tremendous devotion and 
loyalty must have something in him that corresponded to the 
needs and aspirations of the masses. If we could convince him, 
we felt that we could also convert these masses. And it seemed 

K ossible to convince him for, in spite of his peasant outlook, 
e was the born rebel, a revolutionary out for big changes, 
whom no fear of consequences could stop. 

How he disciplined our lazy and demoralised people and 
made them woA: — ^not by force or any material inducement, 
but by a gentle look and a soft word and, above all, by personal 
example! In the early days of Satyagraha in India, as long 
ago as 1919, I remember how Umar Sobani of Bombay called 
him the 'beloved slave-driver*. Much had happened in the 
dozen years since then. Umar had not lived to see these 
changes, but we who had been more fortunate looked back 
from those early months of 1931 with joy and elation. Nine- 
teen-thirty had, indeed, been a wonder year for us, and Gandhiji 
seemed to have changed the face of our country with his magic 
touch. No one was foolish enough to think that we had 
triumphed finally over the British Government. Our feeling 
of elation had little to do with the Government. We were 
proud of our people, of our women folk, of our youth, of our 
children for the part they had played in the movement. It was 
a spiritual gain, valuable at any time and to any people, but 
doubly so to us, a subject and down-trodden people. And we 
were anxious that nothing should happen to take this away 
from us, 

To me, personally, Gandhiji had always shown extraordinary 
kindness and consideration, and my father's death had brought 
him particularly near to me. He had always listened patiently 
to whatever I had to say, and had made every effort to meet my 
wishes. This had, indeed, led me to think that perhaps some 
colleagues and I could influence him continuously in a socialist 
direcdon, and he had himself said that he was prepared to go 
step by step as he saw his way to do so. It se^ed to me almost 
inevitable then that he would accept the fundamental socialist 



2^6 JAWAHARLJiL NEHRU 

position, ns I saw no other way out from the violence and in- 
justice and waste and misery of the existing order. He might 
disagree about the methods but not about the ideal. So I 
thought then, but I realise now that there are basic differences 
between Gandhiji’s ideals and the socialist objective. 

To go back to Delhi in February 1931, The Gandhi-Irwin 
talks went on from time to time, and then they came to a 
sudden stop. For several days Gandhiji was not sent for by 
the Viceroy, and it seemed to us that the break had come. The 
members of the Working Committee prepared to leave Delhi 
for their respective provinces. Before leaving we conferred to- 
gether about our future plans and civil disobedience (which 
was in theory still going on). We felt certain that as soon as 
the break was defintely announced we would have no further 
opportunity of meeting and conferring together. We expected 
arrest, and we had been told, and it seemed likely, that the 
Government would launch a fierce offensive against the Con- 
gress; something much fiercer than we had so far had. So we 
met together at what we thought was our final meeting, and 
we passed various resolutions to guide the movement in the 
future. One resolution had a certain significance. So far, the 
practice had been for each Acting-President to nominate his 
successor in case of arrest, and also to fill by nomination the 
vacancies in the Working Committee. The substitute Working 
Committees hardly functioned and had little authority to take 
the initiative in any matter. They could only go to prison. 
There was always a risk, however, that this continuous process 
of substitution might place the Congress in a false position. 
There were obvious dangers to it. The Working Committee in- 
Delhi, therefore, decided that in future there should be no 
nominations of acting-Presidents or substitute members. So 
long as any members (or member) of the original Committee 
were out of gaol they would fimetion as the full Committee. 
When all of them were in prison, then there would be no 
Committee functioning, but, we said rather grandiloquently, 
the powers of the Working Committee would then vest in each 
man and woman in the country, and we called upon them to 
carry on the struggle uncompromisingly. 

This resolution was a brave lead for a continuance of the 
fight, and it left no loophole for compromise. It was also a 
recognition of the fact that it was becoming increasingly dif- 
ficult for our headquarters to keep in touch with all parts of 
country and to issue instructions regularly. This was 
inevitable, as most of our workers were well-known men and 



TH*; DELHI PACT 


257 

women, and they worked openly. They could always be arrested. 
During 1930 a secret courier service had been built up to carry 
instructions, bring reports, and do inspection work. This 
worked well, and it demonstrated to us that we could organise 
secret information work of this kind with great success. But 
to some extent it did not fit in with our open movement, and 
Candhiji was averse to it. In the absence of instructions from 
headquarters we had to place the responsibility for carrying 
on the work on local people, as otherwise they would simply 
wait helplessly for directions from above and do nothing. When 
possible, of course, instructions were sent. 

So we passed this resolution and other resolutions (none of 
them were published or became cfiective because of subsequent 
events) and packed up to go. Just then another summons came 
from Lord Irwin, and the conversations were resumed. 

On the night of the 4th of March we waited till midnight 
for Gandhiji^ return from the Viceroy’s house. He came back 
about a a.m., and we were woken up and told that an agree- 
ment had been reached. We saw the draft. I knew most of the 
clauses, for they had been often discussed, but, at the very top, 
clause a * with its reference to safeguards, etc., gave me a tre- 
mendous shock. I was wholly unprepared for it. I said nothing 
then, and we all retired. 

There was nothing more to be said. The thing had been 
done, our leader had committed himself ; and even if we dis- 
agreed with him, what could we do? Throw him over? Break 
from him? Announce our disagreement? That might bring 
some personal satisfaction to an individual, but it made no 
difference to the final decision. The Civil Disobedience move- 
ment was ended for the time being at least, and not even the 
Working Committee could push it on now, when the Govern- 
ment could declare that Mr. Gandhi had already agreed to a 
settlement. I was perfectly willing, as were our other colleagues, 
to suspend civil disobedience and to come to a temporary settle- 

^ Clause a of the Delhi Settlement (dated March 5, 1931): "As 
regards constitudonal questions, the scope of future discussion is 
stated, with the assent of His Majesty’s Government, to be with 
the object of considering further the scheme for the constitutional 
Government of India discussed at the Round Table Conference. Of 
the scheme there outlined. Federation is an essential part; so also 
are Indian responsibility and reservations or safeguards in the in- 
terests of India, for such matters as, for instance, defence; external 
affairs; the position of minorities; the ISnandal credit of Ihdia, and 
the discharge of . obligations." 



2^8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ment with the Government. It was not an easy matter for any 
of us to send our comrades back to gaol, or to be instrumental 
in keeping many thousands in prison who were already there. 
Prison is not a pleasant place to spend our days and nights, 
though many Of us may train ourselves for it and talk light- 
heartedly of its crushing routine. Besides, three weeks or more 
of conversations between Gandhiji and Lord Irwin had led the 
country to expect that a settlement was coming, and a final 
break would have been a disappointment. So all of us in the 
Worl^g Committee were decidedly in favour of a provisional 
settlement (for obviously it could be nothing more), provided 
that thereby we did not surrender any vital position. 

So far as I was concerned I was not very much concerned 
with many of the pqints that had given rise to great argument. 
Two matters interested me above all others. One was that our 
objective of independence should in no way be toned down, 
.and the second was the effect of the settlement on our U.P. 
agrarian situation. Our no-tax or no-rent campaign- had so far 
been a great success, and in certain areas hardly any collections 
had been made. The peasantry were in fine mettle, and world 
agricultural conditions and prices were worse than ever, making 
4t difficult for them to pay. Out no-tax campai^ had been 
both political and economic. If there was a provisional settle-, 
ment with the Government, civil disobedience would be ‘'with- 
drawn and the political basis for the no-tax campaign would 
go. But what of the economic side, of the terrible fall m prices, 
and of the inability of most of the peasants to pay anything 
like the demand? Gandhiji had made this point quite clear to 
Lord Irwin. He had stated that while the no-tax campaign 
would be withdrawn, we could not advise the peasantry to pay 
beyond their capacity. This matter could not be discussed in 
detail with the Government of India as it was a provincial 
matter. We were assured that the Provincial Government would 
gladly confer with us on the subject and would do everything 
in its power to relieve the distress of the peasantry. It was a 
vague assurance, but, under the circumstances, it was difficult 
to have anything more definite. This matter was thus, for the 
time being, disposed of. 

The other and vital question of our objective, of indepen- 
dence, remained. And now I saw in that Clause a of the settle- 
ment that even this seemed to be jeopardised. Was it for this 
that our people had behaved so gallantly ffir a year? Were all 
our. brave words and deeds to end in this? The independence 
'resolution of the Congress, the pledge of January a6, so often 



TJtilS iJjiLjal PACT 


259 

repeated? So I lay and pondered on that March night, and in 
my heart there was a great emptiness as of something precious 
gone, almost heyond recall. 

" This is the way the world ends, 

Not with a bang, but a whimper.” 



XXXV 


KARACHI CONGRESS 

Gandhiji learnt indirectly of my distress, and the next morning 
he asked me to accompany him in his usual walk. We had a 
long talk, and he tried to convince me that nothing vital had 
been lost, no surrender of principle made. He interpreted 
Clause 2 of the agreement in a particular way so as to make it 
fit in with our demand for independence, relying chiefly on the 
words in it: “in the interests of India.” The interpretation 
seemed to me to be a forced one, and I was not convinced, but 
I was somewhat soothed by his talk. The merits of the agree- 
ment apart, I told him that his way of springing surprises upon 
us frightened me; there was something unknown about him 
which, in spite of the closest association for fourteen years, I 
could not understand at all and which filled me with appre- 
hension. He admitted the presence of this unknown element 
in him, and said that he himself could not answer for it or 
foretell what it might lead to. 

For a day or two I wobbled, not knowing what to do. There 
was no question of opposing or preventing that agreement 
then. That stage was past, and all I could do was to dissociate 
myself theoretically from it, though accepting it as a matter 
of fact. That would have soothed my personal vanity, biit how 
did it help the larger issue? Would it not be better to accept 
gracefully what had been done, and put the most favourable 
interpretation upon it, as Gandhiji had done? In an interview 
to the Press immediately after the agreement he had stressed 
that interpretation and that we stood completely by indepen- 
dence, He went to Lord Irwin and made this point quite clear, 
so that there might he no misapprehension then or in the 
future. In the event of the Congress sending any representative 
to the Round Table Conference, he told him, it could only be 
on this basis and to advance this claim. Lord Irwin could not, 
of course, admit the claim, but he recognised the right of the 
Congress to advance it. 

So I decided, not without great mental conflict and physical 
distress, to accept the agreement and work for it whole- 
’ heartedly. There appeared to me to be no middle way. 

In the course of Gandhiji’s interviews with Lord Irwin 
prior to the agreement, as well as after, he had pleaded for 

* 460 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


261 

the release of political prisoners other than the civil disobedience 
prisoners. The latter were going to be discharged as part of 
the agreement itself. But there were thousands of others, both 
those convicted after trial and detenus kept without any charge, 
trial or conviction. Many of these detenus had been kept so for 
years, and there had always been a great deal of resentment 
all over India, and especially in Bengal which was most affected, 
at this method of imprisonment without trial. Like the Chief 
of the General Staff in Penguin Island (or was it in the Dreyfus 
case?) the Government of India believed that no proo& are the 
best proofs. No proofs cannot be disproved. The detenus were 
alleged by the Government to be actual or potential revolu- 
tionaries of the violent type. Gandhiji had pleaded for their 
release, not necessarily as part of the agreement, but as 
eminently desirable in order to relieve political tension and 
establish a more normal atmosphere in Bengal. But the Govern- 
ment was not agreeable to this. 

Nor did the Government agree to Gandhiji’s hard pleading 
for the commutation of Bhagat Singh’s death sentence. This 
also had nothing to do with the agreement, and Gandhiji 
pressed for it separately because of the very^ strong feeling all 
over India on this subject. He pleaded in vain. 

I remember a curious incident about that time, which gave 
me an insight into the mind of the terrorist group in India. 
This took place soon after my discharge fi-om prison, either a 
little before father’s death or a few days after. A stranger came 
to see me at our house, and I was told that he was Chan- 
drashekhar Azad. I had never seen him before, but I had 
heard of him ten years earlier, when he had non-co-operated 
from school and gone to prison during the N.C.O. movement 
in 1921, A boy of fifteen or so then, he had been flogged in 
prison for some breach of gaol discipline. Later he had drifted 
towards the terrorists, and he became one of their prominent 
men in north India. All this I had heard vaguely, and I had 
taken no interest in these rumours. I was surprised, therefore, 
to see him. He had been induced to visit me because of the 
general expectation (owing to our release) that some negotia- 
tions between the Government and the Congress were likely. 
He wanted to know if, in case of a settlemmt, his group of 
people would have any peace. Would they still be coiwidered, 
and treated, as outlaws; hunted out ftom place to place, with 
a price on their heads, and the prospect of the j^Uows ever 
brfore them? Or was there a possibility of their being allowed 
to pursue peaceful vocations? He told me that as far as he was 



262 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

concerned, as well as many of his associates, they were con- 
vinced now that purely terrorist methods were futile and did no 
good. He was not, however, prepared to believe that India 
would gain her freedom wholly by peaceful methods. He 
thought that some time in the future a violent conflict might 
take place, but this would not be terrorism. He ruled out 
terrorism as such, so far as the question of Indian freedom was 
concerned. But then, he added. What was he to do when no 
chance was g^vcn him to settle down, as he was being hounded 
all the time? Many of the terroristic acts that had occurred 
recently, according to him, were purely in self-defence. 

I was glad to leam from Azad, and I bad confirmation of 
this subsequently, that the belief in terrorism was dying down. 
As a group notion, indeed, it had practically gone, and indi- 
vidual and sporadic cases were probably due to some special 
reason, act of rmrisal, or individual aberration, and not to 
a general idea. This ^d not mean, of course, that the old 
terrorists or their new associates had become .converts to non- 
violence, or admirers of British rule. But they did not thinlf 
in terms of terrorism as they used to. Many of them, it seems 
to me, have definitely the fascist mentality. 

I tried to explain to Chandrashekhar Azad what my philo- 
sophy of political action was, and tried to convert him to my 
view-point. But I had no answer to his basic question: what 
' was he to do now? Nothing was likely to happen that would 
bring him, or his like, any relief or peace. All I could suggest 
was that he should use his influence to prevent the occurrence 
of terrorist acts in the future, fer these could only injure the 
•la^er cause as well as his own group. 

Two or three weeks later, while the Gandhi— Irwin talks were 
going on, I heard at Delhi that Chandrashekhar Azad had 
been shot down and killed by the police in Allahabad. He was 
recognised in the day-time in a park, and was surrounded by 
a large force of police. He tried to defend himself from behind 
a tree; ^ere was quite a shooting-match, and he injured one or 
two policemen before he was shot down. 

I left Delhi soon after the provisional settlement wafe arrived 
at, and went to Lucknow. We had taken immediate steps to 
.stop civil disobedience all over the country, and the whole 
Congress organisadon had reroonded to our new instructions . 
with remarluble disdpline. 'We had many people in our ranks 
who were ^ssatisfied, many fire-brands, and we had no means 
of compelling them to desist ftom the old activities. But with- 
out a single exception known to me, the' huge organisation 



KARACHI CONGRESS 263 

accepted in practice the new r 61 e, though many criticised it. 
I was particularly interested in the reactions in our province, 
as the no-tax campaign was going strong in some areas there. 
Our first job was to see that the civil disobedience prisoners 
were discharged. Thousands of these were discharged from day 
to day, and after some time only a number of disputed cases 
were left in prison; apart, of course, from the thousands of 
detenus and those convicted for violent activities, who were 
not released. 

These discharged prisoners, when they went home to their 
town or villages, were naturally welcomed back by their people. 
There were often decorations and buntings, and processions, 
and meetings, and speeches and addresses of welcome. It was 
all very natural and to be expected, but the change was sudden 
from the time when tlie police lathi was always in evidence, 
and meetings and processions were forcibly dispersed. The 
police felt rather uncomfortable, and probably there was a feel- 
ing of triumph among many of our people who came out of 
gaol. There was little enough reason to be triumphant, but a 
coming out of gaol always brings a feeling of elation (unless the 
spirit has been crushed in gao^ and mass gaol deliveries add 
very much to this exhilaration. 

I mention this fact here, because in later months great 
exception was taken by the Government to this ‘air of 
triumph’, and it was made a charge against us I Brought up 
and living always in an authoritarian atmosphere, ■ with a 
military notion of government and with no roots or supports 
in the people, nothing is more painful to them than a weaken- 
ing of what they consider their prestige. None of us, so far 
as I know, had given the least thought to the matter, and it 
was with great surprise that we learnt latet that Government 
officials, from the heights of Simla to the plains below, were 
simmering with anger and wounded pride at this impudence 
of the people. The newspapers that echo their views have not 
got over it yet; and even now, three and a half years later, they 
refer with almost a visible shudder to those bold, bad days 
when, according to them. Congressmen went about in triumph 
as if they had won a great victory. These outbursts on me 
part of the Government and its friends in the Press, came as 
a revelation to us. They showed what a state of nerves they 
had been in, what suppressions they had put up with, resulting 
in aU manner of complexes. It was extraordinary that a few 
processions and a few speeches of our rank-and-file men should 
so upset them. 



264 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

As a matter of fact there was in Congress ranks then, and 
even less in the leadership, no idea of having ‘ defeated ’ the 
British Government. But there was a feeling of triumph 
amongst us at our own people’s sacrifices and courage. We 
were a little proud of what the country had done in 1930; it 
raised us in our self-esteem, gave us confidence, and even our 
littlest volunteer straightened himself and held up his head at 
the thought of this. We also felt that this great effort, which had 
attracted world attention, had brought enormous pressure on 
the British Government, and had taken us nearer our goal. 
All this had nothing to do with defeating the Government, 
and indeed many of us were fully conscious of the fact that 
the Government had done rather well in the Delhi Pact. Those 
of us who pointed out that we were far from our goal, and big 
and difficult struggles lay ahead, were accused by mends of the 
Government of war-mongering and going behind the spirit of 
the Delhi Pact. 

In the United Provinces we had now to face the agrarian 
problem. Our policy now was one of co-operation, as far as 
possible, with the British Government and immediately we put 
' ourselves in touch with the U.P. Provincial Government. After 
a long interval — for a dozen years we had had no official deal- 
ings with them— I visited some of the high officials of the 
province to discuss the agrarian question. We also carried on 
a lengthy correspondence on the subject. Our Provincial Con- 
gress Committee appointed one of our leading men, Govind 
Ballabh Pant, as a special liaison officer to keep in continuous 
touch with the Provincial Government, The facts of the 
agrarian crisis, of the tremendous fall in agricultural prices, 
and of the inability of the average peasant to pay the rent 
demanded, were admitted. The question was, what remissions 
should be given, and in this matter the initiative lay with the 
Provincial Government. Ordinarily the Government dealt with 
the landlords alone, and not with their tenants direct, and it 
was for the landlords to reduce or remit rents. ‘But the land- 
lords refused to do any such thing, so long as the Government 
did not remit part of their revenue demand; and in any event 
they were not, as a mle, keen on giving remissions to their 
tenantry. So the decision rested with the Government. 

The Provincial Congress Committee had told the peasantry 
that the no-tax campaign was off, and they should pay as much 
of their rent as they could. But, as their representatives, they 
had demanded heavy remissions. For a long Government 
took no action. Probably it was handicapped by the absence 



KARACHI .CONGRESS 


265 

on leave or special duty of the Governor, Sir Malcolm Hailey. 
Prompt and far-reaching action was necessary, but the acting 
Governor and his colleagues hesitated to commit themselves, 
and preferred to delay matters rill the return of Sir Malcolm 
Hailey in the summer. This indecision and delay made a diffi- 
cult situation worse, and resulted in much suffering for the 
tenantry. 

I had a little breakdown in health soon after the Delhi Pact. 
Even in gaol I had been unwell, and then the shock of father’s 
death, followed immediately by the long strain of the Delhi 
negotiations, proved too much for my physical health. I re- 
covered somewhat for the Karachi Congress. 

Karachi is far to the north-west of India, difficult of access, 
and partly cut off firom the rest of the country by desert 
regions. But it attracted a great gathering &om distant parts, 
and truly represented the temper of the country at the 
moment. There was a feeling of quiet, but deep satisfaction 
at the growii^ strength of jhe national movement in India; 
pride in the Congress organisation which had so far worthily 
responded to the heavy calls made on it, and fully justified 
itself by its disciplined sacrifice; a confidence in our people, 
and a restrained enthusiasm. At the same time there was a heavy 
sense of responsibility at the tremendous problems and perils 
ahead; our words and resolutions were now the preludes to 
action on a national scale, and could not be lightly uttered or 
passed. The Delhi Pact, though accepted by the great majority, 
was not popular or liked, and there was a fear that it might 
lead us to all manner of compromising situations. Somehow it 
seemed to take away fi'om the clarity of the issues before the 
country. On the very eve of the Congress, a new element of 
resentment had crept in— the execution of Bhagat Singh. This 
feeling was especially marked in North India, and Karachi, 
being itself in the north, had attracted large numbers of people 
from the Punjab. 

The Karachi Congress was an even greater personal triumph 
for Gandhiji than any previous Congress had been. The pre- 
sident, Sardar VaUabhbhai Patel, was one of the most popular 
and forceful men in India with the prestige of victorious 
leadership in Gmrat, but it was the Mahatma who dominated 
the scene. The Cfongress also had a strong contingent of ‘ Red- 
shirts ' from the Frontier Province under the leadership of 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan. These Redshirts were popular and drew 
a cheer wherever they went, for India had been impressed by 
their extraordinary and peaceful courage in the face of great 



266 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

provocation from April 1930 onwards. The name ' Redshirts ’ 
led some people to think, guite wrongly, that they were Com- 
munists or left-wing labourites. As a matter of fact their name 
was "Khudai Khidmatgar ”, and this organisation had allied 
itself to the Congress (later in 1931 they were to become 
integral parts of the Congress organisation). They were called 
Redshirts simply because of their rather primitive uniforms, 
which were red. They had no economic policy in their pro- 
gramme, which was nationalistic and also dealt with social 
reform. 

The principal resolution at Karachi dealt with the Delhi Pact 
and the Round Table Conference. I accepted it, of course, as 
it emerged from the Working Committee, but when I was 
asked by GandKiji to move it in the open Congress, I hesitated. 
It went against the grain, and I refused at first, and then this 
seemed a weak and unsatisfactory position to take up. Either 
I was for it or against it, and it was not proper to prevaricate 
or leave people guessing in the matter. Almost at the last 
moment, a few minutes before the resolution was taken up in 
the open Congress, I decided to sponsor it. In my speech I tried 
to lay before the great gathering quite frankly what my feelings 
were and why I had wholeheartedly accepted that resolution 
and pleaded with them to accept it That speech, made on the 
spur of the moment and coming from the heart, and with little 
of ornament or fine phrasing in it, was probably a greater 
success than many of my other efforts, which had followed a 
more carefrd preparation. 

. I spoke on other resolutions, too, notably on the Bhagat Singh 
resolution and the one on Fundamental Rights and Economic 
Policy. The latter resolution interested me especially, partly 
because of what it contained, and even more so because it 
represented a new outlook in the Congress. So far the Congress 
had thought along purely nationalist lines, and had avoided 
facing economic issues, except in so far as it encouraged cottage 
industries and swadeshi generally. lii the Karachi resolution it 
took a step, a very short step, in a socialist direction by advo- 
cating nation^sation of key industries and services, and 
various other measures to lessen the burden on the poor and 
increase it on the rich. This was not soc^ism at all, and 
a capitalist state could easily accept almost everything con- 
tained in that resolution. 

This very mild and prosaic resolution evidently made the big 
people of the Qoveminent of India furiously to think. Perhaps 
they even pictured, with their usual perspicacity, the red gold 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


•467 

of the Bolsheviks stealing its way into Karachi and corrupting 
the Congress leaders. Living in a kind of political harem, cut 
off from the outer world, and surrounded by an atmosphere of 
secrecy, their receptive minds love to hear tales of mystery and 
imagination. And then these stories are given out in little bits 
in a mysterious manner, through favoured newspapers, with 
a hint that much more could be seen if only the veil were 
lifted. In this approved and well-practised manner, frequent 
references have been made to the Karachi resolution on Fun- 
damental Rights, etc., and I can only conclude that they 
represent the Government view of this resolution. The story 
goes that a certain mysterious individual with communist 
afEliations drew up this resolution, or the greater part of it, 
and thrust it dovm upon me at Karachi; that thereupon I -issued 
an ultimatum to Mr. Gandhi to accept this or to face my 
opposition on the Delhi Pact issue, and Mr. Gandhi accepted 
it as i sop to me, and frtrced it down on a tired Subjects 
Committee and Congress on the concluding day. 

The name of the ‘mysterious individual’ has, so far as I 
know, not been direcdy mentioned, but numerous hints make 
it quite clear who is meant. Not being myself used to ways of 
mystery and roundabout methods of expression, I might as 
w^ state that this person seems to be M. N. Roy. It woxdd be 
interesting to know, and instructive to the big ones of Simla 
and Delhi to find out, what M. N. Roy or any other person 
‘ communisdcally inclined ’ thinks of that very iimocent Karachi 
resolution. It may surprise them to discover that any such 
person is rather contemptuous of the resolution because, 
according to him, it is a typical product of a bourgeois re- 
formist mentality. 

So for as Mr. Gandhi is concerned, I have had the privilege 
of knowing him pretty intimately for the last seventeen years, 
and the idea of my presenting ultimatums to him or bar- 
gaining with him seems to ine monstrous. We may accommo; 
date ourselves to each other; or we may, on a particular issue, 
part company, hut the methods of the market-place can never 
affect bur mutual dealings. 

The idea of getting the Congress to pass a resolution of this 
kind was an old one. For some years the U.P. Provincial 
Congress Committee had been agitating in the matter, and 
tr^g to get the A.I.C.C. to accept a socudist resolution. In 
1939 it succeeded to some extent in getting the AJ.C.C. tb’ 
accept the principle. Then followed civil disobe^ence. During 
my early morning talks in Delhi with Gandhiji in February 



j68 jawaharlal kehru 

and March 1931, I had referred to this matter, and he had 
welcomed the idea of having a resolution on economic matters. 
He asked me to bring the matter up at Karachi, and to draft 
a resolution and show it to him there. I did so at Karachi, 
and he made various changes and suggestions. He wanted both 
of us to agree on the wording, before we asked the Working 
Committee to consider it. I had to make several drafts, and 
this delayed matters for a few days, and we were otherwise 
very much occupied with other matters. Ultimately Gandhiji 
and I agreed on a draft, and this was placed before the Working 
Committee, and later before the Subjects Committee. It is 
perfectly true that it was a new subject for the Subjects Com- 
mittee and some members were surprised. However, it was 
easily passed by the Committee and the Congress, and was 
referred to the A.I.C.C. for further elucidation and enlargement 
on the lines laid down. 

While I was drafting this resolution various people, who used 
to come to ray tent, were sometimes consulted by me about it. 
But M. N. Roy had absolutely nothing to do with it, and I 
knew well enough that he would disapprove of it and laugh 
at it. 

I had come across M. N. Roy in Allahabad some days before 
coming to Karachi. He turned up suddenly one evening at 
our house, and though I had no notion that he was in India, 
I recognised him immediately, having seen him in Moscow 
in 1937. He saw me at Karachi also, but that was probably for 
not more than five minutes. Dtuing the past few years Roy 
had written a great deal in condemnation of me politically, 
and -le had often succeeded in hurting me a little. There was 
a great deal of diiference between us, and yet I felt attracted 
towards him, and when later he had been arrested and was in 
trouble, I wanted to do what little I could (and that was little 
enough) to help him. I was attracted to him by his remarkable 
intellectual capacity; I was also attracted to him because he 
seemed such a lonely figure, deserted by everybody. The British 
Government was naturally after him; nationalist India was not 
interested in him; and those who called themselves Communists 
in India condemned him as a traitor to the cause. I knew that 
after many years’ residence in Russia and close co-operation 
with the Comintern, he had parted with them or, perhaps, 
been made to part. Why this happened I did not know, nor 
do I know still, except very vaguely, what his present views 
or his differences with the orthodox Communists are. But this 
desertion of a man -like him by almost everybody pained me. 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


269 

and, against my usual habit, I joined the Defence Committee. 
Since that summer in 193 over three years ago now, he has 
been in prison, unwell and practically in solirary confinement. 

One of the final acts of the Congress session at Karachi was 
to elect a new Working Committee. This is elected by the All- 
India Congress Committee, but a convention has grown up 
that the suggestions of the President for the year (made in 
consultation with Gandhiji and sometimes other colleagues) are 
accepted by the A.I.C.C. The Karachi election of the Working 
Committee led to an imtoward result, which none of us anti- 
cipated then. Some Muslim members of the A.I.C.C. objected 
to this election, in particular to one (Muslim) name in it. Per- 
haps they also felt slighted because no one of their group had 
been chosen. In an all-India committee of fifteen it was mani- 
festly impossible to have all interests represented, and the real 
dispute, about which we knew nothing, was an entirely personal 
and local one in the Punjab. The result was that the protestant 
group gradually drifted away from the Congress in the Punjab, 
and joined others in an ‘Ahrar Party’ or ‘ MaJlis-e-Ahrar 
Some of the most active and popular Muslim Congress workers 
in the Punjab joined this, and it attracted large numbers of 
Punjab Muslims to it. It represented chiefly the lower middle- 
class elements and it had numerous contacts with the Muslim 
masses. It thus became a powerful organisation, far stronger 
than the decrepit Muslim communal organisations of upper- 
class folk, which functioned in the air or, rather, in drawing- 
rooms and committee rooms. Inevitably, the Ahrars drifted 
towards communalism, but because of their touch with the 
Muslim masses they remained a live body with a vague 
economic outlook. They played an important part later in 
Muslim agitations in Indian States, notably Kashmir, where 
economic ills and communalism were strangely and unhappily 
mixed together. The defecdon of some of the leaders of the 
Ahrar Party from the Congress was a serious loss for the Con- 
gress in the Punjab. But we did not know of this at Karachi; 
the realisation came slowly in later months. This defection did 
not, of course, come because of resentment at the election of 
the Congress Working Committee. That was just a straw show- 
ing the drifi: of the wind; the real causes lay deeper. 

While we were all at Karachi news had come of the Hindu- 
Muslim riots at Cawnpore, to be followed, soon after, by the 
report of the murder of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi by a 
frenzied mob of persons whom he was trying to help. Those 
terrible and brutal riots were bad enough, but Ganeshji's death 



270 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

brought them home to U8 as nothing else could have done. 
He was known to thousands in that Congress camp, and to all 
of us of the U.P. he was the dearest of comrades and friend, 
brave and intrepid, far-sighted and full of wise counsel, never 
downhearted, quiedy working away and scorning publicity and 
office and the limelight. In me pride of his youth he willingly 
offered his life for the cause he loved and served, and foolish 
hands struck him down, and deprived Cawnpore and the pro- 
vince of the brightest of their jewels. There was gloom over 
our UJP. camp in Karachi when this news came; the glory 
seemed to have departed. And yet there was pride in him, 
that he had faced death so un&lteringly and died so gloriously. 



XXXVI 


A SOUTHERN HOLIDAY 

My doctors urged me to take some rest and go for a chtmge, 
and I decided to spend a month in Ceylon. India, huge as the 
country is, did not offer a real prospect of change or mental 
rest, for wherever I might go, I would probably come across 

g olitical associates and the same problems would pursue me. 

leylon was the nearest place within reach of India, and so to 
Ceylon we went — ^Kamala, Indira and I. That was the first 
holiday I had had since our return from Europe in 1937, the 
first time since then that my wife and daughter and I holidayed 
together peacefully with little to distract our attention. There 
has been no repetition of that experience, and sometimes I 
wonder if there will be any. 

And yet we did not rea% have much rest in Ceylon, except 
for two weeks at Nuwara Eliya.. We were fairly overwhelmed 
by the hospitality and firiendliness of all classes of people there. 
It was very pleasant to find all this goodwill, but it was often 
embarrassing also. At Nuwara Eliya groups of labourers, tea- 
garden workers and others would come dail^, walking many 
miles, bringing gracious gifts with them— wild flowers, vege- 
tables, home-made butter. We could not, as a rule, even con- 
verse together; we merely looked at each other and smiled. 
Our little house was fiiU of these precious gifts of theirs, which 
they had given out of their poverty, and we passed them on to 
the local hospital and orphanages. 

We visited many of the fttmous sights and historical ruins 
of the island, and Buddhist monasteries, and the rich tropical 
forests. At i^uradhapura, I liked greatly an old seated statue 
•of the Buddha. A year later, when I was in Dehra Dun Gaol, a 
friend in Ceylon sent me a picture of this statue, and I kept it 
on my little table in my cell. It became a precious companion 
for me, and the strong, calm features of Buddha’s statue 
soothed me and gave me strength and helped me to overcome 
many a period of depression. 

Buddha has always had a great appeal for me. It is diflScult 
for me to analyse this appeal, but it is not a religious appeal, 
and I am not interested m foe dogmas that have grown up 
round Buddhism. It is the personality that has drawn me. So 
also the personality of Christ has attracted me greatly. 

*71 



JAWAHARLAL NtHRU 


273 

I saw manj Buddhist hhikhus (monks) in their monasteries 
and on the highways, meeting with respect wherever they went. 
The dominant expression of almost all of them was one of 
peace and calm, a strange detachment from the cares of the 
world. They did "not have intellectual faces, as a rule, and 
there was no trace of the fierce conflicts of the mind on their 
countenances. Life seemed to be for them a smooth-flowing 
river moving slowly to the great ocean. I looked at them with 
some envy, with just a faint yearning for a ha!ven, but I knew 
well enough that my lot was a different one, cast in storms and 
tempests. There was to be no haven for me, for the tempests 
within me were as stormy as those outside. And if perchance I 
found myself in a safe harbour, protected from the fury of the 
winds, would I be contented or happy there? 

For a little while the harbour was pleasant, and one could lie 
down and dream and allow the soothing and enervating charm 
of the tropics to steal over one. Ceylon fitted in with my mood 
then, and the beauty of the island filled me with delight. Our 
month of holiday was soon over, and it was with real regret 
that we bade good-bye. So many memories come back to me 
of Ae land and her peoplej they have been pleasant com- 
panions during the long, empty days in prison. One little inci- 
dent lingers in my memory; it was near JafEna, I think. The 
teachers and boys of a school stopped our car and said a few 
words of greeting. The ardent, eager faces of die boys stood 
out, and then one of their number came to me, shook hands 
with me, and without question or argument, said : " I will not 
filter.’' That bright young face with shining eyes, full of deter- 
mination, is imprinted in iny mind. I do not know who he was; 

I have lost trace of him. But somehow I have the conviction 
that he will remain true to his word and will not falter when he 
has to face life’s difficult problems. 

From Ceylon we went to South India, right to the southern 
tip at Cape Comorin. Amazingly peaceful it was there. And 
ffien through Travancore, Cochin, Malabar, Mysore, Hydera- 
uB-d — ^mostly Indian States, some the most progressive of their 
kind, some the most backward. Travancore and Cochin educa- 
tionally far in advance of British India; Mysore probably ahead 
industrially; Hyderabad almost a perfect feudal relic. We re- 
ceived courtesy and welcome everywhere, both from the people 
and the authorities, but bdiind that welcome I could sense 
the armety of the latter lest our visit might lead the people 
to think dangerously, Mysore and Travancore seemed to give 
some avil liberty and opportunities of political work at the 




INDIRA PRIYADARSHINI 
Jawaharlal’s daughter 



A SOUTHERN HOLIDAY 


time; in Hyderabad even this was wholly absent; and I felt, in 
spite of the courtesy that surrounded us, stifled and suffocated. 
Latterly the Mysore and Travancore governments have with- 
dravm even the measure of civil liberty and political activity 
that they had previously permitted. 

In Bangalore, in the Mysore State, I had hoisted at a great 
gathering a national flag on an enormous iron pole. Not long 
after my departure this pole was broken up into bits, and the 
Mysore government made the display of the flag an offence. 
This ill-treatment and insult of the flag I had hoisted pained 
me greatly. 

In Travancore to-day even the Congress has been made an 
unlawful association, and no one can enrol ordinary members 
for it, although in British India it is now laivful since the with- 
drawal of civil disobedience. Thus both Mysore and Travan- 
core are crushing ordinary peaceful political activity and have 
taken back some facilities they had previously allowed. They 
have moved backwards. Hyderabad had no necessity for going 
back or withdrawing facilities, for it had never moved forward 
at all or given any facility of the kind. Political meetings are 
unknown in Hyderabad, and even social and religious gather- 
ings are looked upon with suspicion, and specid permission 
has to be taken for them. There are no newspapers worthy of 
the name issued there, and, in order to prevent the germs of 
corruption from coming from outeide, a large number of news- 
papers published in other parts of India are prevented entry. 
So strict is this policy of exclusion that even Moderate journals 
are excluded. 

In Cochin we visited the quarter of the ‘White Jews’, as 
they are called, and saw one of the services in their old taber- 
nade. The little community is very andent and very unique. 
It is dwindling in numbers. The part of Cochin they live in, 
we were told, resembled andent Jerusalem. It certainly had an 
andent look about it. 

We also visited, along the backwaters of Malabar, some of 
the" towns inhabited chiefly by Christians belonging to the 
Syrian churches. Few people realise that Christianity came to 
India as early as the first century after Christ, long beft>re 
Europe turned to it, and established a firm hold in' South India. 
Although these Christians have their religious head in Antioch 
or somewhere in Syria, their Christianity is practically indi- 
genous and has j^w outside contacts. 

To my surprise, we also came across a colony of Nestorians in 
the South; I was told by their bishop that there were ten thou- 

T 



274 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

sand of them. I had laboured under the impression that the Nes- 
torians had long be.en absorbed in other sects, and I did not 
know that they had ever flourished in India. But I was told 
that at one time they had a fairly large following in India, 
.extending as far north as Benares. 

We had gone to Hyderabad especially to pay a visit to Mrs. 
Sarojini Naidu and her daughters, Padmaja and Leilamani. 
During our stay with them a small purdanashin gathering of 
women assembled at their house to meet my wife, and Kamala 
apparently addressed them. Probably she spoke of women’s 
struggle for freedom against man-made laws and customs (a 
favourite topic of hers) and urged the women not to be too 
submissive to their menfolk. Ihere was an interesting sequel 
to this two or three weeks later, when a distracted husband 
wrote to Kamala from Hyderabad and said that since her visit 
to that city his wife had behaved strangely. She would not 
listen to him and fall in with his wishes, as she used to, but 
would argde with him and even adopt an aggressive attitude. 

Seven weeks after we had sailed from Bombay fer Ceylon we 
were back in that dty, and immediately I plimged again into 
the whirlpool of Congress politics. There were meetings of the 
Working Committee to consider vital problems— a rapidly- 
changing and developing situation in India, the U.P. agrarian 
impasse, the phenomenal growth of the ‘ Redshirt ’ movement 
in the Frontier province under Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s 
leadership, Bengal in an extreme state of tension and sup- 
pressed anger and unrest, the ever-present communal problem, 
and petty local conflicts, over a variety of issues, between Con- 
gressmen and Government oflSdals, involving mutual charges 
of breaches of the Delhi Pact. And then there was the ever- 
recurring question: was the Congress to be represented at the 
second Round Table Conference? Should Mahatma Gandhi go 
there? 



XXXVII 


FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 

Should Gandhiji go to London for the Round Table Confer- 
ence or not? Again and again the question arose, and there 
was no definite answer. No one knew till the last moment — ^not 
even the Congress Working Committee or Gandhiji hinaself. 
For the answer depended on many things, and new happenings 
were constantly giving a fresh turn to the situation. Behind 
that question and answer lay real and difficult problems. 

We were told repeatedly, on behalf of the British Govern- 
ment and their firiends, that the Round Table Conference had 
already laid down the ficamework of the constitution, that the 
principal lines of the picture had been drawn, and all that re- 
mained was the filling of this picture. But the Congress did 
not t hink so, and so far as it was concerned, the picture had to 
be drawn or painted firom the very beginning on an almost 
blank canvas. It was true that by the Delhi agreement the 
federal basis had been approved and the idea of safeguards 
accepted. But a federation had long seemed to many of us the 
best solution of the Indian constitutional problem, and our 
approval of this idea did not mean our acceptance of the par- 
ticular type of federation envisaged by the first Round Table 
Conference, A federation was perfecdy compatible with political 
independence and social change. It was far more difficult to fit 
in the idea of safeguards and, ordinarily, they would mean a 
substantial diminution of sovereignty, but the qualifying phrase 
“ in the interests of India ” helped us to get over this mmculty 
to some extent at least, though not perhaps very successfully. 
In any event, the Karachi Congress had made it clear that an 
acceptable constitution must provide for full control of defence, 
foreign aifiiirs, and financim and economic policy, and an 
examination of the question of India’s indebtedness to foreign ' 
(meaning largely British) interests before liabilities were under- 
taken; and the Wdamental rights resolution had also indicated 
some of the political and economic changes desired. All this 
was incompatible with many of the Roimd Table Conference 
decisions, as well as with the existing firamework of administra- 
tion in India. 

The gulf between the Congress view-point and that of the 
British Government was immense, and it seemed exceedingly •• 

*75 



276 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

unlikely that it could be bridged at that stage. Very few Con- 
gressmen expected any measure of agreement between the 
Congress and the Government at the Round Table Conference, 
and even Gandhiji, optimistic as he always is, could not look 
forward to much. And yet he was never hopeless and was deter- 
mined to try to the very end. All of us felt that whether success 
ramp or not, the effort had to be made, in continuation of the 
Delhi agreement. But there were two vital considerations which 
might have barred our participation in the second Round Table 
Conference. We could only go if we had full freedom to place 
our view-point in its entirety before the Round Table Confer- 
ence, and were not prevented from doing so by being told that 
the matter had already been decided, or for any other reason. 
We could also be prevented from being represented at the 
Round Table Conference by conditions in India. A situation 
might have developed here which precipitated a conflict with 
Government, or in which we had to face severe repression. If 
this took place in India and our very house was on fire, it would 
have been singularly out of place for any representative of ours 
to ignore the fire and talk academically of constitutions and the 
like.in London. 

The situation was developing svnftly in India. This was 
noticeable aU over the country, and especially so in Bengal, the 
United Provinces, and the Frontier Province. In Bengal the 
Delhi agreement had made little difference, and the tension con- 
tinued and grew worse. Some civil disobedience prisoners were 
discharged, but thousands of politicals, who were technically 
not civil disobedience prisoners, remained in prison. The 
detenus also continued in gaol or detention camps. Fresh arrests 
were frequently made for ‘ seditious ’ speeches or other political 
activities, and generally it was felt that the Government offen- 
sive had continued without any abatement. For the Congress, 
the Bengal problem has been an extraordinarily difficult one 
because of the existence of terrorism. Compared to the normal 
Congress activities and civil disobedience, these terroristic activi- 
ties were, in extent and importance, very little. But they made 
a loud noise and attracted great attention. They also helped in 
making it difficult fer Congress work to function as in most 
other provinces, for terrorism produced an atmosphere which 
was not favourable to peaceful direct action. Inevitably they 
invited the severest repression from the Government, and this 
fell vrith considerable impartiality on terrorist and non-terrorist 
alike. 

It was difficult for the police and the local executive 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 277 

authorities not to make use of the special laws and ordinances 
(meant for the terrorists) for Congressmen, labour and peasant 
workers and others whose activities they disapproved of. It is 
possible than the real offence of many of the detenus, kept now 
for years without charge or trial or conviction, was not terror- 
istic activity but other effective political activity. Thejt have 
been given no chance of proving or di^roving anything, or 
even of knowing what their sins are. They are hot tried in 
court, presumabfy because the police have not sufficient evi- 
dence against them to secure a conviction, although it is well 
known that the British-Indian laws for offences against the State 
are amazingly thorough and comprehensive, and it is difficult 
to escape from their close meshes. It often happens that a person 
is acquitted by the law courts and is immediately arrested again 
and thereafter treated as a detenu. 

The Congress Working Committee felt very helpless before 
this intricate problem of Bengal. They were continually op- 
pressed by it, and some Bengal matter was always coming up 
before them in different forms. They dealt with it as best they 
could, but they knew well that they were not really tackling the 
problem. So, rather weakly, they simply allowed matters to 
drift there; it is a little difficult to say what else they could 
have done, placed as they were. This attitude of the Working 
Committee was much resented in Bengal, and an impression 
grew up there that the Congress executive, as well as the other 
provinces, were ignoring Bengal. In the hour of her trial 
Bengal seemed to be deserted. This impression was entirely 
wrong, for the whole of India was full of sympathy for the 
people of Bengal, but it did not know how to trtinslate this 
sympathy into effective help. And, besides, every part of India 
had to face its own troubles. 

In the United Provinces the agrarian situation was becoming 
worse. The Provincial Government temporised with the prob- 
lem and delayed a decision about rent and revenue remissions, 
and forcible collections were begun. There were wholesale eject- 
ments and attachments. While we were in Ceylon there had 
taken place two or three agrarian riots when forcible attempts 
were made to collect rents. The riots were jpetty in themsdves, 
but unhappily they resulted in the death of the lantllord or his 
^ent. Gandniji had gone to Naini Tal (also when I was in 
Ceylon) to discuss the agrarian situation with the Governor of 
the U.P., Sir Malcolm Hailey, without much result. When the 
Government announced its remissions, they fell for short of ex- 
pertations, and in the rural areas there was a continuous and an 



278 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ever-growing uproar. As the pressure of landlord plus govern- 
ment grew on the peasantry, and thousands of tenants were 
ejected from their holdings and had their little property seized, 
a situation developed which in most other countries would have 
resulted in a big peasant rising. I think it was very largely due 
to the efforts of the Congress which kept the tenants from in- 
dulging in violent activity. But there was an abundance of 
violence against them. 

There was one bright side to this agrarian upheaval and dis- 
tress. Owing to the very low prices of agricultural produce, the 
poorer classes, including the peasants, unless they were dis- 
possessed, had more to eat than they had had for a long time. 

In the Frontier Province, as in Bengal, the Delhi Pact brought 
no peace. There was a permanent state of tension there, and 
government was a military affair, with special laws and ordi- 
nances and heavy punishments £}r trivial offences. To oppose 
this state of affairs, Abdul Ghaffar Khan led a great agitation, 
and he soon became a bugbear to the Government. From village 
to viUagh he went striding along, carrying his six-feet-three of 
Pathan manhood, and establishmg centres of the ' Redshirts *. 
Wherever he or his principal lieutenants went, they left a trail 
of their ‘ Redshirts ’ behind, and the whole province was soon 
covered by branches of the ‘Khudai Khidmatgar They were 
thoroughly peaceful and, in spite of vague allegations, not a 
single definite charge of violence against them has been estab- 
lished. But whether they were peaceful or not, they had the 
tradition of war and violence behind them, and they lived near 
the turbulent frontier, and this rapid growth of a disdplmed 
movement, closely allied to the Indian national movement, 
thoroughly upset the Government. I do not suppose they ever 
believed in its professions of peace and non-violence. But even 
if they had done so, their reactions to it would only have been 
of fright and annoyance. It represented too much of actual 
and potential power for them to view it with equanimity. 

Of this great movement the unquestioned head was Khan 
Abdul Gbaffar Khan— “ Fakhr-e-Afghan ”, ” Fakr-e-Pathan ”, 
the ‘Pride of the Pathans’, ‘ Gandln-e-Sarhad ’, the ‘Frontier 
Gandhi as he came to be known. He had attained an amazing 
popularity in the Frontier Province by sheer dint of quiet, 
persevering work, undaunted by difficulties or Government 
action. He was, and is, no politidan as politidans go; he knows 
nothing of the tactics and manoeuvres of polirics. A tall, 
straight mian, straight in body and mind, hating fuss and too 
much talk, looking forward to freedom for his Frontier Province 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 279 

people within the framework of Indian freedom, but vague 
about, and uninterested in, constitutions and legal talk. Action 
was necessary to achieve anything, and Mahatma Gandhi had 
taught a remarkable way of peaceful action which appealed to 
him. For action, organisation was necessary; therefore, without 
further argument or much drafting of rules for his organisation, 
he started organising— and with remarkable success. 

He was especially attracted to Gandhiji. At first his shyness 
and desire to keep in the background mafie him keep away 
from him. Later they had to meet to discuss various matters, 
and their contacts grew. It was surprising how this Pathan 
accepted the idea of non-violence, far more so in theory than 
many of us. And it was because he believed in it tW he 
managed to impress his people with the importance of remain- 
ing peaceful in spite of provocation. It would be absurd to say 
that the people of the Frontier Province have given up aU 
thoughts of ever indulging in violence, just as it would be 
absurd to say this of the people generally in any province. The 
masses are moved by waves of emotion, and no one can predict 
what they might do when so moved. But the self discipline that 
the frontier people showed in 1930 and subsequent years has 
been something amazing. 

Government officials and some of our very timid countrymen 
look askance at the ‘ Frontier Gandhi They cannot take him 
at his word, and can only think in terms of deep intrigue. But 
the past years have brought him and other frontier comrades 
very near to Congress workers in other parts of India, and 
between them there has grown up a close comradeship and 
mutual appreciation and regard. Abdul Ghafiar Khan has been 
known and liked for many years in Congress circles. But he has 
grown to be. something more than an individual comrade; more 
and more he has come to be, in the eyes of the rest of India, 
the symbol of the courage and sacrifice of a gallant and indo- 
mitable people, comrades of ours in a common struggle. 

Long before I had heard of Abdul Ghaffor Khan, 1 knew his 
brother. Dr. £[han Sahib. He was a student at St. Thomas’s 
Hospital in London when I was at Cambridge, and later, when 
I was eating my Bar dinners at the Inner Temple he and 1 
became dose friends, and hardly a day went by, when I was in 
London, when we did not meet. I returned to India, leaving 
him in England, and he stayed on for many more Kars, serving 
as a doctor in war-time. I saw him next in Naini Prison. 

The frontier ‘Redshirts’ co-operated with the Congress, but 
they were an organisation apart. It was a peculiar position. 



aSo JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The real connecting link was Abdul GhafFar Khan. This 
question was fuUy considered by the Working Committee in 
consultation with the Frontier Province leaders in the summer 
of 193 1 1 and it was decided to absorb the ‘Redshirts’ into the 
Congress. The ‘ Redshirt ’ movement thus became part of the 
Congress organisation. 

It was Gandhiji’s wish to go to the Frontier Province immedi- 
ately after the Karachi Congress, but the Government did not 
encourage this at all. Repeatedly, in later months, when 
Government officials complained of the doings of the ‘Red- 
shirts’, he pressed to be allowed to go there to find out for 
himself, but to no purpose. Nor was my going there approved. 
In view of the Delhi agreement, it was not considered desirable 
by us to enter the Frontier Province against the declared wish 
of the Government. 

Yet another of the problems before the Working Committee 
was the communal problem. There was nothing new about this, 
although it had a way of reappearing in novel and fantastic 
attire. The Round Table Conference gave it an added impor- 
tance at the time, as it was obvious that the British Government 
would keep it in the forefiront and subordinate all other issues 
to it. The members of the Conference, all nominees of the 
Government, had been mainly chosen in order to give impor- 
tance to the communal and sectional interests, and to lay stress 
on these divergences rather than on the common interests. The 
Government had even refused, pointedly and aggressively, to 
nominate any leader of the Nationalist Muslims. Gandhiji fdt 
that if the Conference, at the instance of the British Govern- 
ment, became entangled in the communal issue right at the 
beginning, the real political and economic issues womd not get 
proper consideration. Under these circtunstances, his going to 
the Conference would be of litde use. He put it to the Working 
Committee, therefore, that he should only go to London if some 
understanding on the communal issue was previously arrived 
at between the parties concerned. His instinct was perfectly 
justified, but nevertheless the Committee overruled him and 
decided that he must not refuse to go merely on the ground 
that we had failed to solve the communal problem. An attempt 
was made hj the Committee, in consultation with representa- 
tives of' various communities, to put forward a proposed solu- 
tion. This had no great success. 

These were some of the major problems before us during that 
summer of 1931, besides a large number of minor issues. From 
all over the country we were continually receiving complaints 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 281 

from local Congress Committees pointing out breaches of the 
Delhi Pact by local ofScials. The more important of these were 
forwarded by us to the Government, which, in its turn, brought 
charges against Congressmen of violation of the Pact. So 
charges and counter<harges were made, and later they were 
published in the Press. Needless to say, this did not result in 
the improvement of the relations between the Congress and 
the Government. 

And yet this friction on petty matters was hy itself of no 
great importance. Its importance lay in its revealing the 
development of a more fundamental conflict, something which 
did not depend on individuals but arose from the very namre 
of our national struggle and the want of equilibrium of our 
agrarian economy, something that could not be liquidated or 
compromised away without a basic change. Our national move- 
ment had originally begun because of the desire of our upper 
middle classes to find means of self expression and self-growth, 
and behind it there was the political and economic urge. It 
spread to the lower middle classes and became a power in the 
land; and then it began to stir the rural masses who were find- 
ing it more and more difficult to keep up, as a whole, even 
their miserable rock-bottom standard of living. The old self- 
sufficient village economy had long ceased to exist. Auxiliary 
cottage industries, ancillary to agriculture, which had relieved 
somewhat the burden on the land, had died off, partly because 
of State policy, but largely because, they could not compete with 
the rising machine industry. The bmden on land grew and the 
growth of Indian industry was too slow to make much differ- 
ence to this. Ill-equipped and almost unawares, the overbur- 
dened village was thrown into the world market and was tossed 
about hither and thither. It could not compete on even terms. 
It was backward in its methods of production, and its land 
system, resulting in a progressive fragmentation of holdings, 
made radical improvement impossible. So the agricultural 
classes, both landlords and tenants, went downhill, except 
during brief periods of boom. The landlords tried to pass on 
the burden to their tenantry, and the growing pauperisation of 
the peasantry— both the petty landholders and the tenants — 
drew them to the national movement. The agricultural prole- 
tariat, the large numbers of landless labourers in rural areas, 
were also attracted; and for all these rural classes ' nationalism ' 
or ' swaraj ’ meant fundamental changes in the land system, 
which would relieve or lessen their burdens and provide land 
for the landless. These desires 'ffiund no clear expression eithd: 



a82 JAWAHASLAL NEHRU 

in the peasantry or in the middle-class leaders of the national 
movement. 

The Civil Disobedience movement of 1930 happened to fit in 
unbeknown to its own leaders at first, with the great world 
slump in industry and agriculture. The rural masses were 
powerfully affected by this sIuim, and they turned to the Con- 
gress and civil disobedience. For them it was not a matter 
of a fine constitution drawn up in London or elsewhere, 
but of a basic change in the land system, especially in the 
zamindari areas. The zamindari system, indeed, seemed to 
have outlived its day and had no stability left in it. But the 
British Government, situated as it was, could not venture to 
undertake a radical change of this land system. Even when 
it had appointed the Royal Agricultural Commission, the terms 
of reference to it barred a discussion of the question of owner- 
ship of land or the system of land tenure. 

Thus the conflict lay in tihe very nature of things in India 
then, and it could not be charmed away by phrases or com- 
promises. Only a solution of the basic problem of land (not to 
mention other vital national issues) could resolve that conflict. 
And of this solution through the instrumentality of the British 
Government there was no possibility. Temporary measures 
might alleviate the distress for a while; severe repression might 
frighten and prevent public expression of it; but neither helped 
in the solution of the problem. 

The British Government, like most governments I suppose, 
has an idea that much of the trouble in India is due to '^agita- 
tors It is a singularly inept notion. India has had a great 
leader during the past fifteen years who has won the affection 
and even adoration of her miuions, and has seemed to impose 
his will on her in many ways. He has played a vitally impor- 
tant part in her recent history, and yet more important than 
he were the people themselves who seemed to follow blindly 
his behests. The people were the principal actors, and behind 
them, pushing them on, were great historical urges which pre- 
pared them and made them ready to listen to their leader’s 
piping. But for that historical setting and political and social 
urges, no leaders or agitatom could have inspired them to 
action. It was Gandhiji’s chief virtue as a leader that he could 
instinctively feel the pulse of the people and know when con- 
ditions were ripe for growth and action. 

In 1930 the nation^ movement in India fitted in fiir a while 
with the growing social forces of the country, and because of 
this a great power came to it, a sense of reality, as if it was 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 283 

indeed marching step by step with history- The Congress 
represented that national movement, and this power and 
strength were reflected in the growth of Congress prestige. 
This was something vague, incalculable, indefinable, but never- 
theless very much present. The peasantry, of course, turned to 
the Congress and gave it its real strength; the lower middle<lass 
formed the backbone of its fighting ranks. Even the upper 
bourgeoisie, troubled by this new atmosphere, thought it safer 
to be friendly with the Congress. The great majority of the 
textile mills in India signed undertakings prescribed by the 
Congress, and were afraid of doing things which might bring on 
them the displeasure of the Congress. Wiile people argued fine 
legal points in London at the first R.T.C., the reality of power 
seemed to be slowly and imperceptibly flowing towards the 
Congress as representing the people. This illusion grew even 
after the Delhi Pact, not because of vainglorious speeches, but 
because of the events of ^930 and after, indeed, probably the 
persons who were most conscious of the difficulties and dangers 
ahead were the Congress leaders, and they took every care not 
to minimise them. 

This vague sense of a dual authority growing in the country 
was naturally most irritating to the Government. It had no 
real basis in fact, as physical power rested completely with the 
authorities, but that it existed psychologically there was no 
doubt. For an authoritarian, irremovable government this was 
an impossible situation, and it was this subde atmosphere that 
really got on their nerves, and not a few odd village speeches or 
processions of which they conrolained later. A dash, therefore, 
seemed inevitable; for the Congress could hardly commit 
voluntary hara-kiri, and the Government could not tolerate this 
atmosphere of duality, and was bent on crushing the Coimress. 
This dash was deferred because of the second Round Table 
Conference. For some reason or other the British Government 
was very^een on having Gandhiji in London, and avoided, as 
far as possible, doing anything to prevent this. 

And yet the sense of conflict grew, and we could fed the 
hardening on the side of Government. Soon after the Delhi 
Pact, Lord Irwin had left India and Lord WiUingdon had come 
in his place as Viceroy. A legend grew up that the new Viceroy 
was a hard and stem person and not so amenable to compromise 
as his predecessor. Many of our polilidans have inherited a 
‘ liberal' habit of thinking of politics in terms of persons rather 
than of prindples. They do not realise that the broad imperial 
policy of the British Government does not depend , on the 



284 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

personal views of the Viceroys. The change of Viceroys, 
therefore, did not and could not make any difference, but, 
as it happened, the policy of Government ^adually changed 
owing to the development of the situation. The Civil Service 
hierarchy had not approved of pacts and dealings with the 
Congress; all their training and authoritarian conceptions of 
government were opposed to this. They had an idea that they 
had added to the Congress influence and Gandhiji’s prestige by 
dealing with him almost as an equal and it was about time 
that he was brought down a pe^ or two. The notion was a 
very foolish one, but then the Indian Civil Service is not known 
for the originality of its conceptions. Whatever the reason, the 
Government stiffened its back and tightened its hold, and it 
seemed to tell us, in the words of the old prophet: My little 
finger is thicker than my father’s loins. Where^ he chastised 
you with whips, I will chastise you with scorpions. 

But the time for chastisement was not yet. If possible the 
Congress was to be represented at the second Round Table Con- 
ference. Twice Gandhiji went to Simla to have long conversa- 
tions with the Viceroy and other officials. They discussed many 
of the points at issue, especially the ‘ Redshirt ’ movement in 
the Frontier and U.P. Agrarian situation, the two prob- 
lems, apart from Bengal, which seemed to be worrying the 
Government most. 

Gandhiji had sent for me from Simla, and I had occasion to 
meet some of the Government of India officials also. My talks 
were limited to the U.P. They were frank talks, and the real 
conflicts, which lay behind the petty charges and counter- 
charges, were discussed. I remember being told that the 
Government had been in a position in February 1931 to crush 
the Civil Disobedience movement absolutely within three 
months at the most. They had perfected their machinery of 
repression and only a push had to be given to it; a button 
pressed. But preferring, if possible, a settlement by agreement 
to one imposed by force, they had decided to try the experi- 
ment of mutual talks which had led to the Delhi agreement. 
If the agreement had not come off, the button was always 
there, and could have been pressed at a moment’s notice. And 
there seemed to be a hint that the button might have to be 
pressed in the not distant future if we did not behave. It was 
all said very courteously and very frankly, and both of us knew 
that, quite apart from us and whatever we might say or do, 
conff ct was ineidtable. 

Another high official paid a compliment to the Congress. We 



FRICTION DURING TRUCE PERIOD 385 

were for the moment discussing wider problems of a non- 
political nature, and he told me that, politics apart, the Con- 
gress had done a great service to India. The usual charge 
Drought against Indians was that they were not good organisers, 
but during 1930 the Congress had done a wonderful bit of 
organising, despite enormous difficulties and opposition. 

Gandhiji’s first visit to Simla was inconclusive in so far as the 
question of going to the Round Table Conference was con- 
cerned. The second visit took place in the last week of August. 
A final decision had to be taken one way or the other, but still 
he found it difficult to make up his mind to leave India. In 
Bengal, in the Frontier Province, and in the U.P., he saw 
trouble ahead, and he did not want to go unless he had some 
assurance of peace in India. At last some kind of an agree- 
ment was arrived at with the Government embodied in a 
statement and some letters that were exchanged. This was 
done at the very last moment to enable him to travel by the 
liner that was carrying the delegates to the R.T.C. Indeed, it 
was after the last moment, in a sense, as the last train had gone. 
A special train firom Simla to Kalka was arranged, and other 
trains were delayed to make the connections. 

I accompanied him from Simla to Bombay, and there, one 
bright morning towards the end of August, I waved goodbye 
to him as he was carried away to the Arabian Sea and the 
far West. That was my last glimpse of him for two years. 



XXXVIII 


THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 

In a recent book an English journalist, who claims to have 
seen a great deal of Mr. Gandhi both in India and at the 
Round Table Conference in London, writes as follows ; 

“The leaders on board the Mooltan knew that there was a 
conspiracy against Mr. Gandhi within the Congress Working 
Committee. They knew that, when the time was ripe. Congress 
might expel him. But Congress, by expelling Mr. Gandhi, would 
expel in all probability half its members; and that was the half 
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar wished to attach to the 
Liberal cause. They never disguised the fact that Mr. Gandhi 
was, in their own words, ‘muddle-headed’. It was worth 
winning a ‘ muddle-headed ’ leader when he could bring with 
him a million ‘ muddle-headed ’ followers.” * 

I do not know how far this quotation represents the views 
of Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Mr. Jayakar, or the other members of 
the R.T.C. on their way to London in 1931. But it does seem 
to me an astonishing thing that any person, journalist or 
'leader', with the least acquaintance with Indian politics, 
could have made such a statement. I was astounded to read it; 
I had not heard of it previously even as a suggestion, though 
that is not difficult to understand, as I have been in prison ffir 
most of the time since then. 

Who were the conspirators and what were they after? It was 
sometimes stated that the President, Vallabhbhai Patel, and I 

^ From Glorney Bolton’s The Tragedy of Gandhi. I have taken 
this extract from a review of the book, as I have had no opportunity 
so far of reading the book itself. I hope that 1 am not doing an 
injustice thereW to the author or to the persons mentioned in the 
quotation. . . . Since writing the above I have read the book. Many 
of the statements of Mr. Bolton and the inferences he draws are, to 
my thinking, wholly unjustified. There are also a number of errors 
of fact, especially in re^d to what the Working Committee did or 
did not do during the Delhi Pact negotiations and after. There is 
also a curious assumption that Mr. \^labhbhai Patel got the Con- 

g ess presidentship m 1931, and thereby the leadership of the 
mgress, in rivalry with Mr. Gandhi. As a matter of fact, during 
the last fifteen years Mr. Gandhi has been a far bigger person in the 
Congress (and, of course, in the country) than any Congress Presi- 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 387 

were among the extremists of the Working Committee, and, 
therefore, I suppose, we must have been numbered among the 
leaders of the conspiracy. Perhaps in the whole of India 
Gandhiji has had no more loyal colleague than Vallabhbhai, a 
man strong and unbending in his work, and yet devoted to 
him personally and to his ideals and policy. I could not claim 
to have accepted these ideals in the same way, but I had had 
the privilege of working with Gandhiji in the closest associa- 
tion, and the idea of intriguing against him in any way is 
a monstrous one. Indeed, that applied to the whole Working 
Committee. That Committee was practically his creation; he 
had nominated it, in consultation with a few colleagues, and 
the election itself was a formal matter. The backbone of the 
Committee consisted of members who had served on it for 
many years and had come to be considered almost as per- 
manent members. There were political dififerences amongst 
them, differences in outlook and in temper; but years of associa- 
tion, the joint shouldering of burdens and the facing of com- 
mon perils, had welded them together. Between diem had 


dent could posably be. He has been the president-maker, and 
invariably his suggestions have been followed. Repeatedly he refused 
to preside and preferred that some of his colleagues and lieutenants 
should do so. I became president of the Congress entirely because 
of him. He had acmally been elected, but he withdrew and forced 
my election. Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel’s election was not normal. We 
had just come out of prison, and the Congress Committees were sdll 
illegal bodies, and could not function in the ordinary way. The 
Working Committee, therefore, took it upon itself to elect the Presi- 
dent of the Karachi Congress. The whole Committee, including 
Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel, begged Mr. Gandhi to accept the president- 
ship and thus to be the titular head, as he was the real head, of the 
Congress dunng the coming critical year. He would not agree, and 
inusted on Mr. Vallabhbhm Patd accepting it. I remember that it 
was pointed out to him at the time that he wanted to be Mussolini 
all me time while others were made by him temporary kings and 
figureheads. 

It is not possible to deal with various other misapprehensions of 
Mr. Bolton in a footnote. One somewhat personal matter I should, 
howev«, like to refer to. He seems to be convinced that the turning- 
point in my father’s political career was his non-election by a 
European dub, and that this led him not only to radical ways but 
to an avoidance of English sodety. This story, though often re- 

f eated, is wholly untrue. The real facts have litde importance, but 
am giving them here to dear up this mystery.- In his early days 
at the Bar, he became a favourite of Sir John Edge, who was then 


288 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

f rown Up firiendship and camaraderie and regard for each other. 

’hey formed not a coalition but an organic unity, and it was 
inconceivable for any one to intrigue against the other. 
Gandhiji dominated the Committee, and every one looked to 
him for guidance. That had been so for many years; it was 
even more marked in 1931 after the great success that had 
attended our struggle in 1930. 

What could have been the purpose of the ‘ extremists ’ in the 
Working Committee to try to ^ expel’ him? Perhaps it was 
thought that he was considered too compromising a person 
and was, therefore, an encumbrance. But without mm where 
was the struggle, where was Civil Disobedience and Satyagraha? 
He was part of the living movementr indeed, he was the move- 
ment itself. So far as that struggle was concerned everything 
depended on him. The nation^ struggle, of course, was not 
his creation, nor did it depend on any individual; it had deeper 
roots. But that particular phase of the struggle, of which avil 
disobedience was the symbol, was singularly dependent on 
him. Parting with him meant winding up that movement and 
building anew on &esh foimdations. That would have been a 
difficult enough proposition at any time; in 1931 it was im- 
thinkable for any one. 

It is amusing to think how, according to some people, some of 

the Chief Jusdce of the Allahabad High Court. Sir John suggested 
to him that he should join the Allahabad (European) Club, and 
wanted to propose his name himself. My father manked him for 
his kindly suggesdon, but pointed out that there was bound to be 
trouble, as many English people would object to him as an Indian 
and might vote against him. Any subaltern could bladtball him, 
and he would rather not offer himself for election under these cir- 
cumstances. Sir John even suggested that he would get the Brigadier- 
General commanding the AQahabad area to second my mther's 
name. Ultimately, however, the matter dropped, and my father’s 
name was not proposed, as he made it dear that he was not prepared 
to risk an insint. This inddent, far from embittering him against 
English people, drew him to Sir John Edge, and most of his En ^sh 
friendships and connections grew up in subsequent years. This 
occurred in the ’nineties, and it was nearly a quarter of a century 
later that he became the radical poliddan and non-co-operator. The 
change was not sudden, but the Punjab Martial Law hiuried up 
the process, and Mr. Gandhi’s influence at the right moment made 
a difference. Even then he had no deliberate intention of giving up 
social contacts with Englishmen. But where Engjlishmen are largely 
offidals, non-co-operadon and dvil disobedience inevitably prevent 

istirh 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 289 

US were conspiring to drive him out of the Congress in 1931. 
Why should we conspire when a gentle hint to him was 
sufficient? A mere suggestion from him that he would retire 
has always been enough to upset the Working Committee as 
well as the country. He was so much part of our struggle that 
the very thought that he might leave us was unbearable. We 
hesitated to send him to London, because in his absence the 
burden in India would fall on us, and we did not welcome the 
prospect. We were so used to shifting it on to his shoulders. 
For many of us, in the Working Committee and outside, the 
bonds that tied us to Gandhiji were such that even failure with 
him seemed preferable to the winning of some temporary ad- 
vantage without him. 

Whether Gandhiji is ‘ muddle-headed * or not we can leave to 
our Liberal friends to decide. It is undoubtedly true that his 
politics are sometimes very metaphysical and difficult to imder- 
stand. But he had shown himself a man of action, a man of 
wonderful courage, and a man who could often deliver the 
goods: and if ' muddle-hcadedness ’ yields such practical results 
perhaps it compares not unfavourably with the ‘practical 

? olitics ’ that begin and end in the study and in select circles. 

rue, his millions of followers were ‘muddle-headed’. They 
knew nothing of politics and constitutions; they could think 
only in terms of their human needs, of food and shelter and 
clothing and land. 

It has always seemed to me very remarkable how eminent 
foreign journalists, trained in the observation of human nature, 
go wrong in India. Is it because of the ineradicable impression 
‘of their childhood that the East is utterly difrerent and cannot 
be judged by ordinary standards? Or is it, in the case of Eng- 
lishmen, the kink of empire that governs their vision and 
distorts their view? They wiU believe almost anything, however 
unlikely it might be, without any surprise, for everything is 
deemed to be possible in the mysterious East. They publish 
books sometimes containing able surveys and acute bits of 
observation and, in between, amazing lapses. 

I remember reading, just on the eve of Gandhiji’s departure 
for Europe in 1931, an article by a well-known Paris correspon- 
dent (at the time) of a London newspaper. The article was about 
India, and in the course of it he referred to an incident which, 
according to him, took place in 1921 during the non-co-operation 
days when the Prince of Wales visited India. It was stated that 
in some place (probably it was Delhi) Mahatma Gandhi burst in 
dramatically and unannounced on the Prince, fell on his knees 
u 



ago ‘JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

clasped the Prince’s feet and, weeping copiously, begged him to 
give peace to this unhappy land. None of us, not even Gandhiji, 
had heard of this remarkable story, and I wrote to the journalist 
pointing this out to him. He expressed regret, but added that 
he had got it from a reliable source. What astonished me was 
that he should have given credence, without any attempt at 
an enquiry, to a story on the face of it highly improbable, and 
which no one who knew anything about Mr. Gandhi, the Con- 
gress, or India could believe. It is, unhappily, true that there 
are many Englishmen in India who, in spite of long residence, 
know nothing about the country or about the Congress or about 
Gandhiji. The story was an incredible and ridiculous one, com- 
parable perhaps to a fanciful account of the Archbishop 
of Canterbury suddenly" bursting in upon Mussolini, stand- 
ing on his head, and waving his legs in the air in token of 
greeting. 

A recent report in a newspaper gives another type of 
story. It is stated that Gandhiji has got huge funds, running 
into millions of" pounds, secretly deposited with friends, and 
the Congress is after this money. It (the Congress) is afraid that 
if Ganmiiji retires from its membership it might lose these 
hoards. The story is on the face of it absurd, for he never keeps 
funds personally or secretly, and whatever he has collected he 
hands over to a public organisation. He has the harm’s instinct 
for careful accounting, and all his collections are publicly 
audited. 

This rumour is probably based on the sto^ of the famous 
crore of rupees which were collected by the Congress in ipai. 
This sum, which sounds big but was not much if spread out 
all over India, was utilised for national universities and schools, 
promotion of cottage industries and especially khaddar, un- 
touchability work and a variety of other constructive schemes. 
Much of it was tied up in ear-marked funds, which still exist, 
and are used for their special purposes. The rest of the col- 
lections were left with the local committees, and spent for 
Congress organisational and political work. The non-co- 
operation movement was financed by it, as weU as Congress 
work for a few years after. We have been taught by Ganmiiji, 
as wdl as by the poverty of the country, to carry on our 
political movement with exceedingly limited means. Most of 
our work has been wholly voluntary, and where payment has 
been made ,it .has been on a starvation scale. The best of our 
•workers; uilivetsity graduates with families to support, have been 
paid less than the unemployment allowance in England. I 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE Spi 

doubt if any political or labour movement on a la^e scale 
has been run anywhere with so little money as the Congress 
movement during the last fifteen years. And all Congress 
funds and accounts have been publicly audited from year to 
year, no part of them being secret, except during the civil 
disobedience periods, when the Congress was an illegal organisa- 
tion. 

Gandhiji had gone to London as the sole representative of 
the Congress to the Round Table Conference. We had decided, 
after long debate, not to have additional representatives. Partly 
this was due to our desire to have our best men in India at 
a very critical time, when the most tactful handling of the 
situation was necessary. We felt that, in spite of the R.T.C. 
meeting in London, die centre of gravity lay in India, and 
developments in India would inevitably have their reactions in 
London. We wanted to check xmtoward developments, and to 
keep our organisation in proper condition. This was, however, 
not the real reason for our sending only one representative. If 
we had thought it necessary and advisable, we would certainly 
have sent omers also. Deliberately we refrained ftom doing 
so. 

We were not joining the Round Table Conference to talk 
interminably about the petty details of a constitution. We 
were not interested in those details at that stage, and they could 
only be considered when some agreement on fundamental 
matters had been arrived at with the British Government. The 
real question was how much power was to be transferred to 
a democratic India. Any solicitor almost could do the drafting 
and the settlemmt of details afterwards. The Congress position 
was a fairly simple one on these basic matters, and there was 
no great room for argument over it. It seemed to us that the 
dignified course would be for one representative, and that one 
our leader, to go and explain that position, to show the essential 
reasonableness of it and the inevitability of it, and to try to 
win over, if he could, the British Government to it. That was 
very difBcult, we knew; hardly possible as matters stood then, 
but then we had no other alternative. We could not give up 
that position and our principles and ideals, to which we were 
pledged and in which we firmly believed. If by a strange 
chance a basis of agreement was found on those fundamentals, 
the rest followed easily enough. Indeed, it had been settled 
between us that, in case of sum an agreement, Gandhiji would 
immediately summon to London some or even all the members 
of the Working Committee, so that we could then share the 



apa JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

work of detailed negotiation. We were to keep ourselves in 
readiness for that summons, and even. travel by air if necessary. 
We could thus be with him within ten days of the call. 

But if there was no initial agreement on fundamentals, then 
the question of further and detailed negotiations did not arise, 
nor was it necessary for additional Congress representatives to 
go to the R.T.C, So we decided to send Gandhiji only. One 
other member of the Working Committee, Mrs. Sarojini 
Naidu, also attended the R.T.C. , but she did not do so as a 
Congress representative. She was invited as a representative of 
Indian womanhood, and the Working Committee permitted 
her to go as such. 

The British Government had, however, no intention of falling 
in with our wishes in the matter. Their policy was to postpone 
the consideration of fundamental questions and to make the 
Conference exhaust itself, more or less, on minor and immaterial 
matters. Even when major matters were considered, the 
Government held its hand, refused to commit itself, and 

f )romised to express its opinion after mature consideration 
ater on. Their trump card was, of course, the communal issue 
and they played it for all it was worth. It dominated the Con- 
ference. 

The great majority of the Indian members of the Conference 
fell in, most of them vdllingly, some unwillingly, with this 
official manoeuvring. They were a motley assembly. Few of 
them represented any but themselves. Some were able and 
respected; of many others this could not be said. As a whole 
they represented, politically and socially, the most reactionary 
elements in India. So backward and reactionary were they that 
the Indian Liberals, so very moderate and cautious in India, 
shone as progressives in their company. They represented 

f roups of vested interests in India who were tied up with 
ritish i^erialism, and looked to it for advancement or pro- 
tection. The most prominent representation came from various 
' minority ’ and ‘majority ’ groups on the communal issue. This 
consisted of a number of upper-class irreconcilaliles who, it was 
notorious, could never agree amongst themselves. PoUtically 
they were thorough reactionaries, and their sole interest seemed 
to be to gain a communal advantage, even though that might 
involve a surrender of political advance. Indeed they pro- 
claimed that they would not agree to having any greater 
measure of political freedom unless and ■until their communal 
demands were satisfied. That was an extraordinary sight, and 
it revealed with painful clarity the depths to which a subject 



Tj ROVNU TABLE CONi-EKENCE 


293 

people could fall, and how they could be made pawns in the 
imperialist game. It was true that the Indian people could not 
be said to be represented by that crowd of highnesses, lords, 
knights and others of high degree. The members of the Round 
Table Conference had been nominated by the British Govern- 
ment, and, from its own point of view', the Government had 
chosen well. And yet the mere fact that the British authorities 
could use and exploit us so, showed the weakness of our people, 
and the strange facility with which they could be side-tracked 
and made to undo each other’s efforts. Our upper classes were 
still wrapped up in the ideology of our imperialist rulers, and 
played their game. Was it because they did not see through 
it? Or did they, knowing its real significance, accept it 
knowingly because of their fear of democracy and freedom in 
India? 

It was fitting that in this assembly of vested interests— im- 
perialist, feudal, financial, industrial, religious, communal — ^the 
leadership of the British Indian delegation should usually fall 
to the Aga Khan, who in his own person happened to combine 
an these interests in some degree. Closely associated as he has 
been with British imperialism and the British ruling class for 
over a generation, residing chiefly in England, he could 
thoroughly appreciate and represent our rulers’ interests and 
view-point. He would have been an able representative of 
Imperialist England at that Round Table Conference. The 
irony of it was that he was supposed to represent India. 

The scales were terribly loaded against us at that Conference 
and, little as we expected from it, we watched its proceedii^s 
with amazement and ever-growing disgust. We saw the pitiml 
and absurdly inadequate attempts to scratch the surface of 
national and economic problems, the pacts and intrigues and 
manceuvres, the joining of hands of some of our own country- 
men with the most reactionary elements of the British Conser- 
vative Party, the endless talk over petty issues, the deliberate 
shelving of all that really mattered, the continuous playing into 
the hands of the big vested interests and especially British 
imperialism, the mutual squabbles, varied by feasting and 
mutual admiration. It was ail jobbery-big jobs, little jobs, 
jobs and seats for the Hindus, for the Muslims, for the Sikhs, 
for the Anglo-Indians, for the Europeans; but all jobs for the 
upper classes, the masses had no look-in. Opportunism was 
rampant, and different groups seemed to prowl about like 
hungry wolves waiting for their prey— the spoils under the new 
constitution. The very conception of freedom had taken the 



294 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

form of large-scale jobbery — ' indianisation ’ it was called — more 
jobs for Indians in the army, in the civil services, etc. No one 
thought in terms of independence, of real freedom, of a trans- 
fer of power to a democratic India, of the solution of any 
of the vital and urgent economic problems facing the Indian 
people. Was it for this that India had struggled so manfully? 
Must we exchange this murky air for the rare atmosphere of 
fine idealism and sacrifice? 

In that gilded and crowded hall Gandhiji sat, a very lonely 
figure. His dress, or absence of it, distinguished him from all 
others, but there was an even vaster difference between his 
thought and outlook and that of the well-dressed folk around 
him. His was an extraordinarily difficult position in that Con- 
ference, and we wondered from afar how he could tolerate it. 
But with amazing patience he carried on, and made attempt 
after attempt to find some basis of agreement. One charac- 
teristic gesture he made, which suddenly showed- up how com- 
munalism really covered political reaction. He did not like 
many of the communal demands put forward on behalf of the 
Muslim delegates to the Conference: he thought,' and his own 
Muslim Nationalist colleagues thought so, that some of these 
demands were a bar to freedom and democracy. But still he 
offered to accept the whole lot of them, without question or 
argument, if the Muslim delegates there joined forces with him 
and the Congress on the political issue, that is, oh indepen- 
dence. 

That offer was a personal offer because he could not, situ- 
ated as he was, bind down the Congress. But he promised 
to urge Congress to agree to it, and no one who knew his 
position in the Congress could doubt that he would succeed in 
getting Congress approval. The offer, however, was not 
accepted, and indeed it is a little difficult to imagine the Aga 
Khan standing for Indian independence. This demonstrated 
that the real trouble was not communal, although the com- 
munal issue loomed large before the Conference. It was political 
reaction that barred all progress and sheltered itself behind 
the communal issue. Bjr careful selection of its nominees for 
the Conference, the British Government had collected these 
reactionary elements, and by controlling the procedure, they 
had made the communal issue the major issue, and an. issue 
on which no agreement was possible between the irreconcilables 
gathered there. 

The British Government succeeded in its oideavour, and 
thereby demonstrated that it still has, not only the physical 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 295 

Strength to uphold its Empire, but also the cunning and state- 
craft to carry on the imperial tradition for a while longer. The 
people of India failed, although the Round Table Conference 
neither represented them nor was it a measure of their strength. 
They failed because they had no ideological background of 
what they were striving for, and could be easily misled and 
side-tracked. They failed because they did not feel themselves 
strong enough to discard the vested interests that encumbered 
their progress. They failed because of an excess of religiosity, 
and the ease with which communal feelings could be roused. 
They failed, in short, because they were not advanced enough 
and strong enough to succeed. 

There was no question of iailure or success at this Round 
Table Conference itself. Little was expected of it, and yet it 
made a difference. The previous conference, the first of its 
kind, had attracted very little attention in India or elsewhere 
for the Civil Disobedience movement absorbed attention. The 
nominees of the British Government who went to the Con- 
ference of 1930 often went to the accompaniment of black 
flags and imcomplimentary slogans. But in 1931 all was 
different, and it was different because Gandhiji went as the 
representative of the Congress, and as a leader whom millions 
followed. This gave prestige to the Conference, and India fol- 
lowed its career with far greater interest; and any failure, what- 
ever the cause, redounded now to the discredit of India. We 
understood then why the British Government had attached so 
much importance to Gandhiji’s participation in it. 

The Conference itself, with all its scheming and opportunism 
and futile meandering, was no feilure for India. It vras consti- 
tuted so as to fail, and the people of India could hardly be 
made responsible for its failing. But it succeeded in diverting 
world attention ftom real issues in India, and, in India itself 
it produced disillusion and depression and a sense of humi- 
liation. It gave a' handle to reactionary forces to raise their 
heads again. 

Success or failure was to come to the people of the country 
by events in India itself. The powerful nationalist movement 
could not fade away, because of distant manoeuvring in 
London. Nationalism represented a real and immediate need 
of the middle classes and peasantry, and by its means they 
sought to solve their problems. Ihe movement could thus 
either succeed, fulfil its function, and give place to some other 
movement, which would carry the people further on the road 
to progress and fireedom, or else it could be forcibly suppressed 



296 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

for rlie rime being. That struggle was to come in India 
soon after, and was to result in temporary disablement. The 
second Round Table Conference could not affect this struggle 
much, but it did create an atmosphere somewhat unfavourable 



XXXIX 


AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE 
UNITED PROVINCES 

As one of the General Secretaries of the Congress and a mem- 
ber of the Working Committee, I was in touch with All-India 
politics and occasionally had to do some touring also, though 
I avoided this as far as possible. As our burdens and respon- 
sibilities grew, the meetings of the Working Committee became 
longer and longer, till they developed into a regular sessions of 
two weeks at a time, It was no longer a question of merely 
passing resolutions of criticism, but of controlling numerous 
different kinds of constructive activities of a vast and many- 
sided organisation, and of tackling, from day to day, difficult 
problems on whose handling depended conflict or otherwise 
on a nation-wide scale. 

My chief activities, however, lay in the United Provinces 
where the agrarian situation absorbed Congress attention. The 
U.P. Provincial Congress Committee consisted of over a 
hundred and fifty members, and met every two or three 
months. Its Executive Council, consisting of about fifteen 
members, met frequently and was in charge of its agrarian 
department. 

In the second half of the year 1931, a special Agrarian Com- 
mittee was appointed by this Coimcil. It is interesting to find 
that several zamindars were prominently associated with the 
Council and this Committee throughout, and all steps were 
taken with their approval. Indeed, the President of our Pro- 
vincial Committee for the year (and consequently the ex-officio 
head of the Executive Council and the Agrarian Committee) was 
Tasadduq Ahmad Khan Sherwani, who belong to a well-known 
zamindari family. The General Secretary, Sri Prakasa, as well 
as several leading members of the Council were also zamiridars, 
or were members of zamindari families. The remaining mem- 
bers were middle-class professional people. There was not a 
single tenant or poor peasant representative in our provincial 
executive. Peasants were to be found in our District Com- 
mittees, but they seldom sxywived the various elections which 
ultimately resulted in the formation of the Executive Council 
for the province, which was a body entirely dominated by the 
middle-class intelligentsia with a strong zamindari leaven in it. 

*97 



298 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was thus far from being an extreme body in any sense of the 
word, and certainly not so on the agrarian issue. 

My own position in the province was that of a member of 
the Executive Council and its Agrarian Committee, and 
nothing more. I took a prominent part in our consultations 
and our other work, but in no sense did I take the leading 
part. Indeed no one can be said to have played the leading 
part in our province, as we had long accustomed ourselves to 
corporate and joint action, stress being always laid on the 
organisation and not on the individual. The president for the 
year was our temporary head, and represented us, but even he 
had no special authority. 

I also functioned locally as a member of the Allahabad 
District Congress Committee. This Committee, under the 
leadership of its president, Purushottan Das Tandon, played an 
important part in the development of the agrarian situation. 
In 1930 it had given the lead in starting the no-tax campaign 
in the province. This was not because Allahabad district was 
the area affected most by the agricultural depression; the 
Taluqadari districts of Oudh were much worse 'off. But Alla- 
habad district was better organised and more politically con- 
scious, because Allahabad city was a centre of political activity 
and many prominent workers were frequently visiting the sur- 
rounding villages. 

Immediately after the Delhi Pact of March 1931, we had 
hastened to send workers and notices to the rural areas, inform- 
ing the peasantry that civil disobediepce and the movement 
were off. On political grounds there was no bar to their pay- 
ment of rent, and we advised them to pay. But we added that 
in view of the tremendous fall in prices we were of opinion that 
big remissions should be given to them, and we proposed that 
we should jointly try to obtain these. Even in normal times the 
rent was often an almost unbearable burden; with the slump 
in prices it was im|)ossible to make full payment or even any- 
thing approaching it. We held conferences with representatives 
of the peasantry and, as a tentative proposal, suggested a 
general remission of fifty per cent., and in some cases more 
man that. 

We tried to separate the agrarian issue entirely from the 
general question of civil disobedience. We wanted, at any rate 
m 1931, to consider it from the eeonomic plane only, divorced 
from the political. This was difficult, as the two were anyhow 
intimate^ connected, and in the past had been closely asso- 
ciated. We, as a Congress organisation, were also definitely 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 2gg 

political. For the moment we tried to function as a kind of 
peasants' Union (with non-peasants and even zamindars in con- 
troll) but we could not and did not desire to give up our 
political character, and the Government looked upon everything 
we did as political. The shadow of future civil disobedience 
also lay ahead of us, and if this materialised there could be 
no doubt that economics and politics would march together, 
hand in hand. 

In spite of all these obvious hindrances, it was our effort 
throughout, fi:om the time of the Delhi Pact onwards, to keep 
the agrarian question apart from the political struggle. The 
real reason for this was mat the Delhi Pact did not put an end 
to it, and we wanted to make this perfectly clear to the Govern- 
ment as well as the people. In the course of the Delhi con- 
versations, Gandhiji had, I believe, assured Lord Irwin that 
even if he did not go to the Round Table Conference he would 
not resume civil disobedience while the Conference was sitting. 
He would ask the Congress to give the Conference every chance, 
and to a'wait its result. But even then Gandhiji made it clear 
that this assurance did not apply to any local economic struggle 
that might be forced on us. The U.P. agrarian situation was 
before us all then, because organised action had been taken in 
the U.P.; as a matter of fact the peasantry all over India had 
been similarljr affected. During Ae Simla talks Gandhiji re- 
peated this point, and mention was made of it in the published 
correspondence.^ On the very eve of sailing for Europe, he 


^ The following letters were integral parts of the Simla Agree- 
ment of August 37, 1931 : 


Mr, Gandhi to Mr. 
Government of India. 


Emerson, Secretary, Home Department, 
Simla, 

August 37, 1931. 


“ Dear Mr. JSmerson, 

" I have to acknowledge with thanks your letter of even date, 
enclosing a new , draft. Sir Cowasji has also communicated to me 
the amendments suggested by you. My colleagues and I have care- 
fully considered the amended draft, which we are prepared to 
accept, subject to the following remarks : 

“In paragraph 4, it is not possible for me on behalf of the 
Congress to subscribe to the position taken up by the Government, 
For we feel that where, in the opinion of the Congress, a grievance 
arising out of the working of me Setdeifient is not redressed, an 
inquiry is a necessity of the case, because of the fact that rivil 
disobedience remains under suspension during the pendency of the 



300 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

made it clear that, quite apart from the Round Table Confer- 
ence and the political issues, it might be necessary for 
•the Congress to protect the people’s, and especially the 
peasantry’s, rights in economic struggles. He had no desire to 


Delhi Pact. But if the Government of India and Local Govern- 
ments are not prepared to grant an inquiry, my colleagues and I 
have no objection to the clause remaining. The result will be that, 
whilst the Congress will not press for an inquiry in regard to ‘ the 
other matters hitherto raised* on its behalf, if unfortunately any 
grievance is so acutely felt that it becomes the paramount duty 
of the Congress to seek some method of relief, in the absence of 
an inquiry, in the shape of defensive riirect action, the Congress 
should be held free to adopt such remedy, notwithstanding the 
suspension of dvil disobedience. 

“I need hardly assure the Government that it would be the 
constant endeavour of the Congress to avoid direct action and to 
gain relief by discussion, persuasion, and the like. The statement 
of the Congress position given here has become necessary in order 
to avoid any possible misunderatandhig in the future or a charge 
of breach of faith on the part of the Congress. In the event of a 
successful issue to the present discussions, I assume that the 
communique, this letter, and your reply would be simultaneously 
published. 

" Yours sincerely, 

" M. K. Gandhi.” 

Mr, Emerson to Mr. Gandhi. 

Simla, 

August 37, 1931. 

" Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

" I write to thank you for your letter of to-day’s date, in which 
you accept the draft communique, subject to the observations con- 
tained in your letter. The Govemor-General-in-Coundl has noted 
that it is not the intention of the Congress to press for any inquiry 
into those matters hitherto raised by them, but that while you give 
an assurance that it will be the constant endeavour of the Congress 
to avoid direct action, and to gain relief by discussion, persuasion, 
and the like, you wish to make dear the position of the Congress 
in regard to any future action that they may decide to take. I am 
to say that the Governor-General-in-Coundl shares your hope that 
no resort to direct action will be taken. In regard to the general 
position of Government, I am to refer you to the letter of His 
Excellency the Viceroy dated August 19 to your address. I am to 
say that the communique, your letter of to-day’s date, and this 
reply ■will be published simultaneously by Government. 

“ Yours sincerely, 

«H. W Pm- --on” 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 3OI 

indulge in such a struggle; he wanted to avoid it; but, if it 
became inevitable, it must be undertaken. We could not desert 
the masses. His point was that the Delhi Pact, which applied 
to general and political civil disobedience, did not bar this. 

I mention this because the charge has been repeatedly brought 
against the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee and its leaders 
that they broke the Delhi Pact by re-starting a no-tax campaign. 
Conveniently for its makers, this charge was brought when 
those who were charged and could have answered it were all 
locked up in gaol and every newspaper and press was strictly 
censored. Quite apart from the tact that the U.P. Committee 
never started a no-tax campaign in 1931, the point which I wish 
to make clear is that even such a campaign for an economic 
purpose, and apart firom civil disobedience, would have been 
no breach of the Delhi Pact. Whether it was justified or not 
on the merits was another matter; but the peasantry were as 
much entitled to start it as the workers of a factory are to strike 
for an economic grievance. This was our posidon throughout 
from Delhi to Simla, and it was not only understood but appre- 
ciated by the Government. 

The agricultural slump of 1929 and onwards came as a climax 
to a steadily worsening situadon. For many years past world 
agricultural prices had tended to go up, and Indian agriculture, 
tacked on to the world market, had shared in this tendency. 
The disproportion in the development of industry and agricul- 
ture aU over the world had everywhere sent up agricultural 
prices. As these prices went up in India, the Government 
revenue and the landlord’s rent went up also, so that the actual 
cultivator hardly profited by this upward tendency. On the 
whole, the peasantry, except in some favoured areas, deterio- 
rated. In the United Provinces rent went up much faster than 
revenue, the proportion of relative increase of these two during 
the first thirty years of this century being nearly (to quote 
firom memory) five to one. Thus while the Government’s 
income from land increased substantially, the landlord’s income 
increased far more, and the tenant remained, as ever, at starva- 
tion level. Even where prices fell or there were local natural 
calamities— drought, floods, locusts, haU, etc. — ^the rent and 
revenue remained at the original figures, some remissions being 
granted very hesitatingly, for the season only. The level of the 
rents was at the best of times much too high; at other times it 
became xmbearable without recourse to the money-lender. Agri- 
cultural .debt grew. 

All the agncultural classes— landlords, peasant proprietors, 



303 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tenants — ^became the victims of the money-lender, who fulfilled, 
under existing conditions, an indispensable function in the 
primitive village economy. He exploited that function very 
much to his own advantage, and his stranglehold grew on the 
land and those connected with it. There were few checks on 
him. The law helped him, and he stuck to the letter of his 
bond and claimed, and received, his pound of flesh. Gradually 
land passed to him both from many of the smaller landlords 
and the peasant proprietors, and the money-lender blossomed 
out himself as a proprietor of land on a large scale, a big 
zamindar, one of the landed gentry. The peasant proprietor, 
who had so far cultivated his own land, now became almost a 
serf of the bania-zamindar or sahukar. The tenant’s position 
was even worse. He was also a sahukar^s serf or he joined the 
increasing army of the dispossessed landless proletariat. The 
financier or banker who thus developed into a landowner had 
no living contacts with the soil or the tenantry. He was usually 
a city dweller, where he carried on his banking business, and he 
delegated the collection of rent to agents who did the work 
with the callousness and inhumanity of machines. 

The progressive growth of agricultural indebtedness was in 
itself evidence of the unsoundness and instability of the land 
system. The vast majority of the population had no reserves 
of any kind, physical or material, no power of resistance, and 
lived on the verge of starvation. They could not stand any 
unusual occurrence of an unfavourable character. An epidemic 
would sweep away millions. In 1939 and 1930 it was estimated 
by the officially-appointed Provincial BanMng Inquiry Com- 
mittee that the agricultural indebtedness of India (including 
Burma) was 860 crores of rupees. This figure included the debts 
of landlords, peasant proprietors and tenants, but it was mainly 
the debt of actual cultivators. Government currency policy has 
entirely favoured the creditor classes, and this has added to the 
heavy burden of the debt. Thus the fixing of the rupee ratio 
at one shilling and sixpence, instead of sixteen pence, in spite 
of vehement Indian opposition, meant increasing the agricultural 
debt by 13 j 4 per cent., or by about 107 crores.^ 

* The figure of 860 crores for ’the agricultural indebtedness of 
India is probably a gross under-estimate, and, in any event, it must 
have gone up considerably during the last four or five years. The 
Punjab part of the figure, estimated by the Punjab Provincial Bank- 
ing Inquiry Committee in 1939, was ,135 crores. The report of the 
Select Committee on the Punjab Relief from Indebtedness Bill 
(presented in October 1934) states that “the debt burden of the 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 303 

After the post-war spurt in prices there was a gradual but 
continuing decline, and agrarian conditions worsened. On top 
of this came the catastrophe of 1929 and after. 

Our contention in the United Provinces in 1931 was that rents 
should correspond with prices; that is to say, that rent should 
be reduced to a figure which prevailed in the past when prices 
were as low as in 1931. Approximately this was so thirty years 
earlier, about 1901. This was a rough test and its application 
was not easy as there were many classes of tenants — occupancy, 
non-occupancy, sub-tenants, etc. — and the worst sufferers were 
the lowest grade of tenants. The only other test— and this was 
undoubtedly the fairest— was to find out the capacity of the 
tenant to pay after making allowances for his cost of produc- 
tion and living wage. But according to this latter test, however 
low the living expenses are kept, a very large number of hold- 
ings in India become wholly uneconomic, and, as we showed 
by some instances in the U.P. in 1931, many could not pay any 
rent at aU without selling property (if there was any to be sold) 
or borrowing money at a high rate of interest. 

Our U.P. Congress Committee’s first and tentative proposal 
was a general remission of 50 per cent, for all occupancy tenants 
and a higher percentage for ^e other tenants who were worse 
off. When Gandhi ji came to the U.P. in May 1931 and visited 
the Governor, Sir Malcolm Hailey, there was some difference 
of opinion between them and they could not agree. Soon 
afterwards he (Gandhiji) issued appeals to the zamindars and 
tenants of the U.P. In the latter appeal he asked the tenants 
to pay as much as they could and suggested some figure, which’ 
was a somewhat higher figure than the one we had previously 

f iven. Our Provincial Committee accepted Gandhiji’s figure, 
ut that did not help matters much, as Government would not 
agree to it. 

The Provindal Government was in a difficult position. The 
land tax was its chief source of income, and it could not permit 
this to vanish away or reduce it very greatly without facing 
bankruptcy. On the other hand, it had a wholesome. fear of 
an agrarian upheaval and wanted to soothe the tenantry, as ftir 


agriculturists is stupendous, being modestly estimated at Rs.aoo 
crores.” This new figure is almost 50 per cent, in excess of the 
Banking Inquiry Committee’s estimate. If tiiis rate of increare 
holds good for the other provinces also, the present (1934) all-India 
figure for agricultural indebtedness should be over 1200 crores of 
rupees (a crore=>ten Bullions). 



304 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

as it could, by substantial rent remissions. It was not easy to 
have it both w^s. Between the State and the cultivator stood 
the zamindar, from the economic point of view a useless and 
unnecessary addition, and it might have been possible to pro- 
tect and help both the State and the cultivator at his expense. 
But the British Government, constituted as it is, could not for 
political reasons alienate one of the few classes which clung on 
to it. 

At last the Provincial Government announced the remissions 
both for the landlords and the tenants, These were based on 
some complicated system, and it was not easy at first to make 
out what they were. It was clear, however, that they were far 
firom enough. Besides, they related to the current demand and 
said nothing at all about the arrears due from the tenant or his 
debts. It was obvious that if the tenant was not in a position to 
pay the rent for the current half-year, much less could he pay 
arrears for past years or old debts. As a rule, it was the land- 
lord’s custom to credit all realisations to past arrears. This pro- 
cedure was dangerous from the tenant’s point, of view, for he 
could always be proceeded against and dispossessed of his land 
on the ground of non-payment of some part of the amount due 
from him. 

The Provincial Congress Executive was put in an extraordi- 
narily difficult position. We were convinced that the tenants 
were being treated very unfeirly and yet we were helpless in 
the matter. We did not want to take the responsibility of advis- 
ing the tenants not to pay. We went on repeating that they 
should pay as much as they could and generally sympathising 
with them in their misfortunes and trying to hearten them. We 
agreed with them that the demand, even after the remissions, 
was too much for them. 

The machinery of coercion, legal as well as illegal, began to 
move. Ejectment suits brought against thousands, attachments 
of cows, bullocks, personal property, beatings by agents of 
landlords. Large numbers of tenants paid part of the demand; 
according to them, this was as much as they could pay then. 
Very probably in some instances they could have paid more, 
but it was quite obvious that for the great majority this was a 
heavy burden. These part payments did not save them. The 
steam-roller of the law went on advancing, pitilessly crushing 
aU that came in its way. Ejectment suits were decreed, even 
though part payment had taken place; attachments and sale of 
cattle and personal property continued. The tenants could not 
have been worse off if they had not paid at all. Indeed, they 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 305 

would have been slightly better off, for they would have saved 
that much money at least. 

They came to us in large numbers, complaining bitterly, tell- 
ing us that they had followed our advice and paid what they 
could, and this was the consequence. In Allahabad district 
alone many thousands had been dispossessed, and some pro- 
ceeding or other had been launched against many thousands of 
others. The District Congress Committee office was surrounded 
all day by a distraught crowd. My own house was equally be- 
sieged, and often I felt like running away and hiding myself 
somewhere, anywhere, to escape this dreadful predicament. 
Many tenants who came to us bore marks of injury, said to 
have been inflicted by aamindars’ agents. We had them treated 
in hospital. What could they do? What could we do? We sent 
long letters to the U.P. Government. Our Committee had ap- 
pointed Govind BaUabh Pant as our liaison officer to keep in 
touch with the Provincial Government at Naini Tal or Luck- 
now. He was constantly writing to the Government. Our pro- 
vincial President, Tasadduq A. K. Sherwani, also wrote ftom 
time to time, and so did 1. 

Another c^culty arose with the ^proach of the monsoon 
in June-July. That was the tilling an<i sowing season. Were the 
tenants, who had been dispossessed, to sit idle and watch their 
land lie fallow in front of them? This was very difficult for a 
peasant; it went against the grain. The dispossession in many 
cases was legal and technical and not an actual moving away. 
A court decree had been passed and nothing else had been 
done. Or were they to plough the land and thereby commit an 
offence of criminal trespass, perhaps leading to a petty riot? To 
watch others till their old land was also very difficult for the 
peasants to tolerate. They came to us for advice. What advice 
could we give? 

I put this difficulty to a high official in the Government of 
India, when I visited Simla with Gandhiji during that summer, 
and I asked him what advice he would give if he was in our 
position. His answer was a revealing one. He said that if a 
peasant who had been dispossessed asked him this question he 
would simply refuse to answer him! Even he was' not prepared 
to tell the peasant straight off not to till his land, although he 
had been legally dispossessed. It was easy for hint, sitting on 
the Simla heights, to pass orders on files as if he was dealing 
with an abtract problem in mathematics. He, or the provincim 
bosses at Naini Tal, were not brought into touch with the 
human factor, nor did they see the human misery involved. 



3o6 jaavaharlal nemrv 

We were also told at Simla that we should give only one 
advice to the peasantry : that they should pay the lull demand 
or as much as they could. We should in fact act almost as the 
agents of the landlords. As a matter of fact we had said some- 
thing like it when we asked them to pay as much as they 
could. We had added no doubt that they should not sell up 
their cattle or incur additional debt. And we had seen the 
result. 

It was a terrible summer for all of us, and the strain of it 
was great. The Indian peasant has an amazing capacity to bear 
misfortune, and he has always had more than his share of it — 
famine, flood, disease, and continuous grinding poverty— and 
when he could endure it no longer, he would quietly and almost 
uncomplainingly lie down in his thousands or millions and die. 
That was his way of escape. Nothii^ happened in 1931 to 
compare with the periodical great misrortunes that had visited 
him. But, somehow, the events of 1931 did not seem to him 
part of Nature’s inscrutable plans, and, therefore, to be patiently 
endured; they were the work of man, he thought, and so he 
resented them. His new political education was bearing fruit. 
For us, too, these happenings of 1931 were especially painful 
because we held ourselves partly responsible for them. Had not 
the peasants largely followed our advice in the matter? And 
yet I am quite convmced that, but for our constant help, the con- 
dition of the peasantry would have been far worse. We held 
them together and they remained a force to be reckoned with, 
and because of this they obtained greater remissions than they 
otherwise would have done. Even the coercion and ill-treatment 
to which they were subjected, bad as it was, was not unusual for 
these unhappy people. The ^fference was partly one of degree 
(as there was much more of it now) and partly a question of 
publicity. Ordinarily, ill-treatment and even torture of a tenant 
by a zamindar’s agent in a village is almost taken for granted, 
and few persons outside that area hear of it, unless the victim 
dies. It was difierent now because of our organisation and the 
new consciousness of the peasantry which made them hang 
together and report aU mishaps to the Congress- offices. 

As the summer advanced, the attempts at forcible collections 
toned down and coercive proceedings lessened. What troubled 
us now was the question of the great number of the ejected 
tenants. What was to be done to them? We were pressing the 
Government to help them to get back their holdings, whidi, in 
the majority of cases, were lying vacant. More important still 
was the question of ^e future. The remissions that had been 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 307 

SO far granted were for the. past season only, and nothing had 
yet been decided about the future. From October onwards the 
season for the next collections would begin. What would 
happen then? Would we have to go through the same terrible 
round again? The Provincial Government appointed a small 
committee, consisting of its own officials and some zamindar 
members of the local Council, to consider this. There tvas no 
representative of the peasantry on it. At the last moment, when 
the Committee had actually begun its work, Govind Ballabh 
Pant was asked by Government to join it on our behalf. He did 
not think it worth while to join at that late stage, when impor- 
tant decisions had already been made. 

The U.P. Provincial Congress Committee had also appointed 
a small committee to collect various agrarian data, past and 
present, and to report on the existing situation. This committee 
submitted a long report containing an able survey of agrarian 
conditions in the U.P. and an analysis of the havoc caused by 
the agricultural slump in prices. Their recommendations were 
far-reaching. The report, which was published in book form, 
was signed Govind Ballabh Pant, Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, and 
Venkatesh Narayan Tewary. 

Long before this report came out, Gandhiji had gone to 
London for the Round Table Conference. He had gone with 

g reat hesitation, and one of the reasons for this hesitation was 
le U.P. agrarian situation. He had in fact almost decided that, 
in the event of not going to London for the Round Table 
Conference, he would come to the U.P, and devote himself to 
this complex problem. The last Simla conversations with the 
Government dealt, inter alia, with the UJP. After his departure 
for England we kept him folly informed of developments. I 
used to write to him, during the first month or two, every week 
both by tile air mail and the ordinary mail. During the latter 
part of his stay I was not so regular, as we expected him to 
return soon. He had given us to understand that, at the very 
latest, he would be back within three months, tiiat is, some 
time in November, and we had hoped that no crisis would arise 
in India till then. Above all, we wanted to avoid crises and 
conflicts with Government in his absence. When, however, his 
return was delayed and the agrarian situation began to develop 
rapidly, we sent him a long cablegram informing him of the 
latest develtmments and pointing out to him how our hands 
were being forced. He replied by cable that he was helpless in 
the matter and could not do anything for us then, and told us 
to go ahead according to our lights. 



3o8 jawaharlal nehru 

The Working Committee was also kept fully informed by the 
Provincial Congress Executive. I was always there to give them 
first-hand information, but, as matters were taking a serious 
turn, the Committee also conferred with our Provincial Presi- 
dent, Tasadduq Sherwani, and the Allahabad District President, 
Purushottam Das Tandon. 

The Government Agrarian Committee issued its report and 
made certain recommendations, which were both complicated 
and vague, and left a great deal to local officers. On the whole, 
the proposed remissions were bigger than in the past season, but 
we felt that they were not enough. We objected to the prin- 
ciples underlying the recommendations as well as to their appli- 
cation. Also, the report dealt with the future only and ignored 
past arrears, debt, and the question of the large number of dis- 
possessed tenants. What were we to do? Just advise the 
peasantry to pay as much as they could, as we had done in the 
spring and summer, and face the same consequences? That 
advice, we had seen, was the most foolish of all and could not 
be repeated. Either the peasants should make a great effort and 
pay the revised demand in fuU, if they could at all do so, or 
they should not pay at all for the present and await develop- 
ments. To pay part of the rent demanded was neither here nor 
there; the tenants exhausted their financial resources and, at 
the same time, lost their land. 

Our Provincial Congress Executive considered the position 
long and earnestly and decided that the Government proposals 
were not fevourable enough to be accepted as they were, al- 
though they were an improvement on the summer’s remissions. 
There was still a possibility of their being varied to the 
peasantry’s advantage, and we pressed Government accordingly. 
But we felt that there was little hope, and the conflict we had 
tried to avoid seemed to approach with some rapidity. The 
attitude of the Provincial Government as well as the Govern- 
ment of India towards the Congress organisation had been pro- 
gressively changing and becoming more frigid. To our loi^ 
letters we received brief replies referring us to local officials, fi 
was obvious that the pohcy of Government was not to en- 
courage us in any way. One grievance and difficulty of the 
Government was the possibility of Congress prestige going up 
because of the grant of remissions to the peasantry. Through 
long habit, it could only think in terms of prestige, and the idea 
that the masses might give the credit for the remissions to the 
Congress irritated it, and it wanted to avoid this as fer as pos- 
sihlft 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 309 

Meanwhile, reports were coming to us from Delhi and else- 
where that the Government of India were on the point of 
launching a big offensive against the whole Congress movement. 
The little finger was going to function more vigorously now 
and the scorpions were going to chastise us. We even received 
many details of the proposed action. Some time in November, 
I think. Dr. Ansari sent me (as well as separately to Vallabhbhai 
Patel, the Congress President) a message confirming many of 
the previous reports received by us, and especially giving details 
of the proposed ordinances for the Frontier and the United 
Provinces. Bengal had, I believe, already received the gift of a 
new ordinance or, perhaps, was about to receive it. Dr. Ansari’s 
message was amply confirmed even in its details many weeks 
later, when the new ordinances appeared as if to meet a 
new situation. It was generally supposed that Government 
had delayed action because of the unforeseen prolongation of 
the Round Table Conference. They wished to avoid whole- 
sale repression in India while the members of the Round 
Table Conference whispered sweet nothings into each other's 
ears. 

So tension grew, and aU of us had a feeling that events were 
marching ahead despite our little selves, ana none could stop 
them from their predestined course. All we could do was to 
prepare ourselves to face them and to play our parts, individu- 
dly and together, in the drama — ^more likely the tragedy — of 
life. But we hoped still that Gandhiji would be back before the 
curtain went up on this clash of forces, and would take the 
responsibility on his shoulders for peace or war. None of us 
was prepared to shoulder that burden in his absence. 

In the United Provinces, the Government took another step 
which produced a commotion in the rural areas. Remission 
slips were distributed to the tenants, stating how much remis- 
sion had been allowed, and containing a threat that unless the 
amount now due was paid up within a month (sometimes the 
period mentioned was shorter), the remission would be cancelled 
and the full sum realised by legal process, which meant eject- 
ment, attachment of property, etc. In normal years the tenants 
usually paid up iheir rent in instalments in the course of two 
or three months. Even this usual period was thus, not allowed. 
The whole countryside was suddenly friced by a crisis, and, slip in 
hand, the tenant8.xushed about protesring- and complaining and 
asking for advice. It was a very foolish threat on the part of 
the Government or their local officials, and it was not, we were 
told later, meant seriously. But it lessened the chances of a 



310 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

peaceful settlement very greatly and led inevitably, step by step, 
to conflict. 

The choice had to be made very soon now by the peasants 
and by the Congress; we could not postpone our decision till 
Gandhiji’s return. What were we to do? What advice to give? 
Could we reasonably ask the peasants to pay up the sum de- 
manded within the short period allowed when we knew that 
many of them could not possibly do so? And then what of the 
arrears due from them? Would they not run the risk of dis- 
possession even if they paid a large part of the sum demanded, 
or even the full current demand, which might be credited to 
arrears? 

The Allahabad District Congress Committee, with its strong 
peasant contingent, showed fight. It decided that it could not 
possibly advise the peasants to pay. It was told, however, that 
it could not take any aggressive step without the formal permis- 
sion of ’the Provincial Executive as well as of the All-India 
Working Committee. The matter was, therefore, referred to the 
Working Committee, and both Tasadduq Sherw^ni and Puru- 
shottam Das Tandon were present to place the case for the 
province and the district. The quesdon befiire us related to 
Allahabad district only and it was a purely economic issue, but 
we realised that, in the state of political tension then existing, 
it might have far-reaching consequences. Should the Allahabad 
District Committee be permitted to advise the peasants in the 
district to withhold payment of rent or revenue for the time 
being and pending further negotiation and better terms? This 
was the narrow issue and we wanted to confine ourselves to it, 
but could we do so? The Working Committee wanted to strain 
every nerve to prevent a break with Government before Gand- 
hiji’s return, and, in particular, it wanted to avoid a break on an 
economic issue which might develop into a class issue. The 
Committee, though politically advanced, was not so socially, and 
it disliked , the raising of the tenant versus zamindar question. 

Being socialistically inclined, I was not considered a veiy safe 
person to advise on economic and social matters. I myself felt 
that tile Working Committee should realise that the U.P. situa- 
tion was such mat even our more moderate and right wing 
members were being forced by events to take action, in spite of 
all their disinclination for it. I welcomed, therefore, the pre- 
sence of Sherwani and others firom our province at our Com- 
mittee meeting, for Sherwani (our Provincial President) was by 
no means a fire-brand. Constitutionally he was a right winger 
in the Congress, both politically and socially, and, at tile be^- 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 3II 

ning of the year, he had been prejudiced against the agrarian 
policy of the U.P. Congress Committee. But when he became 
the head of that Committee himself and had to shoulder the 
burden, he realised that there was no other alternative for us. 
Every subsequent step taken by the Provincial Committee was 
in the closest co-operation with him and, indeed, often through 
him, as President. 

Tasadduq Sherwani’s pleading before the Working Commit- 
tee, therefore, produced great effect on the members — a much 
greater effect than mine would have done. With great hesita- 
tion, but feeling that they could not refuse it, they gave the 
U.P. Committee authority to permit in any area the suspension 
of payment of rent and revenue. But, at the same time, they 
pressed the U.P. people to avoid this step if they could and to 
carry on negotiations with the Provincial Government. 

These negotiations were carried on for a while with little 
result. Some improvement was made, I believe, in the Allaha- 
bad district figures for remissions. It might have been possible, 
under ordiiiary circumstances, to arrive at a settlement or at 
least to avoid open conflict. The differences were being nar- 
rowed down. But the circumstances were very imusual, and on 
both sides — ^the Government and the Congress — there was the 
feeling of the inevitability of an approaching conflict, and there 
was no reality behind our negotiations. Every step taken by 
either party seemed to indicate a desire to manoeuvre for a posi- 
tion. The Government's preparations for this could be and were 
in fact carried on and perfected in secret. Our strength lay 
entirely in the morale of the people, and this could not be pre- 
pared or raised by secret activiries. Some of us — and I was one 
of the guilty ones— had often repeated in our public speeches 
that the struggle for fireedom was far from over, and that we 
would have to face many trials and difficulties in the near 
future. We had asked our peirole to keep themselves in readi- 
ness for them, and because of this we had been criticised as 
war-mongers. As a matter of fact, there was a marked reluc- 
tance on the part of our middle-class Congress workers to face 
facts, and thw hoped that somehow or omer a conflict would 
be avoided. Gandhiji’s presence in London also distracted the 
attention of the newspaper-reading classes. And yet in spite of 
this passivity of the intelligentsia, events marched ahead, 
especially in Bengal, the Frontier Province and the U.P., and in 
November it began to dawn on many people that a crisis was 
approaching. 

The U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, afraid of being 



312 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

forestalled by events, made some domestic arrangements in the 
event of conflict taking place. The Allahabad Committee held 
a big Peasant Conference, which passed a tentative resolution 
stating that, in case better terms were not obtained, they would 
have to advise the peasants to withhold payment of rent and 
revenue. This resolution irritated the Provincial Government 
greatly, and, treating it as a casus belli, it refused to have any 
further dealings with us. That attitude again produced its re- 
actions on the Provincial Congress, which interpreted it as a 
sign of the coming storm and hastened its own preparations. 
In Allahabad there was yet another Peasant Conference, when 
a stronger and more definite resolution asking the peasantry to 
withhold payment pending further negotiations and better 
terms, was passed. The attitude taken up even then, and to the 
end, was not one of a * no-rent’ campaign but a ‘ fair-rent ’ 
campaign, and we went on asking for negotiations, though the 
other party had ostentatiously walked away. The Allahabad 
resolution applied to zamindar and tenant alike, but we knew 
that in effect it applied to tenants and some petty zamindars 
only. 

This was the position in the U.P. towards the en'd of Novem- 
ber and the beginning of December 1931. Meanwhile in Bengal 
and the Frontier Province matters had also marched to a head, 
and in Bengal a new and terribly comprehensive ordinance had 
been applied. All these were signs of war, not of peace, and the 
question arose: when would Gandhiji return? Would he reach 
India before the Government started its great offensive, for 
which it had prepared so long? Or would he return to find 
many of his colleagues in prison and the struggle launched? 
We learnt that he was on his way back and would reach Bom- 
bay in the last week of the year. Each one of us, every 
prominent worker in the Congress at headquarters or in the 
provinces, wanted to avoid that struggle till his return. Even 
firom the point of view of the struggle itself it was desirable for 
us to meet him, to have his advice and his directions. It was a 
race in which we were helpless. The initiative lay with the 
British Government. 



THE END OF THE TRUCE 


In spite of my preoccupation in the United Provinces, I had 
long been anxious to visit the two other storm centres, the 
Frontier Province and Bengal. I wanted to study the situation 
on the spot and to meet old colleagues, many or whom I had 
not seen for nearly two years. But, above all, I wanted to pay 
my homage to the spirit and courage of the people of these 
provinces and their sacrifices in tlie national struggle. The 
Frontier Province was beyond reach for the time being, for the 
Government of India did not approve of any prominent Con- 
gressman visiting it, and we had no desire to go in view of this 
disapproval, and thus create an impasse. 

In Bengal the situation was deteriorating and, much as I was 
attracted to the province, I hesitated before going. I realised 
that I would be helpless there and could do little good. A 
deplorable and long-standing dispute between two groups of 
Congressmen in the province had long frightened outside Con- 
gressmen and kept them away, for they were afraid of getting 
involved in it on one side or the other. This was a feeble and 
ostrich-like policy, and did not help either in soothing Bengal 
or in Solving her problems. Some time after Gandhiji had gone 
to London two incidents suddenly concentrated all-India atten- 
tion on the situation in Bengal. These two took place in Hijli 
and Chittagong. 

Hijli was a special detention camp gaol for detenus. It was 
officially announced that a riot had taken place inside the 
camp, the detenus had attacked the staff, and the latter had 
been forced to fire on them. One detenu was killed by this firing 
and many were wounded. A local official enquiry, held im- 
mediately after, absolved the staff from all blame for this firing 
and its consequences. But there were many curious features, 
and some fticts leaked out which did not fit m with the official 
version, and vehement demands were made for a fuller enquiry. 
Contrary to the usual official practice in India, the Government 
of Bengal appointed an Enqmry Committee consisting of high 
judicial officers. It was a purely official committee, but it 
took evidence and considered the matter fully, and its findings 
were against the staff of the Detention Camp Gaol. It was held 
that the feult was largely that of the staff, and the firing was 



314 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

unjustified. The previous Government communiques issued on 
the subject were thus entirely falsified. 

There was nothing very extraordinary about the Hijli occur- 
rence. Unhappily such incidents or accidents are not rare in 
India, and one frequently reads of ' gaol riots ’ and of the 
g allan t suppression of unarmed and helpless prisoners within 
the gaol by armed warders and others. Hijli was unusual in 
so far as it exposed, and exposed officially, the utter one-sided- 
ness, and even the falsity of Government communiques on such 
occurrences. Little credence had been attached to these 
communiques in the past, but now they were completely found 
out. 

Since the Hijli affair a large number of gaol ‘ occurrences ' 
involving sometimes firing, sometimes the use of other kinds 
of force ny the staff, have taken place all over India. Strangely 
enough in these ‘gaol riots' only the prisoners seem to get hurt. 
Almost invariably an official communiqu6 has been issued 
accusing the prisoners of various misdeed and absolving the 
staff. Very rarely some departmental punishments have been 
awarded to the staff. All demands for a fiill enquiry have been 
curdy refused, a departmental enquiry being deemed sufficient. 
Evidently the lesson of Hijli was well learnt by Government, that 
it is imsafe to have proper and impartial enquiries, and the best 
judge is the accuser himself. Is it surprising that the people 
also should learn the lesson of Hijli, that Government com- 
muniques tell us what the Government wants them to believe 
and not what actually happens? 

The Chittagong affair was much more serious. A terrorist 
shot down and killed a Muslim police inspector. This was &1- 
lowed by a BBndu-Muslim riot, or so it was called. It was 
patent, however, that it was something much more than that; 
something different from the usual communal riot. It was 
obvious mat the terrorist’s act had nothing to do with com- 
munalism; it was directed against a police officer, regardless 
of whether he was a Hindu or Muslim. Yet it is true 
that there was some Hindu-Muslim rioting afterwards. How 
this started, what was the occasion for it, has not been cleared 
up, although very serious charges have been made by respon- 
sible public men. Another feature of the rioting was the part 
taken by definite groups of other people, Anglo-Indians, chiefly 
railway employees, and other Government employees, who are 
alleged to have indulged in reprisals on a large scale. J. M. Sen- 
Gupta and other noted leaders of Bengal made specific allega- 
tions in regard to the occurrences in Chittagong, and challenged 



THE END OF THE TRUCE 315 

an enquiry or even a suit for defamation, but the Government 
preferred to take no such step. 

These somewhat unusual occurrences in Chittagong drew 
pointed attention to two dangerous possibilities. Terrorism had 
been condemned from many points of view; even modem 
revolutionary technique condemned it. But one of its possible 
consequences had always especially frightened me, and mat was 
the danger of sporadic and communal violence spreading in 
India. I am not enough of a ‘ timi d Hindu ’ to be afraid of 
violence as such, although I certainly dislike it. But I do feel 
that the disruptive forces in India are still very great, and 
sporadic violence would certainly give them strength and make 
the process of building up a united and disciplined nation a 
much harder task than it is. When people murder in the name 
of religion, or to reserve a place for themselves in Paradise, it 
is a dangerous thing to accustom them to the idea of terroristic 
violence. Political murder is bad. And yet the political terrorist 
can be reasoned with and won over to other ways, because pre- 
sumably the end he is striving for is an earthly one, not per- 
sonal but national. Religious murder is worse, for it deals with 
things of the other world, and one cannot even attempt to 
reason about such matters. Sometimes the dividing line between 
the two is very thin and almost disappears, and political mur- 
der, by a metaphysical process, becomes semi-religious. 

The Chittagong murder of a police official by a terrorist, and 
its consequences, made one realise very vividly the dangerous 
possibilities of terroristic activity and the enormous harm it 
might do to the cause of Indian unity and freedom. The re- 
prisals that followed also showed us that fascist methods had 
appeared in India. Since then there have been many instances, 
notably in Bengal, of such reprisals, and the fascist spirit has 
undoubtedly spread in the European and Anglo-Indian com- 
munity. Some of the Indian hangers-on of Brinsh imperialism 
have also imbibed it. 

It is a curious thing, but the Terrorists themselves, or many 
of them, also have this fascist oudook, but it looks in a different 
direction. Their nationalist-fescism faces the imperialist-fascism 
of the Europeans, Anglo-Indians, and some upper-class Indians. 

I went to Calcutta for a few days in November 1931. I had 
a very crowded programme, and, apart from meeting individuals 
and groups privately, addressed a number of mass meetings. In 
all these meetings I discussed the question of terrorism, and 
tried to show how wrong and futile and harmful it was for 
Indian freedom. I did not abuse the Terrorists, nor did 1 call 



3i6 jawaharlal nehru 

them ' dastardly ’ or ‘ cowardly after the fashion of some of 
our countrymen who have themselves seldom, if ever, yielded 
to the temptation of doing anything brave or involving risk. 
It has always seemed to me a singularly stupid thing to call a 
man or woman, who is constantly risking his life, a coward. 
And the reaction of it on that man is to make him a little more 
contemptuous of his timid critics who shout from a distance 
and are incapable of doing anything. 

On my last evening in Calcutta, a little before I was due to go 
to the station for my departure, two young men called on me. 
They were very young, about twenty, with pale, nervous faces, 
and hrilliant eyes. I did not know who they were, but soon I 
guessed their errand. They were very angry with me for my 
propaganda against terroristic violence. They said that it was 
producing a bad effect on young men, and‘ they could not 
tolerate my intrusion in this way. We had a little argument; 
it was a hurried one, for the time for my departure was at hand. 
I am afraid our voices and our tempers rose, and I told them 
some hard things; and as I left them, they warned me finally 
that if I continued to misbehave in the future they would deal 
with me as they had dealt with others. 

And so I' left Calcutta, and as I lay in my berth in the train 
that night I was long haunted by the excited faces of these 
two boys. Full of life and nervous energy they were; what good 
material if only they turned the right way! I was sorry that 
I had dealt with them hurriedly and rather brusquely, and 
wished I had had the chance of long conversation with them. 
Perhaps I could have convinced them to apply their bright 
young lives to other ways, ways of serving India and freedom, 
in which there was no lack of opportunity for daring and self- 
sacrifice. Often I have thought of them in these after years, I 
never found out their names, nor did I have any other trace of 
them; and I wonder, sometimes, if they are dead or in some 
cell in the Andaman Islands. 

It was December. The second Peasant Conference took place 
in Allahabad, and then I hurried south to the Karnataka to 
fulfiOl a long promise made to my old comrade of the Hindu- 
stani Seva Dal, Doctor N. S. Hardiker. The Seva Dal, the 
volunteer wing of the national movement, had all along been 
an auxiliary of the Congress, though its organisation was quite 
separate. In the summer of 1931, however, the Working 
Committee decided to absorb it completely into the Congress 
organisation, and to make it the Volunteer Department of the 
Congress. This was done, and Hardiker and I were put in charge 



THE ENU Or' iHE 'iRUCE 317 

of it. The headquarters of the Dal continued in the Karnataka 
province at Hubli, and Hardiker induced me to visit the place 
for various functions connected with the Dal. He then took 
me about on tour tor a few days in Karnataka, and I was 
amazed at the tremendous enthusiasm of the people every- 
where. On my way back I visited Sholapur of Martial Law 
fame. 

That tour in the Karnataka assumed the character of a fare- 
well performance for me; my speeches became swan-songs, 
though they were rather aggressive and, I am afraid, not 
musical. News from the U.P. was definite and clear, the Govern- 
ment had struck, and struck hard. On my way to the Karnataka 
from Allahabad I had gone to Bombay with Kamala. She was 
again ill, and I arranged for her treatment in Bombay. It was 
in Bombay, almost immediately after our arrival from Allaha- 
bad, that we learnt that the Government of India had pro- 
mulgated a special Ordinance for the United Provinces. TTiey 
had decided not to wait for Gandhiji’s arrival, although he was 
already on the high seas, and was due in Bombay soon. The 
Ordinance was supposed to deal with the agrarian agitation, 
but it was so extraordinarily wide-flun^ and far-reaching that 
it made aU political or public activity impossible. It provided 
even for the punishment of parents and guardians for the sins 
of their children and wards — a reversal of the old Biblical 
practice. 

It was about this time that we read the report of the inter- 
view alleged to have been given by Gandhiji in Rome to the 
Giomale d’ltalia. This came as a surprise, as it was unlike him 
to give an interview of this kind casually in Rome. On closer 
examination we foimd many words and phrases in it which 
were quite foreign to him, and it was patent to us, even before 
the denial came, that the interview could not have been given 
as published. We thought that there had been a great deal of 
distortion of something that he had said. Then came his 
emphatic contradiction of it, and his statement that he had 
never given any interview at all in Rome. It was evident to us 
that some one had played a trick on him. But to our amaze- 
ment British newspapers and public men refused to believe him, 
and contemptuously referred to him as a liar. This hurt and 
angered. 

I was eager to go back to Allahabad and to give up the 
Karnataka tour. I felt that my place was with my comrades in 
the U.P., and to be far away when so much was happening at 
home was an ordeal. I decided, however, in fevour of adhering 



3i8 jawaharlal nehru 

to the Karnataka programme. On my return to Bombay some 
friends advised me to stay on for Gandhiji’s arrival, which was 
due exactly a week later. But this was impossible. From 
Allahabad came news of Purushottam Das Tandon’s arrest and 
other arrests. There was, besides, our Provincial Conference 
which had been fixed at Etawah for that week. And so I 
decided to go to Allahabad and to return to Bombay six days 
later, if I was free, to meet Gandhiji and to attend a meeting 
of the Working Committee. I left Kamala bed-ridden in 
Bombay. 

Even before I had reached Allahabad, at Chheoki station, an 
order under the new Ordinance was served on me. At Allaha- 
bad station another attempt was made to serve a duplicate of 
that order on me; at my iiouse a third attempt was made by 
a third person. Evidently no risks were being taken. The order 
interned me within the municipal limits of Allahabad, and I 
was told that I must not attend any public meeting or function, 
or speak in public, or write anything in a newspaper or leaflet. 
There were many other restrictions. I found that a similar order 
had been served on many of my colleagues, including Tasadduq 
Sherwani. The next morning 1 wrote to the District Magistrate 
(who had issued the order) acknowledging receipt of it and 
informing him that I did not propose to take my orders from 
him as to what I was to do or not to do. I would carry on with 
my ordinary work in the ordinary way, and in the course of 
this work I proposed to return to Bombay soon to meet 
Mr. Gandhi, and take part in the meeting of the Working 
Committee, of which I was the secretary. 

A new problem confronted us. Our U.P. Provincial Con- 
ference had been fixed to meet at Etawah that week, I had 
come from Bombay with the intention of 8Ug|esting a post- 
ponement, as it clashed somewhat with Gandhiji's arrival, and 
in order to avoid conflict with the Government. But before my 
return to Allahabad a peremptory message had come from the 
U.P, Govermnent to cur President, Sherwani, enquiring if our 
conference would consider the agrarian question, for if so, they 
would prohibit the conference itself. It was patent that the 
main purpose of the conference was to discuss the agrarian 
question which was agitating the whole province; to meet and 
not to discuss it would be the height of absurdity and s elf - 
sj^]^§gaiaon. And in any event our President or any one else 
had no aicLthority to tie down the conference. Quite apart from 
the Govemmmt’s threat it was the intention of some of us to 
postpone the conference, but this threat made a difference. 



1932 

Jawaharlal and Mr. Sherwanij before they were 
arrested on their way to meet Mahatma Gandhi 



THE END OF THE TRUCE 


319 

Many of us were rather obstinate in such matters, and the 
idea of being dictated to by Government was not pleasant. 
After long argument we decided to swallow our pride and to 
postpone the conference. We did so because almost at any cost 
we wanted still to avoid the development of the conflict, which 
had already beg^n, till Gandhiji’s arrival. We did not want 
him to be confronted with a situation in which he was power- 
less to take the helm. In spite of our postponement of our 
Provincial Conference there was a great display of the police 
and military at Etawah, some stray delegates were arrested, 
and the Swadeshi Exhibition there was seized by the military. 

Sherwani and I decided to leave Allahabad for Bombay on 
the morning of December 26th. Sherwani had been especially 
invited to me Working Committee meeting to confer on the 
U.P. situation. Both of us had been served with orders under 
the Ordinance not to leave Allahabad city. The Ordinance 
was said to be directed against the suspension of rent activities 
in the rural areas of Allahabad and some other U.P. districts. 
It was easy to understand that the Government should prevent 
us from visiting these rural areas. But it was obvious that we 
could not carry on this agrarian agitation in the city of Bom- 
bay; and the Ordinance, if it was really meant for the agrarian 
situation only, should have welcomed our departure from the 
province. Ever since the promulgation of the Ordinance our 
general policy had been a defensive one, and we had avoided 
coming to grips with it, although there had been individual 
cases of disobedience of orders. So far as the U.P. Cbngress 
was concerned, it was clear that they wanted to avoid or post- 
pone conflict with the Government for the present at least. 
Sherwani and I were going to Bombay where Gandhiji and the 
Working Committee would consider these matters, and no one 
knew— certainly I was by no means sure— what their ultimate 
decisions might be. 

All these considerations made me think that we would be 
permitted to go to Bombay, and the technical breach of the 
order of internment would, for the moment at least, be tolerated 
by Government. And yet in my bones I felt otherwise. 

As' we got into the train we read in the morning’s papers 
of the new Frontier Province Ordinance and the arrest of 
Abdul GhafFar Khan and Doctor Khan Sahib and others. Very 
soon our train, the Bombay Mail, came to a sudden halt at a 
wayside station, Iradatganj, which is not one of its usual 
stopping places, and police officials mounted up to arrest us. A 
Black Maria waited by the railway line, and Sherwani and I 



320 JAWAHARLAL NkHRU 

mounted this closed prisoners’ van and were bumped away to 
Naini. The Superintendent of Police, an Englishman, who had 
arrested us on that morning of Boxing Day looked glum and 
unhappy. I am afraid we had spoiled his Christmas. 

And so to prison! 

“ Absent thee from felicity a while. 

And for a season draw thy breath in pain.” 



ARRESTS. ORDINANCES. PROSCRIPTIONS 


Two days after our arrest Gandhiji landed in Bombay, and it 
was only then that he learnt of the latest developments. He 
had heard in London of the Bengal Ordinance, and had been 
much upset by it. He now found that fresh Christmas gifts 
awaited him in the shape of the U,P. and Frontier Ordinances, 
and some of his closest colleagues in the Frontier Province 
and the U-P. had been arrested. The die seemed to be cast 
and all hope of peace gone, but still he made an effort to find 
a way out, and sought an interview with the Viceroy, Lord Wil- 
lingdon, for the purpose. The interview, he was informed from 
New Delhi, could only take place on certain conditions— these 
conditions being that he must not discuss recent events in 
Bengal, U.P. and the Frontier, the new Ordinances, and the 
arrests under them. (I write from memory, and have not got 
the text of the Viceregal reply before me.) What exactly 
Gandhiji or any Congress leader was officially supposed to dis- 
cuss with tlie Viceroy, apart from these forbidden subjects 
which were agitating the country, passes one’s comprehension. 
It was absolutely dear now that the Government of India had 
determined to crush the Congress, and would have no dealings 
with it. The Working Committee had no choice left but to 
resort to dvil disobedience. They expected arrest at any 
moment, and they wanted to give a lead to the country before 
their enforced departure. Even so, the civil disobedience resolu- 
tion was passed tentatively, and another attempt was made by 
Gandhiji to see the Viceroy, and he sent him a second telegram 
asking for an unconditional interview. The rg)ly of the Govern- 
ment was to arrest Gandhiji as well as the Congress President, 
and to press the button which was to let loose fierce repression 
all over the country. It was dear that whoever else wanted or 
did not want the struggle, the Government was eager and over- 
ready for it. 

We were in gaol, of course, and all this news came to us 
vaguely and disjointedly. Our trial was postponed to the New 
Year, and so we had, as under-trials, more interviews than a 
convict could have. We heard of the great discussion that was 
going on as to whether the Viceroy should or should not have 
agreed to the interview, as if it really mattered either way. 



342 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU ' 

This question of the interview shadowed all other matters. It 
was stated that Lord Irwin would have agreed to the interview, 
and if he and Gandhiji had met all would have been well. I 
was surmised at the extraordinarily superficial view that the 
Indian Press took of the situation and how they ignored 
realities. Was the inevitable struggle between Indian National* 
ism and British Imperialism — in the final analysis, two irrecon- 
ciliables — ^to be reduced to the personal whims of individuals? 
Could the conflict of two historical forces be removed by 
smiles and mutual courtesy? Gandhiji was driven to act in one 
way, because Indian Nationalism could not commit hara-kiri 
or submit willingly to foreign dictation in vital matters; the 
British Viceroy or India had to act in a particular way to meet 
the challenge of this Nationalism and to endeavour to protect 
British interest, and it made not the slightest dif&rence who 
the Viceroy was at the time. Lord Irwm would have acted 
exactly as Lord Willingdon did, for either of them was but the 
instrument of British imperialist policy' and could only make 
some minor deviations fi:om the line laid down. Lord Irwin, 
indeed, was subsequently a member of the British Govenunent, 
and he associated himself folly with the official steps taken in 
India. To praise or condemn individual Viceroys for British 
policy in India seems to me a singularly inept thing to do, and 
our habit of indulging in this pastime can only be due to an 
ignorance of the real issues or to a ddiberate evasion of them. 

January 4th, 193a, was a notable day. It put a stop to argu- 
ment and discussion. Early that morning Gandhiji and me 
Congress President, Vallabhbhai Patel, were arrested and con- 
fined without trial as State prisoners. Four new ordinances were 
promulgated giving the most far-reaching powers to magistrates 
and poUce of&ers. Civil liberty ceased to exist, and both person 
and property could be seizea by the authorities. It was a 
declaration of a kind of state of siege for the whole of India, 
the extent and intensity of application being left to the dis- 
cretion of the local authorities.^ 

On that 4th of January also our trial took place in Naini 
Prison under the UJP, Emergency Powers Ordinance, as it was 
called. Sherwani was sentenced to six months’ rigorous im- 
prisonment and a fine of RB.150; I was sentenced to two years’ 
rigorous imprisonihent and a fine of Rs.500 (in default six 

^ Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State for India, stated in the 
House of Commons on March 24, 1932: "I admit that the Ordi- 
nances that we have approved are drasdc and severe. They 
cover almost every activity of Indian lire.” 



ARRJtSJl'S, ORDINANCES, PROSCRIPTIONS 323 

months more). Our offences were identical; we had been served 
with identical orders of internment in Allahabad city; we had 
committed the same breach of them by attempting to go to- 
gether to Bombay; we had been arrested and tried together 
under the same section, and yet our sentences were very dis- 
similar. There was, however, one difference: I had written to 
the District Magistrate and informed him of my intendon to 
go to Bombay in defiance of the order; Sherwani had given no 
such formal notice, but his proposed departure was equally well 
known, and had been mentioned in the Press. Immecuately 
after the sentence Sherwani asked the trying magistrate, to the 
amusement of those present and the emb^arrassment of the 
magistrate, if his smaller sentence was due to commimal con- 
slderadons. 

Quite a lot happened on that fateful day, January 4th, all 
over the country. Not far from where we were, in Allahabad 
city, huge crowds came in conflict with the police and military, 
and there were the usual lathi charges involving deaths and 
other casualties. The gaols began to fill with civil disobedience 
prisoners. To begin virith, these prisoners went to the district 
gaols, and Naini and the other great central prisons received 
only the overflows. Later, all the gaols filled up, and huge 
tempora^ camp gaols were established. 

Very few came to our little enclosure in Naini. My old 
companion, Narmada Prasad, joined us, and Banjit Pandit and 
my cousin, Mohanlal Nehru. A surorising addition to our little 
brotherhood of Barrack No. 6 was Bernard Aluvihare, a young 
friend from Ceylon, who had just returned from England after 
being called to the Bar. He had been told by my sister not to 
get mixed up with our demonstrations; but, in a moment of 
enthusiasm, he joined a Congress procession — and a Black 
Maria carried him to prison. 

The Congress had been declared illegal— the Working Com- 
mittee at the top, the Provindal Committees, and innumerable 
local committees. Together with the Congress all manner of 
allied or sympathetic or advanced organisations had been 
declared uJ^ti^l — ^kisan sabhas and peasant unions, youth 
leagues, students' associations, advanced political organisations, 
national universities and schools, hospitals, swadeshi concerns, 
libraries. The lists were indeed formidable, and contained 
many hundreds of names for each major province. The all- 
India total must have run into several thousands, and this very 
number of outlawed organisations was in itself a tribute to the 
Congress and the National Movement. 



324 JAWAHARLAL NfcHRU 

My wife lay in Bombay, ill in bed, fretting at her inability to 
take part in civil disobedience. My mother and both my sisters 
threw them.selves into the movement with vigour, and soon 
both the sisters were in gaol with a sentence of a year each. Odd 
bits of news used to reach us through newcomers to prison or 
through the local weekly paper that we were permitted to read. 
We could only guess much that was happening, for the press 
censorship was strict, and the prospect of heavy penalties always 
faced newspapers and news agencies. In some provinces it was 
an oflFence even to mention the name of a person arrested or 
sentenced. 

So we sat in Naini Prison cut off from the strife outside, and 
yet wrapped up in it in a hundred ways; busying ourselves with 
spinning or reading or other activities, talking sometimes of 
other matters, but thinking always of what was happening 
beyond the prison walls. We were out of it, and yet in it. 
Sometimes the strain of expectation was veiy great; or there 
was anger at something wrongly done; disgust at weakness or 
vulgarity. At other times we were strangely detached, and 
could view the scene calmly and dispassionately, and feel that 
petty individual errors or weaknesses mattered little when vast 
forces were at play and the mills of the gods were grinding. 
We would wonder what the morrow would bring of strife and 
tumult, and gallant enthusiasm and cruel repression and hate- 
ful cowardice — and what was all this leading to? Whither were 
we going? The future was hid firom us, and it was as well that 
it was hidden; even the present was partly covered by a veil, 
so far as we were concerned. But this we knew: that there 
was strife and suflFering and sacrifice in the present and on the 
morrow, 

“ Men will renew the battle in the plain 
To-morrow; reel with blood will Xanthua be; 

Hector and Ajax will be there again; 

Helen will come upon the wall to see. 

“ Then we shall rust in shade, or shine in strife, 

And fluctuate ’tween blind hopes and blind despairs. 

And fancy that we put forth all our life. 

And never know how with the soul it fares." ‘ 


* Matthew Arnold. 



XLII 


BALLYHOO 

Those early months of 1932 were remarkable, among other 
things, for an extraordinary exhibition of ballyhoo on the part 
of the British authorities. Officials, high and low, shouted out 
how virtuous and peaceful they were, and how sinful and pug- 
nacious was the Congress. They stood for democracy w'hile the 
Congress favoured dictatorships. Was not its President called a 
dictator? In their enthusiasm for a righteous cause they forgot 
trifles like Ordinances, and suppression of all liberties, and muz- 
zling of newspapers and presses, imprisonment of people 
without trial, seizure of properties and monies, and the 
many other odd things that were happening from day to day. 
They forgot also the basic character of British rule in India. 
Ministers of Government (our own countrymen) grew eloquent 
on how Congressmen were ‘ grinding their axes ’—in jjrison— 
while they lamoured for the public good on paltry salaries of a 
few thousand rupees per month. The lower magistracy not only 
sentenced us to heavy terms but lectured to us in tire process, 
and sometimes abused the Congress and individuals connected 
with it. Even' Sir Samuel Hoare, from the serene dignity of his 
high office as Secretary of State for India, announced that 
though dogs barked the caravan moved on. He forgot for the 
moment that the dogs were in gaol and could not easily bark 
there, and those left outside were effectively muzzled. 

Most surprising of all, the Cawnpore Communal Riots were 
laid at the door of the Congress. The horrors of these truly 
horrible riots were laid bare, and it was repeatedly stated that 
the Congress was responsible for them. As it happened, the 
Congress had played the only decent part in them, and one of 
its noblest sons lay dead, mourned by every group and com- 
munity in Cawnpore. The Karachi session of the Congress, 
immemately on hearing of the riots, appointed an Enquiry 
Committee, and this Committee made a most exhaustive en- 
quiry. After many months of labour, it issued a voluminous 
report, which was promptly proscribed by the Government, and 
printed copies were seized and, I suppose, destroyed. This at- 
tempt to suppress the results of an enquiry has not prevented 
our official critics and the British-owned Press from repeating 
from time to time that the riots were due to Congress work. 

3*5 



3*6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

No doiibtj in this and other matters, the truth will prevail in 
the end, but sometimes the lie has a long start. 

“ When all its work is done, the lie shall rot; 

The truth is great and shall prevail. 

When none cares whether it prevails or not.” 

It was all very natural, I suppose, this exhibition of a hys- 
terical war mentality, and no one could expect truth or restraint 
under the circumstances. But it did seem to go beyond expec- 
tation, and was surprising in its intensity and abandon. It was 
some indication of the state of nerves of the ruling group in 
India, and of how they had been repressing themselves in the 
past. Probably the anger was not caused by anything we had 
done or said, but by the realisation of their own previous fear 
of losing their empire. Rulers who are confident of their ovra 
strength do not give way in this manner. The contrast between 
this picture and the other was very marked. For on the other 
side silence reigned, not the silence of voluntary and dignified 
restraint, but the silence of prison and of &ar and an all- 
pervasive censorship. But for this enforced gagging, no doubt 
the other side would have also excelled in hysterical outbursts 
and exaggeration and abuse. One outlet, however, there was — 
unauthorised news sheets whidh were issued in various towns 
from time to time. 

The British-owned Anglo-In(fian newspapers in India joined 
in this game of ballyhoo with p;usto, and gave utterance and 
publicity to many a mought wl^h perhaps they had mutured 
and repressed in secret tor long. Ordinarily they have to be 
a little careful of what they say, for many of their readers are 
Indians, but the crisis in India swept away these restraints and 
gave ys a glimpse of the minds of all, English and Indian 
alike. There are few Anglo-Indian newspapers left in India; 
one by one they have dropped out. Several of those that remain 
are high-class journals, both in the news they supply and thdr 
general get-up. Their leading articles on world anairs, though 
always representing the conservative view-point, are able and 
show knowledge and grasp. Undoubtedly as newspapers they 
are probably the best in India. But on Indian political problems 
there is a sudden fall, and their treatment of them is amazingly 
one-sided; and, in times of crisis, this partiality often becomes 
hysteria and vulgarity. They represent faithfully the Govern- 
ment of India, and the continuous propaganda they do for it 
has not the merit of being imobtrusive. 



uALLi HUU 


3^7 

Compared to these selected few Anglo-Indian newspapers, the 
Indian newspapers are usually poor stuff. Their financial re- 
sources are limited, and there is litde attempt on the part of 
their owners to improve them. They carry on their day-to-day 
life with difficulty, and the unhappy editorial staff has no easy 
time. Their get-up is poor, their advertisements often of the 
most objectionable kind, and their general attitude to life and 
politics sentimental and hysterical. Partly, I suppose, this is 
due to the fact that vft are a sentimental race; partly because 
the medium (of the English newspapers) is a foreign tongue 
and it is not easy to write simply and, at the same time, force- 
fully. But the real reason is mat all of us suffer from any 
number of complexes due to long repression and subjection, 
and every outlet is apt to be surcharged with emotion. 

Among the Indian-owned English newspapers. The Hindu of 
Madras is probably the best, so far as get-up and news service 
are concerned. It always reminds me of an old maiden lady, 
very prim and proper, who is shocked if. a naughty word is 
used in her presence. It is eminently the paper of the Bourgeois, 
comfortably settled in life. Not for it is the shady side of 
existence, me rough and tumble and conflict of life. Several 
other newspapers of moderate views have also this 'old maiden 
lady ’ stan(urd. They achieve it, but without the distinction of 
The Hindu and, as a result, they become astonishingly dull in 
every respect. 

It was evident that the Government had long prepared its 
blow, and it wanted it to be as ffiorough and staggering as 
possible right at the beginning. In 1930 it was always at- 
tempting, by fresh Ordinances, to catch up an ever-worsening 
situation. The initiaiive remained then with the Congress. The 
1932 methods were ffifferent, and Government began with an 
offensive all along ffie line. Every conceivable power was given 
and take under a batdi of all-India and provincial Ordinances ; 
organisations were outlawed; buildings, property, automobiles, 
bs^ accounts were seized; public gatherings and processions 
forbidden, and newspapers and printing presses fuUy controlled. 
On the other hand, unlike 1930, Gandhiji was definitely desirous 
of avoiding civil ffisobedience just then, and most of the mem- 
bers of the Working Committee thought likewise. Some of 
them, including myself, thought mat a struggle was inevitable, 
however much we disliked it, and should merefore be prepared 
for, and m the United Provinces and the Frontier Province 
a growii^ tension had directed people's minds to me approadi- 
ing conffict. But, on ffie whole, the middle classes and me 



328 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

intelligentsia were not thinking then in terms of struggle 
although they could not wholly ignore the possibility. Some- 
how, they hoped that this struggle would be avoided on 
Gandhiji’s return; the wish was obviously father to the thought. 

Thus the initiative early in 1933 was definitely with the 
Government, and Congress was always on the defensive. Local 
Congress leaders in many places were taken by surprise by the 
rapid devolpments leading to the Ordinances and civil diso- 
bedience. In spite of this there was a remarkable response to 
the Congress call, and there was no lack of civil resisiers. 
Indeed I think that there can be litde doubt that the resistance 
offered to the British Government in 1932 was far greater than 
in 1930, although in 1930 there was more show and publicity, 
especially in the big cities. In spite of this greater endurance 
shown by the people in 1932, and their remaining overwhelm- 
ingly peaceful, the initial push of inspiration was far less than 
in 1930. It was as if we entered unwillingly to battle. There 
was a glory about it in 1930 which had faded a little two years 
later. The Government countered Congress with every resource 
at its command; India lived pracdcally under martial law, and 
Congress never really got back the initiative or any fi'eedom 
of action. The first blows stunned it, and most of its bourgeois 
sympathisers who had been its principal supporters in the past. 
Their pockets were hit, and it became obvious that those who 
joined the civil disobedience movement, or were known to help 
it in any way, stood to lose not only their liberty, but perhaps 
all their property. This did not matter so much to us in the 
U.P., where the Congress was a poor man’s concern; but in the 
big cities, like Bombay, it made a great deal of difference. It 
meant absolute ruin lor the merefa^t class and great loss to 
professional people. The mere threat of this (and it was some- 
times carried out) paralysed these well-to-do city classes. I 
learnt later of a timid but prosperous merchant, who had little 
to do with politics, except perhaps to give an occasional dona- 
tion, being threatened by the police with a fine of five lakhs of 
rupees, besides a long term of imprisonment. Such threats 
were fairly common, and were by no means empty talk, for the 
police were all-powerful then and instances occurred daily of 
threats being translated into action. 

I do not think any Congressman has a right to object to the 
procedure adopted by the Government, although the violence 
and coercion used by the Government against an overwhelm- 
ingly non-violent movement was certainly most objectionable 
firom any civilised standards. If we choose to adopt revolu- 



BALLYHOO 


329 

tionary direct action methods, however non-violent they might 
be, we must expect every resistance. We cannot play at revolu- 
tion in a drawing-room, but many people want to have the 
advantage of both. For a person to dabble in revolutionary 
methods, he must be prepared to lose everything he possesses. 
The prosperous and the well-to-do are therefore seldom revolu- 
tionaries, though individuals may play the fool in the eyes 
of dte worldly-wise and he dubbed traitors to their own class. 

Other methods had to be adopted, of course, to deal with 
the masses, who had no cars or banking accounts or other 
property worth seizing, and on whom the real burden of the 
struggle lay. One interesting result of the ruthlcssness of 
Government action in all directions was to whip up that crowd 
of people, who might be called (to borrow a word from a recent 
book) ‘ Governmentarians into activity. Some of them had 
recently begun to flirt with the Congress, not knowing what 
the future might bring. But Government could not tolerate 
this, and no passive loyalty was enough. In the words of 
Frederick Cooper of Mutiny fame the authorities “ would brook 
nothing short of absolute, active, and positive loyalty. Govern- 
ment could not condescend to exist upon the moral sufferance 
of its subjects.” A year ago Mr. Lloyd George referred to his 
old colleagues, the leaders of the British Lmeral Party who 
had joined the National Government, as “ specimens or those 
changeable reptiles who adapt their hue to their environments.” 
The new environment in India tolerated no neutral hues, and 
so some of our countrymen appeared in the brightest of ap- 
proved colours and, with song and feasting, they declared their 
love and admiration for our rulers. They had nothing to fear 
from the Ordinances and the numerous prohibitions and inhi- 
bitions and curfew orders and sunset laws; for had it not been 
officially stated that all this was meant for the disloyal and 
the seditious, and the loyal need have no cause for alarm? And 
so they could view the turmoil and conflict all round them 
with a measure of equanimity, devoid of that fear that gripped 
many of their countrymen. With Chloe (in The Faithful Shep- 
herdess) they might perhaps have agreed when she said: 

“ For from one cause of fear I am most free, 

It is impossible to ravish me, 

I am so willing.” 

The Government had somehow got hold of the idea that 
Congress was going to exploit women in the stru^le by filling 



JAWAHARLAL NjiJHRU 


330 

the gaols with them, in the hope that women would be well 
treated or would get light sentences. It was a fantastic notion, 
as if any one likes to push his womenfolk into prison. Usually 
when girls or women took an active part in the campaign, it 
was in spite of their fathers or brothers or husbands, or at any 
rate not with their full co-operation. Government, however, 
decided to discourage women by long sentences and bad treat- 
ment in prison. Soon after my sisters’ arrest and conviction, a 
number of young girls, mostly 15 or 16 years old, met in Alla- 
habad to discuss what they could do. They had no experience, 
but were full of enthusiasm and wanted advice. They were 
arrested as they were meeting in a private house, and ea'ch of 
them was sentenced to two years’ rigorous imprisonment. This 
was a minor incident, one of many that were occurring all over 
India ftom day to day. Most of the girls and women who were 
sentenced had a very bad time in prison, even worse than the 
men had. I heard of many painful instances, but the most extra- 
ordinary account that I saw was one prepared by Miraben 
(Madeleine Slade) giving her experiences, together with those of 
other civil disobedience prisoners, in a Bombay gaoL 

In the United Provinces our struggle was centred in the rural 
areas. Owing to the unceasing pressure of the Congress, as repre- 
senting the pet^antry, ftiirly substantial remissions had been 
promised, though we did not think them enough.’ Immediately 
after our arrest additional remissions were announced. It was 
curious that this announcement did not come earlier, for it could 
have made a great deal of difference. It would have been difficult 
for us to reject it offhand. But then Government was very 
anxious that the Congress should not get the credit for these 
remissions, and so on the one side they wanted to crush the 
Congress, and on the other to give as much as possible remissions 
to the peasants to keep them quiet. It was noticeable that the 
remissions were highest wherever the Congress pressure had been 
greatest. 

These remissions, considerable as they were, did not solve the 
agrarian problem, but -they did ease the situation greatly. They 
took the edge off the peasantry’s resistance, and from the point 
of view of our larger struggle, weakened us at the moment, ^at 
struggle brought suffering to scores of thousands of peasants in 
the U.P., and many were completely ruined by it. But the pres- 
sure of that struggle brought millions of peasants almost the 
highest possible remissions under the existing system, and saved 
them (the consequences of civil disobedience and its offihoots 
apart) ftom a tremendous amount of harassment. These petty 



BALLYHOO 


331 

seasonal gains for the peasants do not amount to much, but I 
have no doubt that, such as they were, they were largely due to 
the persistent eiForts of the U.P. Congress Committee on behalf 
of the peasantry. The general body of the peasantry benefited 
temporarily, but the bravest of them were among the casualties 
in that struggle. 

When the U.P. Special Ordinance was issued in December 1931 
an explanatory statement accompanied it. This statement, as 
well as the statements accompanying other Ordinances, contained 
many half-truths and untruths which were to serve as propa- 
ganda. It was all part of the initial ballyhoo, and we had no 
chance to answer them or even contradict their glaring errors. 
One particularly glaring attempt, in which a falsehood was 
sought to be fastened on Sherwani, was corrected by him just 
before his arrest. These various statements and apologies of 
Government made curious reading. They showed how rattled 
Government was, how its nerve was shaken. Reading the other 
day of a decree issued by the Bourbon Charles HI of Spain, 
banishing the Jesuits from his realm, I was forcibly reminded of 
these decrees and ordinances of the British Government in 
India and of the reasons given fer them. In this decree, issued 
in February 1767, the King justified his action by “extremely 
grave reasons relative to my duty to maintain subordination, 
tranquillity, and justice among my subjects, and other urgent, 
just, and necessary reasons which 1 reserve in my royal breast.” 

So the real reasons fijr the Ordinances remained locked up in 
the Viceregal breast or in the imperialist breasts of his coun- 
sellors, though they were obvious enough. The reasons given 
out officially helped us to understand the new technique of 
propaganda which the British Government in India was per- 
fecting. Some months later we learnt of semi-official 
pamphlets and leaflets being widdy distributed all over the 
rural areas containing quite an astonishing number of mis- 
representations and, in particular, hinting at the fiict that the 
Congress had caused the fall in agricultural prices which had 
hurt the peasantry so much. This was a remarkable tribute to 
the power of the Congress, which could bring about a world 
depression! But the lie was spread persistently and assiduously, 
in the hope that the prestige of the Congress might suffer. 

In spite of aU this, the response of the peasantry in some of 
the principal districts of the’ U.P. to the call for civil diso- 
bedience, which inevitably got mixed up with the dispute about 
fair rent and remissions, was very fine. It was a far bigger and 
more disciplihcd response than in 1930. To begin whn there 



333 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was good humour about it too. A delightful story came to us 
of a visit of a police party to the village Bakulia in Rae Bareli 
district. They had gone to attach goods for non-payment of 
rent. The village was relatively prosperous, and its residents 
were men of some spirit. They received the revenue and police 
officials with all courtesy and, leaving the doors of all the 
houses open, invited them to go wherever they wanted to. Some 
attachments of cattle, etc., were made. The villagers then 
offered pan supari to the police and revenue officials, who 
retired looking very small and rather shamefaced! But this 
was a rare and unusual occurrence, and very soon there was 
little of humour or charity or human kindness to be seen. 
Poor Bakulia could not escape pimishment for its spirit because 
of its humour. 

For many months in these particular districts rent was vrith- 
held by the tenantry, and it was only early in summer probably 
that collections began to dribble in. Large numbers of arrests 
were of course made, but this was almost in spite of Govern- 
ment’s policy. Generally arrests were confined to special workers 
and village leaders. The others were merely beaten. Beating 
was found to be superior to prison as well as shooting. It could 
be repeated whenever necessary and, taking place in remote 
rural areas, attracted little outside attention; nor did it add to 
the swelling number of prisoners. There were of course large 
numbers of ejectments, attachments and sale of cattle and 
property. With terrible anguish, the peasants watched the 
little they possessed being taken away and disposed of for 
ridiculous prices. 

Swaraj Bhawan had been seized by the Government, in com- 
mon with numerous other buildings all over the country. All 
the valuable equipment and materm belonging to the Congress 
Hospital, whidh was functioning in Swaraj Bhawan, was also 
seized. For a few days the hospital ceased functioning alto- 
gether, but then an open-air dispensary was established in a 
park near by. Later the ho^ital, or rather dispensary, moved 
to a small house adjoining Swaraj Bhawan, and there it func- 
tioned &r nearly two and a half years. 

There was some talk of our dwelling-house, Anand Bhawan, 
also being taken possession of by the Government, for I had 
refused to pay a large amount due as inepme tax. This tax had 
been assessed on father’s income in 1930, and he had not paid 
it that year because of civil disobedience. In 1931, after the 
Delhi Pact, I had an argument with the income tax authorities 
about it, but ultimately I agreed to pay and did pay an instal- 



BALLYHOO 


333 

ment. Just tlien came the Ordinances, and I decided to pay no 
more. It seemed to me utterly wrong, and even immoral, for 
me to ask the peasants to withhold payment of rent and 
revenue and to pay income fax myself. I expected, therefore, 
that our house would he attached by the Goventment. I dis- 
liked this idea intensely, as it would have meant my mother 
being turned out: our books, papers, goods and chattels and 
many things that we valued for personal and sentimental 
reasons going into strange hands and perhaps being lost; and 
our National Flag being pulled down and the Union Jack put 
up instead. At the same time I was attracted to the idea of 
losing the house. I felt that this would bring me nearer to the 
peasantry, who were being dispossessed, and would hearten 
them. From the point of view of our movement it was cer- 
tainly a desirable thing. But the Government decided otherwise 
and did not touch the house, perhaps because of consideration 
for my mother, perhaps because they judged rightly that it 
would give an impetus to civil disobedience. Many months 
afterwards some odd railway shares of mine were discovered 
and attached, for non-payment of income tax. My motor-car, 
as well as my brother-in-law's, had been previously attached 
and sold. 

One feature of these early months pained me greatly. This 
was the hauling down of our National Flag by various muni- 
cipalities and public bodies, and especially by the Calcutta 
Corporation which was said to have a majority of Congress 
members. The flag was taken down under pressure from the 
police and the Government, which threatened severe action in 
case of non-compliance. This action would have probably 
meant a suspension of the municipality or punishment of its 
members. Organisations with vested interests are apt to be 
timid, and perhaps it was inevitable that they should act as 
they did, but nevertheless it hurt. That flag had become a 
symbol to us of much that we held dear, and under its shadow 
we had taken many a pledge to protect its honour. To pull 
it down with our own hands, or to have it pulled down at our 
behest, seemed not only a breaking of that pledge but almost 
a sacrilege. It was a submission of the spirit, a denial of the 
truth in one; an affirmation, in the face of superior physical 
might, of the false. And those who submitted in this way low- 
ered the morale of the nation, and injured its self-respect. 

It was not that they were expected to behave a& heroes, and 
rush into the fire. It was wrong and absurd to blame any one 
for not being in the front rank and courting prison, or oth<:r 



334 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

suffering or loss. Each one had many duties and responsi* 
bilities to shoulder, and no one else had a right to sit in 
judgment on him. But to sit or work in the background is 
one thing; to deny the truth, or what one conceives to be the 
truth, is a more serious matter. It was open to members of 
municipalities, when called upon to do anything against the 
national interest, to resign from their seats. As a rule they 
preferred to remain in those seats. 

“ But bees, on flowers alighting, cease their hum — 

So, settling upon places, Whigs grow dumb 1 ” ^ 

Perhaps it is unjust to criticise any one for his behaviour 
during a sudden crisis which threatens to overwhelm him. The 
nerve of the bravest fails them sometimes, as the World War 
demonstrated over and again. Earlier still, in the great Titanic 
disaster of 191a, famous people, who could never have been 
associated with cowardice, escaped by bribing the crew, leaving 
others to drown. Very recen^ the fire on the Morro Castle 
revealed a shameful state of afrairs. No one knows how he will 
behave in a similar crisis when the primeval instincts over- 
power reason and restraint. So we may not blame. But that 
should not prevent us from noting that falling away from right 
conduct, and from taking care in future that the steering-wheel 
of the ship of the nation is not put in hands that tremble and 
fail when the need is greatest. Worse still is the attempt to 
justify this failure and call it right conduct. That, surely, is 
a greater offence than the failure itself. 

All struggles between rival forces depend greatly on morale 
and nerve. Even the bloodiest war depends upon them : “ In 
the final event battles are won by nerves,” said Marshal Foch. 
Much more so are nerve and morale necessary in a non-violent 
struggle, and any one who, by his conduct, impairs that morale 
and shakes the nation’s nerve, does a serious disservice to the 
cause. 

The months went by bringing their daily toll of good news 
and bad, and we adapted ourselves in our respective prisons, to 
our dull and monotonous routine. The National Week came— 
April 6th to 13th— and we knew that this would witness many 
an unusual happening. Much, indeed, happened then; but for 
me everything else paled before one occurrence. In Allahabad 
my mother was in a procession which was stopped by the police 

* Thomas Moore. 



BALLYHOO 


335 

and later charged with lathis. When the procession had been 
halted some one brought her a chair, and she was sitting on 
this on the road at the head of the procession. Some people 
who were especially looking after her, including my secretary, 
were arrested and removed, and then came the police charge. 
My mother was knocked down from her chair, and was hit 
repeatedly on the head with canes. Blood came out of an open 
wound in the head; she fainted, and lay on the roadside, which 
had now been cleared of the processionists and public. After 
some time she was picked up and brought by a police officer 
in his car to Anand Bhawan. 

That night a false rumour spread in Allahabad that my 
mother had died. Angry crowds gathered together, forgot 
about peace and non-violence, and attacked the police. There 
was firing by the police, resulting in the death of some people. 

When the news of all this came to me some days after the 
occurrence (for we had a weekly paper), the thought of my frail 
old mother lying bleeding on the dusty road obsessed me, and 
I wondered how I would have behaved if I had been there. 
How far would my non-violence have carried me? Not very 
far, I fear, for that sight would have made me forget the long 
lesson I had tried to learn for more than a dozen years; and 
I would have recked little of the consequences, personal or 
national. 

Slowly she recovered, and when she came to see me next 
month m Bareilly Gaol she tvas still bandaged up. But she was 
full of joy and pride at having shared with our volunteer boys 
and girls the privilege of reedving cane and lathi blows. Her 
recovery, however, was more apparent than real, and it seems 
that the tremendous shaking that she received at her age upset 
her system entirely and brought into prominence deep-seated 
troubles, which a year later assumed dangerous proportions.' 



XLIII 


IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 

After six weeks in Naini Prison I was transferred to the Bareilly 
District Gaol. I was again keeping indifferent health and, much 
to my annoyance, I used to get a daily rise in temperature. 
After four months spent in Bareilly, when the summer tem- 
perature was almost at its highest, I was again transferred, this 
time to a cooler place, Dehra Dun Gaol, at the foot of the 
Himalayas. There I remained, without a break, for fourteen 
and a half months, almost to the end of my two-year term. 
News reached me, of course, from interviews and letters and 
selected newspapers, but I was wholly out of touch with much 
that was happening and bad only a hazy notion of the principal 
events. 

When I was discharged I was kept busy with personal affairs 
as well as the political situation as I found it then. After 
a little more than five months of freedom I was brought back 
to prison, and here I am still. Thus, during the last three years 
I have been mostly in prison and out of touch with events, 
and I have had little opportunity of making myself acquainted 
in any detail with all that has happened during this period. 
I have still the vaguest of knowledge as to what took place 
behind the scenes at the second Round Table Conference, which 
was attended by Gandhiji. I have had no chance so far of a 
talk with him on this subject, nor of discussing with him or 
others much that has happened since. 

I do not know enough of those years 193a and 1933 to 
trace the development of our national struggle. But I knew 
the stage and the background well and the actors also, and 
had an instinctive appreciation of many a little thing that 
happened. I could thus form a feir notion of the general com'se 
of the struggle. For the first four months or so civil diso- 
bedience functioned strongly and aggressively, and then there 
was a gradual decline with occasional bursts. A direct action 
struggle can only remain at a revolutionary pitch for a very 
short time. It cannot remain static; it has to go up or down. 
Civil disobedience, after the first flush, went down slowly, but 
it could carry on at a lower levd &r long periods. In spite of 
outlawry, the All-India Congress orgamsation continued to 
fimetion with a fair measure of success. It kept in touch 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHKA DUN GAOLS 337 

with its provincial workers, sent instructions, received reports, 
occasionally gave financial assistance. 

The provincial organisations also continued with more or less 
success. I do not know much about other provinces during 
those years when I was in prison, but I gathered some infor- 
mation about U.P. activities after my release. The U.P. Con- 
gress office functioned regularly right through 193a and till the 
middle of 1933, when civil disobedience was first suspended by 
the then acting Congress president, on the advice of Gandhiji. 
During this period frequent directions were sent to districts, 
printed or cyclostyled bulletins issued regularly, district work 
inspected from time to time, and our National Service workers 
paid their allowances. Much of this work was necessarily secret 
work; but the secretary of the Provincial Committee in charge 
of the office, etc., was always working as such, publicly, till he 
was arrested and removed and another took his place. 

Our experience of 1930 and 193a showed that it was easily 
possible mr us to organise a secret network of information all 
over India. Without much effort, and in spite of some oppo- 
sition, good results were produced. But many of us had the 
feeling that secrecy did not fit in with the spirit of civil diso- 
bedience, and produced a damping effect on the mass conscious- 
ness. As a small part of a big open mass-movement it was 
useful, but there was always the danger, especially when the 
movement was declining, of a few more or less inefi^tive secret 
activities taking the place of the mass-movement. Gandhiji 
condemned all secrecy in July 1933. 

Agrarian no-tax movements flourished for some time in 
Gujrat and the Kamatak, apart from the U.P. In both Gujrat 
and Karnatak there were peasant proprietors who refused to 
pay their revenue to the Government, and suffered greatly 
because of this. Some effort, necessarily inadequate, was made 
on behalf of the Congress to help the sufferers and relieve the 
misery caused by the ejectments and confiscation of property. 
In 'the U.P. no effort to help the dispossessed tenantry in this 
way was made by the Provincial Congress. The problem here 
was a much vaster one (tenants are far more numerous than 
peasant proprietors), the area was much bigger, and the pro- 
vincial resources were very limited. It was quite impossible for 
us to help scores of thousands who had suffered because of 
the campaign, and equally difficult for us to draw a line between 
them and the vast numbers who were always on the starvation 
line. To help a, few thousands only would have led to trouble 
and bad blood. So we dedded not to give financial assis- 



338 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tance, and we broadcasted this fact right at the beginning, and 
our position was thoroughly appreciated by the peasantry. It 
was wonderful how much they put up with without complaint 
or murmur. Of course, we tried to help individuals where we 
could, especially the wives and children of workers who went 
to prison. Such is the poverty of this unhappy country that 
even one rupee per month was a godsend. 

Right through this period the U.P. Provincial Committee 
(which was, of course, a proscribed body) continued to pay the 
usual meagre allownances to its paid workers; and if they went 
to prison, as all of them did in turn, to support their families. 
This was a major item in its budget. Then came the charge 
for printing and duplicating leaflets and bulletins; this also 
was a heavy charge. Travelling expenses formed another 
principal item, and some grants had to be given to the less 
prosperous districts. In spite of all these and other expenses 
during a period of intensive mass-struggle against a powerful 
and entrenched government, the total expenditure of the U.P. 
Provincial Committee for twenty months from January 193a to 
the end of August 1933 were about Rs. 63,000, that is about 
Rs.31410 per month. (This figure does not include the separate 
expenditure of some of the strong and more prosperous district 
committees like Allahabad, Agra, Cawnporc, Lucknow.) As a 
province, the U.P. kept in the very forefront of the struggle 
right through 1932 and 1933, and I think, considering the 
results obtained, it is remarkable how little it spent. It would be 
interesting to compare with this modest figure the provincial 
Government’s special expenditure to crush civil disobedience. 
I imagine (though I have no knowledge) that some of the other 
major Congress provinces spent much more. But Behar was, 
from the Congress view-point, an even poorer province than its 
neighbour, the U.P., and yet its part in the struggle was a 
splendid one. 

So, gradually, the civil disobedience movement declined; but 
still it carried on, not without distinction. Progressively it 
ceased to be a mass movement. Apart from the severity of 
Govemment repression, the first severe blow to it came in Sep- 
,-tember 1932 when Gandhi ji fasted for the first time on the 
Hafijan issue. That fast roused mass consciousness, but it 
directed it in another direction. Civil disobedience was finally 
killed fisr all practical purposes by the suspension of it in May 
1933. It continued after that more in theory than in practice. 
It is no doubt true that, even without that suspension, it would 
have gradually petered out. India was numbed by the violence 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 339 

and harshness of repression. The nervous energy of the nation 
as a whole was for the moment exhausted, and it was not being 
re-charged. Individually there were still many who could cany 
on civil resistance, but they functioned in a somewhat artificial 
atmosphere. 

It was not pleasant for us in prison to learn of this slow decay 
of a great movement. And yet very few of us had expected a 
flashing success. There was always an odd chance that some- 
thing flashing might happen if there was an irrepressible up- 
heaval of the masses. But that was not to be counted upon, 
and so we looked forward to a long struggle with ups and 
downs and many a stalemate in between, and a progressive 
strengthening of the masses in discipline and united action and 
ideology. Sometimes in those early days of 1932 I almost feared 
a quick and spectacular success, for this seemed to lead inevit- 
ably to a compromise leaving the ‘ Governmentarians ’ and 
opportunists at the top. The experience of 1931 had been 
revealing. Success to be worth while should come when the 
people generally were strong enough and clear enough in their 
ideas to take advantage of it. Otherwise the masses would fight 
and sacrifice and, at the psychological moment, others would 
step in gracefully and gather the spoils. There was grave 
danger of this, because in the Congress itself there was a great 
deal of loose thinking and no clear ideas as to what system of 
government or society we were driving at. Some Congressmen, 
indeed, did not think of changing the existing system of 
government much, but simply of replacing the British or alien 
element in it by the swadeslii brand. 

The ' Governmentarians ’ of the pure variety did not matter 
much, for their first article of fiiith was subservience to the 
State authority whatever it was. But even the Liberals and 
Responsivists accepted the ideology of the British Government 
almost completely; and their occasional criticism, such as it was, 
was thus wholly ineffective and valueless. It was well known 
that they were legalists at any price, and as such they could not 
welcome civil resistance. But they went much further, and 
more or less ranged themselves on the side of the Government. 
They were almost silent and rather frightened spectators of 
the complete suppression of civil liberties of all kinds. It was 
not merely a question of civil disobedience being countered and 
suppressed by the Government, but of all political life and pubhc 
activity being stopped, and hardly a voice was raised against 
this. Those who usually stood for these liberties were involved 
in the struggle itself, and they took the penalties for refusing to 



340 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

submit to the State’s coercion. Others were cowed into abject 
submission, and hardly raised their voices in criticism. Mild 
criticism, when it was indulged in, was apologetic in tone and 
was accompanied by strong denunciation of the Congress and 
those who were carrying on the struggle. 

In Western countries a strong public opinion has been built 
up in favour of civil liberties, and any limitation of them is 
resented and opposed. (Perhaps this is past history now.) There 
are large numbers of people who, though not prepared to par- 
ticipate in strong and direct action themselves, care enough for 
the liberty of speech and writing. Assembly and Organisation, 
person and Press, to agitate for diem ceaselessly and thus help 
to check the tendency of the State to encroach upon them. 
The Indian Liberals claim to some extent to carry on the 
traditions of British Liberalism (although they have nothing 
in common with them except the name), and might have been 
expected to put up some intellectual opposition to the sup- 
pression of these liberties, for they suffered from this also. But 
they played no such part. It was not for them to say with 
Voltairej “ I disagree absolutely with what you say, but I will 
defend to the death your right to say it.” 

It is hot perhaps fair to blame them for this, for they have 
never stood out as the champions of democracy or liberty, and 
they had to face a situation in which a loose word might have 
got them into trouble. It is more pertinent to observe the 
reactions of those ancient lovers of liberty, the British Liberals, 
and the new socialists of the British Labour Party to repression 
in India. They managed to contemplate the Indian scene with 
a certain measure of equanimity, painful as it was, and some- 
times their satisfaction at the success of the "scientific appli- 
cation of repression,” as a correspondent of the Manchester 
Guardian put it, was evident. Recently the National Govern- 
ment of Great Britain has sought to pass a Sedition Bill, and 
a great deal of criticism has been directed to it, especially from 
Liberals and Labourites on the ground, inter alia, that it 
restricts free speech and gives magistrates the right of issuing 
warrants for searches. Whenever I read this criticism I sym- 
pathised with it, and I had at the same time the picture of 
India before me, where the actual laws in force to-day are 
approximately a hundred times worse than the British Sedition 
BiU seeks to enact. I wondered how it was that Britishers who 
strain at a gnat in England could swallow a camel in India 
without turning a hair. Indeed I have always wondered at and 
admired the astonishing knack of the British people of 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 34I 

making their moral standards correspond with their material 
interests, and of seeing virtue in everything that advances 
their imperial designs. Mussolini and Hitler are condemned by 
them in perfect good faith and with righteous indignation for 
their attacks on liberty and democracy; and, in equal good 
faith, similar attacks and deprivation of liberty in India seem 
to them as necessary, and the highest moral reasons are ad- 
vanced to show that true disinterested behaviour on their part 
demands them. 

While fire raged all over India and men’s and women’s souls 
were put to the test, far away in London the chosen ones 
forgathered to draw up a constitution for India. There was 
the third Round Table Conference in 193a and numerous com- 
mittees, and large numbers of members of the Legislative 
Assembly angled for membership of these committees so that 
they might thus combine public duty with private pleasure. 
Quite a crowd went at the public expense. Later, in 1933, came 
the Joint Committee with its Indian assessors, and again free 
passages were provided by a benevolent Government to those 
who went as witnesses. Many people crossed the seas again at 
public cost in their earnest desire to serve India, and some, it 
was stated, even haggled for more passage money. 

It was not surprising to see these representatives of vested 
interests, frightened by the mass movements of India in action, 
gathering together in London under the aegis of British im- 
perialism. But it hurt the nationalism in us to sec any Indian 
behave in this way when the mother country was involved in 
a life-and-death struggle. And yet from one point of view it 
seemed to many of us a good thing, for it separated once and for 
all, as we thought (wrongly, it now appears), the reactionary 
firom the progressive elements in India. This sifting would help 
in the political education of the masses, and make it clearer 
stiU to Si concerned, that only through independence could we 
hope to face social issues and raise the burdens firom the 
masses. 

But it was surprising to find how far these people had 
alienated themselves, not only in their day-to-day lives, but 
morally and mentally, from the Indian masses. There were 
no links with them, no understanding of them or of that inner 
urge which was driving them to sacrifice and suffering. Reality 
for these distinguished statesmen consisted of one thing— 
British imperial power, which could not be successfully chal- 
lenged and therefore should be accepted with good or bad 
grace. It did not seem to strike them that it was quite im- 



JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 


342 

possible for them to solve India's problem or draw up a real 
live constitution without the goodwill of the masses. Mr. J. A. 
Spender, in his recent Short History of Our Times, refers to the 
failure of the Irish Joint Conference of 1910 which sought to 
end the constitutional crisis. He says that the political leaders 
who were trying to find a constitution in the midst of a crisis 
were like men trying to insure a house when it is on fire. The 
fire in India in 1933 and 1933 was far greater than in Ireland 
in 1910, and even though the flames die down, the burning 
embers will remain for a long time, hot and unquenchable as 
India’s will to freedom. 

In India there was an amazing growth of the spirit of 
violence in official circles. The tradition was an old one, and 
the country had been governed by the British mainly as a 
police State. The overriding outlook even of the civilian ruler 
had been military: there was always a touch of a hostile army 
occupying alien and conquered soil. This mentality grew 
because of the serious challenge to the existing order. The 
occasional acta of terrorism in Bengal or elsewhere fed this 
official violence, and gave it some justification for its own acts. 
The various ordinances and the Government policy gave such 
tremendous power to the executive and the police, that in 
effect India was under Police Raj and there were hardly any 
checks. 

To a greater or less degree all the provinces of India went 
through this fire of fierce repression, but the Frontier Province 
and Bengal suffered most. The Frontier Province had always 
been a predominantly military area, administered under semi- 
military regulations. Its strategic position was important, and 
the ‘Redshirt’ movement had thoroughly upset the Govern- 
ment. Military columns were very much in evidence in the 
' pacification ’ of the province, and in dealing with ‘ recalcitrant 
villages ’. It was a common practice all over India to impose 
heavy collective fines on villages, and occasionally (in Bengal 
especially) on towns. Punitive police were often stationed, and 
police excesses were inevitable when they had enormous powers 
and no checks. We had typical instances of the lawlessness and 
disorderliness of law and order. 

Parts of Bengal presented the most extraordinary spectacle. 
Government treated the whole populations (or, to be exact, the 
Hindu population) as hostile, and everyone — ^man, woman, 
boy or girl between 12 and 35 — ^had to carry identity cards. 
There were extemments and internments in the mass, dress 
was regulated, schools were regulated or closed, bicycles were 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 343 

not allowed, movements had to be reported to the police, 
curfew, sunset law, military marches, punitive police, collective 
fines, and a host of other rules and regulations. Large areas 
seemed to be in a continuous state of siege, and the inhabitants 
were little better than ticket-of-leave men and women under 
the strictest surveillance. Whetlicr, firom the point of view of 
the British Government, all these amazing provisions and regu- 
lations were necessary or not, it is not for me to judge. If they 
were not necessary, then that Government must be held guilty 
of a grave offence in oppressing and humiliating and causing 
great loss to the populations of whole areas. If they were 
necessary then surely that is the final verdict on British rule in 
India. 

The spirit of violence pursued our people even within the 
gaols. The class division of prisoners was a farce, and often 
a torture for those who were put in an upper class. Very few 
went to these upper classes, and many a sensitive man and 
woman had to submit to conditions which were a continuing 
agony. The deliberate policy of Government seems to have 
been to make the lot of political prisoners worse than that of 
ordinary convicts. An Inspector-General of Prisons went to the 
length of issuing a confidential circular to all the prisons, point- 
ing out that Civil Disobedience prisoners must be “ dealt with 
grimly.” * Whipping became a ftequent gaol punishment. On 
April 27, 1933, the Under Secretary for India stated in the House 
of Commons “ that Sir Samuel Hoare was aware that over 500 
persons in India were whipped during 1932 for offences in con- 
nection with the civil disobedience movement.” It is not clear if 
this figure includes the many whippings in prisons for breaches 
of gaol discipline. As news of firequent whippings came to us in 
prison in 1932, 1 remembered our protest and our three-day fast 
m December 1930 against one or two odd instances of whip- 
ping. I had felt shocked then at the brutality of it, and now 
I was still shocked and there was a dull pain inside me, but it 
did not strike me that I should protest and fast again. I felt 
much more helpless in the matter. The mind gets blunted to 


^ This circular was dated June 30, 1932, and it contained the 
following : “ The Inspector-General impresses upon Superintendents 
and gaol subordinates the fact that there is no justification for 
preferential treatment in favour of Civil Disobedience Movement 
prisoners as such. This class require to be kept in their places and 
dealt with grimly.” 



JAWAHARLAL NEIIRU 


344 

brutality after a while. A bad thing has only to continue for 
long for the world to get used to it. 

The hardest of labour tvas given to our men in prison — mills, 
oil-presses, etc. — and their lot was made as unbearable as pos- 
sible in order to induce them to apologise and be released on an 
undertaking being given to Government. That was considered 
a great triumph for the gaol authorities. 

Most of these gaol punishments fell to the lot of boys and 
young men, who resented coercion and humiliation. A fine and 
spirited lot of boys they were, full of self-respect and ' pep ’ and 
the spirit of adventure, the kind that in an English public 
school or university would have received every encouragement 
and praise. Here in India their youthful idealism and pride led 
them to fetters and solitary confinement and whipping. 

The lot of our womenfolk in prison was especially hard 
and painful to contemplate. They were mostly middle-class 
women, accustomed to a sheltered life, and suffering chiefly 
from the many repressions and customs produced by a society 
dominated to his own advantage, by man. The call of freedom 
had always a double meaning for them, and the enthusiasm 
and energy with which they threw themselves into the struggle 
had no doubt their springs in the vague and hardly conscious, 
but nevertheless intense, desire to rid themselves of domestic 
slavery also. Excepting a very few, they were classed as 
ordinary prisoners and placed with the most degraded of com- 
panions, and often under horrid conditions. I was once lodged 
m a barrack next to a female enclosure, a wall separating us. 
In that enclosure there were, besides other convicts, some 
women political prisoners, including one who had bera my 
hostess and in whose house I had once stayed. A high wall 
separated us, but it did not prevent me from listening in horror 
to the language and curses which our friends had to put up 
with from the women convict warders. 

It was very noticeable that the treatment of political prisoners 
in 1932 and 1933 was worse than it had been two years earlier, 
in 1930. Tlris could not have been due merely to the whims of 
individual officers, and the only reasonable inference seems to 
be that this was the deliberate policy of the Government, Even 
apart from political prisoners, the United Provinces Gaol 
Department had had the reputation in those years of being 
very much against anything that might savour of humanity. 
We had an interesting instance of this firom an unimpeachable 
source. A distinguished gaol visitor, a gallant knight, not a 
rebel and a sedition-monger like us, but one whom the Govern- 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 345 

ment had delighted to honour, paid us a visit once in prison. 
He told us that some months earlier he had visited another 
gaol, and in his inspection note had desciibed the gaoler as 
a “ humane disciplinarian.” The gaoler in question begged him 
not to say anything about his humanity, as this was at a dis- 
count in official circles. But the knight insisted, as he could 
not conceive that any harm would befall the gaoler because of 
his description. Result: soon after the gaoler was transferred 
to a distant and out-of-the-way place, which was in the nature 
of a punishment to him. 

Some gaolers, who were considered to be particularly fierce 
and unscrupulous, were promoted and given titles. Graft is 
such a universal phenomenon in gaols that hardly any one 
keeps clear of it. But my own experience, and that of many 
of my friends, has been that the worst offenders among the 
gaol staff are usually those who pose as strict disciplinarians. 

I have been fortunate in ^aol and outside, and almost every one 
I have come across has given me courtesy and consideration, 
even when perhaps I did not deserve them. One incident in 
gaol, however, caused me and my people much pain. My 
mother, Kamala and Indira, my daughter, had gone to inter- 
view my brother-in-law, Ranjit Pandit, in the Allahabad District 
Gaol and, for no fault of theirs, they were insulted and hustled 
out by the gaoler. I was grieved when I learnt of this, and 
the reaction of the Provincial Government to it shocked me. To 
avoid the possibility of my mother being insulted by gaol 
officials, I decided to give up all interviews. For nearly seven 
months, while I was in Dehra Dun Gaol, I had no interview. 



XLIV 


PRISON HUMOURS 

Two of us were transferred together from the Bareilly District 
Gaol to the Dehra Dun Gaol— Govind Ballabh Pant and I. To 
avoid the possibility of a demonstration, we were not put on the 
train at Bareilly, but at a wayside station fifty miles out. We were 
taken secretly by motor-car at night, and, after many months of 
seclusion, that drive through the cool night air was a rare delight. 

Before we left Bareilly Gaol, a little incident took place which 
moved me then and is yet fresh in my memory. The Superinten- 
dent of Police of Bareilly, an Englishman, was present there, 
and, as I got into the car, he handed to me rather shyly a packet 
which he told me contained old German illustrated magazines. 
He said that he had heard that I was learning German and so 
he had brought these magazines for me. I had never met him 
before, nor have I seen him since. I do not even know his name. 
This spontaneous act of courtesy and the kindly thought that 
prompted it touched me and I felt very grateful to him. 

During that long midnight drive I mused over the relations of 
Englishmen and Indians, of ruler and ruled, of official and non- 
official, of those in authority and those who have to obey. What 
a great gulf divided the two races, and how they distrusted and 
disliked each other. But more than the distrust and the dislike 
was the ignorance of each other, and, because of this, each side 
was a little afraid of the other and was constantly on its guard in 
the other’s presence. To each, the other appeared as a sour-looking, 
unamiable creature, and neither realised that there was decency 
and kindliness behind the mask. As the rulers of the land, with 
enormous patronage at their command, the English had attracted 
to themselves crowds of cringing place-hunters and opportunists, 
and they judged of India from these unsavoury specimens. The 
Indian saw the Englishman function only as an official with all 
the inhumanity of the machine and with all the passion of a 
vested interest trying to preserve itself. How different was the 
behaviour of a person acting as an individual and obeying his 
own impulses from his behaviour as an official or a unit in an 
army. The soldier, stiffening to attention, drops his humanity, 
and, acting as an automaton, shoots and kills inoffensive and 
harmless persons who have done him no ill. So also, I thought, 
the police officer who would hesitate to do an unkindness to an 



PRISON HUMOURS 


347 


individual would, the day after, direct a lathi charge on inno- 
cent people. He would not tliink of himself as an individual 
then, nor will he consider as individuals those crowds whom he 
beats down or shoots. 

As soon as one begins to think of the other side as a mass or 
a crowd, the human link seems to go. We forget that crowds 
also consist of individuals, of men and women and children, 
who love and hate and suffer. An average Englishman, if he 
was frank, would probably confess that he knows some quite 
decent Indians, but they are exceptions, and as a whole Indians 
are a detestable crowd. The average Indian would admit that 
some Englishmen whom he knows were admirable, but, apart 
from these few, the English were an overbearing, brutal, and 
thoroughly bad lot. Curious how each person judges of the 
other race, not from the individual with whom he has come in 
contact, but ftom others about whom he knows very little or 
nothing at all. 

Pei-sonally, I have been very fortunate and, almost invariably, 
I have received courtesy from my own countrymen as well as 
from the English. Even my gaolers and the policemen, who 
have arrested me or escorted me as a prisoner from place to 
place, have been kind to me, and much of the bitterness of 
conflict and the sting of gaol life has been toned down because 
of this human touch. It was not surprising that my own coun- 
trymen should treat me so, for I had gained a measure of 
notoriety and popularity among them. Even for Englishmen I 
was an individual and not merely one of the mass, and, I 
imagine, the fact that I had received my education in England, 
and especially my having been to an English public school, 
brought me nearer to them. Because of this, they could not help 
considering me as more or less civilised after their own pattern, 
however perverted my public activities appeared to be. Often I 
felt a little embarrassed and humiliated because of this special 
treatment when I compared my lot with that of most of my 
colleagues. 

Despite all these advantages that I had, gaol was gaol, and 
the oppressive atmosphere of the place was sometimes almost 
unbearable. The very air of it was full of violence and mean- 
ness and graft and untruth; there was either cringing or cursing. 
A person who was at all sensitive was in a continuous state of 
tension. Trivial occurrences would upset one. A piece of bad 
news in a letter, some item in the newspaper, would make one 
almost ill with anxiety or anger for a while. Outside there was 
always relief in action, and various interests and activities pro- 



348 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

duced an equilibrium of the mind and body. In prison there 
was no outlet and one felt bottled up and repressed, and, in- 
evitably, one took one-sided and rather distorted views of 
happenings. Illness in gaol was particularly distressing. 

And yet I managed to accustom myself to the gaol routine, 
and with physical exercise and fairly hard mental work kept fit. 
Whatever the value of work and exercise might be outside, they 
are essential in gaol, for without them one is apt to go to pieces. 
I adhered to a strict time-table and, in order to keep up to the 
mark, I carried on with as many normal habits as I could, such 
as the daily shave (I was allowed a safety razor). I mention this 
minor matter because, as a rule, people gave it up and slacked in 
other ways. After a hard day’s work, the evening found me 
pleasantly tired and sleep was welcomed. 

And so the days passed, and the weeks and the months. But 
sometimes a month would stick terribly and would not end, or 
so it seemed. And sometimes I would feel bored and fed up and ’ 
angry with almost everything and everybody — with my com- 
panions in prison, with the gaol staff, with people outside for 
something they had done or not done, with the British Empire 
(but this was a permanent feeling), and above all with myself. I 
would become a bundle of nerves, very susceptible to various 
humours caused by gaol fife. Fortunately I recovered soon from 
these humours. 

Interview days were the red-letter days in gaol. How one 
longed for them and waited for them and counted the daysl 
And after the excitement of the interview there was the 
inevitable reaction and a sense of emptiness and loneliness. If, 
as sometimes happened, the interview was not a success, because 
of some bad news which upset me, or some other reason, I would 
feel miserable afterwards. There were gaol officials present of 
course at the interviews, but two or three times at Bareilly there 
was in addition a C.I.D. man present ivith paper and pencil, 
eagerly taking down almost every word of the conversation. I 
found this exceedingly irritating, and these interviews were 
complete failures. 

And then I gave up these precious interviews because of the 
treatment my mother and wife had received in the course of an 
interview in the Allahabad Gaol and afterwards firom the 
Government. For nearly seven months I had no interview. 
It was a dreary time for me, and when at the end of that period 
I dedded to resume intervieivs and my people came to see me, 
I was almost intoxicated with the joy of it. My sister’s little 
children also came to see me, and when a tiny one wanted to 



PRISON HUMOURS 


349 

mount on my shoulder, as she used to do, it was more than my 
emotions could stand. That touch of home life, after the long 
yearning for human contacts, upset me. 

When interviews stopped, the fortnightly letters from home or 
from some other gaol (for both my sisters were in prison) 
became all the more precious and eagerly expected. If the letter 
did not come on the appointed day I was worried. And yet 
when it did come, I almost hesitated to open it. I played about 
with it as one does with an assured pleasure, and at the back of 
my mind there was also a trace of fear lest the letter contain 
any news or reference which might annoy me. Letter writing 
and receiving in gaol were always serious incursions on a peace- 
ful and unruffled existence. They produced an emotional state 
which was disturbing, and for a day or two afterwards one’s mind 
wandered and it was difficult to concentrate on the day’s work. 

In Naini Piison and Bareilly Gaol I had several companions. 
In Dehra Dun there were three of us to begin with-AJovind 
Ballabh Pant, Kunwar Anand Singh of Kashipur and I— but 
Pantji was discharged after a couple of months on the expiry 
of his six months. Two others joined us later. By the begin- 
ning of January 1933 all my companions had left me and I was 
alone. For nearly eight months, till my discharge at the end of 
August, I lived a solitary life in Dehra Dun Gaol with hardly 
any one to talk to, except some member of the gaol staff for a 
few minutes daily. This was not technically solitary confine- 
ment, but it was a near approach to it, and it was a dreary 
period for me. Fortunately I had resumed my interviews, and 
they brought some relief. As a special favour, I suppose, I was 
allowed to receive fresh flowers from outside and to keep a few 
photographs, and they cheered me greatly. Ordinarily, flowers 
and photographs are not permitted, and on several occasions I 
have not been allowed to receive the flowers that had been sent 
for me. Attempts to brighten up the cells were not encouraged, 
and I remember a superintendent of a gaol once objecting to 
the manner in which a companion of mine, whose cell was next 
to mine, had arranged his toilet articles. He was told that he 
must not make his cell look attractive and “ luxurious ”. The 
articles of luxury were: a tooth brush, tooth paste, fountain- 
pen ink, a bottle of hair oil, a brush and comb, and perhaps 
one or two other little things. 

One begins to appreciate the value of the little things of life 
in prison. One’s belongings are so few and they cannot easily 
be added to or replaced, and one clings to them and gathers up 
odd bits of things whidi, in the world outside, would go- to the 



JAWAHARLAL NliHRU 


350 

waste-paper basket. The property sense does not leave one even 
when there is nothing worth while to own and keep. 

Sometimes a physical longing would come for the soft things 
of life — ^bodily comfort, pleasant surroundings, the company of 
friends, interesting conversation, games with children. ... A 
picture or a paragraph in a newspaper Would bring the old days 
vividly before one, carefree days of youth, and a nostalgia 
would seize one, and the day would be passed in restlessness. 

I used to spin a little daily, for I found some manual occupa- 
tion soothing and a relief from too much intellectual work. My 
main occupation, however, was reading and writing. I could not 
have all the books I wanted, as there were restrictions and a 
censorship, and the censors were not always t'ery competent for 
the job. Spengler’s Decline of the, West was held up because 
the title looked dangerous and seditious. But I must not com- 
plain, for I had, on the whole, a goodly variety of books. Again 
I seem to have been a favoured person, and many of my col- 
leagues (A Class prisoners) had the greatest difficulty in getting 
books on current topics. In Benares Gaol, I was told, even the 
official White Paper, containing the British Government’s con- 
stitutiona^roposals, was not allowed in, as it dealt with political 
matters. The only books that British officials heartily recom- 
mended were religious books or novels. It is wonderful how dear 
to the heart of the British Government is the subject of religion 
and how impartially it encourages all brands of it. 

When the most ordinary civil liberties have been curtailed in 
India, it is hardly pertinent to talk of a prisoner’s rights. And 
yet the subject is worthy of consideration. If a court of law 
sentences a person to imprisonment, does it follow that not only 
his body but also his mind should be incarcerated? Why should 
not the minds of prisoners be free even though their bodies are 
not? Those in charge of the prison administrations in India will 
no doubt be horrified at such a question, for their capacity for 
new ideas and sustained thought is usually limited. Censorship 
is bad enough at any time and is partisan and stupid. In India 
it deprives us of a great deal of modem literature and advanced 
journals and newspapers. The list of proscribed books is exten- 
sive and is frequently added to. To add to all this, the prisoner 
has to suffer a second and a separate censorship, and thus many 
books and newspapers that can be legally purchased and read 
outside the prison may not reach him. 

Some time ago this question arose in the United States, in the 
famous Sing Sing Prison of New York, where some Communist 
newspapers had been banned. The fe^ng against Communists 



PRISON HUMOURS 


351 

is very strong among the ruling classes in America, but in spite 
of this the prison authorities agreed that the inmates of the 
prison could receive any publication which they desired, inchid- 
ing Communist newspapers and magazines. The sole exception 
made by the Warden was in the case of cartoons which he 
regarded as inflammatory. 

It is a little absurd to discuss this question of freedom of 
mind in prison in India when, as it happens, the vast majority 
of the prisoners are not allowed any newspapers or writing 
materials. It is not a question of censorship but of total denial. 
Only A Class (or in Bengal, Division I) prisoners are allowed 
writing materials as a matter of course, and not even all these are 
allowed daily newspapers. The daily newspaper allowed is of the 
Government’s choice. B and C Class prisoners, politicals and 
non-politicals, are not supposed to have writing materials. The 
former may sometimes get them as a very special privilege, 
which is frequently withdrawn. Probably the proportion of 
A Class prisoners to the others is one to a thousand, and they 
might well be excluded in considering the lot of prisoners in 
Inma. But it is well to remember that even these favoured 
A Class convicts have far less privileges in regard to books 
and newspapers than the ordinary prisoners in most civilised 
countries. 

For the rest, the 999 in every thousand, two or three books 
are permitted at a time, but conditions are such that they 
cannot always take advantage of this privilege. Writing or the 
taking of notes of books read arc dangerous pastimes in which 
they must not indulge. This deliberate discouragement of in- 
tellectual development is curious and revealing. From the point 
of view of reclaiming a prisoner and of making him a fit 
citizen, his mind should be approached and diverted, and he 
should be made literate and taught some craft. But this point 
of view has perhaps not struck the prison authorities in India. 
Certainly it has been conspicuous by its absence in the United 
Provinces, Recently attempts has been made to teach reading 
and writing to the boys and young men in prison, but they are 
wholly ineffective, and the men in charge of them have no 
competence. Sometimes it is said that convicts are averse to 
learning. My own experience has been the exact opposite, and 
I found many of them, who came to me for the puroose, to 
have a perfect passion for learning to read and write. We used 
to teach such convicts as came our way, and they worked hard; 
and sometimes when I woke up in the middle of the night I 
was surprised to find one or two of them sitting by a dim 



352 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

lantern inside their barrack, learning their lessons for the next 
day. 

So I occupied myself with ray books, going from one type of 
reading to another, but usually sticking to ‘ heavy ’ books. 
Novels made one feel mentally slack, and I did not read many 
of them. Sometimes I would weary of too much reading, and 
then I would take to writing. My historical scries of letters to 
my daughter kept me occupied right through my two-year 
term, and they helped me very greatly to keep mentally fit. 
To some extent I lived through the past I was writing about 
and almost forgot about my gaol surroundings. 

Travel books were always welcome — ^records of old travellers, 
Hiuen Tsang, and Marco Polo, and Ibn Battuta and others, and 
moderns like Sven Hedin, with his journeys across the deserts 
of Central Asia, and Roerich, finding strange adventures in 
Tibet. Picture books also, especially of mountains and glaciers 
and deserts, for in prison one hungers for wide spaces and seas 
and mountains. I had some beautiful picture books of Mont 
Blanc, the Alps, and the Himalayas, and I turned to them often 
and gazed at the glaciers when the temperature of my cell or 
barrack was ii5”F. or even more. An atlas was an exciting 
affair. It brought all manner of past memories and dreams of 
places we had visited and places we had wanted to go to. And 
the longing to go again to those haunts of past days, and visit 
all the other inviting marks and dots that represented great 
cities, and cross the shaded regions that were mountains, and 
the blue patches that were seas, and to see the beauties of the 
world, and watch the struggles and conflicts of a changing 
humanity — ^the longing to do all this would seize us and clutch 
us by the throat, and we would hurriedly and sorrowfully put 
the atlas by, and return to the well-known walls that sur- 
rounded us and the dull routine that was our daily lot. 



XLV 


ANIMALS IN PRISON 

For fourteen and a half months I lived in nw little cell or 
room in the Dehra Dun Gaol, and I began to feel as if I was 
almost a part of it. I was familiar with every bit of it; I knew 
every mark arrd dent on the whitewashed walls and on the 
uneven floor and the ceiling with its moth-eaten rafters. In the 
little yard outside I greeted little tufts of grass and odd bits of 
stone as old firiends. I was not alone in my cell, for several 
colonies of wasps and hornets lived there, and many lizards 
found a home behind the rafters, emerging in the evenings in 
search of prey. If thoughts and emotions leave their traces 
behind in the physical surroundings, the very air of that cell 
must be thick with them, and they must cling to every object 
in that little space. 

I had had better cells in other prisons, but in Dehra Dun I 
had one privilege which was very precious to me. The gaol 
proper was a very small one, and we were kept in an old 
lock-up outside the gaol walls, but within the gaol compound. 
This place was so small that Acre was no room to walk about 
in it, and so we were allowed, morning and evening, to go out 
and walk up and down in front of the gate, a distance of 
about a hundred yards. We remained in the gaol compound, 
but this coming outside the walls gave us a view of the moun- 
tains and the fields and a public road at some distance. This 
was not a special privilege for me; it was common for aU the 
A and B Class prisoners kept at Dehra Dun. Within the com- 
pound, but outside the gaol walls, there was another small 
building called the European Lock-up. This had no enclosing 
wall, and a person inside the cell could have a fine view of the 
mountains and the life outside. European convicts and odiers 
kept here were also allowed to walk in front of the gaol gate 
every morning and evening. 

Only a prisoner who has been confined for long behind high 
walls can appreciate the extraordinary psychological value of 
these outside walks and open views. I loved these outings, and 
I did not give them up even during the monsoon, when the 
rain came down for days in torrents and I had to in 
ankle-deep of water. I would have welcomed the outing in any 
place, but the sight of the towering Himalayas near by was an 

AA 



354 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

added joy which went a long way to removing the weariness 
of prison. It was my good fortune that during the long period 
when I had no interviews, and when for many months I was 
quite alone, I could gaze at these mountains that I loved. I 
could not see the mountains from my cell, but my mind was 
full of them and I was ever' conscious of their nearness, and a 
secret intimacy seemed to grow between us. 

“ Flocks of birds have flown high and away; 

A solitary drift of cloud, too, has gone, wandering on. 

And I sit alone with Ching-ting Peak, towering beyond. 

We never grow tired of each other, the mountain and I.” 

I am afraid I cannot say with the poet, Li.T’ai Po, that I 
never grew weary, even of the mountain; but that was a rare 
experience, and, as a rule, I found great comfort in its 
proximity. Its solidity and imperturbability looked down upon 
me with the wisdom of a million years, and mocked at my 
varying humours and soothed my fevered mind. 

Spring was very pleasant in Dehra, and it was a far longer 
one than in the plains below. The winter had denuded almost 
•all the trees of their leaves, and they stood naked and bare. 
Even four magnificent pecpal trees, which stood in front of the 
gaol gate, much to my surprise, dropped nearly all their leaves. 
Gaunt and cheerless they stood there, till the spring air warmed 
them up again and sent a message of life to their innermost 
cells. Suddenly there was a stir both in the peepals and the 
other trees, and an air of mjrstery surrounded them as of 
secret operations going on behind the scenes; and I would be 
stirtled to find little bits of green peeping out all over them. 
It was a gay and cheering sight; And then, very rapidly, the 
leaves would come out in their millions and glisten in the sun- 
light and play about in the breeze. How wonderful is the 
sudden change from bud to leaf I 

I had never noticed before that fresh mango leaves are 
reddish-brown, russet coloured, remarkably like the autumn 
tints on the Kashmir hills. But they change colour soon and 
become green. 

The monsoon rains were always welcome, for they ended the 
summer heat. But one could have too much of a good thing, 
and Dehra Dun is one of the favoured haunts of the rain god. 
Within the first five or six weeks of the break of the monsoon 
we would have about fifty or sixty inches of rain, and it was 
. not pleasant to sit cooped up in a little narrow place trying to 



ANIMALS IN PRISON 


355 

avoid the tvater dripping from the ceiling or rushing in from 
the windows. 

Autumn again was pleasant, and so was the winter, except 
when it rained. With thunder and rain and piercing cold 
winds, one longed for a decent habitation and a little warmth 
and comfort. Occasionally there would be a hailstorm, with 
hailstones bigger than marbles coming down on the corrugated 
iron roofs and making a tremendous noise, something like an 
artillery bombardment. 

I remember one day particularly; it was the a4th of Decem- 
ber, 1933. There was a thunderstorm and rain all day, and it 
was bitterly cold. Altogether it was one of the most miserable 
days, from the bodily point of view, that I have spent in gaol. 
In the evening it cleared up suddenly, and all my misery de- 
parted when I saw all the neighbouring mountains and hills 
covered with a thick mantle of snow. The next day — Christ- 
mas Day — was lovely and clear, and there was a beautiful view 
of snow-covered mountains. 

Prevented from indulging in normal activities we became 
more observant of nature’s ways. We watched also the various 
animals and insects that came our tvay. As I grew more 
observant I noticed all manner of insects living in my cell or 
in the little yard outside. I realised that while I complained of 
loneliness, that yard, which seemed empty and deserted, was 
teeming with life. All these creeping or crawling or flying in- 
sects lived their life without interfering with me in any way, 
and I saw no reason why I should interfere with them. But 
there was continuous war between me and bed-bugs, mosquitos, 
and, to some extent, flies. Wasps and hornets I tolerated, and 
there were himdreds of them in my cell. There had been a 
little tiff between us when, inadvertently I think, a wasp had 
stung me. In my anger I tried to exterminate the lot, but they 
put up a brave fight in defence of their temporary home, which 
probably contained their eggs, and I desisted and decided to 
leave them in peace if they did not interfere with me any 
more. For over a year after diat I lived in that cell surrounded 
by these wasps and hornets, and they never attacked me, and 
we respected each other. 

Bats I did not like, but I had to endure them. They flew 
soundlessly in the evening^dusk, and one could just see them 
against the darkening sky.Eerie things; I had a horror of them. 
They seemed to pass within an inch of one’s face, and I was 
always afraid that they might hit me. Higher up in the air 
passed the big bats, the flying-foxes. 



356 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I used to watch the ants and the white ants and other insects 
by the hour. And the lizards as they crept about in the 
evenings and stalked their prey and chased each other, wagging 
their tails in a most comic fashion. Ordinarily they avoided 
wasps, but twice I saw them stalk them with enormous care 
and seize them from the front. I do not know if this avoidance 
of the sting was intentional or accidental. 

Then there were squirrels, crowds of them if trees were 
about. They would become very venturesome and come right 
near us. In Lucknow Gaol I used to sit reading almost without 
moving for considerable periods, and a squirrel would climb 
up my leg and sit on my knee and have a look round. And 
then It would look into my eyes and realise that I was not a 
tree or whatever it had tideen me for. Fear would disable it 
for a moment, and then it would scamper away. Little baby 
squirrels would sometimes fall down from the trees. The 
mother would come after them, roll them up into a little ball, 
and carry them off to safety. Occasionally the baby got lost. 
One of my companions picked up three of these lost baby 
squirrels and looked after them. They were so tiriy that it was 
a problem how "fo feed them. The problem was, however, 
solved rather ingeniously. A fountain-pen filler, with a little 
cotton wool attached to it, made an efficient feeding bottle. 

Pigeons abounded in all the gaols I went to, except in the 
mountain prison of Almora. There were thousands of them, 
and in the eveniims the sky would be thick with them. Some- 
times the gaol officials would shoot them down and feed on 
them. There were mainas, of course; they are to be found 
everywhere. A pair of them nested over my cell door in Dehra 
Dun, and I used to feed them. They grew quite tame, and if 
there was any delay in their morning or evening meal they 
would sit quite near me and loudly demand their food. It was 
amusing to watch their signs and listen to their impatient cries. 

In Naini there were thousands of parrots, and large numbers 
of them lived in the crevices of my barrack walls. Their court- 
ship and love-making was always a fascinating sight, and 
sometimes there were fierce quarrels between two male parrots 
over a lady parrot, who sat calmly by waiting for the result of 
the encounter and ready to grant her favours to the winner. 

Dehra Dun had a variety of birds, and there was a regular 
jumble of singing and lively chattering and twittering, and 
high above it all came the koel’s plaintive call. During the 
monsoon and just before it the Brain-Fever bird visited us, and 
I realised soon why it was so named. It was amazing the per- 



ANIMAtS IN PRISON 


357 

slstence with which it went on repeating the same notes, in 
daytime and at night, in sunshine and in pouring rain. We 
could not see most of these birds, we could only hear them 
as a rule, as there were no trees in our little yard. But I used 
to watch the eagles and the kites gliding gracefully high up in 
the air, sometimes swooping down and then allowing them- 
selves to be carried up by a current of air. Often a horde of 
wild duck would fly over our heads. 

There was a large colony of monkeys in Bareilly Gaol and 
their antics were always worth watching. One incident im- 
pressed me. A baby monkey managed to come down into our 
barrack enclosure and he could not mount up the wall again. 
The warder and some convict overseers and other prisoners 
caught hold of him and tied a bit of string round his neck. 
The parents (presumably) of the little one saw all this from 
the top of the high wall, and their anger grew. Suddenly one 
of them, a huge monkey, jumped down and charged almost 
right into the crowd which surrounded the baby monkey. It 
was an extraordinary brave thing to do, for the warder and 
C.O.’s had sticks and lathis and they were brandishing them 
about, and there was quite a crowd of them. Reckless courage 
triumphed, and the crowd of humans fled, terrified, leaving 
their sticks behind theml The little monkey was rescued. 

We had often animal visitors that were not welcome. 
Scorpions were frequently found in our cells, especially after 
a thunderstorm. It was surprising that I was never stung by 
one, for I would come across them in the most unlikely places — 
on my bed, or sitting on a book which I had just lifted up. I 
kept a particularly black and poisonous-looking brute in a 
bottle for some time, feeding him with flies, etc., and then 
when I tied him up on a wall with a string he managed to 
escape. I had no desire to meet him loose again, and so I 
cleaned my cell out and hunted for him everywhere, but he 
had vanished. 

Three or four snakes were also found in my cells or near 
them. News of one of them got out, and there were headlines 
in the Press. As a matter of fact I welcomed the diversion. 
Prison life is dull enough, and everything that breaks through 
the monotony is appreaated. Not that I appreciate or welcome 
snakes, but they do not fill me with terror as they do some 
people. I am aftaid of their bite, of course, and would protect 
myself if I saw a snake. But there would be no feeling of 
repulsion or overwhelming flight. Centipedes horrify me 
much more; it is not so much fear as instinaive repulsion. In 



35S jAWArtAKLAl. KEHRU 

Alipore Gaol in Calciifta I woke in the middle of the night 
and felt something crawling over my foot. I pressed a torch 
I had and I saw a centipede on the bed. Instinctively and with 
amazing rapidity I vaulted clear out of that bed and nearly hit 
the cell wall. I realised fully then what Pavlov’s reflexes were. 

In Dehra Dun I saw a new animal, or rather an animal which 
was new to me. I was standing at the gaol gate talking to the 
gaoler when we noticed a man outside carrying a strange 
animal. The gaoler sent for him, and I saw something between 
a lizard and a crocodile, about two feet long w'ith claws and a 
scaly covering. This uncouth animal, which was very much 
alive, had been twisted round in a most peculiar way forming 
a kind of knot, and its owner had passed a pole through this 
knot and was merrily carrying it in this fashion. He called it 
a “Bo.” When asked by the gaoler what he proposed to do 
with it, he replied with a broad smile that he would make 
bhujji — a. kind of curry — out of it! He was a forest-dweller. 
Subsequently I discovered from reading F. W. Champion’s book 
— The Jungle in Sunlight and Shadow — that this animal was 
the Pangolin. 

Prisoners, especially long-term convicts, have to suffer most 
from emotional starvation. Often they seek some emotional 
satisfaction by keeping animal pets. The ordinary prisoner can- 
not keep them, but the convict overseers have a little more 
freedom and the gaol staff usually does not object. The com- 
monest pets were squirrels and, strangely, mongooses. Dogs 
are not allowed in gaols, but cats seem to be encouraged. A 
little kitten made friends with me once. It belonged to a gaol 
official, and when he was transferred he took it away with him. 
I missed it. Although dogs are not allowed, I got tied up with 
some dogs accidentally in Dehra Dun. A gaol official had 
brought a bitch, and then he was transferred, and he deserted 
her. The poor thing became a homeless wanderer, living under 
culverts, picking up scraps from the warders, usually starving. 
As I was being kept in the lock-up outside the gaol proper, she 
used to come to me begging for food. I began to feed her 
regularly, and she gave birth to a litter of pups under a culvert. 
Many of these were taken away, but three remained and I fed 
them; One of the puppies fell ill with a violent distemper, and 
gave me a mat deal of trouble. I nursed her with cafe, and 
sometimes I would get up a dozen times in the course of the 
night to look after her. She survived, and I was happy that my 
nursing had pulled her round. 

I came in contact with animals far more in prison than I had 



ANIMALS IN PRISON 359 

done outside. I had always been fond of dogs, and had kept 
some, but I could never look after them properly as other 
matters claimed my attention. In prison I was grateful for their 
company. Indians do not, as a rule, approve of animals as 
household pets. It is remarkable that in spite of their general 
philosophy of non-violence to animals, they are often singularly 
careless and unkind to them. Even the cow, that favoured 
animal, though looked up to and almost worshipped by many 
Hindus and often the cause of riots, is not treated kindly. 
Worship and kindliness do not always go together. 

Different countries have adopted different animals as symbols 
of their ambition or character — ^the eagle of the United States 
of America and of Germany, the lion and bulldog of England, 
the fighting-cock of France, the bear of old Ritssia. How far 
do these patron animals mould national character? Most of 
them are aggressive, fighting animals, beasts of prey. It is not 
surprising that the people who grow up with these examples 
before them should mould themselves consciously after them 
and strike up aggressive attitudes, and roar, and prey on others. 
Nor is it surprising that the Hindu should be mild and non- 
violent, for his patron animal is the cow. 



XLVI 


STRUGGLE 

Outside, the struggle went on, and brave men and women 
continued to defy peacefully a powerful and entrenched govern- 
ment, though they knew that it was not for them to achieve in 
the present or the near future. And repression without break 
and with ever-increasing intensity, demonstrated the basis of 
British rule in India. There was no camouflage about it now, 
and this at least was some satisfaction to us. Bayonets were 
triumphant, but a great warrior had once said that “ you can 
do everything with bayonets save sit on them.” It was better 
that we should be governed thus, we thought, than that we 
should sell our souls and submit to spiritual prostitution. We 
were physically helpless in prison, but we felt we served our 
cause even there, and served it better than many outside. 
Should we, because of our weakness, sacrifice the future of 
India to save ourselves? It was true that the limits of human 
vitality and human strength were narrow, and many an indi- 
vidual was physically disabled, or died, or fell out of the ranks, 
or even betrayed the cause. But the cause went on despite set- 
backs; there could be no failure if ideals remained undimmed 
and spirits undaunted. Real failure was a desertion of principle, 
a denial of our right, and an ignoble submission to wrong. 
Self-made wounds always took longer to heal than those caused 
by an adversary. 

There was often a weariness at our weaknesses and at a world 
gone awry, and yet there was a measure of pride for our 
achievement. For our people had indeed behaved splendidly, 
and it was good to feel oneself to be a member of a gallant 
band. 

During those years of dvil disobedience two attempts were 
made to hold open Congress sessions, one at Delhi and the 
other at Calcutta. It was obvious that an illegal organisation 
could not meet normally and in peace, and any attempt at an 
open session meant conflict with the police. The meetings were 
in fact dispersed forcibly with the help of the lathi by the 
police, and large numbers of people were arrested. The extra- 
ordinary thing about these gatherings was the fact that 
thousands came firom all parts of India as delegates to these il- 
legal gatherings. I was glad to learn that people from the United 



STRUGGLE 


361 

Provinces played a prominent part in both of them. My 
mother also insisted on^ going to the Calcutta session at the 
end of March 1933. She was 'arrested, however, together with 
Pandit Malaviya and others, and detained in prison for a few 
days at Asansol, on the way to Calcutta. I was amazed at the 
energy and vitality she showed, frail and ailing as she was. 
Prison was really of little consequence to her; she had gone 
through a harder ordeal. Her son and both her daughters 
and others whom she loved spent long periods in prison, 
and the empty house where she lived had become a nightmare 
to her. 

As our struggle toned down and stabilised itself at a low 
level there was little of excitement in it, except at long inter- 
vals. My thoughts travelled more to other countries, and I 
watched and studied, as far as I could in gaol, the world 
situation in the grip of the great depression. I read as many 
books as I could find on the subject, and the more I read the 
more fascinated I grew. India with her problems and struggles 
became just a part of this mighty w'orld drama, of the great-- 
struggle of political and economic forces that was going on 
everywhere, nationally and internationally. In that struggle 
my own syifipathies went increasingly towards the communist 
side. 

I had long been drawn to socialism and communism, and 
Russia had appealed to me. Much in Soviet Russia I dislike — 
the ruthless suppression of all contrary opinion, the wholesale 
regimentation, the unnecessary violence (as I thought) in carry- 
ing out various policies. But there was no lack of violence and 
suppression in the capitalist world, and I realised more and 
more how the very basis and foundation of our acquisitive 
society and property was violence. Without violence it could 
not continue fer many days. A measure of political liberty 
meant little indeed when the fear of starvation was always 
compelling the vast majority of people everywhere to submit 
to the will of the few, to the greater glory and advantage of 
the latter. 

Violence was common in both places, but the violence 
of the capitalist order seemed inherent in it; whilst the 
violence of Russia, bad though it was, aimed at a new 
order based on peace and co-operation and real freedom fer the 
masses. With all her blunders, Soviet Russia had triumphed 
over enormous difficulties and taken great strides towards this 
new order.. While the rest of the world was in the grip of the 
depression and going backward in some ways, in the Soviet 



363 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

country a great new world was being built up before our eyes. 
Russia, following the great Lenin, looked into the future and 
thought only of what was to be, while other countries lay 
numbed under the dead hand of the past and spent their 
energy in preserving the useless relics of a bygone age. In 
particular, I was impressed by the reports of the great progress 
made by the backward regions of Central Asia under the 
Soviet regime. In the balance, therefore, I was all in favour of 
Russia, and the presence and example of the Soviets was a 
bright and heartening phenonaenon in a dark and dismal 
world. 

But Soviet Russia’s success or failure, vastly important as it 
was as a practical, experiment in establishing a communist 
state, did not affect the soundness of the theory of communism. 
The Bolsheviks may blunder or even fail because of national 
or international reasons, and yet the communist theory may 
be correct. On the basis of that very theory it was absurd to 
copy blindly what had taken place in Russia, for its application 
depended on the particular conditions prevailing in the country 
in question and the stage of its historical development. Besides, 
India, or any other country, could profit by the triumphs as well 
as the inevitable mistakes of the Bolsheviks. Perhaps the Bol- 
sheviks had tried to go too fast because, surrounded as they 
were by a world of enemies, they feared external aggression. 
A slower tempo might avoid much of the misery caused in 
the rural areas. But then the question arose if really radical 
results could be obtained by slowing down the rate of change. 
Reformism was an impossible solution of any vital problem at 
a critical moment when the basic structure had to be changed, 
and however slow the progress might be later on, the initial 
step must be a complete break with the existing order, which 
had fulfilled its purpose and was now only a drag on future 
progress. 

In India, only a revolutionary plan could solve the two 
related questions of the land and industry as weU as almost 
every other major problem before the country. “There is no 
graver mistake,” as Mr. Lloyd George says in his War Memoirs, 
“ than to leap the abyss in two Jumps.” 

Russia apart, the theory and philosophy of Marxism 
lightened up many a dark corner of my mind. History came to 
have a new meaning for me. The Marxist interpretation threw 
a flood of light on it, and it became an unfolding drama with 
some order and purpose, howsoever unconscious, behind it. In 
spite of the appalling waste and misery of the past and the 



STRUGGLE 


363 

present, the future was bright tYi^h hope, though many dangers 
intervened. It was the essential freedom from dogma and the 
scientific outlook of Marxism that appealed to me. It was 
true that there was plenty of dogma in official communism in 
Russia and elsewhere, and frequently heresy hunts were or- 
ganised. That seemed to be deplorable, though it was not 
difficult to understand in view of the tremendous changes 
taking place rapidly in the Soviet countries when effective oppo- 
sition might have resulted in catastrophic failure. 

The great world crisis and slump seemed to justify the 
Marxist analysis. While all odier systems and theories were 
groping about in the dark, Marxism alone explained it more or 
less satisfactorily and offered a real solution. 

As this conviction grew upon me, I was filled with a new 
excitement and my depression at the non-success of civil diso- 
bedience grew much less. Was not the world marching rapidly 
towards the desired consummation? There were grave dangers 
of wars and catastrophes, but at any rate we were moving. 
There was no stagnation. Our national struggle became a stage 
in the longer journey, and it was as w'cll that repression and 
suffering were tempering our people for future struggles and 
forcing them to consider the new ideas that were stirring the 
world. We would be the stronger and the more disciplined and 
hardened by the elimination of the weaker elements. Time was 
in our favour. 

And so I studied carefully what was happening in Russia, 
Germany, England, America, Japan, China, France, Spain, Italy 
and Central Europe, and tried to understand the tangled web 
of current affairs. I followed with interest the attempts of each 
country separately, and of all of them together, to weather 
the storm. The repeated failures of international conferences 
to find a solution for political and economic ills and the 
problem of disarmament reminded me forcibly of a little, but 
sufficiently troublesome, problem of our own— the communal 
problem. With all the goodwill in the world, we have so far 
not solved the problem; and, in spite of a widespread belief 
that failure would lead to world catastrophe, the great states- 
men of Europe and America have failed to pull together. In 
either case the approach was wrong, and the people concerned 
did not dare to go the right way. 

In thinking over the troubles and conflicts of the world, I 
forgot to some extent my own personal and national troubles. 
I would even feel b uoyant occasionally at the fact that I was 
alive at this great revolutionary period of the world's history. 



364 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Perhaps I might also have to play some little part in my own 
corner of the world in the great changes that were to come. 
At other times I would find the atmosphere of conflict and 
violence all over the world very depressing. Worse still was the 
sight of intelligent men and women who had become so accus- 
tomed to human degradation and slavery that their minds were 
too coarsened to resent suffering and poverty and inhumanity. 
Noisy vulgarity and organised humbug flourished in this stifling 
moral atmosphere, and good men were silent. The triumph 
of Hitler and the Brown Terror that followed was a great 
shock, though I consoled myself that it could only be tem- 
porary. Almost one had the feeling of the futility of human 
endeavour. The machine went on blindly, what could a little 
cog in it do? 

But still the communist philosophy of life gave me comfort 
and hope. How was it to be applied to India? We had not 
solved yet the problem of political freedom, and the national- 
istic outlook filled our minds. Were we to jump to economic 
freedom at the same time or take them in turn, however short 
the interval might be? World events as well as happenings 
in India were foi-cing the social issue to the front, and it 
seemed that political freedom could no longer be separated 
from it 

The policy of the British Government in India had resulted in 
ranging the socially reactionary classes in opposition to political 
independence. That was inevitable, and I welcomed the clearer 
demarcation of the various classes and groups in India. But 
was this fact appreciated by others? Apparently not by many. 
It was true that there were a handful of orthodox Commuiusts 
in some of the big cities and they were hostile to, and bitterly 
critical of, the national movement. The organised Labour 
movement, especially in Bombay and, to a lesser extent, in 
Calcutta, was also socialistic in a loose kind of way, but it was 
broken up into bits and suffering from the depression. Vague 
communistic and socialistic ideas had spread among the intel- 
ligentsia, even among intelligent Government officials. The 
younger men and women of the Congress, who used to read 
Bryce on Democracies and Morley and Keith and Mazzini, 
were now reading, when they could get them, books on social- 
ism and communism and Russia. The Meerut Conspiracy 
Case had helped greatly in directing people’s minds to these 
new ideas, and the world crisis had compelled attention. Every- 
where there was in evidence a new spirit of enquiry, a 
questioning, and a challenge to existing institutions. The 



STRUGGLE 


365 

general direction of the mental wind was obvious, but still it 
was a gentle breeze, unsure of itself. Some people flirted with 
Fascist ideas. A clear and definite ideology was lacking. 
Nationalism still was the dominating thought. 

It seemed clear to me that nationalism would remain the 
outstanding urge, till some measure of political freedom was 
attained. Because of this the Congress had been, and was still 
(apart from certain Labour circles), the most advanced organisa- 
tion in India, as it was far the most powerful. During the past 
thirteen years, under Gandhiji’s leadership, it had produced 
a wonderful awakening of the masses and, in spite of its vague 
bourgeois ideology, it had served a revolutionary purpose. It 
had not exhausted its utility yet, and was not likely to do so till 
the nationalist urge gave place to a social one. Future progress, 
both ideological and in action, must therefore be largely asso- 
ciated with the Congress, though other avenues could also be 
used. 

To desert the Congress seemed to me thus to cut oneself 
adrift from the vital urge of the nation, to blunt the most 
powerful weapon we had, and perhaps to waste energy in 
ineffective adventurism. And yet, was the Congress, constimted 
as it was, ever likely to adopt a really radical social solution? 
If such an issue was placed before it, the result was bound to 
be to split it into two or more parts, or at least to drive away 
large sections from it. That in itself was not undesirable or 
unwelcome if the issues became clearer and a strongly-knit 
group, either a majority or minority in the Congress, stood for 
a radical social programme. 

But Congress at present meant Gandhiji. What would he 
do? Ideologically he was sometimes amazingly backward, and 
yet in action he had been the greatest revolutionary of recent 
times in India. He was a unique personality, and it was im- 
possible to judge him by the usual standards, or even to apply 
the ordinary canons of logic to him. But because he was a 
revolutionary at bottom and was pledged to political inde- 
pendence for India, he was bound to play an uncompromising 
r61e till that independence was achieved. And in this very 
process he would release tremendous mass energies and would 
nimselfj I half hoped, advance step by step towards the social 
goal. 

The orthodox Communists in India and outside have fi>r 
many years past attacked Gandhiji and the Congress bitterly, 
and imputed all manner of base motives to the Congress 
.leaders. , Many of their theoretical criticisms of Congress, 



366 JAWAI-IARLAL NEHRU 

ideology were able and pointed, and subsequent events partly 
justified them. Some of the earlier Communist analyses of the 
general Indian political situation turned out to be remarkably 
correct. But as soon as they leave their general principles and 
enter into details, and especially when they consider the role 
of the Congress, they go hopelessly astray. One of the reasons 
for the weakness in numbers as well as influence of the Com- 
munists in India is that, instead of spreading a scientific know- 
ledge of communism and trying to convert people’s minds to 
it, they have largely concentrated on abuse of others. This 
has reacted on them and done them great injury. Most of 
them are used to working in labour areas, where a few slogans 
are usually enough to win over the workers. But mere slogans 
are- not enough for the intellectual, and they have not realised 
that in India to-day the middle-class intellectual is the most 
revolutionary force. Almost in spite of the orthodox Com- 
munists, many intellectuals have been drawn to communism, 
but even so there is a gulf between them. 

According to the Communists, the objective of the Congress 
leaders has been to bring mass pressure on the Government in 
order to obtain industrial and commercial concessions in the 
interests of Indian capitalists and zamindars. The task of the 
Congress is "to harness the economic and political discontent 
of the peasantry, the lower middle-class and the industrial 
working-class to the chariot of the mill-owners and financiers 
of Bombay, Ahmedabad and Calcutta.” The Indian capitalists 
are supposed to sit behind the scenes and issue orders to the 
Congress Working Committee first to organise a mass move- 
ment and, when it becomes too vast and dangerous, to suspend 
it or side-track it. Further, that the Congress leaders really do 
not want the British to go away, as they are retjuired to control 
and exploit a starving population, and the Indian middle class 
do not feel themselves equal to this. 

It is surprising that able Communists should believe this 
fantastic analysis, but believing this as they apparently do, it 
is not surprising that they should fail so remarkably in 
India. Their basic error seems to be that they judge the Indian 
National Movement fi:om European Labour standards, and 
used as they are to the repeated betrayals of the labour move- 
ment by the labour leaders, they apply the analogy to India. 
The Indian National Movement is obviously not a labour or 
proletarian movement. It is a bourgeois movement, as its very 
name implies, and its objective so far has been, not a change 
of the social order, but political independence. This objective 



STRUGGLE 


367 

may be criticised as not far-reaching enough, and nationalism 
itself may be condemned as out of date. But accepting the 
fundamental basis of the movement, it is absurd to say that 
the leaders betray the masses because tliey do not try to 
upset the land system or the capitalist system. They never 
claimed to do so. Some people in the Congress, and they are 
a growing number, want to change the land system and the 
capitalist system, but they cannot speak in the name of the 
Congress. 

It is true that the Indian capitalist classes (not the big zamin- 
dars and taluqadars) have profited greatly by the national 
movement because of British and other foreign boycotts, and 
the push given to swadeshi. This was inevitable, as every 
national movement encourages home industries and preaches 
boycotts. As a matter of fact the Bombay mill industry in a 
body, during tlic continuance of civil disobedience and when 
we were preaching the boycott of British goods, had the 
temerity to conclude a pact wdth Lancashire. From the point 
of view of the Congress, this was a gross betrayal of the 
national cause, and it was characterised as such. The repre- 
sentative of the Bombay mill-owners in the Assembly also 
consistently ran down the Congress and ‘ extremists ’ while most 
of us were in gaol. 

The part that many capitalist elements have played in India 
during the past few years has been scandalous, even from the 
Congress and nationalist view-point. Ottawa may have benefited 
temporarily some small groups, but it was bad in the interest 
of Indian industry as a whole, and made it even more sub- 
servient to British capital and industry. It was harmful to the 
masses, and it was negotiated while our struggle was being 
carried on, and many thousands were in prison. Every 
Dominion wrung out the hardest terms firom England, but 
India had the privilege of making almost a gift to her. During 
the last few years also financial adventurers have trafficked in 
gold and silver at India’s expense. 

As for the big zamindars and taluqadars, they ranged them- 
selves completdy against the Congress in the Round Table 
Conference, and they openly and aggressively declared them- 
selves on the side of the Government right through civil diso- 
bedience. It was with their help that Government passed 
repressive legislation in various provinces embodying the 
Ordinances. And in the United Provinces Council the great 
majority of the zamindar members voted against the release of 
civil disobedience prisoners. ' 



368 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The idea that Gandhiji was forced to launch seemingly 
aggressive movements in 1921 and 1930 because of mass pres- 
sure, is also absolutely wrong. Mass stirrings there were, of 
course, but on both occasions it was Gandhiji who forced 
the pace. In 1921 he carried the Congress almost single- 
handed, and plunged it into non-co-operation. In 1930 it 
would have been ^uite impossible to have any aggressive and 
effective direct action movement if he had resisted it in any 
way. 

It is very unfortunate that foolish and ill-informed criticisms 
of a personal nature are made, because they divert attention 
from the real issues. To attack Gandhiji’s hona fides is to injure 
onself and one’s own cause, for to the millions of India he 
stands as the embodiment of truth, and any one who know.s 
him at all realises the passionate earnestness with which he is 
always seeking to do right. 

Communists in India have associated with the industrial 
workers of the big towns. They have little knowledge of, or 
contact with, the rural areas. The industrial workers, important 
as they are, and likely to be more so in the future, must take 
second place before the peasants, for the problem of to-day in 
India is the problem of the peasantry. Congress workers, on 
the other hand, have spread all over these rural areas and, 
in the ordinary course, the Congress must develop into a 
vast peasant organisation. Peasants are seldom revolutionary 
after their immediate objective is attained, and it is likely 
that some time in the future the usual problem of city versus 
village and industrial worker versus peasant will rise in India 
also. 

It has been my privilege to be associated very closely with 
a large number of Congress leaders and workers, and I could 
not wish for a finer set of men and women. And yet I have 
differed from them on vital issues, and often I have felt a little 
weary at finding that they do not appreciate or understand 
something that seems to me quite obvious. It was not due to 
want of intelligence, somehow we moved in different ideo- 
logical grooves. I realised how difficult it is to cross these 
boundaries suddenly. They constitute different philosophies of 
life, and we grow into them gradually and unconsciously. It 
is fiitile to blame the other pariy. Socialism involves a certain 
psychological outlook on life and its problems. It is more than 
mere logic. So also are the other outlooks based on heredity, 
upbringing, the unseen influences of the past and our present 
environments. Only life itself with its bitter lessons forces, us 



STRUGGLE 


369 

along new paths and ultimately, which is far harder, makes us 
think differently. Perhaps we may help a little in this process. 
And perhaps 

" On rencontre sa destinde 
Souvent par les chemins q’on prend pour I’eviier." 



XLVII 


WHAT IS RELIGION? 

Our peaceful and monotonous routine in gaol was suddenly 
upset in the middle of September 1933 by a bombshell. News 
came that Gandhiji had decided to “ fast unto death ” in disap- 
proval of the separate electorates given by Mr. Ramssw Mac- 
Donald’s Communal Award to the Depressed Classes. Wiat a 
capacity he had to give shocks to people ! Suddenly all manner 
of ideas rushed into my head; all kinds of possibilities and 
contingencies rose up before me and upset my equilibrium 
completely. For two days I was in darkness with no light to 
show the way out, my heart sinking when I thought of some 
results of Gandhiji’s action. The personal aspect was powerful 
enough, and I thought with anguish that I might not see him 
again. It was over a year ago that I had seen him last on board 
ship on the way to England. Was that going to be my last 
sight of him? 

And then ..felt annoyed with him for choosing a side-issue 
for his final sacrifice — ^just a question of electorate. What would 
be the result on our freedom movement? Would not the larger 
issues fade into the background, for the time being at least? 
And if he attained his immediate object and got a joint elec- 
torate for the Depressed Classes, would not that result in a 
reaction and a feeling that something has been achieved and 
nothing more need be done for a while? And was not his action 
a recognition, and in part an acceptance, of the Communal 
Award and the general scheme of things as sponsored by the 
Government? Was this consistent with Non-Co-operation and 
Civil Disobedience? After so much sacrifice and brave en- 
deavour, was our movement to tail off into something insig- 
nificant? 

... I felt angry with him at his religious and sentimental ap- 
proach to a political question, and his frequent references to 
God in connection with it. He even seemed to suggest that 
God had indicated the very date of the fast. What a terrible 
example to set I 

If Bapu died I What would India be like then? And how 
would her politics run? There seemed to he a dreary and dismal 
future ahead, and despair seized my heart whdi I thought of 
it. 


87 ° 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


371 

So I thought and thought, and confusion reigned in my head, 
and anger and hopelessness, and love for hiin who was the 
cause of this upheaval. I hardly knew what to do, and I was 
irritable and short-tempered wiA everybody, and most of all 
with myself. 

And then a strange thing happened to me. I had quite an 
emotional crisis, and at the end of it I felt calmer and the 
future seemed not so dark. Bapu had a curious knack of doing 
the right thing at the psychological moment, and it might be 
that his action — ^impossible to justify. as it was from my point 
of view — would lead to great results, not only in the narrow 
field in which it was confined, but in the wider aspects of our 
national struggle. And even if Bapu died our struggle for 
freedom would go on. So whatever happened, one must keep 
ready and fit for it. Having made up my mind to face even 
Gandhiji’s death without flinching, I felt calm and collected 
and ready to face the world and aU it might offer. 

Then came news of the tremendous upheaval all over the 
country, a magic wave of enthusiasm running through Hindu 
society, and untouchability appeared to be doomed. What a 
magician, I thought, was this little man sitting in Yeravda 
Prison, and how well he knew how to pull the strings that 
move people’s hearts ! 

A telegram from him reached me. It was the first message 
I had received from him since my conviction, and it did me 
good to hear from him after tliat long interval. In this tele- 
gram he said : 

During all these days of agony you have been before mind’s 
eye. I am most anxious to know your opinion. You know how 
I value your opinion. Saw Indu (and) Sarup’s children. Indu 
looked happy and in possession of more flesh. Doing very well. 
Wire reply. Love. 

■ It was extraordinary, and yet it was characteristic of him, 
that in the agony of his fast and in the midst of his many 
preoccupations, he should refer to the visit of my daughter 
and my sister’s children to him, and even mention that Indira 
had put on flesh! (My sister was also in prison then and all 
these children were at school in Poona.) He never forgets the 
seemingly little things in life which reaUy mean so much. 

News also came to me just then that some settlement had 
been reached over the electorate issue. The superintenddit of 
the gaol was good enough to allow me to send an answer to 
Gandhiji, and I sent him the following telegram ; 



372 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Your telegram and brief news that some settlement reached 
filled me with relief and joy. First news of your decision to fast 
caused mental agony and confusion, but ultimately optimism 
triumphed and I regained peace of mind. No sacrifice too great 
for suppressed downtrodden classes. Freedom must be judged 
by freedom of lowest but feel danger of other issues obscuring 
only goal. Am unable to judge from religious view point. 
Danger your methods being exploited by others but how can I 
presume to advise a magician. Love. 

A ‘pact’ was signed by various people gathered in Poona, 
and with unusual speed the British Prime Minister accepted it 
and varied his previous award accordingly, and the fast was 
broken. I disliked such pacts and agreements greatly, but I 
welcomed the Poona Pact apart from its contents. 

The excitement was over and we reverted to our gaol routine. 
News of the Harijan movement and of Gandhiji’s activities 
from prison came , to us, and I was not very happy about it. 
There was no doubt that a tremendous push had been given to 
the movement to end untouchability and raise the unhappy 
depressed classes, not so much by the pact as by the crusading 
enthusiasm created all over the country. That was to be wel- 
comed. But it was equally obvious that civil disobedience had 
suffered. The country’s attention had been diverted to other 
issues, and many Congress workers had turned to the Harijan 
cause. Probably most of these people wanted an excuse to 
revert to safer activities which did not involve the risk of gaol 
going or, worse still, lathi blows and confiscations of property. 
That was natural, and it was not fair to expect all the thousands 
of our workers to keep always ready for intense suffering and the 
break-up and destruction of their homes. But still it was pain- 
ful to watch this slow decay of our great movement. Civil 
disobedience was, however, still going on, and occasionally there 
were mass demonstrations like the Calcutta Congress in March- 
April 1933. Gandhiji was in Yeravda Prison, but he had been 
' given certain privileges to meet people and issue directions for 
the Harijan movements. Somehow this took away from the 
sting of his being in prison. All this depressed me. 

Many months later, early in May 1933, Gandhiji began his 
twenty-one-day fast. The first news of 'tms had again come as 
a sho^ to me, but I accepted it as an inevitable occurrence and 
sc hoole d myself to it. Indeed I was irritated that people should 
urge him to give it up, after he had made up his mind and 
declared it to the public. For me the fast was an incompre- 
hensible thing and, if I had been asked before the decision had 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


373 

been taken, I would certainly have spoken strongly against it. 
But I attached great value to Gandhi ji’s word, and it seemed to 
me wrong for any one to try to make him break it, in a per- 
sonal matter which, to him, was of supreme importance. So, 
unhappy as I was, I put up with it. 

A few days before beginning his fast he wrote to me, a typical 
letter which moved me very much. As he asked for a reply 
I sent him the following telegram : 

Your letter. What can I say about matters I do not under- 
stand. I feel lost in strange country where you are the only 
familiar landmark and I try to grope my way in dark but I 
stumble. Whatever happens my love and thoughts tvill be with 
you. 

I had struggled against my utter disapproval of his act and 
my desire not to hurt him. I felt, however, that I had not sent 
him a cheerful message, and now that he was bent on under- 
going his terrible ordeal, which might even end in his death, 
I ou^t to cheer him up as much as I could. Little things make 
a difference psychologically, and he would have to strain every 
nerve to survive. I felt also that we should accept whatever 
happened, even his death, if unhappily it should occur, with a 
stout heart. So I sent him another telegram : 

Now diat you are launched on your great enterprise may I 
send you again love and greetings and assure you that I feel 
more clearly now that whatever happens it is well and whatever 
happens you win. 

He survived the fast. On the first day of it he was discharged 
from prison, and on his advice Civil Disobedience was suspended 
for six weeks. 

Again I watched the emotional upheaval of the country 
during the fast, and I wondered more and more if this was the 
right method in politics. It seemed tp be sheer rpvivalism, and 
clear thinking had not a ghost of a chance against it. All badia, 
or most of it, stared reverently at the Mahatma and expected 
him to perform miracle after miracle and put an end to un- 
touchabuity and get swaraj and so on — and did precious little 
itself f And Gan&iiji did not encourage others to think; his 
insistence was only on purity and sacnfice. I felt that I was 
drifting further and further away from him mentally, in spite 
of my strong emotional attachment to him. Often enough he 
was guided in his political activities by an unerring instinct. He 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


374 

had the flair for action, but was the way of faith the right way 
to train a nation? It might pay for a short while, but in the 
long run? 

And I could not understand how he could accept, as he 
seemed to do, the present social order, which was based 
on violence and conflict. Within me also conflict raged, and I 
was torn between rival loyalties. I knew that there was trouble 
ahead for me, when the enforced protection of gaol was re- 
moved. I felt lonely and homeless, and India, to whom I had 
given my love and for whom I had laboured, seemed a strange 
and bewildering land to me. Was it my fault that I could not 
enter into the spirit and ways of thinking of my countrymen? 
Even with my closest associates I felt that an invisible barrier 
came between us and, unhappy at being unable to overcome it, 
I shrank back into my shell. TTie old world seemed to envelop 
them, the old world of past ideologies, hopes and desires. The 
new world was yet far distant. 

“ Wandering between two worlds, one dead. 

The other powerless to be born. 

With nowhere yet to rest his head.” 

India is supposed to be a religious country above everything 
else, and Hindu and Moslem and Sikh and others take pride in 
their faiths and testify to their truth by breaking heads. The 
spectacle of what is called religion, or at any rate organised 
religion, in India and elsewhere has filled me with horror, and 
I have frequently condemned it and wished to make a clean 
sweep of it. Almost always it seems to stand for blind belief 
and reaction, dogma and bigotry, superstition and exploitation, 
and the preservation of vested interests. And yet I knew well 
that there was something else in it, something which supplied a 
deep inner craving of human beings. How else could it have 
been the tremendous power it has been and brought peace and 
comfort to innumerable tortured souls? Was that peace merely 
the shelter of blind belief and absence of questioning, the calm 
that comes firom being safe in harbour, protected from the 
storms of the open sea, or was it something more? In some 
cases certainly it was something more. 

But organised religion, whatever its past may have been, to- 
day is very largely an empty form devoid of real content. Mr. 
G. K. Chesterton has compared it (not. his own particular brand 
of religion, but others 1) to a fijssil which is the form of an 
animal or organism firom which all its own organic substance 
has entirely msappeared, but which has kept its shape, because 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


375 

it has been filled up by some totally different substance. And 
even where something of value still remains, it is enveloped by 
other and harmful contents. 

That seems to have happened in our Eastern religions as well 
as in the Western. The Church of England is perhaps the most 
obvious example of a religion which is not a religion in any 
real sense of the word. Partly that applies to all organised 
Protestantism, but the Church of England has probably 
gone further because it ha.s long been a State political depart- 
ment.^ 

Many of its votaries are undoubtedly of the highest character, 
but it is remarkable how that Church has served the purposes 
of British imperialism and given both capitalism and imperial- 


' In India the Church of England has been almost indistinguish- 
able from the Government. The officially paid (out of Indian 
revenues) priests and diaplains are the symbols of the imperial 
power just as the higher services are. The Church has been, on the 
whole, a conservative and reactionary force in Indian politics and 
generally opposed to reform or advance. The average missionary is 
usually wholly ignorant of India's past history and culture and does 
not take the slightest trouble to find out what it was or is. He is 
more interested m pointing out the sins and failings of the heathen. 
Of course, there have been many fine exceptions. India does not 
possess a mo:|:e devoted friend than Charlie Andrews, whose abound- 
ing love and spirit of service and overflowing friendliness it is a joy 
to have. The Christa Seva Sangh of Poona contains some fine 
Englishmen, whose religion has led them to understand and serve 
and not to patronise, and who have devoted themselves with all 
their great ^ts to a selfless service of the Indian people. There 
are many other English churchmen whose memory is treasured in 
India. 

The Archbishop of Canterbury, speaking in the House of Lords 
on December la, 1934, referred to the preamble of the Montagu- 
Chelmsford reforms of 1919 and said that "he sometimes thought 
the great declaration had been somewhat hastily made, and sup- 
posed that it was one of the hasty, generous gestures after the War, 
but the goal set could not be wiAdrawn.” It is worthy of note that 
the head of the English Church should take such an exceedingly 
conservative view or Indian politics. A step, which was considered 
wholly insufficient by Indian opinion and which, because of this, 
led to non-co-operation and all its consequences, is consid^ed by 
the Archbishop as “ hasty and generous." It is a comforting doc- 
trine from the point of view of the English ruling classes, and, no 
doubt, this conviction of their own generosity, evra to the point of 
rashness, -must produce a righteous glow of satisfaction. 



376 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ism a moral and Christian covering. It has sought to justify, 
from the highest ethical standards, British predatory policy in 
Asia and Africa, and given that extraordinary and enviable 
feeling of being always in the right to the English, Whether the 
Church has helped in producing this attitude of smug rectitude 
or is itself a product of it, I do not know. Other less favoured 
countries on the Continent of Europe and in America often 
accuse the English of hypocrisy — per fide Albion is an old taunt 
— ^but the accusation is probably the outcome of envy at British 
success, and certainly no other imperialist Power can afford to 
throw stones at England, for its own record is equally shady. 
No nation that is consciously hypocritical could have the 
reserves of strength that the British have repeatedly shown, and 
the brand of ‘ religion ’ which they have adopted has apparently 
helped them in this by blunting their moral susceptibilities 
where their own interests were concerned. Other peoples and 
nations have often behaved far worse than the British have 
done, but they have never succeeded, quite to the same extent, 
in making a virtue of what profited them. All of us find it 
remarkably easy to spot the mote in the other’s eye and over- 
look the beam in our own, but perhaps the British excel at this 
performance,* 

Protestantism tried to adapt itself to new Conditions and 
wanted to have the best of both worlds. It succeeded remark- 
ably so far as this world was concerned, but from the religious 
point of view it fell, as an organised religion, between two stools, 
and religion gradually gave place to sentimentality and big 
business. Roman Catholicism escaped this fate, as it stuck on to 
the old stool, and, so long as that stool holds, it will flourish. 
To-day it seems to be the only living religion, in the restricted 
sense of the word, in the West, A Roman Catholic friend sent 
me in prison many books on Catholicism and Papal Encyclicals 
and I read them with interest. Studying them, I realised the 

* A recent instance of how the Chinch of England indirectly 
influences politics in India has come to my notice. At a provindal 
conference of the U.P. Indian Christians held at Cawnpore on the 
7th November, 1934, the Chairman of the Reception Committee, 
Mr. E, V. David, said : “ As Christians we are bound by our religion 
to loyalty to die King, who is the Defender of our Faith.” Inevit- 
ably that meant support of British imperialism in India. Mr. David 
further expressed his sympathies with some of the views of the ' die- 
hard' Conservative elements in England in regard to the I.C.S., the 
police, and the whole proposed constitution, which, according to 
them, might endanger Chnstian misrions in India. 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


377 

hold it had on such large numbers of people. It offered, as 
Islam and popular Hinduism offer, a safe anchorage from doubt 
and mental conflict, an assurance of a future life which will 
make up for the deficiencies of this life. 

I am afraid it is impossible for me to seek harbourage in this 
way. I prefer the open sea, with all its storms and tempests. Nor 
am I greatly interested in the after life, in what happens after 
death. I find the problems of this life sufficiently absorbing to 
fill my mind. The traditional Chinese outlook, fundamentally 
ethical and yet irreligious or tinged with religious scepticism, 
has an appeal for me, though in its application to life I may not 
agree. It is the Tao, the path to be followed and the way of life 
that interests me; how to understand life, not to reject it but to 
accept it, to conform to it and to improve it. But the usual 
religious outlook does not concern itself with this world. It 
seems to me to be the enemy of clear thought, for it is based 
not only on the acceptance without demur of certain fixed and 
unalterable theories and dogmas, but also on sentiment and 
emotion and passion. It is far removed from what I consider 
spiritually and things of the spirit, and it deliberately or 
unconsciously shuts its eyes to reality lest reality may not 
fit in with preconceived notions. It is narrow and intolerant 
of other opinions and ideas; it is self-centred and egotistic, and 
it often allows itself to be exploited by selfseekers and oppor- 
tunists. 

This does not mean that men of religion have not been and 
are not still often of the highest moral and spiritual type. But 
it does mean that the religious outlook does not help, and even 
hinders, the moral and spiritual progress of a people, if 
morality and spirituality are to be judged by this world’s stan- 
dards, and not by the hereafter. Usually religion becomes an 
asocial quest for God or the Absolute, and the religious man is 
concerned far more with his own salvation than with the good 
of society. The mystic tries to rid himself of self, and in the 
process usually becomes obsessed with it. Moral standards have 
no relation to social needs, but are based on a highly meta- 
physical doctrine of sin. And organised religion invariably 
becomes a vested interest and thus, inevitably a reactionary fierce 
opposing change and progress. 

It is well known that the Christian Church in the early days 
did not help the slaves to improve their social status. The slaves 
became the feudal serfs of the Middle Ages of Europe because 
of economic conditions. The attitude of the Church, as late m 
two hundred years ago (in 17.27), was well exemplified in a letter 



JAWAHARLAL NKHRU 


378 

written by the Bishop of London to the slave-owners of the 
southern colonies of America.^ 

“ Christianity,” wrote the Bishop, “ and the embracing of the 
gospel does not make the least alteration in Civil property or in 
any of the duties which belong to civil relations: but in all these 
respects it continues Persons just in the same State as it found 
them. The Freedom which Christianity gives is Freedom from 
the bondage of Sin and Satan and from the Dominion of Men’s 
Lusts and Passions and inordinate Desires; hut as to their out- 
ward condition, whatever that was before, whether bond or free, 
their being baptised and becoming Christians makes no manner 
of change in them.” 

No organised religion to-day will express itself in this out- 
spoken manner, but essentially its attitude to property and the 
existing social order will be the same. 

Words are well known to be, by themselves, very imperfect 
means of communication, and are often understood in a variety 
of ways. No word perhaps in any language is more likely to be 
interpreted in different ways by different people as the word 
‘ religion ’ (or the corresponding words in other languages). 
Probably to no two persons will the same complex of ideas and 
images arise on hearing or reading this word. Amon^ these 
ideas and images may be those of rites and ceremonial, of 
sacred books, of a community of people, of certain dogmas, of 
morals, reverence, love, fear, hatred, charity, sacrifice, asceti- 
cism, fasting, feasting, prayer, ancient history, marriage, death, 
the next world, of riots and the breaking of heads, and so on. 
Apart from the tremendous confusion caused by this immense 
variety of images and interpretations, almost invariably there 
will be a strong emotional response which will make dispassion- 
ate consideration impossible. The word ‘religion’ has lost all 
precise significance (if it ever had it) and only causes confusion 
and gives rise to interminable debate and argument, when often 
enough entirely different meanings are attached to it. It would 
be far better if it was dropped from use altogether and other 
words with more limited meanings were used instead, such as : 
theology, philosophy, morals, ethics, spirituality, metaphysics, 
duty, ceremonial, etc. Even these words are va^e enough, but 
they have a much more limited range than ‘ religion.’ A great 
advantage would be that these words have not yet attached to 

* This letter is quoted in Reinhold Niebuhr's Moral Man and 
Immoral Society (p. 78), a book which is exceedingly interesting and 
stimulating. 



WHAT IS RELIGION? 


379 

themselves, to the same extent, the passions and emotions that 
surround and envelop the word ‘ religion.’ 

What then is religion (to use the word in spite of its obvious 
disadvantages)? Probably it consists of the inner development 
of the individual, the evolution of his consciousness in a certain 
direction which is considered good. What that direcdon is will 
again be a matter for debate. But, as far as I understand it, 
religion lays stress bn this inner change and considers outward 
change hs but the projection of this inner development. There 
can be no doubt that this inner development powerfully influ- 
ences the outer environment. But it is equally obvious that the 
outer environment powerfully influences the inner development. 
Both act and interact on each other. It is a commonplace that in 
the modern industrial West outward development has far out- 
stripped the inner, but it does not follow, as many people in the 
East appear to imagine, that because we are industrially back- 
ward and our external development has been slow, therefore our 
inner evolution has been greater. That is one of the delusions 
with which we try to comfort om-selves and try to overcome our 
feeling of inferiority. It may be that individuals can rise above 
circumstances and environment and reach great inner heights. 
But for large groups and nations a certain measure of external 
development is essential before the inner evolution can take 
place. A man who is the victim of economic circumstances, and 
who is hedged and restricted by the struggle to live, can very 
rarely achieve inner consciousness of any nigh degree. A class 
that is downtrodden and exploited can never progress inwardly. 
A nation which is politically and economicaUy subject to 
another and hedged and circumscribed and exploited can never 
achieve inner growth. Thus even for inner development exter- 
nal freedom and a suitable environment become necessary. In 
the attempt to gain this outer feeedom and to change the en- 
vironment so as to remove all hindrances to inner development, 
it is desirable that the means should be such as not to defeat 
the real object in view. I take it that when Gandhiji says that 
the means are more important than the end, he has something 
of this kind in view. But the means should be such as lead to 
the end, otherwise they are wasted effort, and they might even 
result in even greater degradation, both outer and inner. 

“No man can live without religion,” Gandhiji has written 
somewhere. "There are some who in the egotism of their reason 
declare that they have nothing to do with felTpon. But that is 
like a man saying that he breathes, but that he has no nose ” 
Again he says : ‘TVly devotion to truth has drawn me into the 



380 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

field of politics; and I can say without the slightest hesitation, 
and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has 
nothing to do with politics do not know what religion means.” 
Perhaps it would have heen more correct if he had said that 
most of these people who want to exclude religion from life and 
politics mean by that word * religion ’ something very different 
from what he means. It is obvious that he is using it in a sense 
— ^probably moral and ethical more than any other^-different 
from that of the critics of religion. This use of the same word 
with different meanings makes mutual comprehension still more 
difficult. 

A very modern definition of religion, with which the men of 
religion will not agree, is that of Professor John Dewey. 
According to him, religion is “whatever introduces genuine 
perspective into the piecemeal and shifting episodes' of exist- 
ence or again " any activity pursued in behalf of an ideal end 
against obstacles, and in spite of threats of personal loss, 
because of conviction of its general and enduring value, is reli- 
gious in quality.” If this is religion, then surely no one can 
have the slightest objection to it. 

Remain Rolland also has stretched religion to mean some- 
thing which will probably horrify the ormodox of organised 
religions. In his Life of Ramkrishna, he says ; 

“. , . many souls who are or who believe they are free from 
all religious lielief, but who in reality live immersed in a state of 
super-rational consciousness, which they term Socialism, Com- 
munism, Humanitarianism, Nationalism and even Rationalism. 
It is the quality of thought and not its object which determines 
its. source and allows us to decide whether or not it emanates 
from religion. If it turns fearlessly towards the search for truth 
at all costs with single-minded sincerity prepared for any sacri- 
fice, I should call it religious; fcr it presupposes faith in an end 
to human dfbrt higher than the life of exisdhg society, and 
even higher than the" life of huinmity as a whole. Scepticism 
itself, when it proceeds from vigorous natures true to the core, 
when it is an expression of strength and not of weakness, joins 
in the march of the Grand Army of the religious Soul.” ’ 

I cannot presume to fulfil the conditions laid down by Romain 
Rolland, but on these terms I am prepared to be a humble 
camp-follower of the Grand Army, 



XLVIII 


THE ‘DUAL POLICY’ OF THE BRITISH 
GOVERNMENT 

The Harijan movement was going on, guided by Gandhiji from 
Yeravda Prison and later from outside. There was a great 
agitation for removing the barriers to temple entry, and a Bill 
to that cflFect was introduced in the Legislative Assembly. And 
then the remarkable spectacle was witnessed of an outstanding 
leader of the Congress going from house to house in Delhi, 
visiting the members of the Assembly and canvassing for their 
votes for this Temple Entry Bill. Gandhiji himself sent an 
appeal through him to the Assembly members. And yet civil 
disobedience was still going on and people were going to prison, 
and the Assembly had been boycotted by the Congress and all 
our members had withdrawn from it. The rump that remained 
and the others who had filled the vacancies had distinguished 
themselves in this crisis by opposition to the Congress and 
support of the Government, A majority of them had helped 
the Government to pass repressive legislation giving some per- 
manence to the extraordinary provisions of the Ordinances. 
They had swallowed the Ottawa Pact, they had fed and feasted 
with the great ones in Delhi and Simla and London, and joined 
in the thank-offerings for British rule in India, and prayed for 
the success of what was called the ‘Dual Policy ’ in India. 

I was amazed at Gandhiji’s appeal, under the circumstances 
then existing, and even more so by the strenuous efforts of 
Rajagopalachariar, who, a few weeks before, had been the act- 
ing-President of the Congress. Civil Disobedience, of course, 
suffered by these activities, but what hurt me more was the 
moral side. To me, for Gandhiji or any Congress 'leader to 
countenance such activities appeared immoral and almost a 
breach of faith with the large numbers of people in gaol or 
carryhig on the struggle. But I knew that his way of looking at 
it was different. 

The Government attitude to this Temple Entry Bill, then and 
subsequently, was very revealing. It put every possible diffimlty 
in the way of its promoters, went on postponing it and en- 
couraging opposition to it, and then finally declared its own 
opposition to it, and killed it. That, to a greater or lesser extent, 
has been its attitude to all, measures of social reform in India, 

38 * 



382 JAWAHARLAL N£HRU 

and on the plea of non-interference with religion, it has pre- 
vented social progress. But this, it need hardly be said, has not 
prevented it from criticising our social evils and encouraging 
others to do so. By a fluke, the Sarda Child Marriage Restraint 
Bill became law, but the subsequent history of this unhappy 
Act showed more than anything else how much averse to en- 
forcing any such measure the Government was. The Govern- 
ment that could produce ordinances overnight, creating novel 
oftcnces and providing for vicarious punishment, and could send 
scores of thousands of people to prison for breach of their pro- 
visions, apparently quailed at the prospect of enforcing one of 
its regular laws like the Sarda Act. The effect of the Act was 
first to increase tremendously the very evil it was intended to 
combat, for people rushed to take advantage of the intervening 
six months of grace which .the Act very foolishly allowed. And 
then it was discovered that the Act was more or less of a joke 
and could be easily ignored without any steps being taken by 
Government. Not eyen the slightest attempt at propaganda was 
made officially, and most people in the villages never knew 
what the Act was. They heard distorted accounts of it from 
Hindu and Muslim village preachers, who themselves seldom 
knew the correct facts. 

This extraordinary spirit of toleration of social evils in India 
which the British Government has shown is obviously not due 
to any partiality for them. It is true that they do not very much 
care about their removal, for these evils do not interfere with 
their business of governing India and exploiting her resources. 
There is also always the danger of irritating various people by 
proposing social reforms, and, having to face enough anger and 
irritation on the political plane, the British Government has no 
desire whatever to add to its troubles. But latterly the position 
has become worse from the point of view of the social reformer, 
for the British are becoming more and more the silent bulwarks 
of these evils. This is due to their close association with the 
most reactionary elements in India. As opposition to their rule 
increases they have to seek strange allies, and to-day the firmest 
champions of British rule in India are the extreme communal- 
ists and the religious reactionaries and obscurantists. The 
Muslim communal organisations are notoriously reactionary 
from every point of view— political, economic, social. The 
Hindu Mahasabha rivals them, but it is left far behind in this 
backward-moving race by the Sanatanists, who combine reli- 
gious obscurantism of an extreme type with fervent, or at any 
rate loudly expressed, loyalty to British rule. 



'dual policy' of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 383 

If the British Government was quiescent and took no steps to 
popularise the Sarda Act and to enforce it, why did not the 
Congress or other non-official organisations carry on propaganda 
in favour of it? This question is often put by British and other 
foreign critics. So far as the Congress is concerned, it has been 
engaged during the last fifteen years, and especially since 1930, 
in a fierce life-and-death struggle for national freedom with the 
British rulers. The other organisations have no .real strength 
or contact with the masses. Men and women of ideals and 
force of character and influence among the masses were drawn 
into the Congress and spent mucli of their time in British 
prisons. 

Other organisations could seldom go beyond the passing of 
resolutions by select people who feared the mass touch. They 
functioned in a gentlemanly way or, like the All-India Women’s 
Association, in a lady-like way, and the spirit of aggressive 
propaganda was not theirs. Besides, they too were paralysed by 
the terrible repression of all public activities by the Ordinances 
and the laws that followed them. Martial law may crush revolu- 
tionary activity, but at the same time it paralyses civilisation 
and most civilised activities. 

Btit the real reason why the Congress and other non-official 
organisations cannot do much for social reform goes deeper. We 
suffer from the disease of nadonalism, and that absorbs our 
attention and it will continue to do so till we get political free- 
dom. As Bernard Shaw has said: "A conquered nation is like 
a man with cancer; he can think of nothing else. . . . There is 
indeed no greater curse to a nation than a nationalist move- 
ment, which is only the agonising symptom of a suppressed 
natural function. Conquered nations lose their place in the 
world’s march because they can do nothing but strive to get rid 
of their nationalist movements by recovering their national 
liberty.” 

Past experience shows us that we can make little social pro- 
gress under present conditions, in spite of apparent transfers of 
subjerts to elected ministers. The tremeiidous inertia of the 
Government is always helpful to the conservative elements, and 
for generations past the British Government has crushed initia- 
tive and ruled despotically, or paternally, ^ it has itself called 
it. It does not approve of any big oj^hised effort by iibn- 
bfficials, and suspects ulterior motives. 'Ae Harijan movement, 
in spite of every precaution taken by its organisers, has occa- 
sionally come in conflict with officials. I am sure that if the 
Congress started a nation-wide propaganda for the greater use 



384 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of soap it would come in conflict with Government in many 
places. 

I do not think it is very difficult to convert the masses to 
social reform if the State takes the matter in hand. But alien 
rulers are always suspect, and they cannot go far in the process 
of conversion. If the alien element was removed and economic 
changes were given precedence, an energetic administration 
could easily introduce far-reaching social reforms. 

But social reform and the Sarda Act and the Harijan Move- 
ment did not fill our minds in prison, except in so far as I felt 
a little irritated by the Harijan Movement because it had come 
in the way of civil disobedience. Early in May 1933 Civil Dis- 
obedience had been suspended for six weeks, and we waited 
anxiously for further developments. That suspension had given 
a final blow to the movement, for one cannot play fast and 
loose with a national struggle and switch it on and off at will. 
Even before the suspension the leadership of the movement 
had been singularly weak and ineffective. There were petty 
conferences being held, and all manner of rumours spread 
which militated against active work. Some of the acting-Presi- 
dents of the Congress were very estimable men, but it was 
unkindness to them to make them generals of an active cam- 
paign. There was too much of a hint of tiredness about them, 
of a desire to get out of a difficult position. There was some 
discontent against this vacillation and indecision in high quar- 
ters, but it was difficult to express it in an organised way, as all 
Congress bodies were unlawful. 

Then came Gandhiji’s twenty-one-day fast, his discharge from 
prison, and the suspension of dvil disobedience for six weeks. 
The fast was over, and very slowly he recovered from it. In the 
middle of June the period of suspension of civil disobedience 
was extended by another six weeks. Meanwhile the Govern- 
ment had in no way toned down its aggression. In the Anda- 
man Islands political prisoners (those convicted in Bengal for 
acts of revolutionary violence were sent there) were on hunger- 
strike on the question of treatment, and one or two of them 
died— starved to death. Others h-j dying. People who addressed 
meetings in India in protest of what was happening in the 
Andamans were themselves arrested and sentenced. We were 
not only to suffer, but we were not even to complain, even 
though prisoners died by the terrible ordeal of the hunger- 
strike, having no other means of protest open to them. Some 
months later, in September 1933 (when I was out of prison), an 
appeal was issued over a number of signatures including 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 385 

Rabindra Nath Tagore, C. F. Andrews, and many other well- 
known people, mostly unconnected with the Congress, asking 
for more humanitarian treatment of the Andamans’ prisoners, 
and preferably for their transfer to Indian gaols. The Home 
Member of the Government of India expressed his great dis- 
pleasure at this statement, and criticised the signatories strongly 
for their sympathy for the prisoners. Later, as far as I can 
remember, the expression of such sympathy was made a 
punishable offence in Bengal. 

Before the second six weeks of suspension of civil dis- 
obedience were over, news came to us in Dehra Dun Gaol that 
Gandhiji had called an informal conference at Poona. Two or 
three hundred people met there and, on Gandhiji’s advice, mass 
civil disobedience was suspended, but individual civil dis- 
obedience was permitted, and all secret methods were barred. 
The decisions were not very inspiring, but I did not particularly 
object to them so far as they went To stop mass civil dis- 
obedience was to recognise and stabilise existing conditions, for, 
in reality, there was no mass movement then. Secret work was 
merely a pretence that we were carrying on, and often it 
demoralised, having regard to the character of our movement 
To some extent it was necessary in order to send instructions 
and keep contacts, but civil disobedience itself could not be 
secret. 

What stirprised me and distressed me was the absence of 
any real discussion at Poona of the existing situation and of 
our objectives. Congressmen had met together after nearly two 
years of fierce conflict and repression, and much had hap- 
pened meanwhile in the world at large and in India, including 
the publication of the White Paper containing the British 
Government’s proposals for constitutional reform. We had to 
put up during this period with enforced silence, and on the 
other side there had been ceaseless and perverted propaganda 
to obscure the issues. It was frequently stated, not oiuy by 
supporters of the Government but by Liberals and others, that 
the Congress had g^ven up its objective of independence. The 
least that should have been done, I thought, was to lay stress 
on our political objective, to make it clear again, and, if pos- 
sible, to add to it social and economic objectives. Instead of 
this, the discussion seems to have been entirely confined to the 
relative merits of mass and individual civil disobedience, and 
the desirability or otherwise of secrecy. There was also some 
strange talk of ‘ peace ’ with the Government. Gandhiji sent 
a telegram to the Viceroy, as far as I remember, asking for an 



386 


JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 


interview, to which the Viceroy replied with a ‘No’, and then 
Gandhiji sent a second telegram mentioning something about 
‘honourable peace*. Where was this elusive peace that was 
being sought, when the Government was triumphantly trying 
to crush the nation in every way, and people were starving to 
death in the Andamans? But I knew that, whatever happened, 
it was Gandhiji’s way always to offer the olive branch. 

Repression was going on in full swing, and all the special laws 
suppressing public activities were in force. In February 1933 
even a memorial meeting on my father’s death anniversary was 
prohibited by the police, although it was a non-Congress meet- 
ing, and such a good Moderate as Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru was 
to have presided over it. And as a vision of future favours to 
come we had been presented with the White Paper. 

This was a remarkable document, a perusal of which left one 
gasping for breath. India was to be converted into a glorified 
Indian State, with a dominating influence of the Statea feudal 
representatives in the Federation. But in the States themselves 
no outside interference would be tolerated, and undiluted 


autocracy would continue to prevail there. The real imperial 
links, the chains of debt, would- bind us for ever to the City of 
London, and the currency and monetary policy would also be 
controlled, through a Reserve Bank, by the Bank of England. 
There would he an impregnable defence of all vested rights, 
and additional vested interests were going' to be created. Our 
revenues were mortgaged up to the hilt for the benefit of these 
vested interests. The great imperial services, which we love so 
much, would continue uncontrolled and untouched, to train us 


for further instalments of self-government. There was going to 
be Provincial Autonomy, but the Governor would be a benevo- 
lent and all-powerful dictator keeping us in order. And high 
above all would sit the All-Highest, the supreme Dictator, ihe 
Viceroy, with conmlete powers to do what he will and check 
when he desires. Truly, the genius of the British ruling class 
for colonial government was never more in evidence, and well 
may the Hitlers and Mussolinis admire them and look with 
en'vy on the Viceroy of India. 

Having produced a constitution which tied up India hand 
and foot, a collection of ‘special responsibilities * and safeguards 
were added as additional fetters, making the unhappy country 
a prisoner incapable of movement. As Mr. Neville Chamber- 
lain said: “ They had done their best to surround the proposals 
with all the safeguards the wit of man could devise." 

Enrtherrwtr were informed that for these favours we would 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 387 

have to pay heavily — to begin with a lump sum of a few crores, 
and then annual payment. We could not have the blessings 
of Swaraj without adequate payment. We had been suffering 
under the delusion that India was poverty-stricken and already 
had too heavy a burden to carry, and we had looked to freedom 
to lighten it. That had been for the masses the urge for free- 
dom. But it now appeared that the burden was to become 
heavier. 

This Gilbertian solution of the Indian problem was ofiered 
with true British grace, and we were told how generous our 
rulers were. Never before had an imperial Power of its own 
free will offered such power and opportunities to a subject 
people. And a great debate arose in England between the 
donors and those who, horrified at such generosity, objected to 
it. This was the outcome of the many comings and goings 
between India and England during three years, of the- three 
Round Table Conferences, and innumerable committees and 
consultations. 

But the visits to England were not over yet. There was the 
Joint Select Committee of the British Parliament which was 
going to sit in judgment on the White Paper, and Indians went 
to it as a kind of assessors and as witnesses. There ivere also 
many other committees sitting in London, and there was an 
undignified scramble behind the scenes for membership of any 
committee which meant a free passage to and stay in the heart 
of the Empire. Brave men, undaunted by the petrifying pro- 
visions of the White Paper, undertook to face the perils of the 
sea voyage or the air journey, and the greater dangers of a 
stay in London city in order to attempt, with all the eloquence 
and power of persuasion at their command, to vary the pro-, 
visions of the White Paper. They knew and said that the task 
was an almost hopeless one, but they were no quitters, and 
would continue to have their say even though there was no 
one to listen to them. One of them, a leader of the .Responsi- 
vists, stuck on till the bitter end, when all others had left, 
probably having interview after interview and dinner after 
diimer with the men in authority in London, so that he might 
impress upon them what political changes he desired. When at 
last he returned to his native land, he infisrmed an expectant 
public that, with the well-known tenacity of the Marathas, he 
had refused to give up his job, and had stayed on in London 
to have his say to the very end. 

I remember a firequent complaint of my father’s that his 
Responsivist friends had no sense of humour. He often got 



388 JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 

into trotible with them because of his humorous remarks, 
which were not appreciated by them at all, and then he had to 
explain and soothe — a tiring operation. And I thought of the 
fine fighting spirit of the Marathas, not only in the past but 
in the present during our national struggles, and of the great 
and indomitable Tilak, who would not bend though he break. 

The Liberals utterly disliked the White Paper. They also 
had no liking for the repression that was going on from day 
to day in India, and sometimes though rarely, even protested 
against it, always making it dear that they condemned the 
Congress and all its works. Tlicy would suggest to Govermnent 
occasionally to release some prominent Congressman firom 
prison — ^they could only think in terms of individuals they knew. 
The argument advanced, both by the Liberals and Responsi- 
visits, was that so-and-so should be released as there was no 
longer any danger to the public peace. And then it is always 
open to the Government to re-arrest that person if he mis- 
behaves, and Government could do so with more justification, 
Some people in England also were good enough to plead for the 
release of some members of the Working Committee, or special 
individuals, on these grounds. We could not help being grate- 
ful to people who were interested in us while we were in prison, 
but we felt also sometimes that it would be a good thing if 
we were saved from our well-meaning friends. We did not 
doubt their good intentions, but it was obvious that they had 
adopted completely the ideology of the British Government, 
and between them and us there was a wide chasm. 

The Liberals did not like much that was happening in India; 
they were unhappy about it, and yet what were they to do? 
It was unthinkable for them to take any effective action against 
Government. Merely to preserve themselves as a separate entity 
they had to retreat further away from the masses and the active 
elements in the population; to drift to the Right, till their 
ideology was hardly distinguishable from that of the Govern- 
ment. Small in numbers, and with no mass influence, they 
could not make any difference to a mass struggle. But among 
them were some distingxiished and well-knovm persons who 
were personally respected. And these leaders, as well as the 
Liberal and Responsivist groups as a whole, did an inestimable 
service to the British Government at a moment «of grave crisis 
by a moral support of the official policy. Even the coercion 
and lawlessness of Government profited by the lack of effective 
criticism and occasional acquiescence and approval of the 
_^Libemis,'‘Thus the Liberals and Responsivists gave a moral 



‘dual policy* of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 389 

sanction, to the fierce and unprecedented coercion that was 
going on in die country at a time when the Government was 
hard put to it to justify it. 

The White Paper was bad, very bad, so said the Liberal 
leaders. What was to be done about it? At the Liberal Federa- 
tion meeting held in Calcutta in April 1933, Mr. Srinivasa 
Sastri, the most eminent of the Liberal leadens, pleaded that 
however unsatisfactory the constitutional changes might be 
they should work them. “ This is no time to stand by and let 
things pass,” he said. The only action that apparently was 
conceivable to him was to accept what was given and to try to 
work it. The alternative to this was doing nothing. Further 
he added : “ If we have wisdom, experience, moderation, power 
of persuasion, quiet influence, and real efiiciency— if we have 
these virtues, this is the time to display them in the fullest 
strength.” ” Shining words ” was the Calcutta Statesman's com- 
ment on this eloquent appeal. 

Mr. Sastri is always eloquent, and has the orator’s love of 
fine words and their musical use. But he is apt to he carried 
away hj his enthtisiasms, and the word-magic that he creates 
blurs his meaning to others and perhaps to himself. It is worth 
while examining this appeal he m^de at Calcutta in April 1933 
during the continuance of the Civil Disobedience Movement. 
Fundamental principles and oHectives apart, two points seem 
to me worthy of note. The flrst is that whatever happens, 
however much we might be insulted, crushed, humiliated, and 
exploited by the British Government, we must submit to it. 
The line can never be drawn beyond which we must not go. 
A worm may turn, but not the Indian people if they followed 
Mr. Sastri’s advice. There is no other way according to him. 
'I'his means that, so far as he is concerned, submission to and 
acceptance of the British Government’s decisions is tantamount 
to a religion (if I may use that unfortunate word). It is the 
fate — Kismet — to which all of us have to bow whether we want 
to or not. 

It must be noted that he was not giving advice on a definite, 
known situation. The ' constiturional changes ’ were still in the 
making, though one had a fiiir notion that they would be very 
bad. K he had said that, bad as the White Paper proposals are, 
having regard to all the circumstances, I am in fevour of work- 
ing them, should they be enacted, his advice might have been 
good, or bad, but it had relation to existing fiicts. Mr. Sastri 
went much further, and said that however unsatisfecto^ the 
constitutional changes nu^t be his advice would hold. Ite was 



390 jawaharlal nehru 

prepared to give a blank cheque to the British Government on 
the most vital matter from the nation’s view-point. It is a little 
difficult for me to understand how any individual, group, or 
party, can talce up this attitude of commitment to an unforeseen 
future, unless it has no principles or moral and political stan- 
dards whatever, and has for its creed and policy invariable 
subservience to the ruler’s mandates. 

The second point that strikes me is one of pure tactics. The 
White Paper was one stage in the long march to the enactment 
of the new reforms. It was, from Government’s point of view, 
an important stage, but many stages remained, and it was 
possible that it might be altered for better or worse during its 
subsequent journey. These alterations would obviously depend 
on the pressure brought to bear on the British Government 
and Parliament from various interests. In this tug-of-war it 
was conceivable that the desire to win over the Indian Liberals 
to its side might have influenced the Government and induced 
it to liberalise the proposals, or at least to resist encroachments. 
But Mr. Sastri’s emphatic declaration, long before the question 
of acceptance or rejection, workix^ or not working the new 
reforms arose, made it clear to the Government that they could 
completely ignore the Indian Liberals. There was no cmestion 
of winning them over. They would not desert the Govern- 
ment, even if they were pushed out. Looking at the matter' 
from the Liberal view-point, as far as I can, Mr. Sastri’s speech 
at Calcutta seems to me to have been extraordinarily bad tactics 
and injurious to the Liberal cause. 

I have ventured to write so much on Mr. Sastri’s old speech, 
not because of any intrinsic importance of that speech or the 
Liberal Federation meeting, but because of my desire to under- 
stand the mentality and psychology of the Liberal leaders. 
They are able and estimable men, and yet, with the best will 
in the world, I have been whoUy unable to appreciate why they 
act as they do. Another speech of Mr. Sastri’s, which I rei^d in 
prison, influenced me greatly. He was addressir^ the Servants 
of Inffia Society, of which he is president, at Riona in June 
1933. He is reported to have pointed the danger in India 
if British influence were suddenly vrithdrawn, of political 
movements being marked by acute hatred, persecution, and 
oppression of one party by another. On the other hand, tolera- 
tion having throughout been a feature of British political life, 
the more India’s future is worked out in co-operation with 
Britain, the greater the likelihood of toleration prevailing in. 
India. Being in prison, I have to rely on the summary of 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 391 

Mr. Sastri’s speech given by the Statesman of Calcutta. The 
Statesman added : “ It is a pleasant doctrine, and we note that 
Doctor Moonje has been speaking in the same sense.” Mr. 
Sastri is further reported to have referred to the suppression 
of freedom in Russia, Italy, and Germany, and to the in- 
humanities and savageries that were being perpetrated there. 

It struck me, when I read this, how extraordinarily similar 
was Mr. Sastri’s outlook in regard to Britain and India to that 
of the ‘diehard’ British Conservative. In matters of detail 
there were no doubt differences, but fundamentally the ideology 
was the same. Mr. Winston Churchill could have expressed 
himself in identical language without doing any violence to his 
convictions. And yet Mr. Sastri belongs to the Left wing of the 
Liberal party, and is the ablest of its leaders. 

I am afraid I am wholly unable to accept Mr. Sastri’s reading 
of history, or his views on world affairs, and more particularly 
on Britain and India. Probably no foreigner, who is not an 
Englishman, will accept them; possibly many Englishmen of 
advanced views will msagree with him. It is his happy gift 
to see the world and his ovra country through the tinted glasses 
of the British ruling class. Nevertheless, it is remarkable that 
he should ignore in this speech the very imusual occurrence 
which had taken place from day to day in India during the 
previous eighteen months, and were taking place at the time 
the speech was delivered. He referred to Russia, Italy, and 
Germany, but not to the fierce repression and suppression of all 
liberties in his own country. He may not have known of all 
the terrible occurrences in the Frontier Province and in Bengal 
—the ‘ rape of Bengal ’ as Rajendra Babu has called it in his 
recent Congress presidential address — as the heavy veil of cen- 
sorship hid much of what was happening. But was he oblivious 
to the agony of India and the struggle for life and freedom 
that his people were waging against a powerful adversary? Did 
he not know of the ponce raj that prevailed over large areas, 
of conditions resembling martial law, of the Ordinances, of 
the hunger-strikes, and other sufferings in prison? Did he not 
realise that the veiy toleration and freedom for which he 
praised Britain had been crushed by Britain herself in India? 

It did not matter whether he agreed with the Congress or 
not. He was perfectly entitled to critidse and condemn Con- 
gress policy. But as an Indian, as a lover of freedom, as a 
sensitive man, what were his reactions to the wonderful courage 
and sacrifice of his countrymen and countrywomen? Did he 
not feel any pain and anguish when our rulers played with a 



393 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

hatchet on India’s heart? Was it nothing to him that scores 
of thousands were refusing to bend before the physical might 
of a proud empire, and preferred to see their bodies crushed, 
their homes broken, their dear ones suffer, rather than yield 
their souls? We put on a brave face in gaol or outside, and 
smiled and laughed, but we smiled often through our tears, and 
our laughter was sometimes near to crying. 

Mr. Verrier Elwin, a brave and generous Englishing, tells 
us what his reactions were. “ It was a wonderful experience,” 
he says of 1930, “ to watch a whole nation throwing oJff its 
mental bonds of servitude and rising to its true dignity of 
fearless determination.” And again: "The amazing discipline 
exhibited by most of the Congress volunteers during the 
Satyagraha struggle, a discipline to which one of the provincial 
Governors has borne generous testimony. . . .” 

Mr. Srinivasa Sastri is an able and sensitive man who is widely 
respected by his countrymen, and it seems impossible that he 
would not react in the same way and feel for his countrymen 
during such a struggle. One would have expeaed him to raise 
his voice in denunciation of the suppression of all civil liberty 
and all public activities by the Government. One would further 
have hoped that he and his colleagues would personally visit 
the worst affected areas — ^Bengal and the Frontier— not m any 
way to help the Congress or. civil disobedience, but to expose 
and thus check official and police excesses. This is usually done 
by the lovers of freedom and civil liberty in other countries. 
But instead of acting in this way, instead of trying to check 
the executive when it was riding rough-shod over India’s men 
* and women and had done away with even the usual liberties; 
instead at least of finding out what was happening, he diose 
to give a certificate to the British for toleration and freedom 

S * ist when both of these virtues were completely lacking under 
rifish rule in India. He gave them his moral backing and 
thus heartened and encouraged them in their task of repression. 

I am quite sure that he could not have meant this or realised 
the consequences of his action. But that his speech must have 
had this effect cannot be doubted. Why, then, should he think 
and act in this manner? 

I have found no adequate answer to this question except that 
the Liberal leaders have cut themselves completely aloof firom 
their countrymen as well as fi:om all modem thought. The 
musty books that they read have shut out the people of India 
from their view, and they have developed a kind of narcissism. 
We went to gaol and our bodies were locked up in cells, but 



'dual policy’ of BKITISH government 393 

our minds ranged free and our spirits were undismayed. But 
they created mental prisons of their own fashioning, where 
they went round and round and from which they feund no 
escape. They worshipped the God of Things as they are; and 
when things changed, as they do in this changing world, they 
were without rudder and compass, helpless in mind and body, 
without ideals or moral values. The choice for each one of us 
always is to go forward or be pushed; we cannot remain static 
in a dynamic universe. Afraid of change and movement, the 
Liberals were frightened at the tempests that surrotmded them; 
weak of limb, mey could not go forward, and so they were 
tossed hither and thither, clutching at every straw that came 
fheir way. They became the Hamlets of Indian politics, 
" sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought ”, ever doubting, 
hesitating, and irresolute. 

“ The dme is out of joint. O cursed spite! 

That ever I was bom to set it right." 

The Servant of India, a Liberal weekly, accused Congress- 
men, during the latter days of the Civil Disobedience Move- 
ment, of waiting to go to P^on, and when they got there 
wanting to come out again. Ihat, it said with some irritation, 
was the sole Congress policy. The Liberal alternative to that, 
apparently, was to send a deputation to England to wait on the 
British ministers, or to wait and pray for a change of Govern- 
ment in England. 

It was true, to some extent, that the Congress policy then was 
mainly one of defiance of the Ordinance laws and other re- 
pressive measures, and this led to gaol. It was also true that 
the Congress and the nation were exhausted after the long 
struggle and could not bring any effective pressure on the 
Government. But there was a practical and moral consideratira. 

Naked coerdon, as India was experiencing is an expensive 
affair for the rulers. Even for them it is a painful nerve- 
shaking ordeal, and they know well that ultimately it weakens 
their foxmdations. It exposes continually the real character of 
their rule, both to the people coerced and the world at large. 
They infinitely prefer to put on the velvet glove to hide me 
iron fist. Nothing is more irritating and, in die_ final analysis, 
harmful to a Government than to have to deal with people who 
vrill not hend to ite will, whatever the consequences. So even 
sporadic defiance of the repressive measures had value; it 
strengthened the people and sapped the morale of Government, 



JAWAHARLAL NKHRU 


394 

The moral consideration was even more important. In a 
famous passage Thoreau has said: “At a time when men and 
women are unjustly imprisoned the place for just men and 
women is also in prison.” This advice may not appeal to 
Liberals and others, but many of us often feel that a moral life 
under existing conditions is intolerable, when, even apart from 
civil disobedience, many of our colleagues are always in prison 
and the coercive apparatus of the State is continually repress- 
ing us and humUiating us, as well as helping in the exploitation 
of our people. In our own country we move about as suspects, 
shadowed and watched, our words recorded lest they infringe 
the all-pervading law of sedition, our correspondence, opened, 
the possibility of some executive prohibition or arrest always 
facing us. For us the choice is ; abject submission to the power 
of the State, spiritual degradation, the denial of the truth that 
is in us, and our moral prostitution for purposes that we con- 
sider base — or opposition with all the consequences thereof. No 
one likes to go to gaol or to invite trouble. But often gaol is 
preferable to the other alternative. “ The only real tragedy in 
life,” as Bernard Shaw has written, “ is the being used by per- 
sonally minded men for purposes which you know to be base. 
All the rest is at the worst mere misfortune and mortality : this 
alone is misery, slavery, hell on earth.” 



XLIX 


THE END OF A LONG TERM 

The time for my discharge was drawing near. I had received 
the usual remissions for ‘ good behaviour and this had reduced 
my two-year term by t&ee and half months. My peace of 
mmd, or rather the general dullness of the mind which prison 
produces, was being disturbed by the excitement created by the 
prospect of release. What must I do outside? A difficult 
question, and the hesitation I had in answering it took away 
&om the joy of going out. But even that was a momentary 
feeling, and my long-suppressed energy was bubbling up and 
I was eager to be out. 

The end of July 1933 brought a painffil and very disturbing 
piece of news — the sudden death of J. M. Sen-Gupta. We had 
not only been close colleagues on the Congress Working Com- 
mittee tor many years, but he was also a link with my early 
Cambridge days. We met in Cambridge first— I was a freshman, 
and he had just taken his degree. 

Sen-Gupta died under detention. He had been made a State 
prisoner on his return firom Europe early in 1932, while he was 
yet on board ship in Bombay. Since then he had been a 
prisoner or a ‘detenu, and his health had deteriorated. Various 
mcilities were given to him by the Government, but evidently 
they could not check the cotu^e of the disease. His funeral in 
Calcutta was the occasion for a remarkable mass demonstration 
and tribute; it seemed that the long pentrup sufifering soul of 
Bengal had ffiimd an oudet ffir a while at least. 

So SenGupta had gone. Subhas Bose, another State prisoner 
whose healm had broken down by years of interment and 
prison, had at last been permitted by me Govermnent to go ,to 
Europe fiir treatment. The veteran Vuhabhhhai Patel also lay ill 
in Europe. And how many others had broken down in health 
or died, unable to stand the physical strain of gaol life and 
ceaseless activity outside I How many, though outwardly not 
much changed, had suffered deeper mental derangements and 
developed complexes on account of the ahnormd lives they 
had been made to lead I . . 

SenGupta’s diath made me vividly aware of all this terrible, 
silent sumring going on throughout the country, and I fflt 
.weary and depressed. To what end was all this? To what end? 

mw 



396 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I had been fortunate about my own health, and in spite of 
the strains and irregular life of Congress activity I had, on the 
whole, kept well. Partly, I suppose, this was due to a good 
constitution I had inherited, partly to my care of the body. 
Illness and weak health as well as too much fat seemed to me 
a most unbecoming state of alfairs, and with the help of 
exercise, plenty of fresh air, and simple food, I managed to keep 
away from them. My own experience has been mat a vast 
proportion of the ailments of the Indian middle classes are 
caused by wrong feeding; the food is both rich and excessive. 
(This applies only to those who can afford such wasteful habits.) 
The fond mother lays the firm foundation of life-long indiges- 
tion by over-feeding the child with sweets and other so-called 
dainties. The child is also muffled up in too many clothes. 
The English people in India also seem to eat far too much, 
although their food is less rich. Probably they have improved 
a little from the older generation which used to consume 
enormous quantities of food, hot and strong. 

I have cared little for food fads, and have only avoided over- 
eating and rich foods. Like nearly all Kashmiri Brahmans our 
family was a meat-eating one, and from clJldhood onwards I 
had always taken meat, ^thou^h I never fancied it much. With 
die coming of Non-Co-operauon in 1920 I gave up meat and 
became a vegetarian. I remained a vegetarian till a visit to 
Europe six years later, when I relapsed to meat-eating. On my 
return to India I became a vegetarian again, and since then 1 
have been more or less a vegetarian. Meat-eating seems to 
agree with me well, but I have developed a distaste for it, and 
it gives me a feeling of coarseness. 

My periods of ill-health, chiefly in prison in 193a, when for 
many months I got a rise of temperature every, day> annoyed 
me, because they hurt my conceit of good health. And for the 
first time I did not think, as I used to do, in terms of abounding 
life and energy, but a spectre of a gradual decay and a wearing 
away rose up before me and alarmed me. I do not think I am 
particularly frightened of death. But a slow deterioration, 
bodily and mental, was quite another matter. However, my 
fears proved exaggerated, and I managed to get rid of the indis- 
position and bimg my body imder control. Long sun-baths 
during the winter helped me to get back my feeling of well- 
being. While my companions in prison would shiver in their 
coats and shawls, I would sit, bare^odied, delightfully warmed 
up by the sun’s embrace. This was only possible in North India 
during the winter, as elsewhere the sun is usually too hot. 



THE END OF A LONG TERM 


397 

Among my exercises one pleased me particularly — the 
shirshasana, standing on the head with the palms of the hands, 
fingers interlocked, supporting the back of the head, elbows on 
the floor, body vertical, upside down. I suppose physically this 
exercise is very good : I liked it even more for its psychological 
ei&ct on me. The slightly comic position increased my good 
humour and made me a little more tolerant of life's vagaries. 

My usual good health and the bodily sense of well-being 
have been of very great help to me in. getting over periods of 
depression, which are inevitable in prison life. They have 
helped me also in accommodating myself to changing con- 
ditions in prison or outside. I have had many shocks, which 
at the time seemed to bowl me over, but to my own surprise I 
have recovered sooner than I expected. I suppose a test of my 
fundamental sobriety and sanity is the fact that I hardly know 
what a bad headache is, nor have I ever been troubled with 
insomnia. I have escaped these common diseases of civilisation, 
as also bad eyesight, in spite of excessive use of the eyes for 
reading and writing, sometimes in a bad light in gaol. An 
eye specialist expressed his amazement last year at my good 
eyesight. Eight years before he had prophesied that I would 
have to take to spectacles in another year or two. He was very 
much mistaken, and I am still carrying on successfully without 
them. Although these facts might establish my reputation for 
sobriety and sanity, I might add that I have a horror of people 
who are inescapably and unchangingly sane and sober. 

While I waited for my discharge from prison, the new form 
of civil disobedience for individuals was beginning outside. 
Gandhiji decided to give the lead and, after giving foil notice 
to the authorities, he started on August ist with the intention 
of preaching civil resistance to the Gujrat peasantry. He was 
immediately arrested, sentenced to one year, and sent back 
again to his cell in Yeravda. I was glad he had gone back. 
But soon a new complication arose. Gandhiji claimed the same 
facilities for carrying on Haiijan work firom prison as he had 
had before; the Government refused to grant them. Suddenly 
we heard that Gandhiji had started fasting again on this issue. 
It seemed an extraordinarily trivial matter for such a tremen- 
dous step. It was quite impossible for me to understand his 
decision, even though he might be completely right in his 
argument with the Government. We could do nothing, and we 
looked on, bewildered. 

After a week of the fast his condition grew rapidly worse. He 
had been removed to a hospital, but he was still a prisoner 



398 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and Government would not give in on the question of facilities 
for Harijan work. He lost the will to live (which he had during 
his previous fasts) and allowed himself to go down hill. The 
end seemed to be near. He said good-bye and even made dis- 
positions about the few personal articles that were lying about 
him, giving some to the nurses. But the Government had no 
intention of allowing him to die on their hands, and that 
evening he was suddenly discharged. It was just in time to 
save him. Another day and perhaps it would have been too 
late. ProbabW a great deal of the credit for saving him 
should go to C. F. Andrews who had rushed to India, contrary 
to Gandhiji’s advice. 

Meanwhile I was transferred from Dehra Dun Gaol on 
August a3rd, and I returned to Naini Prison after more than 
a year and a half’s residence in other gaols. Just then news 
came of my mother’s sudden illness and her removal to hos- 
pital. On the 30th August, 1933 , 1 was discharged from Naini 
liecause my mother’s condition was considered serious. Ordi- 
narily I would have been released, at the latest, on September 
nth when my term expired. I was thus given an additional 
thirteen days of remission by the Provincial Government. 



L 


A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 

Immediately after my release, I hastened to Lucknow to my 
mother’s bed-side, and I remained with her for some days. I 
had come out of prison after a fairly long period, and I felt 
detached and out of touch with my surroundings. I realised 
with little shock, as we all do, that the world had gone on 
moving and changing while I lay stagnating in prison. Chil- 
dren and boys and girls growing up, marriages, births, deaths; 
love and hate, work and play, tragedy and comedy. New 
interests in life, new subjects &r conversation, always there was 
a little element of surprise in what I saw and heard. Life 
seemed to have passed by, leaving me in a backwater. It was 
not a wholly pleasant feeling. Soon I woidd have adapted 
myself to my environment, but I felt no urge to do so. I realised 
that I was only having a brief outing outside prison, and 
would have to go back again before long. So why trouble 
myself about adaptation to something which I would leave 
soon? 

Pol itica lly, India was more or less quiet; public activities were 
largely controlled and suppressed by the Government, and ar- 
rests occasionally took place. But the silence of India then was 
full of significance. It was the ominous silence which follows ex- 
haustion after experiencing a period of fierce repression, a 
silence which is often very eloquent, but is beyond the ken of 
governments that repress. India was the ideal poUce state, and 
the police mentality pervaded ail spheres of government. Out- 
wardly all non-conformity was suppressed, and a. vast army of 
spies and secret agents covered the land. There was an atmo- 
sphere of demoralisation and an all-pervading fear among the 
people. Any political activity, especially in the rural areas, was 
immediately suppressed, and the various provincial govern- 
ments were trymg to hound out Congressmen firom me ser- 
vice of municipauties and local boards. Every person who 
had been to pruon as a civil resister was unfit, according to 
Government, for teaching in a municipal school or serving the 
municipality in any other way. Great pressure was brought to 
bear on municipalities, etc., and threats were held out that 
Government grants would be stopped, if the ofifending Con- 
gressmen were not dismissed. The most .n&torious example of 

SQ9 



400 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

this coercion took place in the Calcutta Corporation. Ulti- 
mately, I believe, the Bengal Government passed a law against 
the employment hy the Corporation of persons who had been 
convicted for political offences. 

Reports of Nazi excesses in Germany had a curious effect 
on British officials and their Press in India. They gave them 
a justification for all they had done in India, and it was pointed 
out to us, with a glow of conscious virtue, how much worse 
our lot would have been if the Nazis had had anything to do 
with us. New standards and records had been set up by the 
Nazis, and it was certainly not an easy matter to rival them. 
Perhaps our lot would have been worse; it is difficult for me to 
judge for I have not all the facts of the occurrences that have 
taken place in various parts of India during the past five years. 
The British Government in India believes in the charity that 
its right hand should not know what its left hand does, and so 
it has turned down every suggestion for an impartial enc^ry, 
although such enquiries are always weighted on the official 
side. I think it is true that the average Englishman hates 
brutality, and I cannot conceive English people openly glorying 
in and repeating lovingly the word ' Brutahtdt ’ (or its English 
equivalent) as the Nazis do. Even when they indulge in the 
deed, they are a little ashamed of it. But whether we are 
Germans or English or Indians, I am afraid our veneer of 
civilised conduct is thin enough, and when passions are aroused 
it rubs off and reveals something that is not good to look at. 
The Great War brutalised humanity terribly, and we saw the 
aftermath of this in that awful hunger blockade of Germany 
even after the Armistice — "one of the most senseless, brutal 
and hideous atrocities ever committed by any nation” as an 
English writer has described it. The years 1857 and 1858 have 
not been forgotten in India. Whenever die challenge to 
our own interests is made we forget our good breeding and 
society manners, and untruth becomes ‘propaganda', and 
brutality ‘ scientific repression ’ and the preservation of ‘ law and 
order ’. 

It is not the fault of individuals or any particular people. 
More or less every one behaves so under simuar drcumstances. 
In India, and in every country under foreign domination, there 
is always a latent challenge to the ruling power, and firom time 
to time this becomes more obvious and threatening. This 
challenge always develops the military virtues and vices in the 
ruling groups. We have had evidence of these military virtues 
and vices in a superlative degree in India during the last few 



A VISIT TO CANDHIJI 40I 

years, because our challenge had become powerful and efifective. 
But to some extent we have always to put up with the military 
mind (or absence of it) in India. That is one of the conse- 
quences of Empire, and it degrades both the parties involved. 
The degradation of Indians is obvious enough, the other degra- 
dation is more subtle, but in times of crisis it becomes patent. 
Then there is a third group, which has the misfortune to share 
in both types of degradation. 

I have had ample leisure in gaol to read the speeches of high 
officials, their answers to questions in the Assembly and Coim- 
cUs, and Government statements. I noticed, during the last 
three years, a marked change coming over them, and this 
change became progressively more and more obvious. They 
became more threatening and minatory, developing more and 
more in the style of a sergeant-major addressing his men. A 
remarkable example of this was a speech dehvered by the 
Commissioner of, I think, the Midnapur Division in Bengal in 
November or December 1933. Vae victis seems to run like 
a thread through these utterances. Non-official Europeans, in 
Bengal especially, go even further than the official vanety, and 
both in their speeches and actions have shown a very decided 
Fascist tendency. 

Yet another revealing instance of brutalisation was the 
recent public hangings of some convicted criminals in Sind. 
Because crime was on the increase in Sind the authorities there 
decided to execute these criminals publicly, as a warning to 
others. Every facility was given to the public to attend and 
watch this ghastly spectacle, and it is said that many thousands 
came. 

So after my discharge from prison, I surveyed political and 
economic conditions in India, and felt little enthusiasm at them. 
Many of my comrades were in prison, fresh arrests continued, 
all the Ordinance laws were in operation, censorship throttled 
the Press and upset our correpondence. A colleague of mine, 
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, was greatly irritated at the vagaries of 
the censor regarding his correspondence. Letters would be hdd 
up and came very late, or would get lost, and this would upset 
his engagements. He wanted to appeal to the censor to do his 
job a littie more efficiently, but who was he to write to? The 
censor was not a public official. He was probably some C.I.D. 
officer working secretly, whose existence and work were not 
even adknowledged openly. Rafi Ahmad solved the difficulty 
by writing to the censor, and addressing the envelope of this 
letter to himself 1 Sure enough the letter reached its proper 



402 


JAWAHAHLAX, NEHRU 


destination, and there was some improvement afterwards in 
Rafi Ahmad's correspondence. 

I had no desire to go back to prison. I had had enough of it. 
But I could not see how I could escape it under the existing 
circumstances, unless I decided to retire from all political 
activity. I had no such intention, and so I felt that I was 
hound to come into conflict with the Government. At any 
moment some order might be served on me to do something, 
or to abstain from doing something, and all my nature rebelled 
at being forced to act in a particular way. An attempt was 
being made to cow down and coerce the people of India. I was 
helpless, and could do nothing on the wider field, but, at any 
rate, I could refuse personally to be cowed down and coerced 
into submission. 

Before I went back to prison I wanted to attend to certain 
matters. My mother’s illness claimed my attention first of all. 
Very slowly she improved; the process was so slow that for a 
year she was bed-ridden. I was eager to see Gandhiji, who lay 
recovering from his latest fast in Poona. For over two years 
I had not met him. I also wanted to meet as many of my 
provincial colleagues as possible to discuss, not only the existing 
political situation in India, but the world situation as well as 
the ideas that filled my mind. I thought then that the world 
was going rapidly towards a catastrophe, political and economic, 
and we ought to keep this in mind m drawing up our national 
programmes. 

My household affairs also claimed my attention. I had 
ignored them completely so far, and I had not even examined 
my father’s papers since his death. We had cut down our 
e^enditure greatly, but still it was far more than we could 
anord. And yet it was difficult to reduce it further, so long as 
we lived in that house of oure. We were not keeping a car 
because that was beyond our means, and also because, at any 
moment, it could be attached by Government. Faced by finan- 
cial difficulties, I was diverted by the large mail of b^ging 
letters that I received. (The censor passed the lot on.) There, 
was a general and very erroneous impression, especially in 
South India, that I was a wealthy person. 

Soon after my release my younger sister, Krishna, got en- 
gaged to be married and I was anxious to have the wedding 
early, befiire my enforced departure took place. Krishna herself 
had come out of prison a few months earlier after serving out 
a year. 

As soon as my mother’s health permitted it, I went to Poona 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 4O3 

to see Gandhiji. I was happy to see him again and to find that, 
though weak, he was making good progress. We had long 
talks. It was obvious that we- differed considerably in our out- 
look on life and politics and economics, but I was grateful to 
him for the generous way in which he tried to come as fer as 
he could to meet my view point. Our correspondence, subse- 
quently published, dealt with some of the wider issues that 
filled my mind, and though they were referred to in vague 
language, the general drift was clear. I was happy to have 
Gandhiji’s declaration that there must be a de-vesting of vested 
interests, though he laid stress that this should be by conversion, 
not compulsion. As some of his methods of conversion are not 
far removed, to my thinking, from courteous and considerate 
compulsion, the difference did not seem to me very great. I had 
the feeling with him then, as before, that though he might be 
averse to considering vague theories, the logic of facts would 
take him, step by step, to the inevitability of fundamental 
social changes. He was a curious phenomenon — a person of the 
t3q)e of a medieval Catholic saint, as Mr. Verrier Elwin has called 
him — and at the same time a practical leader with his pulse 
always on the Indian peasantry. Which way he might turn in 
a crisis it was difficult to say, but whichever way it was, it would 
make a difference. He might go the wrong way, according to 
our thinking, but it would always be a straight way. It was 
good to work with him, but if necessity arose then different 
roads would have to he followed. 

For the present, I thought then, this question did not arise. 
We were in the middle of our national struggle and civil diso- 
bedience was still the programme in theory, of the Congress, 
although it had been restncted to individuds. We must carry 
on as we are and try to spread socialistic ideas among the 
people, and especially among the more politically-conscious 
Congress workers, so that when the time came for another 
declaration of policy we might be ready for a notable advance. 
Meanwhile, Congress was an unlawful organisation, and the 
British Government was trying to crush it. We had to meet 
that attack. 

The principal problem which faced Gandhiji was a personal 
one. What was he to do himself? He was in a tangle. If he 
went to gaol again the same question of Harijan privileges 
would arise and, presumably, the Government would not give 
in, and he would fast again. Would the same round be re- 
peated? He refused to submit to such a cat-and-mouse policy, 
and said that if he fasted again for those privileges, the fast 



404 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

would continue even though he was released. That meant a 
fast to death. 

The second possible course before him was not to court 
imprisonment during the year of his sentence (ten and a half 
months of this remained still) and devote himself to Harijan 
work. But at the same time he would meet Congress workers 
and advise them when necessary. 

A third possibility he suggested to me was that he should 
retire from the Congress altogether for a while, and leave it in 
the hands of the " younger generation,” as he put it. 

The first course, ending, as it seemed, in his death by star- 
vation, was impossible for any one of us to recommend. The 
third seemed very undesirable when the Congress was an illegal 
body. It would either result in the immediate withdrawal of 
civil disobedience and all forms of direct action and a going 
back to legality and constitutional activity, or to a Congress, 
outlawed and isolated, now even from Gandhiji, being crushed 
still further by Government. Besides, there was no question of 
any group taking possession of an illegal organisation which 
could not meet and discuss any policy. By a process of ex- 
clusion' we arrived thus at the second course of action suggested 
by him. Most of us disliked it, and we knew that it would give 
a heavy blow to the remains of civil disobedience. If the 
leader had himself retired from the fight, it was not likely that 
many enthusiastic Congress v/orkers would jump into the fire. 
But there seemed no other way out of the tangle, and Gandhiji 
made his announcement accordingly. 

"We agreed, Gandhiji and I, though perhaps for different 
reasons, that the time was not yet for a withdrawal of civil 
disobedience and we. must carry on even at a low-ebb. For the 
rest, I wanted to turn people’s attention to socialistic doctrines 
and the world situation. 

I spent a few days in Bombay on my way back. I was for- 
tunate in catching udai Shankar there and seeing his dancing. 
This was an unexpected treat which I enjoyed greatly. Theatres, 
music, cinema, talkies, radio and broadcasting— all this had 
been beyond my reach for many years, for even during my 
intervals of freedom I was too engrossed in other activities. I 
have only been once to a talkie so for, and the great names of 
dnema stars- are names onljr to me. I have missed the theatre 
especially, and I have often read with envy of new productions 
in foreign countries. In northwn India, eVen when I was out 
of gaol, there was little opportunity of seeing good plays, for 
there were hardly any within reach. I believe the Bengali, 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 405 

Gujrati and Marathi drama has made some progress; not so 
the Hindustani stage, which is, or was (for I do not know the 
latest developments) terribly crude and inartistic. I am told 
most of the Indian films, both silent and talkies, do not err 
on the side of artistry. They are usually operettes or melo- 
dramas, drawing upon some theme firom old Indian history or 
mythology. 

I suppose they supply what is most appreciated by the city 
people. The contrast between these crude and painful shows 
and the still surviving artistry of the folk-song and -dance, and 
even village drama, is very marked. In Bengal, in Gujrat and 
in the south, one discovers sometimes, with a shock of pleasant 
surprise, how fundamentally, and yet unconsciously, artisdc the 
mass of the village people are. Not so the middle classes; they 
seem to have lost their roots and have no aesthetic tradition, to 
cling to. They glory in cheap and horrid prints made in bulk 
in Germany and Austria, and sometimes even rise to Ravi 
Varma’s pictures. The harmonium is their favourite instru- 
ment. (I live in hope that one of the earliest acts of the Swaraj 
government will be to ban this awful instrument.) But perhaps 
the height of painful incongruity and violation of all artistic 
codes is met with in the houses of most big taluqadars in 
Lucknow or elsewhere. They have money to spend and a desire 
to show off, and they do so; and the people who visit them are 
the pained wimesses of the fulfilment of this desire. 

Recently there has been an artistic awakening, led by the 
brilliant Tagore family, and its influence is already apparent 
all over India. But how can any art flourish widely when the 
people of the country are hampered and restricted and sup- 
pressed at every turn and live in an atmosphere of fear? 

In Bombay i met many friends and comrades, some only 
recently out of prison. The socialistic element was strong there, 
and there was much resentment at recent happenings in the 
upper ranks of the Congress. Gandhiji was severely critidsed 
for his metaphysical ouuook applied to politics. Witji much 
of the criticism I was in agreement, but I was quite clear that, 
situated as we were, we had little dioice in the matter and had 
to carry on. Any attempt to withdraw civil disobedience would 
have brought no relief to us, for the Government's offensive 
would continue and all effective work would mevitably lead to 

E rison. Our national movement had arrived at a stage when it 
ad to be suppressed by Government, or it would impose its will 
on the British Government. This meant that it had arrived at a 
stage when it was always likely to be declared illegal and, as a 



4o6 jawahaulal nehru 

movement, it could not go back even if civil disobedience was 
withdrawn. The continuance of disobedience made little differ- 
ence in practice, but it was an act of moral defiance which had 
value. It was easier to spread new ideas during a struggle than it 
would be when the strugde was wound-up for the time being, and 
demoralisation ensued. The only alternative to the struggle was 
a compromising attitude to the British authority and consti- 
tutional action m the councils. 

It was a difficult position, and the choice- was not an easy one. 
I appreciated the mental conflicts of my colleagues, for I had 
myself had to face them. But I found there, as I have found 
elsewhere in India, some people who wanted to make high 
socialistic doctrine a refuge for inaction. It was a little irritating 
to find people, who did little themselves, criticise others who 
had shouldered the burden in the heat and dust of the fray, 
as reactionaries. These parlour Socialists are especially hard on 
Gandhiji as the arch-reactionary, and advance arguments which 
in logic, leave little to be desired. But the little fact remains 
that this ‘ reactionary ’ knows India, understands India, almost 
is peasant India, and has shaken up India as no so-called 
revolutionary has done. Even his latest Harijan activities have 
gently but irresistibly undermined orthodox Hinduism and 
shaken it to its foundations. The whole tribe of the Orthodox 
have ranged themselves against him, and consider him their 
most dangerous enemy, almough he continues to treat them 
with all gentleness and courtesy. In his own peculiar way he 
has a knack of releasing powerful forces which spread out, like 
ripples on the water’s surface, and affect millions. Reaaionary 
or revolutionary, he has changed the face of India, given pride 
and character to a cringing and demoralised people, built up 
strength and consciousness in the masses, and made the Indian 
problem a world problem. Quite apart from the objectives 
aimed at and its metaphysical implications, the method of 
non-violent non-co-operation or civil resistance is a unique and 
powerful contribution of his to India and the world, and there 
can be no doUbt that it has been peculiarly suited to Indian 
conditions. 

I think it is right that we should encourage honest criticism, 
and have as much public discussion of our problems as possible. 
It is unfortunate that Gandhiji’s dominating position has to 
some extent prevented this discussion. There was always a ten- 
dency to rely on him and to leave the decision to him. This is 
obviously wrong, and the nation can only advance by reasoned 
acceptance of objectives and methods, and a co-operation and 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJl 407 

discipline based on them and not on blind obedience. No one, 
however great he may be, should be above criticism. But when 
criticism becomes a mere refuge for inaction there is something 
wrong with it. For socialists to indulge in this ItinH of thing 
is to invite condemnation &om the public, for the masses judge 
by acts. “ He who denies the sharp tasks of to-day,” says Lenin, 
” in the name of dreams about soft tasks of the mture becomes 
an opportunist. Theoretically it means to fail to base oneself 
on the developments now going on in real life, to detach oneself 
from them in the name of dreams.” 

Socialists and communists in India are largely nurtured on 
literature dealing with the industrial proletariat. In some 
selected areas, like Bombay or near Calcutta, large numbers of 
factory workers abound, but for the rest India remains agricul- 
tural, and the Indian problem caimot be disposed of, or treated 
effectively, in terms of the industrial workers. Nationalism and 
rural economy are the dominating considerations, and Euro- 
pean socialism seldom deals with &ese. Pre-war conditions in 
Russia were a much nearer approach to India, but there again 
the most extraordinary and imusual occurrences took place, 
and it is absurd to expect a repetition of these anywhere else. 
I do believe that the philosophy of communism helps us to 
understand and analyse existing conditions in a^ country, and 
further indicates the road to mture progress. But it is doing 
violence and injustice to that philosophy to apply it blindfold 
and without due regard to fiicts and conditions. 

Life is anyhow a complex afi^r, and the conflicts and con- 
tradictions of life sometimes make one despair a little. It is not 
surprising that people should differ, or even that comrades with 
a common approach to problems should draw different con- 
clusions. But a person who tries to hide his own weakness in 
high-sounding phrases and noble principles is apt to be suspect. 
A person who. tries to save himself from prison by giving 
undertakings and assurances to the Government, or by other 
dubious conduct, and then has the temerity to criticise others, 
is likely to, injure the cause he espouses. 

Bombay being a vast cosmopolitan city had all manner of 
people. One prominent citizen, however, showed a perfecdy 
remarkable catholicity in his political, economic, social and 
religious outlook. As a Labour leader, he was a Socialist; in 
politics generally he called himself a Democrat; he was a 
favourite of the Hindu Sabha and he promised to protect old 
religious and social customs and prevent the legislature from 
interfering; at dection-time he became the nominee of the 



4o8 jawaharlal nehru 

Sanatanists, those high priests at the shrine of the ancient 
mysteries. Not finding this varied and diverting career ex- 
haustii^ enough, he utilised his superfluous energy in criti- 
cising Congress and condemning Gandhiji as reactionary. In 
co-operation with a few others he started a Congress Democratic 
Party, which incidentally had nothing to do with democracy, 
and was connected with Congress only in so far as it attacked 
that august body. Searching fiir firesh fields to conquer, he 
then attended the Geneva Labour Conference as a Labour 
delegate. One might almost think that he was qualifying for 
the Prime Ministership of a ‘ National ' Government after the 
E^lish fashion. 

ilSw people can have had the advantage of such a varied out- 
look and activities. And yet among the critics of the Congress 
there were many who had experimented in various fields, and 
who kept a finger in many a pie. A few of these called them- 
selves socialists, and they gave a bad name to socialism. 



n 


THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 


During my visit to Poona to see Gandhiji, I accompanied him 
one evening to the Servants of India Society's home. For an 
hour or so questions were put to him on political matters by some 
of the members of the Society, and he answered them. Mr. 
Srinivasa Sastri, the President of the Society, was not there, nor 
was Pandit Hriday Nath Kunzru, probably the ablest of the 
other members, but some senior members were present. A few 
of us who were present on the occasion listened with growing 
amazement, for the questions related to the most trivial of 
happenings. Mostly they dealt with Gandhiji's old request for 
an interview with the Viceroy and the Viceroy’s refusal. Was 
this the only important subject they could think of in a world 
full of problems, and when their own country was carrying on 
a hard struggle for freedom and hundreds of organisations 
were outlawed? 'There was the agrarian crisis and the industrial 
depression causing widespread unemployment. 'There were the 
dreadful happenings in Bengal and the Frontier and in other 
parts of India, the suppression of freedom of thought and 
speech and writing and assembly; and so many other national 
and international problems. But the questions were limited to 
unimportant happenings, and the possible reactions of the 
Viceroy and the Government of India to an approach by 
Gandhiji. 

I had a strong feeling as if I had entered a monastery, the 
inhabitants of which had long been cut off &om effective 
contact with the outside world. And yet our friends were active 
politicians, able men with long records of public service and 
sacrifice. They formed, with a few others, the real backbone of 
the Liberal Party. The rest of the Party was a vague, amor' 
phous lot of people, who wanted occasionally to have the sen- 
sation of being connected with political activities. Some of 
these, especially in Bombay and Madras, were indistinguishable 
from Government officials. 

The questions that a country puts are a measure of that 
country^ political development. Often the failure oif that 
countiy is due to the fact that it has not put the right question 
to itself. Our wasting our tiir s and energy and tempen over 
the commimal distribution of seats, or our forming parties on 





410 . JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the Communal Award and carrying bn a sterile controversy 
about it to the exclusion of vital problems, is a measure of our 
political backwardness. In the same way the questions that 
were put to Gandhiji that day in the Servants of India Society’s 
home mirrored the strange mental stable of that Society and of 
the Liberal Party. They seemed to have no political or eco- 
nomic principles, no wide outlook, and their politics seemed to 
be of the parlour or court variety— what high officials would do 
or would not do. 

One is apt to be misled by the name ' Liberal Party ’. The 
word elsewhere, and especially in England, stood for a certain 
economic policy— free trade and laisser-faire, etc. — and a cer- 
tain ideology of individual freedom and civil liberties. The 
English Liberal tradition was based on economic foundations. 
The desire for freedom in trade and to be rid of the King’s 
monopolies and arbitrary taxation, led to the desire for political 
liberty. The Indian Liberals have no such background. They 
do not believe in free trade, being almost all protectionists, and 
they attach little importance to civil liberties as recent events 
have shown. Their close contacts with and general support of 
the semi-feudal and autocratic Indian States, wherO even the 
beginnings of democracy and personal freedom are non- 
existent, also distinguish them from the European type of 
Liberal. Indeed the Indian Liberals are not liberal at all in 
any sense of the word, or at most they are liberal only in spots 
and patches. What they exactly are it is difficult to say, for 
they have no firm positive basis of ideas, and, though small in 
numbers, differ from one another. They are strong only in 
negation. They see error everywhere and attempt to avoid it, 
and hope that in doing so they will find the truth. Truth for 
them indeed always lies between two extremes. By criticising 
everything they consider extreme, they experience the feeling 
of being virtuous and moderate and good. This method helps 
them in avoiding painful and difficult processes of thought 
and in having to put forward constructive ideas. Capitalism, 
some of them vaguely feel, has not wholly succeeded in Europe, 
and is in trouble; on the other hand socialism is obviously bad, 
because it attacks vested interests. Probably some mystic solu- 
tion will be found in the future, some half-way house, and 
meanwhile vested interests should be protected. If therp was 
an arrament as to whether the earth was flat or round, prob- 
ably mey would condemn both these extreme views and suggest 
tentatively that it might be square or elliptical. 

Over trivial and unimportant matters they grow quite excited. 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 41I 

and there is an amazing amount of houha and shouting. 
Consciously and sub-consciously they avoid tackling funda- 
mental issues, for such issues require fundamental remedies and 
the courage of thought and action. Hence Liberal defeats and 
victories are of little consequence. They relate to no principle. 
The leading characteristic of the Party and the distinguishing 
feature, if it can be considered so, is thus moderation in every- 
thing, good or bad. It is an outlook on life and the old name— 
the Moderates — was perhaps the most suitable. 

" In moderadon placing all my glory 
While Tories call me Whig and Whigs a Tory.” * 

But moderation, however admirable it might be, is not a 
bright and scintillating virtue. It produces dullness, and so the 
Inman Liberals have unhappily become a ‘Dull Brigade* — 
sombre and serious in their looks, dull in their writing and 
conversation, and lacking in humour. Of course there are 
exceptions, and the most notable of these is Sir Tcj Bahadur 
Sapru who, in his personal lilfe, is certainly not dull or lacking 
in humour and who enjoys even a joke against himself. But 
on the whole, the Liberal group represents bourgeoisdom in 
excelsis with all its pedestrian solidity. The header of Alla- 
habad, which ip the leading Liberal newspaper, had a revealing 
editorial note last year. It stated that great and unusual men 
had always brought trouble to the world, and therefore it pre- 
ferred the ordinary, mediocre kind of man. With a fine and 
frank gesture it nailed its flag to mediocrity. 

Moderation and conservatism and a desire to avoid risks and 
sudden changes are often 'the iiievitable accompaniments of old 
age. They do not seem quite so appropriate in the young, but 
ours is an ancient land, and sometimes its children seem to be 
born tired and weary, with all the lack-lustre and marks of 
age upon them. But even this old country is now convulsed by 
the forces of change, and the moderate outlook is bewildered. 
The old world is passing, and all the sweet reasonableness of 
which the Liberal are capable does not make any difference; 
they might as well argue with the hurricane or the flood or the 
earthqu^e. Old assumptions &il them, and they dare not seek 
for new ways of thought and action. Dr. A. N. Whitdbead, 
speaking of the European tradition, says : “ The whole of this 
tradition is warped by the vicious assumption that each genera- 
tion will substantially live amid the conditions governing the 
lives of its fathers, and will transihit those conditions to mould 
* Alexander Pope. 



413 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

with equal force the lives of its children. We are living in the 
first period of human history for which the assumption is 
false.” Dr. Whitehead errs on the side of moderation in his 
analysis, for probably that assumption has always been untrue. 
If the European tradition has been conservative, how much 
more so has ours been? But the mechanics of history pay little 
attention to these traditions when the time ffar change comes. 
We watch helplessly and blame others for the failure of our 
plans. And that, as Mr. Gerald Heard points out, is the " most 
disastrous of illusions, the projection that convinces itself 
that any failure in one’s plans must be due not to a mistake in 
one’s own thinking, but to a deliberate thwarting by some one 
else.” 

All of us suffer from this terrible illusion. I sometimes think 
that Gandhiji is not free from it. But we act at least and try 
to keep in touch with life, and by trial and error sometimes 
lessen the power of the illusion and stumble along. But the 
Liberals suffer most. For they do not act for fear of acting 
Avrongly, they do not move for fear of falling, they keep away 
from all healthy contacts with the masses, and sit enchanted 
and self-hypnotised in their mental cells. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri 
warned his fellow-Liberals a year and a half ago not to " stand 
by and let things pass.” That warning had greater truth in it 
than he himself probably realised. Thinking always in terms 
of what the Government did, he was referring to the constitu- 
tional changes that were being hatched by various official com- 
mittees. But the misfortune of the Liberals had been that they 
stood by and let things pass when their own people were 
marching ahead. They feared their own masses, and they pre- 
ferred to tilienate themselves from' these masses rather than fall 
out with our rulers. Was it any wonder that they became 
strangers in their own land, and life went by and left them 
standing? When fierce struggles were waged for life and free- 
dom by their count^men, there was no doubt on which side 
of the barricade the Liberals stood. From the other side of tihat 
barricade they gave us good advice, and were full of moral 
platitudes, laying them on thick like sticky paint. Their co- 
operation with the British Government in the round table 
conferences and committees was a moral factor of value to the 
Government. A denial of it would have made a difference. It 
was remarkable that at one of these conferences even the 
British Labour Party kept away; not so our Liberals, who 
went in spite of an appeal by some Britishers to them not to 
do so. 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 


413 

We are all moderates or extremists in varying degrees, and 
for various objects. If we care enough for anything we are 
likely to feel strongly about it, to be extremist about it. Other- 
wise we can aiford a gracious tolerance, a philosophical modera- 
tion, which really hides to some extent our indifference. I have 
known the mildest of Moderates to grow very aggressive and 
extremist when a suggestion was made for the sweeping away 
of certain vested interests in land. Our Liberal friends repre- 
sent to some extent the prosperous and well-to-do. They can 
afford to wait for Swaraj, and need not excite themselves about 
it. But any proposal for radical social change disturbs them 
greatly, and they are no longer moderate or sweetly reasonable 
about it. Thus their moderation is really confined to their 
attitude towards the British Government, and they nurse the 
hope that if they are sufficiently respectful and compromising 
perhaps, as a reward for this behaviour, they might be listened 
to. Inevitably they have to accept the British view-point. Blue 
books beepme their passionate study, Erskine May's Parlia- 
mentary Practice and such-like books their constant com- 
panions, a new Government Report a matter for excitement 
and speculation. Liberal leaders returning from England make 
mysterious statements about the doings of the great ones in 
■Whitehall, for Whitehall is the Valhalla of Liberals, Respon- 
sivists and other similar groups. In the old days it was said that 
good Americans when they died went to Paris, and it may be 
that the shades of good Liberals sometimes haunt the precincts 
of Whitehall, . 

I write of Liberals, but what I write applies to many of us 
also in the Congress. It applies even more to the Responsivists, 
who have outdistanced the Liberals in their moderation. There 
is a great deal of difference between the average Liberal and 
the average Congressman, and yet the dividing line is not clear 
and definite. Ideologically there is little to choose between the 
advanced Liberal and the moderate Congressman. But, thanks 
to Gandhiji, every Congressman has kept some touch with the 
soil and the people of the cmmtry, and he has dabbled in 
action, and because of this he has escaped some of the conse- 
quences of a vague and defective ideolow. Not so the Liberals ; 
they have lost touch with both the md and the new. As a 
group they represent a vanishing species. 

Most of us, I suppose, have lost the old pagan feeling mid 
not gained the new insight. Not for us to "have sight of 
Proteus rising from the sea”; or "hear old Triton blow his 
wreathed horn.” And very few Of us are fortunate enough--- 



414 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

“ To see a World in a Grain of Sand 
And a Heaven in a Wild flower. 

Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand 
And Eternity in an hour”' 

Not for most of us, unhappily, to sense the mysterious life 
of Nature, to hear her whisper closd to our ears, to thrill and 
quiver at her touch. Those ^ys are gone. But though we may 
not see the sublime in Nature as we used to, we have sought 
to find it in the glory and tragedy of humanity, in its mighty 
dreams and inner tempests, its pangs and failures, its conflicts 
and misery, and, over all this, its faith in a great destiny and 
a realisation of those dreams. That has been some recompense 
for us for all the heart-breaks that such a search involves, and 
often we have been raised above the pettiness of life. But many 
have not undertaken this search, and having cut themselves 
adrift from the ancient ways, find no road to follow in the 
present. They neither dream nor do they act. They have no 
understanding of human convulsions like the great French 
Revolution or the Russian Revolution. The complex, swift and 
cruel eruptions of human desires, long suppressed, frighten 
them. For them the Bastille has not yet fallen. 

It is often said with righteous indignation that “ Patriotism 
is not a monopoly of Congressmen.” The same phrase is re- 
peated again and again with a lack of originality which is some- 
what distressing. I hope no Congressman has ever claimed a 
corner in this emotion. Certainly I do not think it is a Con- 
gress monopoly, and I would be glad to make a present of it to 
any one who desired it. It is often enough the refuge of the 
opportunist and the careerist, and there are so many varieties 
of it to suit all tastes, all interests, all classes. If Judas had been 
alive to-day he would no doubt act in its name. Patriotism is 
no longer enough: we want something higher, wider and 
nobler. 

Nor is moderation enough by itself. Restraint is good and is 
the measure of our culture, but behind that restraint there must 
be something to restrain and hold back. It has been, and is, 
man’s destiny to control the elements, to ride the thunderbolt, 
to bring the raging fire and the rushing and tumbling waters 
to his use, but most difficult of all for him has been to restrain 
and hold in check the passions that consume him. So long as 
he will not master them, he cannot enter fully into his human 
heritage. But are we to restrain the legs that move not and the 
hands that are palsied? 



THE LIBERAL OUTLOOK 415 

I cannot resist the temptation to quote four lines of Roy 
Campbell’s, written on some South African novelists. They seem 
to be equally applicable to various political groups in India : 

“ They praise the firm restraint with which you write. 

I’m with you there, of course. 

You use the snafile and the curb all right, 

But where’s the bloody horse? " 

Our Liberal friends tell us that they follow the narrow path 
of the golden mean, and steer themselves between the extremes 
of the Congress and the Government. They constitute them- 
selves the judges of the failings of both, and congratulate them- 
selves that they are free from either. 'They endeavour to hold 
the scales and, like the figure of Justice, I suppose, they keep 
their eyes closed or bandaged. Is it my fancy merely that takes 
me ba^ through the ages and makes me listen to mat frmous 
cry ; " Scribes and Phansees. ... Ye blind guides, which strain 
at a gnat and swallow a camel 1 ” 



LII 


DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 

Most of those who have sh^ed Congress policy during the last 
seventeen years have come from the middle classes. Liberal or 
Congressmen, they have come from the same class and have 
grown up in the same environment. Their social life and con- 
tacts and friendships have been similar, and there was little 
difference to begin vidth between the two varieties of bourgeois 
ideals that they professed. Temperamental and psychological 
differences began to separate them, and they began to look in 
different directions — one group more towards the Government 
and the rich, upper middle class, the other towards the lower 
middle classes, ttie ideology still remained the same, the objec- 
tives did not differ, but behind the second group there was now 
the push of larger numbers from the market-place and the 
humbler professions as well as the unemployed intelligentsia. 
The tone changed; it was no longer respectful and polite, but 
strident and aggressive. Lacking strength to act effectively, some 
relief was found in strong language. Frightened by this new 
development, the moderate elements dropped out and sought 
safety m seclusion. Even so, the upper middle class was strongly 
represented in the Congress, though in numbers the little 
bourgeoisie was predominant. They were drawn not only by the 
desire for success in their national struggle, but because they 
sought an inner satisfaction in that struggle. They sought 
thereby to recover their lost pride and self-respect, and to reha- 
bilitate their shattered dignity. It was the usual nationalist 
urge, and though this was common to all, it was here that the 
temperamental differences between the moderate and the ex- 
tremist became evident. Gradually the lower middle class began 
to dominate the Congress, and later the peasantry made their 
influence felt. 

As the Congress became more and more the representa- 
tive of the rural masses, the gulf that separated it from 
the Liberals widened, and it became almost impossible for 
the Liberal to understand or appreciate the Congress view-point. 
It is not easy for the upper-dMs drawing-room to understand 
the humble cottage or the mud hut. Yet, in spite of these 
differences, both ideologies were nationalist and bourgeois; 
the variation was one of degree, not of kind. In the Congress 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDE*ICE 417 

many people remained to the last who would have been quite at 
home in the Liberal group. 

For many generations the British treated India as a kind of 
enormous country-house (after the old English fashion) that 
they owned. They were the gentry owning the house and occu- 
pying the desirable parts of it, while the Indians were consigned 
to the servants* hall and pantry and kitchen. As in every proper 
country-house there was a fixed hierarchy in those lower regions 
— ^butler, housekeeper, cook, valet, maid, footman, etc. — and 
strict precedence was observed among them. But between the 
upper and lower regions of the house there was, socially and 
politically, an impassable barrier. The fact that the British 
Government should have imposed this arrangement upon us 
was not surprising; but what does seem surprising is that we, 
or most of us, accepted it as the natural and inevitable ordering 
of our lives and destiny. We developed the mentality of a good 
country-house servant. Sometimes we were treated to a rare 
honour — we were given a cup of tea in the drawing-room. The 
height of our anobition was to become respectable and to be 
promoted individually to the upper regions. Greater than any 
victory of arms or diplomacy was this psychological triumph 
of the British in India. The slave began to think as a slave, as 
the wise men of old had said. 

Times have, changed, and the country-house type of civilisa- 
tion is not accepted willingly now, either in England or India. 
But still there remain people amongst us who desire to .stick to 
the servants’-halls and take pride in the gold braid arrll livery 
of their service. Others, like the Liberals, accept that country- 
house in its entirety, admire its architecture and the whole 
edifice, but look forward to replacing the owners, one by one, by 
themselves. They call this Indianisation. For them the problem 
is one of changing the colour of the administration, or at most 
having a new administration. They never think in terms of a 
new State. 

For them Swaraj means that everything continues as 
' before, only with a darker shade. They can oiuy conceive of a 
future in which they, or people like them, will play the principal 
r61e and take the place of the English high officials; in which 
there are the same types of services, government departments, 
legislatures, trade, industry — ^with the I.C.S. at their jobs; the 
pnnees in their palaces, occasionally appearing in fancy dress 
or carnival attire with all their jewels glittering to impress their 
subjects; the landlords claiming special protection, and mean- 
while harassing their tenants; tiie money-lender, with hb 



4i8 jawaharlal nehrv 

money-bags, harassing both zamindar and tenant; the lawyer 
with his fees; and God in His heaven. 

Essentially their outlook is based on the maintenance of the 
status quo, and the changes they desire can almost be termed 
personal changes. And they seek to achieve these changes by a 
slow infiltration with the goodwill of the British. The whole 
foimdation of their politics and economics rests on the continu- 
ance and stability of the British Empire. Looking on this 
Empire as unshakable, at least for a considerable time, uiey adapt 
themselves to it, and accept not only its political and economic 
ideology but also, to a large extent, its moral standards, which 
have all been firamed to secure the continuance of British 
dominance. 

The Congress attitude differs fundamentally from this because 
it seeks a new State and not just a different administration. 
What that new State is going to be may not be quite clear to 
l^e average Congressman, and opinions may differ about it. But 
it is common ground in the Congress (except perhaps for a 
moderate firing^ that present conditions and methods cannot 
and must not continue, and basic changes are essential. Herein 
lies the difference between Dominion Status and Independence. 
The former envisages the same old structure, with many bonds 
visible and invisible tying us to the British economic system; 
the latter gives us, or ought to give us, fireedom to erect a new 
structure to suit our circumstances. 

It is not a question of an inmlacable and irreconcilable anta- 

S onism to England and the English people, or the desire to 
reak firom them at all costs. It would be - natural enough If 
there was bad blood between India and En|;land after what has 
happened. "The clumsiness of power spoils the key and uses 
the pi^-axe,” says Tagore, and the key to our hearts was 
destroyed long ago, and the abundant use of the pick-axe on us 
has not made us partial to the British. But if we claim to serve 
the larger cause of India and humanity we cannot afford to be 
carried away by our momentary passions. And even if we were 
so inclined the hard training which Gandhiji has given us for 
the last fifteen years would prevent us. I write this sitting in a 
British prison, and for months past my mind has been full of 
anxiety, and I have perhaps suffered more during this solitary 
imprisonment than I have done in gaol before. Anger and 
resentment have often filled my mind at various happenings, 
and yet as I sit here, and look deep into my mind and heart, I 
I do not find any anger against England or the English people. I 
dislike British imperialism and I resent its imposition on India; 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 419 

I dislike the capitalist system; I dislike exceedingly and resent 
the way India is exploited by the ruling classes of Britain. But 
I do not hold England or the English people as a whole respon- 
sible for this, and even if I did, I do not think it would make 
much difference, for it is a little foolish to lose one’s temper at 
or to condemn a whole people. They are as much the victims 
of circumstances as we are. 

Personally, I owe too much to England in my mental make- 
up ever to feel wholly alien to her. And, do what I will, I can- 
not get rid of the habits of mind, and the standards and ways 
of judging other countries as well as life generally, which I 
acquired at school and college in England. All my predilections 
(apart from the political plane) are in favour of England and 
the English people, and if I have become what is called an un- 
compromising opponent of British rule in India, it is almost in 
spite of myself. 

It is that rule, that domination, to which we oHect, and with 
which we. cannot compromise willingly — ^not the English people. 
Let us by all means have the closest contacts with the English 
and other foreign peoples. We want fresh air in India, fresh 
and vital ideas, healthy co-<meration; we have grown too 
musty with age. But if the English come in the rSle of a 
tiger they can expect no friendship or co-operation. To the tiger 
of imperialism there will only be the fiercest opposition, and 
to-day our country has to deal with that ferocious animal. It 
may be possible to tame the wild tiger of the forest and to 
charm away ,his native ferocity, but there is no such possibility 
of taming capitalism and imperialism when they combine and 
swoop down on An unhappy land. 

For any one to say that he or his country will not comptomise 
is, in a sense, a foolish remark, for life is always forcing us to 
compromise. When applied to another country or people, it is 
completely foolish. But there is truth in it when it is applied to 
a system or a particular set of circumstances, and then it be- 
comes something beyond human power to accomplish. Indian 
freedom and British imperialism are two incompatibles, and 
neither martial law nor all the sugar-coating in the world 
can make them compatible or bring them together. Only 
with the elimination of British imperialism from India will 
conditions be created which permit of real Indo-British co- 
operation. 

We are told that independence is a narrow creed in the 
modern world, which is increasingly becoming inter-dependent, 
and therefore in demanding independence we are trying to put 



430 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the, clock back. Liberals and pacifists and even so-called social- 
ists in Britain advance this plea and chide us for our narrow 
nationalism, and incidentally suggest to us that the way to a 
fuller national life is through the " British Commonwealth of 
Nations.” It is curious how all roads in England — ^liberalism, 
pacifism, socialism, etc. — lead to the maintenance of the 
Empire. " The desire of a ruling nation to maintain the status 
quo,” says Trotsky, “frequently dresses up as a superipfity to 
' nationalism just as the desire of a victorious nation to hang 
on to its booty easily takes the form of pacifism. Thus Mac- 
Donald, in the face of Gandhi, feels as though he were an inter- 
nationalist." 

I do not know what India will be like or what she will do 
when she is politically free. But I do know that those of her 
people who stand for national independence to-day stand also 
for the widest internationalism. For a socialist, nationalism can 
have no meaning, but even many of the non-socialists in the 
advanced ranks of the Congress are confirmed internationalists. 
If we claim independence to-day it is with no desire for isola- 
tion. On the contrary, we are perfectly willing to surrender part 
of that independence, in common with other countries, to a real 
international order. Any inmerial system, by whatever high- 
sounding name it may be called, is an enemy of such an'order, 
and it is not through such a system that world co-operation or 
world peace can be reached. 

Recent developments have shown all over the world how the 
various imperialist systems are isolating themselves more and 
more by autarchy and economic imperialism. Instead of the 
growth of internationalism we see a reversal of the process. The 
reasons for this are not difficult to discover, and they indicate 
the growing weakness of the present economic order. One of 
the results of this policy is that while it produces greater co- 
operation within the area of autarchy, it also means isolation 
from the rest of the world. For India, as we have seen by 
Ottawa and other decisions, it has meant a progressive lessening 
of our ties and contacts with other countries. We have become, 
even more than we were, the hangers-on of British industry; 
and the dangers of this policy, apart firom the immediate harm 
it has done in various ways, are obvious. Thus Dominion 
Status seems to lead to isolation and not to wider international 
contacts. 

Our friends the Indian Liberals, however, have an amazing 
knack of seeing the world, and more particularly their own 
country, throu^ British speaacles of true-blue colour. With- 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 431 

out trying to appreciate what the Congress says and why it says 
so, they repeat the old British argument of independence being 
narrower and less soul-lifting man Dominion Status. Inter- 
nationalism means for them vihitehall, for they are singularly 
ignorant of other countries, partly because of the langua^ 
difficulty, but even more so because they are quite content to 
ignore them. They are, of course, averse to direct action or 
any kind of aggressive politics in India. But it is curious 
to note that some of their leaders have no objection to such 
methods being adopted in other countries. They can appre- 
ciate and admire them from a distance, and some of the 
present-day dictators of Western countries receive their mental 
homage. 

Names are apt to mislead, but the real cmestion before us in 
India is whether we are aiming at a new State or merely at a 
new administration. The Liberal answer is clear; they want the 
latter, and nothing more, and even that is a distant and pro^es- 
sive ideal. The words ' Dominion Status ’ are mentioned from 
time to time, but their real objective for the time being is ex- 
pressed in those mystic words .“responsibility at the centre". 
Not for them the full-blooded words: Power, Independence, 
Freedom, Liberty; they sound dangerous. The lawyer's lan- 
guage and approach appeals to them far more, even though it 
may not enthuse the multitude. History has innumerable in- 
stances of individuals and groups facing perils and risking their 
lives for the sake of faith and fireedom. It seems doubtful if 
any one will ever deliberately give up a meal or sleep less 
soundly for "responsibility at the centre" or any other legal 
phrase. 

This, then, is their objective, and this is to be reached not by 
' direct action ’ or any other form of aggressive action but, as 
Mr. Srinivasa Sastri put it, by a display of " wisdom, experi- 
ence, moderation! power of persuasion, quiet influence and real 
efficiency.” It is hoped that by our good behaviour and qur 
good work we shall ultimately induce our rulers to part with 
power. In other words, they resist us to-day because either they 
are irritated against us on account of our aggressive attitude, or 
they doubt our capacity, or both. This seems a rather naive 
analysis of im perialism and the present situation. That brilliant 
English writer. Professor R. H. Tawney, has written an appro- 
priate and arresting passage dealing with the notion of gaining 
power in stages and with the co-operation of the ruling classes. 
He refers to the British Labour Pa^ty, but his words are even 
more applicable to India, for in England they have at least 



422 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

democratic institutions, where the will of the majority can, in 
theory, make itself felt. Professor Tawney writes : 

" Onions can be eaten leaf by leaf, but you cannot skin a live 
tiger paw by paw; vivisection is its trade, and it does the skin- 
nmg first. . . . 

“If there is any country where the privileged classes are 
simpletons, it is certainly not England. The idea that taa and 
amiability in presenting the Labour Party’s case can hoodwink 
them into the belief that it is their case also, is as hopeless as 
an attempt to bluff a sharp solicitor out of a property of which 
he holds the title-deeds. The plutocra(^ consists of agreeable, 
astute, forcible, self-confident, and, when hard pressed, tmscni- 
pulous people, who know pretty well on which side their bread 
IS buttered, and intend that the supply of butter shall not run 
short. ... If their position is seriously threatened, they will use 
every piece on the board, political and economic — ^the House of 
Lords, the Crown, the Press, disaffection in the Army, financial 
crisis, international difficulties,- and even, as newspaper attacks 
on the pound in 1931 showed, the emigri trick of mjuring one’s 
country to protect one’s pocket.” 

The British Labour Party is a powerful org^isation. It is 
backed by the Trade Unions, with their millions of paying 
members, and a highly developed co-operative organisation, as 
well as many members and sympathisers among the professional 
classes. Britain has democratic parliamentary institutions based 
on adult suffrage, and a long tradition of civil liberty. In spite 
of all this, Mr. Tawney is of opinion — and recent events have 
cotifiimed the soundness of this — ^that the Labour Party cannot 
hope to gain real power merely by smiling and persuasion, use- 
ful and desirable as both these approaches are. Mr. Tawney 
suggests that even if the Labour Party obtained a majority in, 
the House of Commons, it would still be powerless . to make any 
radical change in face of the opposition of the privileged 
classes, who hold so many political, social, economic, financial 
and military citadels. In India, it need hardly be pointed out, 
conditions are very different. There are no democratic institu- 
tions or traditions. We have instead a well-established practice 
of ordinance and dictatorial rule and the supprestion of the 
liberties of the person, of meech, writing, assembly and the 
Press. Nor have the liberals any strong organisation behind 
them. They have thus to rely on thtir smile alone. 

Liberals are strongly opposed to any activity that is ' uncon- 
stitutional’ or ‘illegal’. In countries with democratic constitu- 
tions the word ‘ cpnstitutional ’ has a wide significance. It 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 433 

controls the making of laws, it protects liberties, it checks the 
executive, it provides for the democratic methods of bringing 
about changes in the political and economic structure. But in 
India there is no such constitution and the word can mean no 
such thing.*. To use it here is merely to introduce an idea which 
has no place in the India of to-day. The word ‘ constitutional ' 
is often used here, strange to s^, in support of the executive's 
more or less arbitrary actions. .Or else it is used in the sense of 
‘ legal ’. It is far beltter to confine ourselves to the words ' legal ’ 
or ‘ illegal ’, though they are vague enough and vary fiom day 
to day. 

A new ordinance or a new law creates new offences. To 
attend a public meeting may be an offence; so also to ride a 
bicycle, to wear certain clothes, not to be home by sunset, not 
to report oneself to the police daily— all these and numerous 
other acts are offences to-day in some part of India. A certain 
act may be an offence in one part of the country and not in 
another. When these laws can he promulgated by an irrespon- 
sible executive at the shortest notice, the word ‘ legal ' simply 
means the will of that executive and nothing more. Ordinarily 
that will is obeyed, willingly or sullenly, because the conse- 

3 uences of disobedience are unpleasant. But for any one to say 
lat he will always obey’ it means abject submission to a dic- 
tatorship or irresponsible authority, the surrender of his con- 
science, and the impossibility of ever gaining freedom, so far as 
his activities are concerned. 

In every democratic country to-day there is an argument 
going on as to whether radical economic changes can be 
brought^ about in the ordinary course through the constitu- 
tional machin ery at their disposal. Many people are of opinion 
that this cannot be done, and some unusual and revolutionary 
method will have to be adopted. For our purpose in India the 
issue of this argument is immaterial, for we have no constitu- 
tional means of bringing about the changes we desire. If the 
White Paper or something like it is enacted, constitutional 
progress in many directions will be stopped completely. There 
is no way out except by revolution or illegal action. What 

* Mr. C. Y. eSuntamani, the eminent Liberal leader and editor- 
in-diief of the Leader newspaper, has himself laid stress on the lack 
of any kind of constitutional government in India, in his criticism, 
in the U.P. Council, of the Report of the Parliamentary Joint Select 
Committee on hidia: "(Better submit to the present unconsdm- 
tional government rather than to the more reacdonary and further 
more unconstitudonal government of the future.” 



4H 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


then is one to do? Give up all idea of change and resign 
oneself to fate? 

The position to-day in India is even more extraordinary. The 
Executive can and does prevent or restrict all manner of public 
activities. Any activity that is, in its opinion, dangerous for it 
" is prohibited. Thus all effective public activity can be stopped, 
as it was stopped during the last three years. Submission to 
this means giving up all public work. Ihat is an impossible 
position to take up. 

No one can say that he will always and without fail act 
legally. Even in a democratic state occasions may arise when 
one's conscience compels one to act otherwise. In a despotically 
or arbitrarily governed country these occasions are bound to 
be more frequent; indeed, in such a state the law loses all moral 
justification. 

“Direct action is allied to dictatorship and not democracy, 
and those who wish to bring about the triumph of democracy 
must eschew direct action,” say the Liberals. This is confused 
thinking and loose writing. Sometimes direct action — e.g. a 
workers’ strike — ^may even be legal. But probably political 
action was meant. In Germany to-day under Hitler what kind 
of action is possible? Either abject submission or illegal and 
revolutionary action. How could democracy be served mere? 

Indian Liberals often refer to democracy, but most of them 
have no desire to go near it. Sir P. S. Sivaswamy Iyer, one of 
the most prominent of Liberal leaders, said in May 1934: "In 
advocating the convention of a constituent assembly, the Con- 
gress places too much faith in the wisdom of the multitude, 
and does too little justice to the sincerity and ability of men 
who have taken part in various Round Table Coniterences. I 
very much doubt whether the constituent assembly would have 
done better.” Sir Sivaswamy’s idea of democracy is thus some- 
thing apart from the 'multitude', and fits in more with a 
collection of ' sincere and able ’ men nominated by the British 
Government. Further, he blesses the White Paper, for though 
"not fully satisfied” with it, “he thought it would be unwise 
for the country to oppose it wholesale . There appears to be 
no reason whatever why there should not be the most perfect 
co-operation between the British Government and Sir P. S. 
Sivaswamy Iyer. 

The withdrawal of civil disobedience by the Congress was 
naturally welcomed by the Liberals. It was also not surprising 
that th^ should take credit for their wisdom in having kept 
aloof firom this “foolish and ill-advised movemprit”, “Did w** 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 425 

not say so? ” they told us. It was a strange argument. Because 
when we stood up and put up a good fight we were knocked 
down; therefore, the moral pointed out was that standing up is 
a bad thing. Crawling is best 'and safest. It is quite impossible 
£0 be knocked down or to fall from that horizontal position. 



LIII 


INDIA OLD AND NEW 

It was natural and inevitable that Indian nationalism should 
resent alien rule. And yet it was curious how large numbers of 
our intelligentsia, to the end of the nineteen^ century, ac- 
cepted, consciously or unconsciously, the British ideology of 
empire. They built their own arguments on this, ^d only 
ventured to criticise some of iw outward manifestations. The 
history and economics and other subjects that were taught in 
the schools and colleges were written entirely from the British 
imperial view-point, and laid stress on our numerous failings 
in the past and present and the virtues and high destiny of the 
British. We accepted to some extent this distorted version, and 
even when we resisted it instinctively we were influenced by it. 
At first there was no intellectual escape from it for we knew no 
other iacts or arguments, and so we sought relief in religious 
nationalism, in me thought that at least in the sphere of re- 
ligion and philosophy we were second to no other people. We 
comforted ourselves m our misfortune and degradation with 
the notion that though we did not possess the outward show 
and glitter of the "^^st we had the real inner article, which 
was far more valuable and worth having. Vivekananda and 
others, as well as the interest of Western scholars in our old 
philosophies, gave us a measure of self-tespect again and 
roused up our dormant pride in our past. 

Gradually we began to suspect and examine critically British 
statements about our past and present conditions, but still we 
thought and worked within the framework of British ideology. 
If a thing was bad, it would be called ‘un-British’; if a 
Britisher in India misbehaved, the fault was his, not that of 
the system. But the collection of this critical material of 
British rule in India, in spite of the moderate outlook of the 
authors, served a revolutionary purpose and gave a political and 
economic fisundation to our nationalism. Dadabhai Naoroji’s 
Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, and books by Romesh 
Dutt and William Digby and others, thus played a revolu- 
tionary r61e in the development of our nationalist thought. 
Further researches in andent Indian history revealed b rilliant 
and highly dvilised periods in the remote past, and we read of 
these with great satisfaction. We also discovered that the 

4*6 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 


4»7 

British record in India was very different from what we had 
been led to believe from their history books. 

Our challenge to the Britisfr version of history, economics, 
and administration in India grew, and yet we continued to 
function within the orbit of their ideology. That was the 
position of Indian nationalism as a whole at the turn of the 
century. That is still the position of the Liberal group and 
other small groups as well as a number of moderate Congress- 
men, who go forward emotionally from time to time, but 
intellectually still live in the nineteenth century. Because of 
that the Liberal is unable to grasp the idea of Indian freedom, 
for the two are fundamentally irreconcilable. He imagines that 
step by step he will go up to higher offices and will deal with 
fatter and more important files. The m ach in ery of govern- 
ment will go on smoothly as before, only he will be at the 
hub, and somewhere in the background, without intruding 
themselves too much, wiU be the British Army to give him 
protection in case of need. That is his idea of Dominion Status 
within the Empire. It is a naive notion impossible of achieve- 
ment, for the price of British protection is Indian subjection. 
We cannot have it both ways, even if that was not degrading 
to the self-respect of a great coimtry. Sir Frederick Whyte (no 
pahisan of Indian nationalism) says in a recent book:* "He 
(the Indian) stiU believes that England wUl stand between him 
and disaster, and as long as he cherishes this delusion he can- 
not even lay the foundation of his own ideal of selfgovem- 
ment.” Evidently he refers to the Liberal or the reactionary 
and communal t^es of Indians, largely with whom he must 
have come into contact when he was President of the Indian 
Legislative Assembly. This is not the Congress belief, much 
less is it that of other advanced groups. They agree with 
Sir Frederick, however, that there can be ho freedom till this 
delusion goes and India is left to free disaster, if that is her 
fate, by herself. The complete withdrawal of British military 
control of India wUl be the beginning of Indian freedom. • 

It is not surprising that the Indian intelligentsia m the lune- 
teenth century should have succumbed to British ideology; 
what is surprising is that some people should continue to sufiw 
that delusion even after the -stirring events and changes of the 
twentieth century. In the nineteenth century the British ruling 
classes were the aristocrats of the world, with a long record 
of wealth and success and power behind them. Inis long 
record and training gave them some of the virtues as well as 
* Sir Frederick \^yte: The Future of East and West. 



428 TAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

failings of aristocracy. We in India can comfort ourselves with 
the thought that we helped substantially during the last cen- 
tury and three-quarters in providing the wherewithal and the 
traming for this superior state. They began to think themselves 
— as so many races and nations have done — ^the chosen of 
God and their Empire as an earthly Kingdom of Heaven. If 
their special position was acknowledged and their superiority 
not challenged, they were gracious and obliging, provided that 
this did them no harm. But opposition to them became opposi- 
tion to the divine order, and as such was a deadly sin which 
must be suppressed. 

M. Andr^ Siegfried has an interesting passage dealing with 
this aspect of British psychology.^ 

“Par Vhabitude hdrSditaire du pouvoir joint a la richesse, il 
a find par contracted une maniere ^Stre, aristocratique, curieuse- 
metit imbue de droit divin ethnique et qui mime a continui 
de s^accentuer quand dejd la suprematie hritannique itait 
contestie, Les jeunes ginirations de la fin du siicle , . , elles 
en arrivent h se dire, inconsciemment, que ce succhs leur est 
dd. . . . 

“ Cette facon d’interpriter les chases est intiressante d 
souligner, parce qu’elle ecladre, dans ce difiU particuliirement 
dilicat, les rdactions de la psychology britamdque. On n’aura 
pas manqud de le, remarquer, c’est dans des causes extdriiures 
que I’Angleterre croit trouver la source de ces difficultds; 
toujoursj pour commencer, c’est la faute de quelqu’un, et si ce 
quelqu’un veut bien se reformer, I’Angleterre alors pourra 
retrouvey sa prospdrite . . . toujours cet instinct de vouloir 
changer les autres au lieu dud se changer soimSme! ” 

If this was the general British attitude to the rest of the 
world, it was most conspicuous in India. There was something 
fascinating about the British approach to the Indian problem, 
even though it was singularly irritating. The .calm assurance 
of always being in the Hght and of having home a great 
burden worthily, faith in their racial destiny and their own 
brand of imperialism, contempt and anger at the unbelievers 
and sinners who challenged the foundations of the true faith — 
there was something of the religious temper about this attitude, 
like the Inquisitors of old, they were bent on saving us re- 

f ardless of our desires in the matter. Incidentally they profited 
y this traffic in virtue, thus demonstrating the truth of the 
old proverb: “Honesty is the best policy”. The progress of 
India became synonymous with the adaptation of the country 
^ In La Crise Britannique au XX* Sidcle, 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 


429 

to the imperial scheme and the fashioning of chosen Indians 
after the British mould. The more we accepted Bridsh ideals 
and objectives the fitter we were for ‘self-government’. Free- 
dom would be ours as soon as we demonstrated and guaranteed 
that we would use it only in accordance with British wishes. 

Indians and Englishmen are, I am afraid, likely to disagree 
about the record of British mle in India. That is perhaps 
natural, but it does come as a shock when high British officials, 
including Secretaries of State for India, draw fanciful pictures 
of Indins past and present and make statements which have 
no basis in fact. It is quite extraordinary how ignorant English 
people, apart firom some experts and others, are about India. If 
facts elude them, how much more is the spirit of India beyond 
their reach? They seized her body and possessed her, but it 
was the possession of violence. They did not know her or try 
to know her. They never looked into her eyes, for theirs were 
averted and hers downcast through shame and humiliation. 
After centuries of contact they face each other, strangers still, 
full of dislike for each other. 

And yet India with all her poverty and degradation had 
enough of nobility and greatness about her, and though she 
was overburdened with ancient tradition and present misery, 
aiid her eyelids were a little weary, she had “ a beauty wrought 
out firom within upon the flesh, the deposit little cell by 
cell, of strange thoughts and fantastic reveries and exquisite 
passions B^ind and within her battered body one could still 
glimpse a majesty of soul. Through long ages she had travelled 
and gathered much wisdom on the way, and trafficked with 
strangers and added them to her own big family, and witnessed 
days of glory and of decay, and suffered humiliation and ter- 
rible sorrow, and seen many a strange sight; but throughout her 
long journey she had clung to her immemorial culture, drawn 
strength and vitality fi:om it, and shared it , with other lands. 
Like a pendulum she had swung up and down; she had ven- 
tured with the daring of her thought to reach up to the 
heavens and unravel their mystery, and she had also had bitter 
experience of the pit of hell. Despite the woeful accumulations 
of superstition and degrading custom that had clung to her 
and borne her down, she had never wholly fiirgotten the in- 
spiration that some of the wdsest of her children, at the dawn 
of history, had given her in the Upanishads. Their keen minds, 
ever restless and ever striving and exploring, had not sought 
refuge in blind dogma or grown complacent in the routine 
observance of dead forms or ritual and creed. They had de- 



430 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

manded not a personal relief from suffering in the present or 
a place in a paradise to come, but light and understanding: 
“ Lead me ffom the unreal to the real, lead me from darkness 
to light, lead me from death to immortality.” * In the most 
famous of the prayers recited daily even to-day by millions, the 
gayatri mantra, the call is for knowledge, for enlightenment. 

Though often broken up politically her spirit always guarded 
a common heritage, and in her diversity there was ever an 
amazing unity.® Like all ancient lands she was a curious mix- 
tutc of the good and bad, but the good was hidden and had 
to he sought after, while the odour of decay was evident and 
her hot, pitiless sun gave full publicity to the bad. 

There is some similarity between Italy and India, Both are 
ancient countries with long traditions of culture behind them, 
though Italy is a newcomer compared to India, and India is 
a much vaster country. Both are split up politically, and yet 
the conception of Italia, like that of India, never died, and 
in all their diversity the unity was predominant. In Italy the 
unity was largely a Roman unity, for that great city had 
dominated the country and been the fount and symbol of 
unity. In India there was no such single centre or dominant 
dty, although Benares might well be called the Eternal City 
of the East, not only for India but also for Eastern Asia. But, 
unlike Rome, Benares never dabbled in empire or thought of 
temporal power. Indian culture was so widespread all over 
India that no part of the country could be called the heart of 
that culture. From Cape Comorin to Amaranath and Badrinath 
in the Himalayas, from Dwarka to Puri, the same ideas coursed, 
and if there was a clash of ideas in one place, the noise of it 
soon reached distant parts of the country. 

Just as Italy gave the gift of culture and religion to Western 
Europe, India £d so to Eastern Asia, though Qiina was as old 
and venerable as India. And even when Italy was lying pros- 
trate politically, her life coursed through the veins of Europe. 

It was Mettemich who called Italy a “geographical ex- 
pression”, and many a would-be Mettemich has used that 

^ Brihadaranyak Upanishad, i, 3, 37. 

® “ greatest of all the contradictions in India is that over 
this diversity is spread a greater unity, which is not immediately 
evident because it failed historically to find expression in any 
political cohesion to make the country one, but which is so great 
a reality, and so powerful, that even the Musulman world of mdia 
has to confess that it has been deeply affected by coming wiritdn 
its influence.” Sir Frederick Whyte ; Tha Future of East and West. 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 43! 

phrase for India, and, strangely enough, there is a similarity 
even in their geographical positions in the two continents. 
More interesting is the comparison of England with Austria, 
for has not England of the twentieth century been compared 
to Austria of the nineteenth, proud and haughty and imposing 
still, but with the roots that gave strength shrivelling up and 
decay eating its way into the mighty fabric. 

It is curious how one cannot resist the tendency to give an 
anthropomorphic form to a country. Such is the force of habit 
and early associations. India becomes Bharat Mata, Mother 
India, a beautiful lady, very old but ever youthful in appear- 
ance, sad-eyed and forlorn, cruelly treated by aliens and out- 
siders, and calling upon her children to protect her. Some such 
picture rouses the emotions of Hundreds of thousands and 
drives them to aaion and sacrifice. And yet India is in the 
main the peasant and the worker, not beautiful to look at, for 
pove^ is not beautiful. Does the beautiful lady of our 
ima^ations represent the bare-bodied and bent workers in 
the fields and factories? Or the small group of those who have 
from ages past crushed the masses and exploited them, imposed 
cruel customs on them and made many of them even untouch- 
able? We seek to cover truth by the creatures of our imagina- 
tions and endeavour to escape firom reality to a world of 
dreams. 

And yet despite these diSerent classes and their mutual con- 
flicts there was a common bond which united them in India, 
and one is amazed at its persistence and tenacity and enduring 
vitality. What was this strength due to? Not merely the 
passive strength and weight of inertia and tradition, |[reat as 
these always are. There was an active sustaining princmle, fijr 
it resisted successfully poweiful outside influences and absorbed 
internal forces that rose to combat it. And yet with all its 
stren^h it could not preserve political fifeedom or endeavour 
to brmg about political unity. These latter do not appear to 
have been considered worth much trouble; their importance 
was very foolishly ignored, and we have suffered fiir this neglect. 
Right through history the old Indian ideal did not glorify 
political and military triumph, and it looked down upon money 
and the professional money-making class. Honour and wealm 
did not go together, and honour was meant to go, at least in 
theory* to the meii who served the community with little in the 
shape of financial reward. 

The old culture managed to live through many a fierce storm 
and tempest, but though it kept its outer fijrm, it lost its real 



433 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

content. To-day it is fighting silently and desperately against 
a new and all-powerful opponent — the bania civilisation of the 
capitalist West. It will succumb to this newcomer, for the West 
brmgs science, and science brings food for the hungry millions. 
But the West also brings an antidote to the evils of this cut- 
throat civilisation — the principles of socialism, of co-operation, 
and service to the community for the common good. This is 
not so unlike the old Brahman ideal of service, but it means 
the brahmanisation (not in the religious sense, of course) of all 
classes and groups and the abolition of class distinctions. It 
may be that when India puts on her new garment, as she must, 
for the old is tom and tattered, she will have it cut in this 
fashion, so as to make it conform both to present conditions 
and her old thought. The ideas she adopts must become racy to 
her soil. 



LIV 


THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 

What has been the record of British rule in India? I doubt if 
it is possible for any Indian or Englishman to take an objective 
and dispassionate view of this long record. And even if this 
were possible, it would be still more difficult to weigh and 
measure the psychological and other immaterial factors. We 
are told that British rule “has given to India that which 
throughout the centuries she never possessed, a government,- 
whose authority is vmcjuestioned in any part of me sub-con- 
tinent ’V it has estabhshed the rule of law and a just and 
efficient administration; it has brought to India Western con- 
ceptions of parliamentary government and personal liberties; 
and " by transforming British India into a single unitary state 
it has engendered amongst Indians a sense of political unity “ 
and thus fostered the mst beginnings of nationalism.* That 
is the British case, and there is much truth in it, though the 
rule of law and personal liberties have not been evident for 
many years. 

The Indian survey of this period lays stress on many other 
factors, and points out the injury, mat eria l and spirimaJ, that 
foreign rule has brought us. The view-point is so different that 
sometimes the very thing that is commended by the British is 
condemned by Indians. As Doctor Ananda Coomaraswamy 
writes : “ One of the most remarkable features of British rule 
in India is that the greatest injuries inflicted upon the Indian 
people have the outward appearance of blessings.” 

As a matter of fact the changes that have taken place in 
India diflring the last century or more have been world changes 
common to most countries in the East and West. The growth 
of industrialism in Western Europe, and later on in the rest of 
the world, brought nationalism and the strong unitary state in 
its train everywhere. The British can take creiSt for having first 
opened India’ s windo w to the West and brought her one aspect 
of Western indu^rialism and science. But having done so uiey 
throttled the further industriaf growth of the country till , 
circumstances forced their hands. India was already the meet- ’ 
ing-place of two cultures, the western Asiatic culture of Islam 

* The quotadons are from the Report of the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (1934). 



434 JAWAHARLAL NEHRtT 

and the eastern, her own product, which spread to the Far East 
And now a third and more powerful impulse came from further 
west, and India became a meal point and a battle-ground for 
various old and new ideas. There can be no doubt that this 
third impulse would have triumphed and thus solved many of 
India's old problems, but the British, who had themsdves 
helped in brmging it, tried to stop its further progress. They 
preve nted our industria l growth, and thus delayed our political 
growtti, and preserved all the out-of-date feudal and other relics 
they could find in the country. They even froze up our 
changing and to some extent progressing laws and customs at 
the stage they foimd them, and made it difficult for us to 
get out of their shackles. It was not with their good,will or 
assistance that the bourgeoisie grew in India. But after intro- 
ducing the railway and other products of industrialism they 
cotdd not stop the wheel of change; they could only check it 
and slow it down, and this they did to their own manifest ad- 
vantage. 

"On this solid foundation the majestic structure of the 
Government of India rests, and it can be claimed with certainty 
that in the period which has elapsed since i8j8 when the Crown 
assumed supremacy over all the territories of the East India 
Company, the educational and material progress of India has 
been greater than it was ever within her power to achieve during 
any other period of her long and chequered history.” ^ This 
statement is not so self-evident as it appears to be, and it has 
often been stated that literacy actually went down with the 
coming of British rule. But even if the statement was wholly 
true, it amounts to a comparison of the modem industrial age 
with past ages. In almost every country in the world the educa- 
tional and material progress has been tremendous during the 
past century because of science and industrialism, and it may 
be said with assurance of any such country that progress of 
this kind "has been greater than was ever within her power 
to achieve during any other period of her long and chequered 
history” — ^though perhaps that country’s history may not be 
a long one in comparison with Indian history. Are we need- 
lessly ca ntank erous and perverae if we suggest that some such 
technical process would have come to us anyhow in this in- 
dustrial age, and even without British rule? And, indeed, if we 
compare oiir lot with many other countries, may we not hazard 
the guess that such progress might have been greater, for we have 
had to contend agamst a stifling of (hat progress by t|ie British 
^ Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee (1934). 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 


435 

themselves? Railways, telegraphs, telephones, wireless and the 
like are hardly tests of the goodness or beneficence of British 
rule. They were welcome and necessary, and because the British 
happened to be the a^nts who brought theta first, we should 
be grateful to them. But even, these heralds of industrialism 
came to us primarily for the str^gthening of British rule. 
They were the veins and arteries through which the nation’s 
blood should have coursed, increasing its trade, carrying its 
produce, and bringing new life and wealth to its millions. It is 
true that in the long-run some such result was likely, but they 
were designed and worked for another purpose — ^to strengthen 
the imperial hold and to capture markets for British goods — 
which they succeeded in achieving. I am all in favour of 
in dustrialisation and the latest methods of transpeirt, but 
sometimes, as I rushed across the Indian plains, the railway, 
that life-giver, has almost seemed to me liW iron bands con- 
fining and imprisoning India. 

The British conception of ruling India was the police con- 
ception of the State. Government’s job was to protect tEe"State 
and leave the rest to others. Their public finance de^t with 
milita^ expenditure, police, civil administration, interest on 
debt. The economic needs of the citizens were not looked after, 
and were sacrificed to British interests. The cultural and other 
needs of the /people, except for a tiny handful, were entirely 
neglected. The changing conceptions of, public finance which 
brought free and universal education, improvement of public 
health, care of poor and feeble-minded, insurance of workers 
against illness, old age and unemployment, etc., in other 
countries, were almost entirely beyond the ken of die Govern- 
ment. It could not indulge in these spending activities for its 
tax system was most regressive, taking a much larger pro- 
portion of small incomes than of the larger ones, and its ex- 
penditure on its protective and administrative functions was 
terribly heavy and swallowed up most of the revenue. 

The outstanding feature of British rule was their concen- 
tration on everythi ng that went to strengthen their poli tical and 
ec onomic hold on fhe country. Everything else was incidental. 
If they built up a powerful central government and an efficient 
police force, that was an achievement for which they can take 
credit, but die Indian people can hardly congratulate tiiemselves 
on it. Unity is a good thing, but unity in subjection is hardly 
a thing to be proud of. The very strength of a despotic govern- 
ment may become a greater buraen for a' people; and a police 
force, no doubt useful in many ways, can be, and has been often 



436 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


enou^, turned against the very people it is supposed to pro- 
tect. Bertrand Russell, comparing modern civilisation with the 
old Greek, has recently written : “ The only serious superiority 
of Greek civilisation as compared to ours was the inefficiency 
of the police, which enabled a larger proportion of decent 
people to escape.” 

Britain’s supremacy in India brought us peace, and India was 
certainly in need of peace after the troubles and misfortunes 
■^that followed the break-up of the Moghal empire. Peace is a 
precious commodity, necessary for any progress, and it was 
welcome to us when it came. But even peace can be purchased 
at too great a price, and we can have the perfect peace of the 
grave, and the absolute safety of a cage or of prison. Or peace 
may be the sodden despair of men unable to better themselves. 
The peace which is imposed by an alien conqueror has hardly 
the restful and soothing qualities of the real article. War is 
a terrible thing and to be avoided, but it does encourage some 
virtues, which, according to William James, the psychologist, 
are: fidelity, cohesiveness, tenacity, heroism, conscience, edu- 
cation, inventiveness, economy, and physical health and vigour. 
Because of this, James sought for a moral equivalent of war 
which, without the horrors of war, would encourage these 
virtues in a community. Perhaps if he had "learnt of non- 
co-operation and dvil disobedience he would have found some- 
thing after his own heart, a moral and peaceful equivalent of 
war. 

It is a futile task to consider the ‘ifs’ and possibilities of 
history. I feel sure that it was a good thing for India to come 
in contact with the sdentific and industrial West. Science was 


the great gift of the West, and India lacked this, and without 
it she was doomed to decay. The manner of our contacts was 
unfortunate, and yet, perhaps, only a succession of violent 
shocks could shake us out of our torpor. From this point of 
view the Protestant, individualistic, Anglo-Saxon English were 
suitable, for- they were more different from us than most other 
Westerners, and could give us greater shocks. 

They gave us. political unity and that was a desirable thing, 
^but wheflier lye had this unity or not, Indian nationalism would 
'have grown and demanded that unity. The Arab world is to- 
day sj^t up into a large number of separate states — ^indepen- 
dent, protected, mandatory and the like — ^but throughout all of 
them runs the desire for Arab unity. There can be no doubt 
that Arab nationalism would largely achieve this unity if Wes- 
tern imperialist powers did not stand in the way. But, as in 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 437 

India, it is the purpose of these powers to encourage disruptive 
tendencies and create minority problems which weaken and 
partly counteract the nationalist urge and give an excuse to the 
imperialist power to stay on and pose as the impartial arbi- 
trator. 

The political unity of India was achieved incidentally as 
a side-product of the Empire’s advance. In later years, when 
that unity allied itself to nationalism and challenged alien rule, 
we witnessed the deliberate promotion of disunity and sec- 
tarianism, formidable obstacles to our future progress. 

What a long time it is since the British came here, a century 
and three-quarters since they became dominant I They had a 
free hand, as despotic governments have, and a magnificent 
opportunity to mould India according to their desire. During 
these years the world has changed out of all recognition— 
England, Europe, America, Japan. The insignificant American 
colonies bordering the Atlantic in the eighteenth century con- 
stitute to-day the wealthiest, the most powerful and techni call y 
the most advanced nation; Japan, within a brief span, has 
undergone amazing changes; the vast territories of the U.S.S.R., 
where till only yesterday the dead hand of the Tsar's govern- 
ment suppressed and stifled all growth, now pulsate with a new 
life and build a new world berore our eyes. There have been 
big changes in India also, and the country is very different 
from what it was in the eighteenth century — ^railways, irrigation 
works, factories, schools and colleges, huge government offices, 
etc., etc. 

And yet, in spite of these changes, what is India like to-day? 
A servile state, with its splendid strength caged up, hardly 
daring to breaAe freely, governed by strangers firom afar; her 
people poor beyond compare, short-lived and incapable of 
resisting disease and epidemic; illiteracy rampant; vast areas 
devoid of all sanitary or medical provision; unemployment on 
a prodigious scale, both among the middle classes and the 
masses. Freedom, democracy, socialism, communism are, we 
are told, the slogans of unpractical idealists, doctrinaires or 
knaves; the test must be one of the well-bdng of the people as 
a whole. That is indeed a vital test, and by that test India 
makes a terribly poor show to-day. We read of great schemes 
of unemployment relief and the alleviation of distress in other 
countries; what of our scores of millions of unemployed ^d 
the distress that is widespread and permanent? We read , also 
of housing schemes elsewhere; where are the houses of hun- 
dreds of millions of our people, who live in mud huts or have 



438 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

no shelter at all? May we not envy the lot of other countries 
where education, sanitation, medical relief, cultural facilities, 
and production advance rapidly ahead, while we remain where 
we were, or plod wearily along at the pace of a snail? Russia 
in a brief dozen years of wonderful effort has almost ended 
illiteracy in her vast territories, and has evolved a fine and 
up-to-date system of education, in touch with the life of the 
masses. Backward Turkey, under the Ataturk, Mustapha 
Kemal’s leadership, has also made giant strides towards wide- 
spread literacy. Fascist Italy, on the very threshold of its career, 
attacked illiteracy with vigour. Gentile, the Education Minister, 
called for “a fiontal attack on illiteracy. That gangrenous 
plague, which is rotting our body politic, must be extirpated 
with a hot iron.” Hard words, unseemly for a drawing-room, 
but they show the conviction and energy behind the thought. 
We are politer here and use more rounded phrases. We move 
warily and exhaust our energies in commissions and commit- 
tees. 

Indians have been accused of talking too much and doing 
little. It is a just charge. But may we not express our wonder 
at the inexhaustible capacity of the British for committees and 
commissions, each of which, after long labour, produces a 
learned report— -"a great State document” — ^wbich is duly 
praised and pigeon-holed? And so we get the sensation of 
moving ahead, of progress, and yet have the advantage of 
remaimng where we were. Honour is satisfied, and vested 
interests remain untouched and secure. Other countries discuss 
how to get on; we discuss checks and brakes and safeguards 
lest -we go too fast. 

“ The Imperial splendour became the measure of the people's 
poverty,” so we are told (by the Joint Parliamentary Committee 
1934) of the Moghal times. It is a just observation, but may we 
not apply the same measure to-day? What of New Delhi 
to-day with its Viceregal pomp and pageantry, and the Pro- 
vincial GQvemors with all their ostentation? And all this with 
a background of abject and astonishing poverty. The contrast 
hurts, and it is a little difficult to imagine how sensitive men 
can put up with it. India to-day is a poor and dismal sight 
behind all the splendours of the imperial firontage. There is 
a mat deal of patchwork and superficiality, and behind it the 
umiappy petty bourgeoisie, crushed more and more by modem 
conditions. Further back come the workers, living miserably 
in grinding poverty, and then the peasant, that symbol of 
India, whose lot it is to be “ bom. to Endless Nisiht 



-iRE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 


439 


“ Bowed by the weight of centuries he leans 
^on his hoe and,gaze8 on the ground, 

The emptiness of ages on his face, 

And on his back the burden of the world. 

• • • * a • 

“ Through this dread shape the suffering ages look. 

Time’s tragedy is in -that aching stoop. 

Through this dread shape humanity betrayed. 

Plundered, profaned and disinherited. 

Cries protest to the powers that made the world, 

A protest that is also prophecy.” * 

It would be absurd to cast the blame for all India’s ills on the 
British. That responsibility must be shouldered by us, and we 
may not shirk it; it is unseemly to blame others for the inevit- 
able consequences of our own weaknesses. An authoritarian 
system of government, and especially one that is foreign, must 
encourage a psychology of subservience and try to limit the 
mental oudow and horizon of the people. It must crush much 
that is finest in youth — enterprise, spirit of adventure, origi- 
nality, ‘pep’ — and encourage sne^shness, rigid confbrmity, 
and a desire' to cringe and please the bosses. Su(± a system does 
not bring out the real service mentality, the devotion to public 
service or to ideals; it picks out the least public-spirited persons 
whose sole objective is to get on in life. We see what a class 
the British attract to themselves in India! Some of them are 
intellectually keen and -capable of good work. They drift to 
government service or semi-govemment service because of lack 
of opportunity elsewhere, and gradually they tone down and 
become just parts of the big machine, their minds imprisoned 
by the dull routine of work. They develop the qualities of a 
bureaucracy — “a competent knowledge of clerkship and the 
diplomatic art of keeping office At the highest they have a 

g assive devotion to the public service. There is, or can be, no 
aming enthusiasm. Tnat is not possible^ under a foreign 
government. 

But apa!rt from these, the majority of petty officials are not 
an admirable lot, for they have o:^ learnt to cringe to their 
superiors and bully their inferiors. The fault is not theirs. That 
is the training the system gives them. And if sycophancy and 
nepotism flourish, as they often do, is it to be wondered at? 
They have no ideals in service; the haunting fear of unem- 
ployment and consequent 'starvation pursues them, and thdr 

^ These extracts are from the American poet,- E. Markham’s 
Tpoeax: The Man with the Hoe, 



440 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

chief concern is to hold on to their johs and get other jobs for 
their relatives and friends. Where the spy and that most 
odious of creatures, the informer, always hover in the back- 
ground, it is not easy to develop the more desirable virtues in 
a people. 

Recent developments have made it even more difficult for 
sensitive, public-spirited men to join government service. The 
Government does not want them, and they do not wish to 
associate with it too closely, unless compelled by economic 
circumstance. 

But, as all the world knows, it is the White Man who bears 
the burden of Empire, not the Brown. We have various im- 
perial services to carry on the imperial tradition, and a suffi- 
ciency of safeguards to protect their special privileges, all, we 
are told, in the interests of India. It is remarkable how the 
good of India seems to be tied up with the obvious interests 
and advancement .of these services. If any privilege or prize 
post of the Indian Civil Service is taken away, we are told that 
inefficiency and corruption will result. If the reserved jobs for 
the Indian Medical Service are reduced, this becomes a “ menace 
to India’s health.” And of course if the British element in 
the army is touched, all manner of terrible perils confront us. 

I think there is some truth in this; that if the superior 
officials suddenly went away and left their departments in 
charge of their subordinates there would be a fall in efficiency. 
But that is because the whole system has been built this way, 
and the subordinates are not by any means the best men, nor 
have they ever been made to shoulder responsibility. I feel 
convinced that there is abundant good material in India, and 
it could be available within a feirly short period if proper 
steps were taken. But that means a complete change m our 
governmental and social outlook. It means a new State. 

As it is we are told that whatever changes in the constitu- 
tional apparatus may come our way, the ri^d framework of 
the great services which guard and shelter us will continue as 
before. Hierophants of the sacred mysteries of government, 
they will guard the temple and prevent the vulgar from enter- 
ir^ its holy precincts. Gradually, as we make ourselves worthy 
of the privilege, they will remove the veils one after another, 
tiU, in some future age, even the holy of holies stands un- 
covered to our wondering and reverent eyes. 

Of all these imperial services the Indian Civil Service holds 
first place, and to it must largely go the credit or discredit for 
the, functioning of government in India. We have been fre- 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 44I , 

quently told of the many virtues of this service, and its great- 
ness in the imperial scheme has almost become a maxim. Its 
unchallenged position of authority in India with the almost 
autocratic power that this gives, as well as the praise and 
boosting which it receives in ample measure, cannot be wholly 
good for the mental equilibrium of any individual or group. 
With all my admiration for the Service, I am afraid I must 
admit that it is peculiarly susceptible, both individually and 
as a whole, to that old and yet somewhat modem disease, 
paranoia. 

It would be idle to deny the good qualities of the I.C.S., for 
we are not allowed to forget them, but so much bunkum has 
been and is said about the Service that I sometimes feel that 
a little debunking would be desirable. The American economist, 
Veblen, has called the privileged classes the “kept classes”. I 
think it would be equally true to call the I.C.S., as well as the 
other imperial services, the “ kept services ”. They are a very 
expensive luxury. 

Major D. Graham Pole, formerly a Labour member of the 
British Parliament and one who is greatly interested in Indian 
affairs, writing in the Modem Review some time ago stated 
that “ no one has ever tried to dispute the fact that the I.C.S. 
is a most able and efficient service.” As similar statements are 
frequently made in England and believed, it is worth while 
examining this. It is always unsafe to make such positive and 
definite statements which can easily be disproved, and Major 
Graham Pole is entirely wrong in imagining that the fact has 
not been disputed. It has been frequently mallenged and dis- 
puted, and long ago even Mr. G. K. Gokhale said many hard 
thin» about the I.C.S, The average Indian— Congressman or 
non-Congressman— would certainly join issue with Major 
Graham Pole. And yet it is possible that both may be partly 
right and may be thinking of different qualifications. Ability 
and efficiency for what? If this ability and efficiency are to be 
measured from the point of view of strengthening the British 
Empire in India and helping it to exploit the country, the LC.S. 
may certainly claim to have done well. If however, the test is 
the well-being of the Indian masses, they have signally friled, 
and their faimre becomes even more noticeable wffien one sees 
the enormous distance that separates them in regard to income 
and standards of living from the masses they are meant to 
serve, and from whom ultimately their varied emoluments 
come. 

It is perfectly true that the service has, as a whole, kept up 



443 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

a certain standard, though that standard is necessarily one of 
mediocrity, and has occasionally thrbwn up exceptional men. 
More could hardly be expected of any such service. It em- 
bodied essentially the British Public School spirit, with all its 
good and bad points (though many of the members of the 
LC.S. now are not public school men). Though it kept up a 
good standard, it disapproved strongly of nonconformity with 
the type, and special abilities of individual members lost them- 
selves in the dull routine'of the day’s work, and to some extent 
in the fear of appearing different nrom the others. There were 
many earnest members, many with a conception of service, but 
it was service of the Empire, and India came only as a bad 
second. Trained and circumstanced as they were, they could 
only act in that way. Because they were few in numbers, sur- 
rounded by an alien and often unfriendly people, they held 
together and kept up a certain standard. The prestige both of 
race and office demanded this. And because they had largely 
autocratic powers, they resented all criticism, considered it one 
of the major sins, became more and more intolerant and 
pedagogic, and developed many of the ffillings of irresponsible 
rulers. They were self-satisfied and self-sufficient, narrow and 
fixed minds, static in a changing world, and wholly unsuited to 
a progressive environment. When abler and more adaptable 
minds than theirs tackled the Indian problem they resented 
this, called them offensive names, suppressed them and threw 
every possible obstacle in their way. And when post-war 
changes brought dynamic conditions, they were wholly at sea 
and unable to adapt themselves to them. Their limited hide- 
bound education had not fitted them for such emergencies and 
novel situations. They had been spoilt by a long spell of irres- 
ponsibility. As a group they had practically ^solute power, 
subject only in theory to a control by the British Parliament. 
“Power corrupts,” Lord Acton has told us, "and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely.” 

They were, on the whole, reliable officers in their limited 
way, doing their day-to-day work fairly competently, without • 
brilliance. But their very training was such that a wholly un- 
expected situation found them wanting, although their self- 
confidence, their methodical nature, and their esprit de corps 
helped them to tide over immediate difficulties. The famous 
Mesopotamia muddle exposed the British Indian Government 
for its inefficiency and ‘ woodenness but many a aiTnilar 
muddle does not see the light of day. Even their reaction to 
Civil Disobedience was crude. To shoot and club may dispose of 



TH*. Kji^CORD Ol!' BRITISH RULE 443 

the opponents for a while, bnt it does not solve any problem, 
and it undermines that very feeling of superiority which it is 
meant to protect. It was not surprising that they had recourse 
to violence to meet a growing and aggressive nationalist move- 
ment. That was inevitable, for empires rest on that and they 
had been taught no other way of meeting opposition. But the 
fact that excessive and unnecessary violence was used showed 
that they had lost all grip of the situation, and no longer 

E ossessed the self-control and restraint which they seemed to 
ave in normal times. Nerves frequently gave way and even 
in their public utterances there was a trace of hysteria. The 
calm confidence of other days was gone. A crisis has a pitiless 
way of showing us all up and exposing our innermost weak- 
nesses. Civil Disobedience was such a crisis and test, and very 
few on either side of the barricade — Congress or Government- 
survived fully that test. In a crisis the number of men and 
women of really first-class calibre is found to be small, says 
Mr. Lloyd George, and " the rest do not count in a crisis. The 
hummocks that look like eminences in fine weather are quickly 
submerged in a great flood when the highest peaks alone are 
visible Aove the surfiice of the waters.” 

The I.C.S. were intellectually and emotionally not prepared 
for what happened. The ori^al training of many of their 
members was classical, which gave them a certain culture and 
a certain charm. It was an old-world attitude, suitable fi)r the 
Victorian Age, but utterly out of place under modern condi- 
tions. They lived in a narrow, circumscribed world of their 
own — ^Anglo-Indian— which was neither England nor India. 
They had no appreciation of the forces at work in contem- 
porary society. In spite of their amusing assumption of being 
the trustees and guardians of the Indiw masses, they knew 
little. about them and even less about the new agressive bour- 
geoisie. They judged Indians from the sycophants and office- 
seekers who surrounded them and dismissed others as agitators 
and knaves. Their knowledge of post-war changes all over the 
world, and especially in the economic sphere, was of the 
slightest, and they were too much in the ruts to adjust them- 
selves to changing conditions. They did not realise that the 
order they represented was out of date under modem condi- 
tions, and that they were approaching as a group more and 
more the type which T. S. Emot describes in The Hotlow Men. 

And yet that order will continue so long as British im- 
perialism continues, and this is powerful enough still and has 
-hie and remiiTccfiil leaders. The British Government in India 



444 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

is like a tooth that is decaying, hut is still strongly imhedded. 
It is painful, but it cannot he easily pulled out. The pain is 
likely to continue, and even grow worse, till the tooth is taken 
out or falls out itself. 

The Public School type has had its day even in England, and 
does not occupy the same place as it did, although it is still 
prominent in public aifairs. In India it is still more out of 
place, and it can never fit in or co-operate with an aggressive 
nationalism, much less with those working for social change. 

There are of course many excellent men, both English and 
Indian, in the I.C.S. but, so long as the present system pre- 
vails their excellence will be devoted to objects which are not 
beneficial to the Indian people. Some Indian members of the 
Service are so overcome oy this Public School spirit that they 
become plus royaliste que le roi. I remember meeting a youth- 
ful Indian member of the I.C.S. who had a very high opinion 
of himself which unfortunately I could not share. He pointed 
out to me the many virtues of his Service, and ended up by 
the unanswerable argument in favour of the British Empire — 
was it not better than the Roman Empire and the Empires of 
Chengiz Khan and Timur? 

The underlying assumption of the I.C.S. is that they dis- 
charge their duties most efficiently, and therefore they can lay 
every stress on thdr claims, and the claims are many and 
varied. If India is poor, that is the fault of her social customs, 
her banias and money-lenders, and above all, her enormous 
population. The greatest bania of all, the British Government 
in India, is conveniently ignored. And what they propose to do 
about this population I do not know, for in spite of a great 
deal of help received from famines, epidemics, and a high 
death-rate generally, the population is still overwhelming. Birth-' 
control is proposed and I, for one, am entirely in favour of the 
spread of the knowledge and methods of birth-control. But 
the use of these methods itself requires a much higher standard 
of living for the masses, some measure of general education, 
and innumerable clinics, all over the country. Under present 
conditions birth-control methods are completely out of reach 
for the masses. The middle classes can profit by them as, I 
believe, they are doing to a growing extent. 

But this argument of over-population is deserving of fimher 
notice. The problem to-day all over the world is not one of 
lack of food or lack of other essentials, but actually lack of 
mouths to feed, or, to put it differently, lack of capacity to buy 
food, etc., for those who are in need. Even in India, considered 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 445 

apart, there is no lack of food, and though the population has 
gone up, the food supply has increased and can increase more 
proportionately than the population. Then again the much 
advertised increase of population in India has been (except in 
the last decade) at a much lower rate than in most Western 
countries. It is true that in future the difference will be greater, 
for various forces are tending to lessen or even stop population 
increase in Western countries. But limitin g factors are likely to 
check population increase in India also soon. 

Whenever India becomes free, and in a position to build her 
new life as she wants to, she will necessarily require the best 
of her sons and daughters for this purpose. Good human 
material is always rare, and in India it is rarer still because of 
our lack of opportunities under British rule. We shall want 
the help of many foreign experts in many departments of 
public activity, particularly in those which require special 
technical and scientific knowledge. Among those who have 
served in the I.C.S. or other imperial services there tvill be 
many, Indians or foreigners, who will be necessary and wel- 
come to the new order. But of one thing I am quite sure, that 
no new order can be built up in India so long as the spirit of 
the I.C.S. pervades our administration and our public services. 
That spirit of authoritarianism is the ally of imperialism, and 
it cannot co-exist with freedom. It will either succeed in 
crushing fireedom or will be swept away itself. Only with one 
type of state it is likely to fit in, and that is the fascist type. 
Therefore it seems to me quite essential that the I;C.S. and 
similar services must disappear, completely, as such, before we 
can start real work on a new order. Individual members of 
these services, if they are willing and competent for the new 
job, will be welcome, but only on new conditions. It is quite 
inconceivable that they will get the absurdly high salaries and 
allowances that are paid to them to-day. The new India must 
be served by earnest, efiicient workers who have an ardent faith 
in the cause they serve and are bent on achievement, and who 
work for the joy and glory of it, and not for the attraction of 
high salaries. The money motive must be reduced to a mini- 
mum. The need for foreign helpers will be considerable, but 
I imagine that the least wanted will be civil administrators who 
have no technical knowledge. There will be no lack of such 
people in India. 

I have previously stated how the Indian Liberals, and other 
groups like them, have accepted British ideology with reference 
to the government of India. This is especially noticeable in 



446 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

regard to the Services, for their cry is for ‘ indiaixisation ' and 
not for radical change of the spirit and nature of the Services 
and the State structure. This is a vital matter on which it is 
impossible to give in, for Indian freedom is bound up not only 
with the withdrawal of British Forces and Services, but also 
with the elimination of the authoritarian spirit that inspired 
them, and a levelling down of their salaries and privileges. 
There is a great deal of talk of safeguards in these days of 
constitution-making. If these safeguards are to be in the in- 
terests of India, they should lay down, among other things, that 
the I.C.S, and similar services should cease to exist, in their 
present form and with the powers and privileges they possess, 
and should have nothing to do with the new constitution. 

Even more mysterious and formidable are the so-called 
Defence Services. We may not criticise them, we may not say 
anything about them, for what do we know about such matters ? 
We must only pay and pay heavily without murmuring. A 
short while ago, in September 1934, Sir Philip Chetwode, the 
Commander-in-Chief in India, speaking in the Council of State 
at Simla, told Indian politicians, in pungent military language, 
to mind their own business and not interfere with his. Re- 
ferring to the mover of an amendment to some proposition, he 
said : “ Do he and his friends think that a war-worn and war- 
wise race like the British, who won their Empire at the point 
of the sword and have kept it by the sword ever since, are to 
be talked out of war wisdom which that experience brings to 
a nation by armchair critics. . . ” He made many other intei^ 
esting remarks, and we were informed, lest we might think that 
he had spoken in the heat of the moment, that he had care- 
fully written out his speech and spoke from a manuscript. 

It is, of course, an impertinence for a layman to argue about 
military matters with a Commander-in-Chief, and yet perhaps 
even an armchair critic might be permitted to make a few 
observations. It is conceivable that the interests of those who 
hold the Empire by the sword and those over whose heads 
this shining weapon ever hangs, might differ. It is possible that 
an Indian army might be made to serve Indian interests or to 
serve imperial interests, and the two might differ or even con- 
flict with each other. A politician and an armchair critic might 
also wonder if the claims of eminent generals for freedom from 
interference are valid after the experiences of the World War. 
They had a free field then to a large extent, and from all 
accounts they made a terrible mess of almost everything in 
every army— British, French, German, Austrian, Italian, 



THE RECORD OF BRITISH RULE 447 

Russian. Captain Liddell Hart, the distinguished British 
military historian and strategist, writes in his History of the 
World War that at one stage in the War while British soldiers 
fought the enemy, British generals fought one another. The 
national peril did not bring unity of thought or eflfbrt. The 
War, he continues, “ has shattered our faith in idols, our hero- 
worshipping belief that great men are different clay from 
common men. Leaders are still necessary, perhaps more neces- 
sary, but our awakened realisation of their common humanity 
is a safeguard agsunst either expecting from them, or trusting 
in them, too much.*’ 

That arch-politician, Mr. D. Lloyd George, has painted in his 
War Memoirs a terrible picture of the failmgs and blunders of 
the generals and ad m i r al s in the World War, blunders which 
cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of men. England and 
her allies won the War, but it was a “ blood-stained stagger to 
victory the reckless and .unintelligent handling of men and 
situations by the high officers brought England almost to the 
rim of catastrophe, and she and her allies were saved largely 
by the incredible folly of their foes. So writes the great War 
Premier of Btitain, and he explains how he had to undertake 
surgical operations in order to get ideas into Lord Jellicoe's 
head, especially in regard to the proposal for having a convoy 
system. Of the. French Marshal Jofi&e, he seems to think that 
his chief virtue was the possession of a resolute countenance 
which inspired a sense of strength. “That is what harassed 
people instinctively seek in trouble. They make the mistake of 
thinking that the seat of intelligence is in the chin.” 

But Mr. Lloyd George’s main indictment is against the 
British High Command itself, the Commander-in-Chief, Field- 
Marshal Haig, He demonstrates how Lord Haig’s inordinate 
vanity and refusal to listen to politicians and others, made him 
conceal important facts from the British Cabinet itself, and led 
the British Army in France to one of its greatest disasters. 
And even when failure stared him in the face, obstinate to the 
last, he continued his ill-advised offensive for several months 
in that awful mud of Passchendaele and Cambrai, till seventeen 
thousand officers alone lay dead and dying, and four hundred 
thousand gallant British soldiers were ‘casualties’. It is well 
that the ‘ Unknown Soldier ’ is honoured to-day after his death; 
his life was cheap, and he had little consideration when he was 
alive. 

Politicians, like all other people, err frequently, but demo- 
cratic politicians have to be sensitive and responsive to men 



448 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and events, and they usually realise their mistakes and try to 
repair them. The soldier is bred in a different atmosphere, 
where authority reigns and criticism is not tolerated. So he 
resents the advice of others and when he errs, he errs 
thoroughly and persists in error. For him the chin is more 
important than the mind or brain. In India we have the 
advantage of having produced a mixed type, for the civil 
administration itself has grown up and lives in a semi-military 
atmosphere of authority and self-sufficiency, and possesses 
therefore to a great extent the soldier’s chin and other virtues. 

We are told that the process of ‘ indianisation ’ of the army 
is being pushed on, and in another thirty years or more an 
Indian general might even appear on the Indian stage. It is 
possible that in not much more than a hundred years the 
process of indianisation might be considerably advanced. One 
is apt to wonder how, in a moment of crisis, England built up 
a mighty army of millions within a year or two. If it had 
possessed our mentors, perhaps it would have proceeded more 
cautiously and warily. It is possible of course that the War 
would have been over long before this soundly-trained army 
was ready for it. One thinks also of the Russian Soviet armies 
growing out of almost nothing and facing and triunyhing over 
a host of enemies, and to-day constituting one of the most 
efficient fighting machines in the world. They did not appa- 
rently possess “ war-worn and war-wise ” generals to advise them. 

We have now a military academy at Dehra Dun where 
gentlemen cadets are trained to become officers. They are very 
smart on parade, we are told, and they will no doubt make 
admirable officers. But I wonder sometimes what purpose this 
training serves, unless it is accompanied by technical training. 
Infantry and cavalry are about as much use to-day as the 
Roman phalanx, and the rifle is little better than a bow and 
arrow in an age of air warfare, gas bombs, tanks, and powerful 
artillery. No doubt their trainers and mentors realise this. 

What has been the record of British rule in India? Who are 
we to complain of its deficiencies when they were but the 
consequences of our own failings? If we lose touch with the 
river of change and enter a backwater, become self-centred and 
selfsatisfied, and, ostrich-like, ignore what happens elsewhere, 
we do so at our peril. The British came to us on the crrat of 
a wave of new impulse in the world, and represented mighty 
historic forces which they themselves hardly realised. Are we 
to complain of the cyclone that uproots us and hurls us about. 



THE RECORD OK BRITISH RULE 449 

or the cold wind that makes us shiver? T^et us have done with 
the past and its bickering and face the future. To the British 
we must be grateful for one splendid gift of which they were 
the bearers, the gift of science and its rich offspring. It is diffi- 
cult, however, to forget or view with equanimity the efforts of 
the British Government in India to encourage the disruptive, 
obscurantist, reactionary, sectarian, and opportunist elements in 
the country. Perhaps that too is a needed test and challenge 
for us, and before India is reborn it will have to go through 
again and again the fire that cleanses and tempers and bums 
up the weak, the impure and the corrupt. 



LV 


A CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION 
OF SCRIPT ' 

After spending about a week in Poona and Bombay in the 
middle of September 1933, ^ returned to Lucknow, My mother 
was still in hospital there, and was improving very slowly. 
Kamala was also in Lucknow, trying to attend on her, although 
she v<ras not very well herself. My^ sisters used to come over 
firom Allahabad for the week-ends. I remained in Lucknow for 
two or three weeks, and I had more leisure there than I was 
likely to have in Allahabad, my chief occupation being visits 
to the hospital twice daily. I utilised my spare hours in viuiting 
some articles for the Press, and these were widely published all 
over the country. , A series of articles entitled “ Whither India? ”, 
in which I had surveyed world affairs in relation to the Indian 
situation, attracted considerable attention. I learnt later that 
these articles were even reproduced in Persian translations in 
Teheran and Kabul. There was nothing novel or original in 
these articles for any one in touch with recent developments 
and modern Western thought But in India our people had 
been too engrossed in their domestic troubles to pay much 
attention to what was happening elsewhere. The reception 
given to my articles, as well as many other indications, showed 
that they were developing a wider outlook. 

My mother was getting very tired of being in hospital, and 
we decided to take her back to Allahabad. One of the reasons 
for this was my sister Krishna’s engagement, which had just 
then been announced. We wanted to have the marriage as soon 
as possible, before I was suddenly removed to prison again. I 
had no notion how long I would be allowed to remain out, as 
Civil Disobedience was still the official programme of the Con- 
gress, and the Congress itself and scores of other organisations 
were illegal. 

We fixed the marriage for the third week of October in 
Allahabad. It was to be a civil ceremony. I was glad of this, 
though as a matter of fact we had no choice in the matter. 
The marriage was between two different castes, a Brahman and 
a non*Brahman, and under jpresent British Indian Law no 
reli^ous ceremony had validity for such a marriage. Fortu- 
nately a recently passed Civil Marriage Act came to our rescue. 

460 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 45I 

There were two such Acts, the second one, under which my 
sister’s marriage took place, being confined to Hindus and those 
belonging to allied faiths — ^Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs. But if either 
party does not belong to one of these faiths, by birth or con- 
version, then this second Act does not apply and the first Civil 
Marriage Act has to be resorted to. This first Act requires from 
both the parties a denunciation of all the leading religions, or 
at any rate a statement that they do not belong to them. This 
wholly unnecessary denunciation is a great nuisance. Many 
people, even though they are not religiously inclined, object to 
this statement and thus cannot take advantage of the Act. The 
orthodox of various faiths oppose all changes which would 
facilitate inter-marriages. The result is that they drive people 
either to make that statement of denunciation or to a patently 
superficial conversion to get within the law. Personally I should 
like to encourage inter-marriages, but whether they are en- 
couraged or not, it is very necessary to have a permissive general 
civil marriage Act, applicable to persons of all religions, per- 
mitting them to marry without any denunciation or change of 
faith. 

There was no fuss about my sister’s wedding; it, was a very 
simple affair. Ordinarily I dislike the fiiss attendant on Indian 
marriages. In view of my .mother’s illness and, even more so, 
the fact that civil disobedience was still going on and many of 
our colleagues were in prison, anything m the nature of show 
was singularly out of place. Only a few relatives and local 
friends were invited. Many old friends of my father’s were hurt 
because they felt, quite wrongly, that I had purposely ignored 
them. 

The little invitation we issued for the wedding was written in 
Hindustani in the Latin script. This was an innovation, as 
such invitations are always either in the nagri or the Persian 
script, and the idea of writing Hindustani in the Latin script 
is almost unknown, except in army and missionary circles. I 
used the Latin script as an experiment, and I wanted to see the 
reactions of various people. It had a mixed reception, mostly 
unfavourable. The recipients were few: if a larger circle had 
been approached the reaction would have been still more un- 
favourable. Gandhiji did not approve of what I had done. 

I did not use the Latin script because I had become a convert 
to it, although it had long attracted me. Its success in Turkey 
and Central Asia had impressed me, and the obvious arguments 
in its favour were weighty. But even so I was not convinced, 
and even if T had been convinced, I knew well that it did not 



452 jawaharlal nehru 

stand the faintest chance of being adopted in present-day India. 
There would be the most violent opposition to it from all groups, 
nationalist, religious, Hindu, Muslim, old and new. And I feel 
that the opposition would not be merely based on emotion. A 
change of script is a very vital change for any language with a 
rich past, for a script is a most intimate part of its literature. 
Change the script and different word-pictures arise, different 
sounds, different ideas. An almost insurmountable barrier is put 
up between the old literature and the new, and the former be- 
comes almost a foreign language that is dead. Where there is no 
literature worth preserving this risk should be taken. In India I 
can hardly conceive of the change, for our literature is not only 
rich and valuable but is bound up with our history and our 
thought, and is intimately connected with the lives of our 
masses. It would be cruel vivisection to force such a change, and 
it would retard our progress in popular education. 

But this question is not even an academic one in India to-day. 
The irext step in script reform for us seems to me the adoption 
of a common script for the daughter languages of Sanskrit — 
Hindi, Bengali, Marathi and Gujrati. As it is, their scripts have 
a common origin and do not differ greatly, and it should not 
be difficult to strike a common mean. This would bring these 
four great sister languages much nearer to each other. 

One of the legends about India which our English rulers 
have persistently circulated all over the world is that India has 
several hundred languages — 1 forget the exact number. For 
proof there is the census. Of these several hundred, it is an 
extraordinary fact that very few Englishmen know even one 
moderately well, in spite of a life-long residence in this country. 
They class the lot of these together and call them the 'Verna- 
cular the slave language (from the Latin verna, a home-born 
slave), and many of our people have, unknowingly, accepted 
this nomenclature. It is astonishing how English people spend 
a life-time in India without taking the trouble to learn the 
language well. They have evolved, with the help of their 
khansamahs and ayahs, an extraordinary jargon, a kind of 
pidgin-Hindustani, which thw imagine is the real article. Just 
as they take their facts about Indian life from their subordinates 
and sycophants, they take their ideas about Hindustani from 
their domestic servants, who make a point of speaking their 
pic^n language to the sahib-log for fear that they would not 
unoCTStand anything else. They seem to be wholly ignorant of 
the fact that Hindustani, as well as the other Indian languages, 
have high literary merit and extensive literatures. 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 453 

If the census tells us that India has two or three hundred 
languages, it also tells us, I believe, that Germany has about 
fifty or sixty languages. I do not remember any one pointing 
out this fact in proof of the disunity or disparity of Germany. 
As a matter of fact, a census mentions all manner of petty 
languages, sometimes spoken by a few thousand persons only; 
and often dialects are classed, for scientific purposes, as different 
languages. India seems to me to have surprisingly few lan- 
guages, considering its area. Compared to the same area in 
Europe, it is far more closely allied in regard to language, but 
because of widespread illiteracy, common standards have not 
developed and dialects have formed. The principal languages 
of India (excluding Burma) are Hindustani (of the two varieties, 
Hindi and Urdu), Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, Tamil, Telegu, 
Malayalam and Canarese. If Assamese, Oriya, Sindhi, Pushtu 
and Punjabi are added, the whole country is covered, except for 
some hill and forest tribes. Of these, the Indo-Aryan languages, 
which cover the whole north, centre and west of India, are 
closely allied; and the southern Dra vidian languages, though 
different, have been greatly influenced by Sanskrit and are full 
of Sanskrit words. 

The eight principal languages mentioned above have all old 
and valuable literatures, and each of them is spoken to-day over 
a vast area, which is definite and clearly marked. Thus from 
the point of view of numbers speaking a language, these lan- 
guages are among the major languages of the world. Fifty 
million people speak Bengali. As for Hindustani, with its varia- 
tions, it is spoken, I imagine (I have no figures here), by about 
a hundred and forty millions in India, and it is partly under- 
stood by a vast number of others all over the country.* Such a 
language has obviously enormous possibilities. It rests on the 
solid foundation of Sanskrit and it is closely allied to Persian. 
Thus it can draw from two rich sources, and of course, in recent 
years, it has drawn from English. The Dravidian country in 
the south is the only part where Hindustani comes as almost a 
foreign tongue, but the people there are making a great effort 
to learn it. Two years ago (in 193a) I saw some figures of a 
private voluntary society which had undertaken the teaching of 
Hindi in the south. During the previous fourteen years, since 
its formation, it was stated that 550,000 persons had learnt Hindi 
through its efforts in the Madras Presidency alone. For a yolun- 

* The following figures have been given by the advocates of Hin- 
dustani. I do not know if they are based on the last census 01.1931 



454 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tary effort, which is supported in no way by the State, this is 
remarkable, and most of the persons who learn Hindi them- 
selves become missionaries in the cause. 

I have no doubt whatever that Hindustani is going to be the 
common language of India. Indeed it is largely so to-day for 
ordinary purposes. Its progress has been hampered by foolish 
controversies about the script, n5gn or Persian, and by the mis- 
directed efforts of the two factions to use language which is 
either too Sanskritised or too Persianised. There is no way out 
of the script difficulty, for it arouses great heat and passion, 
except to adopt both officially, and allow people to use either. 
But an effort must be made to discourage the extreme tenden- 
cies' and develop a middle literary language, on the lines of the 
spoken language in common use. With mass education this will 
inevitably take place. At present the small middle-class groups, 
that are supposed to be the arbiters of literary taste and style, 
are terribly narrow-minded and conservative, each in its own 
way. They cling tt? antique forms that have no life in them and 
have few contacts with their own masses or with world 
literature. 

The development and spread of Hindustani must not and 
will not con&ct with the continued use and enrichment of the 
other great languages of India — ^Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, 
Oriya and the Dravidian languages of the south. Some of these 
languages are already more wide-awake and intellectually alert 
than Hindustani, and they must remain the official languages 
for educational and other purposes in their respective areas. 

*or the previous one of 1931. I imagine they refer to the latter, and 
up-to-date figures would show a considerable increase under each 
head. 


Hindustani (including western Hindi, Pun- 


jabi and Rajasthani) 

- 139-3 

millions 

Bengali 

- 49-3 

t> 

Telcgu 

... 33.6 

it 

Marariii 

... i8.8 

it 

Tamil - 

... 18.8 


Canarese 

... 10.3 

tt 

Oriya 

ro.i 

tt 

Gujrati 

9.6 

9 i 


. Total 379.8 


Some languages like Pushtu, Assamese and, of couse, Burmese, 
which is entirely different, Unguisdcally and territorially, have been' 
nmittpd frorn thin Kst- 




CIVIL marriage and a question of script 455 

Only through them can education and culture spread rapidly 
among the masses. 

Some people imagine that English is likely to become the 
lingua franca of India, That seems to me a fantastic concep- 
tion, except in respect of a handful of upper-class intelligentsia. 
It has no relation to the problem of mass education and culture. 
It may be, as it is partly to-day, that English will become in- 
creasingly a language used for technical, scientific and business 
communications, and especially for international contacts. It is 
essential for many of us to know foreign languages in order to 
keep in touch with world thought and activities, and I should 
like our universities to encourage the learning of other lan- 
guages besides English— French, German, Russian, Spanish, 
Italian. This does not mean that English should be neglected, 
but if we are to have a balanced view of the world we must not 
confine ourselves to English spectacles. We have already become 
sufficiently lop-sided in our mental outlook because of this con- 
centration on one aspect and ideology, and eyen the most rabid 
of our nationalists hardly realise how much they are cribbed 
and confined by the British outlook in relation to India. 

But however much we may encourage the other foreign lan- 
guages, English is bound to remain our chief link with the out- 
side world. That is as it should be. For generations past we 
have been trying to learn English, and we have achieved a fair 
measure of success in the endeavour. It would be folly to vidpe 
the slate dean now and not to take full advantage of this long 
training. English also is to-day undoubtedly the most wide- 
spread and important world language, and it is gaining fast on 
the other languages. It is likely to become more and mote the 
medium of international intercourse and radio broadcasting, 
unless ‘ American ’ takes its place. Therefore we must continue 
to spread the knowledge of English. It is desirable to learn it as 
well as possible, but it does not seem to me worth while for us 
to spend too much time and energy in appreciating the finer 
points of the language, as many of us do now. Individuals may 
do that, but to set it as an id^ for large numbers is to put a 
needless burden on them and prevent them firom progressing in 
other directions. 

I have been greatly attracted lately by ‘ Basic English ’, and it 
seems to me that this extreme simplification of English -has a 
great future before it. It would be desirable for us to undertake 
the teaching of Basic English on an extensive scale rather than 
Standard English, which can be left to specialists and particular 
students. 



45^ JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I would personally like to encourage Hindustani to adapt and 
assimilate many words from English and other foreign lan- 
guages. This is necessary, as we lack 'modern terms, and it is 
better to have well-known words rather than to evolve new and 
difficult words from the Sanskrit or Persian or Arabic. Ptirists 
object to the use of foreign words, but I think they make a 
great mistake, for the way to enrich our language is to make it 
flexible and capable of assimilating words and ideas from other 
languages. 

I happened to go, soon after my sister’s wedding, to Benares 
to visit an old friend and colleague, Shiva Prasad Gupta, who 
had been lying ill for over a year. He was in Lucknow Gaol 
when he had a sudden attack of paralysis, and he had been 
recovering from it very slowly ever since. During my Benares 
visit, a small Hindi literary society gave me an address and I 
had a pleasant informal talk with its members. I told them that 
I hesitated to speak to experts on subjects I knew little about, 
but still I made a few suggestions. I criticised the intricate and 
ornate language that was customary in Hindi writing, full of 
difficult Sanskrit words, artificial, and clinging to ancient forms, 
I ventured to suggest that this courtly style, addressed to a select 
audience, should be given up, and Hindi writers should deliber- 
ately write for the masses and in language understood by 
them. Mass contacts would give new life and sincerity to the 
language, and the writers themselves would catch some of the 
emotional energy of the mass and do far better work. Further, 
I suggested that if Hindi authors paid more attention to 
Western thought and literature, they would derive great benefit 
from it; it would be desirable to have translations from the 
classics of the European languages as well as from books dealing 
with modem ideas. I also mentioned that probably modern 
Bengali, Gujrati and Marathi were a little more advanced 
in these matters than modem Hindi, and certainly more cre- 
ative work had been done in Bengali in recent years than in 
Hindi. 

We had a friendly talk about these matters and then I came 
away. I had no idea that my remarks would be sent to the 
Press, but some one present sent a report to the Hindi papers. 

And then there was a tremendous outcry in the Hindi Press 
against me and at my presumption in criticising Hindi and 
comparing it, to its disadvantage, with Bengali, Gujrati and 
Marathi. I was called an ignoramus — ^which indeed I was in 
that particular subject — and many harder words were used to 
squash and suppress me. I had no time to follow the contro- 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 457 

versy and it went on, I am told, for months, till I was again in 
prison. 

This incident was a revelation to me. It revealed the extra- 
ordinary sensitiveness of Hindi literary men and journalists, 
and their refusal to face a litde honest criticism from one who 
wished them well. The inferiority complex was evidently at 
work. Self-criticism there was none at all, and critical standards 
were poor. It was not unusual for an author and his critic to 
fall out and accuse each other of personal motives. The whole 
outlook was narrow, bourgeois and parochial, and both the jour- 
nalists and the authors seemed to write for each other and for a 
small circle, ignoring the vast public and its interests. It seemed 
to me an extraordinary pity and an unhappy waste of energy 
when the field was so vast and inviting. 

Hindi literature has a fine past, but it cannot live for ever on 
its past. I feel sure that it has a great future, and that Plindi 
journalism will be a tremendous power in this country. But 
neither will progress much till it shakes itself firee of narrow 
conventions and boldly addresses the masses. 



LVI 


COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 

About the time of my sister’s wedding came news of Vithal- 
bhai J. Patel’s death in Europe. He had long been ailing, and it 
was because of his ill-health that he had been released from 
prison in India. His passing away was a painful event, and the 
thought of our veteran leaders leaving us in this way, one after 
another, in the middle of our struggle, was an extraordinarily 
depressing one. Many tributes were paid to Vithalbhai, and 
most of these laid stress on his ability as a parliamentarian and 
his success as President of the Assembly, This was perfectly 
true, and yet this repetition irritated me. Was there any lack of 
good parliamentarians in India or of people who could fill the 
Speaker’s chair with ability? That was the one job for which 
our lawyer’s training had fitted us. Vithalbhai had been some- 
thing much more than that — ^he had been a great and indomi- 
table fighter for India’s freedom. 

During my visit to Benares in November I was invited to 
address the students of the Hindu University. I gladly accepted 
this invitation and addressed a huge gathering presided over by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, the Vice-Chancellor. In the 
course of my speech I had much to say about communalism, 
and I denounced it in forcible language, and es^cially con- 
demned the activities of the Hindu Mahasabha. This was not 
exactly a premeditated attack, but for a long time past my mind 
had been lull of resentment at the increasingly reactionary 
efforts of the communalists of ail groups, and as I warmed up 
to my subject, some of this resentment came out. Deliberately 
I laid stress on the reactionary character of the Hindu com- 
munalists, for there was no point in my criticising Muslims 
before a Hindu audience. At the moment, it did not strike me 
that it wsis not in the best of taste to criticise the Hindu Maha- 
sabha at a meeting presided over by Malaviyaji, who had long 
been one of its pillars. I did not think of this, as he had not 
had much to do with it lately, and it almost seemed that the 
new aggressive leaders of the Mahasabha had pushed him out. 
So long as he had been one of the leading spirits, the Maha- 
sabha, in spite of its communalism, had not been politically 
reactionary. But latterly this new development has become very 
patent, and I felt sure that Malaviyaji could not have anything 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 459 

to do with it and must have disapproved of it. Still, it was not 
quite right for rhe, as I realised later, to have taken an undue 
advantage of his invitation by making remarks which put him 
in an awkward position. I was sorry for this. 

I was also sorry for a foolish error into which I had fallen. 
Some one sent us by post a copy of a resolution which, it stated, 
had recently been passed in Ajmer by a Hindu young men’s 
organisation. This resolution was most objectionable and I 
referred to it in my Benares speech. As a matter of fact no such 
resolution had been passed by any organisation, and we had been 
the victims of a hoax. 

My Benares speech, briefly reported, created an uproar. Used 
as I was to such outcries, I was quite taken aback by the vehe- 
mence of the attack of the Hindu Mahasabha leaders. These 
attacks were largely personal and seldom touched the point in 
issue. They overreached themselves, and soon I was glad of 
them, for they gave me an opportunity for having my say on 
the subject. I had been bursting with it for months past, even 
when I was in prison, hut did not know how to tackle it. It was 
a hornets’ nest, and though I was used to hornets, it was no 
pleasure to enter into controversies which degenerated into 
abuse. But now I had no choice, and I wrote what I considered 
a reasoned article on Hindu and Muslim communalism, show- 
ing how in neither case was it even bona fide communalism, but 
was political and social reaction hiding behind the communal 
mask. I happened to possess odd newspaper cuttings, which I 
had collected in prison, of variotis speeches and statements of 
conomimal leaders. Indeed 1 had so much material that I was 
hard put to it how to compress it in a newspaper article. 

This article of mine was given great publicity in the Indian 
Press. But strange to say there was no response to it from either 
side — ^Hindu or Muslim communalists — although there was a 
great deal about both in my article. The Hindu Mahasabha 
leaders, who had denoimced me in the most vigorous and varied 
language, now remained perfeedy silent. From the Muslim side 
Sir Mohamad Iqbal endeavoured to correct some of my fricts 
regarding the second Round Table Conference, but otherwise 
he did not say anything about my argument. It was in my 
reply to him that I suggested that a Constituent Assembly 
should decide both the political and communal issues. Later I 
wrote one or two additional articles on communalism. I was 
very much heartened, not only by the reception of all these 
articles, but by the visible effect they were producing on people 
who tried to think. I did not imagine, of course, mat I could 



460 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

conjure away the passions that underlay the communal spirit. 
My object was to point out that the communal leaders were 
allied to the most reactionary elemcnw in India and England, 
and were in reality opposed to political, and even more so to 
social advance. All their demands had no relation whatever to 
the masses. They were meant only to bring some advancement 
to the small groups at the top. It was my intention to carry on 
with this reasoned attack when prison claimed me again. The 
oft-repeated appeal for Hindu-Muslim unity, useful as it no 
doubt is, seemed to me singularly inane, unless some effort 
was made to understand the causes of the disunity. Some 
people, however, seem to imagine that by a frequent repetition 
of the magic formula, unity will ultimately emerge. 

It is interesting to trace British policy since the Rising of 1857 
in its relation to the communal question. Fundamentally and 
inevitably it has been one of preventing the Hindu and Muslim 
from acting together, and of playing off one community 
against another. After 1857 the heavy hand of the British fell 
more on the Muslims than on the Hindus. They considered the 
Muslims more aggressive and militant, possessing memories 
of recent rule in India, and therefore more dangerous. The 
Muslims had also k^t away from the new education and had 
few jobs under the Government. All this made them suspect. 
The Hindus had taken far more kindly to the English language 
and clerkly jobs, and seemed to be more docile. 

The new nationalism then grew up from above— -the upper- 
class English-speaking intelligentsia — and this vras naturally 
confined to the Hindus, for the Muslims were educationally very 
backward. This nationalism spoke in the gentlest and most 
abject of tones, and yet it was not to the liking of the Govern- 
ment, and they decided to encourage the Muslims more and 
keep them away from the new nationalist platform. Lack of 
English education was in itself a sufficient bar then, so far as 
the Muslims were concerned, but this was bound to go gradu- 
ally. With foresight the British provided for the future, and in 
this task they were helped by an outstanding personality— Sir 
Syed Ahmad Khan. 

Sir Syed was unhappy about the backward condition of his 
community, especially in education, and he was distressed at the 
lack of favour and influence it had in the eyes of the British 
Government. Like many of his contemporaries, he was a great 
admirer of the British, and a visit to Europe seems to have had 
a most powerful effect on liim, Europe, or rather Western 
Europe, of the second half of the nineteenth century was at 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 461 

the height of its civilisation, the unchallenged mistress of the 
world, with all the qualities that had made it great most in 
evidence. The upper classes were secure in their inheritance and 
adding to it, with little fear of a successful challenge. It was the 
age of a growing liberalism and a firm belief in a great destiny. 
It is not surprising that the Indians who went there were fasci- 
nated by this imposing spectacle. More Hindus went there to 
begin with and they returned admirers of Europe and England. 
Gradually they got used to the shine and glamour, and the first 
surprise wore off. But in Sir Syed’s case that first surprise and 
fascination is very much in evidence. Visiting England in 1869, 
he wrote letters home giving his impressions. In one of these 
he stated: “The result of all this is that although I do not 
absolve the English in India of discourtesy, and of looking upon 
the natives of that country as animals and beneath contempt, I 
think they do so from not understanding us: and I am afraid I 
must confess that they are not far wrong in their opinion of us. 
Without flattering the English, I can truly say that the natives 
of India, high and low, merchants and petty shopkeepers, 
educated and illiterate, when contrasted with the English in 
education, manners and uprightness, arc as like them as a dirty 
animal is to an able and handsome man. The English have 
reason for believing us in India to be imbecile brutes. . . . What 
I have seen, and seen daily, is utterly beyond the imagination 
of a native of India. . . . All good things, spiritual and worldly, 
which should be found in man, have been bestowed by the 
Almighty on Europe, and especially on England.”^ 

Greater praise no man could give to the British and to 
Europe, and it is obvious that Sir Syed was tremendously im- 
pressed. Perhaps also he used strong language and heightened 
the contrasts in order to shake up his own people out of their 
torpor and induce them to take a step forward. This step, he 
was convinced, must be in the direction of Western education; 
without that education his community would become more and 
more backward and powerless. English education meant govern- 
ment jobs, security, influence, honour. So to this education he 
turned all his energy, trying to win over Ms community to his 
way of thinking. He wanted no diversions or distractions firom 
other directions: it was a difficult enough piece of work to over- 
come the inertia and hesitation of the Muslims. The be- 
ginnings of a new nationalism, sponsored by the Hindu 
hourgepisie, seemed to him to offer such a distraction, and he 
1 This quotation has been taken from Hans Kohn’s History of 
Nationalism in the East, 



463 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

opposed it. The Hindus, half a century ahead in Western edu- 
cation, could indulge in this pastime of criticising the Govern- 
ment, but he had counted on the full co-operation of that 
Government in his educational undertakings and he was not 
going to risk this by any premature step. So he turned his 
back on the infant National Congress, and the British Govern- 
ment were only too willing to encourage this attitude. 

Sir Syed’s decision to concentrate on Western education for 
Muslims was undoubtedly a right one. Without that they could 
not have played any effective part in the building up of Indian 
nationalism of the new type, and they would have been doomed 
to play second fiddle to the Hindus with their better education 
and rar stronger economic position. The Muslims were not 
historically or ideologically ready then’ for the bourgeois 
nationalist movement as they had developed no bourgeoisie, as 
the Hindus had done. Sir Syed’s activities, therefore, although 
seemingly very moderate, were in the right revolutionary direc- 
tion. The Muslims were still wrapped up in a feudal anti- 
democratic ideology, while the rising middle class among the 
Hindus had begun to think in terms of the European liberals. 
Both were thoroughly moderate and dependent on British rule. 
Sir Syed’s moderation was the moderation of the landlord-class 
to which the handful of well-to-do Muslims belonged. The 
Hindu’s moderation was that of the cautious professional or 
business man seeking an outlet for industry and investment. 
These Hindu politicians looked up to the shining lights of 
English liberalism — Gladstone, Bright, etc. I doubt if the 
Muslims did so. Probably they admired the Tories and the 
landed classes of England. Gladstone, indeed was their bite noir 
because of his repeated condemnation of Turkey and the 
Armenian massacres; and because Disraeli seemed to be more 
friendly to Turkey they — ^that is of course the handful who 
took interest in such matters — ^were to some extent partial to 
him. 

Some of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s speeches make strange 
reading to-day. At a speech ddivered in Lucknow in December 
1887 he seems to have criticised and condemned the very 
moderate demands of the National Congress which was hold- 
ing its annual sessions just then. Sir Syed said; . .If 
Government fight Afghanistan or conquer Burma, it is no 

business of ours to criticise its policy Government has 

made a Council for making laws. , . . For this Council she 
selects ftom all Provinces those officials who are best acquainted 
with the administration and the condition of the people, and 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 463 

also some Raises who, on account of tlieir high social position, 
are worthy of a scat in that assembly. Some people may ask- 
why should they be chosen on account of social position in- 
stead of ability? ... I ask you— Would our aristocracy like 
that a man of low caste or insignificant origin, though he be a 
B.A. or M.A. and have the requisite ability, should be in a 
position of authority above them and have power in making 
the laws that affect their lives and property? Never I . . . None 
but a man of good breeding can the Viceroy take as his col- 
league, treat as his brother, and invite to entertainments at 
which he may have to dine with Dukes and Earls. . . . Can we 
say that the Government, in the method it has adopted for 
legislation, acts without regard to the opinions of the people? 
Can we say that we have no share in the making of the laws? 
Most certainly not.” ^ 

Thus spoke the leader and representative of the ‘ democracy 
of Islam’ in India I It is doubtful if even the taluqadars of 
Oudh, or the landed magnates of Agra Province, Behar, or 
Bengal would venture to speak in this vein to-day. And yet 
Sir Syed was by no means unique in this. Many of the Con- 
gress speeches read equally strangely to-day. But it seems clear 
that the political and economic aspect of the Hindu-Muslim 
question then was this: the rising and economically better- 
equipped middle class (Hindu) was resisted and checked to some 
extent by part of the feu«ial landlord-class (Muslim). The 
Hindu landlords were often closely coimected with their 
bourgeoisie, and thus remained neutral or even sympathetic 
to the middle-class demands which were often influenced by 
them. The British, as always, sided with the feudal elements. 
The masses and the lower middle classes on either side were not 
in the picture at all. 

Sir Syed’s dominating and forceful personality impressed 
itself on the Indian Muslims, and the Aligarh College became 
the visible emblem of his hopes and desires. In a period of 
transition a progressive impulse may soon play out its part and 
be reduced to functioning as a brake. (The Indian Liberals are 
an obvious example of this. They remind us often that they 
are the true heirs of the old Congress tradition and we of a 
later day are interlopers. True enough. But they forget that 
.the world changes and the old Congress tradiuon has vanished 
with the snows of yester-year and only remain as a memory. 
So also Sir Syed’s message was appropriate and necessary when 

* Taken from Hans Kohn’s History of Nationalism in the East. 



464 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it came, but it could not be the final ideal of a progressive 
community. It is possible that had he lived a generation later, 
he would himself have given another orientation to that 
message. Or other leaders could have re-interpreted his old 
message and applied it to changing conditions. But the very 
success that came to Sir Syed and the reverence that clung to 
his memory made it difficult for others to depart from the old 
faith; and, unhappily, the Muslims of India were strangely 
lacking in men of outstanding ability who could point a new 
way. Aligarh College did fine work, produced a large number 
of competent men, and changed the whole tone of the Muslim 
intelligentsia, but still it could not wholly get out of the frame- 
work in which it was built — a feudal spirit reigned over it, and 
the goal of the average student’s ambition was government 
service. Not for him the adventures of the spirit or the quest 
of the stars ; he was happy if he got a Deputy Collectorship. 
His pride was soothed by his being reminded that he was a 
unit in the great democracy of Islam, and in witness of this 
brotherhood, he wore jauntily on his head the red cap, called 
the Turkish fez, which the "Turks themselves soon afterwards 
were going to discard utterly. Having assured himself of his 
inalienable right to democracy, which enabled him to feed and 
pray with his brother Muslims, he did not worry about the 
existence or otherwise of political democracy in India. 

This narrow outlook and hankering after government service 
was not confined to the Muslim students of Aligarh and else- 
where. It was equally in evidence among the Hindu students 
who were far from being adventurous by nature. But circum- 
stances forced many of them out of the rut. There were far 
too many of them and not enough jobs to go round, and so 
they became the declasse intellectuals who are the backbone of 
national revolutionary movements. 

The Indian Muslims had not wholly recovered from the 
cramping effects of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s political message 
when the events of the early years of the twentieth century 
helped the British Government to widen the breach between 
them and the nationalist movement, now clamant and aggres- 
sive. Sir Valentine Chirol wrote in 1910 in his Indian Unrest-, 
“It may be confidently asserted that never before have the 
Mohammadans of India as a whole identified their interests 
and their aspirations so closely as at the present day with the 
consolidation and permanence of British rule." Political pro- 
phesies are dangerous. Within five years after Sir Valentine 
wrote, the Muslim intelligentsia was trying hard to bteak 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 465 

through from the fetters that kept it back and to range itself 
beside the Congress. Within a decade the Indian Muslims 
seemed to have outstripped the Congress and were actually 
giving the lead to it. But these ten years were momentous 
years, and the Great War had come and gone and left a broken- 
down world as a legacy. 

And yet Sir Valentine had superficially every reason to come 
to the conclusion he did. The Aga Khan had emerged as the 
leader of the Muslims, and that fact alone showed that they 
still clung to their feudal traditions, for the Aga Khan was no 
bourgeois leader. He was an exceedingly wealthy prince and 
the religious head of a sect, and from the British point of view 
he was very much a persona grata because of his close associa- 
tion with the British ruling classes. He was widely cultured, 
and lived mostly in Europe, the life of a wealthy English 
landed magnate and sportsman; he was thus far from being 
personally narrow-minded on communal or sectarian matters. 
His leadership of the Muslims meant the lining up of the 
Muslim landed classes as well as the growing bourgeoisie with 
the British Government; the communal problem was really 
secondary and was obviously stressed in the interests of 
the main objective. Sir Valentine Chirol tells us that the 
Aga Khan impressed upon Lord Minto, the Viceroy, "the 
Mahommedan view of the political situation created by the 
partition of Bengal, lest political concessions should be hastily 
made to the Hindus which would pave the way for the ascen- 
dency of a Hindu majority e<jually dangerous to the stability 
of British rule and to the interests of the Mahommedan 
minority whose loyalty was beyond dispute.” 

But behind this superficial lining up with the British Govern- 
ment other forces were working. Inevitably the new Muslim 
bourgeoisie was feeling more and more dissatisfied with existing 
conditions and was being drawn towards the nationalist move- 
ment. The Aga Khan himself had to take notice of this and 
to warn the British in characteristic language. He wrote in the 
Edinburgh Review of Jamiary 1914 (that is, long befpre the 
War) advising tlie Government to abandon the policy of 
separating Hindus from Muslims, and to rally the moderate of 
both creeds in a common camp so as to provide a counterpoise 
to the radical nationalist tendencies of young India — ^both 
Efindu and Muslim. It was thus clear that he was far more in- 
terested in checking political change in India than in the 
communal interests of Muslims. 

But the Aga Khan or the British Government could not stop 

HH 



466 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the inevitable drift of the Muslim bourgeoisie towards national- 
ism. The World War hastened the process, and as new leaders 
arose the Aga Khan seemed to retire into the background. Even 
Aligarh College changed its tone, and among the new leaders 
the most dynamic were the All Brothers, both products of 
Aligarh. Doctor M. A. Ansari, Moulana Abul Kalam Azad, 
and a number of other bourgeois leaders now began to play 
an important part in the political affairs of the Muslims. So 
also, on a more moderate scale, Mr. M. A. Jinnah. Gandhiji 
swept most of these leaders (not Mr. Jinnah) and the Muslims 
generally into his non-co-operation movement, and they played 
a leading part in the events of 1919-33. 

Then came the reaction, and communal and backward ele- 
ments, both among the Hindus and the Muslims; began to 
emerge from their enforced retirement. It was a slow process, 
but it was a continuous one. The Hindu Mahasabha for the 
first time assumed some prominence, chiefly because of the 
communal tension, but politically it could not make much 
impression on the Congress. The Muslim communal organisa- 
tions were more successful in regaining some of their old 
prestige among the Muslim masses. Even so a very strong 
group of Muslim leaders remained throughout with the 
Congress. The British Government meanwhile gave every 
encouragement to the Muslim communal leaders who were 
politically thoroughly reactionary. Noting the success of these 
reactionaries, the Hmdu Mahasabha began to compete with 
them in reaction, thereby hoping to win the goodwill of 
the Government. Many of the progressive elements in the 
Mahasabha were driven out or left of their own accord, and it 
inclined more and more towards the upper middle classes, and 
especially the creditor and banker class. 

The communal politicians on both sides, who were inter- 
minably arguing about percentages of seats in legislatures, 
thought only in terms of patronage which influence in Govern- 
ment gives. It was a struggle for jobs for the middle-class in- 
telligentsia. There were obviously not enough jobs to go round, 
and so the Hindu and Muslim communalists quarrelled about 
them, the former on the defensive, for they had most of the 
existing jobs, the latter always wanting more and more. Be- 
hind this struggle for jobs there was a much more important 
contest which, was not exactly communal but which influenced 
the communal issue. On the whole the Hindus were, in the 
Punjab, Sind, and Bengal, the richer, creditor, urban class; the 
Muslims in these provinces were the poorer, debtor, rural class. 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 467 

The conflict between the two was therefore often economic, but 
it was always given a communal colouring. In recent months 
this has come out very prominently in the debates on various 
provincial bills for reducing the burden of rural debt, especially 
in the Punjab. The representath'es of the Hindu Mahasabha 
have consistently opposed these measures and sided with the 
banker class. 

The Hindu Mahasabha is always laying stress on its own 
irreproachable nationalism when it criticises Muslim communal- 
ism. That the Muslim organisations have shown themselves to 
be quite extraordinarily communal has been patent to every- 
body. The Mahasabha’s communalism has not been so obvious, 
as it masquerades under a nationalist cloak. The test comes 
when a national and democratic solution happens to injure 
upper-class Hindu interests, and in this test the Mahasabha 
has repeatedly failed. The separation of Sind has been con- 
sistently opposed by them in the economic interests of a minority 
and against the declared wishes of the majority. 

But the most extraordinary exhibition of anti-nationalism 
and reaction, both on the part of Muslim and Hindu com- 
munalists, took place at the Round Table Conferences. The 
British Government had insisted on nominating only definitely 
communal Muslims, and these, under the leadership of the Aga 
Khan, actually went to the length of allying themselves with 
the most reactionary and, from the point of view not only of 
India but of all progressive groups, the most dangerous elements 
in British public life. It was quite extraordinary to see the close 
association of the Aga Khan and his group with Lord Lloyd and 
his party. They went a step further, and made pacts with the 
representatives of the European Association and others at the 
R.T.C. This was very depressing, for this Association has been 
and is, in India, the stoutest and the most aggressive opponent 
of Indian freedom. 

The Hindu Mahasabha delegates responded to this by de- 
manding, especially in the Punjab, all maniler of checks on 
freedom — safeguards in the interests of the British. They tried 
to outbid the Muslims in their attempts to offer co-operation 
to the British Government, and, without gaining anything, 
damned their own case and betrayed the cause of freedom. 
The Muslims had at least spoken with dignity, the Hindu com- 
munalists did not even possess this. 

The outstanding fact seems to me how, on both sides, the 
communal leaders represent a small upper class reactionary 
group,' and how these people exploit and take advantage.of the 



468 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

religious passions of the masses for their own ends. On both 
sides every effort is made to suppress and avoid the considera- 
tion of economic issues. Soon the time will come when these 
issues can no longer be suppressed, and then, no doubt, the 
communal leaders on both sides will echo the Aga Khan’s 
warning of twenty years ago for the moderates to join hands 
in a common camp against radical tendencies. To some extent 
that is already evident, for however much the Hindu and 
Muslim communalists attack each other in public they co- 
operate in the Assembly and elsewhere in helping Government 
to pass reactionary measures. Ottawa was one of the links 
which brought the three together. 

Meanwhile it is interesting to notice that the Aga Khan’s 
close association with the extreme Right wing of the Conserva- 
tive party continues. In October 1934 he was the guest of 
honour at the British Navy League dinner, at which Lord 
Lloyd presided, and he supported wholeheartedly the proposals 
for further strengthening the British Navy, which Lord Lloyd 
had made at the Bristol Conservative Conference. An Indian 
leader was thus so anxious* about imperial defence and the 
safety of England that he wanted to go further in increasing 
British armaments than even Mr. Baldwin or the ‘National’ 
Government. Of course, this was all in the interest of peace. 

The next month, in November 1934, it was reported that a 
film was privately shown in London, the object of which was 
“ to link the Muslim world in lasting friendship with the British 
Crown ”. We were informed that the guests of honour on this 
occasion were the Aga Khan and Lord Lloyd. It would seem 
that the Aga Khan and Lord Lloyd have become almost as 
inseparably united— two hearts that beat as one— in imperial 
affairs, as mr Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. M. R. Jayakar are in 
our national politics. And it is worth noticing that, during 
these months when the two were so frequently communing 
with each other, Lord Lloyd was leading a bitter and unre- 
lenting attack on the official Conservative leadership and the 
National Government for their alleged weakness in giving too 
much to India.' 

Latterly thCTe has been an interesting development in the 
speeches arid statements of some of the Muslim communal 
leaders. This has no real importance, but I doubt if many 

' Recently a Council of some British peers and Indian Muslims 
has been formed to cement and further the union of these extreme 
reactionary elements. 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 469 

people think so, nevertheless it is significant of the men- 
tality of communalism, and a great deal of prominence has 
been gjiven to it. Stress has been laid on the ‘ Muslim nation ’ 
in India, on ‘ Muslim culture ’ on the utter incompatibility of 
Hindu and Muslim ‘ cultures The inevitable deduction from 
this is (although it is not put baldly) that the British must 
remain in India for ever and ever to hold the scales and 
mediate between the two ‘ cultures 

A few Hindu communal leaders think exactly on the same 
lines, with this difference, however, that they hope that being 
in a majority their brand of ‘ culture ’ will ultimately prevail. 

Hindu and Muslim ‘ cultures ’ and the ‘ Muslim nation ’ — 
how these words open out fascinating vistas of past history 
and present and future speculation! The Muslim nation in 
India — a nation within a nation, and not even compact, but 
vague, spread out, indeterminate. Politically, the idea is absurd, 
economically it is fantastic; it is hardly worth considering. And 
yet it helps us a little to understand the mentality befind it. 
Some such separate and unmixable ‘ nations ’ existed together 
in the Middle Ages and afterwards. In the Constantinople of 
the early days of the Ottoman Sultans each such ‘ nation ’ 
lived separately and had a measure of autonomy — Latin 
Christians, Orthodox Christians, Jews, etc. This was the be- 
ginning of extra-territoriality which, in more recent times, 
became such a nightmare to many eastern countries. To talk 
of a ‘ Muslim nation ’, therefore, means that there is no nation 
at all hut a religious bond; it means that no nation in the 
modern sense must be allowed to grow; it means that modern 
civilisation should be discarded and we should go back to the 
medieval ways; it means either autocratic government or a 
foreign government; it means, finally, just nothing at all except 
an emotional state of mind and a conscious or unconscious de- 
sire not to face realities, especially economic realities. Emotions 
have a way of upsetting logic, and we may not ignore them 
simply because they seem so unreasonable. But this idea of a 
Muslim nation is the figment of a few imaginations only, and, 
but for the publicity given to it by the Press, few people would 
have heard of it. And even if many people believed in it, it 
would still vanish at the touch of reality. 

So also the ideas of Hindu and Muslim ‘ culture ’. The day 
of even national cultures is rapidly passing and the world is 
becoming one cultural unit. Nations may retain, and will retain 
for a long time much that is peculiar to them— -language, habits, 
ways of thought, etc. — ^but the machine age and science, with 



470 jawaharlal nj^hru 

swift, travel, constant supply of world news, radio, cinema, etc., 
will make them more and more uniform. No one can fight 
against this inevitable tendency, and only a world catastrophe 
which shatters modern civilisation can really check it. There 
are certainly many differences between the traditional Hindu 
and Muslim philosophies of life. But these differences are 
hardly noticeable when both of them are compared to the 
modern scientific and industrial outlook on life, for between 
this latter and the former two there is a vast gulf. The real 
struggle to-day in India is not between Hindu culture and 
Muslim culture, but between these two and the conquering 
scientific culture of modern civilisation. Those who are de- 
sirous of preserving ' Muslim culture *, whatever that may be, 
need not worry about Hindu culture, but should withstand the 
giant from the West. I have no doubt, personally, that all 
efforts, Hindu or Muslim, to oppose modern scientific and in- 
dustrial civilisation are doomed to failure, and I shall watch 
this failure without regret. Our choice was unconsciously and 
involuntarily made when railways and the like came here. 
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan made his choice on behalf of the 
Indian Muslims when he started the Aligarh College. But 
none of us had really any choice in the matter, except the 
choice which a drowning man has to clutch at something which 
might save him. 

But what is this ‘Muslim culture’? Is it a kind of racial 
memory of the great deeds of the Arabs, Persians, Turks, etc.? 
Or language? Or art and music? Or customs? I do not re- 
member any one referring to present-day Muslim art or 
Muslim music. The two languages which have influenced 
Muslim thought in India are Aramc and Persian, and especi- 
ally the latter. But the influence of Persian has no element of 
religion about it. The Persian language and many Persian 
customs and traditions came to India in the course of thou- 
sands of years and impressed themselves powerfully all over 
north India. Persia was the France of the East, sending its 
language and culture to all its neighbours. That is a common 
and a precious heritage for all of us in India. 

Pride in the past achievements of Islamic races and countries 
is probably one of the strongest of Islamic bonds. Does any 
one grudge the Muslims this noble record of various races? 
No one can take it away from them so long as they choose to 
reniember it and cherish it. As a matter of fact, this past 
record is also to a large extent a common heritage for all of 
us, perhaps because we feel as Asiatics a common bond uniting 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 471 

US against the aggression of Europe. I know that whenever I 
have read of the conflicts of the Arabs in Spain or during the 
Crusades, my sympathies have always been with them. I try 
to be impartial and objective, but, try as I will, the Asiatic 
in me influences my judgment when an Asiatic people are 
concerned. 

I have tried hard to understand what this ‘ Muslim culture ’ 
is, but I confess that I have not succeeded. I find a tiny handful 
of middle-class Muslims as well as Hindus in north India in- 
fluenced by the Persian language and traditions. And looking 
to the masses the most obvious symbols of ‘Muslim culture' 
seem to be; a particular type of pyjamas, not too long and 
not too short, a particular way of shaving or clipping the mous- 
tache but allowing the beard to grow, and a lota with a special 
kind of snout, just as the corresponding Hindu customs are 
the wearing of a dhoti, the possession of a topknot, and a lota 
of a different kind. As a matter of fact, even these distinctions 
arc largely urban and they tend to disappear. The Muslim 
peasantry and industrial workers are hardly distinguishable 
from the Hindu. The Muslim intelligentsia seldom sports a 
beard, though Aligarh still fancies a red Turkish cap with a 
fez (Turkish it is called, although Turkey will have none of it). 
Muslim women have taken to the sari and are emerging rather 
slowly from the purdah. My own tastes do not harmonise with 
some of those habits, and I do not fancy beards or moustaches 
or topknots, but I have no desire to impose my canons of taste 
on others, though I must confess, in regard to beards, that I 
rejoiced when Amanullah began to deal with them in sum- 
mary fashion in Kabul. 

I must say that those Hindus and Muslims who are always 
looking backward, always clutching at things which are slip- 
ping away from their grasp, are a singularly pathetic sight. I 
do not wish to damn the past or to reject it, for there is so 
much that is singularly beautiful in our past. 'iTiat will endure 
I have no doubt. But it is not the beautiful that these people 
clutch at, but something that is seldom worth while and is often 
harmful. 

In recent years Indian Muslims have had repeated shocks, 
and many of their deeply cherished notions have been shat- 
tered. Turkey, that champion of Islam, has not onl;^ ended 
the Khilafat, for which In<fia put up such a brave fight in igsw, 
but has taken step after step away from religion. In the new 
Turkish Constitution an article stated that Turkey was a 
Moslem ‘State, but, lest there be any mistake, Kemal Pasha 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


470 

said in 1937 : “ The provision in the Constitution that Turkey 
is a Moslem State is a compromise destined to be done away 
with at the first opportunity.” And I believe he acted up to 
this hint later on. Egypt, though much more cautiously, is 
going the same way and keeping her politics quite apart from 
religion. So also the Arab countries, except Arabia itself, which 
is more backward. Persia is looking back 'to pre-Islamic days 
for her cultural inspiration. Everywhere religion recedes into 
the background and nationalism appears in aggressive garbs, 
and behind nationalism other isms which talk in social and 
economic terms. What of the ‘ Muslim nation ’ and ‘ Muslim 
culture ’? Are they to be found in the future only in northern 
India, rejoicing under the benign rule of the British? 

If progress consists in the individual taking a broader view 
of what constitutes politics, our communalists as well as our 
Government have deliberately and consistently aimed at the 
opposite of this — the narrowing of this view. 



LVII 


IMPASSE 

The possibility of my re-arrest and conviction always hung over 
me. It was, indeed, more than a possibility when the land was 
ruled by Ordinances and the like and the Congress itself was 
an illegal organisation. Constimted as the British Government 
was, and constituted as I was, my supression seemed inevitable. 
This ever-present prospect influenced my work. I could not 
settle down to anything, and I was in a hurry to get through 
as much as possible. 

And yet I had no desire to invite arrest, and to a large extent 
I avoided activities which might lead to it. Invitations came to 
me from many places in the province and outside to undertake 
a tour. I refused them, for any such speaking tour could only 
be a raging campaign which would be abruptly ended. There 
was no half-way house for me then. When I visited any place 
for some other object— to confer with Gandhiji and the Work- 
ing Committee members — I addressed public meetings and 
spoke freely. In Jubbulpore we had a great meeting and a very 
impressive procession; in E)elhi the gathering was one of the 
biggest I had seen there. Indeed, the very success of these 
meetings made it clear that the Government would not tolerate 
their frequent repetition. In Delhi, soon after the meeting, 
there was a very .strong rumour of my impending arrest, but 
1 survived and returned to Allahabad, breaking journey at 
Aligarh to address the Muslim University students there. 

I disliked the idea of taking part in non-political public 
activities when the Government was trying to crush all efective 
political work. I found a strong tendency among Congressmen 
to seek shelter from such work by engaging in the most hum- 
drum activities which, though desirable in themselves, had 
little to do with our struggle. The tendency was natural, but 
I felt that it should not be encouraged just then. 

In the middle of October 1933 we had meetings of our U.P. 
Congress workers in Allahabad to consider the situation and 
decide, on future work. The Provincial Congress Committee 
was an illegal body, and as our object was to meet and not just 
to defy the law, we did not formally convene this committee. 
But we asked all its members who were outside gaol, as well as 
other selected workers, to come to an informal conference. 

473 



474 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

There was no secrecy about our meetings, though they were 
private, and we did not know till the lait moment whether the 
Government would interfere or not. At these meetings we paid 
a great deal of attention to the world situation — the great 
slump, naziism, communism, etc. We wanted our comrades to 
see the Indian struggle in relation to what was happening else- 
^where. The conference ultimately passed a socialistic resolution 
defining our objective and expressed itself against the with- 
drawal of civil disobedience. Everybody knew well enough 
that there was no chance of widespread civil disobedience, and 
even individual civil disobedience was likely to peter out soon 
or continue on a very restricted scale. But a withdrawal made 
little difference to us as the Government oflEensivc and Ordinance 
laws continued. So, more as a gesture tlian anything else, we 
decided to continue the formal civil disobedience but in effect 
our instructions to our workers were not to go out of their way 
to invite arrest. They were to carry on their normal work and 
if arrest came in the course of that, to accept it with good 
grace. In particular, they were asked to renew contacts with 
die rural areas and find out the condition of the peasantry, 
both as a result of the remissions of rent and Government 
repression. There was no question of a no-rent campaign then. 
This had been formally withdrawn after the Poona Conference, 
and it was obvious that it could not be revived under the cir- 
cumstances. 

This programme was a mild and inoffensive one with nothing 
patently illegal in it, and yet we knew that it would lead to 
arrests. As soon as our workers went to the villages they were 
arrested and charged, quite wrongly, with preaching a no-rent 
campaign (which had been made an offence under the Ordi- 
ance laws) and convicted. It was my intention to go to these 
rural areas after the arrest of many of my comrades, but other 
activities claimed my attention and I postponed my visit till it 
was too late. 

Twice, during those months, tiie members of the Working 
Committee met together to consider the all-India situation. 
The Committee itself was not ftmetioning, not so much because 
it was an illegal bo(^ but because, at Gandhiji’s instance after 
Poona, aU Congress Committees and offices had been suspended. 
I happened to occupy a peculiar position as, on coming out of 
gaol, I refused to join this self-denying ordinance and insisted on 
calling myself the General Secretary of the Congress. But I 
functioned in the air. There was no proper office, no staff, no 
acting-president, and Gandhiji, though available for consul- 



IMPASSfi 


475 

ration, was busy with one of his tremendous all-India tours, 
this time for Harijan work. We managed to catch him during 
his tour at Jubbulpore and Delhi and held our consultations 
with Working Committee members. They served to bring out 
clearly the differences between various members. There was 
an impasse, and no way out of it agreeable to everybody. Gan- 
dhiji was the deciding factor between those who wanted to with- 
draw civil disobedience and those who were against this. As he 
was then in favour of the latter course, matters continued as 
before. 

The question of contesting elections on behalf of the Con- 
gress to the legislatures was sometimes discussed by Congress- 
men, though the Working Committee members were not much 
interested in this at the time. It did not arise; it was obviously 
premature. The 'Reforms’ were not likely to materialise for 
another two or three years at least, and there was then no 
mention of fresh elections for the Assembly. Personally I had 
no theoretical objection to contesting elections, and I felt sure 
in my mind that when the time came the Congress would have 
to go in for them. But to raise this question then was only to 
distract attention. I hoped that the continuance of our struggle 
would clear up the issues that faced us and prevent the com- 
promising elements from dominating the situation. 

Meanwhile I continued sending articles and statements to the 
Press. To some extent I had to tone down my writings, for they 
were written with a view to publication, and there was the 
censor and various laws whose octopus-like tentacles reached 
far. Even if I was prepared to take risks, the printers, pub- 
lishers and editors were not. On the whole the newspapers were 
good to me and stretched many a point in my favour. But not 
always. Sometimes statements and passages were suppressed, 
and once a whole long article, over which I had taken some 
pains, never saw the light of day. When I was in Calcutta in 
'Japuary 1934 the editor of one of the leading dailies came to 
see'fti^He told me that he had sent one of my statements to 
the Edtlbt^Chief of all Calcutta newspapers for his opinion, 
and as the’S^itor-in-Chief had disapproved of it, it had not 
been publishedSThe ‘ Editor-in-Chief ’ was the Government 
Press Censor for Catemta. 

In some of my PressNkt^iews and statements I ventured to 
criticise forcibly some grolljk^^nd individuals. This -was re- 
sented, partly because of the loKi^^ich Gandhiji had helped, 
to spread, that Congress could be a?ll»sjjed without any danger 
of its hitting back. Gandhiji himself set an example of 



476 JAWAHARLAT- NEHRU 

this and in varying degrees leading Congressmen had followed 
his lead, though sometimes this was not so. Usually we stuck 
to vague and pious phrases, and this gave an opportunity to our 
critics to get away with their faulty reasoning and opportunist 
tactics. The real issues were avoided on both sides, and an 
honest discussion, with occasional parry and thrust, seldom took 
place, as it does in Western countries, except where facism 
prevails, 

A friend, whose opinion I valued, wrote to me that she had 
been a little surprised at the vigour of some of my statements to 
the Press — was almost becoming ‘ cattish '. Was this the out- 
come of ‘ frustration ' of my hopes ? I wondered. Partly it was 
true, for nationally all of us suffer from frustration. Indi- 
vidually also it must have been true to some extent. Yet I was 
not very conscious of the feeling because personally I had no 
sensation of suppression or failure. Ever since Gandhiji came 
within my ken politically, I learnt one thing at least from him : 
not to suppress my ideas within me for fear of the consequences. 
That habit— -followed in the political sphere (in other spheres it 
would be more difficult and dangerous to follow)— has often got 
me into trouble, but it has also brought much satisfaction with 
it. I think that it is because of this that many of us have 
escaped real bitterness of heart and the worst kinds of frus- 
tration. The knowledge also that large numbers of people think 
of one with affection is very soothing and is a powerful antidote 
against defeatism and frustration. The most terrible of all 
feelings, I imagine, is to be alone, forgotten by others. 

But, even so, how can one escape m this strange, unhappy 
world z, feeling of frustration? How often everything seems to 
go wrong, and though we carry on, doubts assail us when we 
see the quality of human material around us. I am afraid I feel 
anger and resentment often enough at various happenings and 
developments, and even at persons and groups. And latterly 
I have begun to resent more and more the drawing-room atti- 
tude to life, which ignores vital issues and considers it improper 
to refer to them, because they happen to touch one’s pocket or 
pet prejudices. With all this resentment and frustration and 
‘ cattishness I hope I have not yet lost the gift of laughing at 
my own and other people’s follies. 

I sometimes wonder at the feitb of people in a beneficent 
Providence : how it survives shock after shock, and how disaster 
JrtseBf and disproof of benefictoce are considered but tests of 
the soundness of that Those delightful lines of Gerard 
Hopkins find an ecjio'ln many a heart: 



IMFASS£ 


477 


“ Thou art indeed just, Lord, if I contend 
With thee; but, sir, so what I plead is just. 

do sinners’ ways prosper? and why must 
Disappointment all I endeavour end? 

Wert thou my enemy, O thou my friend. 

How wouldst thou worse, I wonder, than thou dost 
Defeat, thwart me? Oh, the sots and thralls of lust 
Do in spare hours more thrive than I that spend, 

Sir, life upon thy cause. . . 

Faith in progress, in a cause, in ideals, in human goodness 
and human destiny — are they not nearly allied to faith in a 
Providence? If we seek to Justify them by reason and logic 
immediately we get into difficulties. But something within us 
clutches to that hope and faith, for, deprived of them, life 
would be a wilderness without an oasis. 

The efFert of my propaganda itpspf nf 

my colleagues of the Working Committee. They would have 
put up with me without complaint, as they had done for several 
years during which I had been carrying on this propaganda, 
but I was now frightening to some extent the vested interests 
in the country, and my activities could no longer be called 
innocuous. I knew that some of my colleagues w'ere no 
Socialists, but I had always thought that, as a member of the 
Congress Executive I had perfect freedom to carry on socialist 
propaganda without committing the Congress to it. The realisa- 
tion that some members of the Working Committee did not 
think that I had that freedom came as a surprise. I was putting 
them in a false position and they resented it. But what was I to 
do? I was not going to give up what I considered the most 
important part of my work. I would much rather resign from 
the Working Committee if there was a conflict between the 
two. But how could I resign when the Committee was illegal 
and was not even functioning properly? 

This difficulty faced me again later— I think it was towards 
the end of December — when Gandhiji wrote to me from 
Madras, He sent me a cutting from the Madras Mail containing 
an interview he had given. The interviewer had asked him 
about me and he had replied almost apologising for my acti- 
vities and expressing his faith in my rectitude: I would not 
commit the Congress to these novel ways. I did not particu- 
larly fancy this reference to me, but what upset me much more 
was Gandhiji’s defence, further on in the interview, of the big 
zamindari system,' He seemed to think that this was a very 
desirable part of rural and national economy, This was a great 



478 JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

surprise to me for the big zamindaris and taluqas have very 
few defenders to-day. All over the world they have been broken 
up, and even in India most people recognise that they cannot 
last long. Even taluqadars and zamindars would welcome an 
end of the system provided, of course, they got sufficient com- 
pensation therefor.* The system is indeed sinking of its own 
weight. And yet Gandhiji was in favour of it and talked of 
trusteeship and the like. How very different was his outlook 
from mine, I thought again, and I wondered how far I could 
co-operate with him in future. Must I continue to remain in 
the Working Committee? There was no way out just then, and 
a few weeks later the question became irrelevant because of my 
return to prison. 

My domestic affairs took up a lot of my time. My mother’s 
health continued to improve, but very slowly. She was still bed- 
ridden, but she seemed to be out of danger. I turned to my 
financial affairs which had been long neglected and were in a 
muddle. We had been spending much more than we could 
afford, and there seemed to be no obvious way of reducing our 
expenditure. I was not particularly anxious about making 
both ends meet. Almost I looked forward to the time when I 
would have no money left. Money and possessions are useful 
enough in the modern world, but often they become a burden 
for one who wants to go on a long journey. It is very difficult 
for moneyed people to take part in undertakings which involve 
risk; they are always afraid of losing their goods and chattels. 
What is the good of money or property if the Government can 
take possession of it when it chooses, or even confiscate it? So 
I almost wished to get rid of what little I had. Our needs were 
few and I felt confident of my ability to earn enough. My 
chief concern was that my mother, in the evening of her life, 
should not suffer discomforts or any marked lowering of the 
standard of living. I was also anxious that my daughter’s 
education should not be interfered with, and this, according to 
my thinking, involved a stay in Europe. Apart from this, 

* Mr. P. N, Tagore, Chairman of the Reception Committee of the 
All-Bengal Landholders’ Conference, said in his address on Decem- 
ber 33, 1934 : “ Personally I will not regret the day when lands of 
the zamindars are nationalised, as ha.s been done in Ireland, upon 
payment of adequate compensation to the landlord.” It should be 
remembered that the Bengal landholders, being under the Per- 
manent Settlement, are better off than the landholders in the 
non-permanently settled areas. Mr. P. N, Tagore’s ideas about 
nationalisation appear to be vague. 



IMPASSE 


479 

neither my wife nor I had any special need for money. Or so 
we thought, being unused to the real lack of it. I am quite 
sure that when the time comes when we lack money, we shall 
not be happy about it. One extravagance which I have kept 
up will be hard to give up, and this is the buying of books. 

To improve the immediate financial situation we decided to 
sell off my wife’s jewellery, the silver and other similar articles 
that we possessed, as well as many cart-loads of odds and ends. 
Kamala did not like the idea of parting with her jewellery, 
although she had not worn any of it for a dozen years and it 
had lain in the bank. But she had looked forward to handing 
it on to our daughter. 

It was January 1934. Continued arrests of our workers in the 
villages of the Allahabad district, although innocently em- 
ployed, seemed to demand that we should follow in their steps 
and visit those villages. Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, our very effective 
secretary of the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, was also 
under arrest. January 36th — ^Independence Day — ^was coming 
and it could not be ignored. Despite Ordinances and prohi- 
bitions it had been regularly observed in various parts of the 
country every year since 1930. But who was to give the lead? 
And what was the lead to be? There was no one besides me 
who was functioning, even in theorjr, as an official of the All- 
India Congress. I consulted some friends and almost all agreed 
that something should be done, but there was no agreement as 
to what this something should be, I found a general tendency 
to avoid any action which might lead to arrests on a large scale. 
Eventually I issued a brief appeal for the appropriate celebra- 
tion of Independence Day, the manner of doing so to be 
decided by each local area for itself. In Allahabad we planned 
a fairly widespread celebration all over the district. 

We felt that the organisers of this Independence Day celebra- 
tion would be arrested on that day. Before I went back to 
prison again I wanted to pay a visit to Bengal. This was partly 
to meet old colleagues there, but really it was to be a gesture 
in the nature of tribute to the people of Bengal for their 
extraordinary sufferings during the past few years. I knew 
very well that I could do nothing to help them. Sympathy and 
fellow-feeling did not go far, and yet they were very welcome, 
and Bengal was especially suffering from a sense of isolation, 
of being deserted by the rest of India in her hour of need. 
That feeling was not justified, but nevertheless it was there. 

I had also to go to Calcutta with Kamala to consult our 
doctors there about her tre-ntment. She had been far from well. 



480 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

but we had both tried to overlook this to some extent and post- 
pone recourse to a treatment which might involve a long stay 
in Calcutta or elsewhere. We wanted to be together as much 
as possible during my brief period outside prison. After I 
went back to gaol, I thought, she would have plenty of time for 
doctors and treatment. Now that arrest seemed near, I decided 
to have these consultations at least in my presence in Calcutta; 
the rest could be attended to later. 

So we decided to go to Calcutta, Kamala and I, on January 
15th. We wanted to return in good time for our Independence 
Day meetings. 



LVIII 


EARTHQUAKE 

It was the afternoon of the 15th January, 1934. I was stand- 
ing in the veranda of our house in Allahabad addressing a 
group of peasants. The annual Magh Mela had begun, and we 
had crowds of visitors all day. Suddenly I became unsteady on 
my feet and could hardly keep my balance. I clung on to a 
column near by. Doors started banging and a rumbling noise 
came from the adjoining Swaraj Bhawan, where many of the 
tiles were sliding down the roof. Being unaccustomed to earth- 
quakes, I did not know at first what was happening, but I soon 
realised it. I was rather amused and interested at this novel 
experience and I continued my talk to the peasants and began 
telling them about the earthquake. My old aunt shouted out 
to me from some distance to run out of the building. The idea 
struck me as absurd. I did not take the earthquake seriously, 
and in any event I was not going to leave my bed-ridden motlier 
upstairs, and my wife, who was probably packing, also upstairs 
and seek safety for myself For what seemed quite an appre- 
ciable time the shocks continued and then passed off. They 
provided a few minutes’ conversation and soon were almost 
forgotten. We did not know then, nor could we guess, what 
those two or three minutes had meant to millions in Behar and 
elsewhere. 

That evening Kamala and I left for Calcutta and, all un- 
knowing, we were carried by our train that night through the 
southern earthquake area. The next day there was little news 
in Calcutta about the disaster. The day after bits of news be^an 
to come in. On the third day we began to have a faint notion 
of the calamity. 

We busied ourselves with our Calcutta programme. There 
were plenty of doctors to be seen repeatedly, and it was finally 
decided that Kamala was to come back to Calcutta for treat- 
ment a month or two later. Then there were fi:iends and Con- 
gress colleagues whom we had not met for a long time. I had 
a terrible sense of oppression all the time. People seemed to 
be afraid of doing almost anything lest trouble should come 
to them; they had gone through much. Newspapers were more 
cautious than anywhere else in India. There was also, as else- 
where in India, doubt and confusion about future work. It was 

II 481 



JAWAHAULAL NEHRU 


482 

indeed this doubt, and not so much fear, that prevented any 
effective political activity. There were fascist tendencies much 
in evidence, and socialist and communist tendencies — all rather 
vague and running into each other. It was difficult to draw 
hard and fast lines between these groups. I had neither the 
time nor the opportunity to find out much about the tefforist 
movement, which was receiving a great deal of attention and 
advertisement from official sources. As far as I could gather, it 
had no political significance whatever, and the old members 
of the terrorist groups had no faith left in it. Thw were 
beginning to think on different lines. Resentment at Govern- 
ment action in Bengal had, however, led individuals here and 
there to break loose and indulge in a kind of feud. Indeed, on 
either side this idea of a feud seemed to be dominant. On the 
side of the individual terrorists this was obvious enough. On 
the side of the State also the attitude was far more that of 
carrying on a feud, with occasional reprisals, than of calmly 
grappling with an anti-social occurrence and suppressing it. Any 
government faced by terroristic acts is bound to combat them 
and try to suppress them. But serene control is more becoming 
in a government than excessive action applied indiscriminately 
to guilty and innocent alike, and chiefly to the latter because 
they are sure to be more numerous. Perhaps it is not easy to 
remain calm and collected in the face of such a threat. Ter- 
roristic acts were becoming rare, but the possibility of them 
was ever present, and this was enough to upset the composure 
of those who had to deal with them. Such acts, it is patent 
enough, are not a disease but the symptoms of a disease. It is 
futile to treat the symptoms and not the disease itself, 

I believe that a number of young men and women, who are 
supposed to have dealings with terrorists, are really attracted by 
the glamour of secret work. Secrecy and risk have always an 
appeal for the adventurous type of youth; the desire to be in the 
know, to find out what all this shouting is about, and who are 
these men behind the scenes. It is the call of the detective 
story. These people have no intention of doing anything, 
certainly not a terroristic act, but their mere association with 
suspects in the eyes of the police is enough to make them sus- 
pect also. Soon they are likely to find themselves in the ranks 
of the detenus, or in an internment camp, if a worse fate does 
not await them. 

Law and order, we are told, are among the proud achieve- 
ments of British rule in India. My own instincts are entirely 
in favour of them. I Uke discipline in life, and dislike anarchy 



EARTHQUAKE 


483 

and disorder and inefficiency. But bitter experience has made 
me doubt the value of the law and order that states and 
governments impose on a people. Sometimes the price one pays 
for them is excessive, and the law is but the will of the domi- 
nant faction and the order is the reflex of an all-pervading fear. 
Sometimes, indeed, the so-called law and order might be more 
justly called the absence of law and order. Any achievement 
that is based on widespread fear can hardly be a desirable one, 
and an ‘ order ’ that has for its basis the coercive apparatus of 
the State, and cannot exist without it, is more like a military 
occupation than civil rule. I find in the Rajataranglni, the 
thousand-year-old rashmiri historic epic of the poet Xalhana, 
that the phrase which is repeatedly used in the sense of law and 
order, something that it was the duty of the ruler and the State 
to preserve, is dhanna and abhaya — ^righteousness and absence 
of fear.- Law was something more than mere law, and order was 
the fearlessness of the people. Hovy much more desirable is this 
idea of inculcating fearlessness than of enforcing ' order ’ on a 
frightened populace! 

We spent three and a half days in Calcutta and during this 
period I addressed three public meetings. As I had done before 
in Calcutta, I condemned and argued against terroristic acts, 
and then I passed on to the methods that the Government had 
adopted in Bengal. I spoke from a full heart, for I had been 
greatly moved by accounts of occurrences in the province. 
What pained me most was the manner in which human dignity 
had been outraged by indiscriminate suppression of whole 
populations. The political problem, urgent as it was, took second 
place before this human problem. These three’ speeches of 
mine formed the three counts against me in my subsequent 
trial in Calcutta and my present sentence is due to them. 

From Calcutta we went to Santiniketan to pay a visit to the 
poet Rabindra Nath Tagore. It was always a joy to meet him 
and, having come so near, we did not wish to miss him. I had 
been to Santiniketan twice before. It was Kamala’s first visit, 
and she had come especially to see the place as we were think- 
ing of sending our daughter there. Indira was going to appear 
for her matriculation soon afterwards, and the problem of her 
future education was troubling us. I was wholly against her 
joining the regular official or semi-official universities, for I dis- 
liked them. The whole atmosphere that envelops them is 
official, oppressive and authoritarian. They have no doubt pro- 
duced fine men and women in the past, and they will continue 
to do so. But tiiese few exceptions cannot save the universities 



484 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

from the charge of suppressing and deadening the fine instincts 
of youth. Santinikctan offered an escape from this dead hand, 
and so we fixed upon it, although in some ways it was not so 
up to date and well-equipped as the other universities. 

On our way back we stopped at Patna to discuss with Rajen- 
dra Babu the problem of earthquake relief. He had just been 
discharged from prison and, inevitably, he had taken the lead 
in unofficial relief work. Our arrival was unexpected, for none 
of our telegrams had been delivered. The house where we 
intended staying with Kamala’s brother was in ruins; it was 
a big double-storied brick structure. So, like many others, we 
lived in the open. 

The next day I paid a visit to Muzafl’arpur. It was exactly seven 
days after the earthquake and little had so far been done to 
remove the debris, except from some of the main streets. As 
these streets were cleaned corpses were being discovered, some in 
curiously expressive attitudes, as if trying to ward off a falling 
wall or roof. The ruins were an impressive and terrifying sight. 
The survivors were thoroughly shaken-up and cowed by their 
nerve-racking experiences. 

Returning to Allahabad, collections of funds and materials 
were immediately organised, and all of us, of the Congress or 
out of it, took this up in earnest. Some of my colleagues were 
of opinion that because of the earthquake the Independence 
Day celebrations .should be called off. But other colleagues and 
I saw no reason why even an earthquake should interfere with 
our programme. So on the 26th January we had a large num- 
ber of meetings in the villages of Allahabad district and a 
meeting in the city, and we met with greater success than we 
had anticipated. Most people expected police interference and 
arrests, and on a minor scale there was some interference. But, 
much to our surprise, we survived the meeting. In some of our 
villages and in some other cities arrests were made. 

Soon after returning from Behar I issued a statement about 
the earthquake,' ending up with an appeal for funds. In this 
statement I criticised the inactivity of the Behar Government 
during the first few days after the earthquake. It was not my 
intention to criticise the officials in the earthquake areas, for 
they had had to deal with a very difficult situation which would 
have tried the stoutest nerves, and I was sorry that some of my 
words were capable of this interpretation. But I did feel 
strongly tliat the headquarters of the Behar Government had 
not shown great competence to begin with, especially in the 
matter of removal of debris, which might have saved lives. 



EARTHQUAKE 


485 

Thousands of people were killed in Monghyr city alone, and 
three weeks later I saw a vast quantity of dehris still lying 
untouched, although a few miles away at Jamalpur there was 
a large colony of many thousands of railway workers, who 
could have been utilised for this purpose within a few hours of 
the catastrophe. Living people were unearthed even twelve days 
after the earthquake. The Government had taken immediate 
steps to protect property, but they had not been so expeditious 
in trying to rescue people who lay buried. The municipalities 
in these areas were not functioning. 

I think my criticism was justified, and I found later that the 
great majority of people in the earthquake areas agreed with 
it. But whether it was justified or not, it was honestly made, 
not with the intention of blaming the Government, but of 
speeding them up. No one acctaed them of any deliberate sins 
of commission or omission in this respect. It was a novel and 
overpowering situation and errors were excusable. The Behar 
Government, so far as I know (fi)r I have been in gaol), later on 
worked with energy and competence to repair the ravages of 
the earthquake. 

But my criticism was resented, and soon afterwards a few 
people in Behar came out with a general testimonial in favour 
of the Government as a kind of counterblast. The earthquake 
and its demands Became almost a secondary matter. More im- 
portant was the fact that the Government had been criticised, 
and it must he defended by its loyal subjects. This was an 
interesting instance of a widespread phenomenon in India — 
the dislike of criticism of the Government, which is a common- 
place in Western countries. It is the military mentality, which 
cannot tolerate criticism. Like the King, the British Govern- 
ment in India and all of its superior officials can do no wrong. 
To hint at any such thing is Itse majeste. 

The curious part of it is that a charge of inefficiency and 
incompetence is resented far more than an accusation of harsh 
government or tyranny. The latter might indeed land the 
person making it in prison, but the Government is used to it 
and does not really mind it. After all, in a way, it mi^t almost 
be considered a compliment to an imperial race. But to he 
called inefficient and wanting in nerve hurts, for this strikes at 
the root of their selfiesteem; it disturbs the messianic delusions 
of the English officials in India. They are like the Anglican 
bishop who was prepared to put up meekly with a charge of 
unchristian behaviour, but who resented and hit out when 
some one called him foolish and incompetent. 



JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 


486 

There is a general belief among Englishmen, frequently 
asserted as if it was an incontrovertible maxim, that a change 
of government in India, involving a reduction or elimination 
of British influence, would result in a much worse and more 
inefficient government. Holding this belief, but generous in 
their enthusiasm, radicals and Englishmen of advanced views 
plead that good government is no substitute for self-government, 
and if Indians want to go to the dogs, they should be permitted 
to do so. I do not know what will happen to India when British 
influence is eliminated. Much depends on how the British 
withdraw and who is in control in India then, and on a host 
of other considerations, national and international. I can quite 
conceive a state of affairs, established with the help of the 
British, which will be more inefficient and generally worse than 
anything that we can have to-day, for it will have all the vices 
of the present system without its virtues. I can conceive more 
readily still a different state of affairs which, from the point of 
view of the Indian people, will be far more efficient and bene- 
ficial than anything we have to-day. It is possible that the 
coercive apparatus of the State may not be so efficient, and the 
administrative apparatus not quite so shiny, but there will be 
greater efficiency in production, consumption, and the activities 
which go to raise the physical, the spiritual;' and cultural stan- 
dards of the masses. I believe that self-government is good’ for 
any country. But I am not prepared to accept even self- 
government at the cost of real good government. Self-govern- 
ment if it is to justify itself must stand ultimately for better 
government for the masses. It is because I believe that the 
British Government in India, wliatever its claims in the past 
may have been, is incapable of providing good government and 
rising standards for the masses to-day, that I feel that it has 
outlived its utility, such as it was, m India. The only real 
justification for Indian freedom is the promise of better govern- 
ment, of a higher standard for the masses, of industrial and 
cultural growth, and of the removal of the atmosphere of fear 
and suppression that foreign imperialist rule invariably brings 
in its train. The British Government and the I.C.S., though 
they may be strong enough to impose their will on India, are 
not efficient or competent enough to solve India’s problems of 
to-day, and even less of the future, because their foundations 
and assumptions are all wrong and they have lost touch with 
reality, A government or ruling class which is not competent 
enough, or which represents a passing order, cannot long con- 
tinue even to impose their will. 




THE AUTHOR 



EARTHQUAKE 487 

The Allahabad Earthquake Relief Committee deputed me to 
visit the areas affected by the earthquake and to report on the 
methods of relief-work adopted there. I went immediatelyi 
aloiie, and for ten days I wandered about those torn and ruined 
territories. It was a very strenuous tour, and I had little sleep 
during those days. From five in the morning till almost mid- 
night we were up and about, motoring over the cracked and 
crumpled-up roads, or going by little boats where the bridges had 
collapsed and the roads were under water owing to a change in 
level. The towns were impressive enough with their extensive 
ruins, and their roads torn up and twisted sometimes as by a 
giant hand, or raised high above the plinth of the houses on 
either side. Out of huge cracks in these roads water and sand 
had gushed out and swept away men and cattle. More even 
than these towns, the plains of North Behar— the garden of 
Behar, they used to be called — had desolation and destruction 
stamped upon them. Mile upon mile of sand, and large sheets 
of water, and huge cracks and vast numbers of little craters 
out of which this sand and water had come. Some British 
officers who flew over this area said that it bore some resem- 
blance to the battlefields of northern France in war-time and 
soon after. 

It must have been -a terrible experience. The earthquake 
began with strong side-to-side movements which knocked down 
any person who was standing. Then there were up-and-down 
movements, and a vast rumbhng and reverberating noise as of 
an artillery bombardment or a hundred aeroplanes in the sky, 
and waters gushed out in innumerable places out of huge 
fissures and craters and rose to about ten or twelve feet. All 
this probably lasted for three minutes or a litde more and then 
it died dovm, but those three minutes were terrible enough. 
It is not surprising that many persons who saw this happen 
imagined that this was the end of the world. In the cities mere 
was a noise of falling houses, and a rushing of waters, and an 
atmosphere full of dust which made it impossible to see even 
a few yards. In the rural areas there was not much dust and 
one could see a little farther, but there were no calm-eyed 
spectators about. Those who survived lay flat on the ground, or 
rolled about, in an agony of terror. 

A little boy of twelve was dug out (I think in Muzaffarpur) 
alive ten days after the earthquake. He was greatly surprised. 
He had imagined, when he was knocked down and imprisoned 
by falling material, that the world had ended and he was the 
solitary survivor. 



490 jawaharlal nehru 

that drew a vast sum of money from all over India. Weak in 
health, he threw himself into the work of relief. He over- 
worked himself, for he became the centre of all activity and 
everybody turned to him for advice. 

During my tour in the earthquake areas, or just before going 
there, I read with a great shock Gandhiji’s statement to the 
effect that the earthquake had been a punishment for the sin 
of untouchability. This was a staggering remark and I wel- 
comed and wholly agreed with Rabindra Nath Tagore’s answer 
to it. Anything more opposed to the scientific outlook it would 
be difficult to imagine. Perhaps even science will not be abso- 
lutely dogmatic to-day about the effect of emotional states and 
psychic occurrences on matter. A mental shock may result in 
indigestion or something worse to the person concerned. But 
to suggest that a human custom or failing had its reactions on 
the movements of the earth’s crust is an astounding thing. The 
idea of sin and divine wrath and man’s relative importance in 
the affairs of the universe — they take us back a few hun- 
dred years, when the Inquisition flourished in Europe and 
burned Giordano Bruno for his scientific heresy and sent many 
a witch to the stake I Even in the eighteenth century in 
America leading Boston divines attributed earthquakes in Mas- 
sachusetts to the impiety of lightning rods. 

And if the earthquake was a divine punishment for sin, how 
are we to discover for which sin we are being punished? — for, 
alas I we have many sins to atone fijr. Each person can have his 
pet explanation; we may have been punished for submitting to 
putting up with an unjust social system, 
the Maharaja of Durbhanga, the owner of enormous estates, 
was, financially, one of the major sufferers from the earth- 
quake. We might as well say that this was a judgment on the 
zammdari system. That would be nearer the mark than to 
suggest that the more or leas innocent people of Behar were 
being made to suffer vicariously for the sins of untouchability 
of the people of South India. Wliy did not the earthquake visit 
the land of untouchability itself? Or the British Government 
might call the calamity a divine punishment for civil dis- 
obedi^ce, for, as a matter of fact, North Behar, which suffered 
most from the earthquake, took a leading part in the freedom 
movement. 

We can go on speculating indefinitely in this manner. And 
then’ of course, the question arises why we should interfere 
with the workings of Providence or try to lessen the effect of its 
divine decrees by our humaue efforts. And we begin to wonder 



EARTHQUAKE 


491 

why Providence has played this cruel joke on us : to make us 
full of imperfections, to surround us with snares and pitfalls, to 
create a miserable and cruel world, to make the tiger and the 
lamb, and then to punish us. 

‘‘ When the stars threw down their spearo 
And v/ater’d heaven with their tears, 

Dare he laugh his work to see? 

Dare he who made the lamb make thee? ” 

On my last night in Patna I sat up till very late with many 
friends and comrades who had gathered there from various 
provinces to olFer their services for relief work. The U.P. was 
well represented and some of our chosen men were there. We 
discussed a problem that was troubling us : how far must we 
allow ourselves to be involved in earthquake relief? That 
meant, to that extent at least, a withdrawal from political work. 
Relief work was very exacting and we could not take it up 
casually. Absorption in it might well involve a long period of 
absence from the active political sphere, and that was bound to 
have a bad effect politically on our province. Although there 
were many in the Congress fold, the people who make a differ- 
ence were always limited in number and could ill be spared. 
And yet the call of the earthquake could not be ignored. For 
my part I had no intention of devoting myself exclusively to 
relief work. I felt that there would be no lack of people for 
that; there were few for more risky activities. 

So we talked till far into the night. We discussed the last 
Independence Day and how some of our colleagues had been 
arrested then, while we had escaped. I told them laughingly 
that I had discovered the secret of militant politics with perfect 
safety. 

I got back home in Allahabad on February iith, dead 
tired after my tour. Ten strenuous days had made me look 
ghastly and my people were surprised at my appearance. I tried 
to begin writing my report of the tour for the Allahabad Relief 
Committee, but sleep overcame me. I spent at least twelve hours 
out of the next twenty-four in sleep. 

Next day, in the late afternoon, Kamala and I had finished 
tea and Purushottam Das Tandon had just then joined us. We 
were standing in the veranda when a car drove up and a police 
officer alighted. I knew immediately that my time had come. I 
went up to him and said : “ Bahut dinon se apka intazar tha 
“ I have been waiting for you &r a long time,” He was a little 



492 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

apologetic and said that he was not to hlame. The warrant was 
from Calcutta. 

Five months and thirteen days I had been out, and now 1 
went back again to seclusion and loneliness. But the real burden 
was not mine; it had to be shouldered, as always, by the women 
folk — by my ailing mother, my wife, my sister. 



ALIPORE GAOL 


Already how am I so far 
Out of that minute? Must I go 
Still like the thistle-ball, no bar, 

Onward wherever light winds blow. 

Fixed by no friendly star? 

Robert Browning 

That very night I was taken to Calcutta. From Howrah station 
a huge black Maria carried me to Lai Bazaar Police Station. 
I had read much of this famous headquarters of the Calcutta 
police and I looked round with interest. There were large 
numbers of European sergeants and inspectors to be seen, fer 
more than would have been in evidence in any police head- 
quarters in Northern India. The constables seemed to be almost 
all from Behar or the eastern districts of the U.P. During the 
many journeys I made in the big prison lorry, to court and back 
or from one prison to another, a number of these constables 
used to accompany me inside. They looked thoroughly un- 
happy, disliking their job, and obviously full of sympathy for 
me. Sometimes their eyes glistened with tears. 

I was kept in the Presidency Gaol to begin with, and from 
there I was taken for my trial to the Chief Presidency Magis- 
trate’s court. This was a novel experience. The court-room and 
building had more the appearance of a besieged fortress than 
of an open court. Except for a few newspaper men and the 
usual lawyers, no outsiders were allowed anywhere in the neigh- 
bourhood. The police was present in some force. These arrange- 
ments apparently had not been made especiaEy for me; that was 
the daily routine. When I was taken to the court-room I had to 
march through a long passage ^side the room) which was 
closely wired on top and at the side. It was like going through a 
cage. The dock was far from the magistrate’s seat. The court- 
room was crowded with policemen and black-coated and gowned 

used enough to court trials. Many of my previous trials 
had taken place in gaol precincts. But there had always been 
some friends, relatives, familiar faces about, and the whole 
atmosphere had been a little easier. The police had usually 


lawyers 
I was 



494 jawaharlal nishru 

kept in the background and there had never been any cage-like 
structures about. Here it was very different, and I gazed at 
strange, unfamiliar faces between whom and me there was 
nothing in common. It was not an attractive crowd. I am 
afraid gowned lawyers en masse are not beautiful to look at, 
and police-court lawyers seem to develop a peculiarly unlovely 
look. At last I managed to spot one familiar lawyer’s face in 
that black array, but he was lost in that crowd. 

I felt very lonely and isolated even when I sat on the balcony 
outside before the trial began. My pulse must have quickened 
a little, and inwardly I was not quite so composed as I usually 
had been during my previous trials. It struck me then that if 
even I, with so much experience of trials and convictions, could 
react abnormally to that situation, how much more must young 
and inexperienced people feel the tension? 

I felt much better in the dock itself. There was, as usual, no 
defence offered, and I read out a brief statement. The next 
day, February i6th, I was sentenced to two years. My seventh 
term of imprisonment had begun. 

I looked back with some satisfaction to my five and a half 
months’ stay outside. That time had been fairly well occupied, 
and I had managed to get through some useful jobs. My 
mother had turned the corner and was out of immediate 
danger. My younger sister, Krishna, had married.’ My daugh- 
ter's future education had been' fixed up. I had straighten, ed 
out some of my domestic and financial tangles. Many personal 
matters that I had been long neglecting had been attended to. 
In the field of public affairs I knew that no one could do much 
then. I had at least helped a little in stiffening up the Congress 
attitude and in directing it to some extent towards social and 
economic ways of thinking. My Poona correspondence with 
Gandhiji, and later my articles in the Press, had made a differ- 
ence. My articles on the communal question had also done 
some good. And then I had met Gandhiji again after more 
than two years, and many other firiends and comrades, and had 
charged myself with nervous and emotional energy for another 
period. 

One shadow remained to darken my mind—Kamala’s ill- 
health. I had no notion then how very ill she was, for she has a 
habit of carrying on till she collapses. But I was worried. And 
yet I hoped that now I was in prison she would be free to devote 
herself to her treatment. It was more difficult to do so whilst I 
was out and she was not willing to leave me for long. 

I had olie other regret. I was sorry that I had not visited 



ALIPORE GAOL 


495 

even once the rural areas of Allahabad district. Many of my 
young colleagues had recently been arrested there for carrying 
out our instructions, and it seemed almost like disloyalty to 
them not to follow them in the district. 

Again the black Maria carried me back to prison. On our 
way we passed plenty of troops on the march with machine- 
guns, armoured cars, etc. I peeped at them through the tiny 
openings of our prison van. How ugly an armoured car is, I 
thought, and a tank. They reminded me of prehistoric monsters 
— ^the dinosaurs and the like. 

I was transferred from the Presidency Gaol to the Alipore 
Central Gaol, and- there I was given a little cell, about ten feet 
W nine. In front of it was a veranda and a small open yard. 
Tne wall enclosing the yard was a low one, about seven feet, 
and looking over it a strange sight confronted me. All manner 
of odd buildings — single storey, double storey, round, rectangu- 
lar, curious roofings — ^rose all round, some over-topping the 
others. It seemed that the structures had grown one by one, 
being fitted in anyhow to take advantage of all the available 
space. Almost it looked like a jig-saw puzzle or a fiiturist 
attempt at the fantastic. And yet I was told that all the build- 
ings had been arranged very methodically with a tower in the 
centre (which was a church for the Christian prisoners) and 
radiating lines. Being a city gaol, the area was limited and 
every little bit of it had to be utilised. 

I had hardly recovered from my first view of the seemingly 
fantastic structures around me when a terrifying sight greeted 
me. Two chimneys, right in front of my cell and yard, were 
belching forth dense volumes of black smoke, and sometimes 
the wind blew this smoke in my direction, almost suffocating 
me. They were the chimneys of the gaol kitchens. I suggested 
to the Superintendent later that gas-masks might be provided 
to meet this ofiFensive. 

It was not an agreeable start, and the future was not inviting 
—to enjoy the unchanging prospect of the red-brick structures 
of Alipore Gaol and to swallow and inhale the smoke of its 
kitchen chimneys. There were no trees or greenery in my yard. 
It was all paved and puca and dean, except for the daily 
deposit of smoke, but it was also bare and dieerless. I could 
just see the tops of one or two trees in adjoining yards. They 
were barren of leaf or flower when I arrived. But gradually a 
mysterious change came over them and little bits of green 
were peeping out all over their, branches. The leaves were 
coming out of the buds; they grew rapidly and covered the 



496 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

nakedness of the branches with their pleasant green. It was a 
delightful change which made even Alipore Gaol look gay and 
cheerful. 

In one of these trees was a kite’s nest which interested me, 
and I watched it often. The little ones were growing and learn- 
ing the tricks of the trade, and sometimes they would swoop 
down with rapidity and amazing accuracy and snatch the bread 
out of a prisoner’s hand, almost out of his mouth. 

From sunset to sunrise (more or less) we were locked up in 
our cells, and the long winter evenings were not very easy to 
pass. I grew tired of reading or writing hour after hour, and 
would start walking up and down that little cell — ^four or five 
short steps forward and then back again. I remembered the 
bears at the zoo tramping up and down their cages. Some- 
times when I felt particularly bored I took to my favourite 
remedy, the shirshasana — standing on the head I 

The early part of the night was fairly quiet, and city sounds 
used to float in — the noise of the trams, a gramophone, or some 
one singing in the distance. It was pleasant to hear this faint 
and distant music. But there was not much peace at night, for 
the guards on duty tramped up and down, and every hour 
there was some kind of an inspection. Some officer came round 
with a lantern to make sure that none of us had escaped. At 
3 a.m. every day, or rather night, there was a tremendous din, 
and a mighty sound of scraping and scrubbing. The kitchens 
had begun functioning. 

There were vast numbers of warders and guards and officers 
and clerks in the Alipore Gaol, as also in the Presidency. Both 
these prisons housed a population about equal to that of Naini 
Prison— 2200 to 2300 — but the staff in each must have been 
more than double that of Naini. There were many European 
warders and retired Indian Army officers. It was evident that 
die British Empire functioned more intensively and more ex- 
pensively in Calcutta than in the U.P, A sign and a perpetual 
reminder of the might of the Empire was the cry that prisoners 
had to shout out when high officims approached them. “ Sarkar 
Salaam ” was the cry, lengthened out, and it was accompanied 
by certain physical movements of the body. The voices of the 
prisoners shouting out this cry came to me many times a day 
over my yard wall, and especially when the Superintendent 
passed by daily. I could just see over my seven-foot wall the top 
of the huge State umbrella under which the Superintendent 
marched. 

Was this extraordinary cry— salaam — and the move- 



ALIPORE GAOL 


497 

merits that went with it relics of old times, I wondered; or were 
they the invention of some inspired English official? I do not 
know, but I imagine that it was an Ei^lish invention. It has a 
typical Anglo-Indian sound about it. .Fortunately this cry does 
not prevail in the U.P. gaols or probably in any other province 
besides Bengal and Assam. The way this enforced salutation to 
the might of the sarkar is shouted out seemed to me very 
degrading. 

One change for the better I noticed with pleasure in Alipore. 
The food of the ordinary prisoners was far superior to the U.P. 
prison food. In regard to gaol diet the U.P. compares unfavour- 
ably with many provinces. . 

'fne brief winter was soon over, and spring raced by and 
summer began. It grew hotter day by day. I had never been 
fond of the Calcutta climate, and even a few days of it had 
made me stale and flat. In prison conditions were naturally far 
worse, and I did not prosper as the days went by. Lack of space 
for exercise and long lock-up hours in that climate probably 
affected my health a little and I lost weight rapidly. How I 
began to hate all locks and bolts and bars and walls I 

After a tnonth in Alipore I was allowed to take some exercise, 
outside my yard. This was an agreeable change and I could 
walk up and down under the main wall, morning and evening. 
Gradually I got accustomed to Alipore Gaol and the Calcutta 
climate; and even the kitchen, with its smoke and mighty din, 
became a tolerable nuisance. Other matters occupied my mind, 
other worries filled me. News firora outside was not good. 



LX 


DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 

I WAS surprised to iind in Alipore that no daily paper would be 
allowed to me after my conviction. As an under-trial prisoner I 
received the daily Statesman, of Calcutta, but this was stopped 
the day after my trial was over. In the U.P., ever since 193a, a 
daily (chosen by the Government) was permitted to A Class or 
first division prisoners. So also in most other provinces, and I 
was fully under the impression that the same rule was appli- 
cable in Bengal. Instead of the daily, however, I was supplied 
with the weekly Statesman. This was evidently meant for retired 
English officials or business men who had gone back to 
England, and it contained a summary of Indian news likely to 
interest them. No foreign news at all was given and I missed it 
very much, as I used to follow it closely. Fortunately I was 
allowed to have the Manchester Guardian Weekly, and this kept 
me in touch with Europe and international affairs. 

My arrest and trial in February coincided with upheavals 
and bitter conflicts in Europe. There was the ferment in 
France resulting in Fascist riots and the formation of a 
‘ National ’ Government. And, far worse, in Austria Chancellor 
Dolfuss was shooting down workers and putting an end to the 
great edifice of social democracy there. The news of the Aus- 
trian bloodshed depressed me greatly. What an awful and 
bloody place this world was and how barbarous was man when 
he wanted to protect his vested interests I All over Europe and 
America Fasasm seemed to be advancing. When Hitler came 
into power in Germany I had imagined that his regime could 
not possibly last long, as he was offering no solution of Ger- 
many’s economic troubles. So also, as Fascism spread elsewhere, 
I consoled myself that it represented the last ditch of reaction. 
After it must come the breaking of the shacldes. But I began 
to wonder if my wish was not father to my thought. Was it so 
obvious that this Fascist wave would retire so easily or so 
quickly? And even if conditions became intolerable for the 
Fascist dictatorships, would they not rather hurl their countries 
into devastating war rather than give in? What would be the 
result of such a conflict? 

Meanwhile, Fascism of various kinds and shapes spread. 
Spain, that new ‘Republic of Honest Men ’ — los hombres 

498 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 499 

honrados — the very Manchester Guardian of governments, as 
some one called it, had gone far back and deep into reaction. 
All the fine phrases of its honest Liberal leaders bad not kept 
it from sliding down. Everywhere Liberalism showed its utter 
ineffectiveness to face modern conditions. It dung to words and 
phrases, and thought that they could take the place of action. 
When d crisis came it simply faded off like the end of a film 
that is over. 

]^read the leading articles of the Manchester Guardian on the 
Austrian tragedy with deep interest and appreciation. “And 
what sort of Austria emerges fi:om this bloody struggle? An 
Austria ruled with rifles and machine-guns by the most reac- 
tionary clique in Europe.” “But why, if England stands for 
liberty, has its Prime Minister so little to say? We have heard 
his praises of dictatorships : we have heard him say how they 
‘ mdte the soul of a nation live ’ and ‘ bestow a new vision and 
a new energy.’ But a Prime Minister of England should have 
something to say of the tyrannies, in whatever country, which 
kill often the body, but more often, and with a worse death, the 
soul.” 

And why, if the Manchester Guardian stands for liberty, has 
it so little to jsay when liberty is crushed in India? We also 
have known not only bodily suffering, but that far worse ordeal 
of the soul. 

“Austrian democracy has been de.stroyed, although to its 
everlasting glory it went dovra fighting and so created a legend 
that may re-kindle the spirit of European freedom some day in 
years to come.” 

“ The Europe that is unfree has ceased to breathe; there is no 
flow or counterflow of healthy spirits; a gradual suffocation has 
set in, and only some violent convulsion or inner paroxysm 
and a striking out to the right and left can avert the maital 
coma that is approaching. . . . Europe from the Rhine to the 
Urals is one great prison.” 

Moving passages which found an echo in my heart. But I 
wondered: what of India? How can it be that the Manchester 
Guardian or the many lovers of freedom who undoubtedly exist 
in England should be so oblivious to our fate? How can they 
miss seeing here what they condemn with such fervour else- 
where? It was a great English Liberal leader, trained in the 
nineteenth-century tradition, cautious by temperament,, res- 
trained in his language, who said twenty years ago, on the eve 
of the Great War: “Sooner than be a silent witness of the 
tragic triumph of force over law, I would see this country of 



500 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ours blotted out of the page of history.” A brave thought, 
eloquently put, and the gallant youth of England went in their 
millions to vindicate it. But if an Indian ventures to make a 
statement similar to Mr. Asquith’s, what fate is his? 

National psychology is a complicated affair. Most of us 
imagine how fair and impartial we are; it is always the other 
fellow, the other country that is wrong. Somewhere at the back 
of our minds we are convinced that we are not as others are : 
there U a difference which good breeding usually prevents us 
from emphasising. And if we are fortunate enough to be an 
imperial race controlling the destinies of other countries, it is 
difficult not to believe that all is for the best in this best of all 
possible worlds, and those who agitate for change are self- 
seekers or deluded fools, ungrateful for the benefits they have 
received from us. 

The British are. an insular race, and long success and pros- 
perity has made them look down on almost all others. For 
them, as some one has said, “ les ncgres commenccnt a Calais ”. 
But that is too general a statement. Perhaps the British upper- 
class division of the world would be somewhat as follows: (i) 
Britain — a long gap, and then (a) the British Dominions (white 
populations only) and America (Anglo-Saxons only, and not 
dagoes, wops, etc.), (3) Western Europe, (4) Rest of Europe, (5) 
South America (Latin races), a long gap, and then (6) the brown, 
yellow and black races of Asia and Africa, all bunched up more 
or less together. 

How far we of the last of these classes arc from the heights 
where our rulers live I Is it any wonder that their vision grows 
dim when they look towards us, and that we should irritate 
them when we talk of democracy and liberty? These words 
were not coined for our use. Was it not a great Liberal states- 
man, John Morley, who had declared that he could not conceive 
of democratic institutions in India even in the far, dim future? 
Democracy for India was, like Canada’s fur coat, unsuited to her 
climate. And, later on, Britain’s Labour Party, the standard- 
bearers of Socialism, the champions of the under-dog, presented 
us, in the flush of their triumph, with a revival of the Bengal 
Ordinance in 1924, and during their second government our 
fate was even worse. I am quite sure that none of them mean 
us ill, and when they address us in their best pulpit manner — 
‘ Dearly beloved brethren ’ — ^they feel a glow of conscious virtue. 
But, to them, we are not as they are and must be judged by 
other standards. It is diflicult enough for an Englishman and a 
Frenchman to think alike because of linguistic and cultural 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 5OI 

differences; how much vaster must be the difference between an 
Englishman and an Asiatic? 

Recently the House of Lords has been debating the question 
of Indian reform, and many illuminating speeches were de- 
livered by noble lords. Among these was one by Lord Lytton, a 
fbrmer Governor of an Indian Province, who acted as Viceroy 
for a while. He has often been referred to as a liberal and sym- 
pathetic Governor. He is reported to have said^ that “the 
Government of India was far more representative of India as a 
whole than the Congress politicians. The Government of India 
was able to speak in the name of officials, the Army, the Police, 
the Princes, the fighting regiments and both Moslems and 
Hindus, whereas the Congress politicians could not even speak 
on behalf of one of the great Indian communities.” He went 
on to make his meaning quite clear: “Wlien I speak of Indian 
opinion I am thinking of those on whose co-operation I had to 
rely and on whose co-operation the future Governors and Vice- 
roys will have to rely.” 

Two interesting points emerge firom his speech : the India that 
counts means those who help the British; and the British 
Government of India is the most representative and, therefore, 
democratic body in the country. That this argument should be 
advanced seriously shows that English words seem to change 
their meaning when they cross the Suez Canal. The next and 
obvious step in reasoning would be, that autocratic government 
is the most representative and democratic form because the 
King represents everybody. We get back to the divine right of 
kings and " V 6 tat, cVs# moi! ” 

As a matter of fact, even pure autocracy has had a distin- 
guished advocate recently. Sir Malcolm Hailey, that ornament 
of the Indian Civil Service, speaking as Governor of the United 
Provinces at Benares on November 5, 1934, pleaded for auto- 
cracy in the Indian States. The advice was hardly needed, for 
no Indian State is at all likely.fo part with autocracy of its own 
free will. An interesting development has been the attempt to 
preserve this autocracy on the plea that democracy is failing in 
Europe. Sir Mirza Ismail, the Dewan of Mysore, lias expressed 
his "surprise that radical reforms are advocated when parlia- 
.mentary democracy is decaying everywhere.” "I am sure the 
conscience of the State feels that our present constitution is 
quite democratic enough for all practical purposes.'’ * The * con- 
science ’ of Mysore presumably is a metaphysical abstraction for 

* House of Lords, December 17. 1934. 

® Mysore: June ai, 1934. See also note on page 530, post. 



JAVMHARLAL NEHRU 


503 

the Ruler and his Dewan. The democracy that prevails in 
Mysore at present is indistinguishable from autocracy. 

If democracy is not suited to India, it appears to be equally 
unsuitable for Egypt. I have just read a long despatch from 
Cairo in the Statesman ^ (for this daily is supplied to me now in 
my present gaol). We are told that the Premier, Nessim Pasha, 
" has now aroused no little alarm in responsible-minded quarters 
owing to his declaration that he hoped to get the political parties 
to co-operate, especially the Wa£d, and either to have a national 
conference or elections for a constituent assembly, in cither case 
for the elaboration of a new Constitution. This can only mean 
in the end ... a return to the regime of the popular democratic 
government which history shows has always been disastrous for 
Egypt, since in the past it has ever pandered to the worst 
passions of the mob. . . . No one knowing anything of the inner 
Working of Egyptian politics and of the people, doubts for one 
moment that elections will again result in the return of the 
Wafd with a majority. Unless something is done, therefore, to 
prevent this procedure, we shall within a short time be again 
saddled with an ultra-democratic anti-foreign revolutionary 
regime.” 

It is suggested that the elections should be “ run ” by adminis- 
trative pressure “as a counterpoise to the Wafd,” but, un- 
happily, the Premier " has too much the legal mind ” to do any 
such thing. The only other course that remains, we are told, is 
for Whitehall to intervene and to “ let it be known that it will 
not tolerate the return of a regime ” of this kind. 

What steps Whitehall may or may not take, or what will 
happen in Egypt I do not know.* But this argument put for- 
ward by presumably a liberty-loving Englishman does help us 
to understand a little, some of the complexities of the Egyptian 
and Indian situation. As the Statesman points out in a leading 
article : “ The root evil has been that the way of life and atti- 
tude of mind of an ordinary Egyptian voter are inharmonious 
with the sort of way of life and attitude of mind out of whieli 
democracy is developed." This want of harmony is illustrated 
further on : “ In Europe, democracies have often been brought 
down because there were too many parties; in Egypt the diffi- 
culty has been there only being one party, the Ward.” 

In India we are told that our communal divisions come in the 
way of our democratic progress and, therefore, with incontro- 

* December 19, 1934. 

*' There were widespread political riots in Egypt against the 
British occupation in November 1935. 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 503 

vertible logic, those divisions are perpetuated. We are further 
told that we are not united enough. In Egypt there are no com- 
munal divisions and it appears that the most perfect political 
unity prevails. And yet, this very unity becomes an obstacle in 
the way of democracy and freedom! Truly the path of demo- 
cracy is straight and narrow. Democracy for an Eastern country 
seems to mean only one thing : to carry out the behests of the 
imperialist ruling power and not to touch any of its interests. 
Subject to that proviso, democratic freedom can flourish un- 
checked. 



LXI 


DESOLATION 

“ And I yearn to lay my head 

Where the grass is cool and sweet. 

Mother, all the dreams are fled 
From the tired child at thy feet.” 

April came. Rumours reached me in my cell in Alipore of 
happenings outside, rumours that were unpleasant and disturb- 
ing. The Superintendent of the gaol informed me casually one 
day that Mr. Gandhi had withdrawn Civil Disobedience. I 
knew no more. The news was not welcome, and I felt sad at 
this winding-up of something that had meant so much to me 
for many years. And yet I reasoned with myself that the end 
was bound to come. I knew in my heart that some time or other 
Civil Disobedience would have to be wound up, for the time 
being at least. Individuals may hold out almost indefinitely, 
regardless of the consequences, but national organisations do 
not behave in this manner. I had no doubt that Gandhiji had 
interpreted correctly the mind of the country and of the great 
majority of Congressmen, and I tried to reconcile myself to the 
new development, unpleasant as it was. 

I heard also vaguely of the new move to revive the old Swaraj 
Party in order to enter the legislatures. Thar too seemed inevit- 
able, and I had long been of opinion that the Congress could 
not keep aloof from future elections. During the five months 
of my freedom outside prison I had tried to discourage this 
tendency, for I thought it premature and likely to divert atten- 
tion both from direct action and from the development of new 
ideas of social change which were fermenting in the Congress 
ranks. The longer the crisis continued, I thought, the more 
would these ideas spread among our masses and intelligentsia 
and the realities underlying our political and economic situa- 
tion be laid bare. As Lenin has said somewhere: “Any and 
every political crisis is useful bccaysc it brings to the light what 
was hidden, reveals the actual forces involved in politics; it 
exposes lies and deceptive phrases and fictions; it demonstrates 
comprehensively the facts, and forces on the people the under- 
standing of what is the reality.” I had hoped that this process 
would result in making the Congress a clearer-minded and a 

504 



DliSOLATION 


5OJ 

more compact body with a definite goal. Probably some of 
its weaker elements might drop out. That would be no loss. 
And when the time came for the ending of even theoretical 
direct action and a reversion to so-called constitutional and 
legal methods, the advanced and really active wing of the Con- 
gress would utilise even these methods from the larger point 
of view of our final objective. 

That time apparently had come. But to my dismay I found 
that the people who had been the backbone of Civil Dis- 
obedience and efltective work in the Congress were receding into 
the background, and others, who had taken no such part, were 
taking command. 

Some days later the weekly Statesman came to me, and I read 
in it the statement which Gandhiji had issued when withdraw- 
ing Civil Disobedience. I read it with amazement and sinking 
of heart. Again and again I read it, and Civil Disobedience and 
much else vanished from my mind and other doubts and con- 
flicts filled it. “This statement," wrote Gandhiji, “owes its 
inspiration to a personal chat with the inmates and associates 
of the Satyagraha Ashram. . . . More especially is it due to a 
revealing information I got in the course of a conversation 
about a valued companion of long standing who was found 
reluctant to perform the full prison task, preferring his private 
studies to the allotted task. This was undoubtedly contrary 
to the rules of Satyagraha. More than the imperfection of 
the friend whom I love, more tlian ever it brought home to me 
my own imperfections. The fi'iend said he had thought that 
I was aware of his weakness. I was blind. Blindness in a 
leader is unpardonable. I saw at once that I must for the 
time being remain the sole representative of civil resistance in 
action.” 

The imperfection or fault, if such it was, of the ‘ friend ’ was 
a very trivial aflair. I confess that I have often been guilty of it 
and I am wholly unrepentant. But even if it was a serious 
matter, was a vast national movement involving scores of thou- 
sands directly and millions indirectly to be thrown out of gear 
because an individual had erred? This seemed to me a mon- 
strous proposition and an immoral one. I cannot presume to 
speak of what is and what is not Satyagraha, but in my own 
little way I have endeavoured to follow certain standards of 
conduct, and all those standards were shocked and upset by 
this statement of Gandhiji’s. I knew that Gandhiji usumly acts 
on instinct (I prefer to call it that than the ‘inner voice ’ or an 
answer to prayer), and very often that instinct is right. He has 



5o6 jawaharlal nehru 

repeatedly shown what a wonderful knack he has of sensing the 
mass mind and of acting at the psychological moment. The 
reasons which he afterwards adduces to justify his action are 
usually afterthoughts and seldom carry one very far. A leader 
or a man of action in a crisis almost always acts subconsciously 
and then thinks of the reasons for his action. I felt also that 
Gandhiji had acted rightly in suspending civil resistance. But 
the reason he had given seemed to me an insult to intelligence 
and an amazing performance for a leader of a national move- 
ment. He was perfectly entitled to treat his ashram inmates 
in any manner he liked; they had taken all kinds of pledges 
and accepted a certain regime. But the Congress had not done 
so; I had not done so. Why should we he tossed hither and 
thither for, what seemed to me, metaphysical and mystical 
reasons in which I was not interested? Was it conceivable to 
have any political movement on this basis? I had willingly 
accepted the moral aspect of Satyagraha as I understood it 
(within certain limits T admit). That basic aspect appealed 
to me and it seemed to raise politics to a higher and nobler 
level. I was prepared to agree that the end does not justify all 
kinds of means. But this new development or interpretation 
was something much more far-reaching and it held forth some 
possibilities which frightened me. 

The whole statement frightened and oppressed me tremen- 
dously. And then finally the advice he gave to Congressmen 
was that “they must learn the art and beauty of self-denial 
and voluntary poverty. They must engage themselves in 
nation-building activities, the spread of khaddar through per- 
sonal hand-spinning and hand-weaving, the spread of com- 
munal unity of hearts by irreproachable personal conduct 
towards one another in every walk of life, the banishing of 
untouchability in every shape or form in one’s own person, the 
spread of total abstinence from intoxicating drinks and drugs 
by personal contact with individual addicts and generally by 
cultivating personal purity. These arc services which provide 
maintenance on the poor man’s scale. Those for whom the 
poor man’s scale is not feasible should find a place in small 
unorganised industries of national importance which give a 
better wage.” 

This was the political programme that we were to follow. A 
vast distance seemed to separate him from me. With a stab 
of pain I felt that the chords of allegiance that had bound me 
to him for many years had snapped. For long a mental tussle 
had been going on within me. I had not understood or ap- 



DESOLATION 


507 


predated much that Gandhiji had done. His fasts and his con- 
centration on other issues during the continuance of Civil 
Disobedience, when his comrades were in the grip of the 
struggle, his personal and selPcreated entanglements, which led 
him to the extraordinary position that, while out of prison, he 
was yet pledged to himself not to take part in the political 
movement, his new loyalties and pledges which put in the 
shade the old loyalty and pledge and job, undertaken together 
with many colleagues, while yet that job was unfinished, had 
all oppressed me. During my short period out of prison I had 
felt these and other differences more than ever. Gandhiji had 
stated that there were temperamental differences between us. 
They were perhaps more than temperamental, and I realised 
that I held clear and definite views about many matters which 
were opposed to his. And yet in the past I had tried to sub- 
ordinate them, as far as I could, to what I conceived to be the 
larger loyalty — the cause of national freedom for which the 
Congress seemed to be working. I tried to be loyal and faithful 
to my leader and my colleagues, for in my spiritual make-up 
loyalty to a cause and to one’s colleagues holds a high place. 
I fought many a battle within myself when I felt that T was 
being dragged away from the anchor of my spiritual faith. 
Somehow I managed to compromise. Perhaps I did wrong, for 
it can never be right for any one to let go of that anchor. But 
in the conflict of ideals I clung to my loyalty to my colleagues, 
and hoped that the rush of events and the development of our 
struggle might dissolve the difficulties that troubled ire and 
bring my colleagues nearer to my view-point. 

And now? Suddenly I felt very lonely in that cell of Alipore 
Gaol, Life seemed to be a dreary affair, a very wilderness of 
desolation. Of the many hard lessons that I had learnt, the 
hardest and the most painful how faced me; that it is not 
possible in any vital matter to rely on any one. One .must 
journey through life alone; to rely on others is to invite heart- 
break. 

Some of my accumulated irritation turned to religion and 
the religious outlook; What an enemy this was to clearness of 
tliought and fixity of purpose, I thought; for was it not based 
on emotion and passion? Presuming to be spiritual, how far 
removed it was from real spirituality and things of the spirit. 
Thinking in terms of some other world, it had little conception 
of human values and social values and social justice. With its 
preconceived notions it deliberately shut its eyes to reality for 
fear that this might not fit in with them. It based itself on 



5o8 jawaharlal nehru 

truth, and yet so sure was it of having discovered it, and the 
whole of it, that it did not take the trouble to search for it; all 
that concerned it was to tell others of it. The will to truth was 
not the same thing as the will to believe. It talked of peace and 
yet supported systems and organisations that could not exist 
but for violence. It condemned the violence of the sword, but 
what of the violence that comes quietly and often in peaceful 
garb and starves and kills; or worse still, without doing any 
outward physical injury, outrages the mind and crushes the 
spirit and breaks the heart? 

And then I thought of him again who was the cause of this 
commotion within me. What a wonderful man was Gandhiji 
after all, with his amazing and almost irresistible charm and 
subtle power over people. His writings and his sayings conveyed 
little enough impression of the man behind; his personality was 
far bigger than they would lead one to think. And his services 
to India, how vast they had been. He had instilled courage and 
manhood in her people, and discipline and endurance, and the 
power of joyful sacrifice for a cause, and, with all his humility, 
pride. Courage is the one sure foundation of character, he had 
said, without courage there is no" morality, no religion, no love. 
“ One cannot follow truth or love so long as one is subject to 
fear.” With all his horror of violence, he had told us that 
“ cowardice is a thing even more hateful than violence ”. And 
" discipline is the pledge and guarantee that a man means busi- 
ness. There is no deliverance and no hope without sacrifice, 
discipline, and self-control. Mere sacrifice without discipline will 
be unavailing.” Words only and pious phrases perhaps, rather 
platitudinous, but there was power behind the words, and India 
knew that this little man meant business.,.. 

He came to represent India to an amazing degree and to ex- 
press the very spirit of that ancient and tortured land. Almost 
he was India, and his very failings were Indian failings. A slight 
to him was hardly a personal matter, it was an insult to the 
nation; and "Viceroys and others who indulged in these dis- 
dainful gestures little realised what a dangerous crop they were 
sowing, i remember how hurt I was when I first learnt that the 
Pope had refused an interview to Gandhiji when he was retum- 
■'ing from the Round Table Conference in December 1931. That 
remsal seemed to me an affront to India, and there can be no 
doubt that the refusal was intentional, though the afifont was 
probably not thought of. The Catholic Church does not ap- 
prove of saints or mahatmas outside its fold, and because some 
Protestant churchmen had called Gandhiji a great man of 



UbaULAl'luN 


509 

religion and a real- Christian, it became all the more necessary 
for Rome to dissociate itself from this heresy. 

Just about that time in Aliporc Gaol, in April 1934, I read 
Bernard Shaw’s new plays, and the preface to On the Rocks, 
with its debate between Christ and Pilate, fascinated me. It 
seemed to have a modern significance, when another empire 
faced another man of religion. “I say to you,” Jesus says to 
Pilate in this preface, " cast out fear. Speak no more vain things 
to me about the greatness of Rome. The greatness of Rome, 
as you call it, is nothing but fear; fear of the past and fear 
of the future, fear of the poor, fear of the rich, fear of the 
High Priests, fear of the Jews and Greeks, who are learned, 
fear of the Gauls and Goths and Hiins, who are barbarians, 
fear of the Carthage you destroyed to save you from fear of it, 
and now fear worse than ever, fear of Imperial Caesar, the idol 
you have yourself created, and fear of me, the penniless vag- 
rant, buffeted and mocked, fear of everything except the rule 
of God; faith in nothing but blood and iron and gold. You, 
standing for Rome, are the universal coward; I, standing for the 
Kingdom of God, have braved everything, lost everything, and 
won an eternal crown.” 

But Gandhiji’s greatness or his services to India or the tre- 
mendous debt I personally owed to him were not in question. 
In spite of all that, he might be hopelessly in the wrong in 
many matters. What, after all, was he aiming at? In spite of 
the closest association with him for many years I am not clear 
in my own mind about his objective. I doubt if he is clear 
himself. One step enough for me, he says, and he does not 
try to peep into the future or to have a clearly conceived end 
before him. Look after the means and the end will take care 
of itself, he is never tired of repeating. Be good in your per- 
sonal individual lives and all else will follow. That is not a 
political or scientific attitude, nor is it perhaps even an ethical 
attitude. It is narrowly moralist, and it begs the question ; What 
is goodness? Is it merely an individual affair or a social afl^ir? 
Gandhiji lays all sfress on character and attaches little impor- 
tance to intellectual traming and deveropiricnt. Intellect without 
character is likely to be dangerous, but what is character with- 
out intellect? How, indeed, docs character develop? Gandhiji 
has been compared to the medieval Christain saints, and much 
that he says seems to fit in with this. It does not fit in at all 
with modem psychological experience and method. 

But however this may be, vagueness in an objective seems 
to me deplorable. Action to be effective must be directed tq 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


5JO 

clearly conceived ends. Life is not all logic, and those ends will 
have to be varied from time to time to fit in with it, but soma 
end must always be clearly envisaged. 

I imagine that Gandhiji is not so vague about the objective 
as he sometimes appears to be. He is passionately desirous of 
going in a certain direction, but this is wholly at variance with 
modern ideas and conditions, and he has so far been unable to, 
fit the two, or to chalk out all the intermediate steps leading 
to his goal. Hence, the appearance of vagueness and avoidance 
of clarity. But his general inclination has been clear enough 
for a quarter of a century, ever since he started formulating 
his philosophy in South Africa. I do not know if those early 
writings still represent his views. I doubt if they do so in their 
entirety, but they do help us to understand the background of 
his thought. 

“ India’s salvation consists,” he wrote in 1909. " in unlearning 
what she has learnt during the last fifty years. The railways, 
telegraphs, hospitals, lawyers, doctors, and such-like have all to 
go; and the so-called upper classes have to learn consciously, 
religiously, and deliberately the simple peasant life, knowing 
it to be a life giving true happiness.” And again : " Every time 
I get into a railway car or use a motor-bus I know that I am 
doing violence to my sense of what is right “ to attempt to 
reform the W'orld by means of highly artificial and speedy 
locomotion is to attempt the impossible.” 

All this seems to me utterly wrong and harmful doctrine, and 
impossible of achievement. Behind it lies Gandhiji’s love and 
praise of poverty and sufl'ering and the ascetic life. For him 
progress and civilisation consist not in the multiplication of 
wants, of higher standards of living, “but in the deliberate 
and voluntary restriction of wants, which promotes real happi- 
ness and cqntentment, and increases the capacity for service.” 
If these premises are once accepted it becomes easy to follow 
the rest of Gandhiji’s thought and to have a better under- 
standing of his activities. But most of us do not accept those 
premises and yet we complain later on when we find that his 
activities are not to our liking. 

Personally I dislike the praise of poverty and suffering. I do 
not think they are at all d«irable, and they ought to be 
abolished. Nor do I appreciate the ascetic life as a social ideal, 
though it may suit individuals. I understand and appreciate 
simplicity, equality, self-control, but not the mortification of 
the flesh. Just as an athlete requires to train his body, I 
believe that the mind and h^hifo h^ve aho rn be trained and 



lJ^!,t>OLAilO^ 


5 ” 

brought under control. It would be absurd to expect that a 
person who is given to too much self-indulgence can endure 
much suffering or show unusual self-control or behave like a 
hero when the crisis comes. To be in good moral condition 
requires at least as much training as to be in good physical 
condition. But that certainly does not mean asceticism or self- 
mortification. 

Nor do I appreciate in the least the idealisation of the ‘ simple 
peasant life’. I have almost a horror of it, and instead of 
submitting to it myself I want to drag out even the peasantry 
from it, not to urbanisation, but to the spread of urban cultural 
facilities to rural areas. Far from this life giving me true happi- 
ness, it would be almost as bad as imprisonment for me. What 
is there in the " Man with the Hoe ” to idealise over? Crushed 
and exploited for innumerable generations he is only little 
removed from the animals who keep him company. 

“ Who made him dead to rapture and despair, 

A thing that grieves not and that never hopes. 

Stolid and stunned, a brother to the ox? ” 

This desire to get away from the mind of man to primitive 
conditions where mind docs not count, seems to me quite incom- 
prehensible. The very thing that is the glory and triumph of 
man is decried and discouraged, and a physical environment 
which will oppress the mind and prevent its growth is con- 
sidered desirable. Present-day civilisation is full of evils, but it 
is also full of good; and it has the capacity in it to rid mself 
of those evils. To destroy it root and branch is to remove that 
capacity from it and revert to a dull, sunless and miserable ex- 
istence. But even if that were desirable it is an impossible un- 
dertaking. We cannot stop the river of change or cut ourselves 
adrift from it, and psychologically we who have eaten of the 
apple of Eden cannot forget that taste and go back to primi- 
tiveness. 

It is difficult to argue this, for the two standpoints are utterly 
different. Gandhiji is always thinking in terms of personal 
salvation and of sin, while most of us have society’s welfare 
uppermost in our minds. I find it difficult to grasp the idea of 
sin, and perhaps it is because of this that I cannot appreciate 
Gandhijrs general outlook. He is not out to change, society or 
the social structure, he devotes himself to the eradication of 
sin from individuals. “The follower of swadeshi,” he has 
written, " never takes upon himself the vain task of trying to 
reform the world, for he believes that the World is moved and 



£12 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

always will be moved according to the rules set by God.’’ And 
yet he is aggressive enough in his attempts to reform the world; 
but the reform he aims at is individual reform, the conquest 
over the senses and the desire to indulge them, which is sin. 
Probably he will agree with the definition of liberty which an 
able Roman Cathdic writer on Fascism has given: “Liberty 
is no more than freedom from the bondage of sin.” How 
almost identical this is with the words of the Bishop of London 
written, two hundred years ago: “The Freedom which Chris- 
tianity gives is Freedom from the Bondage of sin and Satan 
and mom the Dominion of Men’s Lusts and Passions and 
inordinate Desires.” ^ 

If this standpoint is once appreciated then one begins to 
understand a little Gandhiji's attitude to sex, extraordinary as 
that seems to the average person to-day. For him “ any union is 
a crime when the desire for progeny is absent ”, and “ the adop- 
tion of artificial methods must result in imbecility and nervous 
prostration.” “ It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the 
consequences of one’s acts. ... It is bad for him to indulge 
his appetite and then escape the consequences by taking tonics 
or other medicines. It is still worse for a person to indulge his 
animal passions and escape the consequences of his acts.” 

Personally I find this altitude unnatural and shocking, and 
if he is right, then I am a criminal on the verge of imbecility 
and nervous prostration. The Roman Catholics have also 
vigorously opposed birth-control, but they have not carried their 
argument to the logical limit as Gandhiji has done. They have 
temporised and compromised with what they considered to be 
human nature.^ But Gandhiji has gone to the extreme limit of 
his argument and does not recognise the validity or necessity 
of the sexual act at any time except for the sake of children; 
he refuses to recognise any natural sex attraction between man 
and woman. "But I am told,” he says, "that this is an im- 
possible ideal, that I do not take account of the natural attrac- 
tion between man and woman. I refuse to believe that the 
sensual affinity, referred to here, can be at all regarded as 

^ Tins letter is quoted on page 378, ante. 

* Pope Pius XI in his Encyclical on ChrisUan Marriage, issued on 
December 31, 1931, says: “ Nor must married people be considered 
to act against the order of nature if they make use of their rights 
according to sound and natural reason, even though no new life 
can thence arise on account of circumstance of time or the existence 
of some defect,” The “ circumstance of time ” apparently refers to 
the so-called “ safe period ” when conception is unlikely. 



DESOLATION 


SI3 

natural; in that case the deluge would soon be over us. The 
natural affinity between man and woman is the attraction 
between brother and sister, mother and son, or father and 
daughter. It is this natural attraction that sustains the world.” 
And more emphatically stiU : “ No, I must declare with all the 
power I can command that sensual attraction, even between 
husband and wife, is unnatural.” 

In these days of the Oedipus complex and Freud and the 
spread of psychoanalytical ideas this emphatic statement of 
belief sounds strange and distant. One can accept it as an act 
of faith or reject it. There is no half-way house, for -it- is -a - 
question of faith, not of reason. For my part I think Gandhiji 
is absolutely wrong in this matter. His advice may fit in with 
some cases, but as a general policy it can only lead to frustra- 
tion, inhibition, neurosis, and all manner of physical and 
nervous ills. Sexual restraint is certainly desirable, but I doubt 
if Gandhiji’s doctrine is likely to result in this to any wide- 
spread extent. It is too extreme, and most people decide that 
it is beyond their capacity and go their usual ways, or there 
is friction between husband and wife. Evidently Gandhiji 
thinks that birth-control methods necessarily mean inordinate 
indulgence in the sex act, and that if the sexual affinity between 
man and woman is admitted, every man will run after every 
woman, and vice versa. Neither inference is justified, and I do 
not know why he is so obsessed by this problem of sex, im- 
portant as it is. For him it is a ‘ soot or whitewash ’ question, 
there are no intermediate shades. At either end he takes up an 
extreme position which seems to me most abnormal and un- 
natural. Perhaps this is a reaction from the deluge of literature 
on sexology that is descending on us in these days. I presume 
I am a normal individual and sex has played its part in my life, 
but it has not obsessed me or diverted me firom my other 
activities. It has been a subordinate part. 

Essentially, his attitude is that of the ascetic who has turned 
his back to the world and its ways, who denies life and con- 
siders it evil. For an ascetic that is natural, but it seems far, 
fetched to apply it to men and women of the world who 
accept life and try to make the most of it. And in avoiding one 
evil he puts up with many other and graver evils. 

I have drifted to other topics, but in those distressful days in 
AUpore Gaol all these ideas crowded in my mind, not in 
logical order or sequence, but in a wild jumble which confused 
me and oppressed me. Above all there was the feeling of 
loneliness and desolation, heightened by the stifling atmosjrtiere 



514 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of the gaol and my lonely little cell. If I had been outside the 
shock would have been more momentary, and I would have 
adjusted myself sooner to new conditions, and found relief in 
expression and action. Inside the prison there was no such 
relief, and I spent some miserable days. Fortunately for myself 
I am resilient and recover soon from attacks of pessimism. I 
began to grow out of my depression, and then I had an inter- 
view in gaol with Kamala. That cheered me up tremendously, 
and my feeling of isolation left me. Whatever happened, I felt, 
we had one another. 



Lxir 


PARADOXES 

People who do not know Gandhiji personally and have only 
read his writings are apt to think that he is a priestly type, 
extremely puritanical, long-feced, Calvinistic, and a kill-joy, 
something like the “ priests in black gowns walking their 
rounds.” But his writings do him an injustice ; he is far greater 
than what he writes, and it is not quite fair to quote what he 
has written and criticise it. He is the very opposite of the 
Calvinistic priestly type. His smile is delightful, his laughter 
infectious, and he radiates light-hcartedness. There is some- 
thing childlike about him which is full of charm. When he 
enters a room he brings a breath of fresh air with him which 
lightens the atmosphere. 

He is an extraordinary paradox. 1 suppose all outstanding 
men are so to some extent. For years I have puzzled over this 
problem : why with all his love and solicitude for the underdog 
he yet supports a system which inevitably produces it and 
crushes it; why with all his passion for non-violence he is in 
fayour of a political ^nd social stnlcture which is wholly, based 
on violence and coercion? Perhaps it is not correct to say that 
he IS in favour of such a system; he is more or less of * a philo- 
sophical anarchist. But as the ideal anarchist state is too far 
off stiH and cannot easily be conceived, he accepts the present 
order. It is not I think a question of means, that he objects, as 
he does, to the use of violence in bringing about a change. Quite 
apart from the methods to be adopted for changing the existing 
order, an ideal objective can be envisaged, something that is 
possible of achievement in the not distant future. 

Sometimes he calls himself a socialist, but he uses the word 
in a sense peculiar to himself which has little or nothing to do 
with the economic framework of society which usually goes 
by the name of socialism. Following his lead a number of 
prominent Congressmen have taken to the use of that word, 
meaning thereby a kind of muddled humanitarianism. They err 
in distinguished company in the use of this vague political ter- 
minology, for they are but following the example of the Prime 
Minister of the British National Government.* I know that 

* Mr., Ramsay MacDonald in the course of his message to the 
Federation of Conservative and Unionist Associations at Edinburgh 



5i6 jawaharlal nehru 

Gandhiji is not ignorant of the subject, for he has read many 
books on economics and socialisni and even Marxism, and has 
discussed it with others. But I am becoming more and more 
convinced that in vital matters the mind by itself does not 
carry us far. “ If your heart does not want to,” said William 
James, “your head will assuredly never make you believe.” 
The emotions govern the general outlook and control the mind. 
Our conversations, whether they are religious, political or 
economic, arc really based on emotion or instinct. As Schopen- 
hauer has said : “ Man can do what he wills, but he cannot will 
what he will will.” 

Gandhiji underwent a tremendous conversion during his early 
days in South Africa, and this shook him up greatly and altered 
his whole outlook on life. Since then he has had a fixed basis 
for all his ideas, and his mind is hardly an open mind. He 
listens with the greatest patience and attention to people who 
make new suggestions to him, but behind all his courteous 
interest one has the impression that one is addressing a closed 
door. He is so firmly anchored to some ideas that everything 
else seems unimportant. To insist on other and secondary 
matters would be a distraction and a distortion of the larger 
scheme. To hold on to that anchor would necessarily result in 
^proper adjustment of these other matters. If the means are 
•'ri^t, the end is bound to be right. 

^That, I think, is the main background of his thought. He 
suspects also socialism, and more particularly Marxism, because 
of their association with violence. The very words ‘ class war ’ 
breathe conflict and violence and arc thus repugnant to him. 
He has also no desire to raise the standards of the masses 
beyond a certain very modest competence, for higlier standards 
and leisure may lead 'to selfiindulgehce and sin. It is bad 
enough that the handful of the well-to-do are self-indulgent, it 
would be much worse if their, numbers were added , to. ‘ Some 
such inference can be drawn from a letter he wrote in 1926. 
This was in answer to a letter that came to him from England 
during the great coal lock-out or strike. His correspondent was 
advancing the argument that the miners will be beaten in the 
struggle because there are too many of them and thdy should 
therefore use contraceptives and limit their numbers. In the 
course of his reply Gandhiji said ; “ Lastly, if the mine-owners 

in January 1935 said: ‘"ITie difficulties of the times make integra- 
tion and concentration essential for every people. This is the true 
Socialism, as it is also the true NationaUsm — and, for that matter, 
the true Tndividti-li'rn " 




PARADOXES 


517 

are in the wrong and still win, they will do so not because the 
miners overbreed, but because the miners have not learnt the 
lesson of restraint all along the line. If the miners had no 
children, they would have no incentive for any betterment and 
no provable cause for a rise in wages. Need they drink, gamble, 
smoke? Will it be any answer to say that mine-owners do 
all these things and yet have the upper hand? If the miners 
do not claim to be better than the capitalist, what right have 
they to ask for the world’s sympathy? Is it to multiply capi- 
talists and strengthen capitalism? We are called upon to pay 
homage to democracy under a.promise of a better world when 
it reigns supreme. Let us not reproduce on a vast scale the 
evils we choose to ascribe to capitalist and capitalism.” ‘ 

As I read this, the starved and pinched faces of the English 
miners and their wives and children came before me, as I had 
seen them in that summer of 1926, struggling helplessly and 
pitifully against the monstrous system that crushed them. 
Gandhiji’s facts are not quite correct, for the miners were not 
asking for a rise in wages; they were fighting against a reduc- 
tion and had been locked out. But this need not concern us 
now. Nor need the question of the use of contraceptives by 
miners concern us, although it was a somewhat remarkable 
suggestion for the solution of industrial conflicts. I have 
quoted from Gandhiji's reply to help in the understanding of 
his outlook on labour matters and the usual demand for a rise 
in the workers’ standard of living. That outlook is as far 
removed from the socialistic, or for the matter of that the 
capitalistic, as anything can Iw. To say that science and indus- 
trial technique to-day can demonstrably feed, clothe and house 
everybody and raise their standards of living very greatly, if 
vested interests did not intervene, does not interest him much, 
for he is not keen on those results, beyond a certain limit. The 
promise of socialism therefore holds no attraction for him, and 
capitalism is only partly tolerable because it circumscribes the 
evil. He dislikes both, but puts up with the latter for the pre- 
sent as a lesser evil and as something which exists and of which 
he has to take cognizance. 

I may be wrong perhaps in imputing these ideas to him, but 
I do feel that he tends to diink in this manner, and the para- 
doxes and confusions in his utterances that trouble us are really 
due to entirely different premises from which he starts. He does 
not want people to make an ideal of over-increasing comfort 

* This letter is quoted in Self-Restraint vs. Self-Indulgence, by 
M riandbi 



Jl8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and leisure, but to think of the moral life, give up their bad 
habits, to indulge themselves less and less, and thus to develop 
themselves individually and spiritually. And those who wish to 
serve the masses have not so much to raise them materially as 
to go down themselves to their level and mix with them on 
equal terms. In so doing inevitably they will help in raising 
them somewhat. That, according to him, is true democracy. 
“Many have despaired of resisting me,” he writes in a state- 
ment he issued on 17th September, 1934. “ This is a humiliating 
revelation to me, a born democrat. I make that claim, if com- 

S dete identification with the poorest of mankind, longing to 
ive no better than they, and a corresponding conscious elfort 
to approach that level to the best of one’s ability, can entitle 
one to make it.” 

With this argument and outlook probably no modern demo- 
crat, capitalist, or socialist, will agree, except in so far as it is 
indecent and improper to cut ourselves off from the masses 
and flaunt our luxury and far higher standards in the faces of 
the vast majority of those who lack the barest necessities. But 
a man with the old religious outlook may find some agreement, 
for both are emotionally tied up with tne past and are always 
thinking in terms of that past. They think more of what has 
been that of what is or what is going to be. There is all the 
difference in the world between the psychological urge to the 
past and to the future. In the old world it was difficult to 
think of raising the general material level of the masses. The 
poor were always with us. The handful of rich men were then 
an essential part of the social febric, they were necessary to the 
productive system. And so the moralist, the reformer, and the 
sensitive man, accepted them, but at the same time tried to 
impress them with their obligations to their needy brethren. 
They were to be the trustees of the poor. They were to be 
charitable. And charity became one of the major virtues 
ordained by religion. Gandhiji is always laying stress on this 
idea of trusteeship of the feudal prince, of the big landlord, of 
the capitalist. He follows a long succession of men of religion. 
The Fope has declared that ‘^the rich must consider them- 
selves the servants of the Almighty as well as the guardians 
and the distributors of his wealth, to whom Jesus Christ him- 
self entrusted the fate of the poor.” Popular Hinduism and 
Islam repeat this idea and are al'tmys camng upon the rich to 
be charitable, and they respond by building temples or mosques 
or dharamshalas, or giving, out of their abundance, coppers or 
silver to the poor and feeling very virtuous in .consequence. 



PARADOXES 


5*9 

A striking passage illustrating this old-world religious attitude 
occurs in the famous Encyclical Rerum Novarum of Pope Leo 
XIII issued in May 1891. Continuing his argument dealing 
with the new industrial conditions, he says : 

" To suffer and to endure, therefore, is the lot of humanity: 
let men try as they may, no strength and no artifice will ever 
succeed in banishing from human life the ills and troubles 
which beset it. If any there are who pretend differently — who 
hold out to a hard-pressed people freedom from pain and 
trouble, undisturbed repose and constant enjoyment— they cheat 
the people and impose upon them, and their lying promises 
will only make the evil worse than before. There is nothing 
more useful than to look at the world as it really is — ^and at 
the same time look elsewhere for a remedy to its troubles.” 

Further on we are told where this ' elsewhere ’ is : 

“The things of the earth cannot be understood or valued 
rightly without taking into consideration the life to come, the 
life that will last for ever. . . . The great truth which we learn 
firom Nature herself is also the grand Christian dogma on 
which religion rests as on its base— that when we have done 
with this present life then we shall really begin fo live. God has 
not created us for the perishable and transitory things of the 
earth, but for things heavenly^ and everlasting; He has given us 
the world as a place of exile, and not as our true country. 
Money and the other things which men call good and desirable 
— ^we may have them in abtmdance or we may want them alto- 
gether; as far as eternal happiness is concerned, it is no 
matter. ...” 

This religious attitude is bound up with the world of long 
ago when me only possible escape fi'om present misery was in 
the hope of a world to come. But though conditions changed 
and raised the human level in material prosperity beyond the 
wildest dreams of the past, the stranglehold of that past, con- 
tinued, the stress nhw being laid on certain vague, unmeasur- 
able spiritual values. The ^tholics look back to the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries— the ve^ period which is called the 
'Dark Age' by others — as the Golden Age of Christianity, 
when saints flourished, and Christian rulers sallied forth to 
fight in the Crusades, and Gothic cathedrals grew up. That 
vras the age, according to them “ of true Christian democracy 
which was then realised under the control of the medieval 
^Ids, more fully than it has ever been before or since.” 
Muslims look back with longing to the “ democracy of Islam ” 
under the early Khalifa, and to their amazing career of viaory. 



520 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Hindus think likewise of the Vedic and Epic Periods, and 
dream of a Rama Raj. And yet all history tells us that the 
great masses of the people lived in utter misery in those past 
days, lacking food and the barest necessaries of life, A handful 
of people at the top may have indulged in the spiritual life, 
having leisure and means to do so, but for the others, it is 
difficult to imagine them doing anything but struggling for 
bare sustenance. To a person who is starving, cultural and 
spiritual progress is highly unlikely; his thoughts will be con- 
centrated on food and how to get it. 

The industrial age has brought many evils that loom large 
before us; but tye are apt to forget that, taking the world as a 
whole, and especially the parts that are most indu.strialised, it 
has laid down a basis of material well-being which makes cul- 
tural and spiritual progress fiir easier for large numbers. This 
is not all evident in India or other colonial countries as we have 
not profited by industrialism. We have only been exploited by 
it and in many respects made worse, even materially, and more 
so culturally and spiritually. The fault is not of industrialism 
ybut of foreign domination. The so-called Westernisation in 
India has actually, for the time being, strengthened feudalism, 
and instead of solving any of our problems has simply intensi- 
fied them. 

That has been our misfortune, and we must not allow it to 
colour our vision of the world to-day. For under present con- 
ditions the rich man is no longer a necessary or a desirable part 
of the productive system or of society as a whole. He is re- 
dundant and he is always coming in the way. And the old 
business of the priest to ask the rich to be charitable and the 
poor to be resigned, grateful for their lot, thrifty and well- 
behaved, has lost its meaning. Human resources have grown 
tremendously and can face and solve the world’s problems. 
Many of the rich have become definitely parasitical and the 
existence of a parasite class is not only a hindrance but an 
enormous waste of these resources. That class and the system 
that breeds them actually prevent work and production and 
encourage the worklcss at either end of the scale, both those 
who live on other people’s labour and those who have no work 
to do and famish. Gandhiji himself wrote some time ago: 
" To a people famishing and idle, the only acceptable form in 
which God dare appear is work and promise of food as wages. 
God created man to work for his food, and said that those who 

+e without work Were thieves." 

To try to understand the complex problems of the modern 



PARADOXES 


531 

world by an application of ancient methods and &rmulae when 
these problems did not exist, to use out-of-date phrases in regard 
to them, is to produce confiision and to invite failure. The 
very idea of private property, which seems to some people one 
of the fundamental notions of the world, has been an ever- 
changing one. Slaves were property at one time, and so were 
women and children, the seigneur’s right to the bride’s first 
night, roads, temples, ferries, bridges, public utilities, air and 
land. Animals are still property, though legislation has in many 
countries limited the rights of ownership. During war-time 
there is a continuous infringement of property rights. Property 
to-day is becoming more and more intangible, the possession of 
shares, a certain amount of credit, etc. As the conception of 
property changes, the State interferes more and more, public 
opinion demands, and the law enforces, a limitation of the 
anarchic rights of property-owners. All manner of heavy 
taxes, which are in the nature of confiscation, swallow up indi- 
vidual property rights for the public good. The public good 
becomes the basis of public policy, and a man may not act 
contrary to this public good even to protect his property rights. 
After all, the vast majority of people had no property rights in 
the past, thjcy were themselves property owned by others. Even 
to-day a very small number have such rights. We hear a great 
deal of vested interests. To-day a new vested interest has come 
to be recognised, that of everj man and woman, to live and 
labour and enjoy the fruits of labour. . Because of these 
changing conceptions property and capital do not vanish, they 
are diffiised, and the power over others, which a concentration 
of them gave to a few, is taken back by society as a whole. 

Gandhiji wants to improve the individual internally, morally 
and spiritually, and thereby to change the external environ- 
ment; He wants people to pve up bad habits and indulgences 
and to become pure. He lays stress on sexual abstinence, on the 
giving up of drink, smoking, etc. Opinions may differ about 
the relative wickedness of these indulgences, but can there be 
any doubt that even from the individual point of view, and 
much more so from the social, these personal failings are less 
harmful than covetousness, selfishness, acquisitiveness, the fierce 
conflicts of individuals for personal gain, the ruthless struggles 
of groups and classes, the inhuman suppression and exploita: 
tion of one group by another, the terrible wars between 
nations? Of course he detests all this violence and degrading 
conflict. But are they not inherent in the acquisitive society of 
to-day with its law that the strong must prey on the weak, and 



533 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

its motto, that, as of old, “ they shall take who have the power 
and they shall keep who can ”? The profit motive to-day inevit- 
ably leads to conflict. The whole system protects and gives 
every scope to man’s predatory instincts; it encourages some 
finer instincts no doubt, but much more so the baser instincts 
of man. Success means the knocking down of others and 
mounting on their vanquished selves. If these motives and 
ambitions are encouraged by society and attract the best of our 
people, does Gandhi ji think that he can achieve his ideal — the 
moral man — in this environment? He wants to develop the 
spirit of service; he will succeed in the case of some individuals, 
but so long as society puts forward as exemplars the victors of 
an acquisitive society and the chief urge as the personal profit 
motive, the vast majority will follow this course. 

But the problem is no longer merely a moral or an ethical 
one. It is a practical and urgent problem of to-day, for the 
world is in a hopeless muddle, and some way out must be found. 
We cannot wait, Micawber-lUce, for something to turn up. Nor 
can we live by negation alone criticising the evil aspects of 
capitalism, socialism, communism, etc., and hoping vaguely for 
the golden mean, which will produce a happy compromise com- 
bining the best features of all systems, old and new. The 
malady has to be diagnosed and the cure suggested and worked 
for. It is quite certain that we cannot stand where we are, 
nationally and internationally; we may try to go back or we 
may push forward. Probably there is no choice in the matter, 
for going back seems inconceivable. 

And yet many of Gandhiji’s activities might lead one to 
think that he wants to go bade to the narrowest autarchy, not 
only a self-sufficient nation, but almost a self-suffident village. 
In primitive communities the village was more or less self- 
sufficient and fed and clothed itself and otherwise provided for 
its needs. Of necessity that means an extremdy low standard 
of living. I do not think Gandhiji is permanently aiming at 
this, for it is an impossible objective. The huge populations of 
to-day would not be able even to subsist in some countries, thw 
would not tolerate this reversion to scardty and starvation. It 
is possible, I think, that in an agricultural country like India, so 
very low is our present standard, that there might be a slight 
improvement for the masses wifh the development of village 
industries. But we are tied up, as every country is tied up, with 
the rest of the world, and it seems to me quite impossible for 
us to cut adrift. We must think, therefore, in terms of the 
world, and in these terms a narrow autardxy is out of the 



PAKAUOaJiIS 


5*3 

question. Personally I consider it undesirable from every point 
of view. 

Inevitably we are led to the only possible solution—the estab- 
lishment of a soeialigt order, first within national boundaries, and 
eventually in the world as a whole, with a controlled production 
and distribution of wealth for the public good. How this is to 
be brought about is another matter, but it is clear that the 
good of a nation or of mankind must not be held up because 
some perale who profit by the existing order object to the 
change. If political or social institutions stand in the way of 
such a change, they have to be removed. To compromise with 
them at the cost of that desirable and practical ideal would be 
a gross betrayal. Such a change may partly be forced or expe- 
dited by world conditions, but it can hardly take place without 
the willing consent or acquiescence of the great majority of the 
people concerned. They have therefore to be converted and 
won over to it. Conspiratorial violence of a small group will 
not help. Naturally' efforts must be made to win over even 
those who profit by the existing system, but it is highly unlikely 
that any large percentage of flrem will be converted. 

The khadi movement, hand-spinning and hand-weaving, 
which is Gandhiji’s special favourite, is an intensification of 
individualism in production, and is thus a throw-back to the 

{ >re-industrial age. As a solution of any vital present-day prob- 
^ it cannot he taken seriously, and it produces a mentality 
which may become an obstacle to growth in the right direction. 
Nevertheless as a temporary measure I am convinced that it has 
served a useful purpose, and it is likely to be helpful for some 
time to come, so long as the State itself does not undertake the 
rightful solution of agrarian and industrial problems on a 
coimtry-wide scale. There is tremendous unrecorded unemploy- 
ment in India and even greater partial unemployment in rural 
areas. No attempt has been made by the State to combat this 
unemployment, or help in any way the unemployed. Econo- 
niically khadi has been of some little help to these wholly and 
partially imemployed, and because this improvement has come 
from their own efforts, it has raised their self-respect and given 
them some feeling of confidence. The most marked result has 
indeed been a psychological one. Khadi tried with some success 
to bridge the gap betwera the city and the village. It brought 
nearer to each other the middleclass intelligentsia and ^e 
peasantry. Clothing has a marked psychological effect on &e 
wearer as well as the beholder, and the adoption of the simple 
white khadi dress by the middle-classes resulted in a growth of 



5^4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

simplicity, a lessening of vulgarity and ostentation, and a feel- 
ing of unity with the masses. Tlie lower middle classes no 
longer tried to ape the richer classes in the matter of clothes or 
feel humiliated in their cheaper attire. Indeed they felt not 
only dignified but a little superior to those who still Haunted 
silks and satins. Even the poorest felt something of this dig- 
nity and self-respect. It was difficult in a large khadi-clad 
gathering to distinguish between the rich and the poor, and 
a spirit of camaraderie grew up. Khadi undoubtedly helped 
the Congress to reach the masses. It became the uniform of 
national freedom. 

Khadi also became a check on the ever-present tendency of 
the mill-owners to raise the prices of their stuffs. These mill- 
owners in India were only kept in check in the past by foreign 
competition, especially that of Lancashire. Whenever this com- 
petition ceased, as during the World War, cloth prices soared 
up in India to extraordinary heights and vast sums were made 
by the Indian mills. The swadeshi and foreign-cloth boycott 
movements later on also helped these mills greatly, but the 
presence of khadi made a difference and prices could not go 
up as high as they might otherwise have done. Indeed the 
mills exploited the kham sentiment of the people (and so did 
Japan) by manufacturing coarse cloths which were almost indis- 
tinguishable from the hand-spun and hand-woven article. In 
the event of another emergency arising, like a war, resulting in 
a stoppage of foreign cloth, it is unlikely now that the Inman 
mill-owners will he able to exploit the consumers to the extent 
they did from 1914 onwards. The khadi movement will prevent 
that, and the khadi organisation has the capacity in it to spread 
out at short notice. 

In spite of all these present-day advantages of the khadi 
movement in India it seems to me after all a transitional affair. 
It may continue even later on as an auxiliary movement easing 
the change-over to a higher economy. Btit .the main drive m 
future will have to be a complete overhauling of the agrarian 
system and the growth of industry. No tinkering wUh the 
land, and a multitucifi of commissions costing lakhs of rupees 
and suggesting trivial changes in the superstructure, will do the 
slightest good. The land system which we have is collapsing 
before our eyes, and it is a hindrance to production, distribution 
■ and any rational and large-scale operations. Only a radical 
change in it, putting an end to the little holdings and intro- 
ducing organised collective and co-operative enterprises, and 
thus increasing the yield greatly with much less effort, will meet 



PARADOXES 


525 

modem conditions. The land will not and cannot absorb all 
our people, and large-scale operations will (as Gandhlji fears) 
lessen the workers required on the land. The others must turn, 
partly it may be, to small-scale industry, but in the main to 
large-scale socialised industries and social services. 

Khadi has certainly brought some relief in many areas, but 
this very success that it has attained has an element of danger. 
It means that it is propping up a decaying land system and 
delaying, to that extent, the change-over to a better system. 
The effect is not substantial enough to make a marked 
difference, but the tendency is there. For the tenant or the 
small peasant proprietor, his share of the produce of the land 
is no longer enough to keep him going even on the very low 
level he has reached. He has to find extraneous aids to his 
meagre income or, as he does usually, get more into debt, in 
order to pay his rent or revenue. The additional income thus 
helps the landlord or the State to realise their share which 
otherwise they might be unable to do. In the event of the 
additional income being substantial enough it is likely eventu- 
ally the rent will rise and catch up to it. Under the present 
system most of the additional labour of the tenant and his 
attempts to be thrifty will ultimately benefit the landlord. As 
far as I can remember, Henry George in his Progress and 
Poverty has dealt with this point, giving instances, especially of 
Ireland. 

Gandhiji’s attempt to revive village industries is an extension 
of his khadi programme. It will do immediate good, part of it 
more or less permanent, most of it temporary. It will help the 
villager in his present distress and revive certain artistic and 
cultural values which were in danger of dying. But in so far 
as it is a revolt against machinery and industrialism it will 
not succeed. In a recent article on Village Industries in the 
Harijan Gandhi ji writes: "Mechanisation is good when hands 
are too few for the work intended to be accomplished. It is an 
evil when there are more hands than required for the work, as 
is the case of India. . . . The problem with us is not how to 
find leisure for the teeming millions inhabiting our villages. 
The problem is how to utilise their idle hours, which are equal 
to the working days of six months in the year.” This objection 
applies in varying measure to all the countries suffering ftom 
unemployment. But the fault surely is not that there is not 
work to do, but that under the present profit system the work 
is not profitable enough to the employers. There is an abim- 
dance of work simply calling out to be done — ^the building of 



^26 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

roads, irrigation schemes, houses, the spread of sanitation and 
medical facilities, of industry, electricity, social and cultural 
services, education, and the provision of the scores of necessary 
articles that the people lack. All our millions can work hard 
for the next fifty years without exhausting the present possi- 
bilities. But that can only be done if the urge is social im- 
provement and not the profit motive, and if the community 
organises it for the general good. The Russian Soviet Union, 
whatever other shortcomings it may possess, has no unem- 
ployed. Our people are idle not fijr lack of work, but because 
no facilities for work and cultural improvement are provided 
for them. The abolition of child labour, the provision of com- 
pulsory education up to a reasonable age, would take boys and 
girls oif from the ranks of labour or the unemployed, and 
relieve the labour market of the weight of tens of millions of 
prospective workers. 

Gandhiji has tried, with some success, to improve the charkha 
and the takli and increase their productive capacities. That is 
an attempt to improve the tool and the machine, and if the 
improvement continues (it is quite conceivable to have cottage 
industries worked by electricity), the profit motive will agam 
step in and produce what is cdled over-production and unem- 
ployment. Village industries without being tacked on to som^ 
modern industrial technique can never provide even the essen- 
tial material and cultural goods that we need to-day. And they 
cannot compete with the machine. Is it desirable or possible fiir 
us to stop the functioning of big-scale machinery in our 
country? Gandhiji has said repeatedly that he is not against 
machinery as such; he seems to think that it is out of place 
in India to-day. But can we wind up the basic industries, 
such as iron and steel, or even the lighter ones that already 
exist? 

It is obvious that we cannot do so. If we have railways, 
bridges, transport facilities, etc., we must either produce them 
ourselves or depend on others. If we want to have the means 
of defence we must not only have the basic industries but a 
highly developed industrial system. No country to-day is really 
independent or capable of resisting aggression unless it is indus- 
trially developed. One basic industry demands another for its 
support and as a complement to it, and finally we have the 
machine-building industry itself. With all these basic industries 
functioning it is inevitable that the lighter industries should 
spread. There is no stopping this process, for not only is our 
material and cultural progress bound up with it, but also our 



PARADOXES 


5*7 

freedom itself. And the more big industry spreads the less can 
small-scale village industries compete with it. They may have 
some chance of survival under a socialist system, but none under 
capitalism, and even under sodalism they can only exist as 
cottage industries specialising in particular goods which are not 
manufactured on a mass scale. 

Some Congress leaders are frightened of industrialisation, 
and imagine that the present-day troubles of the industrial 
countries are due to mass production. That is a strange mis- 
reading of the situation.^ If the masses lack anything, is it bad 
to produce it in sufficient quantities for them? Is it preferable 
for them to continue in want rather than have mass produc- 
tion? The fault obviously is not in the production but in the 
folly and inadequacy of the distributive system. 

Another difficulty wliich the promoters of village industries 
have to face is the dependence of our agriculture on the world 
market. The peasant is forced to grow commercial crops and to 
depend on world prices. While these prices vary he has to 
pay his rent or revenue in hard cash. He has to raise this 
money somehow, or at any rate he tries to do so, and so he 
sows the crops which he thinks will bring him the best price. 
He cannot afford to grow what he himself needs to make 
himself and his family self-sufficient even in the matter of 
food. 

In recent years the fall in agricultural prices of most food 
grains and other articles suddenly led millions of the peasantry, 
especially in the U,P, and Behar, to cultivate sugaivcane. A 
tariff on sugar had resulted in sugar factories cropping up like 
mushrooms, and sugar-cane was in great demand. But the 
supply was soon far in excess of the demand, and the factory 
owners cruelly exploited the peasantry, and the price fell. 

These few considerations and a host of others seem to me to 
exclude' the possibility or the desirability of any narrow 
autarchichal solution of our agrarian and industrial problems. 
Indeed they affect every phase of our national life. We cannot 
take refuge in vague and emotional phrases, but must face these 
facts and adapt ourselves to them, so that we may become the 
subjects of history instead of being its helpless objects. 

1 Sardar VaUabhbhai Patel speaking at Ahmedabad on January 
3, 1935: ‘“IVue socialism lies in the development of village indus- 
tries, We do not want to reproduce in our country the chaotic 
conditions prevalent in the Western countries consequent on mass- 
production.” 



5a8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

A^ain I think of the paradox that is Gandhiji.* With all his 
keen intellect and passion for bettering the downtrodden and 
oppressed, why does he support a system, and a system which 
is obviously decaying, which creates this misery and waste? He 
seeks a way out, it is true, but is not that way to the past 
barred and bolted? And meanwhile he blesses all the relics of 
the old order which stand as obstacles in the way of advance — 
the feudal States, the big zamindaris and taluqadaris, the 
present capitalist system. Is it reasonable to believe in the theory 
of trusteeship — to give unchecked power and wealth to an 
individual and to expect him to use it entirely for the public 
good? Are the best of us so perfect as to be trusted in this way? 
Even Plato’s philosopher-kings could hardly have borne this 
burden worthily. And is it good for the others to have even 
these benevolent supermen over them? But there are no super- 
men or philosopher-kings; there are only frail human beings 
who cannot help thinking that their own personal good or the 
advancement of their own ideas is identical with the public, 
good. The snobbery of birth, position, and economic power is 
perpetuated, and the consequences in many ways are disastrous. 

Again, I would repeat that I am not at present considering 
the question of how to effect the change, of how to get rid of 
the obstacles in the way, by compulsion or conversion, violence 
or non-violence. I shall deal with this aspect later. But the 
necessity for the change must be recognised and clearly stated. 
If leaders and thinkers do not clearly envisage this and state it, 
how can they expect even to convert anybody to their way of 
thinking, or develop the necessary ideology in the people? 
Events are undoubtedly the most powerful educators, but events 
have to be properlp understood and interpreted if their signifi- 
cance is to be realised, and properly directed action is to result 
from them. 

^ In one of his speeches at the Round Table Conference in 
London in 1931, Gandhiji said: “Above all, the Congress repre- 
sents, in its essence, the dumb semi-starved millions scattered over 
the length and breadth of the land in its 700,000 villages, no matter 
whether they come from Briti^ India or what is called Indian 
India (Indian States), Every interest which, in the opinion of the 
Congress, is worthy of protection has to subserve the interests of 
these dumb millions; and so you do find now and again apparently 
a dash between several interests, and if there is a genume real 
clash, I have no hesitadon in saying, on behalf of the Congress^ 
that the Congress will sacrifice every interest for the sake of the 
inti'»'i*«t of thpoe dnmh millioTi",” 



PARADOXES 


539 

I have often been asked by hricnds and colleagues who have 
occasionally been exasperated by my utterances : Have you not 
come across good and benevolent princes, charitable landlords, 
well-meaning and amiable capitalists? Indeed I have. I myself 
belong to a class which mixes with these lords of the land and 
owners of wealth. I am a typical bourgeois, brought up in 
bourgeois surroundings, with all the early prejudices that this 
training has given me. Communists have called me a petty 
bourgeois with perfect justification. Perhaps they might label 
me now one of the " repentant bourgeoisie.” But whatever I 
may be is beside the point. It is absurd to consider national, 
international, economic and social problems in terms of isolated 
individuals. Those very friends who question me are never tired 
of repeating that our quarrel is with the sin and not the sinner. 
I would not even go so far. I would say that my quarrel is with 
a system and not with individuals. A system is certainly em- 
bodied to a great extent in individuals and groups, and these 
individuals and groups have to be converted or combated. But 
if a system has ceased to be of value and is a drag, it has to go, 
and the classes or groups that cling to it will also have to 
undergo a transformation. That process of change should 
involve as little suffering as possible, but tmhappily suffering and 
dislocation are inevitable. We cannot put up with a major evil 
for fear of a far lesser one, which in any event is beyond our 
power to remedy. 

Every type of human association — ^political, social or economic 
— ^has some philosophy at the back of it. When these associa- 
tions change this philosophical foundation must also change in 
order to fit in with it and to utilise it to the best advantage. 
Usually the philosophy lags behind the course of events, and 
this lag creates all the trouble. Democracy and capitalism grew 
up together in the nineteenth century, but they were not mutu- 
ally compatible. There was a basic contradiction between them, 
for democracy laid stress on the power of the many, while 
capitalism gave real power to the few. This ill-assorted pair 
carried on somehow because political parliamentary democracy 
was in itself a very limited kind of democracy and did not 
interfere much with the growth of monopoly and power concen- 
tration. 

Even so, as ,the spirit of democracy grew a divorce be? 
came inevitable, and the time for that has come now. Parlia- 
mentary democracy is in disrepute to-day, and as a. reaction 
from it all manner of new slogans fill the air.' Because of this, 
the British Government in India becomes, more reactiontuy still 





530 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and makes it an excuse for withholding from us even the outer 
forms of political freedom. The Indian Princes, strangely 
enoug)i, make this a justification for their unchecked autocracy 
and stoutly declare their intention of maintaining medieval 
conditions in their domains such as exist nowhere else in the 
world.* But the failure of parliamentary democracy is not that 
it has gone too far, but that it did not go far enough. It was not 
democratic enough because it did not provide for economic 
democracy, and its methods were slow and cumbrous and un- 
suited to a period of rapid change. 

The Indian States represent to-day probably the extremest 
type of autocracy existing in the world. They are, of course, 
subject to British suzerainty, but the British Government inter- 
feres only for the protection or advancement of British interests. 
It is really astonishing how these feudal old-world enclaves have 
carried on with so little change right into the middle of the 
twentieth century. The air is heavy and still there, and the 
waters move sluggishly, and the newcomer, used to change and 
movement and a little weary of them perhaps, feels a drowsi- 
ness, and a faint charm steals over him. It all seems unreal, like 
a picture where time stands still and an unchanging scene meets 

* The Maharaja of Patiala, Chancellor of the Chamber of 
Princes, speaking in tire Chamber at Delhi on January aand, 1935, 
referred to the opinion of Indian politicians who favour Federation 
in the hope that the Princes would be forced by circumstances to 
introduce democratic forms of government. He went on to say that 
“while the Princes of India have always been willing to do what 
was best for their people, and will be ready to accommodate them- 
selves and their constitutions to the spirit of the times, we must 
frankly say that if British India is hoping to compel us to wear on 
our healthy body politic the Nessus shirt of a discredited political 
theory, they are Mving in a world of unreality.” (See also p. 501 ante 
for Mysore Dewan’s speech.) Speaking on the same day in the 
Chamber of Princes, the Maharaja of Bikaner said: “We, the 
Rulers of the Indian States, are not soldiers of fortune. And I take 
the liberty of stating that we who, through centuries of heredity, 
can claim to have inherited the instincts of rule and, I trust, a 
certain measure of statesmanship, should take the utmost care to 
safeguard against our being stampeded in a hurry to any hasty or 
Ul-considcred decision. . , . May I in all modesty say that the Princes 
have no intention of allowing themselves to be destroyed by any- 
body, and that should the time unfortunately come when the 
Crown is unable to afford the Indian States the necessary protection 
in fulfilment of its treaty obligations, the Princes and States will die 
fighting to the bitter end.” 



PARADOXES 


531 

the eye. Almost unconsciously he drifts back to the past and to 
his childhood’s dreams, and visions of belted and armoured 
knights and fair and brave maidens come to him, and turreted 
casdes and chivalry and quixotic ideas of honour and pride and 
matchless courage and scorn of death. Especially if he happens 
to be in Rajputana, that home of romance and of vain and im- 
possible deeds. 

But soon the visions fade and a sense of oppression comes; it 
is stifling and difficult to breathe, and below the still or slow- 
moving waters there is stagnation and putrefaction. One feels 
hedged, circumscribed, bound down in mind and body. And 
one sees the utter backwardness and misery of the people, con- 
trasting vividly with the glaring ostentation of the prince’s 
palace. How much of the wealth of the State flows into that 
palace for the personal needs and luxuries of the prince, how 
little goes back to the people in the form of any service! Our 
pi inces are terribly expensive to produce and to keep up. What 
do they give back for this lavish expense on them? 

A veil of mystery surrounds these States. Newspapers are not 
encouraged there, and at the most a literary or semi-official 
weekly might flourish. Outside newspapers are often barred. 
Uteracy is very low, except in some of the Southern States — 
Trivancore, Cochin, etc.— -where it is far higher than in British 
India. The principal news that comes from the States is of a 
Viceregal visit, with all its pomp and ceremonial and mutually 
complimentaij speeches, or of an extravagantly celebrated 
marriage or birthday of the Ruler, or an agrarian rising. Special 
laws protect the princes from criticism, even in British India, 
and within the States the mildest criticism is rigorously sup- 
pressed. Public meetings are almost unknown, and even meet- 
ings for social purposes are often banned.^ Leading public men 

‘ A Press message from Hyderabad, Deccan, dated October 3rd, 
1934, states : " A public meeting to celebrate Mi, Gandhi's birthday 
announced to be held in the local Vivekvardini Theatre yesterday 
had to be abandoned. The meeting was organised by the Hydera- 
bad Harijan Sevak Sangh (Servants of the Untouchables Society). 
The secretary of the soaety, in a letter to the Press, .stated that 04 
hours before the time of the meeting the authorities demanded that 
permission to hold the meeting could only he granted on condition 
that a cash security of Rs. 2000 was furnished and an undertaking 
given that no speeches of a political nature should be ddivCTed, 
and no official actions of Government officers should be criticised. 
As this gave the convener insufficient time to readjust matters with 
the authorities the meeting had to be abandoned." 



532 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

from outside are frequently prevented from entering the States. 
In the middle ’twenties Mr. C. R. Das was very ill and he de- 
cided to go to Kashmir to recuperate. He was not on a political 
mission. He journeyed right up to the Kashmir border, but was 
stopped there. Even Mr. M. A. Jinnah was debarred from enter- 
ing Hyderabad State, and Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, whose home is 
in Hyderabad city, was not permitted to go there for a long 
period. 

When such conditions prevail in the States it would have 
been natural for the Congress to stand up for the elementary 
rights of the people of the States and to criticise their whole- 
sale suppression. But Gandhiji fathered a novel policy on the 
Congress in regard to the States— the “policy of non-interference 
in the internal administration of the States.’’ This hush-hush 
policy has been adhered to by him in spite of the most extra- 
ordinary and painful occurrences in the States, and in spite of 
wholly unprovoked attacks by the States’ governments on the 
Congress. Apparently the fear is that Congress criticism might 
offend the Rulers and make it more difficult to ‘ convert ’ them. 
In a letter written in July 1934 by Gandhiji to Mr. N. C. Kelkar, 
the President of the States Subjects’ Conference, he reiterated 
his conviction that the policy of non-interference was both wise 
and sound, and the view he took of the legal and constitutional 
position of these States was most extraordinary. " The States,’’ 
he wrote, “are independent entities under British law. That 
part of India which is described as British has no more power 
to shape the policy of the States than it has, say, that of 
Afghanistan or Ceylon.” It is not surprising that even the mild 
and moderate Indian States’ People’s Conference and the 
Liberals took exception to his views and his advice. 

But these views were welcome enough to the Rulers of the 
States, and they took advantage of them. Within a month the 
Travancore Government banned the National Congress in its 
territories and stopped all its meetings and its enrolment of 
members. In doing so, it stated that ^responsible leaders ’ had 
themselves given this advice— obviously hinting at Gandhiji’s 
statement. This ban, it might be noted, was after the with- 
drawal of the Civil Disobemence movement in British India 
(the States had never been involved in the movement) and when 
the Congress' had been declared a legal organisation again by 
the Government of India. It is also interesting to note that the 
chief political adviser of the Travancore Government at the 
tims was (and still is) Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Aiyar, once a 
General Secretary of the Congress as well as of the Home Rule 



PARADOXES 


533 

League, later a Liberal, and the holder of high office in the 
Government of India and the Madras Government. 

In accordance with the Congress policy, following Gandhiji’s 
advice, not a word was said in public about this unprovoked 
attack on the Congress in normal times by the Travancore 
Government.* Some of the Liberals even protested against it 
vigorously. Indeed, Gandhiji’s position in regard to the States is 
far more moderate and restrained than that of the Liberals. 
Perhaps among the leading public men only Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya, with his close contacts with numerous 
Princes, is equally restrained and solicitous of not offending the 
susceptibilities of the Rulers. 

Gandhiji was not always so cautious in regard to the Indian 
Princes. On a famous occasion in February 1916, during the 
inauguration ceremonies of the Hindu University at Benares, 
he addressed a meeting presided over by one of the Princes and 
attended by a host of other Princes. He had freshly returned 
from South Africa, and the burden of all-India politics was not 
yet on his shoulders. Earnestly and with a prophet’s fire he 
addressed them and told them to mend their ways and give up 
their vain pomp and luxury. "Princes I Go and sell your 
jewels I ” he said; and though they may not have sold their 
jewels, they certainly went. In great consternation, one by one 
and in small groups, they left me hall, and even the president 
trooped out, leaving the speaker to carry on by himself. Mrs. 
Annie Besant, who was present then, was also ofended at Gand- 
hiji’s remarks and withdrew fiom the meeting. 

In his letter to Mr. N. C. Kelkar, Gandhiji says further : " I 
would like the States to grant autonomy to their subjects, and 
would like the Princes to regard themselves and be, in tact, 
trustees for the people over vffiom they rule. . . ." If there is 
anything in this idea of trusteeship, why should we object to the 
claim of the British Government that they are trustees for the 
Government of India? Except for the fact that they are^ 
foreigners in India, I see no difference. There are almost equally 
marked differences as regards the colour of the skin, racial origin 
and culture between various peoples in India. 

* Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel laid stress on this non-intervention , 
policy in a speech at Baroda on January 6th, 1935. He is reported to 
have said " that workers in Indian States should do their work with 
all the limitations inmosed by the State, and instead o£ criticising 
the administration, efforts should be made to keep up cordial rela- 
Tinn'' hptwe'*n the ruler and the ruled.” 



534 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

During the past few years there has been a rapid permeation 
of British officials in Indian States, often thrust on an unwilling 
but helpless Ruler. The Government of India always exercised 
a great deal of control over the States from above; now in ad- 
dition to this there is an internal grip on some of the most im- 
portant States. So that when these States speak it is often the 
Government of India speaking with another voice, but taking 
full advantage of the feudal background. 

I can understand that it is not always possible to indulge in 
the same activities in the States as elsewhere. Indeed, there 
are considerable differences — ^agrarian, industrial, communal, 
governmental — between the various British Indian provinces, 
and a uniform policy is not always feasible. But though action 
must depend on circumstances, our general policy should not 
vary in diflFerent localities, and what is bad in one place must 
be bad in another. Otherwise the charge will be made, and it 
has been made, that we have no consistent policy or principles, 
and all we are out for is to gain power for ourselves. 

A great deal of criticism has been directed, and quite rightly, 
against separate electorates for religious and other minorities. 
It has been pointed out that they are quite inconsistent with 
democracy. It is, of course, not possible to have democracy, 
or what is called responsible government, if the electorate is 
divided , up into watertight religious compartments. But the 
most earnest and persistent of the critics, like Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya and the leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
are singularly acquiescent in regard to the conditions in the 
States, and are apparently prepared to have a federal union be- 
tween the autocracy of the States and the democracy (so it is 
called) of the rest of India. A more incompatible and absurd 
union it is difficult to imagine, but this is swallowed without an 
effort by the champions of democracy and nationalism in the 
Hindu Mahasabha. We talk of logic and consistency, but our 
basic urges continue to be emotional. 

And- so I come back to the paradox of the Congress and the 
States. My mind travels to Thomas Paine and the phrase he 
used about Burke nearly a century and a half ago: ‘^He pities 
the plumage, but forgets the dying bird." Gandhiji certainly 
never forgets the dying bird. But why so much insistence on 
thcplumage? • 

More or less the same considerations apply to the taluqadari 
. and big zamindari system. It hardly seems a matter for argu- 
ment that this semi-feudal system is out of date and is a great 
hindrance to production and general progress. It conflicts even 



PARADOAiS 


53J 

with a developing capitalism, and almost all over the world 
large landed estates have gradually vanished and given place to 
peasant proprietors. I had always imagined that the only pos- 
sible question that could arise in India was one of compen- 
sation. But to my surprise I have discovered during the last 
year or so that Gandhiji approves of the taluqudari system as 
such and wants it to continue. He said in July 1934 at Cawn- 
pore " that better relations between landlords and tenants could 
be brought about by a change of hearts on both sides. If that 
was done both could live in peace and harmony. He was never 
in favour of abolition of the taluqardari or zamindari system, 
and those who thought that it should he abolished did not 
know their own minds.” (This last charge is rather unkind.) 

He is further reported to have said : “ I shall be no party to 
dispossessing propertied classes of their private property with- 
out just cause. My objective is to reach your hearts and convert 
you [he was addressing a deputation of big zamiiidars] so that 
you may hold all your private property in trust for your tenants 
and use it primarily for their welfare. . . . But supposing that 
there is an attempt unjustly to deprive you of your property 
you will find, me fighting on your side. . . . The socialism and 
communism of the West is based on certain conceptions which 
are fundamentally different &om ours. One such conception is 
their belief in the essential selfishness of human nature. . . . 
Our socialism and communism should therefore be based on 
non-violence and on the harmonious co-operation of Labour 
and Capital, landlord and tenant.” 

I do not know if there are any such differences in the basic 
conceptions of the East and West. Perhaps there are. But an 
obvious difference in the recent past has been that the Indian 
capitalist and landlord have ignored far more the interests of 
their workers and tenants than their Western prototypes. There 
has been practically no attempt on the part of the Indian land- 
lord to interest himself in any social service for the tenants’ 
welfare. A Western observer, Mr. H. N. Brailsford, has re- 
marked that “Indian usurers and landlords are the most 
rapacious parasites to be found in any contemporary social 
system.” ‘ The fault, perhaps, is not the Indian landlord’s. Cir- 
cumstances have been too much for him and he has gone down 
progressively, and is now in a difficult position firom which he 
can hardly extricate himself. Many landlords have been de- 
prived of their lands by moneylenders and the smaller ones 

* H. N. Brailsford: Property or Peaeef 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


536 

have sunk to the position of tenants in the land they once 
owned. These moneylenders from the city advanced money on 
mortgages and foreclosed, and blossomed out into zamindars, 
and, according to Gandhiji, they are now the trustees for the 
unhappy people whom they have themselves dispossessed of 
their lands, and are to be expected to devote their income 
primarily for the welfare of their tenantry. 

If the taluqardari system is good, why should it not be intro- 
duced all over India? Large tracts of India have peasant pro- 
prietors. I wonder if Gandhiji would be agreeable to the 
creation of large zamindaris and taluquas in Gujrat? I imagine 
not. But then why is one land system good for the U.P. or 
Behar or Bengal, and another for Gujrat and the Punjab? Pre- 
sumably there is not any vital difference between the people of 
the north and ea.st and west and south of India, and their basic 
conceptions, are the same. It comes to this, then, that whatever 
is should continue, the status quo should be mainained. There 
should be no economic enquiry as to what is most desirable or 
beneficial for the people, no attempts to change present con- 
ditions; all that is necessary is to change the people’s hearts. 
That is the pure religious attitude to life and its problems. It 
has nothing to do with politics or economics or sociology. And 
ye Gandhiji goes beyond this in the political, national, sphere. 

Such are some of the paradoxes that face India to-day. We 
have managed to tic ourselves up into a number of knots, and 
it is difficult to get on till we untie them. That release will not 
come emotionally. What is better, Spinoza asked long ago: 
" Freedom through knowledge and understanding, or emotional 
bondage? ” He preferred the former. 



LXIII 


CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 

Sixteen years ago Gandhiji Impressed India with his doctrine 
of non-violence. Ever since then it has dominated the Indian 
horizon. Vast numbers of people have repeated it unthinkingly 
but with approval, some have wrestled with it and then accepted 
it, with or without reservation, some have openly jeered at it. It 
has played a major part in our political and social life, and it 
has also attracted a great deal of attention in the wider world. 
The doctrine is of course almost as old as human thought, but 
perhaps Gandhiji was the first to apply it on a mass scale to 
political and social movements. Formerly it was an individual 
affair and was thus essentially religious. It was the restraint of 
the individual and his attempt to achieve complete disinter- 
estedness and thus to raise himself above the level of worldly 
conflict and attain a kind of personal freedom and salvation. 
There was no idea behind it of dealing with the larger social 
problems and of changing social conditions, except very indi- 
rectly and remotely. There vras almost an acceptance of the 
existing social fabric with' all its inequality and injustice. 
Gandhiji tried to make this individual ideal into a social group 
ideal. He was out to change political conditions as well as 
social; and deliberately, with this end in view, he applied the 
non-violent method on this wider and wholly different plane. 
"Those who have to bring about radical changes in human 
conditions and surroundings,” he has written, “cannot do it 
except by raising a ferment in society. There are only two 
methods of doing this, violent and non-violent. Violent pressure 
is felt on the physical being and it degrades him who uses it as 
it depresses the victim, but non-violent pressure exerted through 
self-suffering, as by fasting, works in an entirely diflferent way. 
It touches not the phyiscal body but it touches and strengthens 
the moral fibre of those against whom it is directed.” ^ 

The idea was to some extent in harmony with Indian thought 
and it was accepted, superficially at least, with enthusiasm by 
the country. Very few realised the far-reaching implications 
that lay behind it, and the few who did so rather vaguely took 
refuge in faith and action. But, when the tempo of aaion 

^ Extracts from statement made by Gandhiji on December 4, 193a 
on the occasion of one of his fasts. 

m 



JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 


538 

slackened, innumerable questions arose in the minds of some 
people, and it was extraordinarily difficult to find answers to 
them. These questions did not affect the immediate course that 
had to be followed in politics. Rather they dealt with the whole 
philosophy that lay behind this idea of non-violent resistance. 
In a political sense the non-violent movement has not succeeded 
so far, for India is still held in the vice-like grip of imperialism. 
In a social sense it has not even envisaged a radical change. 
And yet any one with the slightest penetration can see that it 
has worked a remarkable change in India’s millions. It has 
given them character, strength and self-reliance — precious gifts 
without which any progress, political or social, is difficult to 
achieve or to retain. How far these undoubted gains are due to 
non-violence or to the fact of conflict itself, it is difficult to say. 
Such gains have been achieved by various peoples on numerous 
occasions through violent conflict. Yet it may be said, I think 
with confidence, that the non-violent method has been of ines- 
timable value to us in this respect. It has definitely helped in 
raising that ‘ferment in society’ to which Gandhiji refers, 
though undoubtedly that ferment was due to basic causes and 
conditions. It has brought about that quickening process in the 
masses that precedes revolutionary change. 

That is an obvious point in its favour, but it does not carry us 
far. The real questions remain unanswered. Unfortunately 
Gandhiji does not help us much in solving the problem. He has 
written and spoken on innumerable occasions on the subject, 
but, so far as I know, he has never considered in public all its 
implications, philosophically or scientifically. ‘ He lays stress 
on the means lieing more important than the end, of conversion 
being better than coercion, and there is a tendency to identify 
non-violence with truth and all goodness. Indeed he often uses 
the terms as if they were synonymous. There is also the ten- 
dency to consider all those who may not agree with this as 
outside the pale of the elect and as having offended against 
the moral law. In the case of some of his followers this 
translates itself inevitably into a feeling of self-righteousness. 

Those of us who are not fortunate enough to have this faith 
are, however, troubled with a host of doubts. These doubts 
do not relate so much to immediate necessities, but to the 
mind’s desire for some consistent philosophy of action which is 
both moral from the individual view-point and is at the same 
, * Richard B. Gregg in his The Power of Non-Violence has dis- 
cussed the subject scientifically. His book is most interesting and 
thought-provoking. 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 


539 

time socially effective. I confess that these doubts have not left 
me, and I see no satisfiictory solution of the problem. I dislike 
violence intensely, and yet I am full of violence myself and, 
consciously or unconsciously, I am often attempting to coerce 
others. And can anything be greater coercion than the psychic 
coercion of Gandhiji which reduces many of his intimate fol- 
lowers and colleagues to a state of mental pulp? 

But the real question was: can national and social groups 
imbibe sufficiently this individual creed of non-violence, for it 
involved a tremendou.s rise of mankind in the ma.ss to a high 
level of love and goodness? It is true that the only really 
desirable ultimate ideal is to raise humanity to this level and to 
abolish hatred and ugliness and selfishness. Whether that is 
possible or not, even ultimately, may be a debatable question; 
but without that to hope for life would almost become “ a tale 
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” 
To attain this ideal, are we to work for it directly by preaching 
these virtues, regardless of the obstructions whiA make it im- 
possible of achievement and which encourage every contrary 
tendency? Or must we not remove these obstructions first and 
create a more suitable and more ffivourable environment for the 
growth of love, beauty, goodness? Or can we combine- the two 
processes? 

And then again is the line between violence and non-violence, 
compulsion and conversion, so obvious? Often enough moral 
force is a far more terrible coercive factor than physical violence. 
And is non-violence synonymous with truth? What is truth is 
an ancient question to which a thousand answers have been 
given, and yet the question remains. But whatever it majr be, it 
cannot certainly be wholly identified with non-violence. Violence 
itself, though bad, cannot be considered intrinsically unmoral. 
There are shades and grades of it and often it may be preferable 
to something that is worse. Gandhiji himself has said that it is 
j better than cowardice, fear, and slavery, and a host of other evils 
might be added to this list. It is true that usually violence is 
associated with ill-will, but in theory at least this need not always 
be so. It is conceivable that violence may be based on goodwill 
(that of a surgeon, for example) and anything that has this for 
a basis can never be fundamentally immoral. After all, the final 
tests of ethics and morality arp goodwill and ill-will. Thus, 
although violence is very often imjustifiable morally and may be 
considered dangerous ftom that view-point, it need not always 
be so. 

All life is full of conflict and violence, and it seems to be true 



540 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

that violence breeds violence and is thus not a way to overcome 
it. And yet to forswear it altogether leads to a wholly negative 
attitude utterly out of touch with life itself. Violence is the very 
life-blood of the modern State and social system. Without the 
coercive apparatus of the State taxes would not be realised, land- 
lords would not get their rents, and private property would 
disappear. The law, with the help of its armed forces, excludes 
others from the use of private property. The national State 
itself exists because of offensive and defensive violence. 

Gandhiji’s non-violence, it is true, is certainly not a purely 
negative affair. It is not non-resistance. It is non-violent resis- 
tance, which is a very different thing, a positive and dynamic 
method of action. It was not meant for those who meekly accept 
the status quo. The very purpose for which it was designed was 
to create “a ferment in society” and thus to change existing 
conditions. Whatever the motives of conversion behind it, in 
practice it has been a powerful weapon of compulsion as well, 
though that compulsion is exercised in the most civilised and 
least objectionable manner. Indeed it is interesting to note that 
Gandhiji actually used the word,' compel ’ in Itia earlier writings. 
Criticising the Viceroy’s (Lord Chelmsford's) speech in 1920 on 
the Punjab Martial Law wrongs, he wrote: 

". . . the speech his Excellency delivered at the time of the 
opening of the Council shows to me a mental attitude which 
makes association with him or his Government impossible for 
self-respecting men. 

“The remarks on the Punjab mean a flat refusal to grant 
redress. He would have us to concentrate on the problems of the 
immediate ' future ’I The immediate future is to compel repen- 
tance on the part of the Government on the Punjab matter. Of 
this there is no sign. On the contrary his Excellency resists the 
temptation to reply to his critics, meaning thereby that he has 
not changed his opinion on the many vital matters affecting the 
honour of India. He is ‘ content to leave the issues to the verdict 
of history.' Now this kind of language, in my opinion, is calcu- 
lated further to inflame the Indian mind. Of what use can a 
favourable verdict of history be to men who have been wronged 
and who are still under the heels of officers who have shown 
themselves utterly unfit to hold offices of trust and responsi- 
bility? The plea tor co-operation is, to say the least, hypocritical 
in the face of the determination to refuse justice to the Punjab.” 
, Governments are notoriously based on nolence, not only the 
open violence of the armed forces, but the fer more dangerous 
violence, more subtly exercised, of spies, informers, agents pro- 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 54I 

vocateurs, false propaganda, direct and indirect through educa- 
tion, Press, etc., religious and other forms of fear, economic 
destitution and starvation. As between two governments it is 
taken for granted that every manner of falsehood and treachery 
is justified, provided it is not found out, even in peace-time and 
much more so in war-time. Three hundred years ago Sir Henry 
Wotton, a poet and himself a British ambassador, defined an 
ambassador as “ an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good 
of his country.” Nowadays ambassadors are supported by mili- 
tary, naval and commercial attaches whose chief function is to 
spy in the country to which they are sent. Behind them functions 
the vast network of the secret service, with its innumerable 
ramifications and webs of intrigue and deception, its spies and 
counter-spies, its connections with the underworld of crime, its 
bribery and degradation of human nature, its secret murders. Bad 
as all this is in peace-time, war gives it enormous importance and 
its baneful influence spreads'ln every direction. It is astonishing 
to read now of some of the instances of propaganda during the 
World War, the amazing falsehoods spread about enemy 
countries, the vast sums spent on this and on the secret services. 
But peace to-day is itself merely an interval between two wars, 
a preparation for war, and to some extent a continuation of the 
conflict in economic and other spheres. There is a continuous 
tug-of-war between the victors and the vanquished, between the 
imperialist powers and their colonial dependencies, between the 
privileged classes and the exploited classes. The war atmosphere, 
with all its accompaniments of violence and falsehood, continues 
in some measure therefore even during so-called peacertime, and 
both the soldier and the civilian official are trained to meet this 
situation. Lord Wolseley writes in the Soldier’s Pocket-Book for 
Field Service : “ We will keep hammering along with the con- 
viction that ' honesty is the best policy ’, and that truth always 
wins in the long run. These pretty sentences do well for a child’s 
copy-book, but the man who acts upon them in war had better 
sheathe his sword for ever.” 

Under present conditions with nation against nation and class 
against class this basis of violence and falsehood seems almost 
inevitable. Privileged nations and groups, desirous of holding on 
to their power and privileges and denying those whom they 
oppress the opportunities of growth, must rely on violence, coer- 
cion and i^sehood. It may be possible, as public opinion grows 
and the realities of these conflicts and their suppression become 
more manifest, for the violence to he toned down. As a matter 
of fact all recent experience points to the contrary, and violence 



543 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

has grown as the challenge to existing institutions has gained 
weight. Even when outward violence has been toned down, it 
has taken subtler and more dangerous forms. Neither the growth 
of reason nor of the religious outlook nor morality have checked 
in any way this tendency to violence. Individuals have pro- 
gressed and gone up in the human scale, and probably there are 
far more of these higher-type individuals (the highest type 
excepted) in the world to-day than at any previous period of 
history; society as a whole has progressed, and to a very small 
extent begun to attempt the control of the primitive and bar- 
barian instincts. But on the whole groups and communities have 
not improved greatly. The individual in becoming more civilised 
has passed on many of his primitive passions and vices to the 
community, and as violence always attracts the morally second- 
rate, the leaders of these communities are seldom their best men 
and women. 

But even if we assume that the worst forms of violence will be 
gradually removed from the State, it is impossible to ignore the 
Fact that both government and social life necessitate some 
coercion. Social life necessitates some form of government, and 
the men so placed in authority must curb and prevent all indi- 
vidual or group tendencies which are inherently selfish and likely 
to injure society. Usually they go much further than necessary, 
for power corrupts and degrades. So that however much those 
rulers may love liberty and hate coercion, they will have to 
exercise coercion on recalcitrant individuals, till such time when 
every human being in that State is perfect, wholly unselfish, and 
devoted to the common good. The rulers of that State will also 
have to exercise coercion on outside groups who make predatory 
attacks, that is to say they will have to defend themselves, meet- 
ing force with force. The necessity for this will only disappear 
when there is only a single World-State. 

If force and coercion are thus necessary both for external 
defence and internal cohesion, where is one to draw the line? 
Once this fateful concession is made of ethics to politics. Rein- 
hold Neibuhr points out,* and coercion is accepted as a necessary 
- instrument of social cohesion, it is not possible to make absolute 
distinctions between non-violent and violent types of coercion, or 
between the coercion used by governments and that used by 
revolutionaries. 

I do not know for certain, but I imagine that Gandhiji will 
admit that in this imperfect world a national State will have to 


* In Moral Man and Immoral Society, 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 543 

use force to defend itself against unprovoked attack from out- 
side. Of course the State should allow an absolutely peaceful and 
friendly policy to its neighbour and other States, but nevertheless 
it is absurd to deny the possibility of attack. The State will also 
have to pass some laws of a coercive nature, in the sense that they 
take away some rights and privileges from various classes and 
groups and restrict liberty of action. All laws are to some extent 
coercive. The Karachi programme of the Congress lays down 
that “ In order to end the exploitation of the masses, political 
freedom must include real economic freedom of the starving 
millions.” To give effect to this desirable sentiment the over- 
privileged will have to give up much to the under-privileged. 
Further, it is laid down that workers must have a living wage and 
various other amenities; that special taxes will be charged on 
property; that “ the State shall own or control key industries and 
services, mineral resources, railways, waterways, shipping and 
other means of public transport.” Also that “ intoxicating drinks 
and drugs shall be totally prohibited.” All this is likely to be 
objected to by considerable numbers of people. They may sub- 
mit to the will of the majority, but that will be because they are 
afraid of the consequences of disobedience. Democracy indeed 
means the coercion of the minority by the majority. 

If a law affecting property rights or abolishing them to a large 
extent is passed by a majority, is that to be objected to because 
it is coercion? Manifestly not, because the same procedure is 
followed in the adoption of all democratic laws. Objection, there- 
fore, cannot be taken on the ground of coercion. It might be 
said that the majority was acting wrongly or immorally. The 
question to be considered then is : whether the law as passed by 
a majority offended any ethical principle. Who is to decide this? 
If individuals and groups are allowed to interpret ethics in 
accordance with their own interests, there is an end of demo- 
cratic procedure. Personally I feel that the institution of private 
property (except in a very restricted sense) gives dangerous power 
to individuals over society as a whole, and is therefore very harm- 
ful to society. I consider it immoral, far more so than drink, 
which harms the individual more than society. 

I have been told, however, by some people who claim to believe 
in the doctrine of non-violence that to attempt to nationalise 
private property, except with the consent of the ovjners thereof, 
would be coercion, and as such opposed to non-violence. Indeed 
this view-point has been impressed upon me by big zamindars, 
who do not scruple to take the aid of the State in forcibly 
collecting their rents; and capitalists, owning many factories. 



JAWAHARLAL NiiHRU 


J44 

who will not even permit independent labour unions to exist in 
their domains. The fact that a majority of the people affected 
desires the change is not considered enough, the very people who 
stand to lose by it should be converted. Thus a few interested 
parties can hold up an obviously desirable change. 

If there is one thing that history shows it is this : that economic 
interests shape the political views of groups and classes. Neither 
reason nor moral considerations override these interests. Indi- 
viduals may be converted, they may surrender their special 
privileges, although this is rare enough, but classes and groups 
do not do so. The attempt to convert a governing and privileged 
class into forsaking power and giving up its unjust privileges has 
therefore always so far failed, and there seems to be no reason 
whatever to hold that it will succeed in the future. Reinhold 
Niebuhr in his book ‘ directs his argument against the moralists 
"who imagine that the egoism of individuals is being pro- 
gressively checked by the development of rationality or the 
growth of a religiously inspired goodwill, and that nothing but 
the continuance of this process is necessary to establish social 
harmony between all the human societies and colleaives." These 
moralists "‘disregard the political necessities in the struggle for 
justice in human society by failing to recognise those elements 
in man’s collective behaviour which belong to the order of 
nature and can never be brought completely under the dominion 
of reason or conscience. They do not recognise that when col- 
lective power, whether in the form of imperialism or class 
domination, exploits weakness, it can never be dislodged unless 
power is raised against it.’’ And again : " Since reason is always, 
to some degree, the servant of interest in a social situation, social 
justice cannot be resolved by moral or rational suasion alone. . . . 
Conflict is inevitable, and in this conflict power must be chal- 
le^ed by power." 

To think, therefore, in terms of pure conversion of a class or 
nation ojr of the removal of conflict by rational argument and 
appeals to justice, is to delude oneself. It is an illusion to imagine 
that a dominant imperialist Power will give up its domination 
over a country, or that a class will give up its superior position 
and privileges unless effective pressure, amounting to coercion, 
is exercised. 

Gandhiji obviously wants to apply that pressure, though he 
does not call it coercion. According to him, his method is self- 
suffering. It is a little difflcult to consider this, as there is a 

’ . . *' Moral Man and Immoral Society. 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 545 

metaphysical element in it and it does not yield to measurement 
or any other material approach. That it has considerable effect 
on the opponent is undoubted. It exposes his moral defences, it 
unnerves him, it appeals to the best in him, it leaves the door 
open for conciliation. There can be no doubt that the approach 
of love and self-suffering has powerful psychic reactions on the 
adversary as well as on the onlookers. Most shikaris know that it 
makes a difference how one approaches a wild animal. He seems 
to sense the aggressive spirit from afar and reacts to it. Even 
a suspicion of fear in the man, hardly realised by him, is con- 
veyed somehow to the animal and makes him afraid, and in this 
fear he attacks. If the nerve of a lion-tamer fail him for an 
instant there is immediate danger of his being attacked. An 
absolutely fearless man is seldom in danger from wild animals 
unless some untoward accident occurs. It seems natural, there- 
fore, that human beings should be susceptible to these psychic 
influences. But though individuals may be affected, it is doubtful 
if a class or group is affected. That class, as a class, does not 
come into personal and intimate contact with the other party; 
even the reports it hears are partial and distorted. And, in any 
event, its automatic reaction of anger against any group that 
challenges its position is so great that all minor feelings are 
swallowed up in it. Having for long accustomed itself to the 
notion that its superior position and privileges were necessary 
for the good of society, any contrary opinion savours of heresy. 
Law and order and the maintenance of the status quo become 
the chief virtues, and attempts to challenge them the chief sins. 

So that, so far as the opposite group is concerned, the process 
of conversion does not go far. Indeed sometimes the very 
mildness and saintliness of their adversary makes them angrier 
still, for it seems to put them in the wrong; and when a person 
begins to suspect that he might be in the wrong, his virtuous 
indignation grows. Nevertheless, a non-violent technique does 
affect odd individuals on the oiiier side, and thereby weakens 
the solidity of opposition. Even more so it gains the sympathy 
of neutrals and is a powerful means of influencing world 
opinion. But here again there is the probability of the governing 

g roup preventing the news from going out or of distorting it, 
ecause it controls the agencies of publicity and can thus prevent 
the real facts ftom being known. The most potent and far- 
reaching effect of the non-violent method is, however, on the 
large numbers of more or less indifferent people of the country 
in which this technique is practised. They are certainly con- 
verted and often become enthusiasts in its favour, but then they 

NN 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


546 

did not require much conversion as they generally approved of 
the object aimed at. The effect is not so obvious on those who 
dread the change. The rapid spread of non-co-operation and 
civil disobedience in India was a demonstration of how a non- 
violent movement exercises a powerful influence on vast numbers 
and converts many waverers. It did not convert to any marked 
extent those who were ab initio hostile to it. Indeed the success 
of the movement increased their fears and made them even 
more hostile. 

If it is once admitted that a State is justified in using violence 
to defend its freedom, it is difficult to understand why it is not 
equally justified in adopting violent and coercive methods in 
ti^ng to achieve that freedom. A violent method may be unde- 
sirable and inexpedient, but it would not be wholly unjustifiable 
and barred. The mere fact that a government happens to be 
the dominant faction controlling the armed forces does not give 
it a greater right to the use of violence. In the event of a non- 
violent revolution succeeding and controlling the State, does it 
immediately acquire the right to use violence, which it did not 
possess before? If there is an insurrection against its authority, 
how is it going to meet it? It will naturally be disinclined to use 
violent methods, and will try every peaceful way to ineet the 
situation, but it cannot give up the right to use violence. There 
are sure to be disaffected elements in the population opposed to 
the change, and they will try to go back to the previous condi- 
tion. If they think that their violence will not be checked by 
the coercive apparatus of the new State, they are all the more 
likely to indulge in it. It seems, therefore, that it is quite im- 
possible to draw a hard and fast line between violence and non- 
violence, coercion and conversion. The difficulty is real enough 
in considering political changes, it becomes far worse as between 
privileged and exploited classes. 

To suflFer for an ideal has always commanded admiration; to 
submit to suffering for a cause tvithout giving in or hitting back 
has a nobility and grandeur in it which force recognition. And 
yet there is only a thin line which divides this from suffering 
for suffering’s sake, and this latter kind of self-suffering is apt to 
become morbid and even a little degrading. If violence is often 
sadistic, non-violence in its negative aspects at least is likely to 
err on the other side. There is also always the possibility for 
non-riolence to be made a cloak for cowardice and inaction, as 
well as the maintenance of the status quo. 

During the past few years in India, ever since the idea of 
radical social changes has assumed importance here, it has often 



CONVEJISION OR COMPULSION 547 

been stated that such a change necessarily involves the -use of 
violence and cannot therefore be advocated. Class conflicts must 
not be mentioned (however much they might exist) because they 
jar on the vision of perfect co-operation and a non-violent pro- 
gress to whatever goal might lie in the future. It is quite 
possible that a solution of the social problem cannot be brought 
about ivithout violence at some stage, for it seems certain that 
the privileged classes will not hesitate to use violence to maintain 
their favoured position. But, in theory, if it is possible to bring 
about a great political change by a non-violent technique, why 
should it not be equally possible to affect a radical social change 
by this method? If we can get political freedom and the elimi- 
nation of British imperialism from India non-violently, why 
should we not also solve the problem of the feudal princes and 
landlords and other social problems in the same way, and estab- 
lish a Socialist State? Whether all this is possible or not non- 
violently is not so much the question. The point is that either 
both of these objectives are possible of attainment non-violently 
or neither. Surely it cannot be said that a non-violent method 
can only be used against a foreign ruler. Prima facie it should be 
far easier to use it within a country against indigenous selfish 
interests and obstructionists, for the psychological effect on them 
will be greater than elsewhere. 

The recent tendency in India to condemn objectives and 
policies simply because they are supposed to conflict with non- 
violence seems to me an inversion of the right method of look- 
ing at such problems. We took to the non-violent method 
fifteen years ago because it promised to take us to our goal in the 
most desirable and effective way. The goal was then apart from 
non-violence; it was not a mere appendage or outcome of it. No 
one could have said then that freedom or independence must 
only be aimed at if they are attainable by non-violent means. 
But now our goal itself is judged in terms of non-violence and 
rejected if it does not seem to fit in with it. The idea of non- 
violence is thus becoming an inflexible dogma which may not 
be challenged. As such it is losing its spiritual appeal to the 
intellect, and taking its place in the pigeon-holes of faith and 
religion. It is even becoming a sheet7anchor for vested interests, 
who exploit it to maintain the status quo,' 

This is unfortunate for, I do believe, the ideas of non-violent 
resistance and the non-violent technique of struggle are of 
great value to India as well as to the rest of the world, and 
Gandhiji has done a tremendous service in forcing modem 
thought to consider them. I believe they have a great future 



548 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

before them. It may be that mankind is not sufficiently advanced 
to adopt them in their entirety. “You offer your candle of 
vision to the blind,” says a character in A.E.’s Interpreters, “ but 
virhat use can it be to the blind except as a bludgeon? ” For the 
present the vision may not materialise sufficiently, but like all 
great ideas its influence will grow and it will more and more 
affect our actions. Non-co-operation, the withdrawal of co- 
operation from a State or society which is considered evil, is a 
powerful and dynamic notion. Even if a handful of persons of 
moral worth practise it, its effect spreads and goes on increasing. 
With large numbers the external effect becomes more marked, 
but there is a tendency for other factors to obscure the moral 
issue. The extension of it seems to affect its intensity. The 
collective man gradually pushes back the individual. 

The stress, however, on pure non-violence has made it some- 
thing remote and apart from life, and there is a tendency for 
people either to accept it blindly and religiously or not at all. 
The intellectual element has receded into the background. In 
1920 it had a great effect on the Terrorists in India, and drew 
many away from their ranks, and even those who remained 
were held back by doubt and stopped their violent activities. It 
has no such influence on them now. Even within the Congress 
ranks many of the vital elements who played a notable part in 
the Non-Co-operation and Civil Disobedience movements, and in 
all sincerity tried to live up to the implications of the non-violent 
method, are now considered as heretics who have no business to 
continue as Congressmen because they are not prepared to make 
non-violence a creed and a religion, or to give up the only goal 
they consider worth striving for — a Socialist State with equal 
justice and opportunity for all, a planned society which can only 
come into existence with the abolition of most of the privileges 
and property rights that exist to-day. Gandhiji, of course, con- 
tinues to be a vital force whose non-violence is of a dynamic 
and aggressive character, and no one knows when he might 
again galvanise the country in a forward movement. With all 
his greatness and his contradictions and power of moving 
masses, he is above the usual standards. One cannot measure 
him. or judge him as we would others. But riiahy of ffiose who 
claim to follow him tend to become ineffectual pacifists or non- 
resisters of the Tolstoyan variety or juSt mfembers of a narrow 
sect, not in touch with life and reality. And they gather rotmd 
themselves quite a number of people who are interested in main- 
taining the' present order, and who take shelter under non- 
violence for this purpose. Opportunism thus creeps ih’ and the 



CONVERSION OR COMPULSION 549 

process of converting the adversary leads, in the interests of 
non-violence, to one’s own conversion and lining up with the 
adversary. When enthusiasm wanes and we weaken, there is 
always a tendency to go back a little, to compromise, and it is 
comforting to call this the art of winning over the opponent. 
And sometimes we make this gain at the cost of our own old 
colleagues. We deprecate their extravagances, their utterances, 
that irritate our new friends, and accuse them of breaking the 
unity of our ranks. Instead of a real change of the social order, 
stress is laid on charity and benevolence within the existing 
system, the vested interests remaining where they were. 

I am convinced that Gandhiji has done a great service to us by 
stressing the importance of the means. And yet I feel sure that 
the final emphasis must necessarily be on the end and goal in 
view. Unless wc can conceive that, clearly we can never be any- 
thing but aimless wanderers, wasting our energies on unimpor- 
tant side-issues. But the means cannot be ignored for, quite 
apart from the moral side, they have a practical side. Bad and 
immoral means often defeat the end in view or raise tremendous 
new problems. And, after all, it is the means that a person adopts 
and not the end he declares that enables us to judge him truly. 
I’o adopt means that leads to needless conflict and to the piling 
up of hatreds, is likely to make the achievement of the goal 
more difficult and distant. End and means are indeed so inti- 
mately connected that they can hardly be separated. Essentially, 
therefore, the means must be such as lessen conflict and hatred 
or, at any rate, try to limit them as fiir as possible (for they seem 
to be inevitable), and to encourage goodwill. It becomes more 
a question of motive and intention and temper than of any 
particular method. It is on this basic motive that Gandhiji's 
stress has been, and if he has fiiiled to change human nature to 
any appreciable extent, he succeeded surprisingly in impressing 
this motive on a great national movement involving millions. 
His insistence on strict moral discipline was also very necessary, 
though his standards of that individual discipline are perhaps 
debatable. ’He attaches vast importance to the self-regarding sins 
or failings and very little to social sins. The necessity for this 
discipline is obvious, for the temptation to leave the wilderness 
and join the privileged groups in the seats of power has drawn 
away many a Congressman. For a noted Congressman the door 
to that favoured land is always open. 

The whole world is in the gnp to-day of various crises, but 
the greatest of these is the crisis of the spirit. This is especially 
so in the East, for recent chan^^ in Asia have been more rapid 



550 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

than elsewhere and the process of adjustment is painful. The 
political problem which seems to dominate the situation is 
perhaps the least important of all, though it is the primary 
problem for us, and it must be disposed of satisfactorily before 
the real questions are tackled. For ages past we have been 
accustomed to an almost unchanging basic social order, and 
many of us still believe that it is the only possible and rightful 
basis of society, and associate our moral notions with it. But 
our attempts to fit in the past with the present fail, as they are 
bound to do. “In the last resort,” wrote Veblen, the American 
economist, “the economic moralities wait on the economic 
necessities.” The necessities of to-day will force us to formulate 
a new morality in accordance with them. If we are to find a 
way out of this crisis of the spirit and realise what are the true 
spiritual values to-day, we shall have to face the issues frankly 
and boldly and not take refuge under the dogmas of any reli- 
gion. What rdigion says may be good or bad, but the way it 
says it and wants us to believe it is certainly not conducive to an 
intellectual consideration of any problem. As Freud has pointed 
out, the dogmas of religion “deserve to be believed: firstly, 
because our primal ancestors already believed them; secondly, 
because we possess proofs, which have been handed down to us 
from this very period of antiquity; and thirdly, because it is 
forbidden to raise the question of their authenticity at all.”^ 

If we consider non-violence and all it implies from the reli- 
gious, dogmatic point of view there is no room for argument. 
It reduces itself to the narrow .creed of a sect which people may 
or may not accept. It loses vitality and application to present- 
day problems. But if we are prepared to discuss it in relation 
to' existing conditions it can help us greatly in our attempts to 
refashion this world. Tliis consideration must take into account 
l^e nature and wealoiesses of collective man. Any activity on a 
mass scale, and especially any activity aiming at radical and 
revolutionaiy changes, is affected not only by what the leaders 
think of it hut by existing conditions and, still more, by what 
the human material they work with thinks about it. 

Violence has played a great part in the world’s history. It is 
to-day playing an equally important part, and probably it will 
continue to do so for a considerable time. Most of the changes 
in the past have been caused by violence and coercion. W. E. 
Gladstone once said: "I am sorry to say that if no instructions 
had been addressed in political crises to the people of this 

^ The Future of an Illusion. 



CONVJiRSION OR COMPULSION 55I 

country except to remember to hate violence, to love order, and 
to exercise patience, the liberties of this country would never 
have been attained.” 

It is impossible to ignore the importance of violence in the 
past and present. To do so is to ignore life. Yet violence is un- 
doubtedly bad and brings an unending trail of evil conse- 
quences with it. And worse even than violence are the motives 
of hatred, cruelty, revenge and punishment which very often 
accompany violence. Indeed violence is bad not intrinsically, 
but because of these motives that go with it. There can be 
violence without these motives; there can be violence for a good 
object as well as for an evil object. But it is extremely difficult 
to separate violence from those motives, and therefore it is 
desirable to avoid violence as far as possible. In avoiding it, 
however, one cannot accept a negative attitude of submitting 
to other and far greater evils. Submission to violence or the 
acceptance of an unjust rdgime based on violence, is the very 
negation of the spirit of non-violence. The non-violent method, 
in order to justify itself, must be dynamic and capable of 
changing such a regime or social order. 

Whether it can do so or not I do not know. It can, I think, 
carry us a long way, but I doubt if it can take us to the final 
goal. In any event, some form of coercion seems to be inevit- 
able, for people who hold power and privilege do not give them 
up till they are forced to do so, or till conditions are created 
which make it more harmful to them to keep these privileges 
than to give them up. The present conflicts in society, national 
as well as class conflicts, can never be resolved except by coer- 
cion^ Conversion, of course, there must be on a large seme, for 
so long as large numbers are not converted there can be no real 
basis for a movement of social change. But coercion over some 
will follow. Nor is it right for us to cover up these basic conflicts 
and try to make out that they do not exist. That is not only a 
suppression of the truth, but it direedy leads to bolstering up 
the existing order by misleading people as to the true facts, and 
giving the ruling classes the moi^ basis which they are always 
seeking in order to justify their special privileges. In order to 
combat an unjust system the false premises on which it is based 
must be exposed and the reality laid bare. One of the virtues 
of non-co-operation is that it exposes these false premises and 
lies by our refusal to submit to them or to co-operate in their 
furtherance. 

Our final aim can only be a classless society with equal 
economic justice and opportunity for all, a society organised on 



553 JAWAHARLAL NLHRU 

a planned basis for the raising of mankind to higher material 
and cultured levels, to a cultivation of spiritual values, of co- 
operation, unselfishness, the spirit of service, the desire to do 
right, goodwill and love — ^ultimately a world order. Everything 
that comes in the way will have to be removed, gently if pos- 
sible, forcibly if necessary. And there seems to he little doubt 
that coercion will often be necessary. But if force is used it 
should not be in the spirit of hatred or cruelty, but with the 
dispassionate desire to remove an obstruction. That will be 
difficult. It is not an easy task; there is no easy way, and the 
pitfalls are numerous. The difficulties and pitfalls do not dis- 
appear by our ignoring them, but by realising their true nature 
and facing them boldly. All this sounds fanciful and Utopian, 
and it is highly unlikely that many people will be moved by 
these noble motives. But we can keep them in view and stress 
them, and it may be that gradually they will lessen the hatreds 
and passions that fill most of us. 

Our methods must lead to this goal and be based on these 
motives. But we must also realise that human nature being 
what it is, in the mass, it will not always respond to our appeals 
and persuasions, or act in accordance with high moral prin- 
ciples. Compulsion will often be necessary, in addition to con- 
version, and the best we can do is to limit this compulsion and 
use it in such a manner that its evil is lessened. 



LXIV 


DEHRA GAOL AGAIN 

I WAS not flourishing in Alipore Gaol. My weight had gone 
down considerably, and the Calcutta air and increasing heat 
were distressing me. There were rumours of my transfer to a 
better climate. On May 7 th I was told to gather my belongings 
and to march out of the gaol. I was being sent to Dchra Dun 
Gaol. The drive through Calcutta in the cool evening air was 
very pleasant after some months of seclusion, and the crowds at 
the big Howrah station were fascinating. 

1 was glad of my transfer, and looked forward to Dehra Dun 
with its near-by mountains. On arrival I found that all was not 
as it used to be nine months earlier, when I Wd left it &r Naini. 
I was put in a new place, an old cattle-shed cleaned up and 
fitted out. 

As a cell it was not bad, and there was a little veranda 
attached to it. There was also a small yard adjoining, about 
fifty feet in length. The cell was better than the ancient 
one I had had previously in Dehra, but soon I discovered that 
other changes were not for the better. The surroimding wall, 
which had been ten feet high, had just been raised, especially 
for my benefit, by another four or five feet. The view of the 
hills I had so looked forward to was completely cut off and I 
could just see a few tree-tops. I was in this gaol for over three 
months, and I never had even a glimpse of the mountains. I 
was not allowed to walk outside in front of the gaol gate, as I 
used to, and my little yard was considered quite big enough for 
exercise. 

These and other new restrictions were disappointing, and I felt 
irritated. I grew listless and disinclined to take even the little 
exercise that my yard allowed. I had hardly ever felt quite so 
lonely and cut off from the world. The solitary confinement 
began to tell on iny nerves, and physically and mentally I 
declined. On the other side of the wall, only a few feet away, I 
knew there was freshness and firagrance, the cool smell of grass 
and soft earth, and distant vistas. But they were all out of 
reach and my eyes grew weary and heavy, faced always by those 
walls. There was not even the usual movement of prison life, 
for I was kept apart and by myself. 

After six wee^ the monsoon broke and it rained in torrents; 



554 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

we had twelve inches of rain during the first week. There was a 
change in the air and whisperings of new life; the temperature 
came down and the body felt relaxed and relieved. But there 
was no relief for the eyes or the mind. Sometimes the iron door 
of my yard would open to allow a warder to come in or go out, 
and for a few seconds I had a sudden glimpse of the outside 
world — ^green fields and trees, bright with colour and glistening 
with pearly drops of rain— for a moment only, and then it all 
vanished like a flash of lightning. The door was hardly ever 
fully opened. Apparently the warders had instructions not to 
open it if I was anywhere near, and even when they opened it, 
to do so just a little. These brief glimpses of greenery and 
freshness were hardly welcome to me. That sight produced in 
me a kind of nostalgia, a heartache, and I would even avoid 
looking out when the door opened. 

But all this unhappiness was not really the fault of the gaol, 
though it contributed to it. It vras the reaction of outside events 
— Kamala’s illness and my political worries. I was beginning to 
realise that Kamala was again in the grip of her old disease, 
and I felt helpless and unable to be of any service to her. 
I knew that my presence by her side would have made a 
difference. 

Unlike Alipore, Dehra Dun Gaol allowed me a daily news- 
paper, and I could keep in touch with political and other 
developments outside. In Patna the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee met after nearly three years (for most of this time it was 
unlawful), and its proceedings were depressing. It surprised me 
that no attempt was made at this first meeting, after so much 
that had happened in India and the world, to analyse the situa- 
tion, to have full discussions, to try to get out of old ruts. 
Gandhiji seemed to be, from a distance, his old dictatorial self— 
“ If you choose to follow my lead you have to accept my con- 
ditions,” he said. His demand was perfectly natural, for one 
could not both have him and ask him to act against his own 
deeply-felt convictions. But there seemed too much of imposi- 
tion from above and too little of mutual discussion and 
hammering out a policy. It is curious how Gandhiji dominates 
the mind and then complains of the helplessness of people. 
Few people, I suppose, have had more loyal devotion and obedi- 
ence on the mass-scale than he has had, and it seems hardly fair 
to blame the masses for not coming up to the high standard he 
had set for them. At the Patna meeting he did not even stay 
till the end, as he had to continue his Harijan tour. He told the 
A.I.C.C. to be business-like and to adopt the resolutions placed 



DEHRA GAOL AGAIN 


555 

before them by the Working Committee with speed, and then 
he went away. 

It is probably true that prolonged discussions would not have 
improved matters. There was a confusion and want of clarity 
among the members, and though many were prepared to criti- 
cise, there were hardly any, constructive suggestions. Under the 
circumstances this was natural, for the burden of the struggle 
had largely fallen on these leaders from various provinces and 
they were a little tired and mentally not fresh. Dimly it was felt 
that they had to cry halt, civil disobedience had to be stopped; 
but what then? Two groups took shape: one desiring purely 
constitutional activities through the legislatures, the other think- 
ing rather vaguely along socialistic lines. The majority of the 
members belonged to neither of these groups. They disliked a 
reversion to constitutionalism, and at the same time socialism 
frightened them a little and seemed to them to introduce an 
element which might split their ranks. They had no construc- 
tive ideas, and the one hope and sheet-anchor they possessed 
was Gandhiji. As of old, they turned to him and followed his 
lead, even though many of them did not whoUy approve of 
what he said. Gandhi ji’s support of the moderate constitutional 
elements gave them dommance in the Committee and the 
Congress. 

AU this' was to be expected. But the reaction took the Con- 
gress further back than I had thought. At no time during the 
last fifteen years, ever since the advent of non-co-operation, had 
Congress leaders talked in this ultra-constitutional fashion. 
Even the Swaraj Party of the middle 'twenties, which itself was 
the result of a reaction, was far in advance of the new leader- 
ship, and there were no such commanding personalities now as 
the Swaraj Party had. Many persons who had studiously kept 
aloof from the movement so long as it was risky to join it, now 
streamed in and assumed importance. 

The proscription of the Congress was ended by the Govern- 
ment and it became a legal organisation. But many of its asso- 
ciated and subsidiary bodies continued to be illegal, such as its 
volunteer department, the Seva Dal, as also a number of Ejsan 
Sabhas, which were semi-independoxt peasant unions, and 
several educational institutions and youth leagues, including a 
children’s organisation. In ■ particular the ‘IQiiudai Khidmat- 
gars or the Frontier Redshirts, as they are called, were still 
outlawed. This organisation had become a regular part of the 
Congress in 1931, and represrated it in the Frontier Provinai/ 
Thus, although the Congress had completely drawn off the 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


556 

direct action part of the vStruggle and had reverted to constitu- 
tional ways, the Government kept on all the special laws meant 
for civil disobedience, and even continued the proscription of 
important parts of the Congress organisation. Special attention 
was also paid to the suppression of peasant organisations and 
labour unions, while, it was interesting to note, high Govern- 
ment officials went about urging the zamindars and landlords 
to organise themselves. Every fecility was offered to these land- 
lords’ organisations. The two major ones in the United Pro- 
vinces have their subscriptions collected by official agency, 
together with the revenue or taxes. 

I am afraid I have never been partial to the Hindu or 
Moslem communal organisations, but an incident made me feel 
particularly bitter towards the Hindu Mahasabha. One of its 
secretaries actually went out of the way to approve of the 
continuation of the ban on the “ Redshirts ”, and to pat Govern- 
ment on the back for it. This approval of the deprivation 
of the most elementary of civil rights, at a time when there was 
no aggressive movement on, amazed me. Apart from this ques- 
tion of principle, it was well known that these Frontier people 
had behaved wonderfully during these years of struggle; and 
their leader, Rhan Abdul Ghaiffir Khan, one of the bravest and 
straightest men in India, was still in prison— a State prisoner 
kept confined without any trial. It seemed to me that communal 
bias cotild hardly go further, and I expected that more promi- 
nent leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha would hasten to disown 
their colleague on this matter. But, so fax as I could discover, 
not a single one of them said a word about it. 

I was much upset by this Hindu Sabha secretary’s statement. 
It was bad enough in itself, but to my mind it appeared as a 
symbol of the new state of affairs in the country. In the heat of 
that summer afternoon I dozed off and I remember having a 
curious dream. Abdul Ghaffar Khan was being attacked on all 
sides and I was fighting to defend ’.im. I woke up in an ex- 
hausted state, feeling very miserable, and my pillow was wet 
with tears. This surprised me, for in my waking state I was not 
liable to such emotional outbursts. 

My nerves were obviously in a bad way in those days. My 
sleep became troubled and disturbed, which was vexj unusual 
for me, and all manner of nightmares came to me. Sometimes 
I would shout out in my sleep. Once evidently the shouting had 
been more vigorous than usual, and I woke up with a start to 
find two gaol warders standing near my bed, rather worried at 
my noises. I had dreamed that I was being strangled. 



UEHRA GAOL AGAIN 


557 

About this time a resolution of the Congress Working Com- 
mittee had also a painful effect on me. This resolution was 
passed, it was stated, “ in view of the loose talk about the con- 
fiscation of private property and necessity of class war ”, and it 
proceeded to remind Congressmen that the Karachi Resolution 
“ neither contemplates confiscation of private property without 
just cause or compensation, nor advocacy of class war. The 
Working Committee is further of the opinion that confiscation 
and class war are contrary to the Congress creed of non- 
violence ”. The resolution was loosely worded and exhibited a 
certain amount of ignorance on the part of the framers as to 
what class war was. It was obviously aimed at the newly formed 
Congress Socialist Party. There had, as a matter of fact, been 
no talk of confiscation on the part of any responsible member 
of this group; there had, however, been frequent reference to 
the existence of class war under present conditions. The Work- 
ing Committee’s resolution seemed to hint that any person be- 
lieving in the existence of this class conflict could not even be 
an ordinary member of the Congress. Nobody had ever accused 
the Congress of having turned Socialist or of being against 
private property. Some members of it held those opinions, but 
now it aj^peared that they had no place even in the rank and 
file of this all-embracing national organisation. 

It had often been stated that the Congress rCTresented the 
nation, including every group and interest in it, from prince to 
pauper. National movements frequently make that claim, mean- 
ing thereby presumably that they represent the great majority 
of the nation and that their policy is for the good of all in- 
terests. But the claim is on die face of it untenable, for no 
political organisation can represent conflicting interests without 
reducing itself to a flabby and unmeaning mass with no distinc- 
tive and distinguishing features. The Congress is either a 
political party with a definite (or vague) aim and philosophy of 
achieving political power and of utfrising it for the national 
good, or it is just a benevolent and humanitarian organisation 
with no views of its own and wishing well to everybody. It can 
represent only those who are in general agreement with that 
aim and philosophy, and those who oppose this are likely to be 
considered by it as anti-national or anti-social and reactionary 
elements whose influence must be checked or eliminated, in 
order to give effect to its own philosophy. It is true that a 
national anti-imperialist movement offers a wide basis for agree- 
ment, as it does not touch the social conflicts. And so the 
Congress did represent in varying degrees the vast majority of 



558 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

the people of India, and it drew within its fold all manner of 
mutually differing groups who agreed only on the anti- 
imperialist issue, and even in regard to this there were great 
differences in stress. Those who, on this basic issue of anti- 
imperialism, held a contrary opinion kept out of the Congress 
and sided, also in varying degrees, with the British Government. 
The Congress thus became a kind of permanent All-Parties 
Congress, consisting of large numbers of groups shading into 
each other and held together by one common faith and the 
dominating personality of Gandniji. 

The Working Committee subsequently tried to explain its 
resolution on class war. The importance of that resolution lay 
not so much in its language or what it definitely laid down, as 
in the fact that it was yet another indication of the way Con- 
gress was going. The resolution had obviously been inspired by 
the new parliamentary wing of the Congress aiming at gaining 
the support of men of property in the coming election to the 
Legislative Assembly. At their instance the Congress was look- 
ing more and more to the Bight and trying to win over the 
moderate and conservative elements in the country. Soothing 
words were being addressed even to those who had beerx hostile 
to the Congress movements in the past and had sided with the 
Government during the continuance of civil disobedience. A 
clamorous and critical Left wing was felt to be a handicap in 
this process of conciliation and ‘ conversion and the Working 
Committee's resolution, as weU as many other individual utter- 
ances, made it clear that the Congress Executive were not going 
to be moved from their new path by this nibbling from.the Left. 
If the Left did not behave it would be sat upon and eliminated 
from the Congress ranks. The manifesto issued by the Parlia- 
mentary Board of the Congress contained a programme which 
was far more cautious and moderate than any that the Congress 
had sponsored during the past fifteen years. 

The Congress leadership, quite apart even from Gandhiji, con- 
sisted of many well-known persons with bright records in the 
national struggle for freedom, men honoured throughout the 
country for their integrity and fearlessness. But the new orienta- 
tion of policy brought into the second ranks, and even the 
front rank, of Congress many individuals who could hardly be 
described as idealists. In the Congress ranks there were, of 
course, large numbers of idealists, but the door for careerists 
and opportunists was now more open than it had ever been 
before. Apart from Gandhiji’s enigmatical and elusive person- 
ality, which dominated the scene, the Congress seemed to 



x)1!.hra gaol again 559 

possess two faces ; a purely political side was developing like a 
caucus, and the other aspect was that of a prayer meeting, full 
of pietism and sentimentality. 

On the Government side there was an air of triumph, in no 
way concealed, at what they considered the success of their 
policy in suppressing civil disobedience and its oflFshoots. The 
operation had been successful, and for the moment it mattered 
little whether the patient lived or died. They proposed to con- 
tinue the same policy, with minor variations, even though the 
Congress had been for the moment brought round to some 
extent. They knew that such changes in national policy could 
only be temporary so long as the basic problem remained, and 
any relaxation on their part might lead to a more rapid growth 
than otherwise. Perhaps they also thought that in continuing to 
suppress the more advanced elements in the Congress or in the 
labour and peasant ranks, they would not gready offend the 
more cautious leaders of the Congress. 

To some extent my thoughts in Dehra Dun Gaol ran along 
these channels. I was really not in a position to form definite 
opinions about the course of events, for I was out of touch. In 
Alipore I had been almost completely out of touch, in Dehra 
a newspaper of the Government’s choice brought me partial 
and sometimes one-sided news. It is quite possible that contacts 
with my colleagues outside and a closer study of the situation 
would have resulted in my varying my opinions in some degree. 

Distressed with the present, I began thinking of the past, of 
what had happened politically in India since I began to take 
some part in public affairs. How far had we been right in what 
we had done? How far wrong? It struck me that my thinking 
would be more orderly and helpful if I put it down on paper. 
This would also help in engaging my mind in a definite task 
and so diverting it from worry and depression. So in the month 
of Ju ne 1934 I began this ' autobiographical narrative’ in 
Dehra Gaol, and for the last eight months I have continued it 
when the mood to do so has seized me. Often there have been 
intervals when I felt no desire to write; three of these gaps were 
each of them nearly a month long. But I managed to continue, 
and now I am nearing the end of this personal journey. Most 
of this has been written under peculiarly distressing circum- 
stances when I was suffering from depression and emotional 
strain. Perhaps some of this is reflected in what I have written, 
but this very writing helped me greatly to pull myself out of 
the present with all its worries. As I wrote, 1 was hardly think, - 
ing of an outside audience; I was addressing myself, framing 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


560 

questions and answering them for my own benefit, sometimes 
even drawing some amusement from it. I wanted as far as 
possible to think straight, and I imagined that this review of 
the past might help me to do so. 

Towards the end of July, Kamala’s condition rapidly de- 
teriorated, and within a few days became critical. On August 
I ith I was suddenly asked to leave Dehra Gaol, and that night 
I was sent under police escort to Allahabad. The next evening 
we reached Prayag station in Allahabad and there I was in- 
formed by the District Magistrate that I was being released 
temporarily so that I might visit my ailing wife. It was six 
months to a day from the time of my arrest. 



LXV 


ELEVEN DAYS 

For the Sword outwears its sheath, 

And the soul wears out the breast. 

Byron, 

My release was temporary. I was given to understand that it 
was for a day or two or for such longer period as the doctors 
might think absolutely necessary. It was a peculiar position, 
full of uncertainty, and it was not possible for me to settle 
down to anything. A fixed period would have enabled me to 
know how I stood, and I would have tried to adjust myself to 
it. As it was, any day, at any moment, I might be taken back 
to prison. 

The change was sudden and I was wholly unprepared for 
it. From solitary confinement to a crowded house with doctors, 
nurses, and relatives. My daughter Indira had also come from 
Santiniketan. Many friends were continually coming to see me 
and enquire aft§x»1^3.mala’s health. The style of living was 
quite differentr there were home comforts, better food. And 
colouring all this background was anxiety for Kamala’s serious 
condition. 

There she lay frail and utterly weak, a shadow of herself, 
struggling feebly with her illness, and the thought that she 
might leave me became an intolerable obsession. It was 
eighteen and a half years since our marriage, and my mind 
wandered back to that day and to all that tibese succeeding 
years had brought us. I was twenty-six at the time and she 
was about seventeen, a slip of a girl, utterly unsophisticated 
in the ways of the world. The difference in our ages was con- 
siderable, but greater still was the difference in our mental out- 
look, for I was far more grown-up than she was: And yet with 
all my appearance of worldly wisdom I was very boyish, and 
I hardly realised that this ddicatc, sensitive girl's mind was 
slowly unfolding like a flower and required gentle and careful 
tending. We were attracted to each other and got on well 
enough, but our backwoundS were different and there was a 
want of adjustment. These maladjustments would sometimes 
lead to friction and there were many petty quarrels over 
trivialities, boy-and-girl affairs which did not last long and 

00 fi6l 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


563 

ended in a quick reconciliation. Both had a quick temper, a 
sensitive nature, and a childish notion of keeping one’s dignity. 
In spite of this our attachment grew, though the want of ad- 
justment lessened only slowly. Twenty-one months after our 
marriage, Indira, our daughter and only child, arrived. 

Our marriage had almost coincided with new developments 
in politics, and my absorption in them grew. They were the 
Home Rule days, and soon after came Martial Law in the 
/Punjab and Non-Co-operation, and more and more I was in- 
volved in the dust and tumble of public affairs. So great 
became my concentration in these activities that, all uncon- 
sciously, I almost overlooked her and left her to her own 
resources, just when she required my full co-operation. My 
affection for her continued and even grew, and it was a great 
comfort to know that she was there to help me with her sooth- 
ing influence. She gave me strength, but she must have suf- 
fered and felt a little neglected. An unkindness to her would 
almost have been better than this semi-forgetful, casual attitude. 

And then came her recurring illness and my long absences in 

E rison, when we could only meet at gaol interviews. The Civil 
Usobedience movement brought her in the front rank of our 
fighters, and she rejoiced when she too went to prison. We grew 
ever nearer to each other. Our rare meetings became precious, 
and we looked forward to them and counted the days that in- 
tervened. We could not get tired of each other or stale, for 
there was always a freshness and novelty about our meetings 
and brief periods together. Each of us was continually making 
fresh discoveries in the other, though sometimes perhaps the 
new discoveries were not to our liking. Even our grown-up 
disagreements had something boyish and girlish about them. 

A.fter eighteen years of married life she had still retained her 
girlish and virginal appearance; there was notlung matronly 
about her. Almost she might have been the bride that came to 
our house so long ago. But I had changed vastly, and though 
I was fiit and supple and active enough tor my age — and, I was 
told, I still possessed some boyish traits — ^my looks betrayed 
me. I was partly bald and my hair was grey, lines and furrows 
crossed my face and dark shadows surrounded my eyes. The 
last four years with their troubles and worries had left many 
a mark on me. Often, in these later years when Kamala and 
I had gone out together in a strange place, she was mistaken, 
to my embarrassment, for my daughter. She and Indira looked 
like two sisters. 

Eighteen years of married life! But how many long years 



ELEVEN DAYS 


563 

out of them had I spent in prison-cell, and Kamala in hos- 
pitals and sanatoria? And now again I was serving a prison 
sentence and out just for a few days, and she was lying ill, 
struggling for life. I felt a little irritated at her for her care- 
lessness about her health. And yet how could I blame her, 
for her eager spirit fretted at her inaction and her inability to take 
her full share in the national struggle. Physically unable to do 
so, she could neither take to work properly nor to treatment, 
and the fire inside her wore down the body. 

Surely she was not §oing to leave me now when I needed her 
most? Why, we had just begun to know and understand each 
other really; our joint life was only now properly beginning. 
We relied so much on each other, we had so much to do 
together. 

So I thought as I watched her from day to day and hour 
to hour. 

Colleagues and friends came to see me. They told me of much 
that had happened of which I was unaware. They discussed 
current political problems and asked me questions. I found it 
difficult to answer them. It was not easy for my mind to get 
away firom Kamala’s illness, and after the isolation and detach- 
ment of gaolT was not in a position to face concrete questions 
suddenly. Long experience had taught me that it is not pos- 
sible to appraise a situation from the limited information 
available in gaol. Personal contacts were necessary for a proper 
mental reaction, otherwise the expression of opinion was likely 
to be purely academic and divorced from reality. It seemed 
also unfiiir to Gandhiji and my old colleagues of the Congress 
Working Committee for me to say anything definite regarding 
Congress policy before I had had the opportunity to discuss 
everything with them. My mind was full of criticisms of much 
that had been done, but I was not prepared to make any 
positive suggestions. Not expecting to come out of prison just 
then I had not thought along these lines. 

I had also a feeling that in view of the courtesy shown by 
the Government in allowing me to come to my wife, it would 
not be proper for me to take advantage of this for political 
purposes. I had given no undertaking or assurance to avoid 
any such activity, nevertheless I was condnually being pulled 
back by this idea. 

I avoided issuing any public statements except to contradict 
false rumours. Even m private I refi'ained firom committing 
myself to any definite line of policy, but I was free enough 
with my criticisms of past events. The Congress Socialist Party 



564 JAWAHARI,AL NEHRU 

had recently come into existence, and many of my intimate 
colleagues were associated with it. So far as I had gathered, its 
general policy was agreeable to me, but it seemed a curious and 
mixed assemblage and, even if I had been completely free, I 
would not have suddenly joined it. Local politics took up some 
of my time, for in Allahabad, as in several other places, there 
had been an extraordinarily virulent campaign during the 
elections for the local Congress Committees. No principles were 
involved, it was purely a question of personalities, and I was 
asked to help in settling some of the personal quarrels that had 
arisen. 

I had no desire whatever to go into these matters, nor had I 
the time. In spite of this some of the facts came to my notice 
and caused me great distress. It was surprising that people 
should get so vastly excited over local Congress elections. 
Among the most prominent were those who had retired during 
the struggle for various private reasons. With the withdrawal 
of civil disobedience those reasons ceased to have weight, and 
they emerged suddenly and carried on a fierce and often vulgar 
campaign against each other. It was extraordinary how the 
ordinary canons of decency were fiirgotten in the passionate 
desires to down the other party. I was especially grieved at the 
fact that Kamala’s name and even her illness had been ex- 
ploited for the purposes of these local elections. 

Among the wider questions that were discussed was the 
Congress decision to contest the coming elections to the Legisla- 
tive Assembly. Many of the younger groups opposed this 
decision because they thought it was a return to parliamentary 
and compromising methods, but they suggested no effective 
alternative. Some of these opponents on grounds of high 
principle had, curiously enough, no objection to organisations 
other than the Congress running the elections. Their object 
seemed to be to leave the field clear to communal organisations. 

I felt disgusted with the local squabble and the kind of 
politics which were rapidly developing. I felt out of tune with 
them and a stranger in my own dty of Allahabad. What could 
I do, I wondered, in this environment when the time came for 
me to attend to such matters? 

I wrote to Gandhiji about Kamala’s condition. As I thought 
I would be going back to prison soon and might have no other 
chance to do so, I gave him also some glimpse into my mind. , 
Recent events had embittered and distressed me greatly, and 
my letter carried a faint reflection of this. I did not attempt 
to suggest what should be done or what should not be done; 



ELEVEN DAYS 


565 

all I did was to interpret some of my reactions to what had 
happened. It was a letter full of barely suppressed emotion, 
and I learnt subsequently that it pained Gandhiji considerably. 

Day after day went by and I waited for the summons to 
prison or some other intimation from Government. From time 
to time I was informed that further directions would be issued 
the next day or the day after. Meanwhile the doaors were 
asked to send a daily hulletia of my wife’s condition to Govern- 
ment. Kamala had slightly improved since my arrival. 

It was generally believed, even by those who are usually in 
the confidence of the Government, that I would have been Mly 
discharged but for two impending events— the full session of 
the Congress that was taking place in October in Bombay and 
the Assembly Elections in November. Out of prison I might 
be a disturbing factor at these, and so it seemed probable that 
I might be sent back to prison for another three months and 
then discharged. There was also the possibility of my not 
being sent back to gaol, and this possibility seemed to grow as 
the days went by. I almost decided to settle down. 

It was the eleventh day after my release, August ajrd. The 
police car drove up and the police officer came up to me and 
told me that my time was up and I had to acconmany him to 
Naini Prison. I hade good-bye to my people. As I was getting 
into the police car my ailing mother ran up again to me with 
arms outstretched. That face of hm haunted me for long. 



LXVI 


BACK TO PRISON 

Shadow is itself unrestrained in its path while sunshine, 
as an incident of its very nature, is pursued a hundredfold 
by nuance. Thus is sorrow from happiness a thing apart; 
the scope of happiness, however, is hampered by the aches 
and hurts of endless sorrows. 

Rajatarangini.^ 

I WAS back again in Naini Prison, and I felt as if I was starting 
a fresh term of imprisonment. In and out, out and in; what a 
shuttlecock I had become I This switching on and oflf shook 
up the whole system emotionally and it was not easy to adjust 
onself to repeated changes. I had expected to be put in my old 
cell at Naini to which a previous long stay had accustomed 
me. There were some flowers there; originally planted by my 
brother-in-law, Ranjit Pandit, and a good veranda. But this 
old Barrack No. 6 was occupied by a detenu, a State prisoner, 
kept confined without trial or conviction. It was not considered 
desirable for me to associate with him, and I was therefore 
placed in another part of the gaol which was much more closed 
m and was devoid of flowers or greenery. 

But the place where I spent my days and nights mattered 
little, for my mind was elsewhere. I feared that the little im- 
provement that had taken place in Kamala’s condition would 
not stand the shock of my re-arrest. And so it happened. For 
some days it was arranged to supply me in prison with a very 
brief doctor’s bulletin daily. This came by a devious route. The 
doctor had to telephone it to the police headquarters and the 
latter then sent it on to the prison. It was not considered 
desirable to have any direct contacts between the doctors 
and the gaol staff. For two weeks these bulletins came to 
me, sometimes rather irregularly, and then they were stopped 
although there was a progressive deterioration in Kamala's 
condition. 

Bad news and the waiting fer news made the days intolerably 
long and the nights were sometimes worse. Time seemed almost 
to stand still or to move with desperate slowness, and every 

^ R. S. Pandit’s translation. (“River of Kings.” Taranga, ym 
verse, 1913.) 


666 



KA.MALA NEHRU 



BACK TO PRISON 


567 

hour was a burden and a horror. I had never before had 
this feeling in this acute degree. I thought then that I 
was likely to be released within two months or so, after the 
Bombay Congress Session, but those two months seemed an 
eternity. 

Exactly a month after my re-arrest a police ofBcer took me 
from prison on a brief visit to my wife, I was told that I would 
be allowed to visit her in this way twice a week, and even the 
time for it was fixed. I waited on the fourth day— no one came 
for me; and on the fifth, sixth, seventh. I became weary of wait- 
ing. News reached me that her condition was becoming critical 
again. What a joke it was, I thought, to tell me that I would 
be taken to see her twice a week. 

At last the month of September was over. They were the 
longest and most damnable thirty days that I had ever 
experienced. 

Suggestions were made to me through various intermediaries 
that if I could give an assurance, even an informal assurance, 
to keep away from politics for the rest of my term I would 
be released to attend on Kamala. Politics were far enough from 
my thoughts just then, and the politics I had seen during my 
eleven days outside had disgusted me, but to give an assurance! 
And to be disloyal to my pledges, to the cause, to my col- 
leagues, to myself 1 It was an impossible condition, whatever 
happened. To do so meant inflicting a mortal injury on the 
roots of my being, on almost everything I held sacred. I was 
told that Kamala’s condition was becoming worse and worse 
and my presence by her side might make all the difforence 
between Ufe and death. Was my personal conceit and pride 
greater than my desire to give her this chance? It might have 
been a terrible predicament for me, but fortunately that 
dilemma did not face me in that way at least. I knew that 
Kamala herself would strongly disapprove of my giving any 
undertaking, and if I did anything of the kind it would shock 
her and harm her. 

Early in October I was taken to see her again. She was lying 
almost in a daze with a high temperature. She longed to have 
me by her, but as I was leaving her, to go back to prison, she 
smiled at me bravely and beckoned to me to bend down. When 
I did so, she whispered : " What is this about your giving an 
assurance to Government? Do not pve it! ” 

During the eleven days I was out of prison it had been de- 
cided to send Kamala, as soon as she was a little better,, to a 
more suitable place for treatment. Ever since then we had 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


568 


waited for her to get better, but instead she had gone down- 
hill, and now, six weeks later, the change for the worse was 
very marked. It was futile to continue waiting and watching 
this process of deterioration, and it was decided to send her to 
Bhowali in the hills even in her present condition. 

The day before she was to leave for Bhowali I was taken from 
prison to bid her good-bye. When will I see her again? I 
wondered. And will I see her at all? But she looked bright 
and cheerful that day, and I felt happier than I had done 
for long. 

Nearly three weeks later I was transferred from Naini Prison 
to Almora District Gaol so as to be nearer to Kamala. Bhowali 
was on the way, and my police escort and I spent a few hours 
there. I was greatly pleased to note the improvement in Kamala, 
and I left her, to continue my journey to Almora, with a light 
heart. Indeed, even before I had reached her, the mountains had 
filled me with joy. 

I was glad to be back in these mountains, and as our car sped 
along the winding road the cold morning air and the unfolding 
panorama brought a sense of exhilaration. Higher and higher 
we went: the 'gorges deepened: the peaks lost themselves in the 
clouds : the vegetation changed till the firs and pines covered 
the hill-sides. A turn of the road would bring to our eyes sud- 
denly a new expanse of hills and valleys with a little river 
gurgling in the depths below. I could not have my fill of the 
sight and I looked on hungrily, storing my memory with it, so 
that I might revive it in my mind when actual sight was 
denied. 


Clusters of little mountain huts clung to the hill-sides, and 


from a distance, huge steps iraich sometimes went from the 
valley below right up almost to the mountain top. What 
enormous labour had gone to make nature yield a little food 
to the sparse population! How they toiled unceasingly only to 
get barely enough for their needs! Those ploughed terraces 
gave a domesticated look to the hillsides and they contrasted 
strangely with the bleaker or the more wooded slopes. 

It was very pleasant in the daytime and, as the sun rose 
higher, the growing warmth brought life to the mountains and 
they seemed to lose their remoteness and become friendly and 
companionable. But how they change their aspect with the pass- 
ing of day ! How cold and grim they become when “ Night with 
giant strides stalks o'er the world " and life hides and protects 



BACK TO PRISON 


569 

itself and leaves wild nature to its own. In the semi-darkness 
of the moonlight or starlight the mountains loom up mys- 
terious, threatening, overwhelming, and yet almost insub- 
stantial, and through the valleys can be heard the moaning 
of the wind. The poor traveller shivers as he goes his lonely 
way and senses hostility everywhere. Even the voice of the 
wind seems to mock him and challenge him. And at other 
times there is no breath of wind or other sound, and there is 
an absolute silence that is oppres.sive in its intensity. Only the 
telegraph wires perhaps hum faintly, and the stars seem 
brighter and nearer than ever. The mountains look down 
grimly, and one seems to be face to face with a mystery that 
terrifies. With Pascal one thinks: “La silence dternel de ces 
espaces infini m'effraie”. In the plains the nights are never 
quite so soundless; life is still audible there, and the murmuring 
and humming of various animals and insects break the stillness 
of the night. 

But the night with its chill and inhospitable message was yet 
distant as we motored along to Almora. As we neared the end 
of our journey, a turn in the road and a sudden lifting of the 
clouds Ijrought a new sight which I saw with a gasp of sur- 
prised delight. The snowy peaks of the Himalayas stood glisten- 
ing in the far distance, high above the wooded motmtains that 
intervened. Calm and inscmtable they seemed, with all the 
wisdom of past ages, mighty sentinels over the vast Indian 
plain. The very sight of them cooled the fever in the brain, 
and the petty conflicts and intrigues, the lusts and falsehoods 
of the plains and the cities seemed trivial and far away before 
their eternal ways. 

The little gaol of Almora was perched up on a ridge. I was 
given a lordly barrack to live in. This consisted of one huge 
hall, fifty-one feet by seventeen, with a katcha, very uneven floor, 
and a worm-eaten roof which was continually coming down in 
little bits. There were fifteen windows and a door, or rather 
there were so many barred openings in the walls, for there were 
no doors or windows. There was thus no lack of fresh air. As 
it grew colder some of the window-openings were covered with 
coir matting. In this vast expanse (which was bigger than any 
yard at D^ra Dun) I lived in solitary grandeur. But I was 
not quite alone, for at least two score sparrows had made 
their home in the broken-down roof. Sometimes a wandering 
cloud would visit me, its many arms creeping in through 
the numerous openings and filling the . place with a damp 
m}»i* 



570 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Here I was locked up every evening at about five, after I had 
taken my last meal, a kind of high tea, at four-thirty; and at 
seven in the morning my barred door would be unlocked. In 
the daytime I would sit either in my barrack or outside in an 
adjoining yard, warming myself in the sun. I could just see 
over the enclosing walls the top of a mountain a mile or so 
away, and above me I had a vast expanse of blue sky dotted 
with clouds. Wonderflil shapes these clouds assumed, and I 
never grew tired of watching them. I fancied I saw them take 
the shape of all manner of animals, and sometimes they would 
join together and look like a mighty ocean. Or they would be 
like a beach, and the rustling of the breeze through the deodars 
would sound like the coming in of the tide on a distant sea- 
front. Sometimes a cloud would advance boldly on us, seem- 
ingly solid and compact, and then dissolve in mist as it came 
near and finally enveloped us- 

I preferred the wide expanse of my barrack to a narrow cell, 
though it was lonelier than a smaller place would have been. 
Even when it rained outside I could walk about in it. But as 
it grew colder its cheerlessness became more marked, and my 
love for fresh air and the open abated when the temperature 
hovered about the freezing-point. The new year brought a 
good fall of snow to my delight, and even the drab surround- 
ings of prison became beautiful. Especially beautiful and fairy- 
like were the deodar trees just outside the gaol walls with their 
garment of snow, 

I was worried by the ups and downs of Kamala’s condition, 
and a piece of bad news would upset me for a while, but the 
hill air calmed me and soothed me and I reverted to my habit 
of sleeping soundly. As I was on the verge of sleep I often 
thought what a wonderful and mysterious thing was sleep. 
Why should one wake up fi:om it? Suppose I did not wake 
at all? 

Yet the desire to be out gaol was strong in me, more than I 
had ever felt before. The Bombay Congress was over, and 
November came and went by and the excitement of the As- 
sembly elections also passed away. I half expected that I might 
be released soon. 

But then came the surprising news .of the arrest and con- 
viction of Khan Abdul Ghaffiir Khan and the amazing 
orders passed on Subhas Bose during his brief visit to India. 
These orders in themselves were devoid of aU humanity 
and consideration; they were applied to one who was held 
in affection and esteem by vast numbers of his country- 



BACK TO PRISON 


57 1 

men, and who had hastened home, in spite of his own 
illness, to the death-bed of his father — to arrive too late. If 
that was the outlook of the Government there could be no 
chance of my premature release. Official announcements later 
made this perfectly clear. 

After I had been a month in Almora gaol I was taken to 
Bhoivali to see Kamala. Since then I have visited her approxi- 
mately every third week. Sir Samuel Hoare, the Secretary of 
State for India, has repeatedly stated that I am allowed to visit 
my wife once or twice a week. He would have been more cor- 
rect if he had said once or twice a month. During the last 
three and a half months that I have been at Almora I have 
paid five visits to her. I do not mention this as a grievance, 
because I think that in this matter the Government have been 
very 'considerate to me and have given me quite unusual 
facilities to visit Kamala. I am grateful to them for this. The 
brief visits I have paid her have been very precious to me and 
perhaps to her also. The doctors suspended their regime for 
the day of my visit to some extent, and I was permitted to 
have fairly long talks with her. We came ever nearer to each 
other, and to leave her was a wrench. We met only to be 
parted. And sometimes I thought with anguish that a day 
might come when the parting was for good. 

My mother had gone to Bombay for treatment, for she had 
not recovered ftom her ailment. She seemed to be progressing. 
One morning in mid-January a telegram brought a wholly un- 
expected shock. She had had a stroke of paralysis. There was 
a possibility of my being transferred to a Bombay prison to 
enable me to see her, but as there was a little improvement in 
her condition I was not sent. 

January has given place to February, and there is the whisper 
of spring in the air. The bulbul and other birds arc again to 
be seen and heard, and tiny shoots are mysteriously bursting 
out of the ground and gazing at this strange world. Rhododen- 
drons make blood-red patches on the hiU-sides, and peace and 
plum blossoms are peeping out. The days pass and I count 
them as they go, thinking of my next visit to Bhowali. I won- 
der what truth there is in the saying that life's rich gifts follow 
frustration and cruelty and sedation. Perhaps the gifts would 
not be appreciated otherwise. Perhaps suffering is necessary for 
clear thought, but excess of it may cloud the brain. Gaol 
encourages introspection, and my long years in prison have 
forced me to look more and more withm myself. I was not by 
namre an introvert, but prison life, like strong coffee or 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


51 ^ 

Strychnine, leads to introversion. Sometimes, to amuse myself, 
I draw an outline of Professor McDougall's cube for the 
measurement of introversion and extroversion, and I gaze at 
it to find out how frequent are the changes from one interpreta- 
tion to another. They seem to be rapid. 



LXVII 


SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 

Dawn reddens in the wake of night, but the days of our life 
return not. 

The eye contains a far horizon, but the wound of spring lies 
deep in the heart. 

Li Tai-Po. 

I FOLLOWED from the newspapers supplied to me the proceed- 
ings of the Bombay session of the Congress. I was naturally 
interested in its politics and personalities. Twenty years’ in- 
timate association had tied me up so closely with it that my 
individuality had almost become merged in it, and far stronger 
than the claims of office and responsibility were the invisible 
bonds that tied me to that great organisation and to thousands 
of my old comrades. And yet I felt it difficult to get excited 
over its proceedings; in spite of some important decisions the 
whole session seemed to me a dull affair. The subjects that in- 
terested me were hardly discussed. What would I have done if 
I had been there, I wondered. I did not know for certain; I 
could not say how I would have reacted to the new conditions 
and my surroundings. And I saw no reason why I should force 
my mind to come to a difficult decision in prison when such a 
decision was wholly unnecessary then. The time would come 
when I would have to face the problems of the day and decide 
on my course of action. It was needless foUy to anticipate that 
decision, even in the recesses of my mind, for circumstances 
would change before that choice was forced on me. 

The two outstanding features of the (^n gres s. as fer as I 
could make out from my distant and secluded abode cn the 
mountains, were; the dominant personality of Gandhiji and 
the exceedingly poor show that the communal opposition under 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and Mr. Aney put up. To all 
who have knowledge of the inner workings of the Indian mass- 
mind, as well as me middle-class mind, it was no surprise to 
find that Gandhiji continues to be far and away the master 
figure in India. Government officials and some secluded 
politicians often imagine, making the wish the father to the 
thought, that he is pkyed out in the political field or, at least, 
that his influence has greatly declined. And then when he 

573 



574 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

emerges again with all his old energy and influence they are 
taken aback and search for fresh reasons for this apparent 
change. He dominates the Congress dnd the country not so 
much because of any opinions he holds, and which are gener- 
ally accepted, but because of his unique personality. Person- 
ality counts for much everywhere; in India it plays an even 
more dominant role than elsewhere. 

His retirement from the Congress was a striking feature of 
the session and outwardly it marked the end of a great chapter 
in Congress and Indian history. But, essentially, its significance 
was not great for he cannot rid himself, even if he wanted to, 
of his dominating position. He did not owe that position to 
any office or other tangible tie. The Congress to-day reflects 
almost as much his view-point as it has ever done before, and 
even if it should wander away from his path, Gandhiji, even 
unconsciously, would continue to influence it and the country 
to a very great extent. He cannot divest himself of that 
burden and responsibility. In considering the objective condi- 
tions prevailing in India his personality forces itself on one’s 
attention and cannot be ignored. 

He has, for the present, retired from the Congress presumably 
to avoid embarrassing the Congress. Perhaps he contemplates 
some kind of individual direct action which will necessarily 
lead to a conflict with Government. He does not want to make 
this a Congress issue. 

I was glad that the Congress had adopted the idea of a Con 
.tdi tuent As^- mhly for settling the constitution of the country. 
It seemed to me that there was no other way of solving the 
problem, and I am sure that sometime or other some such 
Assembly will have to meet. Manifestly it cannot do so without 
the consent of the British Government, unless there has been 
a successful revolution. It is equally manifest that this consent 
is not likely to be forthcoming under present circumstances. A 
real Assembly can therefore not meet till enough strength has 
been evolved in the country to force the pace. This inevitably 
means that even the political problem will remain unsolved till 
then. Some of the Congress leaders, while accepting the idea 
of the Constituent Assembly, have tried to tone it down and 
made it not very unlike a large All-Parties Conference after the 
old model. This would be an utterly futile proceeding and the 
same old people, selfchosen mostly, would meet and disagree. 
The whole idea behind the Constituent Assembly is that 
it should be elected on a veiy wide mass basis, drawing 
Its strength and inspiration from the masses. Such a gather- 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


575 

ing will immediately face real problems, and will not remain 
in the communal and other ruts in which we have so often 
stuck. 

It was interesting to watch the reactions of Simla and London 
to this idea. It was made known semi-officially that Govern- 
ment would have no objection; they gave it a patronising ap- 
proval, evidently looking upon it as an old type of All-Parties 
Conference, foredoomed to failure, which would strengthen 
their hands. Later they seem to have realised the dangers 
and possibilities of the idea, and they began opposing it vigor- 
ously. 

Soon after the Bombay Congress came the Assembly elections. 
With all my lack of en&usiasm for the Congress parliamentary 
programme, I was greatly interested and I ivished the Congress 
candidates success, or to put it more correctly, I hoped for the 
defeat of their opponents. Among these opponents was a curi- 
ous assortment of careerists, communalists, renegades, and 
people who had staunchly supported the Government in its 
policy of repression. There was little doubt that most of these 
people would be swept away, but unfortunately the Communal 
Award obscured the issue and many of them took shelter under 
the widespread wings of the communal organisations. Despite 
this the Congress met with remarkable success, and I was 
pleased that a good number of undesirables had been kept 
out. 

The attitude of the so-called Congress Nationalist Party 
struck me as particularly deplorable. One could understand 
their vehement opposition to the Cnmimmal Award but, in 
order to strengthen their position, they allied themselves with 
the extreme communal organisations, even the Sanatanists, than 
whom there is no more reactionary group in India, both politi- 
cally and socially, as well as numerous political reactionaries of 
the most notorious kind. Except in Bengal, where for special 
reasons a strong Congress group supported them, many of 
them were largely anti-Congress in every way. Indeed they 
were the most prominent opponents of the Congress. In spite 
of this varied assortment of forces opposed to it, which included 
landlords, liberals and, of course, omcials, the Congress candi- 
dates succeeded to a remarkable extent. 

The Congress attitude to the Communal Award was extraor- 
diniuy, and yet under the circumstances it could hardly have 
been very different. It was the inevitable outcome of their past 
neutral and rather feeble policy. A strong line adopted at an 
earlier stage and followed regarmess of immediate consequences 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


51 ^ 

would have been more dignified and correct. But as the Con- 
gress had been unwilling to take that up there was no other 
course open to it except the one it took. The Communal Award 
was a patent absurdity, and it was impossible of acceptance 
because, so long as it existed, any kind of freedom was unat- 
tainable. This was not because it gave too much to the Mus- 
lims. It was perhaps possible to give them, in a different way, 
almost all they wanted. As it was, the British Government 
divided up Inma into any number of mutually exclusive com- 
partments, each balancing and neutralising the other, so that 
the foreign British element could remain supreme. It made 
dependence on the British Government inevitable. 

In Bengal especially, where heavy weightage had been given 
to the small European element, the position was exceedingly 
unfair to the Hindus. Such an award or decision, or whatever 
it might be called (objection has been taken to its being called 
an award), was bound to be bitterly resented, and even though 
it might be imposed, or for political reasons tolerated tem- 
porarily, it is likely to be a continuing source of friction. Per- 
sonally I think that its very badness is a thing in its favour, for 
as such it can never become the permanent basis for anything. 

The Nationalist Party, and even more so the Hindu Maha- 
sabha and other communal organisations, naturally resented 
this infliction, but their criticism was really based, as that of 
the supporters, on an acceptance of the British Government’s 
ideology. This led them, and is leading them further, to the 
adoption of a strange policy, which must be very pleasing to 
the Government. Obsessed by the Award, they are toning dovm 
their opposition to other vital matters, in the hope of bribing 
or cajoling the Government into varying the Award in their 
favour. The Hindu Mahasabha has gone farthest in’ this direc- 
tion. It does not seem to strike them that this is not only a 
/humiliating position to take up, but is calculated to make any 
alteration of the Award most difficult, for it merely irritates 
the Muslims and drives them farther away. It is impossible for 
the British Government to win over the nationalist elements; 
the distance is too great and the conflict of interests too 
marked. It is also impossible for them, on the narrower issue 
of communal interests, to please both the Hindu and the 
Myslim communalists. They had to choose and, from their 
points of view, they chose rightly in favouring Muslim com- 
munalism. Are they to upset this well-settled and .profitable 
policy and offend the Muslims for the sake of winning over 
a handful of Hindu comnuin‘»li«-t*i? 



SOME RECENT HAPPENtNdS 

The very fact that the Hindus, as a group, are more advanced 
politically and more clamant for national freedom is bound to 
go against them. For petty communal concessions (and they 
cannot be other than petty) will not make much difference to 
their political hostility; such concessions will however make a 
temporary difference to the Muslim attitude. 

The Assembly elections threw a revealing light on the people 
at the back of the Hindu Mabasabha and the Muslim Con- 
ference — ^the two most reactionary communal bodies. Their 
candidates and supporters were drawn from the big landlords 
or the rich banker class. The Mahasabha also showed its soli- 
citude to the banker class by its. vehement opposition to the 
recent Relief from Indebtedness Bills. These small sections at 
the top of the Hindu social strata constitute the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, and a fraction of them, together with some professional 
people, form the Liberals. They do not carry great weight 
among the Hindus because the lower middle class is politically 
awake. The industrial leaders also stand apart &om them 
because there is some clash between the demands of rising 
industry and the semi-feudal elements. Industrialists, not daring 
to indulge in direct action or other risky methods, try to keep 
on good terms with both nationalism and the Government. 
They do not pay much attention to the liberal or communal 
groups. Industrial advance and profits are their governing 
motives. 

Among the Muslims this lower middle-class awakening is 
still to come, and industrially also they are backward. Thus 
we find the most hopelessly reactionary and feudal and 
ex-official elements not only controlling their communal 
organisations, but exercising considerable influence over the 
co mmuni ty. The Muslim Conference is quite a galaxy of 
knights, ex-ministers and big landlords. And yet I think that 
the Muslim rank and file has more potentialily in it, perhaps 
because of a certain freedom in social relations, than the Hindu 
masses, and is likely to go ahead faster in a socialist direction, 
once it gets moving. Just at present the Muslim intelligentsia 
seems to be paralysed, intellectually as well as physically, and 
has no push in it. It dare not challenge its old guard. 

Even the leadership of the Congress, politically the most 
advanced big group, is flir more cautious than the condition of 
the masses might necessitate. They ask the masses for support, 
but seldom them for their opinion or set about enquiring 
what ails them. Prior to the Assembly elections they made 
every effort to tone down their programme in an attempt to win 



5^5 JAWAHARI.AT, NEHRU 

over various moderate non-Congress elements. Even their atti- 
tude to such measures as the Temple Entry Bill was varied, and 
assurances were given to soothe the more orthodox in Madras. 
A straightforward, aggressive election programme would have 
created more enthusiasm and helped greatly in educating the 
masses. Now that the Congress has committed itself to a par- 
liamentary programme there will be still more accommodation 
of politically and socially reactionary interests, in the hope of 
getting a few odd votes in a division, and a greater widening of 
the breach between the Congress leadership and the masses. 
Eloquent speeches will be delivered, and the best pirliamentary 
etiquette followed, and from time to time the Government will 
be defeated — defeats which the Government will calmly ignore 
as it has previously done. 

During the past few years, when Congress was boycotting the 
Legislatures, we were often told by official spokesmen that the 
Assembly and the Provincial Councils were truly representative 
of the people and mirrored public opinion. It is interesting to 
find that now, when more advanced elements dominate the 
Assembly, the official view-point has changed. Whenever a 
reference is made to the Congress success at the elections, we 
are told that the electorate is a very small one, only three 
millions out of nearly three hundred or thereabouts. The dis- 
franchised millions apparently, according to official opinion, 
stand solidly behind the British Government. The remedy is 
obvious. Give adult suffrage and then we shall know at least 
what these people think. 

Soon after the Assembly elections the Report of the Joint 
Parliamentary Committee on Indian Constitufional Reform was 
issued. Among the varied and widespread critidsims to which 
it was_ subjected, stress was often laid on tlie fact that it showed 
‘ distrust ' and ‘ suspicion ’ of the Indian people. This seemed 
to me a very strange way of looking at our national and sodal 
problems. Were there no vital conflicts of interests between 
British imperial policy and our national interests? The 
question was which was to prevail. Did we want freedom 
merely to continue that imperial policy? Apparently that was 
the British Government’s notion, for we were informed that 
the ‘ safeguards ’ would not be used so long as we behaved and 
demonstrated our fitness for self-rule by doing just what British 
policy required. If British policy was to be continued in India, 
w]^ all this shouting about getting the reins in our own hands? 
/ Tlte Ottawa agreements, it is well known, have not been of 
great benefit to England economically except in regard to 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 579 

Indian trade. ‘ British trade with India has certainly benefited, 
at the cost, according to Indian political and commercial 
opinion, of India’s wider interests. The position is reversed in 
regard to the Dominions, especially Canada and Australia.® 
They struck a hard bargain with Britain and got most of the 
advantages at Britain’s expense. In spite of this fact, continuous 
attempts are being made by them to get away from Ottawa 
and its entanglements in order to develop their own industries 
as well as their trade with other countries.* In Canada a leading 
political party, the Liberals, who are likely to be in power before 
long, are definitely committed to ending the Ottawa pact."* In 

* “Referring to Indian trade. Sir William Currie said that the 
Ottawa agreements had been a definite advantage to Britain.’’ Sir 
William was presiding over the meeting of the P. and O. Shipping 
Company in London on Dec. 5, 1934. 

* The London Economist (June ipjA says that the Ottawa Con- 
ference " could only have been justified if it had increased the 
value of inter-imperial trade without diminishing the value of the 
Empire’s trade with the rest of the world. In fact, it has merely 
increased very slightly the proportion that inter-imperial trade 
hears to the dwindling total of the Empire’s trade. And this diver- 
sion has been much more in the interests of the Dominions than 
of Great Britain. Our imports from the Empire increased from 
^247,000,000 in 1931 to ;f249,ooo,ooo in 1933, but our exports de- 
creased from 1 70,600,000 to jCi63,joo,odo. And the fact remains 
that between 1929 and 1933 our exports to the Empire declined by 

50.9 per cent., while our imports from the Empire declined only 

32.9 per cent. The decline in our exports to foreign countries was 
not quite so great, but the decline in our imports from these 
countries was much greater.” 

* The Melbourne Age does not like the Ottawa Agreement. In 
its view Ottawa is “ acting as a constant irritant and is being in- 
creasing^ recognised as an egregious blunder." (Quoted in Man- 
Chester Guardian Weekly, October 19, 1934.) 

* Even Mr. Bennett, the present Conservative Prime Minister 
of Canada, has been a thorn in ihe side of the British Government 
in trade matters. He is talking now in terms of ‘ New Deals ’ and 
records a surprising conversion. Owing to the dangerous influence 
of Mr. Litvinov, Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr. John Strachey, he has 
turned collectivist. This should be a sign and a warning to all 
Conservatives, Liberals, I.C.S. men, etc., to avoid thinking or asso- 
ciating with those who do so, or else they might themselves become 
converts to dangerous doctrines. (Since writing the above, the 
Liberal Party in Canada, under the leadership of Mr. King, has 
swept the polls and come into power.) 



580 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Australia strained interpretations of Ottawa have led to an 
increase of tariffs on certain classes of piece goods and yarns, 
and this has been bitterly resented by the Lancashire cotton 
industry and denounced by them as a breach of the Ottawa 
Agreement. As a protest and a reprisal, a movement for the 
boycott of Australian goods was inaugurated in Lancashire. 
This threat had little effect on Australia, where an aggressive 
attitude was taken up.’ 

The economic conflicts are obviously not due to any ill-will 
that the people of Canada and Australia may have for Britain, 
though in Ireland's case that ill-will is apparent. Conflicts 
occur because interests clash, and wherever such clashes might 
take place, the object of ' safeguards ’ in India is to see that 
British interests prevail. The recent Indo-British Trade Agree- 
ment, arrived at secretly over the heads and despite the protests 
of Indian business and industry, although British industrialists 
were kept informed, rejected by the Legislative Assembly and 
yet persisted in by the Government, is a gentle indication of 
what ' safeguards ' would lead to. Such ‘ safeguards ' seem to be 
urgently needed in Canada, Australia and South Africa to pre- 
vent the people of those Dominions from going astray not only 
in trade matters but in matters of greater concern to the safety 
and cohesion of the Empire.’* 

Empire, it has been said, is Debt, and the ‘ safeguards ’ have 
been devised to enable the imperial moneylender to keep his 
stranglehold on his unfortunate debtor, and to keep all his 
.special interests and powers intact. A curious doctrine, often 


’ The Melbourne Age declared that if the proposed Lancashire 
boycott is not dropped, Australia must hit harder at whatever 
trade with Lancashire still remains. Lancashire is to be answered 
"with unwavering reiteration.” (Quoted in Manchester Guardian 
Weekly, November 9, 1934.) 

® Mr, O. Pirow, Minister for Defence of the Union of South Africa, 
stated that the Union would not take part in any general scheme of 
Imperial Defence, nor would it participate in an overseas war even 
though Britain might be at war. "If the Government attempted 
rashly to commit South Africa to participate in another overseas 
war there would be large-scale disturbances, possibly civil war. 
Hence Government would not participate in any general scheme 
of Imperial Defence.” (Reuter message dated Cape Town, February 
5> *935'), General Hertzog, the Prime Minister, has confirmed this 
declaration and stated that it represents the Union Government’s 
policy. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 581 

repeated officially, is that Gandhiji and the Congress have 
agreed to the idea of such safeguards because ‘ safeguards in 
the interests of India ’ were accepted in the Delhi Pact of 1931. 

Ottawa and the safeguards dealing with trade and commerce 
are after all relatively minor matters/ What is far more im- 
portant is the series of provisions which aim at perpetuating 
every vital political and economic hold on the Indian people 
which has in the past and present helped in the exploitation of 
the country. So long as these provisions and ' safeguards ’ re- 
main, real progress in any direction is impossible, and there is 
no place left for constitutional attempts at change. Every such 
attempt will come up against the blank wall of the ‘safe- 
guards ’, and make it more and more clear that the only possible 
course is not constitutional. From the point of view of political 
changes this proposed constitution, with its monstrous Federa- 
tion, is an absurdity: it is far worse from the social and eco- 
nomic view-point. The way to socialism is deliberately barred. 
A great deal of responsibility has apparently been transferred 
(but even that largely to ‘ safe ’ classes) but not the power or 
means to do anything worth while. Britain retains the power 
without the responsibility. There is not even the proverbial 
fig-leaf to cover the nakedness of autocracy. Everybody knows 
that the essential need in these times is extreme flexibility and 
adaptation in constitutions to meet a rapidly changing situation. 
Quick decisions are necessary, and the power to enforce them. 
Even so it is doubtful if parliamentary democracy, as it func- 
tions in a few of the Western countries to-day, is capable of 
bringing about the changes essential for the proper functioning 
of the modern world. But that question does not arise here, 
for movement is deliberately checked by chains and fetters, and 
a barred and bolted door confronts us. We are provided with 
a car, all brakes and no. pngines. It is a constitution designed 
by people whose ever-present background is Martial Law. To 
a man of force there is no real alternative to Martial Law 
except collapse. 

The measure of liberty that this proposed gift of Britain 
offers to India can be taken from the fact that even the most 
moderate and politically backward groups in India have 

‘The London Economist (October 1934) has pointed out: "But 
for the future it appears that among the benefits of British rule the 
doubtful privilege of buying expensively from Lancashire is to be 
forced upon the 'native' in many corners of the globe." Ceylon 
has been the most flagrant recent example of this. 



582 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

condemned it as reactionary. The habitual and persistent 
supporters of Government have had to combine criticisms 
of it with their usual genuflections. Others have been more 
vehement. 

In view of these proposals the Liberals found it difficult to 
retain in full measure their abiding faith in the inscrutable 
wisdom of Providence in placing India under British dominion. 
They offered strong criticism, but disdainful of reality and 
enamoured of phrases and fine ‘ gestures they laid the greatest 
stress on the absence of the words “Dominion Status” from 
the Report and the Bill. There was a great outcry about this, 
and now that Sir Samuel Hoare has made some kind of a state- 
ment on the subject, honour will largely be satisfied. The 
Dominion Status may be an insubstantial shadow haunting an 
unknown future — a Never-Never land which we may never 
reach, but we can dream about it at least and grow eloquent 
over its many beauties. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, troubled per- 
haps by doubts about the British Parliament and the British 
people, has sought refuge in the Crown. Eminent lawyer that 
he is, he has laid down a novel constitutional doctrine : “ What- 
ever the British Parliament and people may or may not do for 
India,” he said, “ over and above them stood the Crown that 
looks after the interests of Indian subjects and India’s peace 
and prosperity.” * It is a comforting doctrine which saves us 
from troubling ourselves about constitutions, laws, and political 
and social changes. 

But it would be unfair to suggest that the Liberals have 
lessened their opposition to the scheme. Most of them have 
made it perfectly clear that they prefer present conditions, bad 
as they are, to this imwanted gift that is being thrust on India. 
Bejrond stressing that, their very principles forbid them from 
doing anything, and it may be presumed that they will go on 
laying stress. For their motto they might well have that 
modern adaptation of an ancient saying: " If at first you don’t 
succeed, cry again! ” 

A certain hopeful reliance is placed by Liberal leaders, and 
probably by many others including some’ Congressmen, on the 
victory of the Labour Party in Britain and the formation of 
a Labour Government there. There is absolutely no reason why 
India should not endeavour to go ahead with the co-operation 
of advanced groups in Britain, or should not try to profit by 
the advent of a Labour Government. But to rely helplessly on 

’ Speaking at a public meeting at Lucknow on January 29, 1935. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


5«3 

a change in fortune’s wheel in England is hardly dignified or 
in consonance with national honour. Dignity apart, it is not 
good common sense. Why should we expect much from the 
British Labour Party? We have had two Labour Governments 
already, and we are not likely to forget their gifts to India. Mr. 
Ramsay MacDonald may have left the Labour ranks, but his 
old colleagues do not seem to have changed much. At the 
Southport Labour Party Conference held in October 1934, a 
resolution was submitted by Mr. V. K. Krishna Menon “ex- 
pressing the conviction that it is imperative that the principle 
of self-determination for the establishment of full self-govern- 
ment for India should be implemented forthwith.” Mr. Arthur 
Henderson urged the withdrawal of the resolution and, very 
frankly, refused to give an undertaking on behalf of the 
Executive to carry out its policy of self-determination for India. 
He said : “ We have laid down very clearly that we are going 
to consult if possible all sections of the Indian people. That 
ought to satisfy anybody.” The satisfaction will perhaps be 
tempered by the fact that exactly this was the declared policy 
of the last Labour Government and the National Government, 
resulting in the Round Table Conference, the White Paper, the 
Joint Committee Report, and the India Act. 

It is perfectly dear that in matters of imperial policy there 
is little to choose between Tory or Labour in England. It is 
true that the Labour rank and file is far more advanced, but it 
has little influence on its very conservative leadership. It may 
be that the Labour Left wing gather strength, for conditions 
change rapidly nowadays, but do national or social movements 
curl themselves up and go to sleep, waiting for problematical 
changes elsewhere? 

There is a curious aspect to this reliance of our Liberals on 
the British Labour Party. If, by any chance, this Party went 
Left and gave effect in England to its socialistic programme, 
what would be the reactions in India and on the Liberals and 
other Moderate groups here? Most of them are sodally Con- 
servatives of the deepest dye. They will dislike Labour’s social 
and economic changes, and fear their introduction in India. 
It may even happen that their love of the British connection 
may undergo a sea-change, when this connection becomes a 
symbol of social upsets. It may also happen then that persons 
like me, who want national independence and severance of that 
connection, may change their minds and prefer close association 
with a socialist Britain. None of us surely has any objection 
to co-operating with the British people; it is their imperialism 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


584 

that we object to, and once they have shed this, the way to 
co-operation will he open. Wliat of the Moderates then? Prob- 
ably they will accept the new order as another indication of 
the inscrutable wisdom of Providence. 

One of the notable consequences of the Round Table Con- 
ference and the proposal to have a Federation, is to push the 
Indian Princes very much to the forefront. The solicitude of 
the Tory die-hards for them and their ‘ independence ’ has put 
new life into them. Never before have they had so much im- 
portance thrust on them. Previously they dared not say no to 
a hint from the British Resident, and the Government of 
India’s attitude to the numerous highnesses was openly dis- 
dainful. There was continual interference in their internal 
affairs, and often this was justified. Even to-day a large number 
of the States are directly or indirectly being governed by British 
officers ‘lent’ to the States. But Mr. Churchill’s and Lord 
Rothermere’s campaign seems to have unnerved the Govern- 
ment of India a little, and it has CTOwn cautious about inter- 
fering with their decisions. The Princes also now talk in a 
much more superior way. 

I have tried to follow these superficial developments in the 
Indian political scene, but I cannot help feeling that they are 
unreal, and the background in India oppresses me. The back- 
ground is one of continual repression of every kind of free- 
dom, of enormous suffering and frustration, of distortion of 
goodwill, and encouragement of many evil tendencies. Large 
numbers lie in prison and spend their young lives, year after 
year, eating their hearts out.* Their families and friends and 
connections and thousands of others grow bitter, and a 
nauseating sense of humiliation and powerlessness before brute 
strength takes possession of them. Numerous organisations are 
outlawed even in normal times, and ‘ Emergency Powers ’ and 
'Tranquillity Acts’ make for themselves almost a permanent 

* Sir Han-y Haig, Home Member, stated in the Legislative As- 
sembly on July 23, 1934, that the total number of detenus in 
-gaols and special camps were: in Bengal, 1500 to i6oo; in Deoli 
camp, 500. Total, aooo to aioo. This is the figure for detenus; that 
is, untried and unconvicted prisoners. It does not include political 
convicts. In the case of convicts sentences are usually very heavy. 
In a recent Calcutta case the Associated Press (Dec. 17, 1934) states 
that the High Court gave a sentence of nine years’ rigorous im- 
prisonment, the offence being the unlicensed possession of arms 
and ammunition. The accused had been arrested with a revolver 
and six cartridges. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 585 

home in the Government’s armoury. Exceptions in the matter 
of restrictions of liberties rapidly becomes the general rule. Large 
numbers of books and periodicals are proscribed or prevented 
entry by a ‘ Sea Customs Act and the possession of ' danger- 
ous ' literature may lead to a long term of imprisonment. A 
frank expression of opinion on the political or economic prob- 
lems of the day, or a favourable report of social and cultural 
conditions in Russia meets with the strong disapproval of the 
censor. The Modem Review was warned by the Bengal Govern- 
ment because it published an article by Dr. Rabindra Nath 
Tagore on Russia, an article written after a personal visit to that 
country. We are informed by the Under-Secretary for India in 
Parliament that “the article gave a distorted view of the 
achievements of British rule in India,” and hence action was 
taken against it.* The judge of these achievements is the 
censor, and we may not have a contrary opinion or give ex- 
pression to it. Objection was also taken by Government to the 
publication of a brief message from Rabindra Nath Tagore to 
the Dublin Society of Friends. If a sage like Tagore, interested 
in cultural matters and deliberately keeping aloof from politics, 
revered in India and world famous, is suppressed in this way, 
what of humble folkj; Worse even than the actual instances of 
suppression' is the atmosphere of fear they create- It is not 
possible to have honest journalism under these circumstances, 
or a proper consideration or teaching of history, economics, 
politics or current affairs. This is a strange background for the 
introduction of reforms and responsible government and the 
like. 

Every intelligent person knows that the world is in a state of 
intellectual turmoil to-day, and that there is a vague or acutely- 

* November 12, 1934. 

* On September 4, 1935, an official statement was made in 
the Legislative Assembly regarding the working of the Press laws 
in India. It was stated that from 1930 onwards 514 newspapers had 
been affected by Government demands for securities and by con- 
fiscations. Of these, 348 newspapers stopped publication because 
they could not give further securities; 166 newspapers gave securi- 
ties amounting to Rs. 252,852. 

Recently (in the latter hdf of 1935) a number of laws suppressing 
dvil liberties have again been enacted for a further long period. 
The prindpal one— The Criminal Law Amendment Act— applies 
to the whole of India. It was thrown out by the Legislative As- 
sembly and later certified by the Governor-General. Many pro- 
vinces have also passed such laws. 



586 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

felt, but in any case a tremendous, dissatisfaction with existing 
conditions. Far-reaching changes are taking place before our 
eyes, and the future, whatever shape it might take, is not a 
remote, far-off thing which arouses a purely academic interest 
in the detached minds of philosophers, sociologists and econo- 
mists. It is a matter which affects every human being for better 
or for worse, and surely it is every citizen’s duty to try to under- 
stand the various forces at play and decide on his own course 
of action. A world is coming to an end, and a new world is 
taking shape. To find an answer to a problem it is necessary 
to know what it is. Indeed it is as important to know the 
problem as to seek a solution for it. 

Unhappily there is an astonishing ignorance or indifference 
to world happenings among our politicians. Probably this 
ignorance extends to the great majority of the official element 
in India, for the Civil Service lives happily and complacently in 
a narrow world of its own. Only the topmost of our officials 
have to consider these problems. The British Government of 
course has to keep world events in view and to develop its policy 
accordingly. It is common knowledge that British foreign 
policy has been considerably influenced by the possession and 

5 rocection of India. How many Indian politicians consider that 
apanese imperialism, or the growing strength of the Soviet 
Union, or the Anglo-Russo-Japanese intrigues in Sinkiang, or 
the events in Central Asia or Afghanistan or Persia, have an 
intimate bearing on Indian politics? The Central Asian situa- 
tion obviously affects the position of Kashmir and makes it a 
pivot of British policy and defence. 

Even more important are the economic changes that are 
rapidly taking place the world over. We must realise that the 
nineteenth-century system has passed away, and has no appli- 
cation to present-day needs. The lawyer’s view, so prevalent in 
India, of proceeding from precedent to precedent is of little 
use when there are no precedents. We cannot put a bullock- 
cart on rails and call it a railway train. It has to give way and 
be scrapped as obsolescent material. Even apart ftom Russia, 
there is talk of New Deals and vast changes. President Roose- 
velt, with every desire to retain and strengthen the capitalist 
system, has with great courage inaugurated enormous schemes 
which may change American life. He talks of “ weeding out 
the over-privileged and effectively lifting, up the under-privi- 
leged ”. He may or may not succeed, but the courage of the 
man and his desire to pull his country out of the ruts are 
undeniable. He is not afraid of changing his policy or of 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 587 

admitting mistakes. In England Mr. Lloyd George has come 
out with his ‘ New Deal ’. We want many New Deals in India 
too. The old assumption that “ whatever is worth knowing is 
already known, and whatever is worth doing has already been 
done,” is perilous nonsense. 

We have to face many questions, and we must face them 
boldly. Has the present social or economic system a right to 
exist if it is unable to improve greatly the condition of the 
masses? Does any other system give promise of this wide- 
spread betterment? How far will a mere political change bring 
radical improvement? If vested interests come in the way of 
an eminently desirable change, is it wise or moral to attempt 
to preserve them at the cost of mass misery and poverty? 
Surely the object is not to injure vested interests, but to prevent 
them from injuring others. If it was possible to come to terms 
with these vested interests, it would be most desirable to do so. 
People may disagree with the justice or injustice of this, but 
few will doubt the expediency of a settlement. Such a settlement 
obviously cannot be the removal of one vested interest by 
the creation of another. Whenever possible and desirable, 
reasonable compensation might be given, for a conflict is likely 
to cost far more. But, unhappily, all history shows that vested 
interests do not accept such compromises. Classes that have 
ceased to play a vital part in society are singularly lacking 
in wisdom. They gamble for all or nothing, and so they fade 
away. 

There is a great deal of ' loose talk ’ (as the Congress Working 
Committee put it) about confiscation and the like. Confiscation, 
persistent and continual, is the basis of the existing system, and 
it is to put an end to this that social changes are proposed. 
There is the daily confiscation of part of the labour product of 
the worker; 'a peasant’s holding is ultimately confiscated by 
raising his rent or revenue to such an extent that he cannot 
pay it. Formerly common lands were confiscated by individuals 
and made into big estates; peasant proprietors were also wiped 
out in this way. Confiscation is the basis and life-breath of the 
present system. 

To remedy this partly, society tries various expedients which 
are themselves of the nature of confiscation — ^heavy taxes, 
death-duties, laws for the relief firom indebtedness, inflation, etc. 
Recently we have seen national repudiation of debt on an enor- 
mous scale, not only by the Soviet Union but by leading 
capitalist countries; the most notable instance of this being the 
British repudiation of their debt to the United States— a 



588 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

dangerous example to place before India! But all these con- 
fiscations and repudiations help only to a minor extent, and do 
not get rid of 'the basic cause. To build anew, that root cause 
has to be removed. 

In considering a method for changing the existing order we 
have to weigh the costs of it in material as well as spiritual 
terms. We cannot afford to be too shortsighted. We have to 
see how far it helps ultimately in the development of human 
happiness and human progress, material and spiritual. But we 
have always to bear in mind the terrible costs of not changing 
the existing order, of carrying on as we do to-day with our 
enormous burden of frustrated and distorted lives, starvation 
and misery, and spiritual and moral degradation. Like an 
ever-recurring flood this present economic system is continually 
overwhelming and carrying away to destruction vast numbers 
of human beings. We cannot check the flood or save these 
people by some of us carrying water away in a bucket. Em- 
bankments have to be built and canals, and the destructive 
power of the waters has to be converted and used for human 
betterment. 

It is obvious that the vast changes that socialism envisages 
cannot be brought about by the sudden passing of a few laws. 
But the basic laws and power are necessary to give the direction 
of advance and to lay the foundation of the structure. If the 
great building-up of a socialised society is to proceed, it cannot 
be left to chance nor can it be done in fits and starts with 
intervals of destruction of what has been built. The major 
obstructions have thus to be removed. The object is not to 
deprive, but to provide; to change the present scarcity to future 
abundance. But in doing so the path must necessarily be 
cleared of impediments and selfish interests which want to hold 
society back. And the path we take is not merely a question of 
what we like or dislike or even of abstract justice, but what is 
economically sound, capable of progress and adaptation to 
changing conditions, and likely to do good to the largest num- 
ber of ‘human beings. 

A clash of interests ■seems inevitable. There is no middle path. 
Each one of us will have to choose our side. Before we can 
choose, we must know and understand. The emotional appeal 
of socialism is not enough. Thia.must be supplemented by an 
intellectual and reasoned appeal based on facts and arguments 
and detailed criticism. In the West a great deal of this kind 
of literature exists, hut in India there is a tremendous lack of 
it, and many good books are not ‘allowed entry here. But to 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 589 

read books from other countries is not enough. If socialism is 
to be built up in India it will have to grow out of Indian con- 
ditions, and the closest study of these conditions is essential. 
We want experts in the job who study, and prepare detailed 
plans. Unfortunately our experts arc mostly in Government 
service or in the semi-official universities, and they dare not go 
far in this direction. 

An intellectual background is not enough to bring socialism. 
Other forces are necessary. But I do feel that without that 
background we can never have a grip of the subject or create 
a powerful movement. At the present moment the agrarian 
problem is far the most important in India, and it is likely to 
remain so. _ But industry is of little less importance, and it 
grows. What is our objective : a peasant State or an industrial 
one? Of course we are bound to remain predominantly agri- 
cultural, but one can and, I think, must push on industry. 

Our captains of industry are quite amazingly backward in 
their ideas; they are not even up-to-date capitalists. The masses 
are so poor that they do not look upon them as potential con- 
sumers, and fight bitterly against any proposal to increase wages 
or lower hours of work. Recently hours of work have been 
reduced from ten to nine in the cotton mills. This has led the 
Ahmedabad mill-owners to reduce the wages of labour, even 
piece-work labour. Thus the reduction of hours of work has 
meant a lower income and a yet lower standard for the poor 
worker. Rationalisation, however, proceeds apace, increasing the 
pressure on the worker and his fiitigue, without any propor- 
tionate increase in wages. The whole outlook of the industry is 
an early nineteenth-century one. They make stupendous profits 
when they have the chance and the worker continues as before; 
if there is a slump the owners complain that they cannot carry 
on without reducing wages. Not only have they the help of the 
State, but also usually the sympathy of our middle-class 
politicians. And yet the lot of the cotton worker in Ahmedabad 
is better than that of a similar worker in Bombay and else- 
where. The cotton workers, on the whole, arc better off than 
the jute workers of Bengal and the miners. The workers of the 
small disorganised industries are lowest in the industrial scale. 
To compare the magnificent palaces of the jute millionaires and 
the cotton lords, with their ostentatious display of pomp and 
luxury, with the wretched hovels where their semi-naked 
workers live, should be an education of the most impressive 
kind. But we take these contrasts for granted and pass them by, 
nnaflFected and unimpressed. 



590 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Bad as is the lot of the Indian industrial worker, it is, from 
the income point of view, far better than the peasant’s lot. The 
peasant has one advantage ; he lives in fresh air and escapes the 
degradation of the slums. But so low has he sunk that he often 
converts even his open-air village into a ‘ dung-heap ’, as Gand- 
hiji has called it. There is no sense of co-operation in him or 
of joint effort for the good of the community. It is easy to 
condemn him for this, hut what is the unhappy creature to do 
when life presents itself to him as a bitter and unceasing indi- 
vidual struggle with every man’s hand raised against him? How 
he lives at all is an almost incredible wonder. It has been found 
that the average daily income of typical farmers in the Punjab 
was about nine annas (roughly ninepence) per head in 1928-29. 
This fell in 1930-31 to nine pies (three farthings) per head! 
The Punjab peasant is considered to be far more prosperous 
than the peasantry of the U.P. Behar and Bengal. In some of 
the eastern districts of the U.P. (Gorakhpur, etc.) in prosperous 
times before the slump, the daily field wage was two annas (two- 
pence). To talk of improving these staggering conditions by 
philanthropy or local efforts in rural uplift is a mockery of the 
peasant and his misery. 

How are we to get out of this qupgmire? Means can no doubt 
be devised, although it is a difficult task to raise masses of 
people who have sunk so low. But the real difficulty comes from 
interested groups who oppose change, and under imperialist 
domination the change seems to be out of the question. In 
what direction will India look in the coming years? Com- 
munism and fascism seem to be the major tendencies of the 
age, and intermediate tendencies and vacillating groups are 
gradually being eliminated. Sir Malcolm Hailey has prophesied 
that India will take to National Socialism, that is, some form of 
fascism. Perhaps he is right so far as the near future is con- 
cerned. There are already clearly marked fascist tendencies in 
India’s young men and women, especially in Bengal, but to 
some extent in every province, and the Congress is beginning 
to reflect them. Because of fascism’s close connection with 
extreme forms of violence, the elders of the Congress, wedded 
as they are to non-violence, have a natural horror of it. But the 
so-caUed philosophical background of fascism — the Corporate 
State with private property preserved and vested interests curbed 
but not done away -with— will probably appeal to them. It 
seems to be at first sight a golden way of reta inin g the old and 
yet having the new. Whether it is possible both to have the 
cake and eat it is another matter. 



ROME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


J9I 

But the real drive towards fascism will naturally come from 
the younger members of the middle class. Actually, at present, 
it is part of the middle class in India that is revolutionary, not 
so much the workers or the peasantry, though no doubt the 
industrial workers are potentially more so. This nationalist 
middle class is a favourable field for the spread of fascist ideas. 
But fascism cannot spread here in the European sense so long 
as there is a foreim government. Indian fascism must neces- 
sarily stand for Indian independence, and cannot therefore ally 
itself with British imperialism. It will have to seek support 
from the masses. If British control were wholly removed, 
fascism would probably grow rapidly, supported as it would 
certainly be by the upper middle class and the vested interests. 

But British control is not likely to go soon, and meanwhile 
socialistic and communistic ideas are also spreading in spite of 
severe repression by the British Government. The Communist 
Party is illegal in India, and the term is interpreted in 'a loose 
way to include even sympathisers and labour unions with 
advanced programmes. 

As between fascism and communism my sympathies are 
entirely with communism. As these pages will show, I am very 
far from being a communist. My roots are still perhaps partly 
in the nineteenth century, and I have been too much influenced 
bj^'the humanist liberal tradition to get out of it completely. 
This bourgeois background follows me about and is naturally a 
source of irritation to many communists. I dislike dogmatism, 
and the treatment of Karl Marx’s writings or any other books 
as revealed scripture which cannot be ch^lenged, and the regi- 
mentation and heresy hunts which seem to be a feature of 
modem communism. I dislike also much that has happened in 
Russia, and especially the excessive use of violence in normal 
times. But still I incline more and more towards a communist 
philosophy. 

Marx may be wrong in some of his statements, or his theory 
of ‘yalue; this I am not competent to judge. But he seems to 
me to. have possessed quite an extraordinary degree of insight 
'in^jylocial phenomena, and this insight was apparently due to 
pHe scientific method he adopted. This method, applied to past 
history as well as current events, helps us in understanding 
them far more than any other method of approach, and it is 
because of this that the most revealing and keen analysis of the 
changes that are taking place in the world to-day come fi:om 
Marxist writers. It is easy to point out that Marx ignored or 
underrated certain subsequent tendencies, like the rise of a revo- 



593 JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 

lutionary element in the middle class, which is so notable to- 
day. But the whole value of Marxism seems to me to lie in its 
absence of dogmatism, in its stress on a certain outlook and 
mode of approach, and in its attitude to action. That outlook 
helps us in understanding the social phenomena of our own 
times, and points out the way of action and escape. 

Even that method of action was no fixed and unchangeable 
road, but had to be suited to circumstances. That, at any rate, 
was Lenin's view, and he justified it brilliantly by fitting his 
action to changing circumstances. He tells us that: “To at- 
tempt to answer ' yes ’ or ‘ no ’ to the question of the definite 
means of struggle, without examining in detail the concrete 
situation of a given moment at a given stage of its develop- 
ment, means to depart altogether from the Marxian ground.” 
And again he said ; “ Nothing is final; we must always learn 
from circumstances.” 

Because of this wide and comprehensive outlook, the real 
understanding communist develops to some extent an organic 
sense of social life. Politics for him cease to be a mere record of 
opportunism or a groping in the dark. The ideals and objectives 
he works for give a meaning to the struggle and to the sacrifices 
he willing^ faces. He feels that he is part of a grand army 
marching forward to realise human fate and destiny, and he has 
the sense of ' marching step by step with history ’. 

Probably most communists are far from reeling all this. 
Perhaps only a Lenin had this organic sense of life in its fullness 
which made his action so effective. But to a small extent every 
communist, who has understood the philosophy of his move- 
ment, has it. 

It is difficult to be patient with many communists; they have 
developed a peculiar method of irritating others. But they are 
a sorely tried people and, outside the Soviet Union, they have to 
contend against enormous difficulties. I have always admired 
their great courage and capacity for sacrifice. 'They suffer 
greatly, as unhappily untold millions suffer in various ways, but 
not blindly before a malign and all-powerful fate. They suffer 
as human beings, and there is a tragic nobility about such 
suffering. 

The success or failure of the Russian social experiments do 
not directly affect the validity of the Marxian theory. It is con- 
ceivable, though it is highly unlikely, that a set of untoward 
circumstances or a combination of powers mighf upset those 
experiments! But the value of those mighty social upheavals 
will still remain. "With all my instinctive dislike for much that 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 593 

has happened there, I feel that they offer the greatest hope to 
the world. I do not know enough and I am not in a position to 
judge their actions. My chief fear is that the background of 
too much violence and suppression might bring an evil trail 
behind them which it may be difhcult to get nd of. But the 
greatest thing in favour of the present directors of Russia’s 
destiny is that they are not afraid to learn from their mistakes. 
They can retrace their steps and build anew. And always they 
keep their ideal before them. Their activities in other countries, 
through the Communist International, have been singularly 
futile, but apparently those activities have been reduced to a 
minimum now. 

Coming back to India, communism and socialism seem a far 
cry, unless the rush of external events force the pace here. We 
have to deal not with communism but, with the addition of an 
extra syllable, with communalism. And communally India is in 
a dark age. Men of action waste their energies on trivial thin gs 
and intngue and manoeuvre and try to overreach each other. 
Few of them are interested in tr 5 dng to make the world a better, 
brighter place. Perhaps this is a temporary phase that will pass 
soon. 

The Congress has at least largely kept out of this communal 
darkness, but its outlook is petty oourgeois, and the remedy it 
seeks for this as for other problems is in terms of the petty 
bourgeoisie. It is not likely so succeed that way. It represents to- 
day this lower middle-class, fr>r that is the most voceu and revo- 
lutionary at present. But it is nevertheless not as vital as it 
appears to be. It is pressed on either side by two forces— one 
entrenched, the other still weak but growing rapidly. It is pass- 
ing through a crisis of its existence at present; what wiU happen 
to it in the future it is difficult to say. It cannot go over to thfe 
side of the entrenched forces before it has fulfilled its historic 
mission of attaining national freedom. But before it succeeds 
in that, other forces may grow powerful and influence it in their 
direction, or gradually msplace it. It seems likely, however, that 
so long as a large measure of national freedom is not obtained, 
the Congress w2l play a dominant rfile in India. 

Any violent activity seems to be out of the question, injurious 
and waste of effort. That, I think, is generally recognised in 
India, in spite of rare instances of futile and sporadic violence. 
That way cannot lead us anywhere except into a hopeless maze 
of violence and counter-violence out of which it will be difficult 
to emerge. 

We are often told that we must unite among ourselves and 

QO 



594 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

present a ‘united front’. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu pleads for it 
eloquently with all her poetic ardour. She is a poet and entitled 
to lay stress on the beauty of harmony and concord. Obviously 
a ‘ unjted front ’ is always desirable, provided it is a front. An 
analysis of this phrase leads one to the conclusion that what is 
aimed at is a pact or compromise between various individuals at 
the top. Such a combination will necessarily mean that the 
most cautious and moderate will determine the objective and 
lay down the pace. As some of them are well known to dislike 
all movement, the result will be a united standstill. Instead of 
a united front there will be a united and extensive display of 
back. 

It is, of course, absurd to say that we will not co-operate with 
or compromise with others. Life and politics are much too 
complex for us always to think in straight lines. Even the 
implacable Lenin said that “to march forward without com- 
promise, without turning frona the path” was "intellectual 
childishness and not the serious tactics of a revolutionary 
class.” Compromises there are boimd to be, and we should not 
worry too much about them. But whether we compromise or 
refuse to do so, what matters is that primary things should 
come first always and secondary things should never take pre- 
cedence over them. If we are dear about our principles and 
objectives, temporary compromises will not harm. But danger 
lies in our slurrini; oyer those prin^les and objectives for fear 
of offending our weaker brethren. To mislead is far worse than 
to ofrend. 

I write vaguely and somewhat academically about current 
events, and try to play the part of a detached onlooker. I am 
not usually considered a looker-on when action beckons; my 
offence, I am often told, is that I rush in foolishly without 
sufficient provocation. VS^at would I do now? What would I 
suggest to my countrymen to do? Perhaps the instinctive 
caution of a person who dabbles in public affairs comes in the 
way of my committing myself prematurely. But, if I may 
confess the truth, I really do not know and I do not try to 
find out. When I cannot act, why should I worry? I do worry 
to a large extent, but that is inevitable. At least, so long as 
I am in prison, I try to save myself from coming to grips with 
the problem of immediate action. 

All activity seems to be far away in prison. One becomes the 
object of events, not the subject of action. And one waits and 
waits for something to happen. I write of political and social 
problems of India and the world, but what are they to this 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS J95 

little self-contained world of gaol which has long been my 
home? Prisoners have only one major interest: the date of 
their release. 

In Naini Prison and here in Almora many prisoners have 
come to me to enquire anxiomly about the jugli. I could not 
at first make out what it was, but then I discovered that the 
word was jubilee. They were referring to the rumours of 
King George’s Silver Jubilee celebrations, but they did not 
know this. For them past associations had invested the word 
with one meaning only : it was a partial gaol delivery or a 
substantial reduction of sentences. Every prisoner, and especi- 
ally the long-term ones, are therefore interested in the coming 
jugli. For them the jugli is far more important than constitu- 
tional reforms and Acts of Parliament and Socialism and 
Communism. 



LXVIII 


EPILOGUE 

Wc are enjoined to labour; but it is not granted to us to 
complete our labours. 

The Talmud. 

I HAVE reached the end of the story. This egotistical nar- 
rative of my adventures through life, such as they are, has 
been brought up to to-day, February 14, 1935, District Gaol, 
Almora. Three months ago to-day I celebrated in this prison 
my forty-fifth birthday, and I suppose I have still many years 
to live. Sometimes a sense of age and weariness steals over me, 
at other times I feel full of energy and vitality. I have a fairly 
tough body, and my mind has a capacity for recovering from 
shock, so I imagine I shall yet survive for long unless some sud- 
den fate overtakes me. But the future has to be lived before it 
can be written about. 

The adventures have not been very exciting perhaps; long 
years in prison can hardly be termed adventurous. Nor have 
they been in any way unique, fer I have shared these years with 
their ups and downs with tens of thousands of my country- 
men and countrywomen; and this record of changing moods, 
of exaltations and depressions, of intense activity and enforced 
solitude, is our common record. I have been one of a mass, 
moving with it, swaying it occasionally, being influenced by it; 
and yet, like the other units, an individual, apart from the 
others, living my separate life in the heart of the crowd. We 
have posed often enough and struck up attitudes, but there 
was something very real and intensely truthful in much that 
we did, and this lifted us out of our petty selves and made us 
more vital and gave us an importance that we would otherwise 
not have had. Sometimes we were fortunate enough to ex- 
perience that fullness of life which comes from attempting to 
fit ideals with action. And we realised that any other life in- 
volving a renunciation of these ideals and a tame submission 
to superior force, would have been a wasted existence, full of 
discontent and inner sorrow. 

To me these years have brought one rich gift, among many 
others. More and more I have looked upon life as an adventure 
of absorbing interest, where there is so much to learn, so much 

•SOO 



EPILOGUE 


597 

to do. I have continually had a feeling of growing up, and 
that feeling is still with me and gives a zest to my activities as 
well as to the reading of books, and generally makes life worth 
while. 

In writing this narrative I have tried to give my moods and 
thoughts at the time of each event, to represent as far as I 
could my feelings on the occasion. It is difficult to recapture 
a past mood, and it is not easy to forget subsequent happenings. 
Later ideas thus must inevitably have coloured my account of 
earlier days, but my object was, primarily for my own benefit, 
to trace my own mental growth. Perhaps what I have written 
is not so much an account of what I have been but of what 
I have sometimes wanted to be or imagined myself to be. 

Some months ago Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Aiyar stated in 
public that I did not represent mass-feeling, but that I was all 
the more dangerous because of my sacrifices and idealism and 
the fervour of my convictions, which he characterised as ‘ self- 
hypnotisation ’. A person suffering from self-hypnosis can 
hardly judge himself, and, in any event, I would not presume 
to join issue on this personal matter with C.P. We have not 
met &r many years, but there was a time, long ago, when we 
were joint secretaries of the Home Rule League. Since then 
much has happened, and C.P. has risen by ascending spirals 
to dizzy heights and I have remamed of the earth, earthy. 
There is little now in common between us except our common 
nationality. He is to-day a full-blooded apologist of British 
rule in India, especially during the last few years; an admirer 
of dictatorship in India and elsewhere, and himself a shining 
ornament of autocracy in an Indian State. We disagree about 
most things, I suppose, but we agree on one somewhat trivial 
subject. He is absolutely right when he says that I do not 
represent mass-feeling. I have no illusions on that point. 

Indeed, I often wonder if I represent any one at all, and I 
am inclined to think that I do not, though many have kindly 
and friendly feelings towards me. I have become a queer mix- 
ture of the East and West, out of place everywhere, at home 
nowhere. Perhaps my thoughts and Mproach to life are more 
fiTfin to what is called Western than Eastern, but India clings 
to me, as she does to all her children, in innumerable ways; 
and behind me lie, somewhere in the subconscious, racial 
memories of a hundred, or whatever the number may be, 
generations of Brahmans, I cannot get rid of either that past, 
inheritance or my recent acquisitions. They are both part of 
me, and, though they help me in both the East and the West, 



598 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

they also create in me a feeling of spiritual loneliness not only 
in public activities but in life itself I am a stranger and alien 
in the West. I cannot be of it. But in my own country also, 
sometimes, I have an exile’s feeling. 

The distant mountains seem easy of access and climbing, 
the top beckons, but, as one approaches, difficulties appear, 
and the higher one goes the more laborious becomes the 
journey and the summit recedes into the clouds. Yet the 
climbing is worth the effort and has its own joy and satis- 
faction. Perhaps it is the struggle that gives value to life, not 
so much the ultimate result. Often it is difficult to know which 
is the right path; it is easier sometimes to know what is not 
right, and to avoid that is something after all. If I may 
quote, with all humility, the last words of the great Socrates : 
" I know not what death is — ^it may be a good thing, and I am 
not aftaid of it. But I do know that it is a bad thing to desert 
one’s past, and I prefer what may be good to what I know to 
be bad.” 

The years I have spent in prison! Sitting alone, wrapped 
in my thoughts, how many seasons I have seen go by, follow- 
ing each other into oblivion 1 How many moons I have watched 
wax and wane, and the pageant of the stars moving along 
inexorably and majesticaUyl How many yesterdays of my 
youth lie buried here; and sometimes I see the ghosts of these 
dead yesterdays rise up, bringing poignant memories, and 
whispering to me : " Was it worth while? ” There is no hesita- 
tion about the answer. If I were given the chance to go through 
my life again, with my present knowledge and experience 
added, I would no doubt try to make many changes in my 
personal life; I would endeavour to improve in many ways on 
what I had previously done, but my major decisions in public 
affairs would remain untouched. Indeed, I could not vary them, 
for they were stronger than myself, and a force beyond my 
control drove me to them. 

It is almost exactly a year since my conviction; a year has 
gone by out of the two years of my sentence. Another full 
jrear remains, for there are no remissions this time, as simple 
imprisonment carries no such deductions. Even the eleven days 
that I was out in August last have been added on to the period 
of my sentence. But this year too will pass, and I shall go 
out— -and then? I do not know, but I have a feeling that a 
chapter of my fife is over and another chapter will , begin. 
What this is going to be I cannot clearly guess. The leaves of 
the hoo^ of Hfr arp rlnced. 



POSTSCRIPT 


Badenweiler, Scshwarzwald, 
October 25, 1935 

In May last my wife left Bhowali for further treatment in 
Europe. After her departure there were no more visits to 
Bhowali for me, no more fortnightly outings and drives on 
the mountain roads. I missed them, and Almora Gaol seemed 
to be drearier than before. 

News came of the Quetta earthquake, and for a while all 
else was forgotten. But not for long, for the Government of 
India does not allow us to forget it or its peculiar ways. Soon 
we learnt that Rajendra Prasad, the Congress President, and the 
man who knew more about earthquake relief work than almost 
any other person in India, was not permitted to go to Quetta 
and help in relief. Nor could Gandhiji or any other public man 
of note. Many Indian netvspapers had their securities con- 
fiscated for writing articles on Quetta. 

Everywhere the military mentality, the police outlook— in the 
Assembly, in civil government, in bombing on the Frontier. 
Almost it would seem that the British Government in India is 
permanently at war with large sections of' the Indian people. 

The police are a useful and a necessary force, but a world full 
of policemen and the police bludgeon may not, perhaps, be a 
desirable place to live in. It has often been said that an unre- 
strained use of force degrades the user of it as it humiliates 
and degrades the object of it. Few things are more striking 
to-day in India than the progressive deterioration, moral, and 
intellectual, of the higher services, more especially the Indian 
Civil Service. ' This is most in evidence in the superior officials, 
but it nms like a thread throughout the services. Whenever 
occasion arises fi)r making a firesh appointment to the higher 
ranks, the person who represaats the new spirit best is inevit- 
ably chosen. 

On September 4th I was suddenly discharged ftom Almora 
Gaol as news had come that my wife’s condition was critical. 
She was under treatment in Badenwdler in the SchwarEwald 
in Germany. My sentence iras ' suspended ', I was told, and I 

5QO 



60O JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was released five and half months before my time. I hurried 
to Europe by air. 

Europe in turmoil, fearful of war and tumult and with 
economic crises always on the horizon; Abyssinia invaded and 
her people bombed; various imperialist systems in conflict and 
threatening each other; and England, the greatest of the im- 
perialist Powers, standing up for peace and the League Covenant 
while it bombs and ruthlessly oppresses its subject peoples. But 
here in the Black Forest it is c^m and peacenil, and even the 
swastika is not much in evidence. I watch the mists steal up 
the valley and hide the distant frontier of France and cover 
the landscape, and I wonder what lies behind them. 



APPENDIX A 


PLEDGE TAKEN ON INDEPENDENCE DAY 

January i 6 th, 1930 

We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, 
as of any other people, to have fireedom and to enjoy the fruits 
of their toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may 
have full opportunities of growth. We believe also that if any 
government deprives a people of these rights and oppresses 
them, the people have a further right to alter it or to abolish 
it. The British Government in India has not only deprived 
the Indian people of their fireedom but has based itself on the 
exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India economically, 
politically, culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore, that 
India must sever the British connection and attain Puma Swaraj 
or complete independence. 

India has been ruined economicallY. The revenue derived 
from our people is out of all proportion to our income. Our 
average income is seven pice (less than two pence) per day, 
and of the heavy taxes we pay ao per cent, are raised feom the 
land revenue derived J&om the peasantry and 3 per cent, from 
the salt tax, which falls most heavily on the poor. 

Village industries, such as- hand-spinning, have been de- 
stroyed, leaving the peasantry idle for at least four months in 
the year, and dulling their intellect for want of handicrafts, 
and nothing has been substituted, as in other countries, for 
the crafts thus destroyed. 

Customs and currency have been so manipulated as to heap 
further burdens on the peasantry. British manufactured goods 
constitute the bulk of our imports. Customs duties betray clear 
partiality for British manufactures, and revenue firom them is 
used not to lessen the burden on the masses but for sustaining 
a highly extravagant administration. StiU more arbitrary has 
been the manipulation of the exchange ratio which has re- 
sulted in millions being drained away from the country. 

Politically, India’s status has never been so reduced as under 
the British regime. No reforms have given real political power 
to the people. The tallest of us have to bend before foreign 
authority. The rights of fiee expression of opinion and firee 
association have been denied to us, and many of our country- 



6o2 JAWAHARI-Al. NEHRU 

men are compelled to live in exile abroad and cannot return 
to their homes. All administrative talent is killed, and the 
masses have to be satisfied with petty village offices and 
clerkships. 

Culturally, the system of education has tom us from our 
moorings, and our training has made us hug the very chains 
that bind us. 

Spiritually, compulsory disarmament has made us unmanly 
and the presence of an alien army of occupation, employed 
with deadly effect to crush in us the spirit of resistance, has 
made us think that we cannot look after ourselves or put up a 
defence against foreign aggression, or even defend our homes 
and families- from the attacks of thieves, robbers, and 
miscreants. 

We hold it to be a crime against man and God to submit 
any longer to a rule that has caused this fourfold disaster to 
our country. We recognise, however, that the most effective 
way of gaining our freedom is not through violence. We 
will therefore prepare ourselves by withdrawing, so far as we 
can, all voluntary association from the British Government, 
and will prepare for civil disobedience, including non-payment 
of taxes. We are convinced that if we can but withdraw our 
voluntary help and stop payment of taxes without doing 
violence, even under provocation, the end of this inhuman 
rule is assured. We therefore hereby solemnly resolve to carry 
out the Congress instructions issued from time to time for the 
purpose of establishing Puma Swaraj. 



APPENDIX B 


hetter dated August i^th, 1930, sent by Congress leaders in 

Yeravda Prison to Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. M. R. 

Jayakar containing suggested conditions for peace. 

Yeravda Central Prison, 
i^th August. 1930. 

Dear Friends, 

We are deeply grateful to you for having undertaken the duty 
of trying to effect a peaceful settlement between the British 
Government and the Congress. After having perused the corre- 
spondence between yourselves and His Excellency the Viceroy, 
and having had the benefit of protracted talks with you, and 
having discussed among ourselves, we have come to the con- 
clusion that the time is not yet ripe for securing a settlement 
honourable for our country. Marvellous as has been the mass 
awakening during the past five months, and great as has been 
the suffering of the people among all grades and classes repre- 
senting the different creeds, we feel that the sufferings have been 
neither sustained enough nor large enough for the immediate 
attainment of ’ the end. Needless to mention, we do not in any 
way share your view or the Viceroy’s that civil disobedience 
has harmed the country or that it is ill-timed or unconstitu- 
tional. English history teems with instances of bloody revolts 
whose praises Englishmen have sung unstintingly and taught 
us to do likewise. It therefore ill becomes the Viceroy or any 
intelligent Englishman to condemn a revolt that is in intention, 
and that has overwhelmingly remained in execution, peaceful, 
but we have no desire to quarrel with condemnation, whether 
official or unoffidal, of the present civil disobedience campaign. 
The wonderful mass response to the movement is, we hold, its 
sufficient justification. What is, however, the point here is the 
fact that we gladly make common cause with you in wishing, 
if it is at all possible, to stop or suspend civil disobedience. It 
can he no pleasure to us needlessly to expose the men, women 
and children of our country to imprisonment, lathi charges 
and worse. You will, therefore, believe us when we assure you, 
and through you the Viceroy, that we would leave no stone 
tmturned to explore any and every channel for honourable 
peace, but we are free to confess as yet we see no such sign oti 



6o4 jawaharlal nehru 

the horizon. We notice no symptom of conversion of the 
English official world to the view that it is India’s men and 
women who must decide what is best for India. We distrust the 
pious declarations of the good intentions, often well meant, of 
officials. The age-long exploitation by the English of the people 
of this ancient land has rendered them almost incapable of 
seeing the ruin, moral, economic and political, of our country 
which this exploitation has brought about. They cannot per- 
suade themselves to see that the one thing needful for them to 
do is get off our backs and do some reparation for the past 
wrongs by helping us to grow out of the dwarfing process that 
has gone on for a century of British domination. 

But we know that you and some of our learned countrymen 
think differently. You believe a conversion has taken place, at 
any rate, sufficient to warrant participation in the proposed 
Conference. In spite, therefore,- of the limitation we are labour- 
ing under, we would gladly co-operate with you to the extent of 
our ability. 

The following is the utmost response it is possible for us, 
circumstanced as we are, to make to your friendly endeavour : 

(1) We feed the language used by the Viceroy in the reply 
given to your letter about the proposed conference is too vague 
to enable us to assess its value in terms of the National Demand 
framed last year in Lahore, nor are we in a position to say any- 
thing authoritative without reference to a properly constituted 
meeting of the Working Committee of the Congress and, if 
necessary, to the All-India Congress Committee; but we can say 
that for us individually no solution will be satisfactory unless 

(a) it recognises, in as many words, the right of India to 
secede at wiU from the British Empire, 

(b) it gives to India complete national government respon- 
sible to her people, including the control of defence forces 
and economic control, and covers all the eleven points raised 
in Gandhiji’s letter to the Viceroy, and 

(c) it gives to India the right to refer, if necessary, to an 
independent tribtmal such British dauns, concessions and the 
like, including the so-called public debt of India, as may 
seem to the National Government to be unjust or not in the 
mterest of the people of India. 

Note . — Such adjustments as may be necessitated in the 
interests of India during the transference of power to be 
determined by India’s chosen representatives. 

(2) If the foregoing appears to be feasible to the British 
Government and a satismetory declaration is made to that 



APPENDICES 


605 

effect, we should recommend to the Working Committee the 
advisability of calling off civil disobedience, that is to say, 
disobedience of certain laws for the sake of disobedience. But 
peaceful picketing of foreign cloth and liquor will be continued 
unless Government themselves can enforce prohibition of 
liquor and foreign cloth. The manufacture of salt by the 
people will have to be continued and the penal clauses of the 
Salt Act should not be enforced. Tliere will be no raids on 
Government or private salt depots. 

(3) Simultaneously with the calling off of civil disobedience 

(a) all the satyagraha prisoners and other political prisoners, 
convicted or under trial, who have not been guilty of violence 
or incitement to violence, should be ordered to be released; 

(b) properties confiscated under the Salt Act, the Press Act, 
the Revenue Act, and the like, should be restored; 

(c) fines and securities taken from convicted satyagrahas or 
under the Press Act should be refunded; 

(d) all the ofiicers, including village officers, who have 
resided or who may have been dismissed during the civil 
disobedience movement and who may desire to rejoin 
Government service, should be reinstated. 

lVote.“The foregoing sub-clauses refer also to the non- 
co-operation period. 

(e) All the Viceregal Ordinances should be repealed. 

(4) The question of the composition of the proposed Con- 
ference and of the Congress being represented at it, can only 
be decided after the foregoing preliminaries are satisfactorily 
settled. 

Yourt sincerely, 

MoTiLAt Nehru 
M. K. Gandhi 
Sarojini Natou 
Vaixabhbhai Patel 
Jairamdas Doulatram 
Syed Mahmud 
Jawaharlal Nehru 



APPENDIX C 


RESOLUTION OF REMEMBRANCE 

January ■z 6 th, 1931 

We, the citizens of ^yjh^record our proud and grateful 
appreciation of the sons and daughters of India who have 
taken part in the great struggle for independence and have 
suffered and sacrificed so that the motherland may be free; of 
our great and beloved leader, Mahatma Gandhi, who has been 
a constant inspiration for us, ever pointing to the path of high 
purpose and noble endeavour; of the hundreds of our brave 
youths who have laid down their lives at the altar of freedom; 
of the martyrs of Peshawar and the whole Frontier Province, 
Sholapur, Midnapur District, and Bombay: of the scores of 
thousands who have faced and suffered barbarous lathi attacks 
from the forces of the enemy; of the men of the Garhwali 
Regiment, and all other Indians in the military and the police 
ranks of the Government, who have refused, at the peril of 
their own lives, to fire or take other action against their own 
countrymen; of the indomitable peasantry of Gujrat, which 
has faced without flinching and turning back all manner of 
acts of terrorism, and the brave and long-suflfering peasantry 
of the other parts of India, which has taken full part in the 
struggle despite every effort to suppress it; of the merchants 
and the other members of the commercial community, who 
have helped, at great loss to themselves, in the national struggle 
and especially in the boycotts of foreign cloth and British 
goods; of the one hundred thousand men and women who have 
gone to the prisons and suffered all manner of privation and 
sometimes assaults and beatings even inside the gaol walls; and 
especially of the ordinary volunteer who, like a true soldier of 
India, without care of fame or reward, thinking only of the 
great cause he served, has laboured unceasingly and peacefully 
uirough suffering and hardship. 

And we record our homage and deep admiration for the 
womanhood of India, who, in the hour of peril for the mother- 
land forsook the shelter of their homes and, with un&iling 
courage and endurance, stood shoulder to shoulder with their 
menfolk in the front line of India’s national army, to share 
with them the sacrifices and triumphs of the struggle; and our 



APPENDICES 


607 

pride at the youth of the country and the Vanar Sena, whom 
even their tender age could not prevent from participating in 
the struggle and offering martyrs for the cause. 

And, fiirther, we record our grateful appreciation of the fact 
that all the major and minor communities and classes in India 
have joined together in the great struggle and given of their 
best to the cause; of, particularly, the minority communities — 
the Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis, Christians and others who, by their 
valour and loyal devotion to the cause of the common mother- 
land, have helped in building up a united and indissoluble 
nation, certain of victory, and resolved to achieve and main- 
tain the independence of India, and to use this new freedom to 
raise the shackles from, and to remove the inequalities among, 
all classes of the people of India, and thus also to serve the 
larger cause of humanity. And with this splendid and inspiring 
example of sacrifice and suffering in India’s cause before us, we 
repeat our Pledge of Independence, and resolve to carry on the 
fight till India is completely free. 




INDEX 


A 

Aga Khan, The, 117, 393, 394, 465- 
468 

Agra, 3, 3, 338, 463 
Ahmedabad, 43, 88, 100, 136, 310, 
313 , 348, 365, 589 

Aiyar, Sir C.P.Ramaswamy, 533, 597 
Ajmer. 459 
Akalis, 109 
Akbarpur, 61 

Ali, Maulana Mohamad, 45, 46, 71, | 


Anuradhapura, 271 
Apollonius of Tyana, 1 5 
Asansol, 361 
Aurungzeb, i 

Azad, Chandrashckhar, 261, 262 

Maulana Abul Kalam, 90, 97, 

195, 337, 466 


B 


73, 78, 87, 90, 99, 117-130, 139, 466 

Munshi Mubarak, 8 

M. Shankat, 46 

Syed Raza, 46, 71, 73, 78, 90, 

466 

Aligarh College, 463, 464, 466, 470, 

47*. 473 

Alipore Gaol, 358, 495-498, 504, 507, 

509. 5>3. 553. 554. 559 
Allahabad, 3-6, 8, 10, la, 15, 33, 30, 
32. 33. 35. 4a. 46. 5'. 53. 56. 60. ^7. 
71. 79. 80, 88, 96, 100, loi, 113, 

1 14. I3I, 133, 140-143, 147, 178, 
303, 313, 314, 331-333, 335-337, 
339, 340, 343, 345-247. 349, 363, 
368, 387, 398, 305, 312, 316-319, 
3^3. 330, 334. 335. 338. 450. 473. 
479, 481, 484, 491,561,564. 

Almora Prison, 356, 568, 569, 571, 

595. 596. 599- 
Aluvihare, Bernard, 333 
AmanuUah, 50, 471 
Amaranath, 430 
Ambala, 114 

Amritsar, 43-44, 71, 109, 115, 190 
Anand Bhawan, 96, 235, 234, 33a, 335 
Andaman Islands, 316, 384, 386 
Andrews, Charles F„ 66, 375, 385, 
398 

Aney, Mr., 573 

Ansari, Dr. M. A., 17, 108, t68, 169. 
189, 346, 351, 309, 466 i 

RR (ki 


I Babu, Rajendra, 391, 484, 489 
: Badaun, 8 
' Badcnwcilcr, 599 
I Badrinath, 430 
i Bakulia, 332 
Baldwin, Roger, 154 
Bangalore, 273 
Bardoli Satyagraha, 171 
Bareilly District Gaol, 335, 336, 346, 
348. 349. 357 
Barkatulla, Moulvi, 15 1 
Baroda, Gaekwar of, iS 
Basu, Bhupendra Nath, 37 
Befaar, 54, 338, 463, 481, 484, 485. 

488-490, 537, 536 
Belgaum, t33 

Benares, 8, 15, 274, 420, 456. 458, 501 

Gaol, 350 

Hindu University, 158 

Bengal, 18, 23, 34, 27. 39, 34, 54, 79, 
80, 140, 175, 188, 193, 261, 374. 
276-278, 285, 309, 311-313, 3J5, 
3? I. 342, 384, 39J. 395, 405, 463. 
466, 479, 483, 498, 536, 575, 576. 

589. 590 

Bennett, Mr., 579 
Berlin, 151, 161 

Besant, Mrs. Annie, 14-16, 31, 33, 34, 

*67. 533 
Bharadwaj, 303 
Bhowaii, 568, 571, 590 
Bikaner, Maharaja of, 530 



JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 


610 

Blavatsky, Madame, 15 
Bleriot, 18 
Block, Ivan, 20 
Blunt, Wilfrid Scawen, 64 
Boer War, 12 
Bolton, Glorney, a86 
Bombay, 3, a6, 29, 47, 100, 124, 147, 
183, 187, 215, ai6, 227, 228, 238, 
245, 248, 249, 255, 274, 285, 312, 
3 ' 7-3 '9. 3»*> 3 ^‘ 3 - 3 H' 3^8, 364, 

363. 395. 404 < 405* 407 > 450. 57 ». 
589 

Bose, Subhas, 173, 197, 39 J, J 7 o 
Brailsford, Mr. H. N., 535 
Brooks, Ferdinand T., 14, 16 
Brussels, 161 

Buchman, Frank, 134, 155 
Butler, Sir Harcourt, 50, 92 


C 

Calcutta, 3, 27, 29, 59, 63, 65-67, 80, 
87, 100, 133, 184-188, 191, 197, 
aoi, 236, 240, 243, 315, 316, 360, 
361, 364, 365, 389, 390, 395, 407, 
475. 479-48 1 . 483, 492. 493, 553 
Cama, Madame, 151 
Cambrai, 447 
Cambridge, 279, 395 
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H., 17 
Casement, Roger, 35 
Cawnpore, 3, 4, 147, 269, 270, 325. 
338. 376, 535 

Ceylon, 247, 271, 272, 274, 277, 323 
Chamba, 132, 133 
Chamberlain, Mr. Neville, 386 
Charaparan, 35, 49 
Charvaka, 118 

Chattopadhyaya, Virendranath, 153, 
>54 

Chauri Chaura, 81, 82, 84, 85, 124, 
209 

Chelmsford, Lord. 540 
Chetwodc, Sir Philip, 446 
Chintamani, C. Y., 32, 423 
Chirol, Sir Valentine, 67, 464, 465 
Chittagong, 313-315 


Christa Seva Sangh, 375 
Churchill, Mr. Winston, 391, 584 
Civil Disobedience Movement, 85, 1 20 
Cochin, 272, 273, 531 
Coconada, 117, 120, 12 1 
Cologne, 164 
Colombo, 165 
Comorin, Cape, 272, 430 
Congress, The National, passim 
Coomaraswamy, Dr. Ananda, 433 
Cooper, Frederick, 329 
Cowasji, Sir, 299 
Currie, Sir William, 579 


D 

Dalhousic, 132, 133 
Dandi, 213 

Dar, Pandit Bishan Narayan, 13 
Das, Mr. C. R., 42, 43, 50, 64, 65, 67, 
72, 79, 87, 94, 99, 100, 104, 107, 
108, 125, 126, 128, 132, 133, 159, 
160, 532 

Jatindranath, 193, 194 

David, E. V., 376 
Dayal, Har, 22 
Defence of India Act, 3 1 
Debra Dun Prison, 50, 233, 27 1, 336, 
345. 346. 349. 353. 356. 358, 385. 
398. 553. 554. 559. 56>. 5^9 

Military Academy, 448 • 

Delhi, I, 2, 14, 37, 42-45, 109, no, 
114, 119, 139, 140, 160, 168-170, 
176, 182, 195, 250, 256, 262, 267, 
301, 309, 360, 381, 473, 475 

New, 29, 171. 251, 321, 438 

Desai, Mahadev, 94 
Dewey, Professor John, 380 
Dickinson, G. Lowes, 19, 28 
Digby, William, 426 
Doulatram, Jairamdas, 229 
Dumont, Santos, 18 
Dfisseldorf, 164 
Dutdi Indies, 236 
Dutt, B. K., (92 
Romesh, 426 



INDEX 


Dwarka, 430 
Dyer, General, 43 


E 

Ebbing, Kraft, 30 
Edge, Sir John, 287 
Edinburgh, 243, 249 
Einstein, 163 
Ellis, Havelock, 20 
Elwin, Mr. Verrier, 392, 403 
Emerson, Mr., 299, 300 
Etawah, 318, 319 


F 

Farman, 18 
Farrukhsiar, 1 
Foch, Marshal, 334 
Forster, E. M., 28 
Frasad, Rajen^a, 488 
Freud, 15 

Fricderlchshafen, 25 

Frontier Province, 380, 385, 31 1-3 13, 

3 a>. 3*7. 34 *. 39 *. 555 
Fyzablid, 53, 61 


G 

Gandhi, Devadas, 94 
Gandhiji, 39, 34, 35 . 4 *. 4 *. 44 - 47 . 
49, 54, 61, 63-68, 71-73, 75-77.81- 
88, 90, 95, 99, 104, 1 19, 134, 136, 
137, 139-133, 136, 139, 154, 167, 
169, 173, 185, 186, 191, 193, 194, 

*95. *97. *07. *<* 9 . **o. **». 

313, 315, 323, 337-339, 34SS47, 
349-358, 360, a6i, 365-369, 374- 
*77. * 79 . ® 8 o, 283-293, 394, 395, 
399. 300. 303. 3 ° 5 . 3 ® 7 . 309-3*3. 
317-3*9. 3 **. 3 * 2 . 327. 328, 336- 
338, 36s, 368, 370-373,; 379, 381, 
384-386, 397, 398, 402^406, 408- 


61 1 

410, 412, 413, 418, 451, 473-478, 
489, 490, 494, 504, 505, 507-513, 

5 *5-5 >8.' 520-523. 525. 526, 528, 
532-540. 542 . 544 , 547-549, 554, 
555. 558. 563-565. 573. 574. 58*. 
59“. 599 

Ganges, 8 , 57, 131, 122, 247 
Gaya, 107 

Geneva, 33, 148-150, 154, 155, 158, 
186, 199 

Ghose, Aravindo, 31 

Syt Motilal, 66 

Ghosh, Sir Rash Behary, 35, 36 
Gidwani, A T., no, 115, 116 
Gokhale, G. K., 23, 37, 30, 36, 64, 195, 
223, 441 
Gorakhpur, 19 1 

Gujrat, 54, 108, 171, 231, 265, 337, 

405. 489, 536 

Gupta, Shiva Prasad, 456 
Gurdwara Movement, 109, 115 
Guru-Ka-Bagh, 109 


H 

Haig, Lord, 447 

Sir Harry, 584 

Hailey, Sir Malcolm, 365, 377, 303, 
SO*. 590 
Harda, 230 
Hardayal, 153, 153 
Haidiker, Dr. N. S., 130, 131,316, 317 
Harrison, Mr., 3 
Hanow, 14, 17 
Hart, Captain Liddell, 447 
Heard, Mr. Gerald, 413 
Hearn, Lafcadio, 16 
Henderson, Mr. Arthur, 583 , 

Hijli, 3*3. 3*4 

Hindu Mabasabha, 157, 159, 169,383, 

458. 459. 466, 467. 534. 556. 576. 

577 

Hindu University, Benares, 533 
Hindustani Seva Dal, 120, lai 
Hitler, 153, 341, 364, 434 
Hoare, Sir Samuel, 333, 335, 571, 583 



6i 2 JW\rTARI 

Homr Rule League, 31, 32 
HuWi, 317 

Ilunrrr Committee of Inquiry, 43 
Hyrlcrabad, 373-374, 533 


I 

India House, 33, 149 

Indian Defence Torcc, 33 

Inner Temple, 279 

International Labour Office, 148, 14O 

Iqbal, Sir Mohamad, 459 

Iradatganj, 319 

Irwin, Lady> 247 

Lord, 195, 197, 326. 238, 230, 

347. 349, 250, 356-258, 360, 383, 
299. 333 

Ismail, Sir Mirza, 501 
Italy, 15 1 
Itarsi, 330 

Iyer, Sir P. S. Swaswamy, 434 


J 

JaSna, 272 

Jaito, 109-111, 115 

Jallianwala Bagh, 42, 43, 71, 190, 213 

Jamalpur, 4S5 

Jambusar, 31a 

Jamshedpur, 188 

Jayakar, M. R., 326, 337, 329, 331, 
286, 468 

Jdlicoe, Lord, 447 
Jharia, 186, 187 

Jinnah, M. A., 67, 197, 466, 532 
JofiEre, Marshal, 447 
Joseph, George. 94, 95 
joshi, N. M., 186, 187 
Jubbulpore, 473, 475 
Juhu, 134 
Jumna, 121, 234 


K 

Kabul, 158, 450, 471 
Kaira, 49 


A I, XEHRU 

Kalka, 285 
Kapurthala, 18 
Karachi, 87, 265, 267-270 
Karnatak, 337 
Karnataka, 316-318 
Kashipiir, 349 

Kashmir, i, 8, 30, 37, 369, 533 
Kaul, Raj, i 

Kelkar, Mr. N. C., 533, 533 
Kemal Pasha, 471 

Khan, Khan Abdul GhallaT, 202, 265, 
274, 378-380, 319, 556, 570 

Hiikim Ajmal, 168-170, 279, 

3>9 

Sir Syed Alimad, 460-464. 470 

Khaparde, Mr., 36 
Khetri State, 3 

Khilafat Question, 40, 45-47, 63, 69, 
71, 95, 87, 99, 100, 169, 471 
Khudai Khidmatgars, 555, 556 
Khwaja, A. M., 23 
Kidwai, Rafi Ahmad, 307, 401, 479 
King, Mr., 579 
Kirkee, 328 

Kitchlew, Sai£-ud-Din, 23 
Komagata Maru, 40 
Krishnavartna, Shyamaji, 22, 33, 148, 
•49 

Kunzu, Pandit Hriday Nath, 409 
Kuo-Min-Tang, 161, 162 


L 

Lahore, 43, 120, 174, 176, 190, 193- 

•95. 197. ®OI, 302 

Lai Bazaar Police Station, 493 

Mirza Mohan, 14 

Lambert, Comte de, 25 
Lansbury, Mr. George, 162 
Latham, 18 
Lawes, Lewis E., 330 
League of Nations, 148, 149 
Lindberg, 25 
Lloyd, Lord, 467, 468 
Lloyd George, Mr., 329, 447, 586 
London, 17, no, 164, 381 



INDEX 


Lucknow, 3a, 33, 33, 56, gi, 147, 169, 
> 7 *. > 73 . 177-179. ' 94 . 233. 244. 
246, 247, 262, 305, 338. 399, 405, 
450. 462. 582 

Lucknow District Gaol, 93, 95, 98, 
356. 4 S<J 

Lytton, Lord, 501 


M 

MacDonald, Ramsay, 243, 370, 515, 

583 

Madras, no, 165, 167, 168, 182, 477 
Maharashtra, 18, 23, 53 
Mahmud, Syed, 22, 216, 225, 228, 
229, 230, 235 
"Majlis”, 21, 22 
Malabar, 18a, 272, 273 
Malaviya, Kapil Dev, 1 13 

Pandit Madan Mohan, 34, 42. 

121-123, iS7->59. 2><5. 228, 239, 
361. 458. 333. 534 . 573 
Marseilles, 165 

Martin, Lieut.-Colonel, 229, 230 
Marx, 591 

Mears, Sir Grimwood, roi 

Meerut, 71, 189, 199 

— ^ Case, 364 

Mehta, Jivraj, 246 

Menon, Mr. V. K. Krishna, 583 

Minto, Lord, 465 

Minto-Morley Scheme, 27 

Monghyr, 485, 488 

Montagu, Edwin, 21, 33 

Montagu-Chelmsford Report, 33, 36. 

4 J. 44 . 375 
Montana, 148 
Montreux, 150 
Moonje, Dr„ 391 
Moplah, 87 
Morley, John, 500 
Moscow, 154, 164, 2(58 
Moslem League, 31, 46, 47, 67 
Muir Central College, 3 
Mukerji, Dhan Gopal, 154 
Mussolini, 341 

Mussoorie, 50, 51, 57. 216, 231, 233 


Miizaffarpiir, 484, 487, 48S 
'■ Mysore, 272, 273, 502 


N 

Nabha, 1 09-1 14, 116, 125, 134 
Gaol, 1 15 

Nagpur, 60. 67, 69, 108, 197, 199 
Naidu, S.irojini, 35, 67, 212, 229 

Mrs. Sarojini, 274, 292, 532, 594 

Naini, 227, 229, 330, 334, 235, 240, 
277. 305. 320. 553 

Gaol, 92, 120, 216, 217, 226, 

328, 238, 239, 343-345, 379, 322- 
3 * 4 . 336. 349. 356. 398. 565. 566. 
568, 595 

Naoroji, Dadabhai, 426 
Nath, Raja Narendra, 169 
Nehru, Bans! Dhar, 3 

Canga Dhar, 3 

Mrs., 7. 16, 247, 334, 333-335. 

345. 398. 399. 4 ‘>». 450. 48 «. 

49a. 565 

Indira, 371, 345, 371, 483, 561, 

563 

Nehru, Jawaharlal, early family his- 
tory, 1-5: home life in childhood, 
6-11: "Anand Bhawan”, la; 
" prayashchit ”, "purdah", 13; 
English studies and Theosophy, 14, 
15; family sail for England, 16; 
Harrow and Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, 18-20; “The Magpie and 
Stump ”, 21, • Inner Temple, 24; an 
adventure in Norway, called to the 
Bar, return to India, 26; join .the 
High Court, 28; relations of Eng- 
lish with Indians, 29; Mrs. Besant 
I and English politics, 32; politics, a 

j thorny subject, 34; losing interest 

j in law, 35; married, 37; an adven* 

1 ture in the Him.'il.'iy.is, 37, 38; the 

I Rowlatt Bills, 40; G.^ndhiji and 

I Satyagraha Sabha, 41; visit Am- 

■ ritsar, 43; non-violence non-co- 

I operation movement, 45-^47; short- 

, comings of "nationalist” netVs- 



JAWAHARLAL NEllRU 


614 

Nehru, Jawaharlal — (Continued). 
papers, 48; ktsan (peasant) move- 
ment, 49; their misery, 52; Rama- 
chandra’s agitation, 53; vices of the 
zamindari system, 34; visit the 
villages, 56; growing agrarian 
movement, 57-59; a telegram from 
Rae Bareli, 60; the " charkha ” 
seditious, 61; trouble in Fyzabad, 
61, 62; Swaraj, 63: Congress poli- 
tics, 65-70; nervousness of British 
officials, fears of a rising, 70, 71; 
nationalism in 1921, 75; absorbed 
in Swaraj, 76: arrested, 79; Prince 
of Wales's visit, 80: mass arrests, 
civil resistance suspended, 81; 
Gandhiji arrested, 81; Gandhiji’s 
policy, 85, 86; communal friction, 
87; am released, 88; boycott of 
foreign cloth, 8g; sentenced again, 
89; imprisonment and prison life, 
90-97; release, 98; Allahabad 
Klunicipality, too; Sir Grimwood 
Mears, loi; social relations, loi, 
102; criticism of native Ministers, 
102, 103; money troubles, 106; 
salaried posts, 107: Congress 
troubles, Swarajists and No- 
changers, Gurdwara movement, 
loS, 109; Jaito, Nabha gaol and 
Nabha procedure, i lo-i 12; Indian 
State administration, 113; release 
•'and illness, 114, 115; Secretary of 
the All-India Congress, 117; reli- 
gious feuds, communal question, 
1 1 8-! 20; Hindustani Seva Dal, 121; 
bathing in the Ganges, 121-123; 
trip to Juhu, 124; rift in Congress, 
Gandhiji and Swarajists, the “ spin- 
ning franchise’’, 124-128; Hindu- 
Muslim tension, renegade Con- 
gressmen, 132-136; reform or re- 
volution, 137; job-hunting, 138; 
Nationalist Muslim Party, Unity 
Conferences, 138; Ram Lila cele- 
bration, 14 1 : municipal work, why 
local bodies are inefficient, 142- 
146; resign my chairmanship, 147; 


quiet days in Switzerland, 148-151; 
Indian politiciil exiles, 152- 154; 
visit England, 156; a new Nation- 
alist Party, 157-159; canker of 
communalism, 159, 160; Congress 
of Oppressed Nationalities in Brus- 
sels, t6i, 162: return home to 
politics again, 165, 166; a batch of 
resolutions, 167; Congress Secre- 
taryship, 168: Republican Con- 
ference, 168; Trade Union move- 
ment, 170; peasants’ agitation, 
171; Simon Commission, Nehru 
Committee, 171, 172; difficulties at 
All-Parties Conference, 172, 173; 
incident in Lahore, 174; waning 
of terrorism, 175; Bhagat Singh, 
177; Simon Commission at Luck- 
now, 178-180; independence and 
social freedom, 182, 183; rumours 
of arrest, 184; All-India Trade- 
Union Congress, 186; president of 
the T.U.C., 187: arrests of labour 
leaders, 188; Meerut Case Defence 
Committee, 189; khadi propa- 
ganda, 191, 192: terrorist activity, 
hunger strike, 193; succeed father 
as president of Congress, 194: 
Round Table Conference an- 
nounced, 195; interview with Lord 
Irwin, 197; Congress and Labour, 
198; Whitley Commission, 198: 
split in Labour movement, 199; 
Lahore Congress and Indepen- 
dence, 201 ; Independence Day, 
202; visits from pilgrims, 203: 
popularity and hero-worship, 204- 
208; Civil Disobedience, 209; 
Dandi Salt March, a 10; arrested, 
213; women in the national 
struggle, 214; Naini Central Prison, 
217; prison population, horrors of 
prison system, 220-224: peace 
efforts, 227-229; release, 231; no- 
tax campaign, 231-233; rearrested, 
234; Civil Disobedience spreads, 
235; fear of agrarian upheaval, 
237: prison flogitinEs, 238; life in 



INDEX 


Nehru, Jawaharlal — {Continued). 
Naini, 239; Round Table Con- 
ference, dominion status, alarm of 
vested interests, 241, 242; Resolu- 
tion of Remembrance, 243; dele- 
gates return home, 249; talks at 
Delhi, 250-256; the Delhi Pact, 
257; Civil Disobedience prisoners 
released, 263; agrarian problem, 
264; Karachi Congress, 265, 166; 
interview with M. N. Roy, 265; 
Ahrar Party, Hindu-Muslim riots, 
269: Ceylon, 271; back to India, 
272: White Jews, Syrian Christians, 
273; second Round Table Con- 
ference, 276; Bengal Terrorism, 
agrarian riots, 277; Khudai Khid- 
matgar, 278; "Frontier Gandhi”, 
279; India’s basic problem is the 
land, 281; second Round Table 
Conference, 285; journalist fic- 
tions, 286-290; Conference unsatis- 
factory, 292; jobbery, reaction and 
vested interests, 293-295; agrarian 
trouble in the U.P., 297; starving 
peasantry, rent and debts, 302-308; 
repressive policy, 309: approaching 
crisis, 309; incident in Hijli, 313; 
Chittagong shooting, 314; un- 
wisdom of terrorism, 315, 316; 
special Ordinance, public activities 
forbidden, arrested, 317-320; con- 
demned to rigorous imprisonment, 
322; Congress declared illegal, and 
abused by the Press, 323-326; 
Government coercion, 327-329; 
severe treatment of women, 330; 
rdease and rearrest, 336; Civil 
Disobedience practically killed, 
338; third Round Table Confer- 
ence, 34 1 ; police punitive measures, 
whippings, treatment of women 
prisoners, 342, 343; gaol routine, 
348; Debra Dun Gaol, 353; wasps, 
hornets, bats and other animals, 
355-359; thoughts about Russia 
and world conditions, 361-363; 
Communist criticism of Congress, 


61/; 

365; political independence the aim 
of Congress, 366; the peasantry, 
368; the depressed classes, 372; the 
intrusion of religion, 374-380; 
Harijan movement, 381 ; Sarda Act 
a failure, 383; further suspension 
of Civil Disobedience, 384; the 
White Paper, 386; how received by 
Liberals and Responsivists, 38S- 
390; release, 398; India under 
coercion, 399; personal matters to 
attend to, 402; talks with Gandhiji, 
403; Socialism and Communism 
in India, 407; Indian Liberals a 
colourless and vanishing species, 
409-413; Congress originally a 
middle-class body, 416; “Indiani- 
sation ”, 417: " Dominion Status ”, 
418; " Tiger of Imperialism ”, 419; 
White Paper a barrier to progress, 
423; British protection is Indian 
subjection, 427 ; English ignorance 
of India, 429; Bharat Mata, 431; 
what has Briti^ rule done for 
India, 433-436; India a servile 
State, 437; sycophancy and nepo- 
tism, 440; adulation of the I.C.S., 
441-444; burden of the Defence 
Services, 446; ineptitude of Gen- 
erals, 447; language question in 
India, 453, 454; my address at the 
Hindu University, 458; Commu- 
nalism in India partly a struggle 
for jobs, 460-466; the "Muslim 
nation ”, 469; " Muslim cultme ”, 
470; religion and politics parting 
company, 472; fear of rearrest, 473; 
Press articles and censorship, 475; 
attend to domestic affairs, 478; in- 
dependence Day, 479: earthquake, 
481; I denounce terrorism in 
Bengal, 482; earthquake relief 
work, 484-487; return from rdief 
work and rearrest, 491; Court pro- 
ceedings in Calcutta, 493; im- 
prisoned for the seventh tim^ 494; 
Alipore Central Gaol, 495-49?? 
liberty under an eclipse, 498; not 



6l6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Nehru, Jawaharlal — (Conttnued). 
intended for India, 500; Civil 
Disobedience withdrawn, 504; 
Gandhiji’s reasons, 505; recognise 
Gandhiji’s services, 508; some criti- 
cism of Gandhiji’s philosophy of 
life, 511-519: the myth of a past 
Golden Age, 530; Socialism the 
cure for world evils, 533; the khadi 
movement, 534; village industries, 
335; mass production, 537: demo- 
cracy and capitalism incompatible, 
529; autocracy of the Indian states, 
330; rapacity of the money-lender, 
335; the doctrine of non-violence 
examined, 537-551: transferred to 
Dehra Dun, 353; confusion in Con- 
gress ranks, 333; Congress bans 
class-war and looks forward to the 
elections, 337; begin this autobio- 
graphical narrative, 539; tempor- 
ary release, 560, 561 ; retrospect of 
married life, 363; local squabbles, 
564: back to Naini Prison, 563; 
journey to Almora Gaol, 368, 569: 
Bombay session of Congress, Gand- 
hiji's withdrawal, 573, 574: the 
Communal Award, 373; the Otta- 
wa agreements, 578-581; position 
of Indian Princes improved, 584; 
India and British foreign policy, 
586; vested interests alarmed at 
prospect of change, 587-390; pov- 
erty of the peasantry, 390; signs of 
Fascism, 590, 391; Marxism, 391, 
593; the clog of Communalism, 
393; the " united front ”, 394; the 
jugli, 59s; my book ended, and 
survey of past activides, 396-598; 
deterioration of the LC.S., my re- 
lease from Almora, 599; in the 
Black Forest, 600 

Nehru, Kamala, 312, 314, 334, 326, 
331, 333-336, 340, 344, 348, 371, 
*74. 3*7. 318, 334, 343, 450, 479- 
481, 483, 491, 494, 514, 334, 361- 
568. 570, 571, 599 

Krishna, sjs, 340, 403, 430,^94 


Lakshmi Narayan, a 

Mohanlal, 333 

Pandit Motilal, 3-8, 10-13, 13- 

17, 33-33, 3*. 34. 36. 4'. 4*. 44. 
50. 5*. 64, 63, 79, 88, 93, loi, 
104-107, 1 13, 136, 139-133, 
160, 164, 163, 169, 178, 184, 183, 
195, 303-203, 307, 2 1 3-3 1 4, 216, 
235-231, 233-336, 340, 243, 
243-347, 287, 333, 387 

Nand Lai, 3, 4, 8 

Nepal, 488 
Nevinson, H. W., 33 
Newton, 83 
Nietzsche, 19 
Norway, 35, 36 
Nuwara Eliya, .347, 37 1 


O 

Obeidulla, Moulvi, 151, 159 

Olcott, Colonel, 15 

Oudh, S3, 59, 62, 171, 398, 463 

Barons of, 33 

Tenancy Law, 58 

Oxford Group Movement, 154, 155 


P 

Pal, Bepin Chandra, 32 
Pandit, Ranjit S., 30, 147, 331, 335, 
339, 344, 345, 347, 333, 345, 566 
Pant, Govind Ballabh, 177, 178, 180, 
*64. 30s. 307. 346. 349 
Partabgarh, 51, 53, 57, 39-61 
Passchendaele, 447 
Patel, Sardar Vallabhbhai, 100, 171, 
328, 265, 32a, 337, 533 

Vithalbhai, 100, 190, 193, 197, 

239, 386-288, 309, 395, 438 
Pater, Walter, 30, 65 
Patiala, 109 

Maharaja of, 530 

Patna, 484, 491, 334 
Peshawar, 214 



INDEX 


Pillai, Champakraman, 1 53 
Pirow, Mr. O., 580 
Pole, Major D. Craham, 441 
Poona, 19, 24, 124, 228, 230, 371, 372, 
375. 385. 390. 402, 409. 450 
Prakasa, Sri, 297 
Prasad, Narmada, 230, 235, 323 
Prasal, Rajendra, 599 
Pratap, Raja Mahendra, 150, 151 
Prince of Wales, 79, 87, 205, 289 
Punjab, 18. 31, 34, 40, 42, 54, 63, 65, 
69, 71, 90, 109, 140, 159, 169, 172, 
174, 175, 1 8a, 190, 265, 269, 466, 
467. 536. 54“ 

Puri, 430 
Pythagoras, 15 

Q 

Quetta, 599 

Rae Bareli, 53, 60, 61, 332 
Rai, Lala Lajpat, 18, 22, 63, 64, 72, 
151. iS7->59. 174-177. >93 
Raipur, 213 

Rajagopalachari, C., 95, 381 
Rajputana, a, 531 
Raraachandra, 51, 53 
Rangoon, 236 
Reading, Lord, 70, 87 
Responsivists, 132, 413 
Revolt of 1857, a, 8, ai, 41 
Rolland, Romain, 154, 163, 380 
Rome, 317 

Roosevdt, President, 586 
Rowlatt Bills, 40, 41 
Roy, Bidan Chandra, 246 
Roy, M, N., 154, 189, 267, 268 
Russell, Bertrand, 35 
Russia, 361 

Russo-Japanese War, 16 

S 

Sabartnati, 210 
— — Prison, 88 


617 

Saha, Gopinath, 126 
Sanatanists, 382, 408, 575 
Santanum, K., no, 1 15 
Santinikelan, 66, 483, 484, 561 
Sapru, Sir Tej Bahadur, la, 32-34, 
125, 169, 173, 196, 197, 326-229, 
331, 243, 249, 386, 386, 411, 468, 
583 

Sastri, Srinivas, 30, 31-33, 36, 68, 
125, 243, 249, 389-393, 409, 412, 
421 

Satyagraha Sabha, 41, 61, 73, 83, 90, 
109, 122, 127, I3I, 213, 2JJ, 388. 
392. 5“S. 5“6 
Seeley, 66 

Sen-Gupta, J. M., 22, 314, 395 
Servants of India Society, 30, 36, 390, 
409, 410 

Shankar, Udai, 404 

Sharma, Balkrishna, 94 

Sherwanl, Tasadduk Ahmad, 32, 228, 

397. 3“5. 3“®. 3>“. 3>>. 3>®. 3>9. 
323, 323, 331 

Sholapur, 334, 317 
Shraddhananda, Swami, 42, 161 
Siegfried, M. Andre, 438 
Sikhs, 109, 140, 159 
Simla, 36, 267, 284, 385, 301, 305, 
306, 381 

Sind, 140, ijp, 401, 466, 467 
Sindh, 47 
Singapore, 236 

Singh, Bhagat, 174, 175, 193, 193, 
361, 265, 366 

Kunwar Anand, 349 

Narmada Prasad, 325 

Paramjit, 18 

S. Ajit, 18, 193 

Sing Sing Prison, 220, 350 
Slade, Madeleine, 330 
Slocombe, Mr., 227 
Sobani, Umar, 355 
Sohagpur, 330 
Spender, J. A., 34a 
Sulaiman, 8. M., 22 
Sun Yat Sen, Madame, 163 
j Surat, 33 



6i8 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Swaraj, 65, 69, 73, 76, 104. 107, 136, 
137, 131, 133, 157-160. 167, 317, 
2t3, 343, 346, 3S7, 417, 504, 555 

Bhawan, 213, 345, 333, 481 

Switzerland, 147, 151, 156 


T 

Tagore, Boro Dada, 66 
Rabindra Nad), 3, 66, 385, 483, 

490. 58s 

Taj Mahal, 3, 130 

Tandon, Purushottam Das, 94, 298, 
308, 310, 318, 491 
Tawney, Professor R. H., 4a i 
Teheran, 450 
Tcmpelhof Field, 35 
Tcwary, Venkatcsh Narayan, 307 
Theosophical Convention, 15 

Society, 15 

Thompson, Edward, 43 
Tilak, Locomanya, 18, ai, 33, 37, 31, 
36, 44, 47, 63, go, 388 
Toller, Ernst, 134 
Townsend, Meredith, at 
Travancore, 27a, 373, 531 
Turkey, 40 


U 

United Provinces, The, 54, 182, 232, 
237-239, 264, 276, 377, 284, 285, 
397. 3°3. 307. 309- 311-3*3. 3*7. 
331. 337. 3*8, 330. 33*. 337. 338. 
35‘. 36*. 489. 5*7. 536 

V 

Venice, 147, 164 
Vidyarthi, Ganesh Shankar, 369 
Villeneuve, 154 
Vivekananda, 436 

W 

Weininger, Otto, 30 
Wellington, 83 
Whitehead, Dr. A. N., 4 j i 
Whyte, Sir Frederick, 437, 430 
Willingdon, Lord, 283, 321, 32a, 386 
Wolselcy, Lord, 541 
Wright Brothers, 18 

y 

Yeravda, 328-330, 335, 345, 371, 37a, 
38*. 397. 

Z 

Zeppelin, Count, 35 




