CHAPTER XIV 


THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME 

Gandhi never despaired of the worst reprobate. During the 
South African struggle, Gandhi learned that one of his close 
Indian associates was a government informer. Later the 
man openly opposed Gandhi, yet when he became ill and impe¬ 
cunious Gandhi visited him and gave him financial aid. In time, 
the backslider repented. 

It was not easy for Gandhi to hold his followers. Government 
punitive measures caused many Satyagrahis to abandon the 
movement. Some resisters were deported to India with loss of 
property. Satyagraha put even the strongest character to a 
withering test. At one time, of the thirteen thousand Indians in the 
Transvaal, twenty-five hundred were in jail and six thousand had 
fled the province. Only as self-abnegating, high-minded, deter¬ 
mined and indefatigable a leader as Gandhi could have kept the 
movement alive. The worst setbacks did not shake his faith in 
victory. This faith, plus the fact that in and out of jail he shared 
his followers’ hardships and thereby won their love, was the bind¬ 
ing cement of the loyal band which at times dwindled alarmingly. 
Some resisters served five prison terms in quick succession, court¬ 
ing a new sentence the moment they finished the old one. They 
merely left the Transvaal for Natal and immediately crossed into the 
Transvaal again. That, under the immigration ban, was their crime. 

Presently, a bigger danger loomed: a federal Union of South 
Africa was projected; it might, probably would, enact anti-Indian 
legislation like that of the Transvaal. Gandhi decided to lobby 
in London. Generals Botha and Smuts were already there making 
arrangements for the creation of the Union. 

Gandhi always set his sights high. This time he won the active 
support of Lord Ampthill, former Governor of Madras and acting 
Viceroy of India in 1904. From his arrival in England on July 
10th, 1909, until his return to South Africa in November, Gandhi 
met editors, M.P.s, officials and private citizens of all races; his 
fervour fascinated and infected many of them. 

118 


THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME 

Liberal Englishmen regretted overt colour discrimination in 
an empire overwhelmingly non-white. Imperialistic Englishmen 
were concerned with the effects of South African and anti-Indian 
legislation on India. While Gandhi worked in England, Henry 
Polak was in India explaining the Transvaal situation and stirring 
protests which echoed in Whitehall. The British government in 
London tried to reconcile the differences between Smuts and 
Gandhi; but the general yielded too little. Smuts was ready to 
repeal the compulsory registration act and permit the immigration 
into the Transvaal of a limited number of English-speaking, 
educated, professional Indians to serve the Indian community. 

Gandhi, however, asked for the removal of the ‘badge of inferior¬ 
ity’ and the ‘implied racial taint’; he wanted ‘legal or theoretical 
equality in respect of immigration’. Small material concessions 
neither impressed nor mollified him. When, therefore, Lord 
Crewe, the British Secretary of State for the Colonies, informed 
Gandhi in writing that ‘Mr. Smuts was unable to accept the 
claim that Asiatics should be placed in a position of equality with 
Europeans in respect of right of entry or otherwise’, the militant 
barrister, admitting defeat in diplomatic negotiation, foresaw a 
renewal of civil disobedience. 

Gandhi’s trip to England nevertheless made the South African 
Indian question a major imperial concern. Therein lay a seed of 
ultimate triumph in South Africa. 

Moreover, and apparently for the first time, Gandhi began, 
during his London sojourn, to connect himself with the problem 
of India’s independence. In England he sought out Indians of all 
shades of political belief: nationalists, Home-Rulers, anarchists 
and advocates of assassination. While he debated with them far 
into many nights, his own political views and philosophy were 
taking shape. Some of the tenets which later formed the tissue of 
the Mahatma’s creed found their first expression in a letter 
addressed to Lord Ampthill by Gandhi on October gth, 1909, 
from Westminster Palace Hotel. 

Judging by the Indians in England, Gandhi wrote, impatience 
with British rule was widespread in India as was Indian hatred of 
the British. Partisans of violence were gaining ground. Against 
this, repression would be futile. Yet he feared that ‘the British 
rulers will not give liberally and in time. The British people seem 

“9 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


to be obsessed by the demon of commercial selfishness. The fault 
is not of men but of the system . . . India is exploited in the 
interests of foreign capitalists. The true remedy lies, in my humble 
opinion, in England discarding modern civilization . . . which is a 
negation of the spirit of Christianity’. One hears Tolstoy’s gentle 
voice here and echoes, too, of the raucous voices of Indian 
students in Bloomsbury. 

‘But this is a large order,’ Gandhi admits. ‘The railways, 
machineries and the corresponding increase of indulgent habits 
are the true badge of slavery of the Indian people, as they are of 
Europeans. I therefore have no quarrel with the rulers. I have 
every quarrel with their methods ... To me the rise of cities like 
Calcutta and Bombay is a matter of sorrow rather than con¬ 
gratulations. India has lost in having broken up a part of her 
village system. 

‘Holding these views,’ Gandhi continues, prophetically though 
unconsciously enunciating the programme of his entire career in 
India, ‘I share the National spirit, but I totally dissent from the 
methods, whether of the extremists or of the moderates, for either 
party relies on violence ultimately. Violent methods must mean 
an acceptance of modern civilization and therefore of the same 
ruinous competition we notice here and the consequent destruc¬ 
tion of morality. I should be uninterested in the fact as to who 
rules. I should expect rulers to rule according to my wish, other¬ 
wise I cease to help them to rule me. I become a passive resister 
against them.’ 

Long before Gandhi had any warrant to regard himself as a 
factor or leader in the liberation of India he knew, and indicated 
in this letter to Ampthill, that his aim Was not merely substitution 
of Indian rule for British rule. Not governments but methods and 
objectives interested him, not whether a William or a Chandra 
sat in the seat of power but whose deeds were more civilized. 

This is what distinguished Gandhi from other politicians. The 
argument — Was Gandhi a saint or politician? — is endless yet 
barren. Polak quotes Gandhi as having said in South Africa, 
‘Men say I am a saint losing myself in politics. The fact is that I 
am a politician trying my hardest to be a saint.’ The important 
fact is that in politics Gandhi always cleaved to religious and moral 
considerations and as a saint he never thought his place was in a 


120 


THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO GOME 

cave or cloister but rather in the hurly-burly of the popular 
struggle for rights and right. Gandhi’s religion cannot be divorced 
from his politics. His religion made him political. His politics 
were religious. 

When Gandhi returned from England to South Africa at the 
end of 1909, political necessity forced him to establish ‘a sort of 
co-operative commonwealth’ on a diminutive scale where civil 
resisters ‘would be trained to live a new and simple life in harmony 
with one another’. There he took further steps towards sainthood, 
mahatma-ship, and Gita detachment. 

Previously, when Satyagrahis were imprisoned, the organiza¬ 
tion attempted to support their dependants in their accustomed 
style of living. This led to inequality and sometimes to fraud. 
Gandhi consequently decided that the movement needed a rural 
commune for civil resisters and their familes. Phoenix Farm was 
thirty hours by train and hence too remote from the epicentre of 
the Transvaal struggle. 

Accordingly, Herman Kallenbach bought 1100 acres of land at 
Lawley, twenty-one miles outside Johannesburg and, on May 30th, 
1910, gave it to the Satyagrahis free of any rent or charge. Here 
religion was wed to politics. Gandhi called it The Tolstoy Farm. 

The farm had over a thousand orange, apricot and plum trees, 
two wells, a spring and one house. Additional houses were built 
of corrugated iron. Gandhi and his family came to live on the 
farm and so did Kallenbach. 

‘I prepare the bread that is required on the farm,’ Gandhi 
wrote to a friend in India. ‘The general opinion about it is that it 
is well made. We put in no yeast and no baking powder. We 
grind our own wheat. We have just prepared some marmalade 
from the oranges grown on the farm. I have also learned how to 
prepare caramel coffee. It can be given as a beverage even to 
babies. The passive resisters on the farm have given up the use of 
tea and coffee, and taken to caramel coffee prepared on the farm. 
It is made from wheat which is first baked in a certain way and 
then ground. We intend to sell our surplus production of the 
above three articles to the public later on. Just at present, we are 
working as labourers on the construction work . . .’ There were 
no servants. 

Gandhi was baker and caramel and marmalade maker and much 


121 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


more besides. Kallenbach went to stay in a Trappist monastery 
for German Catholic monks to master the art of sandal making. 
This he then taught to Gandhi who taught it to others. Surplus 
sandals were sold to friends. As an architect, Kallenbach knew 
something of carpentry and headed that department. Gandhi 
learned to make cabinets, chests of drawers and school benches. 
But they had no chairs and no beds; everybody slept on the ground 
and, except in inclement weather, in the open. Each person got 
two blankets and a wooden pillow. Gandhi likewise sewed jackets 
for his wife and he later boasted that she wore them. 

Gandhi was general manager. The population of the farm, 
which varied with arrests and other circumstances, consisted 
originally of forty young men, three old men, five women and 
between twenty and thirty children, of whom five were girls. 
There were Hindus, Moslems, Christians and Parsis among them, 
vegetarians and meat-eaters, smokers and non-smokers and they 
spoke Tamil, Telugu, Gujarati, etc. As if these conditions did 
not create enough problems, Gandhi created some more. 

Smoking and alcohol drinking were strictly prohibited. Resi¬ 
dents could have meat if they wished but, after a little propaganda 
from the general manager, none ever asked for it. Gandhi assisted 
in the cookhouse and kept the women there from quarrelling. 

He also supervised the sanitation, which was primitive, and 
taught people not to spit. ‘Leaving nightsoil, cleaning the nose, or 
spitting on the road is a sin against God and humanity,’ he told 
the community. 

Occasionally, Kallenbach had business in town and Gandhi 
still had legal cases. The rule was that if you went on an errand 
or shopping trip for the commune you could travel by train, third 
class; but if the journey was private or for fun (children liked to 
go on picnics to Johannesburg) you had to walk and, for economy, 
take dry refreshments with you. Gandhi frequently walked the 
twenty-one miles to the city, starting at 2 a.m. and returning 
the same night. He said it did them all a lot of good. One day, 
he recalls, ‘I walked fifty miles on foot.’ 

Gandhi attributed his physical stamina and that of the other 
communards to pure living and healthy diet. Breakfast was at 
7, lunch at ii, dinner at 5.30, prayers at 7.30, bedtime at 9. All 
meals were light. But to make them lighter still, Gandhi and 

122 


THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO GOME 

Kallenbach resolved to avoid cooked food and limit themselves to 
a ‘fruitarian’ menu of bananas, dates, lemons, peanuts, oranges 
and olive oil. Gandhi had read somewhere of the cruelties 
practised in India to make cows and water buffaloes yield the 
maximum in milk. So he and Kallenbach dispensed with milk. 
Kallenbach, who owned a beautiful and spacious house on a hill¬ 
top above Johannesburg, and who always had lived in luxury, 
shared every deprivation, chore and dietary experiment on the 
farm. He also divided with Gandhi the task of teaching the 
children religion, geography, history, arithmetic, etc., and very 
rudimentary it all was. 

Gandhi’s ideas on co-education were unconventional. He 
encouraged boys and girls, some of them adolescents, to bathe at 
the spring at the same time. For the girls’ safety, he was always 
present and ‘My eyes followed the girls as a mother’s eye follows 
a daughter.’ No doubt, the boys’ eyes did likewise and less 
innocently. At night, everybody slept on an open veranda and 
the young folks grouped their sleeping places around Gandhi. 
Beds were only three feet apart. But Gandhi said the young folks 
knew he loved them ‘with a mother’s love’, and hadn’t he ex¬ 
plained the duty of self-restraint to them? 

After an incident involving two girls, he searched for a method 
‘to sterilize the sinner’s eye’ of males. The quest kept him awake 
all night, but in the morning he had it: he summoned the girls 
and suggested that they shave their heads. They were shocked, 
but he had an irresistible way and finally they consented. He 
himself did the cutting. 

Years later, Gandhi explained this innocence by ignorance, but 
he did not explain why he should have been ignorant. He 
dispelled some of the mystery by adding that his ‘faith and courage 
were at their highest in Tolstoy Farm’. Boundless faith in human 
beings sometimes blinded him to their faults. It was the sort of 
blindness which blots out obstacles and thus leads to brave 
ventures. He measured other people’s capacities by his own. 
This often spurred them to unwonted effort. It was good peda¬ 
gogy if it worked; it worked better with adults and little children 
than with adolescents. 

In October 1912, Krishna Gopal Gokhale, Professor of English 
and Economics, President of the Servants of India Society in India, 

123 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


came to South Africa for a month in order to assess the Indian 
community’s condition and assist Gandhi in ameliorating it. 
Gokhale and Lokamanya Tilak were Gandhi’s forerunners in 
pre-Gandhian India. Gokhale was a revered leader of the Indian 
Nationalist movement, a brilliant intellectual and an impressive 
person. Gandhi acknowledged him an excellent judge of char¬ 
acter. In South Africa, Gokhale once said to Gandhi, ‘You will 
always have your own way. And there is no help for me as I am 
here at your mercy.’ The dictum was spoken in friendship and in 
earnest. 

Gandhi’s selflessness fortified his assurance. Certain in his 
heart that he sought neither material gain, nor power, nor praise, 
he had none of the guilty and deterring feeling which might have 
prevented him from insisting on his point of view. Sure he was 
right, he was sure of victory. Then why yield? When Gokhale 
asked for a list of the really reliable civil resisters, Gandhi wrote 
down sixty-six names. That was maximum. The number, 
however, might sink to sixteen. This was Gandhi’s ‘army of 
peace’. Yet he never flinched; the Government would surrender. 

Gokhale’s tour was a triumphal procession through South 
Africa. Gandhi was always by his side. In Cape Town, where 
Gokhale landed, the Schreiners welcomed him, and Europeans as 
well as Indians attended his big public meeting. From the Trans¬ 
vaal frontier to Johannesburg he travelled by special train. At 
every town he stopped for a meeting over which the local mayor 
presided. The principal railway stations had been decorated by 
Indians. At the Park Terminus in Johannesburg a large orna¬ 
mental arch designed by Kallenbach was erected. During his 
stay in Johannesburg Gokhale had the use of the mayor’s car. 
At Pretoria, capital of the Transvaal, the Government entertained 
him. 

The South African authorities wanted Gokhale to carry back a 
good impression to India. 

After making many speeches and talking to many Indians and 
whites, Gokhale had a two-hour interview with Generals Botha 
and Smuts, the heads, now, of the Union government. Gandhi, 
of his own accord, absented himself; he was a controversial figure 
who might spoil the atmosphere. 

When Gokhale came back from the interview, he reported that 

124 


THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME 


the racial bar in the Immigration Act would be removed together 
with the three-pound annual tax collected from indentured 
labourers who remained in South Africa but did not continue 
their indenture. 

T doubt it very much/ Gandhi retorted. ‘You do not know the 
Ministers as I do. 5 

‘What I have told you is bound to come to pass/ Gokhale cried. 
‘General Botha promised me that the Black Act would be repealed 
and the three-pound tax abolished. You must return to India 
within twelve months and I will not have any of your excuses.* 

Gandhi was glad of the Government’s promise; it proved the 
justice of the Indian cause. But he did not think his job in the 
Union of South Africa would be completed before many more 
Indians, and he too, had again gone to prison. 

At Gokhale’s request, GaUdhi and Kallenbach took the steamer 
with him as far as Zanzibar in Tanganyika. On board, Gokhale 
talked at length about Indian politics, economics, superstitions, 
problems. He was introducing Gandhi to the future. Then Gok¬ 
hale sailed on to India, and Gandhi and Kallenbach returned to 
Natal for the final struggle. 

Addressing an assembly in Bombay Town Hall in December 
1912, Gokhale said, ‘Gandhi has in him the marvellous spiritual 
power to turn ordinary men around him into heroes and martyrs.’ 
Gokhale, who looked critically at Gandhi and sometimes rebuked 
him, added that in Gandhi’s presence one is ‘ashamed to do 
anything unworthy’, indeed one is ‘afraid of thinking anything 
unworthy’. 

Gandhi proved this to the hilt in the final chapter of the South 
Africa epic. 


125 