CHAPTER II 


THE BEGINNINGS OF AN 
EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


G andhi belonged to the Vaisya caste. In the old Hindu 
social scale, the Vaisyas stood third, far below the Brah¬ 
mans who were the number one caste and the Kshatriyas, 
or rulers and soldiers, who ranked second. The Vaisyas, in fact, 
were only a notch above the Sudras, the working class. Origin¬ 
ally, they devoted themselves to trade and agriculture. 

The Gandhis belonged to the Modh Bania subdivision of their 
caste. Bania is a synonym in India for a sharp, shrewd business¬ 
man. Far back, the Gandhi family were retail grocers; ‘Gandhi’ 
means grocer. But the professional barriers between castes began 
to crumble generations ago, and Gandhi’s grandfather Uttam- 
chand served as prime minister to the princeling of Porbandar, a 
tiny state in the Kathiawar peninsula, western India, about half 
way between the mouth of the Indus and the city of Bombay. 
Uttamchand handed the office down to his son Karamchand 
who passed it to his brother Tulsidas. The job had almost become 
the family’s private property. 

Karamchand was the father of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, 
the Mahatma. 

The Gandhis apparently got into trouble often. Political 
intrigues forced grandfather Uttamchand out of the prime 
ministership of Porbandar and into exile in the nearby little state 
of Junagadh. There he once saluted the ruling Nawab with his 
left hand. Asked for an explanation, he said: ‘The right hand is 
already pledged to Porbandar.’ Mohandas was proud of such 
loyalty: ‘My grandfather’, he wrote, ‘must have been a man of 
principle.’ 

Gandhi’s father likewise left his position as prime minister to 
Rana Saheb Vikmatji, the ruler of Porbandar, and took the same 
office in Rajkot, another miniature Kathiawar principality 120 
miles to the north-west. Once, the British Political Agent spoke 
disparagingly of Thakor Saheb Bawajiraj, Rajkot’s native ruler. 

25 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

Karamchand sprang to the defence of his chief. The Agent 
ordered Karamchand to apologize. Karamchand refused and 
was forthwith arrested. But Gandhi’s father stood his ground and 
was released after several hours. Subsequently he became prime 
minister of Wankaner. 

In the 1872 census, Porbandar state had a population of 72,077, 
Rajkot 36,770 and Wankaner 28,750. Their rulers behaved like 
petty autocrats to their subjects and quaking sycophants before 
the British. 

Karamchand Gandhi ‘had no education save that of experi¬ 
ence’, his son, Mohandas, wrote; he was likewise ‘innocent’ of 
history and geography; ‘but he was incorruptible and had earned 
a reputation for strict impartiality in his family as well as outside’. 
He ‘was a lover of his clan, truthful, brave and generous, but 
short-tempered. To a certain extent he might have been even 
given to carnal pleasures. For he married for the fourth time when 
he was over forty’. The other three wives had died. 

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was the fourth and last child 
of his father’s fourth and last marriage. He was born at Porbandar 
on October 2nd, 1869. That year the Suez Canal was opened, 
Thomas A. Edison patented his first invention, France celebrated 
the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Napoleon Bonaparte, 
and Charles W. Eliot became president of Harvard University. 
Karl Marx had just published Capital , Bismarck was about to 
launch the Franco-Prussian War, and Victoria ruled over England 
and India. 

Mohandas was born in the dark, right-hand corner of a room, 

11 feet by 19 J feet and 10 feet high, in a three-storey humble house 
on the border of the town. The house is still standing. 

The little town of Porbandar, or Porbunder, rises straight out 
of the Arabian Sea and ‘becomes a vision of glory at sunrise and 
sunset when the slanting rays beat upon it, turning its turrets and 
pinnacles into gold’, wrote Charles Freer Andrews, a British 
disciple of the Mahatma. It and Rajkot and Wankaner were quite 
remote, at the time of Gandhi’s youth, from the European and 
Western influences which had invaded less isolated parts of India. 
Its landmarks were its temples. 

Gandhi’s home life was cultured and the family, by Indian 
standards, was well-to-do. There were books in the house; they 

26 


AN EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


dealt chiefly with religion and mythology. Mohandas played 
tunes on a concertina purchased especially for him. Karamchand 
wore a gold necklace and a brother of Mohandas had a heavy, 
solid gold armlet. Karamchand once owned a house in Porbandar, 
a second in Rajkot and a third in Kutiana. But in his last three 
years of illness he lived modestly on a pension from the Rajkot 
prince. He left little property. 

Gandhi’s elder brother Laxmidas practised law in Rajkot and 
later became a treasury official in the Porbandar government. He 
spent money freely and married his daughters with a pomp worthy 
of petty Indian royalty. He owned two houses in Rajkot. Kar- 
sandas, the other brother, served as sub-inspector of police in 
Porbandar and ultimately of the princeling’s harem. His income 
was small. 

Both brothers died while Mohandas K. Gandhi was still alive. 
A sister, Raliatben, four years his senior, survived him. She 
remained resident in Rajkot. 

Mohania, as the family affectionately called Mohandas, 
received the special treatment often accorded a youngest child. 
A nurse named Rambha was engaged for him and he formed an 
attachment to her which continued into mature life. His warmest 
affection went to his mother Putlibai. He sometimes feared his 
father, but he loved his mother and always remembered her 
‘saintliness’ and her ‘deeply religious’ nature. She never ate a 
meal without prayer, and attended temple services daily. Long 
fasts did not dismay her, and arduous vows, voluntarily made, 
were steadfastly performed. In the annual Ghaturmas, a kind of 
Lent lasting through the four-month rainy season, she habitually 
lived on a single meal a day and, one year, she observed, in addi¬ 
tion, a complete fast on alternate days. Another Ghaturmas, she 
vowed not to eat unless the sun appeared. Mohandas and his 
sister and brothers would watch for the sun, and when it showed 
through the clouds they would rush into the house and announce 
to Putlibai that now she could eat. But her vow required her to 
see the sun herself and so she would go out of doors and by then the 
sun was hidden again. ‘That does not matter,’ she would cheer¬ 
fully comfort her children. ‘God does not want me to eat today.’ 

As a boy, Mohandas amused himself with rubber balloons and 
revolving tops. He played tennis and cricket and also ‘gilli danda’, 

27 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

a game, encountered in so many widely separated countries, 
which consists in striking a short, sharpened wooden peg with a 
long stick: ‘peggy’ or ‘pussy’ some call it. 

Gandhi started school in Porbandar. He encountered more 
difficulty in mastering the multiplication table than in learning 
naughty names for the teacher. ‘My intellect must have been 
sluggish and my memory raw,’ the adult Mahatma lays charge 
against the child of six. In Rajkot, whither the family moved a 
year later, he was again a ‘mediocre student’, but punctual. His 
sister recalls that rather than be late he would eat the food of the 
previous day if breakfast was not ready. He preferred walking 
to going to school by carriage. Pie was timid: ‘my books and 
lessons were my sole companions’. At the end of the school day, 
he ran home. He could not bear to talk to anybody: ‘I was even 
afraid lest anyone should poke fun at me.’ When he grew older, 
however, he found some congenial mates and played in the streets. 
He also played by the sea. 

In his first year at the Alfred High School in Rajkot, when 
Mohandas was twelve, a British educational inspector named Mr. 
Giles came to examine the pupils. They were asked to spell five 
English words. Gandhi mis-spelled ‘kettle’. Walking up and down 
the ’aisles, the regular teacher saw the mistake and motioned 
Mohandas to copy from his neighbour’s slate. Mohandas refused. 
Later the teacher chided him for this ‘stupidity’ which spoiled the 
record of the class; everybody else had written all the words 
correctly. 

The incident, however, did not diminish Gandhi’s respect for 
his teacher. ‘I was by nature blind to the faults of elders ... I had 
learned to carry out the orders of elders, not to scan their actions.’ 
But obedience did not include cheating with teacher’s permission. 

Perhaps the refusal to cheat was a form of self-assertion or 
rebellion. In any case, compliance at school did not preclude 
revolt outside it. At the age of twelve, Gandhi began to smoke. 
And he stole from elders in the house to finance the transgression. 
His partner in the adventure was a young relative. Sometimes 
both were penniless; then they made cigarettes from the porous 
stalks of a wild plant. This interest in botany led to the discovery 
that the seeds of a jungle weed named dhatura were poisonous. 
Off they went to the jungle on the successful quest. Tired of life 

28 


AN EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


under parental supervision, they joined in a suicide pact. They 
would die, appropriately, in the temple of God. 

Having made their obeisances, Mohandas and his pal sought 
out a lonely corner for the final act. But perhaps death would be 
long in coming and meanwhile they might suffer pain. Perhaps 
it was better to live in slavery. To salvage a vestige of self-respect 
they each swallowed two or three seeds. 

Presently, serious matters claimed the child’s attention. 

Mohandas K. Gandhi married when he was a high school pupil 
— aged thirteen. He had been engaged three times, of course 
without his knowledge. Betrothals were compacts between 
parents, and the children rarely learned about them. Gandhi 
happened to hear that two girls to whom he had been engaged — 
probably as a toddler — had died. T have a faint recollection’, 
he reports, ‘that the third betrothal took place in my seventh year,’ 
but he was not informed. He was told six years later, a short time 
before the wedding. The Bride was Kasturbai, the daughter of a 
Porbandar merchant named Gokuldas Makanji. The marriage 
lasted sixty-two years. 

Writing about the wedding more than forty years later, Gandhi 
remembered all the details of the ceremony, as well as the trip to 
Porbandar where it took place. ‘And oh! that first night,’ he 
added. ‘Two innocent children all unwittingly hurled themselves 
into the ocean of life.’ Kasturbai, too, was thirteen. ‘My brother’s 
wife had thoroughly coached me about my behaviour on the first 
night. I do not know who had coached my wife.’ Both were 
nervous and ‘the coaching could not carry me far’, Gandhi wrote. 
‘But no coaching is really necessary in such matters. The impres¬ 
sions of the former birth are potent enough to make all coaching 
superfluous.’ Presumably, they remembered their experiences in 
an earlier incarnation. 

The newlyweds, Gandhi confesses, were ‘married children’ and 
behaved accordingly. He was jealous and ‘therefore she could 
not go anywhere without my permission’ for, ‘I took no time in 
assuming the authority of a husband’. So when the thirteen-year- 
old wife wanted to go out to play she had to ask the thirteen-year- 
old Mohandas; he would often say no. ‘The restraint was virtually 
a sort of imprisonment. And Kasturbai was not the girl to brook 
any such thing. She made it a point to go out whenever and 

29 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

wherever she liked. 1 The little husband got ‘more and more 
cross 1 ; sometimes they did not speak to each other for days. 

He loved Kasturbai. His ‘passion was entirely centred on one 
woman 1 and he wanted it reciprocated, but the woman was a 
child. Sitting in the high school classroom he daydreamed about 
her. ‘I used to keep her awake till late at night with my idle talk. 1 

‘The cruel custom of child marriage 1 , as Gandhi subsequently 
castigated it, would have been impossible but for the ancient 
Indian institution of the joint family: parents and their children 
and their sons 1 wives and children, sometimes thirty or more 
persons altogether, lived under one roof; newly wed adolescents 
therefore had no worry about a home, furniture, or board. Later, 
British law, seconding Indian reformers, raised the minimum 
marriage age. In its time the evil was mitigated by enforced 
separations for as much as six months in a year when the bride 
went to live with her parents. The first five years of Gandhi’s 
marriage — from thirteen to eighteen — included only three 
years of common life. 

The ‘shackles of lust 1 tormented Gandhi. They gave him a 
feeling of guilt. The feeling grew when sex seemed to clash with 
the keen sense of duty which developed in him at an early age. 
One instance of such a conflict impressed itself indelibly. When 
Mohandas was sixteen his father Karamchand became bedridden 
with a fistula. Gandhi helped his mother and an old servant to tend 
the patient; he dressed the wound and mixed the medicines and 
administered them. He also massaged his father’s legs every night 
until the sufferer fell asleep or asked his son to go to bed. ‘I 
loved to do this service, 1 Gandhi recalls. 

Kasturbai had become pregnant at fifteen and she was now in an 
advanced stage. Nevertheless, ‘every night whilst my hands were 
busy massaging my father’s legs’, Gandhi states in his autobio¬ 
graphy, ‘my mind was hovering about [my wife’s] bedroom — 
and that too at a time when religion, medical science and common 
sense alike forbade sexual intercourse 1 . 

One evening, between ten and eleven, Gandhi’s uncle relieved 
him at massaging Karamchand. Gandhi went quickly to his 
wife’s bedroom and woke her. A few minutes later the servant 
knocked at the door and urgently summoned Gandhi. He jumped 
out of bed, but when he reached the sick room his father was 

30 


AN EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


dead. Tf passion had not blinded me,’ Gandhi ruminated forty 
years later, ‘I should have been spared the torture of separation 
from my father during his last moments. I should have been 
massaging him and he would have died in my arms. But now it 
was my uncle who had had this privilege. 5 

The ‘shame of my carnal desire at the critical moment of my 
father’s death ... is a blot I have never been able to efface or 
forget 5 , Gandhi wrote when he was near sixty. Moreover, 
Kasturbai’s baby died three days after birth and Mohandas 
blamed the death on intercourse late in pregnancy. This doubled 
his sense of guilt. 

Kasturbai was illiterate. Her husband had every intention of 
teaching her, but she disliked studies and he preferred lovemaking. 
Private tutors also got nowhere with her. Yet Gandhi took the 
blame upon himself and felt that if his affection ‘had been 
absolutely untainted with lust, she would be a learned lady to¬ 
day 5 . She never learned to read or write anything but elementary 
Gujarati, her native language. 

Gandhi himself lost a year at high school through getting 
married. Modestly he asserts he ‘was not regarded as a dunce 5 . 
Every year he brought home a report on study progress and char¬ 
acter; it was never bad. He even won some prizes but that, he 
says, was only because there were few competitors. 

When Mohandas merited a teacher’s rebuke it pained him and 
he sometimes cried. Once he was beaten at school. The punish¬ 
ment hurt less than being considered worthy of it: ‘I wept 
piteously. 5 

Gandhi neglected penmanship and thought it unimportant. 
Geometry was taught in English, which was then a new language 
for him, and he had difficulty in following. But ‘when I reached 
the thirteenth proposition of Euclid the utter simplicity of the 
subject was suddenly revealed to me. A subject which only re¬ 
quired a pure and simple use of one’s reasoning powers could not 
be difficult. Ever since that time geometry has been both easy 
and interesting for me 5 . He likewise had trouble with Sanskrit, 
but after the teacher, Mr. Krishnashanker, reminded him that it 
was the language of Hinduism’s sacred scriptures, the future 
Mahatma persevered and succeeded. 

In the upper grades, gymnastics and cricket were compulsory. 

3 1 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Gandhi disliked both. He was shy, and he thought physical 
exercises did not belong in education. But he had read that long 
walks in the open air were good for the health, and he formed the 
habit. ‘These walks gave me a fairly hardy constitution.’ 

Mohandas envied the bigger, stronger boys. He was frail 
compared with his older brother and especially compared with a 
Moslem friend named Sheik Mehtab who could run great distances 
with remarkable speed. Sheik Mehtab was spectacular in the 
long and high jump as well. These exploits dazzled Gandhi. 

Gandhi regarded himself as a coward. T used to be haunted’, he 
asserts, ‘by the fear of thieves, ghosts and serpents. I did not dare 
to stir out of doors at night.’ He could not sleep without a light 
in his room; his wife had more courage than he and did not fear 
serpents or ghosts or darkness. ‘I felt ashamed of myself.’ 

Sheik Mehtab played on this sentiment. He boasted that he 
could hold live snakes in his hand, feared no burglars and did not 
believe in ghosts. Whence all this prowess and bravery? He ate 
meat. Gandhi ate no meat; it was forbidden by his religion. 

The boys at school used to recite a poem which went: 

Behold the mighty Englishman, 

He rules the Indian small, 

Because being a meat-eater 
He is five cubits tall. 

If all Indians ate meat they could expel the British and make 
India free. Besides, argued Sheik Mehtab, boys who ate meat did 
not get boils; many of their teachers and some of the most prom¬ 
inent citizens of Rajkot ate meat secretly, and drank wine, too. 

Day in, day out, Sheik Mehtab propagandized Mohandas, 
whose older brother had already succumbed. Finally, Mohandas 
yielded. 

At the appointed hour the tempter and his victim met in a 
secluded spot on the river bank. Sheik Mehtab brought cooked 
goat’s meat and bread. Gandhi rarely touched baker’s bread (the 
substitute was chappatis, an unleavened dough cushion filled with 
air) and he had never even seen meat. The family was strictly 
vegetarian and so, in fact, were almost all the inhabitants of the 
Gujurat district in Kathiawar. But firm in the resolve to make 
himself an effective liberator of his country, Gandhi bit into the 

32 


AN EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


meat. It was tough as leather. He chewed and chewed and then 
swallowed. He became sick immediately. 

That night he had a nightmare: a live goat was bleating in his 
stomach. However, ‘meat-eating was a duty 5 , and, in the midst of 
the terrible dream, therefore, he decided to continue the experiment. 

It continued for a whole year. Irregularly throughout that long 
period he met Sheik Mehtab at secret rendezvous to partake of 
meat dishes, now tastier than the first, and bread. Where Sheik 
got the money for these feasts Gandhi never knew. 

The sin of consuming and liking meat was made the greater by 
the sin of lying. In the end he could not stand the dishonesty and, 
though still convinced that meat-eating was ‘essential’ for patriotic 
reasons, he vowed to abjure it until his parents’ death enabled him 
to be a carnivore openly. 

By now Gandhi developed an urge to reform Sheik Mehtab. 
This prolonged the relationship. But the naive and younger 
Gandhi was no match for the shrewd, moneyed wastrel who 
offered revolt and adventure. Sheik also knew how to arrange 
things. Once he led Gandhi to the entrance of a brothel. The 
institution had been told and paid in advance. Gandhi went in. 
‘I was almost struck blind and dumb in this den of vice. I sat near 
the woman on her bed, but I was tongue-tied. She naturally lost 
patience with me and showed me the door, with abuses and 
insults.’ Providence, he explains, interceded and saved him 
despite himself. 

About that time — Mohandas must have been fifteen — he 
pilfered a bit of gold from his older brother. This produced a 
moral crisis. He had gnawing pangs of conscience and resolved 
never to steal again. But he needed the cleansing effect of a 
confession: he would tell his father. He made a full, written state¬ 
ment of the crime, asked for due penalty, promised never to steal 
again and, with emphasis, begged his father not to punish himself 
for his son’s dereliction. 

Karamchand sat up in his sick bed to read the letter. Tears 
filled his eyes and fell to his cheeks. Then he tore up the paper and 
lay down. Mohandas sat near him and wept. 

Gandhi never forgot that silent scene. Sincere repentance and 
confession induced by love, rather than fear, won him his father’s 
‘sublime forgiveness’ and affection. 

33 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

Lest he give pain to his father, and especially his mother, 
Mohandas did not tell them that he absented himself from 
temple. He did not like the ‘glitter and pomp’ of the Hindu 
temples. Religion to him meant irksome restrictions like vege¬ 
tarianism which intensified his youthful protest against society 
and authority. And he had no ‘living faith in God’. Who made 
the world; who directed it, he asked. Elders could not answer, 
and the sacred books were so unsatisfactory on such matters that 
he inclined ‘somewhat towards atheism’. He even began to believe 
that it was quite moral, indeed a duty, to kill serpents and bugs. 

Gandhi’s anti-religious sentiments quickened his interest in 
religion and he listened attentively to his father’s frequent discus¬ 
sions with Moslem and Parsi friends on the differences between 
their faiths and Hinduism. He also learned much about the Jain 
religion. Jain monks often visited the house and went out of their 
way to accept food from the non-Jain Gandhis. 

When Karamchand died in 1885, Mohandas’s mother Putlibai 
took advice on family matters from a Jain monk named Becharji 
Swami, originally a Hindu of the Modh Bania sub-caste. Jain 
influence was strong in the Gujarat region. And Jainism prohibits 
the killing of any living creature, even insects. Jain priests wear 
white masks over their mouths lest they breathe in, and thus kill, 
an insect. They are not supposed to walk out at night lest they 
unwittingly step on a worm. 

Gandhi was always a great absorber. Jainism, as well as 
Buddhism, perceptibly coloured Gandhi’s thoughts and shaped 
his works. Both were attempts to reform the Hindu religion, 
India’s dominant faith; both originated in the sixth century 
B.C. in north-eastern India, in what is now the province of Bihar. 

The Jain monk, Becharji Swami, helped Gandhi to go to England. 
After graduating from high school, Gandhi enrolled in Samaldas 
College, in Bhavnagar, a town on the inland side of the Kathiawar 
peninsula. But he found the studies difficult and the atmosphere 
distasteful. A friend of the family suggested that if Mohandas was 
to succeed his father as prime minister he had better hurry and 
become a lawyer; the quickest way was to take a three-year course 
in England. Gandhi was most eager to go. But he was afraid of 
law; could he pass the examinations? Might it not be preferable 
to study medicine? He was interested in medicine. 

34 


AN EXTRAORDINARY MAN 


Mohandas’s brother objected that their father was opposed to 
the dissection of dead bodies and intended Mohandas for the bar. 
A Brahman friend of the family did not take the same dark view of 
the medical profession; but could a doctor become prime minister? 

Mother Putlibai disliked parting with her last-born. ‘What will 
uncle say? He is the head of the family, now that father is no 
more.’ And where will the money come from? 

Mohandas had set his heart on England. He developed energy 
and unwonted courage. He hired a bullock cart for the five-day 
journey to Porbandar where his uncle lived. To save a day, he 
left the cart and rode on a camel; it was his first camel ride. 

Uncle was not encouraging; European-trained lawyers forsook 
Indian traditions; cigars were never out of their mouths; they ate 
everything; they dressed ‘as shamelessly as Englishmen’. But he 
would not stand in the way. If Putlibai agreed, he would, too. 

So Mohandas was back where he had started. His mother sent 
him to uncle and uncle passed him back to mother. Meanwhile, 
Gandhi tried to get a scholarship from the Porbandar government. 
The British administrator of the state rebuffed him curtly 
without even letting him present his case. 

Mohandas returned to Rajkot. Pawn his wife’s jewels? They 
were valued at two to three thousand rupees. Finally,, his brother 
promised to supply the funds, but there remained his mother’s 
doubts about young men’s morals in England. Here Becharji 
Swami, the Jain monk, came to the rescue. He administered an 
oath to Mohandas who then solemnly took three vows: not to 
touch wine, women or meat. Therewith, Putlibai consented. 

Joyfully, in June 1888, Gandhi left for Bombay with his 
brother, who carried the monev. That did not end his tribulations. 
People said the Arabian Sea was too rough during the summer 
monsoon season; one ship had sunk in a gale. Departure was 
delayed. Meanwhile, the Modh Banias of Bombay heard about the 
projected trip. They convened a meeting of the clan and sum¬ 
moned Mohandas to attend. No Modh Bania had ever been to 
England, the elders argued; their religion forbade voyages abroad 
because Hinduism could not be practised there. 

Gandhi told them he would go nevertheless. At this, the head¬ 
man ostracized Mohandas. ‘This boy shall be treated as an out¬ 
cast from today,’ the elder declared. 

35 


c 


M.G. 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Undaunted, Gandhi bought a steamer ticket, a necktie, a short 
jacket and enough food, chiefly sweets and fruit, for the three 
weeks to Southampton. On September 4th, he sailed. He was 
not yet eighteen. Several months earlier, Kasturbai had borne 
him a male child and they called it Harilal. Now the voyage 
to England gave Gandhi ‘a long and healthy separation’ from 
his wife. 


3b 


 

