CHAPTER XV 


THE VICTORY 

S muts precipitated the final contest by announcing in the 
House of Assembly that the Europeans of Natal, who were the 
original employers of Indian contract labour, would not 
permit the lifting of the three-pound annual tax on ex-serfs. That 
was the signal for the renewal of civil disobedience. Indentured 
labourers and former indentured labourers considered this a 
breach of the promise given to Professor Gokhale; they volun¬ 
teered en masse for Satyagraha. 

Gandhi closed Tolstoy Farm. Kasturbai, Gandhi, the Gandhi 
children and several others moved to Phoenix Farm. Adults 
prepared to go to prison. 

There were two issues: the tax and the ban on Asiatic immi¬ 
grants. Presently, a third was added. On March 14th, 1913, a 
Justice of the Cape Colony Supreme Court ruled that only 
Christian marriages were legal in South Africa. This invalidated 
Hindu, Moslem, or Parsi marriages and turned all Indian wives 
into concubines without rights. 

For the first time, large numbers of women joined the resisters. 
Kasturbai also joined. 

As the opening move in the new campaign, a group of women 
volunteers were to cross from the Transvaal into Natal and thereby 
court arrest. If the border police ignored them, they would pro¬ 
ceed to the Natal coal field at Newcastle and urge the indentured 
miners to go on strike. Simultaneously, a chosen handful of Natal 
‘sisters 5 , as Gandhi called them, would invite arrest by entering 
the Transvaal without permission. 

The Natal ‘sisters’ were arrested and imprisoned. Indignation 
flared and brought new recruits. The Transvaal ‘sisters’ were not 
arrested. They went to Newcastle and-persuaded the Indian 
workers to put down their tools. Then the Government arrested 
these women, too, and lodged them in jail for three months. 
As a result, the miners’ strike spread. 

Gandhi hurried from Phoenix Farm to Newcastle. 

126 


THE VICTORY 


The miners lived in company houses. The company turned off 
their light and water. 

Gandhi believed the strike would last and therefore counselled 
the indentured labourers to leave their compounds, taking their 
blankets and some clothes, and pitch camp outside the home of 
Mr. and Mrs. D. M. Lazarus, a Christian couple from India, who 
had invited Gandhi to stay with them despite the risks such 
hospitality entailed. 

The strikers slept under the sky. Newcastle Indian merchants 
contributed food and cooking and eating utensils. Before long, 
five thousand strikers had assembled within sight of the Lazarus 
house. 

Gandhi was astonished and baffled. What could he do with 
this multitude? They might be on his hands for months. He 
decided to ‘see them safely deposited in jail’ in the Transvaal. He 
informed them of this prospect, described prison at its blackest 
and urged waverers to return to the mines. None did. It was then 
agreed that on a fixed day they would all march the thirty-six 
miles from Newcastle to Charlestown, on the Natal-Transvaal 
border, walk into the Transvaal and thereby earn jail sentences. 
A few women with children, and disabled men were to travel by 
rail towards the same goal. 

While plans were being made, more strikers arrived. Again 
Gandhi attempted, without success, to dissuade them from fol¬ 
lowing him. Accordingly, October 13th was set as the day of 
departure from Newcastle. He was able to furnish each ‘soldier’ 
with a pound and a half of bread and an ounce of sugar. Instruc¬ 
tions were: Conduct yourselves morally, hygienically and pacific¬ 
ally. Submit to police flogging and abuse. Do not resist arrest. 

Charlestown was reached without incident. Preparations to 
receive the Gandhi army had been made in advance by Kallen- 
bach and others. The Indian merchants of Charlestown (normal 
population one thousand) contributed rice, vegetables, kitchen 
equipment, etc. Gandhi was chef and head waiter. Complaints 
about inadequate portions were met with an infectious smile and 
a report on the total amount of food available and the amount of 
each person’s equal ration. 

Women and children were accommodated in houses; the men 
slept in the grounds of the local mosque. 

127 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Before moving on, Gandhi communicated his intentions to the 
Government. He and his people were coming into the Transvaal 
to demonstrate against the breach of the Botha-Smuts pledge and 
to assert their self-respect: T cannot conceive a greater loss to a 
man that the loss of his self-respect. 5 Of course, he added, the 
Natal government could arrest them in Charlestown and thus 
spare them further treks. On the other hand, if the Government 
annulled the three-pound tax the strikers would resume the mining 
of coal. 

The Government did not oblige by arresting them at Charles¬ 
town, nor did it eliminate the three-pound levy. In fact, Gandhi 
suspected that the authorities might not stop the ‘army 5 even if it 
penetrated into the Transvaal. In that case, he contemplated 
advancing on Tolstoy Farm by eight day-marches of twenty miles 
each. 

How would he feed his peace troops on the road for eight days? 
A European baker at Volksrust, the Transvaal border town, 
undertook to supply them in Volksrust and then to ship the 
necessary quantity of bread by rail each day to an appointed spot 
en route to the farm. 

Gandhi counted his forces. There were 2037 men, 127 women 
and 57 children. At 6.30 on the morning of November 6th, 1913, 
Gandhi recalls, ‘we offered prayers and commenced the march 
in the name of God 5 . 

From Charlestown on the Natal side to Volksrust is one mile. 
A large detachment of Transvaal mounted border guards was on 
emergency duty. Two days earlier the Volksrust whites had held 
a meeting at which several speakers declared they personally 
would shoot any Indian who attempted to enter the Transvaal. 
Kallenbach, who attended to defend the Indians, was challenged 
to a duel. He was a pupil of the great Sandow, and an accom¬ 
plished pugilist and wrestler, but the Gandhian German arose and 
said, ‘As I have accepted the religion of peace I may not accept 
the challenge .. . The Indians do not want what you imagine 
. . . The Indians are not out to challenge your position as rulers. 
They do not wish to fight with you or to fill the country . . . They 
propose to enter the Transvaal not with a view to settle there, but 
only as an effective demonstration against the unjust tax which is 
levied upon them. They are brave men. They will not injure 

128 


THE VICTORY 


you in person or in property, they will not fight with you, but 
enter the Transvaal they will, even in the face of your gunfire. 
They are not the men to beat a retreat from the fear of your bullets 
or spears. They propose to melt and I know they will melt, your 
hearts by self-suffering.’ 

Nobody shot anybody; perhaps Kallenbach’s speech turned 
away the white wrath. Perhaps the police reinforcements at the 
border sobered the hotheads. The guards let the Indians pass. 

The first halt was made at Palmford, eight miles beyond Volks- 
rust. The marchers ate a meagre meal and stretched out on the 
earth for sleep. Gandhi had surveyed his slumbering resisters 
and was about to lie down when he heard steps and a moment 
later saw a policeman approaching, lantern in hand. 

T have a warrant to arrest you,’ the officer said politely to 
Gandhi. T want to arrest you. 5 

‘When?’ Gandhi asked. 

‘Now,’ the policeman replied. 

‘Where will you take me?’ 

‘To the adjoining station first,’ the officer explained democratic¬ 
ally, ‘and to Volksrust when there is a train.’ 

Gandhi woke Mr. P. K. Naidoo, a faithful lieutenant, and gave 
him instructions for continuing the march to Tolstoy Farm. 
Gandhi was transported to Volksrust and arraigned in court. 
The prosecutor demanded imprisonment, but the judge released 
Gandhi on bail furnished by Kallenbach. Gandhi had asked for 
release on bail because of his responsibilities to the marchers. 
Kallenbach, stationed in Volksrust to send on stragglers and new 
recruits, had a car ready and quickly drove Gandhi back to the 
Indian ‘army’. 

The next day the Indians halted at Standerton. Gandhi was 
handing out bread and marmalade when a magistrate stepped 
up and said to Gandhi, ‘You are my prisoner.’ 

‘It seems I have been promoted,’ Gandhi commented with a 
laugh, ‘since magistrates take the trouble to arrest me instead of 
mere police officials.’ 

Again Gandhi was freed on bail. Five co-workers were Im¬ 
prisoned. 

Two days later, November 9th, as Gandhi and Polak were 
walking at the head of the long column, a cart came up and the 

129 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


officer in it ordered Gandhi to go with him. Gandhi passed the 
command to Polak. The officer permitted Gandhi to inform the 
marchers of his arrest, but when the little ‘general’ began to 
exhort the Indians to remain peaceful, the officer exclaimed, ‘You 
are now a prisoner and cannot make any speeches.’ 

In four days, Gandhi had been arrested three times. 

The march continued without the leader. 

On the morning of the ioth, on reaching Balfour, the Indians 
saw three special trains drawn up at the station to deport them 
from the Transvaal to Natal. At first they refused to submit to 
arrest, and it was only through the co-operation of Polak, Ahmed 
Kachhalia and others that the police were able to herd the 
marchers into the trains. 

Polak was thanked for his services and arrested and confined in 
Volksrust jail. There he found Kallenbach. 

On November 14th, Gandhi was brought to trial in Volksrust. 
He pleaded guilty. The court, however, ‘would not convict a 
prisoner’, Gandhi wrote, ‘merely upon his pleading guilty’. It 
therefore requested him to supply the witnesses against himself 
and Gandhi did so. Kallenbach and Polak testified against him. 

Twenty-four hours later, Gandhi appeared as a witness against 
Kallenbach and two days after that, Gandhi and Kallenbach 
testified against Polak. Judge Theodore Jooste reluctantly gave 
each of them three months’ hard labour in the Volksrust prison. 

Fresh prisoners kept Gandhi informed on Satyagraha develop¬ 
ments outside. The arrest of the leaders and marchers had stirred 
new enthusiasm and the number of resisters throughout South 
Africa mounted fast. Occasionally, Gandhi could send messages 
to followers still at liberty. Meanwhile Gandhi rejoiced in con¬ 
genial company. This was too much of a good thing and the 
Government shifted him to Bloemfontein where he was with 
Europeans and Negroes, but no Indians. 

The striking miners met a worse fate. Trains carried them 
back to the mines, where they were forced into wire-enclosed 
stockades and placed under company employees who had been 
sworn in as special constables. Despite whips, sticks and kicks, 
they refused to descend to the coal face. 

News of these events was cabled to India and England. India 
seethed with resentment; the authorities grew alarmed. Lord 

130 


THE VICTORY 


Hardinge, the British Viceroy, was impelled to deliver a strong 
speech at Madras in which, breaking precedent, he trenchantly 
criticized the South African government and demanded a com¬ 
mission of inquiry. 

Meanwhile, more indentured labourers left their work in 
sympathy with the rebellious Newcastle miners. The State re¬ 
garded such labourers as slaves without the right to strike, and 
sent soldiers to suppress them. In one place some were killed 
and several wounded. 

The tide of resistance rose higher. Approximately fifty thousand 
indentured labourers were on strike; several thousand free Indians 
were in prison. From India came a stream of gold. At a meeting 
in Lahore, in the Punjab, a Christian missionary named Charles F. 
Andrews gave all the money he had to the South African move¬ 
ment. Others made similar sacrifices. 

By arrangement, several leading Indians and Albert West, who 
edited Indian Opinion , and Sonya Schlesin, Gandhi’s secretary, 
avoided arrest to conduct propaganda, handle finances and 
communicate with India and England. The Government never¬ 
theless arrested Mr. West. Thereupon, Gokhale sent Andrews 
from India to replace him. He came with W. W. Pearson, another 
high-minded Englishman. 

Cables between the Viceroy’s office and London and between 
London and South Africa hummed with voluminous official 
messages. 

Unexpectedly, the Government liberated Gandhi, Kallenbach 
and Polak on December 18th, 1913. ‘All three of us’, Gandhi 
writes, ‘were disappointed upon our release.’ Civil disobedience, 
properly launched and inspired, needed no leaders. 

If Gandhi wanted to be free he need not have gone to jail at all; 
he could have refrained from opposing the Government. Going 
into and coming out of prison had to advance the cause and this 
time coming out did not. Under pressure from the Viceroy and 
the British authorities in Whitehall, a commission had been 
appointed to investigate the grievances of the Indians in South 
Africa and it was hoped that the release of Gandhi and his 
colleagues would testify to the bona fides of Botha and Smuts in 
appointing it. 

But upon regaining his liberty Gandhi asserted in a public 

1 m.g. 131 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

statement that the commission ‘is a packed body and intended to 
hoodwink the government and the public opinion both of England 
and of India’. He did not doubt the ‘integrity and impartiality’ 
of the chairman, Sir William Solomon, but Mr. Ewald Esselen, he 
said, was prejudiced. With regard to the third member, he 
had, in January 1897, ‘led a mob to demonstrate against the 
landing of Indians who had arrived at Durban in two vessels, 
advocated at a public meeting the sinking of two ships with all 
Indians on board and commending a remark made by another 
speaker that he would willingly put down a month’s pay for one 
shot at the Indians . . . He has consistently been our enemy all 
these years’. Gandhi was injured in that 1897 assault. 

Three days after leaving prison, Gandhi appeared at a mass 
meeting in Durban. He was no longer dressed in shirt and dun¬ 
garee trousers. He wore a knee-length white smock, a white 
wrapping around his legs (an elongated loincloth) and sandals. 
He had abandoned Western clothing. He did so, he told the 
meeting, to mourn comrades killed during the miners’ strike. 

Reviewing the situation, Gandhi advised ‘still greater purifying 
suffering until at last the Government may order the military to 
riddle us also with bullets. 

‘My friends,’ he exclaimed, ‘are you prepared for this?’ 

‘Yes, yes,’ the audience shouted. 

‘Are you prepared to share the fate of those of our countrymen 
whom the cold stone is resting upon today?’ 

‘Yes, yes,’ they shouted. 

‘I hope,’ Gandhi proceeded, ‘that every man, woman and 
grown-up child will. . . not consider their salaries, trades, or even 
families, or their own bodies. . . .’ 

The struggle, he emphasized, is ‘a struggle for human liberty 
and therefore a struggle for religion’. 

After the meeting Gandhi wrote to Smuts condemning the 
choice of two members of the commission. ‘Man’, he philosophized, 
‘cannot change his temperament all at once. It is against the laws 
of nature to suppose that these gentlemen will suddenly become 
different. . . .’ 

Smuts replied three days later, rejecting Gandhi’s proposal to 
add Indians or pro-Indians to the commission. 

Gandhi accordingly announced that on January 1st, 1914, he 

132 


THE VICTORY 


and a group of Indians would march from Durban, Natal, to 
court arrest. They would not agitate for free immigration into 
the Union, nor for political franchise in the near future, he de¬ 
clared. They merely wished to regain lost rights. 

While this embarrassing threat of an Indian mass march hung 
over the Government’s head, the white employees of all the South 
African railways went on strike. Gandhi immediately called off 
his march. It was not part of the tactics of Satyagraha, he 
explained, to destroy, hurt, humble, or embitter the adversary, 
or to win a victory by weakening him. Civil resisters hope, by 
sincerity, chivalry and self-suffering, to convince the opponent’s 
brain and conquer his heart. They never take advantage of the 
Government’s difficulty or form unnatural alliances. 

Congratulations poured in on Gandhi; Lord Amp thill wired 
from England, so did others; messages of appreciation came from 
India and many points in South Africa. 

Smuts, busy with the railway strike (martial law had been 
declared), nevertheless summoned Gandhi to a talk. The first 
talk led to another. The Government had accepted the principle 
of negotiation. Gandhi’s friends warned him against deferring the 
march again. They recalled Smuts’s broken pledge in 1908. 

‘Forgiveness,’ Gandhi replied, quoting the Sanskrit, ‘is the 
ornament of the brave.’ 

Gandhi’s knightly forbearance in cancelling the march created 
an atmosphere favourable to a settlement. Gandhi’s hand, more¬ 
over, was strengthened by the arrival, on a fast, special steamer, of 
Sir Benjamin Robertson, extraordinary envoy of the Viceroy 
who was worried about hostile reactions in India to South African 
persecutions. 

Gandhi postponed the march a second time. 

‘Gandhi,’ Smuts said at one of their interviews, ‘this time we 
want no misunderstanding, we want no mental or other reserva¬ 
tions, let all the cards be on the table and I want you to tell me 
wherever you think that a particular passage or word does not 
read in accordance with your own reading.’ 

This spirit, recognized as friendly by Gandhi, conduced to 
steady if slow progress in the talks. ; You can’t put twenty thou¬ 
sand Indians into jail,’ Smuts declared in defence of his new, 
conciliatory attitude. 


i33 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Smuts and Gandhi placed their cards and texts on the table. 
Memoranda passed from one side to the other. For weeks, each 
word was weighed, each sentence sharpened for precision. On 
June 30th, 1914, the two subtle negotiators finally exchanged 
letters confirming the terms of a complete agreement. 

This document was then translated into the Indian Relief Bill 
and submitted to the Union Parliament in Gape Town. Smuts 
pleaded with Members to approach the problem fin a non- 
controversial spirit*. The bill became South African law in July. 

The terms were: 

1. Hindu, Moslem and Parsi marriages are valid. 

2. The three-pound annual tax on indentured labourers who 
wish to remain in Natal is abolished; arrears are cancelled. 

3. Indentured labour will cease coming from India by 1920. 

4. Indians could not move freely from one province of the 
Union to another, but Indians born in South Africa might enter 
Cape Colony. 

Smuts promised publicly that the law would be administered 
fin a just manner and with due regard to vested rights’ of Indians. 

The settlement was a compromise which pleased both sides. 
Gandhi noted that Indians would still be ‘cooped up’ in their 
provinces, they could not buy gold, they could not hold land in 
the Transvaal, and they had difficulty in obtaining trade licences. 
But he regarded the agreement as the ‘Magna Charta’ of South 
African Indians. The gain, he told a farewell banquet in Johan¬ 
nesburg — he was feted at a dozen dinners — was not ‘the intrinsic 
things’ in the law but the vindication of the abstract principle of 
racial equality and the removal of the ‘racial taint’. 

The victory, moreover, was a vindication of civil resistance. 
‘It is a force which,’ Gandhi wrote in Indian Opinion , ‘if it became 
universal, would revolutionize social ideals and do away with 
despotisms and the ever-growing militarism under which the 
nations of the West are groaning and are being almost crushed to 
death, and which fairly promises to overwhelm even the nations 
of the East.’ 

Having won the battle, Gandhi, accompanied by Mrs. Gandhi 
and Mr. Kallenbach, sailed for England on July 18th, 1914. 
Gandhi was in European clothes and looked gentle, thoughtful 
and tired. Kasturbai wore a white sari with a gay flower design 

134 


THE VICTORY 

and showed signs of suffering as well as beauty. Like her husband, 
she was forty-five. 

Just before leaving South Africa for ever, Gandhi gave Miss 
Schlesin and Polak a pair of sandals he had made in prison and 
asked that they be delivered to General Smuts as a gift. Smuts 
wore them every summer at his own Doornkloof farm at Irene, 
near Pretoria. In 1939, on Gandhi’s seventieth birthday, he 
returned them to Gandhi in a gesture of friendship. Invited to 
contribute to a Gandhi memorial volume on that occasion, Smuts, 
by then a world-famous statesman and war leader, complied and, 
graciously calling himself ‘an opponent of Gandhi a generation 
ago’, declared that men like the Mahatma ‘redeem us from a 
sense of commonplace and futility and are an inspiration to us not 
to weary in well-doing. . . . 

‘The story of our clash in the early days of the Union of South 
Africa’, Smuts wrote, ‘has been told by Gandhi himself and is 
well known. It was my fate to be the antagonist of a man for 
whom even then I had the highest respect. . . He never forgot the 
human background of the situation, never lost his temper or 
succumbed to hate, and preserved his gentle humour even in the 
most trying situations. His manner and spirit even then, as well 
as later, contrasted markedly with the ruthless and brutal force¬ 
fulness which is the vogue in our day. . . . 

‘I must frankly admit’, Smuts continued, ‘that his activities at 
that time were very trying to me . . . Gandhi . . . showed a new 
technique . . . His method was deliberately to break the law and 
to organize his followers into a mass movement... In both 
provinces a wild and disconcerting commotion was created, large 
numbers of Indians had to be imprisoned for lawless behaviour 
and Gandhi himself received — what no doubt he desired — a 
period of rest and quiet in jail. For him everything went accord¬ 
ing to plan. For me — the defender of law and order — there was 
the usual trying situation, the odium of carrying out a law which 
had not strong public support, and finally the discomfiture when 
the law was repealed.’ 

Speaking of Gandhi’s present, Smuts remarked, ‘I have worn 
these sandals for many a summer since then, even though I may 
feel that I am not worthy to stand in the shoes of so great a man.’ 
Such humour and generosity proved him worthy of Gandhi’s mettle. 

135 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Part of Gandhi’s effectiveness lay in evoking the best Gandhian 
impulses of his adversary. 

The purity of Gandhi’s methods made it difficult for Smuts to 
oppose him. Victory came to Gandhi not when Smuts had no 
more strength to fight him but when he had no more heart to 
fight him. 

Professor Gilbert Murray wrote: ‘Be careful in dealing with 
a man who cares nothing for sensual pleasures, nothing for 
comfort or praise or promotion, but is simply determined to do 
what he believes to be right. He is a dangerous and uncomfort¬ 
able enemy because his body which you can always conquer gives 
you so little purchase over his soul.’ 

That was Gandhi, the leader. 

Gandhi once recited these verses 1 of Shelley to a Christian 
gathering in India: 

Stand ye calm and resolute, 

Like a forest close and mute, 

With folded arms and looks which are 
Weapons in unvanquished war. 

And if then the tyrants dare, 

Let them ride among you there, 

Slash, and stab, and maim, and hew — 

What they like, that let them do. 

With folded arms and steady eyes, 

And little fear, and less surprise, 

Look upon them as they slay 
Till their rage has died away. 

Then they will return with shame 
To the place from which they came, 

And the blood thus shed will speak 
In hot blushes on their cheek. 

Rise like lions after slumber 
In unvanquishable number — 

Shake your chains to earth like dew 
Which in sleep has fallen on you — 

Ye are many, they are few. 

1 Taken from The Mask of Anarchy. 

136 


THE VICTORY 

Those were the followers, the Indian civil resisters in South 
Africa. 

In 1949, the Indian population of South Africa was a quarter of 
a million, of whom two hundred thousand lived in the province 
of Natal. Though they had multiplied and prospered, they still 
did not have the franchise or guaranteed civil rights. They were 
subject to white and Zulu violence. Their condition was precar¬ 
ious. Manilal Gandhi’s Indian Opinion of February 25th, 1949, 
noted that in 1914 passive resistance was ‘only suspended’ and 
‘may have to be reintroduced’. Every generation re-enacts the 
battle for ita rights — or it loses them. But while individuals in 
several continents have practised passive resistance, nobody 
except Mohandas K. Gandhi has ever led a successful, non-violent, 
mass, civil disobedience campaign. He possessed the personal 
qualities which aroused the necessary qualities in the community. 