CHAPTER VIII 


GANDHI GOES TO WAR 

I n the Boer War, which was waged in South Africa from 1899 
to 1902 between Dutch settlers and the British, Gandhi’s 
personal sympathies ‘were all with the Boers’. Yet he volun¬ 
teered to serve with the British. ‘Every single subject of a state,’ 
he explained, ‘must not hope to enforce his opinion in all cases. 
The authorities may not always be right, but as long as the sub¬ 
jects owe allegiance to a state, it is their clear duty generally to 
accommodate themselves, and to accord their support, to the acts 
of the state.’ 

This is not the language or sentiment of a pacifist. Although 
the Indians, Gandhi knew, were ‘helots in the Empire’, they were 
still hoping to improve their condition within that empire and 
here was ‘a golden opportunity’ to do so by supporting the 
British in the Boer War. 

The Indians’ claim for equal rights and fair treatment in South 
Africa, lawyer Gandhi submitted, was based on their status as 
British subjects, and since they sought the advantages of British 
citizenship they should also accept its obligations. 

Then Gandhi made a fine point: it could be said that this war 
and any war was immoral or anti-religious. Unless, however, a 
person had taken that position and actively defended it before the 
war he could not use it as a justification for abstention after 
hostilities had commenced. 

Gandhi would have been more popular with his countrymen 
had he advocated a do-nothing neutral policy. But it was unlike 
Gandhi to be evasive. He accordingly offered to organize 
Indians as stretcher bearers and medical orderlies at the front 
or for menial work in hospitals. The Natal government rejected 
the offer. Nevertheless, Gandhi and other Indians began, at their 
own expense, to train as nurses. They conveyed this information 
to the authorities together with certificates of physical fitness. 
Anpther rejection came. But the Boers were advancing, the dead 

69 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

were piling up on the battlefield, and the wounded were receiving 
inadequate care. 

After much procrastination from prejudice, Natal sanctioned 
the formation of an Indian Ambulance Corps. Three hundred 
free Indians volunteered together with eight hundred indentured 
labourers furloughed by their masters. England and South Africa 
were impressed. 

Gandhi led the corps. A photograph taken at the time shows 
him in khaki uniform and broad-brimmed, jaunty, felt cowboy 
hat seated in the centre of twenty-one men similarly dressed. 
Gandhi has a drooping moustache and, like the others, wears a 
Red Cross armband. He looks stern and small. Next to him is 
Dr. Booth, a bulky English doctor with goatee who trained the 
volunteers. The man standing above Gandhi has both his hands 
on Gandhi’s shoulders. 

The corps members were African-born and Indian-born 
Hindus, Moslems and Christians who lived together in natural 
amity. Their relations with the Tommies were very friendly. The 
public and the army admired the endurance and courage of 
Gandhi’s corps. In one sanguinary engagement at Spion Kop in 
January 1900, the British were being forced to retire and General 
Buller, the commanding officer, sent through a message saying 
that although, by the terms of enlistment, the Indians were not to 
enter the firing line he would be thankful if they came up to remove 
the wounded. Gandhi led his men on to the battlefield. For days 
they worked under the fire of enemy guns and carried wounded 
soldiers back to base hospital. The Indians sometimes walked as 
much as twenty-five miles a day. 

Mr. Vere Stent, British editor of the Pretoria News , wrote an 
article in the July 1911 issue of the Johannesburg Illustrated Star 
about a visit to the front during the Spion Kop battle. ‘After a 
night’s work, which had shattered men with much bigger frames,’ 
he reported, ‘I came across Gandhi in the early morning sitting 
by the roadside eating a regulation army biscuit. Every man in 
Buller’s force was dull and depressed, and damnation was invoked 
on everything. But Gandhi was stoical in his bearing, cheerful 
and confident in his conversations, and had a kindly eye. He did 
one good. It was an informal introduction and it led to a friend¬ 
ship. I saw the man and his small undisciplined corps on many a 

70 


GANDHI GOES TO WAR 


battlefield during the Natal campaign. When succour was to be 
rendered they were there. Their unassuming dauntlessness cost 
them many lives and eventually an order was published forbidding 
them to go into the firing line.’ 

Later in 1900 seasoned units arrived from England, fortune 
smiled on British arms and the Indian Ambulance Corps was 
disbanded. Gandhi and several comrades received the War 
Medal, and the corps was mentioned in dispatches. 

Gandhi hoped that the fortitude of the Indians in war would 
appeal to South Africa’s sense of fair play and help to moderate white 
hostility towards coloured Asiatics. Perhaps the two communities 
would slowly grow closer together. He himself had no unspent 
belligerence and no further plans or ambitions in South Africa; 
nothing foreshadowed the epic opportunity for leadership and 
realization that awaited him there. He yearned to go home to 
India, and did — at the end of 1901. He took his family. He 
settled down in Bombay to practise law and enter politics. 

Gandhi was forging ahead in both fields. In fact, he was 
beginning to tread a path which led to the routine success of a 
mediocre lawyer who made money, joined committees and grew 
a paunch, when a telegraphic summons from South Africa asked 
him to return. He had promised to return if called. It pained him 
to break up his new life but it pleased him to be needed. Kasturbai 
and the boys remained in Bombay. Gandhi estimated that he 
might be away four months to a year. 

Joseph Chamberlain, the Colonial Secretary, was making a 
trip to South Africa which the Indian community regarded as 
fateful, and they wanted their grievances presented to him by 
Gandhi. Hence the summons. 

Gandhi arrived in Durban near the end of 1902. 

Chamberlain, Gandhi assumed, had come to get a gift of thirty- 
five million pounds from South Africa and to cement the post¬ 
war bonds between Boers and British. The Colonial Secretary 
certainly did not propose to antagonize the Boers. On the 
contrary, every possible concession would be made to them. Very 
soon, in fact, General Louis Botha, the Boer leader, became Prime 
Minister of the British-dominated Union of South Africa and Jan 
Christian Smuts, another Boer general and lawyer, its Minister of 
Finance and Defence. Britain was tending Boer wounds and did 

71 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


not intend, therefore, to wound Boer susceptibilities by redressing 
Indian grievances. In British Natal, accordingly, Chamberlain 
received an Indian delegation, listened to Gandhi’s plea and 
answered with chilling evasiveness; in the former Boer republic of 
Transvaal Gandhi was not even admitted into Chamberlain’s 
presence, and those Indian representatives who were admitted got 
no greater satisfaction than seeing him. 

From repeated rumblings in the Transvaal it seemed that a 
political volcano might any day erupt and wipe out the entire 
Indian settlement. Gandhi therefore pitched his tent close to 
the crater; he became a resident of Johannesburg, the largest 
city of the Transvaal, opened a law office there and, without 
objection from the bar association, won the right to practise 
before the Supreme Court. 

The Transvaal government established an Asiatic Department 
to deal with Indians. This in itself was ominous; it suggested a 
racial approach. The Department, which Gandhi charged with 
corruption, was manned, in the main, by British army officers who 
had come from India during the Boer War and elected to stay. Their 
mentality was that of the white sahib in a colony of coloured inferiors. 

One of the top Asiatic Department ideologues was Lionel 
Curtis, Assistant Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal, who later 
attained wider fame as a liberal apologist of imperialism. Gandhi 
went to see him in 1903 and Mr. Curtis wrote subsequently: 
‘Mr. Gandhi was, I believe, the first Oriental I ever met’; but 
ignorance has ever facilitated policy-making. Gandhi, Curtis 
says, ‘started by trying to convince me of the good points in the 
character of his countrymen, their industry, frugality, their 
patience’. Still the same Gandhian hope of winning friends by 
disproving calumnies! But Curtis replied, ‘Mr. Gandhi, you are 
preaching to the converted. It is not the vices of Indians that 
Europeans in this country fear but their virtues.’ 

If the Indians in South Africa had consented to be ‘hewers of 
wood and drawers of water’ they would have had no trouble. 
But the whites, unprepared to accept the Indians as equals, used 
their monopoly of political power to handicap the brown men 
from another part of the Empire. The purpose was unmistakable 
because frankly avowed. General Botha put it bluntly in an elec¬ 
tion speech at Standerton in January 1907, when he declared, 

72 


GANDHI GOES TO WAR 


‘If my party is returned to office we will undertake to drive the 
coolies out of the country within four years. 5 And Smuts asserted 
in October 1906, ‘The Asiatic cancer, which has already eaten so 
deeply into the vitals of South Africa, ought to be resolutely 
eradicated.’ These were the Asiatic Department’s marching orders. 

Gandhi stopped the whites far short of this goal. 

Throughout 1904, 1905 and the first part of 1906, the Transvaal 
Asiatic Department diligently carried out all anti-Indian regula¬ 
tions and showed special aptitude in inventing new ones. It 
looked as though the existence of the ten thousand Indians of the 
Transvaal and of the more than one hundred thousand in South 
Africa was in jeopardy; the threats of Botha and Smuts appeared 
on the eve of being translated into actuality. 

Gandhi was now the recognized leader of South Africa’s 
Indian community. Tension between whites and Indians was 
growing. Nevertheless Gandhi forsook the political arena when 
the Zulu ‘rebellion’ occurred in the first half of 1906 and joined 
the British army with a small group of twenty-four Indian 
volunteers to serve as stretcher bearers and sanitary aids. Gandhi 
said he joined because he believed that ‘the British Empire existed for 
the welfare of the world’; he had a ‘genuine sense of loyalty’ to it. 

The ‘rebellion’ was really a punitive expedition or ‘police 
action’ which opened with the exemplary hanging of twelve 
Zulus and continued to the last as a ghastly procession of shoot¬ 
ings and floggings. Since white physicians and nurses would not 
tend sick and dying Zulus, the task was left to the Indians who 
witnessed all the horrors of black men whipped till their skin 
came off in strips. Gandhi’s party sometimes came on the scene 
five or six days after the whites had passed by and found the 
victims suffering agony from open, suppurating wounds. The 
Indians marched as many as forty miles a day. 

After a month’s service, the Indian unit was demobilized and 
each man honoured with a special medal. Gandhi had held the 
rank of sergeant-major. All members wore khaki uniform, this 
time with puttees. 

When Gandhi returned from this expedition he was obliged to 
plunge into a cold war with the British which ended in an 
historic victory for moral force and brought him honour in India 
and fame throughout the world. 

73 


 

