  ha ter    III.
THE MILITARY OPERATIONS of 1864 were of the most
momentous importance. It was a year of intense activity in
every 
department; 
and, 
although 
there 
were 
great
miscarriages and serious and perplexing disasters, the
grand results were such as to show to the people of the
whole country that the end was not far oﬀ; and that that
end would leave the rebellion hopeless and helpless at the
feet of the national power. Although the principal interest
was attached to the operations of the two grand armies
under Grant and Sherman, there were minor movements of
subsidiary bodies, which attracted considerable attention.
Early 
in 
February, 
an 
expedition 
under 
General
Gillmore’s direction, for clearing Florida of insurgent
forces, so as to enable the Union elements of the state to
reorganize, resulted in a failure. At the same time,
Sherman, proceeding from Vicksburg, with a strong
infantry force, and General Smith, starting from Memphis,
with a heavy force of cavalry, undertook a joint movement
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
destroying 
rebel 
supplies 
and
communications; but they failed in their plan of forming a
junction, though they were quite successful in their work of
destruction. Later in the month, Kilpatrick made his bold
and dashing raid upon Richmond, blowing up the locks of
the Kanawha canal, cutting railways and telegraphs, and
 penetrating within the outer defenses of the rebel capital.
In March, the disastrous Red River expedition of General
Banks occurred. Much damage was done to the rebels, and
more was received by ourselves. In April, Fort Pillow was
captured from us; and here occurred one of the most
shocking outrages of the war, already incidentally alluded
to in these pages. Some three hundred negro troops, with
women and children, were murdered in cold blood, after
they had surrendered. The white oﬀicers of these troops
shared their cruel fate; and the event was greeted with
approval by rebel newspapers. The history of war is
illustrated by no deed of blacker barbarism than this. It
ﬁlled the country with horror, and inspired a universal
demand for retaliation. Mr. Lincoln, who was as deeply
touched as any one, promised retaliation publicly; but it
was never inﬂicted.
Late in the spring, the western army, under Sherman,
confronted Johnston at Chattanooga. The army of the
Potomac, immediately under General Meade, faced Lee in
Virginia. Both sides had gathered every available man for
the last great trial of arms. Lieutenant-general Grant
perfected his plans, and, after visiting the western army,
and consulting with Sherman, he returned to the east, and
took the general direction of military aﬀairs. Everything
was given into his hands; and he was supplied with all the
men and material that were desired. “The particulars of
your plans,” said the President to him in a letter, “I neither
know, nor seek to know. You are vigilant and self-reliant;
and, pleased with this, I wish not to obtrude any restraints
 nor constraints upon you.” General Grant’s response to this
note of Mr. Lincoln was evidently not given in ignorance of
the charges which had so freely been made, by political
enemies of the administration, that our generals were
interfered with by the President and the Secretary of War.
“From my ﬁrst entrance into the volunteer service of my
country to the present day,” said he, “I have never had
cause of complaint... Indeed, since the promotion which
placed me in command of all the armies, and in view of the
great responsibility and importance of success, I have been
astonished at the readiness with which everything asked
for has been yielded, without even an explanation being
asked.”
Everything having been made ready, the two armies
moved, at the opening of May, to the work that lay before
them. On Tuesday night, May third, the army of the
Potomac crossed the Rapidan; and on Thursday that series
of actions was begun which will be known in history as
“The Battles of the Wilderness.” Thousands and tens of
thousands of brave men fell on both sides; but the rebel
general was obliged, from day to day, to fall back from his
carefully prepared defenses, to save his communications;
while Grant ﬂanked him by a series of swift and daring
swoops of his gigantic force, until Lee found himself and his
army in Richmond. In co-operation with these movements
of Grant’s army, General Butler pushed up the James River
with a large force, and secured and held City Point and
Bermuda Hundred. This was his principal work; but he
undertook various diversions without remarkable results.
 It was not until the middle of June that the army reached
the James River, and commenced the siege of Petersburgh,
which was destined to ultimate in the downfall of the
rebellion.
General Sherman pursued the strategy adopted by his
superior. He had a larger army than Johnston, but Johnston
had the advantage of strong positions and a knowledge of
the country. He also moved toward his supplies, while
Sherman left his behind him. The federal General ﬂanked
Johnston out of his works at Buzzard’s Roost; and then,
ﬁghting and ﬂanking, from day to day, he drove him from
Dalton to Atlanta. Then Johnston was superseded by Hood,
and Hood assumed the oﬀensive. In three days of bloody
battle, the new commander lost half of his army; and then
he was glad to get behind the defenses of Atlanta. Here he
remained more than a month, besieged. In the endeavor to
escape from the toils which Sherman was weaving around
him, he found himself at last thoroughly outgeneraled, and
was obliged to run. Atlanta fell into our hands, on the
second of September. Then Hood, a rash and desperate
oﬀicer, set oﬀ to break up Sherman’s communications; and,
ﬁnding himself thoroughly whipped, started for a grand
march to Nashville, where he hoped to ﬁnd repayment for
the losses and disgraces he had suﬀered. Sherman sent
back to General Thomas, who had been left in command
there, a portion of his army, and much of his material of
war; and then he turned his hack on Hood, for a march to
the sea-coast.
 This march, one of the most remarkable in the history of
war, was called by the rebels a retreat. It was begun on the
twelfth of November; and, leaving behind supplies and all
means of communication, the gallant host started for the
Atlantic. The most frantic eﬀorts were made by the rebels
to check the progress of the redoubtable army. Small forces
hovered in front, in ﬂank, and in rear, but nothing impeded
its march. It was a gala-day aﬀair, the soldiers supporting
themselves upon the country through which they passed.
On the eighth of December, the army arrived within twenty
miles of Savannah. On the fourteenth, Fort McAllister was
taken; and, on the same day, communication was opened
with the federal ﬂeet, sent to co-operate and bear supplies.
The army had reached a new base; and had reached it
without 
a 
single 
disaster. 
Savannah 
was 
occupied
immediately, the rebel troops retreating and escaping. On
the next day after Fort McAllister fell, Thomas defeated
Hood in Tennessee, and sent him back, with his army cut in
pieces and ruined.
In the meantime, Sheridan had whipped Early in the
Shenandoah valley, in a series of brilliant engagements;
and, although there had been raids of rebel cavalry across
the Potomac, and panics and alarms in various quarters,
the 1st of January, 1865, found the Union cause much
advanced, and the rebels weakened and despondent.
Sherman 
was 
at 
Savannah, 
organizing 
for 
another
movement up the coast; Hood was crushed; Early’s army
was destroyed; Price, too, had been routed in Missouri;
Canby was operating for the capture of Mobile; and Grant,
 with the grip of a bull-dog, held Lee in Richmond, while all
these great movements in other parts of the country were
in progress.
There was discord in the counsels of the rebels. They
began to talk of using the negroes as soldiers. The
commanding general demanded this measure; and, at last,
the singular spectacle was exhibited of a slaveholders’
rebellion, undertaken to make slavery perpetual, calling
upon the slaves themselves for help. But the call for help
came too late, even had it been addressed to more
promising sources. Lee was tied, and Sherman was turning
his steps toward him; and among the leaders of the
rebellion there was a fearful looking-for of fatal disasters.
Two changes occurred in Mr. Lincoln’s cabinet during
the year, in addition to that already noted in the post-oﬀice
department. Edward Bates of Missouri, the Attorney-
general, left his post on the ﬁrst of December, and was
succeeded by James Speed of Kentucky. Mr. Chase, the
Secretary of the Treasury, resigned early in July. That this
resignation was unexpected and unwelcome to Mr. Lincoln,
was evident; but it was immediately accepted. There was
probably some personal feeling on both sides, into the
causes of which there is no occasion to enter. The matter
excited Mr. Lincoln very much — probably more than
anything 
that 
concerned 
him 
personally 
during 
his
administration. He ﬁrst appointed to the vacant oﬀice
Governor David Todd of Ohio; and, the appointment being
declined, he named Hon. William Pitt Fessenden of Maine.
Mr. Fessenden was a gentleman in whom the country had
 full conﬁdence; but, owing to his inﬁrm health, he assumed
the responsibilities of the place with great reluctance, and
only after such an appeal from Mr. Lincoln as he could not
resist.
On the twelfth of October, Chief Justice Taney died; and
the friends of Mr. Chase urged that gentleman at once as
the proper man to be endowed with the responsibilities of
that august oﬀice. But Mr. Chase had his enemies, like all
those who have achieved an equally prominent position.
The antagonism between his friends and enemies was at
once developed; and Mr. Lincoln was approached with all
the motives for and against the appointment. In this matter,
Mr. Lincoln’s habit of hearing all the arguments in a case
on which he had already passed his judgment, was
strikingly exhibited. Intimate friends of Mr. Lincoln declare
that there never was a time during his administration when
he did not intend to appoint Mr. Chase to this place, if it
should be made vacant by any cause. To all arguments
which related to Mr. Chase’s ﬁtness or unﬁtness for the
oﬀice, the President lent a ready ear; but he was
exceedingly vexed with those who appealed to his selﬁsh
resentments. There were not wanting men who tried to
arouse his prejudices, by reporting unpleasant words that
Mr. Chase was alleged to have uttered against the
President; but this gossip was always oﬀensive, because it
supposed that he could be aﬀected in his choice by selﬁsh
motives. To one man who accused Mr. Chase to him of
having used the patronage of his department to advance his
own presidential prospects, he simply replied: “Well, Chase
 would make a pretty good president; and, so far as I am
concerned, I wish some one would take it oﬀ my hands.” To
another 
friend 
he 
remarked 
that 
there 
were 
two
considerations that controlled him in the appointment: ﬁrst,
the man appointed should be an anti-slavery man on
principle; secondly, he should thoroughly understand the
ﬁnancial policy of the government. Mr. Chase’s anti-slavery
principles were universally acknowledged, and the ﬁnancial
policy of the government was his own. So, after a delay that
gave Mr. Chase’s friends and enemies time to urge the
points of their respective cases, Mr. Chase received the
appointment; and the country was no better satisﬁed with
this disposition of the matter than was Mr. Lincoln himself.
On the sixth of December, Mr. Lincoln sent in his annual
message to Congress, which had assembled on the ﬁfth.
The document opened with a review of the position of
foreign 
governments, 
and 
our 
relations 
to 
those
governments. The President announced the ports of
Norfolk, Fernandina and Pensacola to have been opened by
proclamation. His view of the Arguelles case, which the
opposition had made the subject of severe criticism, he
gave in the words: “For myself, I have no doubt of the
power and duty of the executive, under the law of nations,
to exclude enemies of the human race from an asylum in
the 
United 
States. 
If 
Congress 
should 
think 
that
proceedings in such cases lack the authority of law, or
ought to be further regulated by it, I recommend that
provision be made for eﬀectually preventing foreign
slavetraders from acquiring domicile and facilities for their
 criminal occupation in our country.” Owing to raids into the
states, planned in Canada by enemies of the United States
harbored there, he announced that he had thought proper
to give notice that, after the expiration of six months, the
period conditionally stipulated in the existing arrangements
with 
Great 
Britain, 
the 
United 
States 
would 
hold
themselves at liberty to increase their naval armament
upon the lakes, if they should deem it necessary to do so.
Increased taxation had beneﬁted the revenue; and the
national banking system had proved to be acceptable to
capitalists and the people. The naval exhibit gave a total of
671 vessels, carrying 4,610 guns, which showed an
increase, during the year, of 88 vessels and 167 guns. The
whole cost of the immense squadrons that had been called
into existence since the beginning of the war, was more
than two hundred and thirty-eight millions of dollars. One
matter the President spoke of with special interest, viz: the
steady 
expansion 
of 
population, 
improvement, 
and
governmental institutions, over the new and unoccupied
portions of the country, notwithstanding the civil war.
Mr. Lincoln thought ﬁt to urge the passage of an
amendment 
to 
the 
Constitution, 
prohibiting 
slavery
throughout the United States, notwithstanding the same
Congress had killed the measure at its previous session. It
may be stated here that Mr. Lincoln had contemplated this
measure, and was ready for it long before Congress had
come up to his position. Before even an allusion to this
amendment had been publicly made, he talked about it with
his friends, and was urged by one of them to become a
 leader in the movement. He replied that he had no ambition
of that sort, but that he thought that the amendment ought
to be made, and would be made. For himself, he was
content to let others initiate the pleasure, and win the
credit of it. But the matter had arrived at a new stage; and,
when he saw that his inﬂuence was really necessary to its
consummation, he did not hesitate to exert it.
Mr. Lincoln alluded to the lessons which had been taught
by the presidential election. This election had proved the
purpose of the people in the loyal states to maintain the
integrity of the Union. It had proved, too, that, although the
waste of war had been great, there were actually more men
in the Union than when the war began. There had been,
during the three years and a half of war, an increase of
nearly one hundred and ﬁfty thousand voters, without
counting the soldiers who, by the laws of their respective
states, were not permitted to vote. With this fact in view, it
was plain that the government could maintain its contest
with the rebellion indeﬁnitely, so far as the supply of men
was concerned. Mr. Lincoln closed his message by
remarking that the rebels could, at any moment, have
peace, by laying down their arms, and submitting to the
national authority, under the Constitution. In saying this,
however, he did not mean to retract anything he had said
about slavery. He would not retract his Emancipation
Proclamation, nor return to slavery any man free by the
terms of that proclamation.
The most important measure eﬀected by Congress at this
session, was the passage of the amendment to the
 Constitution, abolishing slavery in all the states. It passed
the House by more than the requisite two-thirds vote,
having passed the Senate during the previous session. The
event was hailed with great satisfaction by the friends of
the administration; and only a few of the more virulent of
the opposition were disaﬀected by it. To the President, the
measure was particularly gratifying; and he took occasion
to express his satisfaction to a crowd that gathered around
the White House, immediately after its adoption. He said
that it seemed to him to be the one thing necessary to the
winding up of the whole diﬀiculty. It completed and
conﬁrmed the work of his proclamation of emancipation. It
needed only to be adopted by the votes of the states; and
he appealed to his auditors to go home, and see that work
faithfully accomplished.
The ﬁgures which gave the result of the presidential
election showed that the country was stronger in men than
it was at the beginning of the war; and, as the call for ﬁve
hundred thousand men, made in July, had failed to produce
all the soldiers which the war, much longer protracted,
would require, the President issued a call, on the
nineteenth of December, for three hundred thousand more.
A peace conference, procured by the voluntary and
irresponsible agency of Mr. Francis P. Blair, was held on the
steamer River Queen, in Hampton Roads, on the 3d of
February, 1865, between President Lincoln and Mr.
Seward, 
representing 
the 
government, 
and 
Messrs.
Alexander H. Stephens, J.A. Campbell and R.M.T. Hunter,
representing the rebel confederacy. It was an informal
 aﬀair, entirely verbal in its conduct, and unproductive of
results. The President consented to become a party to the
interview, on representations made by General Grant, who
regarded at least two of the commissioners as very sincere
in their desire for peace. In the conference, these
commissioners favored a postponement of the question of
separation, and mutual eﬀorts of the two governments
toward some extrinsic policy for a season, so as to give time
for the passions of the people to cool. The armies,
meantime, were to be reduced, and the intercourse
between the people of the two sections to be resumed. This
the President considered as equivalent to an armistice or
truce; and he informed them that he could agree to no
cessation 
of 
hostilities, 
except 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
a
disbandment of the insurgent forces, and the recognition of
the national authority throughout all the states of the
Union. He also declared it impossible to recede from his
Emancipation Proclamation; and informed the Richmond
gentlemen that Congress had passed the constitutional
amendment, prohibiting slavery; stating, in addition, that
the amendment would doubtless be perfected by the action
of three-fourths of the states. There was an earnest desire
for peace on both sides, without a doubt; but Mr. Lincoln
could, with truth to himself and honor to his country, make
peace only on certain essential conditions; while the hands
of the commissioners were tied by the obstinacy which
reigned in Richmond.
The reports of the conversation at this conference are
very meager, necessarily; but enough has been made public
 to show that some of the incidents were very interesting
and somewhat amusing. The Augusta (Georgia) Chronicle
has published an account of the conference, which is said
to have been prepared under the eye of Mr. Stephens. This
account states that Mr. Lincoln declared that, in his
negotiations for peace, he could not recognize another
government inside of the one of which he alone was
President. “That,” said he, “would be doing what you so
long asked Europe to do in vain, and be resigning the only
thing the Union armies are ﬁghting for.” To this, Mr. Hunter
replied that the recognition of Davis’ power to make a
treaty was the ﬁrst and indispensable step to peace; and, to
illustrate his point, he referred to the correspondence
between King Charles the First and his Parliament, as a
reliable precedent of a constitutional ruler treating with
rebels. The Chronicle’s account says that at this point “Mr.
Lincoln’s face wore that indescribable expression which
generally preceded his hardest hits; and he remarked:
‘Upon questions of history, I must refer you to Mr. Seward,
for he is posted in such things, and I don’t profess to be;
but my only distinct recollection of the matter is that
Charles lost his head.’”
The President told his “little story,” too, on this occasion,
the best version of which is given in Mr. Carpenter’s
Reminiscences. They were discussing the slavery question,
when Mr. Hunter remarked that the slaves, always
accustomed to work upon compulsion, under an overseer,
would, if suddenly freed, precipitate not only themselves,
but the entire society at the South, into irremediable ruin.
 No work would be done, but blacks and whites would
starve together. The President waited for Mr. Seward to
answer the argument; but, as that gentleman hesitated, he
said: “Mr. Hunter, you ought to know a great deal better
about this matter than I, for you have always lived under
the slave system. I can only say, in reply to your statement
of the case, that it reminds me of a man out in Illinois, by
the name of Case, who undertook, a few years ago, to raise
a very large herd of hogs. It was a great trouble to feed
them; and how to get around this was a puzzle to him. At
length, he hit upon the plan of planting an immense ﬁeld of
potatoes; and, when they were suﬀiciently grown, he
turned the whole herd into the ﬁeld, and let them have full
swing, thus saving not only the labor of feeding the hogs,
but that also of digging the potatoes! Charmed with his
sagacity, he stood one day leaning against the fence,
counting his hogs, when a neighbor came along. ‘Well,
well,’ said he, ‘Mr. Case, this is all very ﬁne. Your hogs are
doing very well just now; but you know out here in Illinois
the frost comes early, and the ground freezes a foot deep.
Then what are they going to do?’ This was a view of the
matter which Mr. Case had not taken into account.
Butchering time for hogs was away on in December or
January. He scratched his head, and at length stammered,
‘Well, it may come pretty hard on their snouts, but I don’t
see but it will be root hog or die! ‘“
It is not supposed that Mr. Lincoln hoped for more from
this conference than he did from the Niagara Falls
negotiations; but he was determined to show that he was
 ready for peace, on the only grounds that would satisfy the
loyal people of the country. The result strengthened the
faith of the people in him; and the rebel President seized
upon it to stir the ashes in the southern heart, in the vain
hope to ﬁnd fuel there which the long ﬁre had left
unconsumed.
Congress adjourned by constitutional limitation on the
third of March, although the Senate was at once convened
in extra session, in accordance with a proclamation of the
President.
On the day of the adjournment of Congress, Mr. Lincoln’s
ﬁrst term of oﬀice expired. Four years of bloody war had
passed away — four years marked by the most marvelous
changes in the spirit, position, feelings, principles and
institutions of the American people. The great system of
wrong, out of which the rebellion had sprung, was in rapid
process of dissolution, and already beyond the reach of
resuscitation. The government had passed through the
severest tests, and had emerged triumphant. There was no
longer doubt in the hearts of the people, and no longer
contempt among the nations of the earth. Abraham Lincoln,
the humble and unobtrusive citizen, the self-educated and
Christian man, had been tried, and had not been found
wanting. His foes no longer denied, and his friends no
longer doubted, his great ability. He was, in every sense,
the ﬁrst citizen of the republic; and he had taken his place
among the leading rulers of the world.
Mr. Lincoln was re-inaugurated into the presidential
oﬀice on the fourth of March. An immense crowd was in
 attendance — a crowd of aﬀectionate friends, not doubtful
of the President, and not doubtful of one another and the
future, as at the ﬁrst inauguration. Chief Justice Chase
administered the oath of oﬀice; and then Mr. Lincoln read
his inaugural address — a paper whose Christian
sentiments and whose reverent and pious spirit has no
parallel 
among 
the 
state 
papers 
of 
the 
American
Presidents. It showed the President still untouched by
resentment, still brotherly in his feelings toward the
enemies of the government, and still profoundly conscious
of the overruling power of Providence in national aﬀairs.
The address was as follows:
“Fellow-Countrymen — At this second appearing to take
the oath of the Presidential oﬀice, there is less occasion for
an extended address than there was at the ﬁrst. Then a
statement somewhat in detail of a course to be pursued
seemed very ﬁtting and proper. Now, at the expiration of
four years, during which public declarations have been
constantly called forth on every point and phase of the
great contest which still absorbs the attention and
engrosses the energies of the nation, little that is new could
be presented.
“The progress of our arms, upon which all else chieﬂy
depends, is as well known to the public as to myself; and it
is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all.
With high hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it
is ventured.
“On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago, all
thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war.
 All dreaded it; all sought to avoid it. While the inaugural
address was being delivered from this place, devoted
altogether to saving the Union without war, agents were in
the city seeking to destroy it without war — seeking to
dissolve the Union and divide the eﬀects by negotiation.
Both parties deprecated war; but one of them would make
war rather than let the nation survive, and the other would
accept war rather than let it perish; and the war came.
“One eighth of the whole population were colored slaves,
not distributed generally over the Union, but localized in
the southern part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar
and powerful interest. All knew that this interest was
somehow the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate
and extend this interest, was the object for which the
insurgents would rend the Union even by war, while the
government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the
territorial enlargement of it.
“Neither party expected for the war the magnitude or the
duration which it has already attained. Neither anticipated
that the cause of the conﬂict might cease with, or even
before, the conﬂict itself should cease. Each looked for an
easier triumph, and a result less fundamental and
astounding.
“Both read the same Bible and pray to the same God, and
each invokes his aid against the other. It may seem strange
that any men should dare to ask a just God’s assistance in
wringing their bread from the sweat of other men’s faces;
but let us judge not, that we be not judged. The prayers of
both could not be answered. That of neither has been
 answered fully. The Almighty has his own purposes. ‘Woe
unto the world because of oﬀences, for it must needs be
that oﬀences come: but woe to that man by whom the
oﬀence cometh.’ If we shall suppose that American slavery
is one of these oﬀences, which in the providence of God
must needs come, but which having continued through his
appointed time, he now wills to remove, and that he gives
to both North and South this terrible war as the woe due to
those by whom the oﬀence came, shall we discern therein
any departure from those divine attributes which the
believers in a living God always ascribe to him? Fondly do
we hope, fervently do we pray, that this mighty scourge of
war may soon pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue
until all the wealth piled by the bondman’s two hundred
and ﬁfty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until
every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid with
another drawn with the sword; as was said three thousand
years ago, so still it must be said; ‘The judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.’
“With malice toward none, with charity for all, with
ﬁrmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us
strive on to ﬁnish the work we are in, to bind up the
nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the
battle and for his widow and orphans, to do all which may
achieve and cherish a just and a lasting peace among
ourselves and with all nations.”
On the sixth of March, Mr. Fessenden, who had never
regarded himself as permanently in the oﬀice of Secretary
of the Treasury, resigned; and Hugh McCulloch of Indiana
 was appointed to his place. Further than this, Mr. Lincoln
introduced no changes into his cabinet. The people had not
only indorsed Mr. Lincoln, but they had indorsed his
administration. On the eleventh of March, the President
issued a proclamation, in pursuance of an act of Congress,
calling upon deserters to return to their posts, and
promising them pardon. The proclamation called many of
the wanderers back to their duty. The draft for three
hundred thousand men was commenced on the ﬁfteenth of
the same month, and every necessary measure was adopted
for a continuance of the war, should the constant
accumulation of federal successes fail to bring the rebellion
to a close.
