  ha ter   I .
THE EVENTS OF 1863, legislative, military, and personal as
they relate to Mr. Lincoln, must receive only a brief and
condensed review. It will have been noticed, by several
incidents that have been recorded in this narrative, and by
sundry papers of Mr. Lincoln, that, during the whole of his
presidency thus far, he had indulged in projects of
colonization of the freed blacks. Congress had so far
regarded his suggestions as to place at his disposal a sum
of money for experiments in colonization. In August, 1862,
he called to the Executive Mansion a representative
company of negroes whom he familiarly addressed on the
subject, freely telling them of the disadvantages under
which they labored, expressing his convictions that they
suﬀered much by living in association with the whites, and
uttering his conviction that the whites suﬀered by living
with them, even when they were free. His wish was to have
them colonized at some point in Central America; and he
promised to spend some of the money intrusted to him, if
they would join in suﬀicient numbers to make an
experiment.
In his message delivered to Congress on the opening of
the session of 1862-63, he called up the subject again; and
communicated information of the measures he had taken,
for eﬀecting his wishes, and securing to the blacks the
 beneﬁts of the congressional provision. He had had
correspondence 
with 
some 
of 
the 
Spanish-American
republics, and they had protested against the reception of
black colonies. He had declined to move any colonists
forward, under the circumstances, and should still desist,
unless they could be protected. Liberia and Hayti were the
only countries to which they could go, with the certainty of
immediate adoption as citizens; and the blacks manifested
a strange indisposition to emigrate to those countries.
This dream of colonization, in which Mr. Lincoln so
benevolently indulged, was destined to fail of even partial
realization. He loved the negro too well to wish him to
remain where the prejudices of race would shut him out
from the full recognition of his manhood. He not only
wanted him free, but he wanted him located where he
might receive all the rights of citizenship, and where he
could live — self-respectful and independent — in the
society of his equals and his race. It was a matter of pitying
wonder with him that the negro should love to live with a
race that abused him, and held him at so low a value in the
scale of humanity.
All the closing portion of this message was devoted to an
earnest 
discussion 
of 
the 
scheme 
of 
compensated
emancipation. 
Notwithstanding 
he 
had 
issued 
his
preliminary proclamation of freedom to the slaves of rebels,
and 
expected 
soon 
to 
complete 
that 
work; 
and
notwithstanding his conviction that slavery could not long
survive this proclamation, even in the loyal slave states, he
never forgot that neither over slavery in these states, the
 Constitution nor the necessities of war gave him any
control. One thing he did forget, viz: that these states had
uniformly turned their backs upon all his earnest and kindly
eﬀorts to save them from a loss which he was certain must
ultimately fall upon them.
With the exposition of his views upon this subject, Mr.
Lincoln submitted the draft of a resolution embodying his
policy. 
This 
resolution 
proposed 
certain 
articles 
as
amendments to the Constitution of the United States, to be
acted upon by the legislatures or conventions of the several
states. These articles, by being adopted by the legislatures
of three-fourths of the states, should become valid, and be
held as parts of the Constitution. They provided that every
slave state which should voluntarily abolish the slave
system at any date previous to the year 1900, should
receive a speciﬁed compensation. Slaves who should be
freed by the chances of war should remain free, though
loyal masters should receive compensation for them. The
closing article provided that Congress might “appropriate
money, and otherwise provide for colonizing free colored
persons, with their own consent, at any place or places
without the United States.”
Sudden emancipation was never in accordance with Mr.
Lincoln’s judgment. Nothing but the necessities of war
would have induced him to decree it with relation to the
slaves of any state. His thought was, that, by giving every
state the opportunity to terminate slavery in its own way,
within a period of thirty-seven years, the institution could
be removed without a shock to the prosperity and the social
 institutions of the whites, and without bringing to the
blacks a freedom which many of them, at least, would not
know how to use. The stress of feeling under which he
urged this measure, is suﬀiciently exhibited by the closing
paragraph of the message: “Fellow citizens,” — thus reads
the passage— “We cannot escape history. We of this
Congress, and this Administration, will be remembered in
spite 
of 
ourselves. 
No 
personal 
signiﬁcance 
or
insigniﬁcance can spare one or another of us. The ﬁery trial
through which we pass will light us down in honor or
dishonor to the latest generation. We say that we are for
the Union. The world will not forget that we say this. We
know how to save the Union. The world knows we know
how to save it... In giving freedom to the slave, we assure
freedom to the free — honorable alike in what we give and
what we preserve. We shall nobly save or meanly lose the
last, best hope of earth. Other means may succeed; this
could not, cannot, fail. The way is plain, peaceful, generous,
just — a way which, if followed, the world will forever
applaud, and God must forever bless.”
Allusion has been made, in the preceding chapter, to the
action of this session, on the subject of arbitrary arrests;
and the subject does not need to be recalled further than to
say that the discussion which it excited fully illustrated the
political antagonisms which, prevalent among the people,
were 
brought 
into 
thorough 
exposition 
by 
their
representatives. In the precise degree in which the
members of both houses sympathized with treason, or were
excited by their party feelings against the general policy of
 the government toward the rebellion, did they oppose the
suspension of the write of habeas corpus. The same rule
good, with rare exceptions, with relation to the discussion
of a project for arming the blacks. There were some friends
of the government from the border states who were very
timid and doubtful about the adoption of this measure: but
the majority of the House agreed to it; and the Senate
would undoubtedly have done the same, had not the
committee to which the matter was referred reported that
the President already had the power to call persons of
African descent into the military and naval service, by an
act passed during the previous session.
The same antagonisms were exhibited concerning a
measure for enrolling and drafting the militia of the
diﬀerent states, so that each state should be compelled to
contribute its equitable quota, the troops when raised to be
under the control of the President. The absolute necessity
of this measure was attributable partly to the stage at
which the war had arrived — when the surplus population
was all in the army, and it was essential to draw upon the
vital resources of the country — and partly to party feeling
and party policy. Either through the failure of McClellan’s
campaign, or the eﬀect of the emancipation proclamation,
or the inﬂuence of both together, the administration had
received a rebuke through the autumn elections of 1862.
This had greatly encouraged the opposition, who, as
opponents of the war, or as most unreliable friends of the
President’s war policy, so conducted their counsels that the
government became fearful concerning its ability to raise
 men for the campaign of 1863. Just in proportion to the
treasonable sympathies of the members of the Senate and
the House, did they oppose the measure. The bill was
ﬁnally passed and approved; and it became an eﬀicient
instrument in the hands of the government for prosecuting
the war. It contained provisions for procuring substitutes,
for exemption by the payment of three hundred dollars, a
clause deﬁning the conditions of exemption, 
c.
Much of the session was devoted to a discussion of
measures of ﬁnance, which ended in giving the Secretary of
the Treasury leave to borrow nine hundred millions of
dollars, bearing six per cent interest, payable in not less
than ten nor more than forty years. The Secretary was
authorized to issue four hundred millions in treasury notes
bearing interest, and a hundred and ﬁfty millions without
interest. To meet the immediate necessities of the army and
navy, especially as they related to debts due the soldiers
and sailors, authority was given for the issue of one
hundred millions of treasury notes, before the leading
measures of ﬁnance were perfected.
The latter measure was signed by the President at once,
in order that the soldiers and marines might have their
due; but he took occasion, in a special message, to express
his regret that it had been found necessary to make so
large an additional issue of United States notes, at a time
when the combined circulation of those notes and the notes
of the suspended banks had advanced the prices of
everything beyond real values, augmenting the cost of
living, to the injury of labor, and the cost of supplies, to the
 injury of the country. “It seems very plain,” he said, “that
continued issues of United States notes, without any check
to the issues of suspended banks, and without any
adequate provision for the raising of money by loans, and
for funding the issues, so as to keep them within due limits,
must soon produce disastrous consequences.” He had
already, in his annual message, advocated the national bank
system for the production of a uniform currency, secured by
the pledge of United States bonds, thus increasing the
demand for the bonds. A bill for the object desired was
passed by small majorities, and approved. It was a doubtful
measure, and touched a great many selﬁsh and corporate
interests, carrying more or less of disturbance into the
various ﬁnancial systems of the states; but the country has
had no reason to ﬁnd fault with its results.
Two events during the session marked the beginning of
those 
reconstructive 
measures 
which 
were 
destined
eventually to embrace all the members of the old Union.
Western Virginia, loyal from the ﬁrst, was admitted into the
Union as a state; and two representatives from Louisiana
were admitted to the House, under the representation, on
the part of the committee to which their application was
referred, that they had been elected in accordance with the
constitutional conditions and provisions of that state.
When Congress adjourned, it left the Executive strong in
all the powers and prerogatives necessary for the
successful prosecution of the war. The president’s hands
were strengthened by competent ﬁnancial provisions, by
the conﬁrmation of his power to arrest and hold suspicious
 and inimical persons, and by authority to levy upon the
militia of the states for such force as might be necessary to
eﬀect the purposes of the government. His eﬀorts for
measures of compensated emancipation failed. A single
measure concerning Missouri miscarried through the
failure of the House to conﬁrm the action of the Senate.
On the twenty-second of November, 1862, two months
after Mr. Lincoln issued his proclamation suspending the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, the opponents of the
government became so quiet that an order was issued from
the War Department, discharging from further military
restraint all those persons who had been arrested for
discouraging volunteer enlistments, opposing the draft, or
otherwise giving aid and comfort to the enemy, in all states
where the draft had been eﬀected, or the quota of
volunteers and militia had been furnished. The order also
released persons held in military custody who had been
arrested for disloyalty by the military governors of rebel
states, on giving their parole to do no act of hostility
against the United States. They had the liberty to live
under military surveillance; or to go to the rebel states, not
to return until after the war, or until they should be
permitted to do so by the President. The suspension of the
writ, and the acts which accompanied it, accomplished
their object temporarily; but, at the close of the session of
Congress, in March, the more malicious of the malcontents
began their foul work again. Undoubtedly the country was
tired of the war; and many of the weaker and more
unreasoning classes, ﬁnding themselves more than ever in
 the hands of the government by the legislation of the
winter, lent willing ears to disloyal politicians. Agitation
against the war was revived. The people were called upon
to mark the great sacriﬁces they had already uselessly
made; the war was declared to be a failure, and peace as
far oﬀ as ever; and the country was adjured to demand a
cessation of the coercive policy.
Among the most pestilent of these sympathizers with
traitors, was Clement L. Vallandigham of Ohio — a person
who, as a member of Congress, stump politician and
private citizen, had opposed the war from the start. In
Congress, he had steadily voted against every measure
instituted by the government for maintaining the integrity
of the nation and putting down the rebellion. Not a step did
the President take, in the execution of his purpose, that
Vallandigham did not dispute. Indeed, he oﬀered in the
House resolutions of censure for those early acts of the
President in calling out a military force, by which alone
Washington was saved from capture. His language in the
House had been so bitter and disloyal that the feelings of
every friend of the government had been outraged. Going
home from Congress, where he had been engaged in his
foul work, he entered upon a canvass of his district,
denouncing the government, and maligning its motives.
The tendency of his malicious utterances was to weaken
the hands of the Executive in its great work of subduing the
insurrection, and to give aid and comfort to the national
enemies.
 General Burnside, then in command of the Department
o  the Ohio, issued an order (Number 88,) announcing that
thereafter all persons found within the federal lines who
should commit acts for the beneﬁt of the enemy would be
tried as spies or traitors; and, if convicted, would suﬀer
death. This order, the demagogue publicly denounced; and
then he called upon the people to resist its execution.
General Burnside arrested him at once, and ordered him to
be tried by court-martial at Cincinnati. On the ﬁfth of May,
the day following his arrest, he applied to the United States
Circuit Court for a writ of habeas corpus; and after an
elaborate argument from his counsel, and the reading of a
long letter from General Burnside giving the reasons for his
arrest, Judge Leavitt decided against his application, giving
his opinion that “The legality of the arrest depends upon
the extent of the necessity for making it; and that was to be
determined by the military commander.” Judge Leavitt
dealt with the case nobly. “Those who live under the
protection and enjoy the blessings of our benignant
government,” said he, “must learn that they cannot stab its
vitals with impunity. If they remain with us, while they are
not of us, they must be subject to such a course of dealing
as the great law of self-preservation prescribes and will
enforce.” Further, he said: “I confess I am but little moved
by the eloquent appeals of those who, while they
indignantly denounce violation of personal liberty, look with
no horror upon a despotism as unmitigated as the world
has ever witnessed.”
 On the following day, Vallandigham had his trial, was
convicted, and was sentenced to conﬁnement in some
fortress of the United States, to be designated by General
Burnside, who approved the ﬁnding of the court, and
designated Fort Warren as his prison. The President,
however, modiﬁed the sentence, and directed that the
convict should be sent within the rebel lines, among the
people which he held in such cordial sympathy, with the
direction that he should not return until after the
termination of the war. The man thus sent to his own found
safe conduct through the rebel states, and managed to
reach Canada, from whose territory he subsequently
emerged, without waiting for the termination of the war,
and without saying to the President, “By your leave.”
There were numbers of men in the loyal states who were
quite as guilty as Mr. Vallandigham, even if less bold than
he. These took alarm. If Mr. Vallandigham could be arrested
and sent within the rebel lines for abasing the motives acts
of the government, who, that sympathized with Mr.
Vallandigham, was safe? It was a natural and pertinent
inquiry. So they began to hold public meetings, to denounce
the government, and to call upon the President to
reconsider his act in Vallandigham’s case. Governor
Seymour of New York was powerfully exercised in the
matter, and wrote a very spirited letter to one of these
meetings held in Albany, on the sixteenth of May. If the
Ohio demagogue used treasonable language, it is hard to
see why the New York governor did not. The sanction of the
act by which Vallandigham was sent among his friends, by
 President and people, was, in his opinion, not only
despotism but revolution. He almost copied the language of
the convict himself. Mr. Vallandigham had said that the
government was aiming not to restore the Union, but to
crush out liberty. Governor Seymour said: “The action of
the administration will determine, in the minds of more
than one half of the people in the loyal states, whether this
war is waged to put down rebellion in the South, or destroy
free institutions at the North.”
This meeting and others of the same kind, held in the
leading cities of the Union, denounced arbitrary arrests and
the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, protested
against Vallandigham’s sentence, and called upon the
President to recall their injured friend and protege. A
month after Vallandigham was banished, the Democratic
State Convention of Ohio met, and, by almost a unanimous
vote, nominated him as their candidate for governor, and
Senator Pugh, his legal counsel, as their candidate for
lieutenant governor. They also sent a committee to
Washington to demand of the President the recall of their
candidate. The letter which they bore was answered at
length by the President; and he gave the supporters of Mr.
Vallandigham a very plain talk. He told them what he
believed to be the facts touching Mr. Vallandigham’s words
and inﬂuence, in opposition to those means which the
government deemed indispensable to its own preservation,
and then said: “Your own attitude, therefore, encourages
desertion, resistance to the draft, and the like, because it
teaches those who incline to desert and to escape the draft,
 to believe it is your purpose to protect them.” He told them,
however, that the proceedings in Mr. Vallandigham’s case
were “for prevention, not for punishment — an injunction to
stay an injury;” — and that the modiﬁcation of General
Burnside’s order was made as a less disagreeable mode to
Mr. 
Vallandigham 
himself 
of 
securing 
the 
desired
prevention.
It is hardly to be doubted that Mr. Lincoln would never,
of his own motion, have arrested the greatly over-rated
subject of these discussions. He had talked as badly in
Washington as he had in Ohio, and lost no opportunity to
abuse the President himself; but Mr. Lincoln very severely
let him alone. When, therefore, he clandestinely returned, a
year afterwards, and fulminated his threats against the
government, in case he should be arrested in any way
except by oﬀicers of the civil tribunals, he was permitted to
say what he pleased. The people of Ohio had already
decided against him by a majority of one hundred thousand
votes; and he had lost his power for harm, except where he
might choose to bestow his friendship.
To the resolutions passed by the Albany meeting of which
Hon. Erastus Corning was president, Mr. Lincoln made an
elaborate reply. This was his favorite ﬁeld. He had got hold
of a case to argue; and its importance, in his apprehension,
may be judged by the fact that he spent more time and
exhausted more pains upon this paper than upon any other
written during his administration, messages included. It
was intended to be the full and exhaustive vindication of his
policy, upon the subjects it covered, before the American
 people; and the American people so regarded it. No
headway could be made against it, and no serious and
candid attempt was made to answer it.
These pages will not give space to the entire document,
or even a review of the argument; but some of its
illustrations may be cited as giving its drift and style. In
arguing the necessity of the arrest of those who were
known to be traitors, but who had committed no overt act
of treason, he said: “General John C. Breckinridge, General
Robert E. Lee, General Joseph E. Johnston, General John B.
Magruder, General William B. Preston, General Simon B.
Buckner, 
and 
Commodore 
Franklin 
Buchanan, 
now
occupying the very highest places in the rebel war service,
were all within the power of the government since the war
began, and were nearly as well known to be traitors then as
now. Unquestionably, if we had seized and held them, the
insurgent cause would be much weaker. But no one of them
had committed any crime deﬁned in the law. Every one of
them, if arrested, would have been discharged on habeas
corpus, were the writ allowed to operate. In view of these
and similar cases, I think the time not unlikely to come
when I shall be blamed for having made too few arrests,
rather than too many.”
Certainly here was a case in point; and it is hard to see
why reasoning that applies so well to those men would not
apply as well to those still in the power of the government,
who had notoriously so opposed the war as to hinder that
government from conquering the traitors named. Mr.
Vallandigham “was not arrested,” he said, “because he was
 damaging the political prospects of the administration, or
the personal interests of the commanding general; but
because he was damaging the army, upon the existence and
vigor of which the life of the nation depends.” Furthermore:
“Must I shoot a simple-minded soldier-boy, who deserts,
while I must not touch a hair of a wily agitator who induces
him to desert? I think that, in such a case, to silence the
agitator and save the boy, is not only constitutional, but
withal a great mercy.”
The Albany meeting had spoken to Mr. Lincoln as
“democrats.” To this aspect of the matter he paid his
addresses. He would have preferred to meet them on the
higher platform of “American citizens,” at such a time; but,
since he was denied this privilege, he comforted himself
with the reﬂection that all democrats did not believe with
them. General Burnside, who arrested Mr. Vallandigham,
was a democrat. Judge Leavitt, who refused to release him
on the writ of habeas corpus, was also a democrat who
received his mantle from the hand of Jackson himself; and
speaking of Jackson reminded him of an incident in point:
“After the battle of New Orleans, and while the fact that the
treaty of peace had been concluded was well known in the
city, but before oﬀicial knowledge of it had arrived, General
Jackson still maintained martial or military law. Now that it
could be said the war was over, the clamor against martial
law, which had existed from the ﬁrst, grew more furious.
Among 
other 
things, 
a 
Mr. 
Louiallier 
published 
a
denunciatory newspaper article. General Jackson arrested
him. A lawyer by the name of Morel procured the United
 States Judge Hall to issue a writ of habeas corpus to relieve
Mr. Louiallier. General Jackson arrested both the lawyer
and the Judge. A Mr. Hollander ventured to say of some
part of the matter that it was a ‘dirty trick.’ General
Jackson arrested him. When the oﬀicer undertook to serve
the writ of habeas corpus, General Jackson took it from
him, and sent him away with a copy. Holding the Judge in
custody a few days, the General sent him beyond the limits
of his encampment, and set him at liberty, with an order to
remain until the ratiﬁcation of peace should be regularly
announced, or until the British should have left the
southern coast. A day or two more elapsed, the ratiﬁcation
of a treaty of peace was regularly announced, and the
Judge and others were fully liberated. A few days more, and
the Judge called General Jackson into court, and ﬁned him
one thousand dollars for having arrested him and the
others named. The General paid the ﬁne, and there the
matter rested for nearly thirty years, when Congress
refunded principal and interest.”
Mr. Lincoln could not avoid adding that Senator Douglas,
then a member of the House, was a prominent advocate of
this democratic measure; and remarking: “First, that we
had the same constitution then as now; second, that we
then had a case of invasion, and now we have a case of
rebellion; and, third, that the permanent right of the people
to public discussion, the liberty of speech and of the press,
the trial by jury, the law of evidence, and the habeas
corpus, suﬀered no detriment whatever by that conduct of
 General Jackson, or its subsequent approval by the
American Congress.”
To obviate an objection made to the course of the
administration, in permitting the privilege of the writ of
habeas corpus to be suspended at the pleasure of the heads
of military departments, thus delegating the authority, Mr.
Lincoln, by proclamation on the ﬁfteenth day of September,
suspended the writ throughout the United States.
Under the enrollment act, passed March third, a draft of
militia was ordered for July, and was eﬀected without
serious disturbance, except in a single instance, in the city
of New York. Great eﬀorts had been made by interested
politicians, during the spring and summer, to make certain
provisions of the act odious to the people, especially to the
lower and more unreasoning classes. The clause exempting
from conscription on the payment of three hundred dollars,
was represented to be intended for the beneﬁt of the rich;
and the bad passions of the mob were wrought upon in
various ways. The ﬁrst day of the draft in New York, July
eleventh, though attended with some excitement, witnessed
no outbreak or violent opposition: but the Sunday that
intervened between that day and the resumption of the
draft on the thirteenth, aﬀorded an opportunity for
organization: and, when the fateful wheels started again,
one of them was seized by a mob, and destroyed; and the
building which contained it was ﬁred. For four days
thereafter, New York was under the reign of riot. The
troops were all away, having been called upon to resist the
invasion of Maryland and Pennsylvania. During this fearful
 period, the most ﬁendish outrages were visited upon the
harmless black population of the city, houses belonging to
prominent supporters of the government were sacked and
burned, and plunder became the one ruling passion of all
the worst inhabitants of the city. Those who had led on the
mob, as a demonstration against the draft, soon found that
they could not direct the whirlwind, and that the passions
they had aroused were altogether beyond their control.
Women and children of the lowest classes gave free rein to
their thievish impulses; and, after a single day of riot, the
draft was forgotten in the greed for spoil. The disgraceful
proceedings were not stayed until the return of the
regiments that had been sent away.
The Governor of New York, friendly neither to the
administration nor to the draft, asked for a postponement
of the measure of conscription until volunteering could be
tried; and he complained of certain inequalities of the
government requisitions in certain districts of the state. Mr.
Lincoln replied, temporarily yielding the point in relation to
four districts, and promising a careful re-enrollment, but
saying that the draft must be proceeded with. The
Governor wished for delay, also, in order that the
constitutionality of the draft law might be tried. Mr. Lincoln
replied that he should be willing to facilitate the bringing of
the law before the Supreme Court, but he could not
consent to lose the time. “We are contending,” said he,
“with an enemy who, as I understand, drives every able-
bodied man he can reach into his ranks, very much as a
butcher drives bullocks into a slaughter-pen. No time is
 wasted, no argument is used. This produces an army which
will soon turn upon our now victorious soldiers, already in
the ﬁeld, if they shall not be sustained by recruits as they
should be. It produces an army with a rapidity not to be
matched on our side, if we ﬁrst waste time to re-experiment
with the volunteer system, already deemed by Congress,
and palpably, in fact, so far exhausted as to be inadequate;
and then more time to obtain a court decision as to whether
a law is constitutional which requires a part of those not
now in the service to go to the aid of those already in it;
and still more time to determine with absolute certainty
that we get those who are to go in the precisely legal
proportion to those who are not to go.” The Governor was
still in trouble about the inequality of the quotas in the
districts, and regretted that the President would not
suspend the draft. The President understood his duty, and
did not misunderstand Governor Seymour; and the draft
was 
resumed 
and 
peacefully 
consummated, 
through
measures of protection instituted by the war department.
The popularity of Mr. Lincoln and his administration had
entirely recovered from whatever depressing inﬂuence the
emancipation policy had occasioned, and from the eﬀects of
the Peninsular campaign. His determined pursuit of duty,
whatever the consequences might be to himself, won him
friends among his enemies. The spring elections of 1863
showed a reaction from those of the previous autumn, and
the fall elections conﬁrmed his growing popularity. The
elections in New York were a direct and decided
indorsement of the draft in that state, and, in the same
 degree, a condemnation of those who had opposed it. Ohio
decided Mr. Vallandigham’s case by giving a tremendous
majority on the side of the government. Pennsylvania re-
elected Governor Curtin by an unexpected majority; and
the same successes occurred in every state, with the single
exception of New Jersey. To Mr. Lincoln, who watched the
indications of the public feeling and opinion with constant
anxiety, 
these 
events 
brought 
great 
relief 
and
encouragement. 
The 
South 
had 
been 
watching 
for
outbreaks, and its northern friends had been prophesying
them. The South had been expecting the growth of a peace
party, and its northern friends had endeavored to bring one
into the ﬁeld; but the fall elections of 1863 crushed the
rebel expectations; and the whole North was regarded by
the traitors as bound to the fortunes of that horrible tyrant
— that blood-thirsty boor — Abraham Lincoln. In the
meantime, Mr. Lincoln had made great progress in the
esteem of foreign governments and foreign peoples, of
which he received abundant testimonials.
Early in the year, the working men of Manchester,
England, sent him a letter, to which he gave a grateful and
cordial 
reply. 
They, 
although 
greatly 
suﬀering 
in
consequence of the war, sent him their sympathy; and in his
reply, he said to them: “It has been often and studiously
represented 
that 
the 
attempt 
to 
overthrow 
this
government, which was built upon the foundation of human
rights, and to substitute for it one which should rest
exclusively upon the basis of human slavery, was likely to
obtain the favor of Europe. Through the action of our
 disloyal citizens, the working men of Europe have been
subjected to severe trial, for the purpose of forcing their
sanction to that attempt. Under these circumstances, I
cannot but regard your decisive utterances upon the
question as an instance of sublime Christian heroism,
which has not been surpassed in any age, or in any
country... I do not doubt that the sentiments you have
expressed will be sustained by your great nation; and, on
the other hand, I have no hesitation in assuring you that
they will excite admiration, esteem, and the most reciprocal
feelings of friendship among the American people.”
In a letter written August twenty-sixth, to James C.
Conkling, in reply to an invitation to attend a mass meeting
of “unconditional Union men,” to be held at his old home in
Springﬁeld, Illinois, it is evident that Mr. Lincoln was
hopeful and conﬁdent of results. In this letter he treated
again of the subject of emancipation; and handled the
clamorer for peace, the enemies of the Emancipation
Proclamation, and the advocates of compromise, with most
admirable skill. The closing paragraphs are peculiarly keen,
clear and sparkling:
“You say that you will not ﬁght to free negroes. Some of
them seem willing to ﬁght for you; but no matter. Fight you,
then, exclusively to save the Union. I issued the
Proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the Union.
Whenever you shall have conquered all resistance to the
Union, if I shall urge you to continue ﬁghting, it will be an
apt time then for you to declare you win not ﬁght to free
negroes. I thought that, in your struggle for the Union, to
 whatever extent the negroes should cease helping the
enemy, to that extent it weakened the enemy in his
resistance to you. Do you think diﬀerently? I thought that
whatever negroes can be got to do as soldiers, leaves just
so much less for white soldiers to do in saving the Union.
Does it appear otherwise to you? But negroes, like other
people, act upon motives. Why should they do anything for
us, if we will do nothing for them? If they stake their lives
for us, they must be prompted by the strongest motive,
even the promise of freedom. And the promise, being made,
must be kept.
“The signs look better. The Father of Waters again goes
unvexed to the sea. Thanks to the great Northwest for it;
nor yet wholly to them. Three hundred miles up they met
New England, Empire, Keystone, and Jersey, hewing their
way right and left. The sunny South, too, in more colors
than one, also lent a helping hand. On the spot, their part
of the history was jotted down in black and white. The job
was a great national one; and let none be slighted who bore
an honorable part in it. And while those who have cleared
the great river may well be proud, even that is not all. It is
hard to say that anything has been more bravely and well
done than at Antietam, Murfreesboro, Gettysburg, and on
many ﬁelds of less note. Nor must Uncle Sam’s webfeet be
forgotten. At all the watery margins they have been
present, not only on the deep sea, the broad bay, and the
rapid river, but also up the narrow, muddy bayou, and
wherever the ground was a little damp they have been and
made their tracks. Thanks to all. For the great Republic —
 for the principle it lives by and keeps alive — for man’s vast
future — thanks to all.
“Peace does not appear so distant as it did. I hope it will
come soon, and come to stay; and so come as to be worth
the keeping in all future time. It will then have been proved
that among freemen there can be no successful appeal from
the ballot to the bullet, and that they who take such appeal
are sure to lose their case and pay the cost. And there will
be some black men who can remember that with silent
tongue, and clinched teeth, and steady eye, and well-poised
bayonet, they have helped mankind on to this great
consummation; while I fear there will be some white ones
unable to forget that with malignant heart and deceitful
speech they have striven to hinder it.”
The military events of the year were of great importance,
and, on the whole, well calculated to give hope, not only to
Mr. Lincoln, but to the loyal people of the whole country.
After the battle of Fredericksburg, in December, 1862, the
army of the Potomac did nothing for several months. Late
in April — General Burnside having meantime been
relieved, and General Hooker placed in command — a
movement was made across the river, and the battle of
Chancellorsville was fought, which resulted in the retreat
of our army, and a loss of eighteen thousand men. It was a
sad beginning of the year’s operations, and was followed by
the invasion of Maryland and Pennsylvania by the whole of
General Lee’s forces. The invasion took place in June; and it
was accomplished so quickly, so easily, and by so great a
force, that the whole country became terribly excited. The
 President issued a proclamation calling for one hundred
thousand militia to assist in driving back the foe. The army
under Hooker crossed the Potomac at about the same time
with the army of Lee, and both entered Maryland together.
Here General Hooker was relieved, and General Meade
placed in command, who, ﬁnding the enemy advancing
toward and into Pennsylvania, pushed forward with his
army to dispute the movement. On the ﬁrst of July, the
battle of Gettysburg in Pennsylvania began; and it raged
with terriﬁc energy for three days. It was one of the most
brilliant and terrible battles of the war. On the ﬁfth of July,
the enemy, who had been terribly punished, and saw that
his invasion was a failure, retreated, and was pursued by
our weary forces back to the old position on the
Rappahannock. At the close of the ﬁghting on the third, it
was evident that the enemy was whipped; and the
President announced the fact on the fourth, by a dispatch
sent over the whole country, stating that the news was such
as to cover the army with the highest honor, and to promise
a great success to the cause of the Union. With
characteristic reverence, he closed by expressing his desire
that on that day — the anniversary of the national
independence— “He whose will, not ours, should ever be
done, be everywhere remembered, and reverenced with
profoundest gratitude.” Our losses in this battle, in killed,
wounded and missing, amounted to twenty-three thousand
men, while those of the enemy were much greater, leaving,
indeed, fourteen thousand prisoners in our hands. The state
of Pennsylvania, with considerate liberality, subsequently
 purchased a piece of land adjoining the cemetery of the
town, where much severe ﬁghting took place, as a burial
ground for the loyal dead of the great battle. This place was
dedicated on the succeeding nineteenth of November, in
the presence of Mr. Lincoln and his cabinet, Hon. Edward
Everett delivering the formal address of the occasion. The
brief remarks of Mr. Lincoln. though brought into
immediate comparison with the elaborate eloquence of the
venerable Massachusetts orator, were very eﬀective, and
betrayed a degree of literary ability quite unexpected to
those who had read only his formal state papers. He said:
“Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought
forth upon this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty,
and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created
equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing
whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so
dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battle-
ﬁeld of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that
ﬁeld as a ﬁnal resting-place for those who here gave their
lives that that nation might live. It is altogether ﬁtting and
proper that we should do this. But in a larger sense we
cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow
this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled
here, have consecrated it far above our power to add or
detract. The world will little note, nor long remember, what
we say here; but it can never forget what they did here. It
is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the
unﬁnished work which they who fought here have thus far
so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated
 to the great task remaining before us, that from these
honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for
which they gave the last full measure of devotion; that we
here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in
vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of
freedom, and that the government of the people, by the
people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”
Did Mr. Everett say more or better in all his pages than
Mr. Lincoln said in these lines? Yet they were written after
he left Washington, and during a brief interval of leisure.
The Fourth of July was further rendered memorable by
the surrender of the city of Vicksburg — the stronghold of
the Mississippi River — by General Pemberton to General
Grant, with all his defenses and his army of thirty thousand
men. After various unsuccessful operations, beginning with
the year, contemplating the capture of this city, General
Grant ran by the batteries with his transports, and landed
far down the river, to attempt the approach of the city from
the rear. Fighting all the way, and winning every battle, he
reached Jackson, and then advanced westward, directly
upon the doomed town. General Pemberton, in the
endeavor to dispute his progress, lost at Baker’s Creek four
thousand men and twenty-nine pieces of artillery. On the
banks of the Big Black, the enemy gave battle again, and
was again defeated, with a loss of nearly three thousand
men, and seventeen pieces of artillery. Then Pemberton fell
back behind his defenses, which he did not leave till, on the
national anniversary, he and his army marched forth as
prisoners of war, leaving behind them more than two
 hundred cannon, and seventy thousand stand of small-
arms. Four days later, Port Hudson, which had been closely
besieged by an army advancing from the south, under
General Banks, surrendered with seven thousand prisoners
and ﬁfty cannon.
Thus was the confederacy cut in twain; and from that
hour its cause was doomed. Not a life was lost afterwards
that was not lost in the destruction and defense of a
hopeless cause. “The Father of Waters,” wrote Mr. Lincoln,
in glad and poetic mood, to Mr. Conkling, “again goes
unvexed to the sea.” It was a great event, and one which
might well ﬁll the heart of the President with exultation.
These victories gave great encouragement to the loyal
people of the country; and, from the day of their
occurrence, there was but little doubt among them of the
ﬁnal triumph of the national cause. In Washington, there
were great rejoicings; and of course there was a popular
call upon Mr. Lincoln, who, in response to a serenade, came
out, and made a brief speech. These calls were not
occasions in which he delighted, and it was honest and
characteristic for him to say, in beginning: “I am very glad
indeed to see you to-night, and yet I will not say I thank you
for this call; but I do most sincerely thank Almighty God for
the occasion on which you have called.”
Another very characteristic utterance of Mr. Lincoln, in
connection with these events, was a letter written to
General Grant, July thirteenth, in which he took occasion to
acknowledge that results had conﬁrmed the General’s
judgment rather than his own:
 “My Dear General: I do not remember that you and I ever
met 
personally. 
I 
write 
this 
now 
as 
a 
grateful
acknowledgment for the almost inestimable service you
have done the country. I write to say a word further. When
you ﬁrst reached the vicinity of Vicksburg, I thought you
should do what you ﬁnally did — march the troops across
the neck, run the batteries with the transports, and thus go
below; and I never had any faith, except a general hope
that you knew better than I, that the Yazoo Pass expedition
and the like could succeed. When you got below, and took
Port Gibson, Grand Gulf, and vicinity, I thought you should
go down the river and join General Banks; and when you
turned northward, east of the Big Black, I feared it was a
mistake. I wish now to make the personal acknowledgment
that you were right and I was wrong.”
The President’s praise of General Grant was the voice of
the country. The capture of Vicksburg, with its preliminary
battles, was the work of a great general, and one of the
most brilliant feats in the history of war. The country felt
that it had one man, at least, who was not only thoroughly
in earnest, but who was the master of his profession.
The operations in the west were pursued with various
fortunes during the year; but with ﬁnal results wholly in
our favor. On the ﬁfth of January, a battle occurred at
Murfreesboro, which ended in the federal occupation of the
place, and the falling back of the enemy to Tullahoma,
where he entrenched himself. On the twenty-ﬁfth of June,
General Rosecrans advanced, and made an attack, driving
Bragg and his army back in confusion. Pursuit was made as
 far as practicable, and Bragg kept up his retreat until he
reached Chattanooga. Rosecrans came up with him August
twenty-ﬁrst, and then Bragg retired again, but, after
receiving reinforcements, turned, and, on September
nineteenth, 
made 
an 
attack 
upon 
our 
army. 
The
engagement was a desperate one, inﬂicting severe losses
upon the federal forces; but the rebels gained no
permanent advantages. Burnside at Knoxville had been
ordered to join Rosecrans, but had failed to do so, and,
after the battle, Longstreet’s corps of the rebel army was
sent against him, while the enemy held his main force at or
near Chattanooga. On the twenty-ﬁfth of November,
General Grant, who, having ﬁnished up his Vicksburg job,
had assumed command, attacked Bragg, and utterly routed
him, crowding him back into Georgia. Then Grant paid his
respects to Longstreet, who was besieging Knoxville, and
that General made safe his retreat into Virginia.
Mr. Lincoln, who had prayed for all these successes,
referred them directly and at once to the favor of God. His
announcement of the federal success at Gettysburg was
accompanied by a call upon the people to remember and
reverence Him with profoundest gratitude. After the fall of
Vicksburg, he publicly thanked Almighty God for the event.
On the ﬁfteenth of July, he issued a proclamation, setting
apart the sixth day of August to be observed as a day for
national thanksgiving, praise and prayer: inviting the
people to “render the homage due to the Divine Majesty,
for the wonderful things he has done in the nation’s behalf:
and invoke the inﬂuences of his Holy Spirit to subdue the
 anger which has produced and so long sustained a needless
and cruel rebellion; to change the hearts of the insurgents;
to guide the counsels of the government with wisdom
adequate to so great a national emergency; and to visit
with tender care and consolation, throughout the length
and breadth of our land, all those who, through the
vicissitudes of marches, voyages, battles and sieges, have
been brought to suﬀer in mind, body, or estate; and, ﬁnally,
to lead the whole nation through paths of repentance and
submission to the Divine Will, back to the perfect
enjoyment of union and fraternal peace.” On the third of
October he issued another proclamation of thanksgiving,
setting apart the last Thursday of November as the day to
be observed. The spirit of tender piety which this document
breathed in every part, could only have come from a heart
surcharged with that spirit. Still again, having heard of the
retreat of the insurgent forces from East Tennessee, he
issued 
a 
dispatch 
on 
the 
seventh 
of 
December,
recommending all loyal people, on the receipt of the
information. to assemble at their places of worship, “and
render special homage and gratitude to Almighty God for
this great advancement of the national cause.”
One of the most vexatious events of the year, to Mr.
Lincoln, was the quarrel among his friends in Missouri,
dating as far back as the removal of General Fremont, and
not frowned upon by that General at its inception. An order
of General Halleck, who succeeded General Hunter in
Missouri, excluding fugitive slaves from his lines, though
issued only for military reasons, helped on the discord.
 Then 
came 
discussions 
and 
action 
concerning
emancipation, the parties dividing on the issue of gradual
or immediate emancipation; and this was followed, or
accompanied, by disagreement between the commander of
the federal forces and Governor Gamble, controlling the
state 
troops, 
raised 
originally 
as 
auxiliary 
to 
the
government. General Curtis, who was in command of the
department, was removed because he and Governor
Gamble could not agree, and not because he had done any
wrong; and General Schoﬁeld was put in his place. This
oﬀended 
Governor 
Gamble’s 
enemies, 
and 
they
remonstrated. Mr. Lincoln, in a note written at this time,
said: “It is very painful to me that you, in Missouri, cannot
or will not settle your factional quarrel among yourselves. I
have been tormented with it beyond endurance for a
month, by both sides. Neither side pays the least respect to
my appeals to your reason.”
General Fremont’s friends wanted him recalled, and
desired him to be military governor, setting Governor
Gamble aside. Deputations, committees, and independent
partisans visited Washington to “torment” the President
still more. Each carried back a report, and made the most
of it, to feed the quarrel. During the summer of 1863, the
public 
feeling 
came 
up 
to 
fever 
heat. 
Gradual
emancipationists were denounced as traitors by the radical
emancipation party, which claimed to represent the only
loyal elements of the state; and, of course, gradual
emancipationists retorted the charge, and assumed the
claim. On the ﬁfth of October, the President wrote a long
 letter, reviewing the whole case, in his own frank and lucid
way. He also sent a letter of instruction to General
Schoﬁeld, in which he directed him so to use his power as
“to compel the excited people there to let one another
alone.” Neither the letter nor the instructions produced the
slightest eﬀect in quieting the political agitation, or
softening the personal feeling which accompanied it. The
department was subsequently placed under the command
of General Rosecrans; and the quarrel itself died out, or
ceased to attract public and presidential attention. In the
President’s letter to General Schoﬁeld, at the time of his
appointment, he said to him: “If both factions or neither
abuse you, you will probably be about right. Beware of
being assailed by one and praised by the other.” Judged by
his own rule in this case, the President was as nearly right
as he could be, for both sides abused him thoroughly. Let it
be said, however, to their credit, that, at the succeeding
presidential election, both supported him, and contributed
to his triumph.
