  ha ter    I.
ON THE 9TH of December, 1863, Mr. Lincoln sent in his
annual message to Congress, which had assembled on the
seventh. It represented the country as holding satisfactory
relations with foreign powers; spoke favorably of the
establishment of an international telegraph across the
Atlantic; referred to the movements abroad for emigration
to this country, to ﬁll the demand for labor in every ﬁeld of
industry; stated that the operations of the Treasury
Department had been successfully conducted during the
year; and gave a general historical account of the
operations of the army and navy. Eleven months had passed
since the ﬁnal proclamation of emancipation was issued;
and Mr. Lincoln took up the matter to see what progress
had been made under its operations. The policy of
emancipation and of the employment of black soldiers had
changed the aspect of aﬀairs; and, though it was
immediately followed by dark and doubtful days, the results
had vindicated its wisdom. The rebel borders had been
pressed still further back; the rebel territory had been
divided by the opening of the Mississippi; Tennessee and
Arkansas had been substantially cleared of insurgent
control; and, in these states, inﬂuential citizens were
declaring openly for emancipation. Maryland and Missouri,
neither of which states, three years previously, would
 tolerate any restraint upon the extension of slavery into
new territories, were disputing only as to the best mode of
removing it from their own limits. Of those who were slaves
at the beginning of the rebellion, full one hundred thousand
were in the military service of the United States, and about
one-half of them were bearing arms in the ranks. No servile
insurrection, or tendency to violence or cruelty, had marked
the measures of emancipation and the arming of the blacks.
The tone of public feeling abroad had improved under the
inﬂuence of the policy, while the government had been
encouraged and supported by elections at home. The new
reckoning showed that the crisis which threatened to divide
the friends of the Union was passed.
The message treated with considerable detail a question
which had, from the ﬁrst, been one of great importance,
and which, it was seen, would grow more important with
the progress of events. On the day previous to the delivery
of the message, he had issued a proclamation of amnesty,
to all those engaged in the rebellion who should take an
oath to support, protect, and defend the Constitution of the
United States, and the Union of the states under it, with the
acts of Congress passed during the rebellion, and the
proclamations of the President concerning slaves. This
proclamation made certain exceptions of persons in the
civil and military service of the rebel government, and of
persons who had left the civil and military service of the
United States to aid in the rebellion. It further declared
that whenever, in any of the rebel states, a number of
persons, not less than one-tenth of the qualiﬁed voters,
 should take this oath, and establish a state government
which should be republican, it should be recognized as the
true government of the state. These were the principal
provisions of the proclamation; and to them the President
called congressional attention.
He had issued it, he said, “looking to the present and the
future, and with reference to a resumption of the national
authority in the states wherein that authority had been
suspended.” He had given the form of an oath; but no man
was coerced to take it. Men were only promised pardon in
case they should voluntarily take it. Amnesty was oﬀered,
so that, if, in any of the rebel states, a state government
should be set up, in the mode prescribed, it should be
recognized and guaranteed by the United States, and
protected against invasion and domestic violence. The
following passage is his justiﬁcation for prescribing the
peculiar oath which he had made the condition of pardon:
“An attempt to guarantee and protect a revived state
government, constructed in whole or in preponderating
part from the very element against whose hostility and
violence it is to be protected, is simply absurd. There must
be a test by which to separate the opposing elements, so as
to build only from the sound; and that test is a suﬀiciently
liberal one which accepts as sound whoever will make a
sworn recantation of his former unsoundness. But, if it be
proper to require, as a test of admission to the political
body, an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and to the Union under it, why also to the laws and
proclamations in regard to slavery? Those laws and
 proclamations were enacted, and put forth, for the purpose
of aiding in the suppression of the rebellion. To give them
their fullest eﬀect, there had to be a pledge for their
maintenance. In my judgment, they have aided and will
further aid the cause for which they were intended. To now
abandon them, would be not only to relinquish a lever of
power, but would also be a cruel and an astounding breach
of faith. I may add, at this point, that while I remain in my
present position, I shall not attempt to retract, or modify,
the Emancipation Proclamation; nor shall I return to
slavery any person who is free by the terms of that
proclamation, or by any of the acts of Congress.
“For these and other reasons, it is thought best that
support of these measures shall be included in the oath;
and it is believed that the Executive may lawfully claim it,
in return for pardon and restoration of forfeited rights,
which he has a clear constitutional power to withhold
altogether, or grant upon the terms which he shall deem
wisest for the public interest. It should be observed, also,
that this part of the oath is subject to the modifying and
abrogating power of legislation and supreme judicial
decision.”
This proclamation was issued as a rallying point for those
loyal or penitent elements which were believed to exist in
many of the insurgent states, and which, in the confusion of
plans for reconstruction, were lying dormant, and without
practical advantage to the states themselves and to the
government. He believed his plan of reconstruction would
 save labor, and avoid great confusion. On the 24th of
March, 1864, he issued a supplementary and explanatory
proclamation, deﬁning more carefully the cases in which
rebels were to be pardoned, and the manner in which they
were to avail themselves of the beneﬁts of the amnesty. He
shut out many from the beneﬁts of the proclamation,
though he excluded none from personal application to the
President for clemency.
The action of Congress during this session was not of
notable importance. Important subjects were discussed at
length; but they were not embodied in measures, or, rather,
the measures sought to be enacted were not successfully
carried through. A bill for the establishment of a Bureau of
Freedmen’s Aﬀairs passed the House, but failed in the
Senate; while a resolution to submit to a vote of the states
an amendment of the Constitution, permanently prohibiting
the existence of slavery in the states and territories of the
Union, was passed by the Senate, but rejected by the
House. The fugitive slave law — one of those compromise
measures which were to silence the anti-slavery agitation
forever, and be a ﬁnal settlement of the slavery question —
was repealed, with surprising ease and unanimity. A heated
debate occurred upon a resolution introduced by Speaker
Colfax, for the expulsion from the House of Alexander Long
of Ohio, for declaring himself in favor of recognizing the
rebel confederacy. A two-thirds vote being necessary for
the purpose of the resolution, and this vote not being
obtainable, the mover contented himself with a substitute,
declaring Mr. Long an unworthy member of the House.
 During the discussion of the resolution, Mr. Harris of
Maryland thanked God that the South had not yet been
brought into subjection, and prayed God that it might not
be; and straightway a resolution was introduced for his
expulsion, which failed of passage by lack of the requisite
two-thirds vote. He was, however, “severely censured;”
and, although no extreme measures were eﬀected in these
cases, the debate had a healthy inﬂuence, in deﬁning the
boundaries of legitimate debate on the great questions
which agitated the country.
An outcropping of the Missouri imbroglio showed itself
above the surface during the session. General F.P. Blair
resigned his seat in the House, and resumed his place in
the army, at the close of a discussion introduced by one of
his colleagues, who charged him with improprieties in the
administration of aﬀairs in his department. Although he
cleared himself of the charges, the House called upon the
President for an explanation of his restoration to command.
The President gave them a reply at length, and frankly
stated all the circumstances of the case. The two facts
which the letter and all the correspondence in the case
reveal most prominently, were, that Mr. Lincoln had a
strong personal friendship for General Blair, and a ﬁrm
belief in his anti-slavery principles and sentiments; and that
he wished him to be where he could do the government the
most good in the prosecution of the war. Mr. Lincoln’s
representation of the case was, that General Blair and
General Schenck of Ohio, having been elected to Congress,
were permitted to resign their commissions, and take their
 seats, with the distinct verbal understanding with the
President and the Secretary of War that they might, at their
pleasure, withdraw their resignations, leave their places in
the House, and return to the ﬁeld. It is apparent that Mr.
Lincoln wished for General Blair’s aid in the organization of
the House, and, after that, in the ﬁeld, if he could be most
useful to the government there. The arrangement seems to
have been a little irregular, though entered upon with the
best motives. It was one of Mr. Lincoln’s short cuts out of
the labyrinth of “red tape,” in which it was always diﬀicult
for him to walk. In a letter which he wrote to Montgomery
Blair, he revealed one of the motives which actuated him in
making the arrangement. “It will relieve him (the General)
from a dangerous position, or a misunderstanding,” said he,
“as I think he is in danger of being permanently separated
from those with whom only he can ever have a real
sympathy — the sincere opponents of slavery.”
A measure which time has proved to be of great
importance was the restoration of the grade of Lieutenant-
general, with reference to investing General Grant with the
chief command of the armies of the United States. His
appointment to this oﬀice, by the President, was an
expression of the popular conﬁdence in his devotion to the
national cause, and his transcendent ability as a military
man. In presenting him with his commission, Mr. Lincoln
took occasion to say: “The expression of the nation’s
approbation of what you have already done, and its reliance
on you for what remains to do, in the existing struggle, is
now presented with this commission, constituting you
 Lieutenant-general of the armies of the United States.” The
modest General made a ﬁtting response: “I feel the full
weight of the responsibilities now devolving on me; and I
know that, if they are met, it will be due to those armies,
and above all to the favor of that Providence which leads
both nations and men.” Fit oﬀicer with ﬁt superior! Two
simpler-hearted, truer men than President Lincoln and
Lieutenant-general Grant, have not been produced by the
republic; and, in their hands, unweakened by selﬁsh
ambition, and entirely consecrated to the work of saving
the country, the cause of nationality, freedom, and humanity
was destined to a glorious triumph. The victories of both
had been victories of character. Not brilliant gifts, but a
noble spirit had made the President a mighty man. Neither
the courage of the brute nor the dash of the cavalier had
made General Grant a great soldier; but a devoted purpose
and a will of iron had crowned him with the name and
enrobed him with the prestige of the greatest general
living.
An incident occurred on the 18th of April, 1864, which
forcibly illustrated the progress, not only of events, but of
ideas. A grand fair, for the beneﬁt of the United States
Sanitary Commission, the original and leading charity
established to mitigate the immediate horrors of war, was
held in Baltimore; and one of the attractions was the
presence and the voice of President Lincoln. Three years
had introduced and conﬁrmed great changes. Three years
before this occasion, he was obliged to pass through the
city in the night, to escape assassination. Three years
 before, 
the 
Massachusetts 
Sixth, 
hastening 
to 
the
protection of Washington, had left some of their members
dead in the streets. Three years before, the whole city was
seething with treason. Now, gold was pouring into the
treasury of the great charity which had been established to
aid the soldiers of the Union; and the President was
welcomed to the city with grateful gladness.
There was a large crowd, and, in the anxiety to get a
glimpse of Mr. Lincoln and to hear his voice, great
confusion; but enough of his remarks have been preserved
to give an idea of their drift and spirit. “Calling it to mind
that we are in Baltimore,” said he, “we cannot fail to note
that the world moves. Looking upon the many people I see
assembled here, to serve as they best may the soldiers of
the Union, it occurs to me that three years ago those
soldiers could not pass through Baltimore. I would say,
blessings upon the men who have wrought these changes,
and the women who have assisted them!” These allusions
to the changes in Baltimore were heartily applauded by the
Baltimoreans; and, when he proceeded to the mention of
changes which had been wrought upon the institution of
slavery, 
the 
applause 
was 
still 
more 
hearty 
and
enthusiastic. Maryland had practically abolished the
institution; and the President thanked her for what she had
done and what she was doing.
A month or two later, the President attended another fair
of the Sanitary Commission at Philadelphia. Of course,
these movements were not entered upon to gratify a love of
excitement or a desire for display, but to manifest his
 friendliness to the beneﬁcent purposes of the commission.
Here a grand supper was given; and, in response to a toast,
Mr. Lincoln made a brief speech. Opening with an allusion
to the terrors and burdens of war, he spoke of the two great
associations which had done so much to relieve the soldier,
in the ﬁeld and in the hospital, and paid a grateful tribute
to the ministry of woman in the great work of alleviating
the suﬀering of the army. Speaking of the generous
outpouring of means for sustaining these charities, he said:
“They are voluntary contributions, giving proof that the
national resources are not at all exhausted, and that the
national patriotism will sustain us through all.” Here, as
always and everywhere, the war was uppermost in his
mind. “It is a pertinent question,” said he, “When is the war
to end? I do not wish to name a day when it will end, lest
the end should not come at the given time. We accepted the
war, and did not begin it. We accepted it for an object, and,
when that object is accomplished, the war will end; and I
hope to God it will never end until that object is
accomplished. We are going through with our task, so far
as I am concerned, if it takes us three years longer. I have
not been in the habit of making predictions, but I am
almost tempted now to hazard one. It is, that Grant is this
evening in a position, with Meade and Hancock of
Pennsylvania, whence he can never be dislodged by the
enemy, until Richmond is taken.” Events that wait to be
recounted veriﬁed the President’s prediction.
A fair for the beneﬁt of the soldiers, held at the Patent
Oﬀice, in Washington, called out Mr. Lincoln as an
 interested visitor; and he was not permitted to retire
without giving a word to those in attendance. “In this
extraordinary war,” said he, “extraordinary developments
have manifested themselves, such as have not been seen in
former wars; and among these manifestations nothing has
been more remarkable than these fairs for the relief of
suﬀering soldiers and their families. And the chief agents in
these fairs are the women of America. I am not accustomed
to the use of language of eulogy; I have never studied the
art of paying compliments to women; but I must say that if
all that has been said by orators and poets, since the
creation of the world, in praise of women, were applied to
the women of America, it would not do them justice for
their conduct during this war. I will close by saying, God
bless the women of America!”
The government was pledged to the protection of its
black soldiers. The President felt that the matter involved
many diﬀiculties, for the government was not always able
to protect them. When these soldiers were shown no
quarter in battle, or when, as prisoners, they were killed or
enslaved by the infuriated and unscrupulous foe, he who
could not prevent his white soldiers from starving to death
in rebel prisons, could hardly protect the colored soldiers
from the indignities which rebel policy and rebel spite
inﬂicted upon them. But he did what he could. As early as
July 30th, 1863, he issued an order declaring that: “The
government of the United States will give the same
protection to all its soldiers; and, if the enemy shall sell or
enslave anyone, because of his color, the oﬀense shall be
 punished by retaliation upon the enemy’s prisoners in our
possession.” Proceeding, he deﬁnitely ordered, “that for
every soldier of the United States killed in violation of the
laws of war, a rebel soldier should (shall) be executed; and
for every one enslaved by the enemy, or sold into slavery, a
rebel soldier should (shall) be placed at hard labor on the
public works, and continued at such labor until the other
should (shall) be released, or receive such treatment as was
(is, or may be) due to a prisoner of war.” This matter of
retaliation was brought up during Mr. Lincoln’s speech at
the Baltimore Fair, to which allusion has been made in this
chapter. He had just heard the rumor of the massacre of
black soldiers and white oﬀicers at Fort Pillow. His mind
was full of the horrible event; and, as his custom was, he
spoke of that which interested him most. The public
thought the government was not doing its whole duty in
this matter. For the measure which put the black man into
the war, he declared himself responsible to the American
people, the future historian, and, above all, to God; and he
declared that the black soldier ought to have, and should
have, the same protection given to the white soldier. His
closing words were:
“It is an error to say that the government is not acting in
this matter. The government has no direct evidence to
conﬁrm the reports in existence relative to this massacre,
but I believe the facts in relation to it to be as stated. When
the government does know the facts from oﬀicial sources,
and they prove to substantiate the reports, retribution will
be surely given. What is reported, I think, will make a clear
 case. If it is not true, then all such stories are to be
considered as false. If proved to be true, when the matter
shall be thoroughly examined, what shape is to be given to
the retribution? Can we take the man who was captured at
Vicksburg, and shoot him for the victim of this massacre? If
it should happen that it was the act of only one man, what
course is to be pursued then? It is a matter requiring
careful examination and deliberation; and, if it shall be
substantiated by suﬀicient evidence, all may rest assured
that retribution will be had.”
And now we leave these minor matters, for the
consideration of great and decisive events, concerning alike
the life of Mr. Lincoln and the life of the nation.
