  ha ter  .
HITHERTO THE LIFE of our subject has run in a single
stream. His history thus far has related to his private
career — to his birth, education, growth of mind and
character, and personal struggles. Before entering upon
that period or his life through which we are to trace a
double current, a private and a public one, it will be proper
to inquire what kind of a man he had become.
No man ever lived, probably, who was more a self-made
man than Abraham Lincoln. Not a circumstance of his life
favored the development which he had reached. He was
self-moved 
to 
study 
under 
the 
most 
discouraging
conditions. He had few teachers, few books, and no
intellectual companions. His father could neither read nor
write. His mother died when he was a child. He had none of
those personal attractions which would naturally enlist the
sympathies and assistance of any reﬁned men and women
with whom he must occasionally have come in contact. He
was miserably poor, and was compelled to labor among
poor people to win his daily bread. There was not an
inﬂuence around him except that left upon him by his
“angel mother,” which did not tend rather to drag him
down than lift him up. He was not endowed with a hopeful
temperament. He had no force of self-esteem — no faith in
himself that buoyed him up amid the contempt of the proud
 and prosperous. He was altogether a humble man —
humble in condition, and humble in spirit. Yet, by the love
of that which was good and great and true, and by the
hunger and thirst of a noble nature, he was led to the
acquisition of a practical education, and to the development
of all those peculiar powers that were latent within him.
He was loyal to his convictions. There is no doubt that at
this time he had begun to think of political life. He was, at
least, thoroughly conversant with the politics of his own
state and of the country. There was not a more diligent
reader of political newspapers than he. He had become
familiar with the position and history of the politicians and
statesmen of the country, and must have been entirely
aware of the unpopularity of those toward whom his
judgment and sympathies led him. That he was then, and
always remained, an ambitious man, there is no question;
and with this fact in mind we can measure the sacriﬁce
which adherence to his convictions cost him. His early love
of Henry Clay has already been noticed; and this love for
the great Kentuckian, though circumstances modiﬁed it
somewhat, never ceased. He clung to him with the warmest
aﬀection through the most of his life, pronounced his
eulogy when he died, and stood ﬁrmly by the principles
which 
he 
represented. 
In 
a 
state 
overwhelmingly
democratic, he took his position with the minority, and
steadily 
adhered 
to 
the 
opposition 
against 
all 
the
temptations to quick and certain success which desertion
would bring him.
 He was a marked and peculiar man. People talked about
him. His studious habits, his greed for information, his
thorough mastery of the diﬀiculties of every new position in
which he was placed, his intelligence touching all matters
of public concern, his unwearying good nature, his skill in
telling a story, his great athletic power, his quaint, odd
ways, his uncouth appearance, all tended to bring him into
sharp contrast with the dull mediocrity by which he was
surrounded. Denton Oﬀutt, his old employer in the store,
said, in the extravagance of his admiration, that he knew
more than any other man in the United States. The
Governor of Indiana, one of Oﬀutt’s acquaintances, said,
after having a conversation with Lincoln, that the young
man “had talent enough in him to make a President.” In
every circle in which he found himself, whether reﬁned or
coarse, he was always the center of attraction. William G.
Greene says that when he (Greene) was a member of
Illinois college, he brought home with him, on a vacation,
Richard Yates, the present Governor of the state, and some
other boys, and, in order to entertain them, took them all
up to see Lincoln. He found him in his usual position and at
his usual occupation. He was ﬂat on his back, on a cellar
door, reading a newspaper. That was the manner in which a
President of the United States and a Governor of Illinois
became acquainted with one another. Mr. Greene says that
Lincoln then could repeat the whole of Burns, and was a
devoted 
student 
of 
Shakspeare. 
So 
the 
rough
backwoodsman, self-educated, entertained the college
boys, and was invited to dine with them on bread and milk.
 How he managed to upset his bowl of milk is not a matter
of history, but the fact that he did so is, as is the further
fact that Greene’s mother, who loved Lincoln, tried to
smooth over the accident, and relieve the young man’s
embarrassment.
Wherever he moved he found men and women to respect
and love him. One man who knew him at that time says that
“Lincoln had nothing, only plenty of friends.” And these
friends trusted him wholly, and were willing to be led by
him. His unanimous election as Captain in the Black Hawk
war, and the unanimous vote given him for the legislature
by political friend and foe, wherever in the county he was
known, 
illustrates 
his 
wonderful 
popularity. 
All 
the
circumstances considered, it was probably without a
precedent or parallel. When we remember that this
popularity was achieved without any direct attempt to win
it — that he ﬂattered nobody, made no pretensions
whatever, and was the plainest and poorest man in his
precinct, we can appreciate something of the strength of
his character and the beauty and purity of his life. He
aroused no jealousies, for he was not selﬁsh. He made no
enemies, because he felt kindly toward every man. People
were glad to see him rise, because it seemed just that he
should rise. Indeed, all seemed glad to help him along.
He was a man of practical expedients. He always found
some way to get out of diﬀiculties, whether moral or
mechanical, and was equally ingenious in his expedients for
escaping or surmounting each variety. Governor Yates, in a
speech at Springﬁeld, before a meeting at which William G.
 Greene presided, quoted Mr. Greene as having said that the
ﬁrst time he ever saw Lincoln he was “in the Sangamon
River, with his trousers rolled up ﬁve feet more or less,
trying to pilot a ﬂat-boat over a mill-dam. The boat was so
full of water that it was hard to manage. Lincoln got the
prow over, and then, instead of waiting to bail the water
out, bored a hole through the projecting part, and let it run
out.” Barring a little western extravagance in the statement
of a measurement, the incident is truly recorded; and it
illustrates more forcibly than words can describe the man’s
ingenuity in the quick invention of moral expedients, then
and afterwards. His life had been a life of expedients. He
had always been engaged in making the best of bad
conditions and untoward circumstances, and in meeting
and mastering emergencies. Among those who did not
understand him, he had the credit or the discredit, of being
a cunning man; but cunning was not at all an element of his
nature or character. He was simply ingenious; he was
wonderfully ingenious; but he was not cunning. Cunning is,
or tries to be, far-sighted; ingenuity disposes of occasions.
Cunning contrives plots; ingenuity dissolves them. Cunning
sets traps; ingenuity evades them. Cunning envelops its
victims in diﬀiculties; ingenuity helps them out of them.
Cunning is the oﬀspring of selﬁshness; ingenuity is the
child or companion of practical wisdom. He took his boat
safely over a great many mill-dams during his life, but
always by an expedient.
He was a religious man. The fact may be stated without
any reservation — with only an explanation. He believed in
 God, and in his personal supervision of the aﬀairs of men.
He believed himself to be under his control and guidance.
He believed in the power and ultimate triumph of the right,
through his belief in God. This unwavering faith in a Divine
Providence began at his mother’s knee, and ran like a
thread of gold through all the inner experiences of his life.
His constant sense of human duty was one of the forms by
which his faith manifested itself. His conscience took a
broader grasp than the simple apprehension of right and
wrong. He recognized an immediate relation between God
and himself, in all the actions and passions of his life. He
was not professedly a Christian — that is, he subscribed to
no creed, — joined no organization of Christian disciples.
He spoke little then, perhaps less than he did afterward,
and 
always 
sparingly, 
of 
his 
religious 
belief 
and
experiences; but that he had a deep religious life,
sometimes imbued with superstition, there is no doubt. We
guess at a mountain of marble by the outcropping ledges
that hide their whiteness among the ferns.
At this period of his life he had not exhibited in any form
that has been preserved, those logical and reasoning
powers that so greatly distinguished him during his
subsequent public career. The little clubs at and around
New Salem where he “practiced polemics” kept no records,
and have published no reports. The long talks in Oﬀutt’s
store, on the ﬂat-boat, on the farm and by the cabin ﬁreside
have not been preserved; but there is no doubt that the
germ of the power was within him, and that the peculiarity
of his education developed it into the remarkable and
 unique faculty which did much to distinguish him among
the men of his generation. He had been from a child, in the
habit of putting his thoughts into language. He wrote
much, and to this fact is doubtless owing his clearness in
statement. He could state with great exactness any fact
within the range of his knowledge. His knowledge was not
great, nor his vocabulary rich, but he could state the details
of one by the use of the other with a precision that Daniel
Webster never surpassed.
He was a childlike man. No public man of modern days
has been fortunate enough to carry into his manhood so
much of the directness, truthfulness and simplicity of
childhood as distinguished him. He was exactly what he
seemed. He was not awkward for a purpose, but because
he could not help it. He did not dress shabbily to win votes,
or excite comment, but partly because he was too poor to
dress well, and partly because he had no love for dress, or
taste in its arrangement. He was not honest because be
thought honesty was “the best policy,” but because honesty
was with him “the natural way of living.” With a modest
estimate of his own powers, and a still humbler one of his
acquisitions, he never assumed to be more or other than he
was. A lie in any form seemed impossible to him. He could
neither speak one nor act one, and in the light of this fact
all the words and acts of his life are to be judged.
If this brief statement of his qualities and powers
represents a wonderfully perfect character — so strangely
pure and noble that it seems like the sketch of an
enthusiast, it is not the writer’s fault. Its materials are
 drawn from the lips of old friends who speak of him with
tears — who loved him then as if he were their brother, and
who worship his memory with a fond idolatry. It is drawn
from such humble materials as composed his early history.
He loved all, was kind to all, was without a vice of appetite
or passion, was honest, was truthful, was simple, was
unselﬁsh, was religious, was intelligent and self-helpful,
was all that a good man could desire in a son ready to enter
life. We shall see how such a man with such a character
entered life, and passed through it.
