  ha ter   III.
THE MORNING OF the fourth of March broke beautifully
clear, and it found General Scott and the Washington police
in readiness for the day. The friends of Mr. Lincoln had
gathered in from far and near, determined that he should
be inaugurated. In the hearts of the surging crowds there
was anxiety; but outside, all looked as usual on such
occasions, with the single exception of an extraordinary
display of soldiers. The public buildings, the schools and
most of the places of business were closed during the day,
and the stars and stripes were ﬂoating from every ﬂag-staﬀ.
There was a great desire to hear Mr. Lincoln’s inaugural;
and, at an early hour, Pennsylvania Avenue was full of
people, wending their way to the east front of the capitol,
from which it was to be delivered.
At ﬁve minutes before twelve o’clock, Vice-President
Breckinridge and Senator Foote escorted Mr. Hamlin, the
Vice-President elect, into the Senate Chamber, and gave
him a seat at the left of the chair. At twelve, Mr.
Breckinridge announced the Senate adjourned without day,
and then conducted Mr. Hamlin to the seat he had vacated.
At this moment, the foreign diplomats, of whom there was a
very large and brilliant representation, entered the
chamber, and took the seats assigned to them. At a quarter
before one o’clock, the Judges of the Supreme Court
 entered, with the venerable Chief Justice Taney at their
head, each exchanging salutes with the new Vice-President,
as they took their seats. At a quarter past one o’clock, an
unusual stir and excitement announced the coming of the
most important personage of the occasion. It was a relief to
many to know that he was safely within the building; and
those who were assembled in the hall regarded with the
profoundest interest the entrance of President Buchanan
and the President elect — the outgoing and the incoming
man. A procession was then formed which passed to the
platform erected for the ceremonies of the occasion, in the
following order: Marshal of the District of Columbia, Judges
of the Supreme Court and Sergeant-at-Arms, Senate
Committee of Arrangements, President of the United States
and President elect, Vice-President, Clerk of the Senate,
Senators, 
Diplomatic 
Corps, 
heads 
of 
departments,
Governors of states, and such others as were in the
chamber. On arriving at the platform, Senator Baker of
Oregon, whose name as one of Mr. Lincoln’s old friends and
political rivals in Illinois has been frequently mentioned in
this volume, introduced Mr. Lincoln to the assembly. There
was not a very hearty welcome given to the President, as
he stepped forward to read his inaugural. His enemies were
too many: and his friends too much in fear of exasperating
them. The representative of American loyalty carried his
burden alone. The inaugural was listened to with profound
attention, every passage being vociferously cheered which
contained any allusion to the Union, and none listening
more carefully than Mr. Buchanan and Judge Taney, the
 latter of whom, with much agitation, administered the oath
of oﬀice to Mr. Lincoln when his address was concluded.
Mr. Lincoln himself must have wondered at the strange
conjunction of personages and events. The “Stephen” of his
ﬁrst speech in the old senatorial campaign was a defeated
candidate for the presidency who then stood patriotically at
his side, holding the hat of the republican President, which
he had politely taken at the beginning of the inaugural
address; “James” had just walked out of oﬀice to make
room for him; “Franklin” had passed into comparative
obscurity or something worse, and “Roger” had just
administered to him the oath of oﬀice.
No thorough understanding of the moderate and
conciliatory tone of the inaugural can be acquired without a
perusal of the document itself. Its arguments were
unanswerable, and its tone of respectful friendliness
toward the South so marked that great pains were
subsequently taken by the southern press to misrepresent
it, and to counteract its eﬀects. Mr. Lincoln said:
“Fellow-Citizens of the United States: — In compliance
with a custom as old as the government itself, I appear
before you to address you brieﬂy, and to take, in your
presence, the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the
United States to be taken by the President before he enters
on the execution of his oﬀice.
“I do not consider it necessary, at present, for me to
discuss those matters of administration about which there
is no special anxiety or excitement. Apprehension seems to
exist among the people of the southern states, that, by the
 accession of a republican administration, their property
and 
their 
peace 
and 
personal 
security 
are 
to 
be
endangered. There has never been any reasonable cause
for such apprehension. Indeed, the most ample evidence to
the contrary has all the while existed, and been open to
their inspection. It is found in nearly all the published
speeches of him who now addresses you. I do but quote
from one of those speeches, when I declare that ‘I have no
purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the
institution of slavery in the states where it exists.’ I believe
I have no lawful right to do so; and I have no inclination to
do so. Those who nominated and elected me did so with the
full knowledge that I had made this, and made many similar
declarations, and had never recanted them. And, more than
this, they placed in the platform, for my acceptance, and as
a law to themselves and to me, the clear and emphatic
resolution which I now read:
“ ‘Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate of the rights
of the states, and especially the right of each state to order
and control its own domestic institutions according to its
own judgment exclusively, is essential to that balance of
power on which the perfection and endurance of our
political fabric depend; and we denounce the lawless
invasion by armed force of the soil of any state or territory,
no matter under what pretext, as among the gravest of
crimes.’
“I now reiterate these sentiments; and in doing so I only
press upon the public attention the most conclusive
evidence of which the case is susceptible, that the property,
 peace, and security of no section are to be in anywise
endangered by the now incoming administration.
“I add, too, that all the protection which, consistently
with the Constitution and the laws, can be given, will be
cheerfully given to all the states when lawfully demanded,
for whatever cause, as cheerfully to one section as to
another.
“There is much controversy about the delivering up of
fugitives from service or labor. The clause I now read is as
plainly written in the Constitution as any other of its
provisions:
“‘No person held to service or labor in one state under
the 
law 
thereof, 
escaping 
into 
another, 
shall, 
in
consequence 
of 
any 
law 
or 
regulation 
therein, 
be
discharged from such service or labor, but shall be
delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or
labor may be due.’
“It is scarcely questioned that this provision was
intended by those who made it for the reclaiming of what
we call fugitive slaves; and the intention of the lawgiver is
the law.
“All members of Congress swear their support to the
whole Constitution — to this provision as well as any other.
To the proposition, then, that slaves whose cases come
within the terms of this clause ‘shall be delivered up,’ their
oaths are unanimous. Now, if they would make the eﬀort in
good temper, could they not, with nearly equal unanimity,
frame and pass a law by means of which to keep good that
unanimous oath?
 “There is some diﬀerence of opinion whether this clause
should be enforced by national or by state authority; but
surely that diﬀerence is not a very material one. If the slave
is to be surrendered, it can be of but little consequence to
him or to others by which authority it is done; and should
any one, in any case, be content that this oath shall go
unkept on a merely unsubstantial controversy as to how it
shall be kept?
“Again, in any law upon this subject, ought not all the
safeguards of liberty known in civilized and humane
jurisprudence to be introduced, so that a free man be not,
in any case, surrendered as a slave? And might it not be
well at the same time to provide by law for the enforcement
of that clause in the Constitution which guarantees that
‘the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the
privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states?’
“I take the oﬀicial oath to-day with no mental
reservations, and with no purpose to construe the
Constitution or laws by any hypercritical rules; and while I
do not choose now to specify particular acts of Congress as
proper to be enforced, I do suggest that it will be much
safer for all, both in oﬀicial and private stations, to conform
to and abide by all those acts which stand unrepealed, than
to violate any of them, trusting to ﬁnd impunity in having
them held to be unconstitutional.
“It is seventy-two years since the ﬁrst inauguration of a
President under our national Constitution. During that
period ﬁfteen diﬀerent and very distinguished citizens have
in succession administered the executive branch of the
 government. They have conducted it through many perils,
and generally with great success. Yet, with all this scope for
precedent, I now enter upon the same task, for the brief
constitutional term of four years, under great and peculiar
diﬀiculties.
“A disruption of the Federal Union, heretofore only
menaced, is now formidably attempted. I hold that in the
contemplation of universal law and of the Constitution, the
Union of these states is perpetual. Perpetuity is implied, if
not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national
governments. It is safe to assert that no government proper
ever had a provision in its organic law for its own
termination. Continue to execute all the express provisions
of our national Constitution, and the Union will endure
forever, it being impossible to destroy it except by some
action not provided for in the instrument itself.
“Again, if the United States be not a government proper,
but an association of states in the nature of a contract
merely, can it, as a contract, be peaceably unmade by less
than all the parties who made it? One party to a contract
may violate it — break it, so to speak; but does it not
require all to lawfully rescind it? Descending from these
general principles, we ﬁnd the proposition that in legal
contemplation the Union is perpetual, conﬁrmed by the
history of the Union itself.
“The Union is much older than the Constitution. It was
formed, in fact, by the Articles of Association in 1774. It
was 
matured 
and 
continued 
in 
the 
Declaration 
of
Independence in 1776. It was further matured, and the
 faith of all the then thirteen states expressly plighted and
engaged that it should be perpetual, by the Articles of the
Confederation, in 1778; and, ﬁnally, in 1787, one of the
declared objects for ordaining and establishing the
Constitution was to form a more perfect union. But if the
destruction of the Union by one or by a part only of the
states be lawfully possible, the Union is less perfect than
before, the Constitution having lost the vital element of
perpetuity.
“It follows from these views that no state, upon its own
mere motion, can lawfully get out of the Union; that
resolves and ordinances to that eﬀect are legally void; and
that acts of violence within any state or states against the
authority of the United States are insurrectionary or
revolutionary, according to circumstances.
“I therefore consider that, in view of the Constitution and
the laws, the Union is unbroken, and, to the extent of my
ability, I shall take care, as the Constitution itself expressly
enjoins upon me, that the laws of the Union shall be
faithfully executed in all the states. Doing this, which I
deem to be only a simple duty on my part, I shall perfectly
perform it, so far as is practicable, unless my rightful
masters, 
the 
American 
people, 
shall 
withhold 
the
requisition, or in some authoritative manner direct the
contrary.
“I trust this will not be regarded as a menace, but only as
the 
declared 
purpose 
of 
the 
Union 
that 
it 
will
constitutionally defend and maintain itself.
 “In doing this there need be no bloodshed or violence,
and there shall be none unless it is forced upon the national
authority.
“The power conﬁded to me will be used to hold, occupy,
and possess the property and places belonging to the
government, and collect the duties and imposts; but beyond
what may be necessary for these objects there will be no
invasion, no using of force against or among the people
anywhere.
“Where hostility to the United States shall be so great
and so universal as to prevent competent resident citizens
from holding federal oﬀices, there will be no attempt to
force obnoxious strangers among the people that object.
While strict legal right may exist of the government to
enforce the exercise of these oﬀices, the attempt to do so
would be so irritating, and so nearly impracticable withal,
that I deem it best to forego for the time the uses of such
oﬀices.
“The mails, unless repelled, will continue to be furnished
in all parts of the Union.
“So far as possible, the people everywhere shall have
that sense of perfect security which is most favorable to
calm thought and reﬂection.
“The course here indicated will be followed, unless
current events and experience shall show a modiﬁcation or
change to be proper; and in every case and exigency my
best discretion will be exercised according to the
circumstances actually existing, and with a view and hope
 of a peaceful solution of the national troubles, and the
restoration of fraternal sympathies and aﬀections.
“That there are persons, in one section or another, who
seek to destroy the Union at all events, and are glad of any
pretext to do it, I will neither aﬀirm nor deny. But if there
be such, I need address no word to them.
“To those, however, who really love the Union, may I not
speak, before entering upon so grave a matter as the
destruction of our national fabric, with all its beneﬁts, its
memories, and its hopes? Would it not be well to ascertain
why we do it? Will you hazard so desperate a step, while
any portion of the ills you ﬂy from have no real existence?
Will you, while the certain ills you ﬂy to are greater than all
the real ones you ﬂy from? Will you risk the commission of
so fearful a mistake? All profess to be content in the Union
if all constitutional rights can be maintained. Is it true,
then, that any right, plainly written in the Constitution, has
been denied? I think not. Happily the human mind is so
constituted that no party can reach to the audacity of doing
this.
“Think, if you can, of a single instance in which a plainly-
written provision of the Constitution has ever been denied.
If, by the mere force of numbers. a majority should deprive
a minority of any clearly-written constitutional right, it
might, in a moral point of view, justify revolution; it
certainly would, if such right were a vital one. But sUch is
not our case.
“All the vital rights of minorities and of individuals are so
plainly assured to them by aﬀirmations and negations,
 guaranties and prohibitions in the Constitution, that
controversies never arise concerning them. But no organic
law can ever be framed with a provision speciﬁcally
applicable to every question which may occur in practical
administration. No foresight can anticipate, nor any
document of reasonable length contain, express provisions
for all possible questions. Shall fugitives from labor be
surrendered by national or by state authorities? The
Constitution does not expressly say. Must Congress protect
slavery in the territories? The Constitution does not
expressly say. From questions of this class, spring all our
constitutional controversies, and we divide upon them into
majorities and minorities.
“If the minority will not acquiesce, the majority must, or
the government must cease. There is no alternative for
continuing the government but acquiescence on the one
side or the other. If a minority in such a case will secede
rather than acquiesce, they make a precedent, which, in
turn, will ruin and divide them, for a minority of their own
will secede from them whenever a majority refuses to be
controlled by such a minority. For instance, why not any
portion of a new confederacy, a year or two hence,
arbitrarily secede again, precisely as portions of the
present Union now claim to secede from it? All who cherish
disunion sentiments are now being educated to the exact
temper of doing this. Is there such perfect identity of
interests among the states to compose a new Union as to
produce harmony only, and prevent renewed secession?
 Plainly, the central idea of secession is the essence of
anarchy.
“A majority held in restraint by constitutional check and
limitation, and always changing easily with deliberate
changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only
true sovereign of a free people. Whoever rejects it, does, of
necessity, ﬂy to anarchy or to despotism. Unanimity is
impossible; the rule of a minority, as a permanent
arrangement, is wholly inadmissible. So that, rejecting the
majority principle, anarchy or despotism, in some form, is
all that is left.
“I do not forget the position assumed by some that
constitutional questions are to be decided by the Supreme
Court, nor do I deny that such decisions must be binding in
any case upon the parties to a suit, as to the object of that
suit, while they are also entitled to a very high respect and
consideration in all parallel cases by all other departments
of the government; and while it is obviously possible that
such decision may be erroneous in any given case, still the
evil eﬀect following it, being limited to that particular case,
with the chance that it may be overruled an never become
a precedent for other cases, can better be borne than could
the evils of a diﬀerent practice.
“At the same time the candid citizen must confess that, if
the policy of the government upon the vital question
aﬀecting the whole people is to be irrevocably ﬁxed by the
decisions of the Supreme Court, the instant they are made,
as in ordinary litigation between parties in personal
actions, the people will have ceased to be their own
 masters, unless having to that extent practically resigned
their government into the hands of that eminent tribunal.
“Nor is there in this view any assault upon the court or
the judges. It is a duty from which they may not shrink, to
decide cases properly brought before them; and it is no
fault of theirs if others seek to turn their decisions to
political purposes. One section of our country believes
slavery is right, and ought to be extended, while the other
believes it is wrong, and ought not to be extended, and this
is the only substantial dispute; and the fugitive slave clause
of the Constitution and the law for the suppression of the
foreign slave trade, are each as well enforced, perhaps, as
any law can ever be in a community where the moral sense
of the people imperfectly supports the law itself. The great
body of the people abide by the dry legal obligations in
both cases, and a few break over in each. This, I think,
cannot be perfectly cured, and it would be worse, in both
cases, after the separation of the sections, than before. The
foreign slave trade, now imperfectly suppressed, would be
ultimately revived, without restriction, in one section; while
fugitive slaves, now only partially surrendered, would not
be surrendered at all by the other.
“Physically speaking we can not separate; we can not
remove our respective sections from each other, nor build
an impassable wall between them. A husband and wife may
be divorced, and go out of the presence and beyond the
reach of each other, but the diﬀerent parts of our country
cannot do this. They can not but remain face to face; and
intercourse, either amicable or hostile, must continue
 between them. Is it possible, then, to make that intercourse
more advantageous or more satisfactory after separation
than before? Can aliens make treaties easier than friends
can make laws? Can treaties be more faithfully enforced
between aliens than laws can among friends? Suppose you
go to war, you cannot ﬁght always; and when, after much
loss on both sides, and no gain on either, you cease
ﬁghting, the identical questions as to terms of intercourse
are again upon you.
“This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people
who inhabit it. Whenever they shall grow weary of the
existing government, they can exercise their constitutional
right 
of 
amending, 
or 
their 
revolutionary 
right 
to
dismember or overthrow it. I can not be ignorant of the fact
that many worthy and patriotic citizens are desirous of
having the national Constitution amended. While I make no
recommendation of amendment, I fully recognize the full
authority of the people over the whole subject, to be
exercised in either of the modes prescribed in the
instrument 
itself, 
and 
I 
should, 
under 
existing
circumstances, favor rather than oppose a fair opportunity
being aﬀorded the people to act upon it.
“I will venture to add, that to me the convention mode
seems preferable, in that it allows amendments to originate
with the people themselves, instead of only permitting
them to take or reject propositions originated by others not
especially chosen for the purpose, and which might not be
precisely such as they would wish either to accept or
refuse. I understand that a proposed amendment to the
 Constitution (which amendment, however, I have not seen)
has passed Congress, to the eﬀect that the federal
government shall never interfere with the domestic
institutions of states, including that of persons held to
service. To avoid misconstruction of what I have said, I
depart from my purpose not to speak of particular
amendments, so far as to say that, holding such a provision
to now be implied constitutional law, I have no objection to
its being made express and irrevocable.
“The chief magistrate derives all his authority from the
people, and they have conferred none upon him to ﬁx the
terms for the separation of the states. The people
themselves, also, can do this if they choose, but the
executive, as such, has nothing to do with it. His duty is to
administer the present government as it came to his hands,
and to transmit it unimpaired by him to his successor. Why
should there not be a patient conﬁdence in the ultimate
justice of the people? Is there any better or equal hope in
the world? In our present diﬀerences is either party
without faith of being in the right? If the Almighty Ruler of
nations, with his eternal truth and justice, be on your side
of the North, or on yours of the South, that truth and that
justice will surely prevail by the judgment of this great
tribunal, the American people. By the frame of the
government under which we live, this same people have
wisely given their public servants but little power for
mischief, and have with equal wisdom provided for the
return of that little to their own hands at very short
intervals. While the people retain their virtue and vigilance,
 no administration, by any extreme wickedness or folly, can
very seriously injure the government in the short space of
four years.
“My countrymen, one and all, think calmly and well upon
this whole subject. Nothing valuable can be lost by taking
time.
“If there be an object to hurry any of you, in hot haste, to
a step which you would never take deliberately, that object
will be frustrated by taking time: but no good object can be
frustrated by it.
“Such of you as are now dissatisﬁed still have the old
Constitution unimpaired, and, on the sensitive point, the
laws of your own framing under it; while the new
administration will have no immediate power, it it would, to
change either.
“If it were admitted that you who are dissatisﬁed hold
the right side in the dispute, there is still no single reason
for precipitate action. Intelligence, patriotism, Christianity,
and a ﬁrm reliance on Him who has never yet forsaken this
favored land, are still competent to adjust, in the best way,
all our present diﬀiculties.
“In your hands, my dissatisﬁed fellow-countrymen, and
not in mine, is the momentous issue of civil war. The
government will not assail you.
“You can have no conﬂict without being yourselves the
aggressors. You have no oath registered in Heaven to
destroy the government; while I shall have the most solemn
one to ‘preserve, protect, and defend’ it.
 “I am loth to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We
must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it
must not break our bonds of aﬀection.
“The mystic cords of memory, stretching from every
battle-ﬁeld and patriot grave to every living heart and
hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the
chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they
will be, by the better angels of our nature.”
The address delivered and the oath administered, the
august ceremonies of the occasion were concluded; and,
passing back through the Senate Chamber, the President
was escorted to the White House, where Mr. Buchanan took
leave of him, and where the people were received by him in
large numbers. Mr. Lincoln, on being asked whether he felt
frightened while delivering his address, in consequence of
the threats of assassination, replied that he had frequently
experienced greater fear in addressing a dozen western
men on the subject of temperance. Of one thing the “ﬁre-
eaters” were assured by the address, viz: that if a war was
to be inaugurated, they would be obliged to ﬁre the ﬁrst
gun. Mr. Lincoln had pledged himself to take no step of
even doubtful propriety. He proposed simply to possess and
hold the property of the United States.
And now began the great work of Mr. Lincoln’s life. The
humble boy, reared in a log cabin, was the great man,
occupying the proudest place in the nation, in the most
perilous period of that nation’s existence. He was in the
White House as God’s and the people’s instrument, to work
for both.
 His ﬁrst duty was the formal designation of a cabinet, for
undoubtedly his choice of secretaries was essentially
settled in his own mind before he left home. The highest
position was oﬀered to Mr. Seward, the ﬁrst statesman in
the republican party, and the equal if not the superior of
any in the country. Concerning the ﬁlling of the oﬀice of
Secretary of State, it is believed that Mr. Lincoln had no
hesitation. Mr. Seward was his ﬁrst and last choice. With
equal promptitude he decided to call Edward Bates of
Missouri to the oﬀice of Attorney General. Simon Cameron
of Pennsylvania was known to be an aspirant for cabinet
honors; and, it is believed, would have accepted the post of
Secretary of the Treasury with more alacrity than he did
that of Secretary of War, to which Mr. Lincoln called him.
Salmon P. Chase of Ohio, who shared with Mr. Seward the
highest regards of the republican party and the conﬁdence
of the country, was appointed to the Treasury. The men
thus brought into the government were all prominent
candidates for the presidency at Chicago, and on the ﬁrst
ballot received an aggregate of three hundred and twenty-
one votes of the four hundred and sixty-ﬁve cast. The great
majority of the party thus had the expression of their ﬁrst
choice for the presidency honored by Mr. Lincoln in a
remarkable degree. Gideon Welles of Connecticut was
appointed Secretary of the Navy. Caleb B. Smith of Indiana,
an old personal friend of Mr. Lincoln, and for many years a
distinguished politician of the West, was oﬀered the
Portfolio of the Interior, and accepted it; and Montgomery
Blair of Maryland was appointed Postmaster General.
 Thus furnished with his secretaries, another most
important work opened before him — the clearing the
departments of the sympathizers with treason. This was
indeed a Herculean task. Treason was everywhere. Every
department was infected. The men had been manipulated
so long by treasonable hands — had been moulded into
such thorough sympathy with the rebellion — and had so
imbibed its treacherous spirit, that no measure could be
discussed or adopted by the new administration that was
not reported to the rebels by some clerk or conﬁdant. The
government was betrayed every day by its own agents. Not
a step could be taken by Mr. Lincoln in any direction, that
some spy in the departments, or some traitor in his
conﬁdence, did not report to his enemies.
There were certain things that Mr. Lincoln specially
endeavored to do in his inaugural address, and in all the
preliminary work of his administration. He endeavored to
show that the rebellion was without an adequate cause —
to show this ﬁrst to his own people, and then to the
governments and peoples on the other side of the Atlantic.
He endeavored to leave no way untried that promised to
procure or preserve an honorable peace. He endeavored so
to manage aﬀairs that whenever open hostilities should
come, they should be begun by the rebels and not by the
government. He intended to preserve for himself and for
the govemment a clean record. He intended to bear with
the rebellion just so long as it conﬁned itself to paper —
nay, further than this — to bear with it to the silent
suﬀerance of many practical indignities. He did not mean to
 unsheath a sword, or ﬁre a gun, until the rebellion
absolutely compelled him to do so. Yet, while waiting the
development of events, he was very busily engaged in
clearing the government for action. Many of the revelations
and movements of the ﬁrst few weeks would doubtless be
startling, even to-day, but the time has not yet come for
their exposure.
Mr. Lincoln found not only the departments corrupt and
unreliable, but he found the public mind abroad thoroughly
poisoned against him, and fully in sympathy with the
secessionists. Perhaps a majority of the representatives of
the government in Europe were in the secrets of the
seceders, and, in company with many who had gone from
the southern states to shape public opinion to the interests
of treason, were doing everything in their power to injure
the government which had honored them. The places thus
disgraced and made instruments in the hands of treason
were to be ﬁlled by loyal men; and a set of inﬂuences were
to be put in motion which should secure respect for the
government, and a sound understanding of the merits of
the controversy between the government and slavery. To ﬁll
these places was not an easy task, but it was done quickly
and, in the main, wisely.
It is proper here to give an explanation of Mr. Lincoln’s
paciﬁc policy, at this time. Great fault was subsequently
found with him by the extremists among his northern
friends, for his deference to the border states; and a full
understanding of his policy, as it related to these states,
cannot be had without going back to this period when it
 was initiated. There were ﬁfteen slave states, which those
engaged in the rebellion hoped to lead or to force into
secession. At the time of the inauguration, only seven of
these ﬁfteen — less than a majority — had revolted. The
cotton states alone had followed the lead of South Carolina
out of the Union. Several weeks had passed since a state
had seceded; and unless other states could be dragooned
into the movement, the rebellion would be practically a
failure from the start. Such a confederacy could not hope to
live a year, and would be obliged to ﬁnd its way back into
the Union upon some terms. In the meantime, two or three
conventions in the border states, delegated freshly from the
people, had voted distinctly and decidedly not to secede.
The aﬀairs of the confederacy were really in a very
precarious condition when Mr. Lincoln came into power.
The rebel government was making very much more bluster
than progress.
It became Mr. Lincoln’s policy so to conduct aﬀairs as to
strengthen the Union feeling in the border states, and to
give utterance to no sentiment and to do no deed which
should drive these states toward the confederacy. He saw
that if he could hold these states, there could not be a very
serious war; for the ﬁrst condition of success to the rebel
cause was its general adoption by the border slave states.
To hold these states by every means that did not bring
absolute disgrace upon the government was his object. He
must do nothing that would weaken the hands of Union
men. The diﬀicult position of these Union men he fully
comprehended and considered. Of course, he had a hard
 path to pursue; and it is not strange. that those more hasty
than himself should sometimes think he was loitering by
the way, or was making it more tortuous than was either
necessary or expedient. It is doubtful whether the
politicians of New England ever gave Mr. Lincoln the credit
which was his due for retaining in the Union those slave
states which never left their allegiance. An early and
decided war policy could have been morally certain to drive
every slave state into the confederacy, except Maryland and
Delaware, and they would only have been retained by force.
The confederacy found that it must make progress or die.
The rebel Congress passed a measure for the organization
of an army, on the ninth of March, and on the twelfth two
confederate commissioners — Mr. Forsyth of Alabama and
Mr. Crawford of Georgia — presented themselves at the
State Department at Washington for the purpose of making
a treaty with the United States. They knew, of course, that
they could not be received oﬀicially, and that they ought to
be arrested for treason. The President would not recognize
them, but sent to them a copy of his Inaugural, as the
embodiment 
of 
the 
views 
of 
the 
government. 
The
commissioners hung about Washington for a month,
learning what they could, and in daily communication with
the traitors who still haunted the conﬁdence of the heads of
the government. Mr. Seward’s reply to them, on the eighth
of April, was delayed at their own request until that time,
and when it came they probably knew what its contents
and character would be. In order to give secession a new
impetus, they wished, in some way, to throw the
 responsibility of beginning war upon the Washington
authorities, and to make it appear that they had exhausted
all peaceable measures for an adjustment of the diﬀiculties.
In the meantime, Lieutenant Talbot, on behalf of Mr.
Lincoln, was having interviews with Governor Pickens of
South Carolina and with General Beauregard, in command
of the confederate forces there, in which he informed them
that provisions would be sent to Fort Sumter peaceably if
possible, otherwise by force. This was communicated to L.P.
Walker, then rebel Secretary of War. Before Talbot had
made his communication, Beauregard had informed Major
Anderson, in command of Fort Sumter, that he must have
no further intercourse with Charleston; and Talbot himself
was refused permission to visit that gallant and faithful
oﬀicer.
These were very dark days with Mr. Lincoln. The rebels
were determined to wrest from him a pretext for war —
determined to make him take a step which could be made
to appear to be the ﬁrst step. At the same time, he was
making rapid preparations for war, all of which must be
kept secret from friends, that they might not exasperate
foes. The loyal press became impatient with his apparent
inactivity, and under the inspiration of this press the loyal
masses became uneasy. Under these circumstances, there
were not wanting disloyal men in the North, who became
bold in the entertainment of schemes for a revolution. Mr.
Douglas himself did not support the administration,
although he had publicly declared for coercion. He could
not forget his hatred of the republican party; and was ready
 for almost any scheme for its destruction. He wished to
organize a great compromise party, which would consent to
the reconstruction of the Union, with slavery recognized
and protected in all its departments. Until the ﬁrst overt
act of war had been committed, he brought no aid to the
government.
While Mr. Lincoln’s friends were clamoring for a policy —
as if he had not a very decided one — and his foes north
and south were busy with their schemes for the destruction
of himself, his party and his country, he was performing the
most exhausting labors. He was thronged with oﬀice-
seekers, to whose claims he gave his personal attention. He
was holding protracted cabinet meetings. He was in almost
hourly intercourse with prominent men from every section
of the country. All these labors he was performing with the
consciousness that his nominal friends were doubtful, that
seven states were in open revolt, and that a majority
throughout the Union had not the slightest sympathy with
him.
There was distraction, also, in his counsels. Loyal men,
burning with patriotic indignation, were demanding that
Fort Sumter should be reinforced and provisioned, while
the 
veteran 
Lieutenant 
General 
was 
advising 
its
abandonment as a military necessity. The wisdom of Mr.
Lincoln’s waiting became evident at a day not too long
delayed. Fort Pickens, which the rebels had not taken, was
quietly reinforced, and when the vessels which carried the
relief were dispatched, Mr. Lincoln gave oﬀicial information
to General Beauregard that provisions were to be sent to
 Major Anderson in Fort Sumter, by an unarmed vessel. He
was determined that no hostile act on the part of the
government should commence the war, for which both
sides were preparing; although an act of open war had
already transpired in Charleston harbor, for which the rebel
forces were responsible. The steamer Star of the West,
loaded with troops and provisions for Major Anderson, was
ﬁred upon and driven out of the harbor two months before
the expiration of Mr. Buchanan’s term of oﬀice. The
supplying the garrison with food was an act of humanity,
and not an act of war, except as it might be so construed.
Beauregard 
laid 
this 
last 
intelligence 
before 
his
Secretary of War, and under special instructions, on the
twelfth of April, he demanded the surrender of Fort Sumter.
He was ready to make the demand, and to back it by force.
The city of Charleston was full of troops, and, for months,
batteries had been in course of construction, with the
special purpose of compelling the surrender of the fort.
Major Anderson had seen these batteries going up, day
after day, without the liberty to ﬁre a gun. He declined to
surrender. He was called upon to state when he would
evacuate the fort. He replied that on the ﬁfteenth he would
do so, should he not meantime receive controlling
instructions from the government, or additional supplies.
The response which he received was that the confederate
batteries would open on Fort Sumter in one hour from the
date of the message. The date of the message was “April
12, 1861, 3:30 A.M.” Beauregard was true to his word. At
half past four, the batteries opened upon the fort, which,
 after a long and terrible bombardment, and a gallant
though comparatively feeble defense by a small and half-
starved garrison, was surrendered the following day.
This was practically the initial act of war. Mr. Lincoln, by
his determined forbearance, had thrown the onus of its
commencement upon the rebel government. Never by
word, or deed, or declared or concealed intention, had he
wronged the South, or denied its rights under the
Constitution. By no hostile act had he provoked war. From
the time he had ﬁrst opened his lips as President of the
United States, he had breathed none but paciﬁc words. He
had claimed the least that he could claim for the
government, and still preserve a show of right and power.
Upon the heads of the conspirators rested every particle of
responsibility for the beginning of the war, and the train of
horrors that followed. The rebellion was conceived in
perjury, brought forth in violence, cradled in ignorance, and
reared upon spoil. It never had an apology for existence
that will be entertained for a moment at the bar of history.
It never was anything from its birth to its death but a crime
— a crime against Christianity, against patriotism, against
humanity, against civilization, against progress, against
personal and political honor, against the people who were
forced to support it, against the people who voluntarily put
it down, and against that God to whom it blasphemously
appealed for justiﬁcation, and arrogantly prayed for
success.
The fall of Sumter was the resurrection of patriotism.
The North needed just this. Such a universal burst of
 patriotic indignation as ran over the North under the
inﬂuence of this insult to the national ﬂag has never been
witnessed. It swept away all party lines as if it had been
ﬂame and they had been ﬂax. No combination of moral
inﬂuences could thus have united in one feeling and
purpose the elements which the ﬁre from those batteries
welded into a burning union. All disloyalty was silenced.
Compromise was a word that had no signiﬁcance.
“Coercion” — a word which had had a fearful meaning
among the timid — lost its terrors. There was a universal
desire, all over the North, to avenge the foul insult. It was
worth a life-time of indiﬀerence or discord to feel and to
see a nation thus once more united in thought and purpose,
and to realize that underneath all divisions of party and
sect, and deeper down than selﬁsh interest and personal
prejudice, there was a love of country which made us a
nation.
Now was the time for Mr. Lincoln to act. Up to this date
he had had no basis for action in the popular feeling. If he
had raised an army, that would have been an act of hostility
— that would have been a threat of “coercion.” A thousand
northern presses would have pounced upon him as a
provoker of war. On the ﬁfteenth of April he issued a
proclamation, calling upon the loyal states for seventy-ﬁve
thousand men to protect the national capital, and suppress
such combinations as had been made to resist the
inforcement of the laws of the United States. “I appeal,”
said Mr. Lincoln, in this proclamation, “to all loyal citizens
to favor, facilitate and aid this eﬀort to maintain the honor,
 the integrity and existence of our national Union, and the
perpetuity of popular government, and to redress the
wrongs already long enough endured.” The ﬁrst service, he
stated, to which the forces thus called for would be
subjected would be to repossess the forts, places and
property taken from the Union by the rebels. By the same
proclamation he convened both Houses of Congress to
assemble on the fourth of July.
The utterance of this proclamation was so clearly a
necessity, and was so directly a response to the uprising of
the people, that not a voice was raised against it. It was
received with no small degree of excitement, but it was a
healthy excitement. It was a necessity; and loyal men
everywhere felt that the great struggle between slavery
and the country was upon them. “Better that it should be
settled by us than by our children,” said men, everywhere;
and in their self-devotion they were encouraged by their
mothers, sisters and wives. The South knew that war must
come, and they were prepared. Nearly all the southern
forts were already in their hands. They had robbed the
northern arsenals through the miscreant Floyd. They had
cut oﬀ the payment of all debts due the North. They had
ransacked the mails, so that the government could have no
communication with its friends and forces. They had been
instructing oﬀicers for years, and drilling troops for
months. They knew that there were not arms enough in the
North to furnish an army competent to overcome them.
When, therefore, Mr. Lincoln called for his seventy-ﬁve
 thousand men, they met the proclamation with a howl of
derision.
Massachusetts was the ﬁrst state to respond to the call
for troops. Governor Andrew, a devoted friend of the
administration, acted as promptly then in the support of the
government as he afterwards labored with eﬀicient
persistence in the destruction of the rebellion; but the
credit of having the troops ready for motion and action was
due mainly to the foresight of Governor N.P. Banks,
afterwards a Major General in the federal service. He was
Governor Andrew’s predecessor; and three years before the
breaking out of the rebellion declared, when rallied on his
devotion to the military, that the troops would be called
upon within a few years to suppress a slaveholders’
rebellion. The prediction seemed very wild then, and
probably would never have been recalled but for its exact
fulﬁllment. The troops which he had made ready, Governor
Andrew, coming after him, promptly dispatched.
The moral eﬀect of the marching of the Massachusetts
Sixth was very great. The hearts of the people were stirred
all along their route by the most powerful emotions. They
were fed and applauded at every considerable station.
Women thronged around the cars, bringing to them their
Bibles and other gifts, and giving them their tearful
blessing. New York city was much impressed by their
sturdy march through the great metropolis. It was a new
sensation. Men forgot their counting — rooms and ware-
houses, and gave themselves up to the emotions excited by
so prompt and gallant an exhibition of patriotism. But the
 tramp of the Sixth awoke the young men everywhere to
deeds of emulation. Within forty-eight hours after this
regiment left Boston, two more regiments had been made
ready, and were dispatched. On its way through Baltimore,
the Sixth Regiment was attacked by a mob, carrying a
secession ﬂag, and several of its members killed and
wounded. This outrage added new fuel to the ﬁre. The
North was growing angry. The idea that a loyal regiment
could not pass through a nominally loyal city, on its way to
protect the national capital, without ﬁghting its way
through, aroused a storm of indignation that swept over the
whole of loyal America.
Governor Hicks of Maryland and Mayor Brown of
Baltimore were frightened. They did not wish to have any
more troops taken through Baltimore. Mr. Lincoln assured
them that he made no point of bringing troops through that
city, and that he left the matter with General Scott, who
had said in his presence that the troops might be marched
around Baltimore. By this arrangement a collision with the
people of Baltimore would be avoided, unless they should
go out of the way to seek it. “Now and ever,” said Mr.
Lincoln, in closing a note to these gentlemen, “I shall do all
in my power for peace, consistently with the maintenance
of the government.”
Governor Hicks wished the quarrel between the North
and South referred to Lord Lyons, the British minister, for
arbitration. To this Mr. Seward, speaking for the President,
made a most admirable reply, stating that “whatever noble
sentiments, 
once 
prevalent 
in 
Maryland, 
had 
been
 obliterated, the President would be hopeful, nevertheless,
that there is one that would forever remain there and
everywhere. That sentiment is that no domestic contention
whatever, that may arise among the parties of this republic,
ought, in any case, to be referred to any foreign
arbitrament — least of all to the arbitrament of a foreign
monarchy.”
Governor Hicks occupied, without doubt, a diﬀicult
position. Out of ninety-two thousand votes cast at the
presidential election, only a little more than two thousand
had been cast for Mr. Lincoln. More than forty-two
thousand votes had been given for Mr. Breckinridge, and
almost an equal number for John Bell. Maryland was a
southern slave-holding state, and the sympathies of four
persons in every ﬁve were with the rebellion. His people
threatened him, while the government would have its
troops, and insisted that they should pass through
Maryland.
After the passage of the Massachusetts Sixth, the mob
had control. They burnt the bridges north of Baltimore, so
as to cut oﬀ the means of access to the city; and then,
against the protests of the governor, the troops were
forwarded by way of Annapolis.
Four days after Mr. Lincoln’s call for troops — on the day
of the bloody passage of the Massachusetts Sixth through
Baltimore — he issued a proclamation declaring a blockade
of the ports of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida,
Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas. This call for troops and
the establishment of a blockade were the preliminaries of
 one of the most remarkable wars that have occurred in the
history of the human race — a war which, for the number of
men involved, the amount of spaces traversed, of coast line
blockaded, of material consumed and results achieved,
surpasses all the wars of history.
The South had calculated upon the disloyalty of
Maryland. Nay, more, it had calculated on the assistance of
a large party at the North. It did not intend to be conﬁned
in its warlike operations to its own territory. Northern
politicians, and among them ex-President Pierce, had told
them it would not be. It expected to take and hold
Washington, and to banish the government; and Maryland
had an important part to play in the drama. Jeﬀerson Davis
had openly declared that the North and not the South
should be the ﬁeld of battle. The rebel Secretary of War
said publicly in Montgomery that while no man could tell
where the war would end, he would prophesy that the ﬂag
which then ﬂaunted the breeze at Montgomery would ﬂoat
over the dome of the old capitol at Washington before the
ﬁrst of May; and that it “might ﬂoat eventually over Fanueil
Hall itself.” To make good these predictions, the rebel
government organized and sent toward Virginia, a force of
20,000 men, calculating upon the secession of Virginia
which had not then joined the confederacy, and which, left
to the popular choice, never would have taken that fatal
step.
The attitude of the two governments at this period
presented a strong contrast — a most instructive contrast
to all who are curious to mark the respective degrees of
 responsibility attaching to them for the war which followed.
The confederate forces, or the state forces in the
confederate interest, had seized and occupied nearly every
fort, arsenal and dock-yard belonging to the United States,
upon the southern territory. The rebel government had
opened its batteries upon United States vessels, and had
bombarded and captured Fort Sumter. It had issued letters
of marque to distress our commerce. It was engaged in the
attempt to force every border slave state into the support
of its schemes. It was pushing its soldiers northward for a
war of aggression; and its highest representatives were
publicly boasting that their ﬂag would soon ﬂoat over the
capitol at Washington, and that the war should not be
carried on upon confederate soil. The attitude of the rebel
government 
was 
that 
of 
direct, 
bitter, 
determined,
aggressive hostility.
Virginia at this time was holding a state convention
which, to the dismay and vexation of the rebel leaders, was
controlled by a large majority of Union men. Nothing is
more demonstrable than that the choice of Virginia was to
remain in the Union. These delegates were chosen as Union
men; yet every possible inﬂuence was brought to bear upon
them to cajole or coerce them into disunion. Threats,
misrepresentations, promises of power, social proscription,
appeals to personal and sectional interest, everything that
treasonable ingenuity could suggest were resorted to to
urge the laggard state into the vortex of secession. The fall
of Sumter, the inaugural of President Lincoln and the
failure of the confederate commissioners to secure a treaty
 were used in diﬀerent ways to inﬂame southern pride, and
loosen the love of the loyal members from the old Union.
The President’s Inaugural had been so misconstrued as to
convey the idea that his policy was one of coercion; and the
convention sent a committee to Mr. Lincoln, commissioned
to ask him to communicate to the convention the policy
which the federal executive intended to pursue, in regard
to the confederate states, complaining that great and
injurious uncertainty prevailed in the public mind in regard
to this policy.
To this request Mr. Lincoln gave a formal answer; and in
this answer appears the contrast to which attention has
been called. He expressed his regret and mortiﬁcation that,
after having stated his position and policy as plainly as he
was able to state it in his inaugural address, there should
be any uncertainty on the subject. “As I then and therein
said,” the reply proceeds, “‘the power conﬁded in me will
be used to hold, occupy and possess property and places
belonging to the government, and to collect duties and
imposts; but, beyond what is necessary for these objects,
there will be no invasion, no using of force against, or
among, people anywhere.’” Fort Sumter, he declared it his
purpose to repossess, with all the other places seized from
the government, and to the best of his ability he should
repel force by force. In consequence of the attack on
Sumter, it was possible that he should cause the withdrawal
of the mails from the states which claimed to have seceded.
He closed by reiterating the claim of the government upon
the military posts and property which had been seized, and
 by stating that, whatever else he might do for the purpose,
he should not “attempt to collect the duties and imposts by
any armed invasion of any part of the country,” not
meaning by that, however, to cut himself oﬀ from the
liberty to land a force necessary to relieve a fort upon the
border of the country.
On one side was rampant treason and a policy of
aggressive war; on the other, patient forbearance, and the
most considerate care not to take any step not absolutely
necessary to the maintenance of the indisputable rights of
the government. No man in the United States who
pretended to be loyal could ﬁnd fault with Mr. Lincoln for
claiming too much, or being harsh with those “erring
sisters” who, it was believed by many, might be gently led
back to their allegiance.
On the seventeenth of April, Virginia went out of the
Union by a convention vote of eighty-eight to ﬁfty-ﬁve; and
on the twenty-ﬁrst of May the confederate capital was
transferred 
to 
Richmond. 
Thenceforth 
Virginia 
went
straight toward desolation. Its “sacred soil” was from that
hour devoted to trenches, fortiﬁcations, battle-ﬁelds,
military roads, camps and graves.
The conciliatory policy of Mr. Lincoln had threatened the
ruin of the confederacy; but the confederacy made war, and
then appealed to the border states for sympathy and help.
Governor Pickens of South Carolina telegraphed the fall of
Sumter to the Governor of Virginia, and appealed to
Virginia to know what she was going to do. This was the
policy — to precipitate war, and then appeal to sectional
 pride and interest for sectional assistance. The ﬁrst
practical show of sectional feeling on the part of the border
states was contained in the angry and insulting responses
which they returned to Mr. Lincoln’s call for troops. These
responses exhibited the sympathies of their Governors, at
least. Tennessee, North Carolina and Arkansas followed
Virginia out of the Union, and thus the confederate cause
made the gain it sought.
At the North and West the response to the President’s
call for soldiers was rendered with enthusiastic alacrity, the
states vieing with each other in the oﬀice of raising, ﬁtting
out and dispatching troops. Money was oﬀered to the
government by millions, and the President found that he
had a basis for a policy in the national feeling. After a week
of great anxiety, Washington was relieved; and while troops
from the North were rushing southward, a still larger
number from the South were pushing northward in
preparation for the grand struggle.
One of the most encouraging incidents of this opening
chapter of the war was a visit of Mr. Douglas to Mr. Lincoln,
in which the former gave to the latter the assurance of his
sympathy and support in the war for the preservation of the
Union. It is to be remembered that Mr. Douglas was an
ambitious man, that he was a strong party man, that he had
battled for power with all the persistence of a strong and
determined nature, and that he was a sadly disappointed
man. The person with whom he had had his hardest ﬁghts
occupied the chair to which he had for many years aspired.
 On Sunday, the fourteenth of April, all Washington was
alive with excitement under the eﬀect of the news of the
fall of Sumter. Secessionists could not conceal their joy, and
the loyal were equally sad and indignant. Churches were
forsaken, and the opening of the war was the only topic of
thought and conversation. Under these circumstances,
Hon. 
George 
Ashmun 
of 
Massachusetts, 
who 
was
personally on the most friendly terms with Mr. Lincoln and.
Mr. Douglas, called on the latter in the evening, to obtain
from him some public declaration that should help the
government in its extremity. He found the Senator
surrounded by political friends, who were soon dismissed,
and then, for an hour, the two men discussed the relations
of Mr. Douglas to the administration. The ﬁrst impulse of
the Senator was against Mr. Ashmun’s wishes, who desired
him to go to the President at once, and tell him he would
sustain him in all the needful measures which the exigency
demanded. His reply was: “Mr. Lincoln has dealt hardly
with me, in removing some of my friends from oﬀice, and I
don’t know as he wants my advice or aid.” Mr. Ashmun
remarked that he had probably followed democratic
precedents in making removals, but that the present
question was above party, and that it was now in the power
of Mr. Douglas to render such a service to his country as
would not only give him a title to its lasting gratitude, but
would show that in the hour of his country’s need he could
trample all party considerations and resentments under
feet. At this juncture, Mrs. Douglas came in, and gave the
whole weight of her aﬀectionate inﬂuence in the direction
 in which Mr. Ashmun was endeavoring to lead him. He
could not withstand the inﬂuence of his friend, his wife, and
that better nature to which they appealed. He gave up all
his enmity, all his resentment, cast every unworthy
sentiment and selﬁsh feeling behind him, and cordially
declared his willingness to go to Mr. Lincoln, and oﬀer him
his earnest and hearty support.
It was nearly dark when the two gentlemen started for
the President’s house. Mr. Lincoln was alone, and on
learning their errand gave them a most cordial welcome.
For once, the life-long antagonists were united in heart and
purpose. Mr. Lincoln took up the proclamation, calling for
seventy-ﬁve thousand troops, which he had determined to
issue the next day, and read it. When he had ﬁnished, Mr.
Douglas rose from his chair and said: “Mr. President, I
cordially concur in every word of that document, except
that instead of the call for seventy-ﬁve thousand men I
would make it two hundred thousand. You do not know the
dishonest purposes of those men as well as I do.” Then he
asked the President and Mr. Ashmun to look at a map of the
United States which hung at one end of the room. On this
he pointed out, in detail, the principal strategic points
which should be at once strengthened for the coming
contest. Among the more prominent of these were Fortress
Monroe, Washington, Harper’s Ferry and Cairo. He then
enlarged upon the ﬁrm, warlike course which should be
pursued, while Mr. Lincoln listened with earnest interest,
and the two old foes parted that night thorough friends,
perfectly united in a patriotic purpose.
 After leaving the President, Mr. Ashmun said to Mr.
Douglas: “You have done justice to your own reputation and
to the President; and the country must know it. The
proclamation will go by telegraph all over the country in
the morning, and the account of this interview must go with
it. I shall send it, either in my own language or yours. I
prefer that you should give your own version.” Mr. Douglas
said he would write it; and so the dispatch went with the
message wherever the telegraph would carry it, conﬁrming
the wavering of his own party, and helping to raise the tide
of loyal feeling, among all parties and classes, to its ﬂood.
The dispatch, the original of which Mr. Ashmun still retains,
was as follows:
“Mr. Douglas called on the President this evening, and
had an interesting conversation on the present condition of
the country. The substance of the conversation was that
while Mr. Douglas was unalterably opposed to the
administration on all its political issues, he was prepared to
sustain the President in the exercise of all his constitutional
functions to preserve the Union, and maintain the
government and defend the federal capital. A ﬁrm policy
and prompt action were necessary. The capital of our
country was in danger and must be defended at all hazards,
and at any expense of men or money. He spoke of the
present and future without reference to the past.”
The writer of the life of Mr. Lincoln and the chronicler of
the rebellion will ﬁnd few more delightful tasks than that of
recording the unwearied devotion of Mr. Douglas to the
cause of his country during the brief remainder of his life.
 He was done with his dreams of power, done with the
thought that compromise would save the country, and done,
for 
the 
time 
at 
least, 
with 
schemes 
for 
party
aggrandizement. Six days after his interview with Mr.
Lincoln he was on his way home, and at Bellair, Ohio, he
was called out to make a speech. All parties received him
with the greatest enthusiasm, and every word he uttered
had the genuine ring of patriotism. Subsequently he
addressed the legislature of Illinois, at Springﬁeld, and his
own fellow-citizens at Chicago. The old party talk and the
old party policy were all forgotten, and only the sturdy,
enthusiastic patriot spoke. In one of the last letters he ever
wrote he said: “We should never forget that a man cannot
be a true democrat unless he is a loyal patriot.” In May he
became sick, and on the third of June he died. In the low
delirium that attended his disease he talked of nothing but
his country, and almost his last coherent words were
shaped to a wish for its honor and prosperity, through the
defeat and dispersion of its enemies.
Mr. Lincoln felt his death as a calamity. He had been of
great service to him in unveiling the designs of the rebels,
and in bringing to the support of the government an
element which a word from him at a favorable moment
would have alienated. He freely said that he regarded Mr.
Douglas as one of his best and most valuable friends.
To 
those 
who 
are 
curious 
in 
marking 
strange
coincidences, it will be interesting to remember that just
four years to an hour after Mr. Douglas parted with Mr.
Lincoln, at the close of the interview that has been
 described, Mr. Lincoln was slain by an assassin. Both died
with a common purpose uppermost in their minds, one in
the threatening morning of the rebellion, and the other
when its sun had just set in blood; and both sleep in the
dust of that magniﬁcent state almost every rod of which,
within a quarter of a century, had echoed to their
contending voices as they expounded their principles to the
people.
