  ha ter  III.
THE “SANGAMON CHIEF,” as Mr. Lincoln had been
popularly named, was placed upon the legislative ticket
again in 1840, and re-elected. At a special session of the
previous legislature, held during 1839, Vandalia as the
capital of the state had been forsaken, and Springﬁeld
received the legislature and the archives and oﬀices of the
state government. Mr. Lincoln was in the legislature, and,
at the same time, at home. The fact reconciled him to
holding an oﬀice which he felt to be a disadvantage to his
business, for he could attend upon his duties at the State
House, and, at the same time, have a care that his
professional interests were not entirely sacriﬁced. In the
only session held by the legislature of 1840, no important
business 
of 
general 
interest 
was 
transacted. 
The
democratic preponderance in the state had been partially
restored and was still maintained, and although Mr. Lincoln
was again the ﬁrst man on the whig side and the candidate
for speaker, for which oﬀice he was supported by more
than the strength of his party, he was defeated as he had
been in 1838. This session ﬁnished up Mr. Lincoln’s
connection with the legislature of the state, for, a1though
urged 
by 
the 
people 
to 
represent 
them 
again,
considerations of a private nature made him peremptory in
his refusal to be again a candidate. It is recorded, however,
 that he was re-elected in 1854, and that he resigned before
taking his seat. The election was made against his will, for
a larger political life was already dawning upon him.
It was about this time that a strange incident in his
private life occurred — one, certainly, which was quite in
discord with his principles and feelings. A sharp, sarcastic
poem appeared in the Sangamon Journal, edited at that
time by Simeon Francis. The poem had an evident allusion
to James Shields, a young lawyer of Springﬁeld, and since a
United States Senator from Illinois. General Shields was at
that time hot-blooded and impulsive, and, instead of
laughing oﬀ the matter, regarded it seriously, and
demanded of Mr. Francis the author’s name. Mr. Francis
knew at once what the demand meant, and sought to delay
his answer. He asked the young man for a day to consider
whether he should reveal the name of his contributor or
not. The request was granted, when Mr. Francis went to
work to ascertain how he could lift the responsibility of the
publication from his own shoulders, as the writer of the
poem was a lady. On inquiry among the lady’s friends, he
ascertained that Mr. Lincoln was, at least, one of her
admirers, and that he possibly bore a tenderer relation to
her. Accordingly he went to Mr. Lincoln, and told him that
he was in trouble, and explained to him the cause of his
diﬀiculty. It seemed certain that somebody would be
obliged to ﬁght a duel with Mr. Shields, or be branded by
him as a coward; and Mr. Francis, though entirely
responsible for the publication of a lady’s poem shrank, in a
very unworthy way, from the alternative.
 As soon as Mr. Lincoln comprehended the case, and saw
what Mr. Francis expected of him, he told the editor that if
Mr. Shields should call again, and demand the author’s
name, to inform him that he, Lincoln, held himself
responsible for the poem. The result was just what was
expected, at least by Mr. Francis. Mr. Lincoln at once
received a challenge and accepted it. There must have
existed in that part of the country, at that time, a state of
feeling on this subject which cannot now be comprehended
among the people of the North. With a natural aversion to
all violence and bloodshed, with a moral sense that shrank
from the barbaric arbitrament of the duel, with his whole
soul at war with the policy which seeks to heal a wound of
honor by the commission of a crime, he walked with his
eyes wide open into this duel. It is possible that he
imagined Mr. Shields did not mean a duel by his question,
or that he would not ﬁght a duel with him; but he certainly
knew that he made himself liable to a challenge, and
intended to accept it if it came. Gallantry was, of course,
the moving power. The lady’s name was to be protected,
and the editor who had been imprudent enough to publish
her poem relieved from all responsibility on her account.
Mr. Lincoln selected broad-swords as the weapons for
the encounter, and immediately took instruction in the
exercise of that arm, of Dr. E.H. Merriman, a physician of
Springﬁeld. The place of meeting was Bloody Island, a
disputed or neutral territory on the Mississippi River, lying
between Illinois and Missouri. The meeting took place
according 
to 
appointment, 
but 
friends 
interfered,
 determined that on such foolish grounds no duel should be
fought, and no blood shed. The parties were brought
together, and a reconciliation easily eﬀected. Mr. Lincoln
felt afterwards that he could have done, under the
circumstances, no less than he did. He stated to a friend,
however, that he selected broad-swords because his arms
were long. He had not the slightest intention of injuring Mr.
Shields, and thought that the length of his arms would aid
him in defending his own person.
This incident does not seem to have been remembered
against Mr. Lincoln, by any class of the community in which
he lived. It was certainly a boyish aﬀair, and was probably
regarded and forgotten as such. Even the excitements of a
great political campaign, like that which resulted in his
election to the presidency, did not call it from its slumbers,
and the American people were spared a representation of
Mr. Lincoln’s atrocities as a duelist.
Mr. Lincoln’s law partnership with Mr. Stuart was
dissolved in 1840, when he immediately formed a business
association with Judge S.T. Logan of Springﬁeld, one of the
ablest and most learned lawyers in the state. He entered
upon this new partnership with a determination to devote
his time more exclusively to business than he had done, but
the people would not permit him to do so. He was called
upon from all quarters to engage in the exciting political
canvass of 1840, and made many speeches.
In 1842, having arrived at his thirty-third year, Mr.
Lincoln married Miss Mary Todd, a daughter of Hon.
Robert S. Todd of Lexington, Kentucky. The marriage took
 place in Springﬁeld, where the lady had for several years
resided, on the fourth of November of the year mentioned.
It is probable that he married as early as the circumstances
of his life permitted, for he had always loved the society of
women, and possessed a nature that took profound delight
in intimate female companionship. A letter written on the
eighteenth of May following his marriage, to J.F. Speed,
Esq., of Louisville, Kentucky, an early and a life-long
personal friend, gives a pleasant glimpse of his domestic
arrangements at this time. “We are not keeping house,” Mr.
Lincoln says in this letter, “but boarding at the Globe
Tavern, which is very well kept now by a widow lady of the
name of Beck. Our rooms are the same Dr. Wallace
occupied there, and boarding only costs four dollars a
week... I most heartily wish you and your Fanny will not fail
to come. Just let us know the time, a week in advance, and
we will have a room prepared for you, and we’ll all be
merry together for a while.” He seems to have been in
excellent spirits, and to have been very hearty in the
enjoyment of his new relation.
The private letters of Mr. Lincoln were charmingly
natural and sincere, and there can be no harm in giving a
passage from one written during these early years, as an
illustration. Mr. Lincoln has been charged with having no
strong personal attachments; but no one can read his
private letters, written at any time during his life, without
perceiving that his personal friendships were the sweetest
sources of his happiness. To a particular friend, he wrote
February 25th, 1842: “Yours of the sixteenth, announcing
 that Miss —— and you ‘are no longer twain but one ﬂesh,’
reached me this morning. I have no way of telling you how
much happiness I wish you both, though I believe you both
can conceive it. I feel somewhat jealous of both of you now,
for you will be so exclusively concerned for one another
that I shall be forgotten entirely. My acquaintance with
Miss —— (I call her thus lest you should think I am
speaking of your mother,) was too short for me to
reasonably hope to long be remembered by her; and still I
am sure I shall not forget her soon. Try if you cannot
remind her of that debt she owes me, and be sure you do
not interfere to prevent her paying it.
“I regret to learn that you have resolved not to return to
Illinois. I shall be very lonesome without you. How
miserably things seem to be arranged in this world! If we
have no friends we have no pleasure; and if we have them,
we are sure to lose them, and be doubly pained by the loss.
I did hope she and you would make your home here, yet I
own I have no right to insist. You owe obligations to her ten
thousand times more sacred than any you can owe to
others, and in that light let them be respected and
observed. It is natural that she should desire to remain with
her relations and friends. As to friends, she could not need
them anywhere; — she would have them in abundance
here. Give my kind regards to Mr. —— and his family,
particularly to Miss E. Also to your mother, brothers and
sisters. Ask little E. D — if she will ride to town with me if I
come there again. And, ﬁnally, give —— a double
 reciprocation of all the love she sent me. Write me often,
and believe me, yours forever, LINCOLN.”
The 
kind 
feeling, 
the 
delicate 
playfulness, 
the
considerate remembrance of all who were associated with
the recipient of the missive, and the hearty, outspoken
aﬀection which this letter breathes, reveal a sound and true
heart in the writer. It is true, indeed, that Mr. Lincoln had a
friendly feeling toward everybody; and it is just as true that
his personal friendships were as devoted and unselﬁsh as
those of a man of more exclusive feelings and more
abounding prejudices.
Mr. Lincoln seems to have been thinking about a seat in
Congress at this time. On the 24th of March, 1843, he
wrote to his friend Speed: “We had a meeting of the whigs
of the county here on last Monday, to appoint delegates to a
district convention, and Baker beat me, and got the
delegation instructed to go for him. The meeting, in spite of
my attempt to decline it, appointed me one of the
delegates, so that, in getting Baker the nomination, I shall
be ‘ﬁxed’ a good deal like a fellow who is made groomsman
to the man who has ‘cut him out,’ and is marrying his own
dear gal.”
In a subsequent letter, he writes: “In regard to the
Congress matter here, you were right in supposing I would
support the nominee. Neither Baker nor myself however,
will be the man, but Hardin.”
It was Mr. Lincoln’s rule and habit to “support the
nominee.” He was always a loyal party man. In the ordinary
use of the word, Mr. Lincoln was not, and never became, a
 reformer. He believed that a man, in order to eﬀect
anything, should work through organizations of men. In a
eulogy upon Henry Clay which he delivered in 1852, occurs
the following passage: “A free people, in times of peace and
quiet, when pressed by no common danger, naturally divide
into parties. At such times, the man who is not of either
party, is not, cannot be, of any consequence. Mr. Clay,
therefore, was of a party.” Whether his position was sound
or otherwise, he believed it was, and always acted upon it.
With as true a love of freedom and progress as any man —
with a regard for popular rights never surpassed by
professional reformers — he was careful to go no faster,
and no farther, than he could take his party with him, and
no faster and no farther than was consistent with that
party’s permanent success. He would endanger nothing by
precipitancy. His policy was to advance surely, even if he
was 
obliged 
to 
proceed 
slowly. 
The 
policy 
which
distinguished his presidential career was the policy of his
life. It was adopted early, and he always followed it.
With Mr. Lincoln’s modest estimate of his own services,
and with his friendly feelings toward all, it is not to be
wondered at that he never made much money. It was not
possible for him to regard his clients simply in the light of
business. An unfortunate man was a subject of his
sympathy, no matter what his business relations to him
might be. A Mr. Cogdal, who related the incident to the
writer, met with a ﬁnancial wreck in 1843. He employed
Mr. Lincoln as his lawyer, and at the close of the business,
gave him a note to cover the regular lawyer’s fees. He was
 soon afterwards blown up by an accidental discharge of
powder, and lost his hand. Meeting Mr. Lincoln some time
after the accident, on the steps of the State House, the kind
lawyer asked him how he was getting along. “Badly
enough,” replied Mr. Cogdal, “I am both broken up in
business, and crippled.” Then he added, “I have been
thinking about that note of yours.” Mr. Lincoln, who had
probably known all about Mr. Cogdal’s troubles, and had
prepared himself for the meeting, took out his pocket-book,
and saying with a laugh, “well, you needn’t think any more
about it,” handed him the note. Mr. Cogdal protesting, Mr.
Lincoln said “if you had the money, I would not take it,” and
hurried away. At this same date, he was frankly writing
about his poverty to his friends. as a reason for not making
them a visit, and probably found it no easy task to take care
of his family, even when board at the Globe Tavern was
“only four dollars a week.”
In the active discharge of the duties or his profession, in
the enjoyments of his new domestic life, and in the
intrigues of local politics, as betrayed in his letter to Mr.
Speed, the months passed away, and brought Mr. Lincoln to
the great political contest of 1844. Henry Clay, his political
idol was the candidate of the whig party for the presidency,
and he went into the canvass with his whole heart. As a
candidate for presidential elector, he canvassed the state of
Illinois, and afterwards went over into Indiana, and made a
series of speeches there. The result of this great campaign
to 
Mr. 
Clay 
and 
to 
the 
whig 
party 
was 
a 
sad
disappointment. Probably no defeat of a great party ever
 brought to its members so much personal sorrow as this.
Mr. Clay had the power of exciting an enthusiastic aﬀection
for his person that few political men have enjoyed. The
women of the country were as much interested in his
election as their brothers and husbands were, and wept at
his defeat as if he had been their best and most intimate
friend. Mr. Lincoln was among the heartiest of these
mourners; but, while the event rendered his great political
exemplar a hopeless man politically, the canvass itself had
raised Mr. Lincoln to the proudest hight he had occupied.
He had greatly strengthened the whig organization in the
state, and had established his reputation as one of the most
powerful political debaters in the country. His exposition of
the protective system of duties, which was the principal
issue of the canvass, was elaborate and powerful. He had
thoroughly mastered his subject, and his arguments are
still remembered for the copiousness of their facts, and the
closeness and soundness of their logic.
Mr. Clay’s defeat was the more a matter or sorrow with
Mr. Lincoln because it was, in a measure, unexpected. No
personal defeat could have been more dispiriting to him
than this failure before the people of his political idol. He
was not only disappointed but disgusted. With his strong
convictions of the soundness of the principles of the whig
party, and his belief in the almost immeasurable superiority
of Mr. Clay over Mr. Polk, he doubtless had the same
misgivings that have come to others, touching the capacity
of the people for self-government, and realized the same
distrust of the value of honors which could be so unworthily
 bestowed. It was to him a popular decision in the cause of
political iniquity and bad government. It was not strange,
therefore, in the ﬁrst gush of his disappointment, that he
made a new resolution to let politics alone, and attend
more devotedly to the duties of his profession. But Mr.
Lincoln’s ambition, and Mr. Lincoln’s friends, more
powerful than his ambition, were not likely to permit this
resolution to have a permanent inﬂuence upon his career.
Subsequently, Mr. Lincoln paid a personal visit to Mr.
Clay, and it is possible that he needed the inﬂuence of this
visit to restore a healthy tone to his feelings, and to teach
him that the person whom his imagination had transformed
into a demigod was only a man, possessing the full measure
of weaknesses common to men. In 1846, Mr. Lincoln
learned that Mr. Clay had agreed to deliver a speech at
Lexington, Kentucky, in favor of gradual emancipation. He
had never seen the great Kentuckian, and this event
seemed to give him an excuse for breaking away from his
business, and satisfying his curiosity to look his demigod in
the face, and hear the music of his eloquence. He
accordingly went to Lexington, and arrived there in time to
attend the meeting.
On returning to his home from this visit, he did not
attempt to disguise his disappointment. The speech itself
was written and read. It lacked entirely the spontaneity and
ﬁre which Mr. Lincoln had anticipated, and was not
eloquent at all. At the close of the meeting Mr. Lincoln
secured an introduction to the great orator, and as Mr. Clay
knew what a friend to him Mr. Lincoln had been, he invited
 his admirer and partisan to Ashland. No invitation could
have delighted Mr. Lincoln more, but the result of his
private interview with Mr. Clay was no more satisfactory
than that which followed the speech. Those who have
known both men, will not wonder at this, for two men could
hardly be more unlike in their motives and manners than
the two thus brought together. One was a proud man; the
other was a humble man. One was princely in his bearing;
the other was lowly. One was distant and digniﬁed; the
other was as simple and teachable as a child. One received
the deference of men as his due; the other received it with
an uncomfortable sense of his unworthiness.
A friend of Mr. Lincoln, who had a long conversation with
him after his return from Ashland, found that his old
enthusiasm was gone. Mr. Lincoln said that though Mr. Clay
was most polished in his manners, and very hospitable, he
betrayed a consciousness of superiority that none could
mistake. He felt that Mr. Clay did not regard him, or any
other person in his presence, as, in any sense, on an
equality with him. In short, he thought that Mr. Clay was
overbearing and domineering, and that, while he was
apparently kind, it was in that magniﬁcent and patronizing
way which made a sensitive man uncomfortable.
It is quite possible that Mr. Lincoln needed to experience
this disappointment, and to be taught this lesson. It was,
perhaps, the only instance in his life in which he had given
his whole heart to a man without knowing him, or been
carried away by his imagination into an unbounded zeal on
behalf of a personal stranger. It made him more cautious in
 the bestowal of his love. He was, certainly, from that time
forward, more careful to look on all sides of a man, and on
all sides of a subject, before yielding to either his devotion,
than ever before. If he became slow in moving, it was
because he saw more than his own side of every case and
question, and recognized, in advance, such obstacles as
would be certain to impede his progress.
Much has been said of Mr. Lincoln’s kindness, and many
suppose that he was not brave — that his patient and
universal love of men was inconsistent with those sterner
qualities which are necessary to make, not only a true hero,
but a true man. An incident occurred during the Clay
campaign which shows how ill-founded this estimate of Mr.
Lincoln is. On the occasion of a great mass convention at
Springﬁeld, U.F. Linder, Esq., now a resident of Chicago,
and a man of rare eloquence, made a speech which seemed
to rouse the enthusiasm of the assemblage to the highest
pitch. The speech was very oﬀensive to some of the
democrats who were present — who, indeed, proposed to
make a personal matter of it. Mr. Linder being called out
again, in the course of the meeting, was considered in
personal danger, if he should attempt to respond. At this
juncture, Mr. Lincoln and Colonel Baker took their places
by his side, and, when he ﬁnished, conducted him to his
hotel. The ruﬀians knew both men, and prudently refrained
from interfering with them. On a previous occasion, Mr.
Lincoln had protected the person of Colonel Baker himself.
Baker was speaking in a court-house, which had once been
a store-house, and, on making some remarks that were
 oﬀensive to certain political rowdies in the crowd, they
cried: “take him oﬀ the stand.” Immediate confusion
ensued, and there was an attempt to carry the demand into
execution. Directly over the speaker’s head was an old
scuttle, at which it appeared Mr. Lincoln had been listening
to the speech. In an instant, Mr. Lincoln’s feet came
through the scuttle, followed by his tall and sinewy frame,
and he was standing by Colonel Baker’s side. He raised his
hand, and the assembly subsided immediately into silence.
“Gentlemen,” said Mr. Lincoln, “let us not disgrace the age
and country in which live. This is a land where freedom of
speech is guaranteed. Mr. Baker has a right to speak, and
ought to be permitted to do so. I am here to protect him,
and no man shall take him from this stand if I can prevent
it.” The suddenness of his appearance, his perfect calmness
and fairness, and the knowledge that he would do what he
had promised to do, quieted all disturbance, and the
speaker concluded his remarks without diﬀiculty.
Mr. Lincoln has already been spoken of as a strong party
man, and his thorough devotion to his party, on some
occasions, 
though 
very 
rarely, 
led 
him 
into 
hasty
expressions and hasty actions, quite out of harmony with
his usual self-poise and good nature. A scene occurred in
the room occupied by Mr. Lincoln and his particular friend,
Judge Davis, at Paris, on one occasion, which illustrates
this. There was present, as a visitor, a young lawyer of the
name of Constable, a gentleman of ﬁne abilities, and at
present a judge of the circuit court. Mr. Constable was a
whig, but had probably been disappointed in some of his
 political aspirations, and did not feel that the party had
treated him fairly. He was in the habit of speaking
disparagingly of the policy of the party in the treatment of
its own friends, and particularly of its young men,
especially when he found whig leaders to listen to him. On
this occasion he charged the party with being “old fogyish,”
and indiﬀerent to rising men, while the democratic party
was lauded for the contrast which it presented in this
particular. Mr. Lincoln felt the charge as keenly as if it had
been a personal one. Indeed, his own experience disproved
the whole statement. Constable went on, and charged the
whig party with ingratitude and neglect in his own case.
Mr. Lincoln stood with his coat oﬀ, shaving himself before
his glass. He had heard the charges without saying a word,
but when Mr. Constable alluded to himself as having been
badly treated, he turned ﬁercely upon him, and said, “Mr.
Constable, I understand you perfectly, and have noticed for
some time back that you have been slowly and cautiously
picking your way over to the democratic party.” Both men
were angry, and it required the eﬀorts of all the others
present to keep them from ﬁghting. Mr. Lincoln seemed for
a time, as one of the spectators of the scene remarks, to be
“terribly willing.” Such instances as this have been very
rare in Mr. Lincoln’s life, and the fact that he was
susceptible to the inﬂuence of such motives renders his
notorious equanimity of temper all the more creditable to
him. The matter was adjusted between him and Mr.
Constable, and, not long afterwards, the latter justiﬁed Mr.
 Lincoln’s interpretation of his motives, and was numbered
among the democrats.
