  ha ter  II.
ONE OF THE most remarkable passages in Mr. Lincoln’s
history was his contest with Senator Douglas, in 1858, for
the seat in the United States Senate which was soon to be
vacated by the expiration of the term for which the latter
was elected. Frequent allusion has been made to this
already; but before proceeding to its description something
further should be said of Mr. Douglas himself.
Mr. Douglas was but little more than twenty years of age
when, in 1833, he entered Illinois. He was poor —
penniless, indeed. The ﬁrst money he earned in the state
was as the clerk of an auction sale. His next essay was in
teaching school. He began to practice law during the
second year, and at the age of twenty-two was elected
Attorney General of the state. He resigned this oﬀice in
1835, and was elected a member of the legislature. It was
here that he and Abraham Lincoln met for the ﬁrst time. In
1837, before he was twenty-ﬁve years old, he received the
democratic nomination for Congress, and was only beaten
by a majority of ﬁve votes. In 1840, he was appointed
secretary of the state of Illinois, and in 1843 he was elected
to Congress, and re-elected in 1844 and 1846. Before he
took his seat under the last election, he was elected to the
United States Senate; and his second term of service in this
 august body was about expiring at the present point of this
history.
The career of Mr. Douglas had been one of almost
uninterrupted political success. He was the recognized
leader of the democratic party of Illinois, and had been
known and felt as a positive power in national legislation.
He had very decided opinions upon all the great questions
passed upon by Congress, and, though not unfrequently at
variance with the administrations he had himself assisted
to place in power, his inﬂuence was great in whatever
direction he might choose to exert it. He accomplished
much in establishing and nourishing the prosperity of
Illinois. No man did so much as Mr. Douglas for securing
those magniﬁcent grants of land which contributed to the
development of his adopted state. To the material interests
of Illinois, and the preservation of the power of the
democratic party in that state, he was thoroughly devoted;
and that party honored him with its entire conﬁdence and
almost unquestioning support. He was their ﬁrst man; and
they bestowed upon him, during his life, more honor than
they ever gave to any other man living on their territory.
Mr. Lincoln had watched this man, with admiration for
his tact and respect for his power with the people. He had
seen him winning the highest honors in their gift, and, if he
did not envy him, it was not because he was not ambitious.
It was because nothing so mean as envy could have place in
him. That he regarded Mr. Douglas as an unscrupulous man
in the use of means for securing his ambitious ends, there
is no doubt; and although he would have refused honor and
 oﬀice on the terms on which Mr. Douglas received them, he
was much impressed by the dignities with which the
Senator was invested, and felt that the power he held was a
precious, aye, a priceless, possession.
From the original manuscript of one of Mr. Lincoln’s
speeches, these words are transferred to this biography:
“Twenty-two years ago, Judge Douglas and I ﬁrst became
acquainted. We were both young then — he a triﬂe younger
than I. Even then we were both ambitious, — I, perhaps,
quite as much so as he. With me, the race of ambition has
been a failure — a ﬂat failure; with him, it has been one of
splendid success. His name ﬁlls the nation, and is not
unknown even in foreign lands. I aﬀect no contempt for the
high eminence he has reached. So reached that the
oppressed of my species might have shared with me in the
elevation, I would rather stand on that eminence than wear
the richest crown that ever pressed a monarch’s brow.”
This extract touches the points of similarity between the
two men, and their points of diﬀerence. Mr. Lincoln was far
from insensible to the honors of Mr. Douglas’ position; but
he would not have them at the price Mr. Douglas had paid
for them. The oppressed of his species had not shared with
Mr. Douglas in his elevation. The slave had had none of his
consideration; and he was in league with the slave’s
oppressor. It would not have been pleasant to Mr. Lincoln
to wear the honors of Mr. Douglas, if, with them, he had
been obliged to carry the responsibility of extending or
giving latitude and lease to an institution which made
chattels of men. Mr. Douglas looked upon slavery either
 with indiﬀerence or approval. He had publicly said that he
did not care whether slavery was “voted up or voted down”
in the territories. Mr. Lincoln regarded slavery as a great
moral, social and political wrong. Here was the vital
diﬀerence between the two, recognized as such by Mr.
Lincoln himself.
After the adoption of the Lecompton Constitution in
Kansas, Mr. Douglas having foreseen its character, and
having virtually committed himself to it in advance —
having, indeed, undertaken to make the republican party
morally responsible for its existence and adoption, a
change seems to have come over his opinions. Before he
departed for Washington, to attend the session of 1857 and
1858, it was whispered that he was about to break with the
administration on the Lecompton business. It is always
pleasant to give men credit for the best motives; and those
under which he acted may have been the best. To oppose
that constitution was certainly not inconsistent with his pet
doctrine “popular sovereignty” when taken by itself, for
nothing was more easily demonstrable than the fact that
that constitution was not the act and deed of the people of
Kansas — that it was in no sense an expression of their will.
While this is true, it is proper to remember that Mr.
Douglas was shrewd enough to see that he could not carry
the burden of the Lecompton Constitution through the
canvass for the senatorial prize, then imminent. The
outrage was too ﬂagrant to be ignored, and the facts too
notorious to be disputed. He was also shrewd enough to
see that his opposition to the Lecompton fraud would take
 from the republican party some of its best capital, and
greatly distract the opposition in their eﬀorts to defeat him.
During that session of Congress Mr. Douglas fought a
gallant and manly ﬁght against the administration on the
Lecompton question, and, on that question, voted and
labored with the republicans. It was a bold step. Without
Mr. Douglas, it is easy to see that the Lecompton
Constitution would have been impossible. He voluntarily
threw open the territory to this outrage. Then he tried to
kill his own legitimate child. He forsook the men whom he
had led into the great iniquity. The republicans were
grateful for his aid, and were naturally drawn to him in
sympathy because, for his eﬀorts on behalf of justice in
Kansas, he had incurred the enmity of Mr. Buchanan, who
was regarded as a most willing tool in the hands of the
slave power.
The democratic state convention of Illinois assembled on
the 21st of April, 1858, and endorsed Mr. Douglas in his
position as an anti-Lecompton man. They placed a state
ticket in the ﬁeld, and engineered the canvass with such
skill and vigor that the administration, through its oﬀice-
holders, could make no headway against them. The power
of Mr. Douglas over the politicians and masses in his own
state, was never better illustrated than during this
campaign, 
when 
all 
the 
patronage 
of 
the 
federal
government could do nothing to defeat him. Before the
close of the session, Mr. Douglas went home to look after
his interests, and to prepare for the great campaign of his
life.
 A large number of republicans in the eastern states who
had not known Mr. Douglas at home, and who had
witnessed his bold and gallant ﬁght with the administration
and the slave-power in the senate, expressed the wish that
their friends in Illinois might ﬁnd it in the line of their duty
to aid in returning him to the senate. The republicans of
Illinois, however, felt that they knew the man better, and
that their duty did not lie in that direction at all. They
urged that Mr. Douglas did not agree with them in a single
point of doctrine — that he had diﬀered with the
administration merely on a question of fact, whether the
Lecompton Constitution was the act and deed of the people
of Kansas. They averred that he adhered to the outrageous
decision of the Supreme Court in the Dred Scott case —
that a negro cannot sue in a United States court, and that
Congress cannot prohibit slavery in the territories — and
that they dared not trust Mr. Douglas. To this it was replied
that Mr. Douglas was coming over to the republican party
as fast as he could carry his followers with him, and that
his extraordinary hold upon the masses of the democratic
party at the North would enable him to bring to the
republican ranks a reinforcement which would prove
irresistible at the approaching presidential election. The
rejoinder of the Illinois republicans was that the probability
of any sincere change of faith in Mr. Douglas was too
remote and uncertain to warrant them in abandoning an
organization which had been formed to advance a great
and just cause, and Which, once dissolved, could not be re-
formed in time to render eﬀicient service in the election of
 1860. Quite a controversy grew out of the diﬀerences
between the Illinois republicans and their eastern advisers,
and no small degree of bitterness was engendered. The
party in Illinois was nearly a unit in its views, but the
controversy had undoubtedly the inﬂuence to loosen the
hold of the organization upon some of its members. The
eﬀect was temporary, however, for the issues of the
campaign 
were 
so 
thoroughly 
discussed, 
and 
the
discussions themselves were so generally listened to, or
read in the journals of the day, that it is doubtful whether
Mr. Douglas gained any appreciable advantage from the
controversy, or the sympathy of republicans in other states.
The republican state convention met at Springﬁeld on
the sixteenth of June, nearly two months after the
assembling of the democratic convention. Aside from the
senatorial question, there was but little interest in the
proceedings. For state oﬀicers, only a treasurer and a
superintendent of public instruction were to be nominated,
and, besides these oﬀicers, only the members of a
legislature were to be elected. Nearly six hundred
delegates were present in the convention, and they, with
their alternates, completed a round thousand of earnest
men, gathered from all parts of the state. The ﬁfth
resolution adopted on this occasion covers the grand issue
made with Judge Douglas.
“That while we deprecate all interference on the part of
political organizations with the judiciary, if such action is
limited to its appropriate sphere, yet we cannot refrain
from expressing our condemnation of the principles and
 tendencies of the extra-judicial opinions of a majority of the
Judges of the Supreme Court of the United States, in the
matter of Dred Scott, wherein the political heresy is put
forth that the federal constitution extends slavery into all
the territories of the Republic, and so maintains it that
neither Congress nor the people through the territorial
legislature can by law abolish it. We hold that Congress
possesses sovereign power over the territories, and has the
right to govern and control them whilst they remain in a
territorial condition, and that it is the duty of the general
government to protect the territories from the curse of
slavery, and to preserve the public domain for the
occupation of free men and free labor; and we declare that
no power on earth can carry and maintain slavery in the
states against the will of their people and the provisions of
their constitutions and laws; and we fully indorse the
recent decision of the Supreme Court of our own state,
which declares that property in persons is repugnant to the
Constitution and laws of Illinois, and that all persons within
its jurisdiction are presumed to be free, and that slavery,
where it exists, is a municipal regulation, without any
extra-territorial operation.”
If there were men in the convention who had at ﬁrst been
aﬀected by the representations of the republicans in the
eastern states, the action of the democratic convention
which met in April had restored their determination to
stand by their party and its candidates. That convention
had denounced the republicans, had indorsed the old
democratic platform of the party adopted at Cincinnati in
 national convention, and, while it approved the course of
Senator Douglas, failed to say one word in condemnation of
the course and principles, or, rather, lack of principles, of
Mr. Buchanan and his administration. The republican
convention had hardly assembled before it was discovered
that there was entire unanimity for Mr. Lincoln, as their
nominee in opposition to Mr. Douglas. When a banner from
Chicago was borne into the convention, inscribed with the
words— “Cook County for Abraham Lincoln” — the whole
convention rose to its feet, and gave three cheers for the
candidate whom it was proposed to place in the ﬁeld in
opposition to the champion of “popular sovereignty.” That
the convention was embarrassed and doubtful as to results,
there is no question. Mr. Douglas had the sympathy of
many republicans abroad, he had attacked a hated
administration with great vigor and persistence, he had the
enmity of that administration, and, in the state, he had the
advantage of an unjust apportionment of legislative
districts, by which not less than ninety-three thousand
people were virtually disfranchised. Though it was not
according to the wish of many of the members of the
convention to make a formal nomination for the senate, yet,
as Mr. Douglas had already declared that it was the
intention to use Mr. Lincoln’s name during the canvass, and
to adopt another name in the legislature, the following
resolution was brought forward, and unanimously adopted:
“That Hon. Abraham Lincoln is our ﬁrst and only choice
for United States Senator, to ﬁll the vacancy about to be
created by the expiration of Mr. Douglas’ term of oﬀice.”
 The anxiety of the convention to see and hear their
chosen man and champion was intense; and frequent calls
were made for him during the day. That Mr. Lincoln
expected the nomination, and had prepared himself for it,
is evident. It was announced at length that he would
address the members of the convention at the State House
in the evening. During the day, he was busy in giving the
ﬁnishing touches to his speech, which had been prepared
with unusual care, every sentence having been carefully
weighed. He had put into it what he believed to be the real
issues of the campaign, and had laid out in it the ground
upon which he proposed to stand, and ﬁght his battles.
Before going to the hall, he entered his law oﬀice, where
Mr. Herndon, his partner, was sitting, and turned the key
against all intrusion. Taking out his manuscript, he read to
Mr. Herndon the ﬁrst paragraph of his speech, and asked
him for his opinion of it. Mr. Herndon replied that it was all
true, but he doubted whether it was good policy to give it
utterance at that time. “That makes no diﬀerence,”
responded Mr. Lincoln. “It is the truth, and the nation is
entitled to it.” Then, alluding to a quotation which he had
made from the Bible— “A house divided against itself
cannot stand,” he said that he wished to give an illustration
familiar to all, “that he who reads may run.” “The
proposition is true,” said Mr. Lincoln, “and has been true
for six thousand years, and I will deliver it as it is written.”
At eight o’clock, the hall of the House of Representatives
was ﬁlled to its utmost capacity, and when Mr. Lincoln
appeared he was received with the most tumultuous
 applause. The speech which he made on that occasion is so
full of meaning, so fraught with prophecy, so keen in its
analysis, so irresistible in its logic, so profoundly intelligent
concerning the politics of the time, and, withal, so
condensed in the expression of every part, that no proper
idea can be given of it through any description or
abbreviation. It must be given entire.
Mr. Lincoln said:
“If We could ﬁrst know where we are, and whither we are
tending. we could better judge what to do, and how to do it.
We are now far into the ﬁfth year, since a policy was
initiated with the avowed object and conﬁdent promise of
putting an end to slavery agitation. Under the operation of
that policy, that agitation has not only not ceased, but has
constantly augmented. In my opinion, it will not cease, until
a crisis shall have been reached and passed. ‘A house
divided 
against 
itself 
cannot 
stand.’ 
I 
believe 
this
government cannot endure permanently half slave and half
free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved — I do not
expect the house to fall — but I do expect it will cease to be
divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other. Either
the opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it,
and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief
that it is in the course of ultimate extinction; or its
advocates will push it forward, till it shall become alike
lawful in all the states, old as well as new — North as well
as South.
“Have we no tendency to the latter condition?
 “Let any one who doubts, carefully contemplate that now
almost complete legal combination-piece of machinery, so
to speak — compounded of the Nebraska doctrine, and the
Dred Scott decision. Let him consider not only what work
the machinery is adapted to do, and how well adapted; but
also, let him study the history of its construction, and trace,
if he can, or rather fail, if he can, to trace the evidences of
design, and concert of action among its chief architects,
from the beginning.
“The new year of 1854 found slavery excluded from more
than half the states by State Constitutions, and from most
of the national territory by Congressional prohibition. Four
days later, commenced the struggle which ended in
repealing that Congressional prohibition. This opened all
the national territory to slavery, and was the ﬁrst point
gained.
“But, 
so 
far, 
Congress 
only 
had 
acted; 
and 
an
indorsement by the people, real or apparent, was
indispensable, to save the point already gained, and give
chance for more.
“This necessity had not been overlooked; but had been
provided for, as well as might be, in the notable argument
of ‘squatter sovereignty,’ otherwise called ‘sacred right of
self-government,’ which latter phrase, though expressive of
the only rightful basis of any government, was so perverted
in this attempted use of it as to amount to just this: That if
any one man choose to enslave another, no third man shall
be allowed to object. That argument was incorporated into
the Nebraska bill itself, in the language which follows: ‘It
 being the true intent and meaning of this act not to
legislate slavery into any territory or state, nor to exclude it
therefrom; but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to
form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own
way, subject only to the Constitution of the United States.’
Then opened the roar of loose declamation in favor of
‘squatter 
sovereignty,’ 
and 
‘sacred 
right 
of 
self-
government.’ ‘But,’ said opposition members, ‘let us amend
the bill so as to expressly declare that the people of the
territory may exclude slavery.’ ‘Not we,’ said the friends of
the measure; and down they voted the amendment.
“While the Nebraska bill was passing through Congress,
a law case involving the question of a negro’s freedom, by
reason of his owner having voluntarily taken him ﬁrst into a
free state and then into a territory covered by the
Congressional prohibition, and held him as a slave for a
long time in each, was passing through the United States
Circuit Court for the District of Missouri; and both
Nebraska bill and lawsuit Were brought to a decision in the
same month of May, 1854. The negro’s name was ‘Dred
Scott,’ which name now designates the decision ﬁnally
made in the case. Before the then next presidential
election, the law case came to, and was argued in the
Supreme Court of the United States: but the decision of it
was deferred until after the election. Still, before the
election. Senator Trumbull, on the ﬂoor of the Senate,
requested the leading advocate of the Nebraska bill to state
his opinion whether the people of a territory can
 constitutionally exclude slavery from their limits; and the
latter answers, “That is a question for the Supreme Court.’
“The election came. Mr. Buchanan was elected, and the
indorsement, such as it was, secured. That was the second
point gained. The indorsement, however, fell short of a
clear popular majority by nearly four hundred thousand
votes, and so, perhaps. was not overwhelmingly reliable
and satisfactory. The outgoing President, in his last annual
message, as impressively as possible echoed back upon the
people the weight and authority of the indorsement. The
Supreme Court met again; did not announce their decision,
but ordered a re-argument. The presidential inauguration
came, and still no decision of the court; but the incoming
president in his inaugural address fervently exhorted the
people to abide by the forthcoming decision, whatever it
might be. Then, in a few days, came the decision.
“The reputed author of the Nebraska bill ﬁnds an early
occasion to make a speech at this capital indorsing the
Dred Scott decision, and vehemently denouncing all
opposition to it. The new president, too, seizes the early
occasion of the Silliman letter to indorse and strongly
construe that decision, and to express his astonishment
that any diﬀerent view had ever been entertained!
“At length a squabble springs up between the president
and the author of the Nebraska bill, on the mere question
of fact, whether the Lecompton Constitution was or was
not, in any just sense, made by the people of Kansas; and in
that quarrel the latter declares that all he wants is a fair
vote for the people, and that he cares not whether slavery
 be voted down or voted up. I do not understand his
declaration that he cares not whether slavery be voted
down or voted up to be intended by him other than as an
apt deﬁnition of the policy he would impress upon the
public mind — the principle for which he declares he has
suﬀered so much, and is ready to suﬀer to the end. And
well may he cling to that principle. If he has any parental
feeling, well may he cling to it. That principle is the only
shred left of his original Nebraska doctrine. Under the
Dred Scott decision squatter sovereignty squatted out of
existence, tumbled down like temporary scaﬀolding — like
the mould at the foundry, served through one blast and fell
back into loose sand — helped to carry an election, and
then was kicked to the winds. His late joint struggle with
the republicans, against the Lecompton Constitution,
involves nothing of the original Nebraska doctrine. That
struggle was made on a point — the right of a people to
make their own constitution — upon which he and the
republicans have never diﬀered.
“The several points of the Dred Scott decision, in
connection with Senator Douglas’ ‘care not’ policy,
constitute the piece of machinery, in its present state of
advancement. This was the third point gained. The working
points of that machinery are:
“First, That no negro slave, imported as such from Africa,
and no descendant of such slave, can ever be a citizen of
any state, in the sense of that term as used in the
Constitution of the United States. This point is made in
order to deprive the negro, in every possible event, of the
 beneﬁt of that provision of the United States Constitution,
which declares that ‘The citizens of each state shall be
entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the
several states.’
“Secondly, That ‘subject to the Constitution of the United
States,’ neither Congress nor a territorial legislature can
exclude slavery from any United States territory. This point
is made in order that individual men may ﬁll up the
territories with slaves, without danger of losing them as
property, and thus to enhance the chances of permanency
to the institution through all the future.
“Thirdly, That whether the holding a negro in actual
slavery in a free state, makes him free, as against the
holder, the United States courts will not decide, but will
leave to be decided by the courts of any slave state the
negro may be forced into by the master. This point is made,
not to be pressed immediately; but, if acquiesced in for
awhile, and apparently indorsed by the people at an
election, then to sustain the logical conclusion that what
Dred Scott’s master might lawfully do with Dred Scott, in
the free state of Illinois, every other master may lawfully do
with any other one, or one thousand slaves, in Illinois, or in
any other free state.
“Auxiliary to all this, and working hand in hand with it,
the Nebraska doctrine, or what is left of it, is to educate
and mould public opinion, at least northern public opinion,
not to care whether slavery is voted down or voted up. This
shows exactly where we now are; and partially, also,
whither we are tending.
 “It will throw additional light on the latter, to go back,
and run the mind over the string of historical facts already
stated. Several things will now appear less dark and
mysterious than they did when they were transpiring. The
people were to be left ‘perfectly free,’ ‘subject only to the
Constitution.’ What the Constitution had to do with it,
outsiders could not then see. Plainly enough now, it was an
exactly ﬁtted niche, for the Dred Scott decision to
afterward come in, and declare the perfect freedom of the
people to be just no freedom at all. Why was the
amendment, expressly declaring the right of the people,
voted down? Plainly enough now: the adoption of it would
have spoiled the niche for the Dred Scott decision. Why
was the court decision held up? Why even a senator’s
individual opinion withheld, till after the presidential
election? Plainly enough now: the speaking out then would
have damaged the perfectly free argument upon which the
election was to be carried. Why the out-going president’s
felicitation on the indorsement? Why the delay of a re-
argument? 
Why 
the 
incoming 
president’s 
advance
exhortation in favor of the decision? These things look like
the cautious patting and petting of a spirited horse
preparatory to mounting him, when it is dreaded that he
may give the rider a fall. And why the hasty after-
indorsement of the decision by the president and others?
“We cannot absolutely know that all these exact
adaptations are the result of preconcert. But when we see a
lot of framed timbers, diﬀerent portions of which we know
have been gotten out at diﬀerent times and places and by
 diﬀerent workmen — Stephen, Franklin, Roger and James,
for instance — and when we see these timbers joined
together, and see they exactly make the frame of a house or
a mill, all the tenons and mortices exactly ﬁtting, and all
the lengths and proportions of the diﬀerent pieces exactly
adapted to their respective places, and not a piece too
many or too few — not omitting even scaﬀolding — or, if a
single piece be lacking, we see the place in the frame
exactly ﬁtted and prepared yet to bring such piece in — in
such a case, we ﬁnd it impossible not to believe that
Stephen and Franklin and Roger and James all understood
one another from the beginning, and all worked upon a
common plan or draft drawn up before the ﬁrst blow was
struck.
“It should not be overlooked that, by the Nebraska bill,
the people of a state as well as territory, were to be left
‘perfectly free,’ ‘subject only to the Constitution.’ Why
mention a state? They were legislating for territories, and
not for or about states. Certainly the people of a state are
and ought to be subject to the Constitution of the United
States; but why is mention of this lugged into this merely
territorial law? Why are the people of a territory and the
people of a state therein lumped together, and their
relation to the Constitution therein treated as being
precisely the same? While the opinion of the court, by Chief
Justice Taney, in the Dred Scott case, and the separate
opinions of all the concurring judges, expressly declare that
the Constitution of the United States neither permits
Congress nor a territorial legislature to exclude slavery
 from any United States territory, they all omit to declare
whether or not the same Constitution permits a state, or
the people of a state, to exclude it. Possibly, this is a mere
omission; but who can be quite sure, if McLean or Curtis
had sought to get into the opinion a declaration of
unlimited power in the people of a state to exclude slavery
from their limits, just as Chase and Mace sought to get
such declaration, in behalf of the people of a territory, into
the Nebraska bill; — I ask, who can be quite sure that it
would not have been voted down in the one case as it had
been in the other? The nearest approach to the point of
declaring the power of a state over slavery, is made by
Judge Nelson. He approaches it more than once, using the
precise idea, and almost the language, too, of the Nebraska
act. On one occasion, his exact language is, ‘except in cases
where the power is restrained by the Constitution of the
United States, the law of the state is supreme over the
subject of slavery within its jurisdiction.’ In what cases the
power of the states is so restrained by the United States
Constitution, is left an open question, precisely as the same
question as to the restraint on the power of the territories
was left open in the Nebraska act. Put this and that
together, and we have another nice little niche, which we
may, ere long, see ﬁlled with another Supreme Court
decision, declaring that the Constitution of the United
States does not permit a state to exclude slavery from its
limits. And this may especially be expected if the doctrine
of ‘care not whether slavery be voted down or voted up,’
 shall gain upon the public mind suﬀiciently to give promise
that such a decision can be maintained when made.
“Such a decision is all that slavery now lacks of being
alike lawful in all the states. Welcome, or unwelcome, such
decision is probably coming, and will soon be upon us,
unless the power of the present political dynasty shall be
met and overthrown. We shall lie down pleasantly dreaming
that the people of Missouri are on the verge of making their
state free, and we shall awake to the reality instead, that
the Supreme Court has made Illinois a slave state. To meet
and overthrow the power of that dynasty, is the work now
before all those who would prevent that consummation.
That is what we have to do. How can we best do it?
“There are those who denounce us openly to their own
friends, and yet whisper us softly that Senator Douglas is
the aptest instrument there is with which to eﬀect that
object. They wish us to infer all, from the fact that he now
has a little quarrel with the present head of the dynasty;
and that he has regularly voted with us on a single point,
upon which he and we have never diﬀered. They remind us
that he is a great man, and that the largest of us are very
small ones. Let this be granted. But ‘a living dog is better
than a dead lion.’ Judge Douglas, if not a dead lion, for this
work, is at least a caged and toothless one. How can he
oppose the advances of slavery? He don’t care anything
about it. His avowed mission is impressing the public heart
to care nothing about it. A leading Douglas democratic
newspaper thinks Douglas’ superior talent will be needed
to resist the revival of the African slave trade. Does
 Douglas 
believe 
an 
eﬀort 
to 
revive 
that 
trade 
is
approaching? He has not said so. Does he really think so?
But if it is, how can he resist it? For years he has labored to
prove it a sacred right of white men to take negro slaves
into the new territories. Can he possibly show that it is less
a sacred right to buy them where they can be bought
cheapest? And unquestionably they can be bought cheaper
in Africa than in Virginia. He has done all in his power to
reduce the whole question of slavery to one of a mere right
of property; and as such, how can he oppose the foreign
slave trade — how can he refuse that trade in that
‘property’ shall be ‘perfectly free’ — unless he does it as a
protection to the home production? And as the home
producers will probably not ask the protection, he will be
wholly without a ground of opposition.
“Senator Douglas holds, we know, that a man may
rightfully be wiser to-day than he was yesterday — that he
may rightfully change when he ﬁnds himself wrong. But
can we, for that reason, run ahead, and infer that he will
make any particular change of which he himself has given
no intimation? Can we safely base our action upon any such
vague inference? Now, as ever, I wish not to misrepresent
Judge Douglas’ position, question his motives, or do aught
that can be personally oﬀensive to him. Whenever, if ever,
he and we can come together on principle so that our cause
may have assistance from his great ability, I hope to have
interposed no adventitious obstacle. But clearly, he is not
now with us — he does not pretend to be — he does not
promise ever to be.
 “Our cause, then, must be intrusted to, and conducted
by, its own undoubted friends — those whose hands are
free, whose hearts are in the work — who do care for the
result. Two years ago the Republicans of the nation
mustered over thirteen hundred thousand strong. We did
this under the single impulse of resistance to a common
danger, with every external circumstance against us. Of
strange, discordant, and even hostile elements, we
gathered from the four winds, and formed and fought the
battle through, under the constant hot ire of a disciplined,
proud and pampered enemy. Did we brave all then, to falter
now? — now, when that same enemy is wavering,
dissevered and belligerent? The result is not doubtful. We
shall not fail — if we stand ﬁrm, we shall not fail. Wise
counsels may accelerate, or mistakes delay it, but, sooner
or later, the victory is sure to come.”
The members of the convention carried away with them
something to think about. There had been in Mr. Lincoln’s
speech no appeals to their partisan prejudices, no tricks to
catch applause. He had appeared before them as an
earnest, patriotic man, intent only on discussing, in the
gravest an most candid manner, the most interesting and
momentous political questions.
On the ninth of July, Mr. Douglas made a speech in
Chicago. The reception he received was a magniﬁcent one
— one which might well have ﬁlled him with the
gratiﬁcation which he did not attempt to conceal — which,
indeed, he took repeated occasion to express. In this
speech he alluded to his eﬀorts to crush the Lecompton
 fraud, and claimed that the republicans who had fought by
his side had indorsed his popular sovereignty doctrine —
the right of the people of a territory to form their own
institutions.
He then took up the action of the republican convention
at Springﬁeld, and spoke at length of Mr. Lincoln and his
speech. Of Mr. Lincoln, he said: “I take great pleasure in
saying that I have known, personally and intimately, for
about a quarter of a century, the worthy gentleman who has
been nominated for my place, and I will say that I regard
him as a kind, amiable and intelligent gentleman, a good
citizen and an honorable opponent; and whatever issue I
may have with him will be of principle and not of
personalities.” He then read from the opening paragraph of
Mr. Lincoln’s speech the words: “A house divided against
itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot
endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect
the Union to be dissolved. I do not expect the house to fall,
but I do expect it to cease to be divided. It will become all
one thing or all the other.” The unfairness of his comments
upon this simple statement of a conviction may be gathered
from the construction which he put upon it in the words—
“Mr. Lincoln advocates boldly and clearly a war of sections,
a war of the North against the South, of the free states
against the slave states, a war of extermination, to be
continued relentlessly, until the one or the other shall be
subdued, and all the states shall either become free or
become slave.”
 Mr. Lincoln foresaw the approaching struggle between
freedom and slavery and its inevitable result. He did not
believe a dissolution of the Union possible, but he knew
that freedom and slavery were irreconcilable enemies. He
knew that slavery must die, or become national. He saw the
determination of its friends to make it national, and he
believed that this attempt would succeed, or that, failing of
success, it would end in the universal abolition of slavery.
Events have entirely justiﬁed his most philosophical view of
the subject.
The next point that Mr. Douglas endeavored to make was
as illegitimate as his previous one, viz: that Mr. Lincoln
desired to reduce the states to a dead uniformity of
interests and institutions, contrary to the theory and policy
of the fathers of the republic. In order to do this, he was of
course obliged to ignore the fact that Mr. Lincoln had
alluded to but one institution, and that, in its nature
antagonistic with the principles of the Declaration of
Independence, and to recognize slavery as having the same
legitimate basis with the other institutions of the country.
Having construed Mr. Lincoln’s position unfairly, he
logically drove to the unjust conclusion that when the
uniformity should be attained which Mr. Lincoln desired,
the government would have “converted these thirty-two
sovereign, independent states, into one consolidated
empire, 
with 
the 
uniformity 
of 
disposition 
reigning
triumphant throughout the length and breadth of the land.”
He next took up Mr. Lincoln’s criticism of the Dred Scott
decision, and, by his treatment of it, fully vindicated the
 action of the Illinois republicans in their refusal to support
him in accordance with the wishes of their eastern friends.
No republican could consistently support a man who
supported that iniquitous and barbarous decision. If it is
said that his course on this question would have been
changed by their support, the case is still worse, for no man
whose course could be changed by such considerations
would be worthy of the support of any party. “I am opposed
to this doctrine of Mr. Lincoln,” said Mr. Douglas, “by which
he proposes to take an appeal from the decision of the
Supreme Court of the United States upon this high
constitutional question, to a republican caucus sitting in
the country... I respect the decisions of that august
tribunal; I shall always bow in deference to them... I will
sustain the judicial tribunals and constituted authorities, in
all matters within the pale of their jurisdiction, as deﬁned
by the Constitution.” Mr. Douglas did not see ﬁt to allude in
this speech to Mr. Lincoln’s charge that the Dred Scott
decision was a part of that building framed so cunningly by
“Stephen, Franklin, Roger and James,” in which was to be
conserved the power of making slavery universal.
Mr. Douglas went farther than simply to indorse the Dred
Scott decision, and to declare his intention to sustain it. “I
am equally free,” said he, “to say that the reason assigned
by Mr. Lincoln for resisting the decision of the Supreme
Court in the Dred Scott case does not, in itself, meet my
approbation... He says it is wrong, because it deprives the
negro of the beneﬁt of that clause of the Constitution which
says that the citizens of one state shall enjoy all the
 privileges and immunities of the citizens of the several
states; in other words, he thinks it wrong because it
deprives the negro of the privileges, immunities and rights
of citizenship which pertain, according to that decision,
only to the white man. I am free to say to you that, in my
opinion, this government of ours is founded on the white
basis. It was made for the white man, for the beneﬁt of the
white man, to be administered by white men, in such
manner as they should determine. It is also true that a
negro, an indian, or any other man of inferior race to a
white man should be permitted to enjoy, and humanity
requires that he should have, all the rights, privileges and
immunities which he is capable of exercising, consistent
with the safety of society.” What these rights should be,
was only legitimately to be determined by the states
themselves, in Mr. Douglas’ opinion. Illinois had decided for
herself what the black man’s rights were in Illinois, and
New York and Maine had decided for themselves. By
inference, Kentucky had a right to say her negroes should
be slaves, Illinois that her negroes should not vote, New
York that her negroes might vote when qualiﬁed by
property, and Maine that the negro was equal at the polls
to the white man.
These were the main points that Mr. Douglas made in his
Chicago speech. Mr. Lincoln sat near him, on the platform,
and heard the whole of it. Here, as elsewhere during the
campaign which succeeded, he manifested his wonderful
good nature under misrepresentation. There were incidents
of this campaign which no man cast in the common mould
 could have passed through without yielding to the severest
passions of indignation and anger. He was belied, abused,
misrepresented; but he never betrayed a moment’s
irritation. That he smarted with a sense of wrong, there is
abundant evidence; but he was never moved to a single act
of resentment.
Mr. Lincoln had taken the speech all in, and, on the
following evening, it was announced that he would reply to
it. The greeting which he received when he took the stand
was quite as enthusiastic as that which Mr. Douglas had
met on the previous evening. He was introduced to the
audience by Mr. C.L. Wilson of Chicago, and when he came
forward, there was such a storm of long-continued
applause that he was obliged to extend his hand in
deprecation, before he could secure the silence necessary
for proceeding. After disposing of some minor matters, he
took up the points of Mr. Douglas’ speech and treated them
fully. Touching the comments upon his own declaration— “a
house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this
government cannot endure permanently half slave and half
free,” 
c., he said:
“I am not, in the ﬁrst place, unaware that this
Government has endured eighty-two years, half slave and
half free. I know that. I am tolerably well acquainted with
the history of the country, and I know that it has endured
eighty-two years, half slave and half free. I believe — and
that is what I meant to allude to there — I believe it has
endured, 
because 
during 
all 
that 
time, 
until 
the
introduction of the Nebraska bill, the public mind did rest
 all the time in the belief that slavery was in course of
ultimate extinction. That was what gave us the rest that we
had through that period of eighty-two years; at least, so I
believe. I have always hated slavery, I think, as much as any
abolitionist — I have been an old line whig — I have always
hated it, but I have always been quiet about it until this
new era of the introduction of the Nebraska bill began. I
always believed that everybody was against it, and that it
was in course of ultimate extinction.
“The adoption of the Constitution and its attendant
history led the people to believe so; and such was the belief
of the framers of the Constitution itself, else why did those
old men, about the time of the adoption of the Constitution,
decree that slavery should not go into the new territory,
where it had not already gone? Why declare that within
twenty years the African slave trade, by which slaves are
supplied, might be cut oﬀ by Congress? Why were all these
acts? I might enumerate more of these acts — but enough.
What were they but a clear indication that the framers of
the Constitution intended and expected the ultimate
extinction of that institution? And now, when I say, as I said
in my speech that Judge Douglas has quoted from — when I
say that I think the opponents of slavery will resist the
farther spread of it, and place it where the public mind
shall rest with the belief that it is in course of ultimate
extinction, I only mean to say that they will place it where
the founders of this Government originally placed it.
“I have said a hundred times, and I have now no
inclination to take it back, that I believe there is no right,
 and ought to be no inclination in the people of the free
states to enter into the slave states, and interfere with the
question of slavery at all. I have said that always; Judge
Douglas has heard me say it — if not quite a hundred times,
at least as good as a hundred times; and when it is said that
I am in favor of interfering with slavery where it exists, I
know it is unwarranted by anything I have ever intended,
and, as I believe, by anything I have ever said. If, by any
means, I have ever used language which could fairly be so
construed (as, however, I believe I never have), I now
correct it.”
The next point touched upon was Judge Douglas’ charge
that Mr. Lincoln was in favor of reducing the institutions of
all the states to uniformity:
“Now in relation to his inference that I am in favor of a
general consolidation of all the local institutions of the
various states. I will attend to that for a little while, and try
to inquire, if I can, how on earth it could be that any man
could draw such an inference from anything I said. I have
said, very many times, in Judge Douglas’ hearing, that no
man believed more than I in the principle of self-
government; that it lies at the bottom of all my ideas of just
government, from beginning to end. I have denied that his
use of that term applies properly. But for the thing itself, I
deny that any man has ever gone ahead of me in his
devotion to the principle, whatever he may have done in
eﬀiciency in advocating it. I think that I have laid it in your
hearing — that I believe each individual is naturally entitled
to do as he pleases with himself and the fruit of his labor, so
 far as it in no wise interferes with any other man’s rights —
that each community, as a state, has a right to do exactly as
it pleases with all the concerns within that state that
interferes with the right of no other state, and that the
general government, upon principle, has no right to
interfere with anything other than that general class of
things that does concern the whole. I have said that at all
times. I have said as illustrations, that I do not believe in
the right of Illinois to interfere with the cranberry laws of
Indiana, the oyster laws of Virginia, or the liquor laws of
Maine. I have said these things over aud over again, and I
repeat them here as my sentiments.
“How is it, then, that Judge Douglas infers, because I
hope to see slavery put where the public mind shall rest in
the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction, that
I am in favor of Illinois going over and interfering with the
cranberry laws of Indiana? What can authorize him to draw
any such inference? I suppose there might be one thing
that at least enabled him to draw such an inference that
would not be true with me or many others, that is, because
he looks upon all this matter of slavery as an exceedingly
little thing — this matter of keeping one-sixth of the
population of the whole nation in a state of oppression and
tyranny unequaled in the world. He looks upon it as being
an exceedingly little thing — only equal to the question of
the cranberry laws of Indiana — as something having no
moral question in it — as something on a par with the
question of whether a man shall pasture his land with
cattle, or plant it with tobacco — so little and so small a
 thing, that he concludes, if I could desire that if anything
should be done to bring about the ultimate extinction of
that little thing, I must be in favor of bringing about an
amalgamation of all the other little things in the Union.
Now, it so happens — and there, I presume, is the
foundation of this mistake — that the Judge thinks thus;
and it so happens that there is a vast portion of the
American people that do not look upon that matter as being
this very little thing. They look upon it as a vast moral evil;
they can prove it such by the writings of those who gave us
the blessings of liberty which we enjoy, and that they so
looked upon it, not as an evil merely conﬁning itself to the
states where it is situated; and while we agree that, by the
Constitution we assented to, in the states where it exists we
have no right to interfere with it, because it is in the
Constitution; we are by both duty and inclination to stick by
that Constitution, in all its letter and spirit, from beginning
to end.
“So much then as to my disposition — my wish — to have
all the state legislatures blotted out, and to have one
consolidated government, and a uniformity of domestic
regulations in all the states by which I suppose it is meant,
if we raise corn here, we must make sugar-cane grow here
too, and we must make those which grow North grow in the
South. All this I suppose he understands I am in favor of
doing. Now, so much for all this nonsense — for I must call
it so. The Judge can have no issue with me on a question of
establishing uniformity in the domestic regulations of the
states.”
 Concerning the Dred Scott decision he said:
“I have expressed heretofore, and I now repeat, my
opposition to the Dred Scott decision, but I should be
allowed to state the nature of that opposition, and I ask
your indulgence while I do so. What is fairly implied by the
term Judge Douglas has used, ‘resistance to the decision?’ I
do not resist it. If I wanted to take Dred Scott from his
master, I would be interfering with property, and that
terrible diﬀiculty that Judge Douglas speaks of, of
interfering with property would arise. But I am doing no
such thing as that, but all that I am doing is refusing to
obey it as a political rule. If I were in Congress, and a vote
should come up on a question whether slavery should be
prohibited in a new territory, in spite of the Dred Scott
decision, I would vote that it should.
“That is what I would do. Judge Douglas said last night,
that before the decision he might advance his opinion, and
it might be contrary to the decision when it was made; but
after it was made he would abide by it until it was reversed.
Just so! We let this property abide by the decision, but we
will try to reverse that decision. We will try to put it where
Judge Douglas would not object, for he says he will obey it
until it is reversed. Somebody has to reverse that decision,
since it is made, and we mean to reverse it, and we mean to
do it peaceably.
“What are the uses of decisions of courts? They have two
uses. As rules of property they have two uses. First — they
decide upon the question before the court. They decide in
this case that Dred Scott is a slave. Nobody resists that.
 Not only that, but they say to everybody else, that persons
standing just as Dred Scott stands, is as he is. That is, they
say that when a question comes up upon another person, it
will be so decided again, unless the court decides in
another way, unless the court overrules its decision. Well,
we mean to do what we can to have the court decide the
other way. That is one thing we mean to try to do.
“The sacredness that Judge Douglas throws around this
decision, is a degree of sacredness that has never been
before thrown around any other decision. I have never
heard of such a thing. Why, decisions apparently contrary
to that decision, or that good lawyers thought were
contrary to that decision, have been made by that very
court before. It is the ﬁrst of its kind; it is an astonisher in
legal history. It is a new wonder of the world. It is based
upon falsehood in the main as to the facts — allegations of
facts upon which it stands are not facts at all in many
instances — and no decision made on any question — the
ﬁrst instance of a decision made under so many
unfavorable circumstances — thus placed, has ever been
held by the profession as law, and it has always needed
conﬁrmation before the lawyers regarded it as settled law.
But Judge Douglas will have it that all hands must take this
extraordinary decision, made under these extraordinary
circumstances, and give their vote in Congress in
accordance with it, yield to it and obey it in every possible
sense. Circumstances alter cases. Do not gentlemen here
remember the case of that same Supreme Court, some
twenty-ﬁve or thirty years ago, deciding that a national
 bank was constitutional? I ask, if somebody does not
remember that a national bank was declared to be
constitutional? 
Such 
is 
the 
truth, 
whether 
it 
be
remembered or not. The bank charter ran out, and a re-
charter was granted by Congress. That re-charter was laid
before General Jackson. It was urged upon him, when he
denied the constitutionality of the bank that the Supreme
Court had decided was constitutional; and General Jackson
then said that the Supreme Court had no right to lay down
a rule to govern a co-ordinate branch of the Government,
the members of which had sworn to support the
Constitution — that each member had sworn to support
that Constitution as he understood it. I will venture here to
say, that I have heard Judge Douglas say that he approved
of General Jackson for that act. What has now become of all
his tirade about ‘resistance to the Supreme Court?’”
There were some passages in this speech which
illustrated Mr. Lincoln’s readiness in “putting things” to the
common apprehension. After having said that the much
vaunted “popular sovereignty” which Mr. Douglas had put
forth as his own invention was something which, when
properly deﬁned, the republicans had always accepted and
acted upon, and that it came, not from Judge Douglas, but
from the Declaration of Independence, which states that
governments derive their just powers “from the consent of
the governed,” he alluded to the defeat of the Lecompton
Constitution in Congress. He said that the republicans took
ground against the Lecompton Constitution long before
Judge Douglas did, and that he held in his hand a speech in
 which he urged the same reason against Douglas the year
before that he (Douglas) was urging now. He went on:
“A little more, now, as to this matter of popular
sovereignty 
and 
the 
Lecompton 
Constitution. 
The
Lecompton Constitution, as the Judge tells us, was
defeated. The defeat of it was a good thing, or it was not.
He thinks the defeat of it was a good thing, and so do I, and
we agree in that. Who defeated it?
“A voice— ‘Judge Douglas.’
“Mr. Lincoln — Yes, he furnished himself and, if you
suppose he furnished the other democrats that went with
him, he furnished three votes, while the republicans
furnished twenty. That is what he did to defeat it. In the
House of Representatives he and his friends furnished
some twenty votes and the republicans ninety odd. Now
who was it that did the work?
“A voice— ‘Douglas.’
“Mr. Lincoln — Why, yes, Douglas did it. To be sure he
did. Let us, however, put that proposition another way. The
republicans could not have done it without Judge Douglas.
Could he have done it without them? Which could have
come the nearest to doing it without the other?”
The following point was so neatly made that it drew from
the house three hearty cheers:
“We were often — more than once at least — in the
course of Judge Douglas’ speech last night, reminded that
this government was made for white men — that he
believed it was made for white men. Well, that is putting it
into a shape in which no one wants to deny it; but the Judge
 then goes into his passion for drawing inferences that are
not warranted. I protest, now and forever, against that
counterfeit logic which presumes that because I do not
want a negro woman for a slave, I do necessarily want her
for a wife. My understanding is that I need not have her for
either, but, as God made us separate, we can leave one
another alone, and do one another much good thereby.
There are white men enough to marry all the white women,
and enough black men to marry all the black women, and in
God’s name let them be so married. The Judge regales us
with the terrible enormities that take place by the mixture
of races; that the inferior race bears the superior down.
Why, Judge, if we do not let them get together in the
territories they won’t mix there.”
And thus was opened the grand senatorial campaign of
1858. Mr. Douglas had not been present at Mr. Lincoln’s
speech, a fact which Mr. Lincoln regretted, and he soon
took measures to secure his attendance. In the meantime,
the campaign went on. Mr. Douglas spoke a week later at
Bloomington, making much, as usual, of his doctrine of
popular sovereignty, and of his rebellion against the
administration on the Lecompton question. Mr. Lincoln’s
original 
Springﬁeld 
speech 
came 
in 
for 
comment,
particularly the two points which he criticised at Chicago.
Mr. Lincoln was present on this occasion also, determined
to ﬁnd out the exact ground of his antagonist, that he might
be able to meet him in the struggle which he had
determined upon. On the day following his Bloomington
speech, Mr. Douglas spoke at Springﬁeld, as did also Mr.
 Lincoln, though not at the same meeting. Mr. Lincoln, in
opening his speech, alluded to the disadvantages which the
republicans of the state labored under in the unjust
apportionment of the legislative districts, and particularly
in the disparity that existed between the reputation and
prospects of the senatorial candidates of the two parties.
All the anxious politicians of the party of Mr. Douglas had
been looking upon him as certain, at no distant day, to be
the President of the United States. “They have seen,” he
said, “in his round, jolly, fruitful face, post-oﬀices, land-
oﬀices, marshalships and cabinet appointments, charge-
ships and foreign missions, bursting and sprouting out, in
wonderful luxuriance, ready to be laid hold of by their
greedy hands. And as they have been gazing upon this
attractive picture so long, they cannot, in the little
distraction that has taken place in the party, bring
themselves to give up the charming hope; but with greedier
anxiety they rush about him, sustain him, and give him
marches, triumphal entries and receptions, beyond what,
even in the days of his highest prosperity, they could have
brought about in his favor. On the contrary, nobody has
ever expected me to be president. In my poor, lean, lank
face nobody has ever seen that any cabbages were
sprouting out.” The main body of the speech was devoted to
the questions at issue between him and Judge Douglas, and
does not contain matter of special interest beyond what he
had previously uttered upon the same points. He closed by
reiterating the charge made in his speech of June
seventeenth that Mr. Douglas was a party to the conspiracy
 for deceiving the people with the idea that the settlers of a
territory could exclude slavery from their limits if they
should choose to do so, and, at the same time, rendering it
impossible for them to do so through the standing veto of
the Dred Scott decision. The charge was a grave one, but
Mr. Douglas had ignored it. Since it was made, he had not
alluded to it at all. “On his own tacit admission,” said Mr.
Lincoln, “I renew the charge.”
