  ha ter   I.
EARLY IN NOVEMBER, an event occurred which gave to our
relations with England a very threatening aspect — an
event which aroused the ire of the British people to a
feverish pitch, encouraged the rebels, and ﬁlled with
uneasiness the friends of the government. Although the
blockade, under the energetic measures of the government,
had become something very diﬀerent from a blockade on
paper, there were still many ports in the southern states
which carried on a large contraband commerce, through
the agency of blockade-runners, the majority of which were
owned in England, and navigated by British seamen. The
capture of the Hatteras forts and of the defenses of Port
Royal Harbor had shut two of these ports; but Charleston,
notwithstanding all the eﬀorts of the blockading ﬂeet,
continued to receive numbers of foreign vessels, and to
dispatch them in safety. On the twelfth of October, the
steamship Theodora shot out of that harbor, with two
notorious rebels on board, James M. Mason and John
Slidell, both perjured senators of the United States, and
accredited by the Davis government respectively to the
governments of England and France. They went to get
recognition for their government. They went as enemies of
the United States.
 Proceeding to Cuba, these emissaries took passage from
Havana on the seventh of November, on the British mail
steamer Trent, bound immediately for St. Thomas. On the
following day, the Trent was hailed by the United States
frigate San Jacinto, Captain Wilkes, who directed a shot
across her bows to bring her to. Then two oﬀicers and
twenty men, more or less, put oﬀ from the San Jacinto,
boarded the Trent, and, after a search, took out Mr. Mason
and Mr. Slidell and their two secretaries, and, by force,
against the protest of the Trent’s oﬀicers, bore them to
their vessel. These rebel emissaries Captain Wilkes brought
to the United States, and they were lodged in Fort Warren.
The excitement which this aﬀair produced in both
countries was intense, and but little favorable to its calm
consideration. It was unquestionably a doubtful proceeding,
and cool British blood came up to a boiling heat wherever
in England or her provinces the intelligence of the aﬀair
was published. The news found the loyal people of America
smarting under a sense of the injustice of the relation
which England had assumed toward their struggle, and
sensitive to the insults which their people had received
from the British press and public. America came to care
less for England afterward; but then she was sensitive in
every ﬁber to her opinion, her lack of sympathy, and her
covert aid to the rebellion. To the American public the news
of this capture was most grateful. They felt that whatever
the laws of nations might be — and in these they were but
little versed — it was morally right that these men should
be in their power, and that it was morally wrong that any
 other power should have our traitors under its protection.
So they greeted the event with huzzas, and made a hero of
the impulsive Captain Wilkes, who, though a most loyal and
excellent person, was possessed by a zeal that sometimes
surpassed his discretion.
The eﬀect of this capture was, of course, foreseen by the
government; and on the thirtieth of November Mr. Seward
communicated to Mr. Adams, our minister in England, a
statement of the facts, with the assurance that Captain
Wilkes had acted without any instructions from the
government, and that our government was prepared to
discuss the matter in a friendly spirit, so soon as the
position of the British government should be made known.
Earl Russell wrote under the same date to Lord Lyons,
rehearsing his understanding of the facts of the case, and
saying that his government was “willing to believe that the
naval oﬀicer who committed the aggression was not acting
in compliance with any authority from his government,”
because the government of the United States “must be fully
aware that the British government could not allow such an
aﬀront to the national honor to pass without full
reparation.” The minister expressed the hope that the
United States would, of its own motion, release the
commissioners, and make an apology.
This was a very sensible and neighborly dispatch, but
Earl Russell seems to have been subjected afterward to a
pressure that changed his feelings and sharpened his
policy, for, in a subsequent note, he transformed his polite
dispatch into an insulting ultimatum. Lord Lyons was
 directed to wait seven days after having made his demand
for reparation; and then, in case no answer should be
given, or any other answer should be given than a full
compliance with the terms of the demand, he should pack
up the archives of the legation, and return to London,
bringing his archives with him. Usually an ultimatum comes
at the end of a long series of negotiations — after all the
resources of diplomacy are exhausted — after there is
plainly seen to be a warlike, or unreasonable, or
contumacious spirit on the part of the power from which
redress is sought. Earl Russell gave Mr. Lincoln his
ultimatum at the start. It was an insult — a threat. It was
uttered to gratify the war-like feeling of the British people.
There is no question that they desired war; and when the
British people are mentioned in this connection, those are
meant who, in print and speech, represent them and
assume to speak for them. War with America was looked
upon in England as probable. Measures were taken to
prepare for it. Indeed, many of the London journals
regarded war as inevitable; and when the peaceful nature
of Mr. Seward’s ﬁrst dispatches were known, the Morning
Post hastened to publish in large type an oﬀicial
contradiction of the news. “The war will be terrible,” said
the London journals. “It will begin by a recognition of the
South, by the alliance of the South, by the assured triumph
of the South.” That was the precise point. War was wanted
by the people, that their cherished desire for the disruption
of the Republic might be fulﬁlled; and they were
 disappointed when they found that even an impertinent
ultimatum could not bring it.
If British statesmen sympathized with these views and
feelings, — and some of them did, — it showed how poorly
informed they were; for there was never anything in the
diﬀiculty, from the ﬁrst, to give either government alarm.
The British people found that there was a government at
Washington, — calm, digniﬁed and intelligent, not under
the control of the mob at all, and showing, in the cool
independence of its action, its entire freedom from the
misdirected passions of the people. Only in the early
approval of the Secretary of the Navy and of the lower
House of Congress, awarded to Captain Wilkes, was there
anything to give the British government cause of alarm, or
ground of serious complaint; and the news of these ill-
advised indorsements reached England after the tempest of
passion had been spent.
On the twenty-sixth of December Mr. Seward addressed
a note to Lord Lyons, in which he elaborately discussed all
the questions growing out of the case. The paper was one
of great moderation, and consummate ability — indeed, one
of the ﬁnest to which he ever gave utterance. It was a
profound lesson in the law of nations, which could not be
read without beneﬁt by statesmen everywhere. By it the
British government learned that there were two sides to
the case, and that there was something to be said upon the
side of Captain Wilkes; for in it he argued most ingeniously,
if not in all instances decisively, that Messrs. Mason and
Slidell and their dispatches were contraband of war, that
 Captain Wilkes might lawfully stop and search the Trent for
contraband persons and dispatches, and that he had the
right to capture the persons presumed to have contraband
dispatches. He did not, however, exercise the right of
capture in the manner allowed and recognized by the laws
of nations, as understood and practically entertained by the
American government. “If I decide this case in favor of my
own government,” said Mr. Seward, “I must disavow its
most cherished principles, and reverse and forever
abandon its essential policy. If I maintain those principles
and adhere to that policy, I must surrender the case itself.”
He therefore declared that the persons held in military
custody in Fort Warren would be “cheerfully liberated.” Mr.
Seward could not forbear to say that, if the safety of the
Union required their detention, they would have been
detained; to draw a contrast between the action of our
government and that of Great Britain under similar
circumstances; and to indulge in the irony that “the claim
of the British government is not made in a discourteous
manner.”
Earl Russell was satisﬁed with the “reparation.” The
prisoners were released, peace between the two nations
was kept, the war feeling subsided, disunion sympathizers
all over Europe were disgusted with Mr. Seward’s
pusillanimity, and at the South there was no attempt to
disguise the disappointment felt at the result. The hopes
excited in the South by the diﬀiculty are well expressed in
the language of Pollard’s “History of the First Year of the
War,” which says: “Providence was declared to be in our
 favor; the incident of the Trent was looked upon almost as a
special dispensation; and it was said in fond imagination
that on its deck and in the trough of the weltering Atlantic
the key of the blockade had at last been lost.” The same
author continues: “The surrender was an exhibition of
meanness and cowardice unparalleled in the political
history of the civilized world.” Patriots may well be content
with a decision which brought grief to their enemies
everywhere, and raised the whole nation in the respect of
Christendom.
On the second day of December, Congress met in regular
session, and on the following day Mr. Lincoln sent in his
annual message. The message opened with an allusion to
the attitude of foreign governments, and a statement of the
fact that, should those governments be controlled only by
material considerations, they would ﬁnd that the quickest
and best way out of the embarrassments of commerce
consequent upon the American diﬀiculties, would be rather
through the maintenance, than the destruction, of the
Union. It was undoubtedly with reference to the excitement
then existing concerning the Trent aﬀair that he penned
the sentence: “Since, however, it is apparent that here, as
in every other state, foreign dangers necessarily attend
domestic diﬀiculties, I recommend that adequate and
ample measures be adopted for maintaining the public
defenses on every side.”
The message announced the ﬁnancial measures of the
government to have been very successful; recommended a
re-organization of the Supreme Court, the machinery of
 which the country had outgrown; suggested a codiﬁcation
or digest of the statutes of Congress, so as to reduce the six
thousand pages upon which they were printed to the
measure of a volume; indicated his wish that the Court of
Claims should have power to make its decisions ﬁnal, with
only the right of appeal on questions of law to the Supreme
Court; asked for increased attention on the part of
Congress to the interests of agriculture; expressed his
gratiﬁcation with the success of eﬀorts for the suppression
of the African slave trade; and broached a plan for
colonizing such slaves as had been freed by the operation
of the conﬁscation act, passed on the previous sixth of
August, on territory to be acquired. The progress made by
the federal armies, and by his own careful and moderate
management of aﬀairs in the border states, is shown in the
following passage:
“The last ray of hope for preserving the Union peaceably,
expired at the assault upon Fort Sumter; and a general
review of what has occurred since may not be unproﬁtable.
What was painfully uncertain then, is much better deﬁned
and more distinct now; and the progress of events is plainly
in the right direction. The insurgents conﬁdently claimed a
strong support from north of Mason and Dixon’s line; and
the friends of the Union were not free from apprehension
on the point. This, however, was soon settled deﬁnitely, and
on the right side. South of the line, noble little Delaware
led oﬀ right from the ﬁrst. Maryland was made to seem
against the Union. Our soldiers were assaulted, bridges
were burned, and railroads torn up within her limits; and
 we were many days, at one time, without the ability to
bring a single regiment over her soil to the capital. Now
her bridges and railroads are repaired and open to the
Government; she already gives seven regiments to the
cause of the Union, and none to the enemy; and her people,
at a regular election, have sustained the Union by a larger
majority and a larger aggregate vote than they ever before
gave to any candidate or any question. Kentucky, too, for
some time in doubt, is now decidedly and, I think,
unchangeably ranged on the side of the Union. Missouri is
comparatively quiet, and, I believe, can not again be
overrun by the insurrectionists. These three states of
Maryland, Kentucky and Missouri, neither of which would
promise a single soldier at ﬁrst, have now an aggregate of
not less than forty thousand in the ﬁeld for the Union; while
of their citizens, certainly not more than a third of that
number, and they of doubtful whereabouts and doubtful
existence, are in arms against it. After a somewhat bloody
struggle of months, winter closes on the Union people of
Western Virginia, leaving them masters of their own
country.
“An insurgent force of about ﬁfteen hundred, for months
dominating the narrow peninsular region constituting the
counties of Accomac and Northampton, and known as the
Eastern Shore of Virginia, together with some contiguous
parts of Maryland, have laid down their arms; and the
people there have renewed their allegiance to, and
accepted the protection of the old ﬂag. This leaves no
 armed insurrectionist north of the Potomac, or east of the
Chesapeake.
“Also, we have obtained a footing at each of the isolated
points on the southern coast, of Hatteras, Port Royal, Tybee
Island near Savannah, and Ship Island; and we likewise
have some general accounts of popular movements in
behalf of the Union in North Carolina and Tennessee.
“These things demonstrate that the cause of the Union is
advancing steadily and certainly southward.”
In the development of the insurrection, Mr. Lincoln
detected a growing enmity to the ﬁrst principle of popular
government — the rights of the people. In the grave and
well considered public documents of the rebels he found
labored arguments to prove that “large control of the
people in government is the source of all political evil.
Monarchy itself,” he adds, “is sometimes hinted at as a
possible refuge from the power of the people.” Proceeding
from this, Mr. Lincoln said:
“It is not needed, nor ﬁtting here, that a general
argument should be made in favor of popular institutions;
but there is one point, with its connections, not so
hackneyed as most others, to which I ask a brief attention.
It is the eﬀort to place capital on an equal footing with, if
not above, labor, in the structure of the government. It is
assumed that labor is available only in connection with
capital; that nobody labors unless somebody else, owning
capital, somehow by the use of it induces him to labor. This
assumed, it is next considered whether it is best that
capital shall hire laborers, and thus induce them to work by
 their own consent, or buy them, and drive them to it
without their consent. Having proceeded so far, it is
naturally concluded that all laborers are either hired
laborers or what we call slaves. And further, it is assumed
that whoever is once a hired laborer, is ﬁxed in that
condition for life.
“Now, there is no such relation between capital and labor
as assumed; nor is there any such thing as a free man being
ﬁxed for life in the condition of a hired laborer. Both these
assumptions are false, and all inferences from them are
groundless.
“Labor is prior to and independent of capital. Capital is
only the fruit of labor, and could never have existed if labor
had not ﬁrst existed. Labor is the superior of capital, and
deserves much the higher consideration. Capital has its
rights, which are as worthy of protection as any other
rights. Nor is it denied that there is, and probably always
will be, a relation between labor and capital, producing
mutual beneﬁts. The error is in assuming that the whole
labor of the community exists within that relation. A few
men own capital, and those few avoid labor themselves,
and, with their capital, hire or buy another few to labor for
them. A large majority belong to neither class — neither
work for others, nor have others working for them. In most
of the southern states, a majority of the whole people of all
colors are neither slaves nor masters; while in the
northern, a large majority are neither hirers nor hired.
Men, with their families — wives, sons, and daughters —
work for themselves, on their farms, in their houses, and in
 their shops, taking the whole product to themselves, and
asking no favors of capital on the one hand, nor of hired
laborers or slaves on the other. It is not forgotten that a
considerable number of persons mingle their own labor
with capital — that is, they labor with their own hands, and
also buy or hire others to labor for them; but this is only a
mixed, and not a distinct class. No principle stated is
disturbed by the existence of this mixed class.
“Again: as has already been said, there is not of necessity
any such thing as the free hired laborer being ﬁxed to that
condition for life. Many independent men everywhere in
these states, a few years back in their lives, were hired
laborers. The prudent, penniless beginner in the world,
labors for wages awhile, saves a surplus with which to buy
tools or land for himself, then labors on his own account
another while, and at length hires another new beginner to
help him. This is the just and generous and prosperous
system, which opens the way to all, gives hope to all, and
consequent energy and progress, and improvement of
condition to all. No men living are more worthy to be
trusted than those who toil up from poverty — none less
inclined to take or touch aught which they have not
honestly earned. Let them beware of surrendering a
political power which they already possess, and which, if
surrendered, will surely be used to close the door of
advancement against such as they, and to ﬁx new
disabilities and burdens upon them, till all of liberty shall
be lost.”
 Aside from the bills passed for sustaining the war, and
sustaining the President in his mode of and means for
suppressing the rebellion, very little important action was
taken by this session of Congress, that did not relate to
slavery. The question of “arbitrary arrests,” of which the
enemies of the President made loud complaint, came up,
and Mr. Lincoln was sustained in the House by a vote of
one hundred and eight to twenty-six. A provision was made
for the issue of legal-tender notes, for increasing the
internal revenue, and establishing a basis for the payment
of interest on loans, in accordance with the policy of Mr.
Chase, the distinguished Secretary of the Treasury; and a
conﬁscation act was passed, more stringent than its
predecessor.
We now enter upon a review of that series of measures
and movements which culminated in the overthrow of
slavery; and, as Mr. Lincoln has been assailed on one side
for being too slow, and on the other for being too
precipitate, these movements and measures deserve
careful consideration.
If there is one thing that stands out more prominently
than any other in Mr. Lincoln’s history, it is his regard for
the Constitution and the laws. Especially was this the case
in relation to that clause of the Constitution which
protected slavery, and all the laws by which the relation of
master and slave was preserved. This was not attributable
to his love of slavery, for he hated it; but it was because
that on this point only was he suspected, and on this point
only was there any sensitiveness in the nation. He
 voluntarily and frequently declared that he considered the
slaveholders entitled to a fugitive slave law. By the
Constitution he was determined to stand; yet there is
evidence that from the ﬁrst he considered emancipation to
be the logical result of persistence in rebellion. As the
rebellion progressed, and the rebels themselves had
forfeited all right to constitutional protection for their
peculiar institution, he felt himself still withheld from
meddling with slavery by any sweeping measure, for, in the
four border states — Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky and
Missouri — which had not seceded, the government had
many friends, whose hands he felt it his duty to strengthen
by every possible means. He saw the time of emancipation
coming, but he wished to save them; and this was the
principal reason for his delay. How faithfully he endeavored
to do this, and with how little avail, will appear in the
narrative. Amid the attacks of bitter political foes, and the
reproaches of well-meaning but impatient friends, he had a
diﬀicult path to pursue.
Following Mr. Lincoln’s lead, Mr. Seward had announced
to foreign governments that no change in the institutions of
the South was contemplated. General McClellan had
abundant reason in the President’s position for assuring the
people of Virginia, as he did, that he contemplated nothing
of the kind. But the people were becoming discontented
with this mild policy, and Congress obeyed their voice by an
early tabling of the Crittenden resolution, which had
satisﬁed that body at their session in July.
 Mr. Lincoln was quick to see the tendency of the public
mind, and began at once to shape his measures for the
result which could not long be delayed. On the sixth of
March, he sent a message to Congress, recommending the
passage of a joint resolution which should be substantially
as follows:
“Resolved: That the United States ought to co-operate
with any state which may gradually adopt abolishment of
slavery, giving to such state pecuniary aid, to be used by
such 
state 
in 
its 
discretion, 
to 
compensate 
for
inconveniences, public and private, produced by such
change of system.”
“If the proposition contained in the resolution docs not
meet the approval of Congress and the country,” added Mr.
Lincoln, “there is an end; but if it does command such
approval, I deem it of importance that the states and people
immediately interested should be at once distinctly notiﬁed
of the fact, so that they may begin to consider whether to
accept or reject it.” It was Mr. Lincoln’s opinion that one of
the severest blows the rebellion could receive would be the
abolition of slavery in the border states. To deprive the
rebels of the hope of securing the still loyal slave states, he
believed would be substantially to end the rebellion. If
these states should abolish slavery, it would in eﬀect be
saying to the confederacy, “We will join you under no
circumstances.” He believed that gradual was better than
sudden emancipation; and that, as a war measure, the
government would make the scheme of compensation a
paying one. Still true to his old tenderness on the subject of
 national interference with slavery, he took pains to show
that his plan threw the whole matter into the hands of the
states themselves.
There was kindly warning to his friends in the border
slave states, in these words:
“In the annual message of last December, I thought ﬁt to
say— ‘The Union must be preserved; and hence all
indispensable means must be employed.’ I said this not
hastily, but deliberately. War has been made, and continues
to be, an indispensable means to this end. A practical re-
acknowledgment of the national authority would render the
war unnecessary, and it would at once cease. If, however,
resistance continues, the war must also continue; and it is
impossible to foresee all the incidents which may attend,
and all the ruin which may follow it. Such as may seem
indispensable, or may obviously promise great eﬀiciency
toward ending the struggle, must and will come. The
proposition now made (though an oﬀer only), I hope it may
be esteemed no oﬀense to ask whether the pecuniary
consideration tendered would not be of more value to the
states and private persons concerned, than are the
institutions and property in it, in the present aspect of
aﬀairs.
“While it is true that the adoption of the proposed
resolution would be merely initiatory, and not within itself a
practical measure, it is recommended in the hope that it
would soon lead to important practical results. In full view
of my great responsibility to God and my country, I
 earnestly beg the attention of Congress and the people to
the subject.”
It took no special degree of sagacity to learn what this
passage meant; but those for whom this thoughtful
measure was intended, though the resolution went through
both Houses of Congress, and stood as a pledge of
compensation for emancipation, turned their backs upon it.
Only a very few members from the border states voted for
it. But the President could not let the matter stop there. He
saw that emancipation would surely come as a war
measure; and that these slave states that had stood by him
through much diﬀiculty, would lose, in that event, that
which the Constitution recognized as their property.
Before the close of the session, he invited the senators
and representatives from those states to a conference, at
the Executive Mansion. It was early in July; and, while
Congress had been talking and acting, McClellan had been
ﬁghting with very unsatisfactory results. The nation was
depressed by reverses; and Mr. Lincoln wished to give
these men and the people they represented another chance
to escape from the loss which he felt must soon befall them.
Having convened them, he read to them this carefully
prepared address, in which he argued his own case and
theirs, and appealed to them to save themselves and the
country:
“Gentlemen — After the adjournment of Congress, now
near, I shall have no opportunity of seeing you for several
months. Believing that you of the border states hold more
power for good than any other equal number of members, I
 feel it a duty which I cannot justiﬁably waive, to make this
appeal to you.
“I intend no reproach or complaint when I assure you
that, in my opinion, if you all had voted for the resolution in
the gradual emancipation message of last March, the war
would now be substantially ended. And the plan therein
proposed is yet one of the most potent and swift means of
ending it. Let the states which are in rebellion see
deﬁnitely and certainly that in no event will the states you
represent ever join their proposed confederacy, and they
cannot much longer maintain the contest. But you cannot
divest them of their hope to ultimately have you with them,
as long as you show a determination to perpetuate the
institution within your own states. Beat them at elections,
as you have overwhelmingly done, and, nothing daunted,
they still claim you as their own. You and I know what the
lever of their power is. Break that lever before their faces,
and they can shake you no more forever.
“Most of you have treated me with kindness and
consideration; and I trust you will not now think I
improperly touch what is exclusively your own, when, for
the sake of the whole country, I ask, can you, for your
states, do better than to take the course I urge? Discarding
punctilio and maxims adapted to more manageable times,
and looking only to the unprecedentedly stern facts of our
case, can you do better in any possible event? You prefer
that the constitutional relation of the states to the nation
shall be practically restored without disturbance of the
institution: and if this were done, my whole duty, in this
 respect, under the Constitution and my oath of oﬀice,
would be performed. But it is not done, and we are trying
to accomplish it by war. The incidents of the war cannot be
avoided. If the war continues long, as it must if the object
be not sooner attained, the institution in your states will be
extinguished by mere friction and abrasion — by the mere
incidents of the war. It will be gone, and you will have
nothing valuable in lieu of it. Much of its value is gone
already. How much better for you and for your people, to
take the step which at once shortens the war, and secures
substantial compensation for that which is sure to be
wholly lost in any other event! How much better to thus
save the money which else we sink forever in the war! How
much better to do it while we can, lest the war ere long
render us pecuniarily unable to do it! How much better for
you, as seller, and the nation, as buyer, to sell out and buy
out that without which the war never could have been, than
to sink both the thing to be sold and the price of it in
cutting one another’s throats!
“I do not speak of emancipation at once, but of a decision
at once to emancipate gradually. Room in South America
for colonization can be obtained cheaply, and in abundance;
and, when numbers shall be large enough to be company
and encouragement for one another, the freed people will
not be so reluctant to go.
“I am pressed with a diﬀiculty not yet mentioned — one
which threatens division among those who, united, are
none too strong. An instance of it is known to you. General
Hunter is an honest man. He was, and I hope still is, my
 friend. I valued him none the less for his agreeing with me
in the general wish that all men everywhere could be free.
He proclaimed all men free within certain states, and I
repudiated the proclamation. He expected more good and
less harm from the measure than I could believe would
follow. Yet, in repudiating it, I gave dissatisfaction, if not
oﬀense, to many whose support the country cannot aﬀord
to lose. And this is not the end of it. The pressure in this
direction is still upon me, and is increasing. By conceding
what I now ask, you can relieve me, and, much more, can
relieve the country in this important point.
“Upon these considerations I have again begged your
attention to the message of March last. Before leaving the
capital, consider and discuss it among yourselves. You are
patriots and statesmen, and as such I pray you consider
this proposition; and at the least commend it to the
consideration of your states and people. As you would
perpetuate popular government for the best people in the
world, I beseech you that you do in nowise omit this. Our
common country is in great peril, demanding the loftiest
views and boldest action to bring a speedy relief. Once
relieved, its form of government is saved to the world; its
beloved history and cherished memories are vindicated;
and 
its 
happy 
future 
fully 
assured, 
and 
rendered
inconceivably grand. To you, more than to any others, the
privilege is given to assure that happiness and swell that
grandeur, and to link your own names therewith forever.”
What Mr. Lincoln said in this paper, touching the
dissatisfaction with which his revocation of General
 Hunter’s order of emancipation had been received, was
true. People were tired of the governmental protection of
slavery in the rebel states; and they had reason to be. Mr.
Lincoln felt all this, but he could not forsake his friends,
until he had tried every means to save them. In his
revocation of General Hunter’s order, one of the most
beautiful and touching appeals that man ever penned,
occurs an appeal which the mistaken men before him had
already had the opportunity of reading. In that paper, after
quoting the resolution which Congress had passed pledging
the country to compensation for emancipation, he said:
“To the people of those states I now earnestly appeal. I
do not argue — I beseech you to make the argument for
yourselves. You cannot, if you would, be blind to the signs
of the times. I beg of you a calm and enlarged
consideration of them, ranging, if it may be, far above
personal and partisan politics. This proposal makes
common cause for a common object, casting no reproaches
upon any. It acts not the Pharisee. The changes it
contemplates would come gently as the dews of Heaven,
not rending nor wrecking anything. Will you not embrace
it? So much good has not been done by one eﬀort in all past
time, as, in the providence of God, it is now your high
privilege to do. May the vast future not have to lament that
you have neglected it.”
Still forbearing, still arguing, still beseeching, Mr.
Lincoln stood before these border-state legislators, for
whose sake he was suﬀering sharp reproach in the house of
his best friends; but they were unmoved. They could not
 read the signs of the times. Only nine of the twenty-nine
who responded gave words of friendliness and approval. If,
since then, they have found themselves and their friends in
distress through the destruction of their property, they can
have no reproaches to cast upon the patient man who so
faithfully besought them to save themselves while there
was an opportunity.
Two acts were passed by this session which respectively
called out a message from the President. The conﬁscation
act, to which allusion has already been made, touched a
subject on which he had peculiar views. It would be diﬀicult
to express in the English language the basis of the right of
Congress to free the slaves of rebels, in clearer and more
unanswerable tones than Mr. Lincoln used when he wrote:
“It is startling to say that Congress can free a slave within a
state, and yet, were it said that the ownership of the slave
had ﬁrst been transferred to the nation, and that Congress
had then liberated him, the diﬀiculty would vanish; and this
is the real case. The traitor against the general government
forfeits his slave, at least as justly as he does any other
property; and he forfeits both to the government against
which he oﬀends. The government, so far as there can be
ownership, owns the forfeited slaves; and the question for
Congress, in regard to them, is, — Shall they be made free,
or sold to new masters? I see no objection to Congress
deciding in advance that they should be free.” The
argument of a whole volume would not make the subject
clearer.
 The other act abolished slavery in the District of
Columbia, and he merely pointed out an oversight in the
bill, expressing at the same time his gratiﬁcation that it
recognized 
the 
two 
principles 
of 
colonization 
and
compensation. It must have been with peculiar satisfaction
that he thus completed a work which he began while he
was a member of Congress himself, many years before.
Late in the session, Mr. Lincoln sent to Congress the
draft of a bill for the compensation of any state that might
abolish slavery within its limits; which, although it was
referred to a committee, was not acted upon, as there
appeared no disposition on the part of the border states to
respond to the action which Congress had already taken.
Meantime, and especially after the enactment of the
conﬁscation bill, presses and people maintained their
clamor for a sweeping proclamation of emancipation. The
clamor took a direct and deﬁnite form in a letter addressed
by Horace Greeley, through the New York Tribune. The
letter was severe in its terms, and intemperate in spirit.
Any President who had occupied the oﬀice previous to Mr.
Lincoln, would have passed over such a letter in silence,
however much it might have annoyed or pained him. Mr.
Lincoln, however, never thought of his dignity, and saw no
reason why the President of the United States should not
appear in a newspaper, as well as other men. He
accordingly replied to Mr. Greeley, under date of August
twenty-second, in a letter which, for conciseness and
lucidity, may well be regarded as a model, whether the
 position assumed in it was sound or otherwise. Mr. Lincoln
wrote as follows:
“Hon. Horace Greeley, Dear Sir: I have just read yours of
the nineteenth instant, addressed to myself through the
New York Tribune.
“If there be in it any statements or assumptions of fact
which I may know to be erroneous, I do not now and here
controvert them.
“If there be any inferences which I may believe to be
falsely drawn, I do not now and here argue against them.
“If there be perceptible in it an impatient and dictatorial
tone, I waive it in deference to an old friend whose heart I
have always supposed to be right.
“As to the policy I ‘seem to be pursuing,’ as you say, I
have not meant to leave any one in doubt. I would save the
Union. I would save it in the shortest way under the
Constitution.
“The sooner the national authority can be restored, the
nearer the Union will be — the Union as it was.
“If there be those who would not save the Union unless
they could at the same time save slavery, I do not agree
with them.
“If there be those who would not save the Union unless
they could at the same time destroy slavery, I do not agree
with them.
“My paramount object is to save the Union, and not
either to save or destroy slavery.
“If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I
would do it; if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I
 would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving
others alone, I would also do that.
“What I do about slavery and the colored race, I do
because I believe it helps to save this Union; and what I
forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would help to
save the Union.
“I shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am doing
hurts the cause, and I shall do more whenever I believe
doing more will help the cause.
“I shall try to correct errors when shown to be errors,
and I shall adopt new views so fast as they shall appear to
be true views.
“I have here stated my purpose according to my views of
oﬀicial duty, and I intend no modiﬁcation of my oft-
expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be
free.
“Yours, A. Lincoln.”
Mr. Lincoln was anxious to take no steps which be should
be obliged to retrace through the lack of popular support,
and at this time he was carefully measuring the public
opinion on the subject of emancipation. A part of the
preliminary work he had accomplished. He had performed
with the tenderest and most assiduous ﬁdelity all his duty
toward the border slave states. He had warned them,
besought them, advised them, to get out of the way of an
event which he felt certain would come. He knew that the
institution of slavery would not be worth a straw, in any
state, after it should be destroyed in the rebel states. But
they turned a deaf ear to his warnings and entreaties; and
 in this manner, if not in the manner desired, took
themselves out of his way.
His letter to Horace Greeley was, without doubt,
intended to prepare the mind of the country for
emancipation, and to exhibit the principles and exigencies
by which he should be controlled in proclaiming it. He was
clearing away obstacles, and preparing his ground; and, in
connection with events which wait for record, the time for
action came at last.
Mr. 
Cameron 
was 
not 
very 
successful 
in 
the
administration of the aﬀairs of his bureau. It is no
derogation to his ability as a statesman to say that, for the
discharge of the duties of the war oﬀice, at the time he
occupied it, he had no eminent ﬁtness. It was not the oﬀice
he would have chosen for himself. He had immense and
almost countless contracts at his disposal, and could give to
them but little personal care. That he was overreached,
under the circumstances, was almost a matter of course,
and many of his contracts were very bad ones. Congress,
after his resignation, censured him for his loose way of
doing business, in intrusting Alexander Cummings of New
York with the expenditure of large sums of money without
restriction; but Mr. Lincoln, by a special message, assumed
all the responsibility of Mr. Cummings’ appointment to this
duty and responsibility. Mr. Cameron resigned his position
on the 11th of January, 1862; and Mr. Lincoln showed what
he thought of the charges of fraud against him, by
appointing him minister to Russia. Nevertheless, it was to
be said of him that Mr. Chase found it diﬀicult to raise
 money while he remained to make contracts. He resigned
while the House was busy with overhauling his aﬀairs; and
it occurred that he sent in his resignation on the same day
on which Mr. Dawes of Massachusetts was making a
powerful speech against him, and on which the special
committee on government contracts made a report severely
condemning his operations.
Mr. Lincoln appointed Edwin M. Stanton of Ohio to the
oﬀice thus vacated. Mr. Stanton was a democrat, and had
been a member of Mr. Buchanan’s cabinet — was, indeed,
the ﬁrst one in that cabinet to protest against the
downright treason into which it was drifting. He was a man
of indomitable energy, devoted loyalty and thorough
honesty. Contractors could not manipulate him, and traitors
could not deceive him. Impulsive, perhaps, but true; willful,
it is possible, but placable; impatient, but persistent and
eﬀicient, — he became, at once, one of the most marked
and important of the members of the cabinet. Mr. Lincoln
loved him and believed in him from ﬁrst to last. When
inquired of concerning the reasons for his appointment, Mr.
Lincoln said he rather wished, at ﬁrst, to appoint a man
from one of the border states, but he knew the New
England people would object; and then, again, it would
have given him great satisfaction to appoint a man from
New England, but that would displease the border states.
On the whole, he thought he had better take a man from
some intervening territory; “and, to tell you the truth,
gentlemen,” said he, “I don’t believe Stanton knows where
he belongs himself.” The gentlemen proceeding to discuss
 Mr. Stanton’s impulsiveness, Mr. Lincoln said: “Well, we
may have to treat him as they are sometimes obliged to
treat a Methodist minister I know of out west. He gets
wrought up to so high a pitch of excitement in his prayers
and exhortations, that they are obliged to put bricks into
his pockets to keep him down. We may be obliged to serve
Stanton the same way, but I guess we’ll let him jump awhile
ﬁrst.”
The country has sometimes thought the time for bricks
had come; but, on the whole, the leaders of the rebellion
have had greatest cause of complaint. Mr. Stanton’s place
in history will be a proud one.
Malcontents, who felt that everything went wrong
because there was something wrong in the cabinet, were
much encouraged by the change that had been made, and
personally and by letter urged Mr. Lincoln to make further
changes. A number of them called upon him to insist on
changes that they considered absolutely necessary. Mr.
Lincoln heard them through, and then, with his peculiar
smile, said, “Gentlemen, the case reminds me of a story of
an old friend of mine out in Illinois. His homestead was
very much infested with those little black and white
animals that we needn’t call by name; and, after losing his
patience with them, he determined to sally out and inﬂict
upon them a general slaughter. He took gun, clubs and
dogs, and at it he went, but stopped after killing one, and
returned home. When his neighbors asked him why he had
not fulﬁlled his threat of killing all there were on his place,
he replied that his experience with the one he had killed
 was such that he thought he had better stop where he
was.”
This story was told with no disrespect to Mr. Cameron, or
to the other members of his cabinet, for he honored them
all; but it was told to get rid of his troublesome advisers.
They went away forgetting that they had failed to make any
impression on the President — forgetting that they had
failed in their errand utterly — and laughing over the story
by which the President had dismissed them.
