  ha ter   I.
AND NOW BEGAN a new life, so unlike anything that Mr.
Lincoln had hitherto experienced that he found himself
altogether aﬂoat as to the proprieties of his position. His
nomination had not elevated or elated him; and he did not
see why it should change his manners or his bearing
toward anybody. He had been diminished in his own
estimation — in some respects humbled and oppressed —
by the great responsibilities placed upon him, rather than
made important and great. He was the people’s instrument,
the people’s servant, the people’s creation. He could put on
none of the airs of eminence; he could place no bars
between himself and those who had honored him. None of
his old heartiness and simplicity left him. Men who entered
his house impressed with a sense of his new dignities,
found him the same honest, aﬀectionate, true-hearted and
simple-minded Abraham Lincoln that he had always been.
He answered his own bell, accompanied his visitors to the
door when they retired, and felt all that interfered with his
old homely and hearty habits of hospitality as a burden —
almost an impertinence.
From this moment to the moment of his death he knew
nothing of leisure. He was astonished to ﬁnd how many
friends he had. They thronged his house from every quarter
of the country. Probably no candidate for presidential
 honors was ever so beset by place-seekers and lion-hunters
as was Mr. Lincoln; for it is rare indeed that any man is
nominated for the presidency with the same moral
certainty of an election which attached to his prospects. It
was almost universally believed, both at the North and the
South, that he would be elected; and he was treated like a
man who already had the reins of power in his hands.
Some of his friends who had witnessed his laborious way
of receiving and dismissing his guests and visitors
interposed with “Thomas,” a colored servant who became
very useful to him; but it was very hard and very unnatural
for him to yield to another, and he a servant, the ministry of
the courtesies which it was so much his delight to render;
and he not unfrequently broke over the rules which his
considerate advisers undertook to impose upon him. One
thing was remarkable in these receptions — his attention to
the humble and the poor. No poor, humble, scared man
ever came into his house toward whom his heart did not at
once go out with a gush of noble sympathy. To these he was
always particularly attentive, and they were placed at ease
at once. He took pains to show them that no change of
circumstance could make him forget his early condition, or
alienate his heart from those with whom he had shared the
hardships and humilities of obscurity and poverty.
The interruption of family privacy and comfort by the
constant throng of visitors at last became intolerable, and it
was determined that Mr. Lincoln should hold his receptions
elsewhere. Accordingly the Executive Chamber, a large ﬁne
room in the State House, was set apart for him; and in this
 room he met the public until, after his election, he departed
for Washington. Here he met the millionaire and the
menial, the priest and the politician, men, women and
children, old friends and new friends, those who called for
love and those who sought for oﬀice. From morning until
night this was his business; and he performed it with
conscientious care and the most unwearying patience.
As illustrative of the nature of many of his calls, a brace
of incidents may be recorded as they were related to the
writer by an eye-witness. Mr. Lincoln being seated in
conversation with a gentleman one day, two raw, plainly
dressed young “Suckers” entered the room, and bashfully
lingered near the door. As soon as he observed them, and
apprehended their embarrassment, he rose and walked to
them, saying, “How do you do, my good fellows? What can I
do for you? Will you sit down?” The spokesman of the pair,
the shorter of the two, declined to sit, and explained the
object of the call thus: he had had a talk about the relative
hight of Mr. Lincoln and his companion, and had asserted
his belief that they were of exactly the same hight. He had
come in to verify his judgment. Mr. Lincoln smiled, went
and got his cane, and, placing the end of it upon the wall,
said, “here, young man, come under here.” The young man
came under the cane, as Mr. Lincoln held it, and when it
was perfectly adjusted to his hight, Mr. Lincoln said: “now
come out and hold up the cane.” This he did while Mr.
Lincoln stepped under. Rubbing his head back and forth to
see that it worked easily under the measurement, he
stepped out, and declared to the sagacious fellow who was
 curiously looking on, that he had guessed with remarkable
accuracy — that he and the young man were exactly of the
same hight. Then he shook hands with them and sent them
on their way. Mr. Lincoln would just as soon have thought
of cutting oﬀ his right hand as he would have thought of
turning those boys away with the impression that they had
in any way insulted his dignity.
They had hardly disappeared when an old and modestly
dressed woman made her appearance. She knew Mr.
Lincoln, but Mr. Lincoln did not at ﬁrst recognize her. Then
she undertook to recall to his memory certain incidents
connected with his rides upon the circuit — especially his
dining at her house upon the road at diﬀerent times. Then
he remembered her and her home. Having ﬁxed her own
place in his recollection; she tried to recall to him a certain
scanty dinner of bread and milk that he once ate at her
house. He could not remember it — on the contrary, he only
remembered that he had always fared well at her house.
“Well,” said she, “one day you came along after we had got
through dinner, and we had eaten up everything, and I
could give you nothing but a bowl of bread and milk; and
you ate it; and when you got up you said it was good
enough for the President of the United States.” The good
old woman, remembering the remark, had come in from the
country, making a journey of eight or ten miles, to relate to
Mr. Lincoln this incident, which, in her mind, had doubtless
taken the form of prophesy. Mr. Lincoln placed the honest
creature at her ease, chatted with her of old times, and
 dismissed her in the most happy and complacent frame of
mind.
The interviews of this character were almost numberless,
constantly intermingled with grave conversations with
statesmen and politicians concerning the campaign in
progress, and the condition and prospects of the country.
The future was very dark. Threats of secession grew louder
and deeper. Steps towards treason were bolder with every
passing day. He knew the spirit of slavery. He had
measured it in all the length and breadth of its malignity
and treachery. He felt that he was entering upon a path full
of danger, overshadowed all the way with doubt and fear.
With this great care upon him — with the burden of a
nation already taken upon his shoulders — he was often
bowed down with the deepest despondency. He believed in
his inmost soul that he was an instrument in the hands of
God for the accomplishment of a great purpose. The power
was above him, the workers were around him, the end was
beyond him. In him, Providence, the people and the
purpose of both met; and as a poor, weak, imperfect man,
he felt humbled by the august presence, and crushed by the
importance with which he had been endowed.
Of one thing Mr. Lincoln felt sure: that in the great
struggle before him he ought to be supported by the
Christian sentiment and the Christian inﬂuence of the
nation. Nothing pained him more than the thought that a
man professing the religion of Jesus Christ, and especially a
man who taught the religion of Jesus Christ, should be
opposed to him. He felt that every religious man — every
 man who believed in God, in the principles of everlasting
justice, in truth and righteousness — should be opposed to
slavery, and should support and assist him in the struggle
against inhumanity and oppression which he felt to be
imminent. It was to him a great mystery how those who
preached the gospel to the poor, and who, by their Divine
Master, were sent to heal the broken-hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and to set at liberty those that
were bruised, could be his opponents and enemies.
Mr. 
Newton 
Bateman, 
Superintendent 
of 
Public
Instruction for the State of Illinois, occupied a room
adjoining and opening into the Executive Chamber.
Frequently this door was open during Mr. Lincoln’s
receptions; and throughout the seven months or more of
his occupation Mr. Bateman saw him nearly every day.
Often when Mr. Lincoln was tired he closed his door
against all intrusion, and called Mr. Bateman into his room
for a quiet talk. On one of these occasions Mr. Lincoln took
up a book containing a careful canvass of the city of
Springﬁeld in which he lived, showing the candidate for
whom each citizen had declared it his intention to vote in
the approaching election. Mr. Lincoln’s friends had,
doubtless at his own request, placed the result of the
canvass in his hands. This was toward the close of October,
and only a few days before the election. Calling Mr.
Bateman to a seat at his side, having previously locked all
the doors, he said: “let us look over this book. I wish
particularly to see how the ministers of Springﬁeld are
going to vote.” The leaves were turned, one by one, and as
 the names were examined Mr. Lincoln frequently asked if
this one and that were not a minister, or an elder, or the
member of such or such a church, and sadly expressed his
surprise on receiving an aﬀirmative answer. In that manner
they went through the book, and then he closed it and sat
silently and for some minutes regarding a memorandum in
pencil which lay before him. At length he turned to Mr.
Bateman with a face full of sadness, and said: “Here are
twenty-three ministers, of diﬀerent denominations, and all
of them are against me but three; and here are a great
many prominent members of the churches, a very large
majority of whom are against me. Mr. Bateman, I am not a
Christian — God knows I would be one — but I have
carefully read the Bible, and I do not so understand this
book;” and he drew from his bosom a pocket New
Testament. “These men well know,” he continued, “that I
am for freedom in the territories, freedom everywhere as
far as the Constitution and laws will permit, and that my
opponents are for slavery. They know this, and yet, with
this book in their hands, in the light of which human
bondage cannot live a moment, they are going to vote
against me. I do not understand it at all.”
Here Mr. Lincoln paused — paused for long minutes, his
features surcharged with emotion. Then he rose and
walked up and down the room in the eﬀort to retain or
regain his self-possession. Stopping at last, he said, with a
trembling voice and his cheeks wet with tears: “I know
there is a God, and that He hates injustice and slavery. I see
the storm coming, and I know that His hand is in it. If He
 has a place and work for me — and I think He has — I
believe I am ready. I am nothing, but truth is everything. I
know I am right because I know that liberty is right, for
Christ teaches it, and Christ is God. I have told them that a
house divided against itself cannot stand, and Christ and
reason say the same; and they will ﬁnd it so. Douglas don’t
care whether slavery is voted up or voted down, but God
cares, and humanity cares, and I care; and with God’s help
I shall not fail. I may not see the end; but it will come, and I
shall be vindicated; and these men will ﬁnd that they have
not read their Bibles aright.”
Much of this was uttered as if he were speaking to
himself; and with a sad and earnest solemnity of manner
impossible to be described. After a pause, he resumed:
“Doesn’t it appear strange that men can ignore the moral
aspects of this contest? A revelation could not make it
plainer to me that slavery or the government must be
destroyed. The future would be something awful, as I look
at it, but for this rock on which I stand” (alluding to the
Testament which he still held in his hand,) “especially with
the knowledge of how these ministers are going to vote. It
seems as if God had borne with this thing (slavery) until the
very teachers of religion have come to defend it from the
Bible, and to claim for it a divine character and sanction;
and now the cup of iniquity is full, and the vials of wrath
will be poured out.”
His last reference was to certain prominent clergymen in
the South, Drs. Ross and Palmer among the number; and he
went on to comment on the atrociousness and essential
 blasphemy of their attempts to defend American slavery
from the Bible. After this the conversation was continued
for a long time. Everything he said was of a peculiarly
deep, tender and religious tone, and all was tinged with a
touching melancholy. He repeatedly referred to his
conviction that the day of wrath was at hand, and that he
was to be an actor in the terrible struggle which would
issue in the overthrow of slavery, though he might not live
to see the end. He repeated many passages of the Bible,
and seemed especially impressed with the solemn grandeur
of portions of Revelation, describing the wrath of Almighty
God. In the course of the conversation, he dwelt much upon
the necessity of faith in the Christian’s God, as an element
of successful statesmanship, especially in times like those
which were upon him, and said that it gave that calmness
and tranquillity of mind, that assurance of ultimate success,
which made a man ﬁrm and immovable amid the wildest
excitements. After further reference to a belief in Divine
Providence, and the fact of God in history, the conversation
turned upon prayer. He freely stated his belief in the duty,
privilege and eﬀicacy of prayer, and intimated, in no
unmistakable terms, that he had sought in that way the
divine guidance and favor.
The eﬀect of this conversation upon the mind of Mr.
Bateman, a Christian gentleman whom Mr. Lincoln
profoundly respected, was to convince him, that Mr.
Lincoln had, in his quiet way, found a path to the Christian
stand-point — that he had found God, and rested on the
eternal truth of God. As the two men were about to
 separate, Mr. Bateman remarked: “I have not supposed that
you were accustomed to think so much upon this class of
subjects. Certainly your friends generally are ignorant of
the sentiments you have expressed to me.” He replied
quickly: “I know they are. I am obliged to appear diﬀerent
to them; but I think more on these subjects than upon all
others, and I have done so for years; and I am willing that
you should know it.”
This remarkable conversation furnished a golden link in
the chain of Mr. Lincoln’s history. It ﬂashes a strong light
upon the path he had already trod, and illuminates every
page of his subsequent record. Men have wondered at his
abounding charity, his love of men, his equanimity under
the most distressing circumstances, his patience under
insult and misrepresentation, his delicate consideration of
the feelings of the humble, his apparent incapacity of
resentment, his love of justice, his transparent simplicity,
his truthfulness, his good will toward his enemies, his
beautiful and unshaken faith in the triumph of the right.
There 
was 
undoubtedly 
something 
in 
his 
natural
constitution 
that 
favored 
the 
development 
of 
these
qualities; but those best acquainted with human nature will
hardly attribute the combination of excellencies which were
exhibited in his character and life to the unaided forces of
his constitution. The man who carried what he called “this
rock” in his bosom, who prayed, who thought more of
religious subjects than of all others, who had an undying
faith in the providence of God, drew his life from the
highest fountains.
 It was one of the peculiarities of Mr. Lincoln to hide
these religious experiences from the eyes of the world. In
the same State House where this conversion occurred,
there were men who imagined — really believed — who
freely said — that Mr. Lincoln had probably revealed
himself with less restraint to them than to others — men
who thought they knew him as they knew their bosom
companions — who had never in their whole lives heard
from his lips one word of all these religious convictions and
experiences. They did not regard him as a religious man.
They had never seen anything but the active lawyer, the
keen politician, the jovial, fun-loving companion, in Mr.
Lincoln. All this department of his life he had kept carefully
hidden from them. Why he should say that he was obliged
to appear diﬀerently to others does not appear; but the fact
is a matter of history that he never exposed his own
religious life to those who had no sympathy with it. It is
doubtful whether the clergymen of Springﬁeld knew
anything of these experiences. Very few of them were in
political sympathy with him; and it is evident that he could
open his heart to no one except under the most favorable
circumstances. The fountain from which gushed up so
grand and good a life was kept carefully covered from the
eyes of the world. Its possessor looked into it often, but the
careless or curious crowd were never favored with the
vision. There was much in his conduct that was simply a
cover to these thoughts — an attempt to conceal them. It is
more than probable that, on separating with Mr. Bateman
on this occasion, he met some old friend, and, departing by
 a single bound from his tearful melancholy and his sublime
religious passion, he told him some story, or indulged in
some jest, that ﬁlled his own heart with mirthfulness, and
awoke convulsions of laughter in him who heard it.
These sudden and wide transitions of feeling were
common with him. He lived for years a double life — a deep
and a shallow one. Oppressed with great responsibilities,
absorbed by the most profound problems relating to his
own spirit and destiny, brought into sympathetic relation
with the woes of the world, and living much in the very
depths of a sadness whose natural fountain had been
deepened by the experience of his life, he found no relief
except by direct and entire translation to that other
channel of his life which lay among his shallowest
emotions. His sense of the ludicrous and the grotesque, of
the witty and the funny, was really something wonderful;
and when this sense was appealed to by a story, or an
incident, or a jest, he seemed to leave all his dignity aside,
and give himself up to mirth with no more of self-restraint
than if he were a boy of twelve years. He resorted to this
channel of life for relief. It was here that he won strength
for trial by forgetting trial. It was here that he restored the
balance which sadness had destroyed. Such a nature and
character seem full of contradictions; and a man who is
subject to such transitions will always be a mystery to those
who do not know him wholly. Thus no two men among his
intimate friends will agree concerning him.
The writer has conversed with multitudes of men who
claimed to know Mr. Lincoln intimately; yet there are not
 two of the whole number who agree in their estimate of
him. The fact was that he rarely showed more than one
aspect of himself to one man. He opened himself to men in
diﬀerent directions. It was rare that he exhibited what was
religious in him; and he never did this at all, except when
he found just the nature and character that were
sympathetic with that aspect and element of his character.
A great deal of his best, deepest, largest life he kept almost
constantly from view, because he would not expose it to the
eyes and apprehension of the careless multitude.
To illustrate the eﬀect of the peculiarity of Mr. Lincoln’s
intercourse with men, it may be said that men who knew
him through all his professional and political life have
oﬀered opinions as diametrically opposite as these, viz: that
he was a very ambitious man, and that he was without a
particle of ambition; that he was one of the saddest men
that ever lived, and that he was one of the jolliest men that
ever lived; that he was very religious, but that he was not a
Christian; that he was a Christian, but did not know it; that
he was so far from being a religious man or a Christian that
“the less said upon that subject the better;” that he was the
most cunning man in America, and that he had not a
particle of cunning in him; that he had the strongest
personal attachment, and that he had no personal
attachments at all — only a general good feeling toward
everybody; that he was a man of indomitable will, and that
he was a man almost without a will; that he was a tyrant,
and that he was the softest-hearted, most brotherly man
that ever lived; that he was remarkable for his pure-
 mindedness, and that he was the foulest in his jests and
stories of any man in the country; that he was a witty man,
and that he was only a retailer of the wit of others; that his
apparent candor and fairness were only apparent, and that
they were as real as his head and his hands; that he was a
boor, and that he was in all essential respects a gentleman;
that he was a leader of the people, and that he was always
led by the people; that he was cool and impassive, and that
he was susceptible of the strongest passions. It is only by
tracing these separate streams of impression back to their
fountain that we are able to arrive at anything like a
competent comprehension of the man, or to learn why he
came to be held in such various estimation. Men caught
only separate aspects of his character — only the fragments
that were called into exhibition by their own qualities.
Thus the months passed away until the election. His
room was thronged by visitors from every portion of the
Union, drawn to him by a great variety of motives; and to
all he gave an open and cordial welcome. In the meantime
his political opponents had virtually given up the contest.
While 
they 
worked 
faithfully 
within 
their 
own
organizations, they openly or secretly conceded his
election. At the South no attempt was made to conceal the
conviction that he would be the next President of the
United States. Indeed, this was so entirely what they
desired that they would have regarded the election of Mr.
Douglas as a calamity, although it may well be doubted
whether they would have been deterred from their disunion
schemes by his election. They took pains to poison the
 public mind by every possible expedient. They identiﬁed
the cause of the republicans with the John Brown raid into
Virginia, with everything that was oﬀensive to the pride of
the 
South 
in 
Helper’s 
“Impending 
Crisis,” 
with
“abolitionism” 
which 
was 
the 
most 
disgusting 
and
dangerous sin in the pro-slavery catalogue of sins. It was all
a lie. Not a republican was concerned in or approved or the
John Brown invasion, for which Virginia had exacted the life
of that stern old enthusiast. Helper’s book was a home
production of the South; and the creed of the party had no
item looking to the abolition of slavery. Not content with
misrepresenting Mr. Lincoln’s cause and principles, they
traduced him and his associates upon the ticket. Mr.
Lincoln was called the “Illinois ape,” and this, not by the
rabble, but by the leaders of public opinion; while Mr.
Hamlin was actually believed by many southern people to
be a mulatto, through the representations of presses and
politicians. Every falsehood that could sting the southern
mind to malignity and resentment against the North, and
make detestable the man whom the North was about to
elect to the presidency, was shamelessly uttered. The
object, of course, was to ﬁll the southern mind with
bitterness against the North, to alienate the Union from its
aﬀections, to foster its pride, and to prepare it for the
premeditated and prepared separation.
Mr. Lincoln saw the gathering storm, and felt that upon
him it would expend its wildest fury; yet he cherished no
resentment against these men or their section for all the
wrongs they heaped upon him, and the woes they were
 bringing upon the country. He was only an instrument in
the hands of a higher power. It was only the natural
exhibition of the spirit of a system of wrong which was
making its last terrible struggle for life. The hatred aroused
in him passed over the heads of his enemies and fastened
itself upon the institution which could make such demons
of men. If he was an instrument in the hands of a higher
power, they were instruments in the hands of a lower
power, malignant but mighty indeed. He had charity,
because he felt these men to be the victims of a false
education — of a great mistake. He remembered that had
he been bred as they had been, the probabilities were that
he should sympathize with them.
Mr. Lincoln was what was called a wise candidate. He
held his tongue. No abuse provoked him to utter a word in
self-vindication. He had accepted the platform of the party
and his record was before the country. So he calmly
awaited the result.
On the sixth of November the election took place
throughout the whole country, and the result was Mr.
Lincoln’s triumph, not by a majority of the votes cast, but
by a handsome plurality. The popular vote for him was
1,857,610; while Stephen A. Douglas received 1,365,976
votes, John C. Breckinridge 847,953, and John Bell 590,631.
In the electoral college Mr. Lincoln had 180 votes, Mr.
Douglas receiving 12, Mr. Breckinridge 72, and Mr. Bell 39;
and when, on the following thirteenth of February, in a joint
session of both Houses of Congress, these votes were
declared, it was the oﬀice of John C. Breckinridge himself,
 then 
Vice-President, 
to 
pronounce 
Mr. 
Lincoln 
the
constitutionally elected President of the United States for
four years from the succeeding fourth of March. And this
man who, by going into the election as a candidate for the
presidency, and declaring the result of the contest, had
bound himself by every principle of honor to abide by the
result, was a foul traitor at heart, and only left the chair he
disgraced to become a leader in the armies of treason.
The result of the election was great popular rejoicing at
the North, great exasperation at the South, great fear and
trembling among compromisers of both sections, and a
general conviction that the crisis so long threatened was
actually upon the nation. Among the republicans there was
this feeling: that they had fairly, on an open declaration of
principles and policy, and strictly according to the
provisions of the Constitution, elected a president; and that
if, for this, the South was determined to make war, the
contest might as well come ﬁrst as last. They knew they
had made no proposition and entertained no intention to
interfere with slavery in the states where the Constitution
protected it, that they had made no aggressions upon the
institution, and had only endeavored to limit its spread into
free territory. If this was cause of war, then they were ready
for the ﬁght. Feeling thus, and thus declaring themselves,
they still did not generally believe there would be a war.
They thought the matter would yet rise upon the wings of
some convenient wind and be blown away.
Of course the man of all others chieﬂy concerned in the
results of the election was intensely interested. The eﬀect
 upon his nervous system, not altogether ephemeral, is well
illustrated by an incident which he subsequently related to
several of his friends, and which has found no better
record, perhaps, than in an article from the pen of Major
John Hay, one of his private secretaries in Washington,
published in Harper’s Magazine for July, 1865. Major Hay
reports the incident as nearly as possible in Mr. Lincoln’s
own words.
“It was just after my election in 1860,” said Mr. Lincoln,
“when the news had been coming in thick and fast all day,
and there had been a great ‘hurrah boys!’ so that I was well
tired out and went home to rest, throwing myself upon a
lounge in my chamber. Opposite to where I lay was a
bureau with a swinging glass upon it; and looking in that
glass, I saw myself reﬂected nearly at full length; but my
face, I noticed, had two separate and distinct images, the
tip of the nose of one being about three inches from the tip
of the other. I was a little bothered, perhaps startled, and
got up and looked in the glass, but the illusion vanished. On
lying down again, I saw it a second time, plainer, if
possible, than before; and then I noticed that one of the
faces was a little paler — say ﬁve shades — than the other. I
got up and the thing melted away, and I went oﬀ; and, in
the excitement of the hour forgot all about it, — nearly, but
not quite, for the thing would once in a while come up, and
give me a little pang as though something uncomfortable
had happened. When I went home, I told my wife about it,
and a few days after I tried the experiment again, when,
sure enough, the thing came back again; but I never
 succeeded in bringing the ghost back after that, though I
once tried very industriously to show it to my wife, who was
worried about it somewhat. She thought it was ‘a sign’ that
I was to be elected to a second term of oﬀice, and that the
paleness of one of the faces was an omen that I should not
see life through the last term.”
The President had good sense enough to regard the
vision as an optical illusion, growing out of the excited
condition of his nervous system at the time — yet, with that
tinge of superstition which clings to every sensitive and
deeply thoughtful man, in a world full of mysteries, he was
so 
far 
aﬀected 
by 
it 
as 
to 
feel 
that 
“something
uncomfortable had happened.” In the light of subsequent
events, Mrs. Lincoln’s prophetic interpretation of the vision
has almost a startling interest.
Mr. Lincoln had become the most important man on the
continent. Parties were given in his honor, autograph
hunters beset him everywhere, and oﬀice-seekers met him
on the right hand and on the left. That he felt at home in
this new life is not probable, but he had the good sense to
put on no airs, and to undertake no change of his manners
in meeting men and women. From the day of his election to
the day of his death, he was the same unpretending man
that he was when he ﬁrst entered Springﬁeld to practice
law. He had known nothing of drawing-rooms in his youth,
and he aﬀected to know nothing of them when every
drawing-room of loyal America would have swung wide its
doors to welcome him. It was noticed by the critical that he
found great diﬀiculty in disposing of his hand and feet. It is
 quite possible that they were hard to be disposed of, and
that he succeeded with them quite as well as he would if he
had been a master of deportment. If the hands were large,
they had taken no bribes; if his feet were heavy, they had
outstripped the ﬂeetest in the race of ambition. If he could
not win admiration for his personal graces, he could win
love for his personal goodness.
He visited Chicago after his election, and met with a
magniﬁcent welcome. One or two little incidents of this trip
will illustrate especially his consideration for children. He
was holding a reception at the Tremont House. A fond
father took in a little boy by the hand who was anxious to
see the new President. The moment the child entered the
parlor door, he, of his own motion, and quite to the surprise
of his father, took oﬀ his hat, and giving it a swing, cried,
“Hurrah for Lincoln!” There was a crowd, but as soon as
Mr. Lincoln could get hold of the little fellow, he lifted him
in his hands, and tossing him toward the ceiling laughingly
shouted: “Hurrah for you!” To Mr. Lincoln it was evidently a
refreshing episode in the dreary work of hand-shaking. At a
party in Chicago, during this visit, he saw a little girl
timidly approaching him. He called her to him, and asked
her what she wished for. She replied that she wanted his
name. Mr. Lincoln looked back into the room and said: “But
here are other little girls — they would feel badly if I should
give my name only to you.” The little girl replied that there
were eight of them in all. “Then,” said Mr. Lincoln “get me
eight sheets of paper, and a pen and ink, and I will see what
I can do for you.” The paper was brought, and Mr. Lincoln
 sat down in the crowded drawing-room, and wrote a
sentence upon each sheet, appending his name; and thus
every little girl carried oﬀ her souvenir.
During all this period of waiting for oﬀice, Mr. Lincoln
carried a calm exterior but events were transpiring in the
nation that gave him the most intense anxiety, and ﬁlled
every leisure hour with painful thought.
There were, of course, the usual eﬀorts at cabinet
making on the part of presses and politicians, and he was
favored with copious advice. It has been publicly said that
he really desired to put Mr. Stephens of Georgia, whom he
had been somewhat intimate with in Congress, into his
cabinet. The appointment was at least strongly urged upon
him. The republicans were seeking for some policy by
which the South could be silenced and held to its
allegiance. Many republicans in Washington were inclined
to compromise the slavery question on the popular
sovereignty position. Others thought it would be well to put
southerners into the cabinet, and the names of Stephens of
Georgia and Scott of Virginia were mentioned. These facts
a personal friend communicated to Mr. Lincoln, and under
date of December eighteenth, he replied: “I am sorry any
republican inclines to dally with popular sovereignty of any
sort. It acknowledges that slavery has equal rights with
liberty, and surrenders all we have contended for. Once
fastened on us as a settled policy, ﬁllibustering for all south
of us and making slave states of it follow in spite of us, with
an early supreme court decision holding our free state
constitutions to be unconstitutional. Would Scott or
 Stephens go into the cabinet? And if yea, on what terms?
Do they come to me? or I go to them? Or are we to lead oﬀ
in open hostility to each other?”
In Mr. Lincoln, though the prospect was dark and the
way dangerous, there was no disposition to compromise the
principles of his life and his party, and no entertainment of
the illusion that concord could come of discord in his
cabinet. In the latter matter he kept his own counsel and
awaited his own time.
