  ha ter  I.
SEVERAL OF THE old acquaintances of Mr. Lincoln speak of
his having studied law, or having begun the study of law,
previous to 1834. He had doubtless thought of it, and had
made it a subject of consideration among his friends. With
a vague project of doing this at some time, he had bought a
copy of Blackstone at an auction in Springﬁeld, and had
looked it over. This fact was enough to furnish a basis for
the story; but by his own statement he did not begin the
study of his profession until after he had been a member of
the legislature.
Two years had passed away since his unsuccessful
attempt to be elected a representative of Sangamon
County. In the meantime, he had become known more
widely. His duties as surveyor had brought him into contact
with people in other localities. He had become a political
speaker, and, although rather rough and slow and
argumentative, was very popular. He had made a few
speeches on the condition that the friends who persuaded
him to try the experiment “would not laugh at him.” They
agreed to the condition, and found no occasion to depart
from it.
In 1834, he became again a candidate for the legislature,
and was elected by the highest vote cast for any candidate.
Major John T. Stuart, whose name has been mentioned as
 an oﬀicer in the Black Hawk war, and whose acquaintance
Lincoln made at Beardstown, was also elected. Major
Stuart had already conceived the highest opinion of the
young man, and seeing much of him during the canvass for
the election, privately advised him to study law. Stuart was
himself engaged in a large and lucrative legal practice at
Springﬁeld. Lincoln said he was poor — that he had no
money to buy books, or to live where books might be
borrowed and used. Major Stuart oﬀered to lend him all he
needed, and he decided to take the kind lawyer’s advice,
and accept his oﬀer. At the close of the canvass which
resulted in his election, he walked to Springﬁeld, borrowed
“a load” of books of Stuart, and took them home with him
to New Sale. Here he began the study of law in good
earnest, though with no preceptor. He studied while he had
bread, and then started out on a surveying tour, to win the
money that would buy more. One who remembers his
habits during this period says that he went, day after day,
for weeks, and sat under an oak tree on a hill near New
Salem and read, moving around to keep in the shade, as the
sun moved. He was so much absorbed that some people
thought and said that he was crazy. Not unfrequently he
met and passed his best friends without noticing them. The
truth was that he had found the pursuit of his life, and had
become very much in earnest.
During Lincoln’s campaign, he possessed and rode a
horse, to procure which he had quite likely sold his
compass and chain, for, as soon as the canvass had closed,
he 
sold 
a 
horse, 
and 
bought 
these 
instruments
 indispensable to him in the only pursuit by which he could
make his living. When the time for the assembling of the
legislature approached, Lincoln dropped his law books,
shouldered his pack, and, on foot, trudged to Vandalia, then
the capital of the state, about a hundred miles, to make his
entrance into public life.
His personal appearance at this time must have been
something of an improvement upon former days. A
gentleman now living in Chicago, then a resident of Coles
County, met him at that time, or very soon afterwards, and
says that he was dressed in plain mixed jeans, his coat
being of the surtout fashion, which, at that day, and in that
part of the country, was a very reputable dress. He speaks
of him, also, as being then extremely modest and retiring.
Colonel Jesse K. Dubois, (one of the Sangamon County
delegation,) and Lincoln were the two youngest men in the
House. During this session, Mr. Lincoln said very little, but
learned much. As he was a novice in legislation, he left the
talking to older and wiser men. James Semple, afterwards
United States Senator, was elected speaker, and by him
Lincoln was assigned to the second place on the committee
on public accounts and expenditures. The subject of
controlling interest before the legislature has no special
interest in connection with Mr. Lincoln’s life. The state was
new, and very imperfectly developed. A plan of internal
improvements was in agitation, special reference being had
to a loan for the beneﬁt of the Illinois and Michigan Canal
Company, which had been incorporated in 1825. The loan
bill was not carried at this session, though it was at a
 subsequent one. Lincoln was constantly in his place, and
faithful in the performance of all the duties that were
devolved upon him. When the session c1oeed, he walked
home as he came, and resumed his law and his surveying.
The canvass of 1836, which resulted in his re-election to
the legislature, was an unusually exciting one, and resulted
in the choice of a House which has probably never been
equaled in any state, in the whole history of the country, for
its number of remarkable men. As early as June 13th, of
that year, we ﬁnd a letter in the Sangamon Journal,
addressed by Mr. Lincoln to the editor, beginning as
follows: “In your paper of last Saturday, I see a
communication over the signature of ‘Many Voters,’ in
which the candidates who are announced in the Journal,
are called upon to ‘show their hands.’ Agreed. Here’s
mine.” He then goes on in his characteristic way to “show
his hand,” which was that substantially of the new whig
party. It was during this canvass that he made the most
striking speech he had ever uttered, and one that
established his reputation as a ﬁrst-class political debater.
It has been spoken of, by some writers, as the ﬁrst speech
he ever uttered; but this is a mistake. The opposing
candidates had met at Springﬁeld, as is the custom in the
western states, for a public discussion of the questions
involved in the canvass; and a large number of citizens had
gathered in the Court House to hear the speeches. Ninian
W. Edwards, then a whig, led oﬀ, and was followed by Dr.
Early, a sharp debater and a representative man among the
democrats. Early bore down very heavily upon Edwards —
 so much so that the latter wanted the opportunity for an
immediate rejoinder, but Lincoln took his turn upon the
platform. Embarrassed at ﬁrst, and speaking slowly, he
began to lay down and ﬁx his propositions. His auditors
followed him with breathless attention, and saw him inclose
his adversary in a wall of fact, and then weave over him a
network of deductions so logically tight in all its meshes,
that there was no escape for the victim. He forgot himself
entirely, as he grew warm at his work. His audience
applauded, and with ridicule and wit he riddled the man
whom he had made helpless. Men who remember the
speech allude particularly to the transformation which it
wrought in Mr. Lincoln’s appearance. The homely man was
majestic, 
the 
plain, 
good-natured 
face 
was 
full 
of
expression, the long, bent ﬁgure was straight as an arrow,
and the kind and dreamy eyes ﬂashed with the ﬁre of true
inspiration. His reputation was made, and from that day to
the day of his death, he was recognized in Illinois as one of
the most powerful orators in the state.
The Sangamon County delegation, consisting of nine
representatives, was so remarkable for the physical altitude
of its members that they were known as “The Long Nine.”
Not a man of the number was less than six feet high, and
Lincoln was the tallest of the nine, as he was the leading
man intellectually, in and out of the House. Among those
who 
composed 
the 
House, 
were 
General 
John 
A.
McClernand, afterward, a member of Congress, Jesse K.
Dubois, afterwards auditor of the state; James Semple, the
speaker of this and the previous House, and subsequently
 United States Senator; Robert Smith, afterwards member
of Congress; John Hogan, at present a member or Congress
from St. Louis; General James Shields, afterwards United
States Senator; John Dement, who has since been treasurer
of the state; Stephen A. Douglas, whose subsequent public
career is familiar to all; Newton Cloud, president of the
convention which framed the present state constitution of
Illinois; John J. Hardin, who fell at Buena Vista; John Moore,
afterwards Lieutenant Governor of the state; William A.
Richardson, subsequently United States Senator, and
William 
McMurtny, 
who 
has 
since 
been 
Lieutenant
Governor of the State. This list does not embrace all who
had then, or who have since been distinguished, but it is
large enough to show that Lincoln was, during the term of
this legislature, thrown into association and often into
antagonism with the brightest men of the new state. It is
enough, with this fact in mind, to say that he was by them
and by the people regarded as one of the leading men in
the House.
The principal measure with this legislature was the
adoption of a general system of public improvements. It
was a great object with the special friends of this measure
to secure the co-operation and support of the two senators
and nine representatives from Sangamon County, but they
ﬁrmly refused to support the measure, unless the removal
of the capital from Vandalia to Springﬁeld was made a part
of the proposed system. So the measure for this removal
passed through its various stages in company with the
internal improvement bill, and both were enacted on the
 same day. The measure which thus changed the location of
the capital of the state to Springﬁeld, brought great
popularity to the members from Sangamon, at least in their
own home, and especially to Mr. Lincoln, who was put
forward on all occasions to do the important work in
securing it. When it is remembered that he had achieved
his position before the people and among the leading men
of the state at the early age of twenty-seven, it must be
admitted that the disadvantages under which he had
labored had not hindered him from doing what the best
educated and most favored would have been proud to do.
It was at this session that Mr. Lincoln met Stephen A.
Douglas for the ﬁrst time. Mr. Douglas was then only
twenty-three years old, and was the youngest man in the
House. Mr. Lincoln, in speaking of the fact subsequently,
said that Douglas was then “the least man he ever saw.” He
was not only very short but very slender. The two young
men, who commenced their intellectual and political
sparring during the session, could hardly have foreseen the
struggle in which they were to engage in after years — a
struggle which foreshadowed and even laid the basis of an
epoch in the national history, and in the history of freedom
and progress throughout the world.
This session of the legislature was notable for its
connection with the beginning of Mr. Lincoln’s anti-slavery
history. It was at Vandalia, at this time, that Mr. Lincoln and
Mr. Douglas marked out the course in which they were to
walk — one to disappointment and a grave of unsatisﬁed
hopes and baﬄed ambitions, the other to the realization of
 his highest dreams of achievement and renown, and a
martyrdom that crowns his memory with an undying glory.
Illinois contained many immigrants from the border slave
states. Its territory was joined to two of them; and there
was a strong desire to live in harmony with neighbors quick
to anger and resentment, and sensitive touching their
“peculiar institution.” The prevailing sentiment in the state
was in favor of slavery, or in favor of slaveholders in the
exercise of their legal and constitutional rights. There
were, in fact, a few hundred slaves living in the state at
that time, as appears by the census tables, but by what law
is not apparent. The democratic party was unanimously
pro-slavery, and whatever there may have been of anti-
slavery sentiment among the whigs was practically of little
account. The abolitionist was hated and despised by both
parties alike, and the whigs deprecated and disowned the
tide with indignation. There was doubtless some anti-
slavery sentiment among the whigs, but it was weak and
timid. Both parties were strong in their professed regard
for the Constitution, and neither party doubted that the
Constitution protected the institution of American Slavery.
The agitation of the slavery question was just beginning
to create uneasiness among slaveholders and politicians;
and during the winter the subject was broached in the
legislature. Resolutions were introduced of an extreme pro-
slavery character, and the attempt was made to ﬁx the
stigma of abolitionism upon all who did not indorse them.
They were carried through by the large democratic
majority, and the opposition to them was weak in numbers
 and weaker still in its positions. We can judge something of
its weakness when we learn that only two men among all
the whig members were found willing to subscribe to a
protest against these resolutions. Abraham Lincoln and Dan
Stone, “representatives from the County of Sangamon,”
entered upon the Journal of the House their reasons for
refusing to vote for these oﬀensive resolutions, and they
were the only men in the state who had the manliness to do
it. The points of the protest were these: that while “the
Congress of the United States has no power under the
Constitution to interfere with the institution of slavery in
the diﬀerent states,” and that while “the promulgation of
abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its
evils,” still, the “institution of slavery is founded on both
injustice and bad policy,” and Congress “has the power,
under the Constitution, to abolish slavery in the District of
Columbia.” The latter proposition was qualiﬁed by the
statement that this power “ought not to be exercised unless
at the request of the people of said District.” Certainly this
protest was a moderate one, and we may judge by it
something of the character of the resolutions which
compelled its utterance. We may judge something also of
the low grade of anti-slavery sentiment in the whig party at
that time, when only two men could be found to sign so
moderate and guarded a document as this. Still, the refusal
to sign may have been a matter of policy, for which a good
reason could be given. It was something, however, for two
men to stand out, and protest that slavery was a moral and
political evil, over which Congress had power upon the
 national territory. It was the beginning of Mr. Lincoln’s anti-
slavery record, and modest and moderate as it was, and
much as Mr. Lincoln afterwards accomplished for the
abolition of slavery, he never became more extreme in his
views than the words of this protest indicate. He never
ceased to believe that Congress had no power under the
Constitution to interfere with slavery in the diﬀerent states.
He never thought worse of slavery than that it was founded
in injustice and bad policy. He never changed his belief
touching the power of Congress over the institution of
slavery in territory under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
United States. This little protest, entered into with his
brother representative, Dan Stone, was the outline of the
platform upon which he stood, and fought out the great
anti-slavery battle whose trophies were four million
freedmen, and a nation redeemed to justice and humanity.
In the meantime, Mr. Lincoln had made no money. He
had walked his hundred miles to Vandalia in 1836, as he did
in 1834, and when the session closed he walked home
again. A gentleman in Menard County remembers meeting
him and a detachment of “The Long Nine” on their way
home. They were all mounted except Lincoln, who had thus
far kept up with them on foot. If he had money, he was
hoarding it for more important purposes than that of saving
leg-weariness and leather. The weather was raw, and
Lincoln’s clothing was none of the warmest. Complaining of
being cold to one of his companions, this irreverent
member of “The Long Nine” told his future President that it
was no wonder he was cold— “there was so much of him on
 the ground.” None of the party appreciated this homely
joke at the expense of his feet (they were doubtless able to
bear it) more thoroughly than Lincoln himself. We can
imagine the cross-ﬁres of wit and humor by which the way
was enlivened during this cold and tedious journey. The
scene was certainly a rude one and seems more like a
dream than a reality, when we remember that it occurred
less than thirty years ago, in a state which now contains
hardly less than a million and a half of people and three
thousand miles of railway.
