  ha ter  I .
THE EMERGENCY WHICH the rebellion forced upon the
government found that government no less prepared to
meet it than it found the loyal people of the country
wanting in military knowledge and experience. The people
were so eager to furnish men and supplies that they at once
became impatient for results. No one among them seemed
to doubt that the rebellion might be crushed in a few
months, at most. They did not comprehend the almost
inﬁnite detail of a war. Patience was a virtue which it took
four years to teach them; and when every man connected
with the government was making all the eﬀorts possible to
forward the preparations for the struggle, the popular
press — meaning well, but much misapprehending the
diﬀiculties of the situation — were already ﬁnding fault
with the tardiness of operations. They had apparently
forgotten how long it took to bring the Mexican war to a
successful termination; — indeed, they stood in a very
diﬀerent relation to this war from that which they had held
toward the Mexican war. That was a war of the government
against another power; this was a war of their own, against
domestic traitors who sought to overthrow the government.
Every loyal man had a direct interest in the war; and he
judged every movement and every delay as if it were his
own private enterprise. There were inconveniences in this;
 but, in this universal personal interest, lay the secret of
those four years of popular devotion to the war which so
astonished the observers of other lands, and made ultimate
victory, under Providence, a certainty from the ﬁrst.
This popular impatience was, during the ﬁrst two or
three years of the war, one of the serious diﬀiculties with
which the administration had to deal. It had its advantages
in holding to vigilance and industry all who were in
responsible 
positions, 
but 
it 
had 
disadvantages 
in
sometimes compelling precipitancy of action, and in
breeding in the administration the idea that the people
were to be managed like children whose food should be
carefully prepared in the departments whenever it was
administered, or carefully withheld when their stomachs
were not able to receive it. This idea of the people was not
born in the White House. Mr. Lincoln had a profound
respect for the people, and never had any sympathy with
eﬀorts which aimed to make them instruments in the hands
of the government, or which ignored the fact that they
were the source of all his power.
During the latter part of April, certain important military
operations were eﬀected. Washington, the safety of which
was the ﬁrst consideration, was relieved from immediate
danger; Fortress Monroe, commanding the water gateway
of Virginia, was reinforced and held; the government works
at Harper’s Ferry were blown up and burned by Lieutenant
Jones, in command of a company of regulars, moved by the
intelligence of an advance of a large confederate force;
Cairo, Illinois, an important strategic point at the
 conﬂuence of the Ohio and the Mississippi rivers, had been
occupied by government forces, and the blockade was
extended so as to embrace the states of Virginia and North
Carolina. Then began organization. On the twenty-seventh
of April, Adjutant General Thomas made the following
announcement of new military departments: First, The
military department of Washington, including the District of
Columbia, 
according 
to 
its 
original 
boundary, 
Fort
Washington and the adjacent country, and the state of
Maryland as far as Bladensburgh, to be under the charge of
Colonel Mansﬁeld, with head-quarters at Washington.
Second, The department of Annapolis, head-quarters at
that city, and including the country for twenty miles on
either side of the railroad between Annapolis and
Washington, under command of General B.F. Butler, of the
Massachusetts volunteers. Third, The department of
Pennsylvania, including that state, Delaware and all of
Maryland not included in the other departments already
mentioned, and with Major General Patterson in command.
The extension of the department of Washington to the old
limits of the district was for the purpose of including
territory absolutely necessary for the defense of the capital.
On the following tenth of May, another department was
added to this list, including the states of Ohio, Indiana and
Illinois, under the charge of General George B. McClellan.
The object of this department was to maintain a defensive
line on the Ohio River from Wheeling to Cairo.
On the twenty-ninth of April, Jeﬀerson Davis convened
his Congress at Montgomery, and sent them a message
 which was intended to be a justiﬁcation of himself and his
cause, before the country and the world. It was a document
of rare ability, in its plausible presentation of the favorite
southern doctrine of state rights, and its rehearsal of the
pretended wrongs which the South had suﬀered at the
hands of the North. It must have made a profound
impression upon the great multitude of minds ready to
receive it among his own people, and upon statesmen
abroad who, from the ﬁrst opening of the American
diﬀiculties, manifested a strange ignorance of the genius
and structure of American institutions.
It is interesting to notice here the attempt on the part,
both of Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Davis, to argue the rightfulness
of their respective positions, in a great number of their
state papers. Mr. Lincoln’s old intellectual struggle with Mr.
Douglas had ceased, and Jeﬀerson Davis was now his
antagonist — a man of higher culture and deeper character.
Mr. Davis, in his message, assumed the role of the
wronged party. Notwithstanding the fact that he had seized
all the property of the United States upon which he could
lay his hands, and had, by bombardment, compelled the
surrender of Fort Sumter, he tried to shift the burden of
opening the war upon Mr. Lincoln, whose ca1l for troops,
weeks after a confederate army was on its feet and actively
gathering numbers, was the pretended cause of the
convening of the rebel Congress. In this very message,
indeed, he announced that there were already nineteen
thousand men in diﬀerent forts, and that sixteen thousand
were on their way to Virginia.
 In the doctrine of state rights was the only justiﬁcation of
the rebellion; and it was necessary that Mr. Davis should
labor to establish it. With him, a state was greater than the
United States. The state was sovereign, and the Union was
essentially subject. Whenever, therefore, any state should
have a plausible pretext for dissolVing its union with other
states, it had a right to do so. Mr. Davis did not stop to
consider that he could not establish a government on any
such basis as this, and that the doctrine of state rights
would, in the end, be just as fatal to his confederacy as he
was endeavoring to make it to the United States. On the
other hand, Mr. Lincoln held the Union sovereign and the
state subject. A state had no right to coerce a nation into
dissolution, any more than a county had a right to force a
state into dissolution. He maintained that the United States
were a nation, one and indivisible, and that any attempt to
dissolve it on the part of a state, or a combination of states,
was treason. Here was where the Union and the new
confederacy separated. The confederacy was a logical
result of the doctrine of state rights, and its destruction, by
all the power of the federal government, was the logical
necessity of its contravention. Mr. Lincoln believed that a
nation had a fundamental right to live, and that the United
States were a nation. Mr. Davis believed that the United
States were not a nation — or, if one — that it held its only
right to live at the will of any state that might choose to
exercise it.
On the third of May, Mr. Lincoln found it necessary to call
for forty-two thousand additional volunteers, to serve for
 three years, unless sooner discharged, and for an
aggregate of twenty-two thousand seven hundred and
fourteen men for diﬀerent classes of service in the regular
army. An additional call for eighteen thousand men to serve
in the navy was also made in the same proclamation. The
country gave quick response to this call, and the demand
for army volunteers was soon answered to excess.
The 
area 
of 
operations 
was 
rapidly 
spreading.
Secessionists in and around St. Louis, Missouri, were
plotting for the seizure of the arsenal in that city, but
Captain (afterward General) Lyon promptly thwarted the
scheme, and secured the arms for the government forces. A
secession camp, forming in the same city, was captured,
and many within it taken prisoners. The Governor of
Missouri was disloyal, and did what he could to throw that
state into the hands of the rebels; and General Harney, for
a short time in command of the military department of the
West, so far aided his schemes as to agree with Sterling
Price that the whole duty of maintaining order in the state
should be intrusted to the state authorities. Harney was
removed, and General Lyon put in his place, with a force
for which he found abundant employment, and at the head
of which he afterwards fell — one of the ﬁrst and costliest
sacriﬁces of the war.
During all the ﬁrst part of May, a secession ﬂag ﬂoated
over a building in Alexandria, in sight of the capitol at
Washington; the rebel forces were gathering at Manassas
Junction, and rebel troops held Harper’s Ferry. On the
twenty-second of May, General Butler took command of the
 new department of the South, with head-quarters at
Fortress Monroe. Five days afterward, he issued his famous
order declaring slaves “contraband of war.” The phrase
imbodied a new idea, which was the germ of a new policy,
as well as the basis of a new name for the freed negro.
General Butler had under command here about twelve
thousand men. Confederate troops were already gathering
and fortifying in the vicinity, and on the tenth of June
occurred the ﬁrst considerable battle of the war at Big
Bethel. It was a badly managed aﬀair on the part of the
Union forces; and, in the excited and expectant state of the
public mind, produced a degree of discouragement in the
country quite disproportioned to the importance of its
results. Here fell Major Winthrop, a young man of great
bravery and rare literary ability. The troops fought well, but
were badly handled. Enough was learned, however, of the
bravery of the Yankee, to give prophecy of ﬁne results when
the art of war should be better learned.
These 
comparatively 
small 
and 
widely 
separated
movements were but ripples shot out into the coves and
reaches of treason from the tidal sweep of the loyal armies,
crowding southward to dash against the grand front of the
rebellion. The government had no lack of men; but it
suﬀered sadly for the want of arms to put into their hands.
But they were armed in one way and another — some of
them very poorly. The impatient people could not know how
poorly, because it would expose the weakness of the
government to the enemy; so they clamored for a
movement, and it was made. On the twenty-fourth of May,
 General Mansﬁeld began his passage into Virginia. The
gallant and lamented Colonel Ellsworth was sent with his
regiment of Zouaves to Alexandria; and troops to the
number of thirteen thousand were moved across the river,
and set to work in the erection of forts for the defense of
Washington. Colonel Ellsworth, on landing at Alexandria,
without resistance, went personally to the Marshall House,
kept by James Jackson, and mounting to the top, pulled
down the secession ﬂag with which Jackson had for weeks
been 
insulting 
the 
authorities 
at 
Washington. 
On
descending, the owner shot him dead, and was in turn
immediately shot dead by a private named Brownell, who
accompanied his Colonel.
It is interesting to remember the profound impression
which the death of this young and enthusiastic oﬀicer
produced upon the country. He was among the ﬁrst the
nation gave to the war, and his name, with those of Greble
and Winthrop, who fell at Big Bethel, and Lyon who
afterward fell in Missouri were embalmed in the fresh
sensibilities of the people, and remain there, ﬁxed and
fragrant, while thousands of those since fallen have found
only weary and sickened hearts to rest in, or memories too
sadly crowded with precious names to give them room.
Ellsworth’s death aﬀected Mr. Lincoln with peculiar sorrow.
He had known the young man well. At one time, Ellsworth
was a student in Lincoln 
 Herndon’s oﬀice; and he
accompanied Mr. Lincoln on his journey to Washington. The
body of the young martyr was borne sadly back to
Washington, and was received into the White House itself,
 where the funeral took place, Mr. Lincoln himself assuming
the position of chief mourner.
After the accumulation of a large army on the Virginia
side of the Potomac, it was determined to push forward the
forces then under the command of Major General
McDowell, for a battle with the rebel army which had been
gathered at Manassas. For this battle each side had been
preparing with great industry. The enemy had withdrawn
his forces from the occupation of Harper’s Ferry, and that
important point had passed into federal control. From every
quarter he gathered in his troops, or held them within easy
call, and waited for the attack. It began on the nineteenth,
and ended on the twenty-ﬁrst of July, in a most terrible rout
of the Union forces. The whole army upon which the
President and the people had rested such strong hope and
expectation was broken in pieces, and came ﬂying back
toward Washington, Panic-stricken, worn out, disorganized
and utterly demoralized. They had fought bravely and well;
but they were not above inﬂuences that have aﬀected
armies since time began, and they yielded to fears which
made them uncontrollable.
The loss of this battle, fought under the pressure of
popular impatience, cost the country a fearful amount of
sacriﬁce. 
It 
greatly 
encouraged 
the 
rebels, 
their
sympathizers abroad sent up a shout of triumph, and the
loyal masses were put to such a test of their patriotism and
determined bravery as they had never been subjected to.
The work had all to be done again, under the most
discouraging circumstances; but when the case was
 reviewed, reason was found for gratitude that it had been
no worse. Washington, at the close of the battle at Bull Run,
was at the mercy of the rebels. It was well that they did not
know this, or that, if they knew it, they were not in a
condition to push on, and occupy what must have fallen
into their hands.
Among all the millions to whom this event brought
sorrow, there was not one who suﬀered so keenly as the
tender-hearted and patient man who, walking back and
forth between the White House and the War Department,
felt the great burden of it all upon his own shoulders. He
had need of the full exercise of his abounding faith in
Providence to sustain him in that dark and perilous hour.
He could not but feel that peace had been put far away by
the result of the battle; but he learned afterwards that
Providence had wise and beneﬁcent designs in that result.
Peace conquered then, would have been peace with the
cause of the war retained. Peace then would have left four
million slaves in bondage. Peace then would have left the
“house divided against itself” still, with the possibility of an
indeﬁnite extension of slavery. It was not so to be. A
thousand plagues were yet to come before the public mind
would be ready to let the bondman go.
Soon after the original movement into Virginia, the
Postmaster-general suspended all postal service in the
seceded states; and at this time active movements
commenced in General McClellan’s department. Under the
auspices of Governor Magoﬀin of Kentucky — one of the
governors who had sent back an insulting response to the
 President’s original call for troops — his Inspector-general
Buckner organized a force in Kentucky, which was watched
with much anxiety by the loyal people on the other side of
the Ohio, because it was believed to be intended for the
rebel service. Buckner visited General McClellan at
Cincinnati on the eighth of June, and on the twenty-second
of that month he reported to Governor Magoﬀin the terms
of a convention into which he had entered with the federal
general. Brieﬂy he reported that General McClellan
stipulated that Kentucky should be regarded by the United
States as neutral territory, even though southern troops
should occupy it. In such a case, the United States should
call upon Kentucky to remove such troops, and if she
should fail to do so within a reasonable time, then the
General claimed the same right of occupation accorded to
the southern troops, and promised to withdraw so soon as
those troops should be expelled. Whether this was a true
statement of the agreement or not, General McClellan did
nothing inconsistent with it, although he afterwards denied
Buckner’s statement of the results of the consultation. The
occupation and defense of important points upon the bank
of the river opposite Cincinnati were abandoned, and, in a
letter to Mr. Crittenden, he disclaimed all responsibility for
the intrusion of a body of General Prentiss’ men, who had
landed on the Kentucky shore and brought away a
secession ﬂag. The General, it was evident, did not
comprehend the character of the rebellion, or he failed to
recognize the fact that in such a struggle there could be no
 such 
thing 
as 
the 
neutrality 
which 
Kentucky 
was
professedly desirous to maintain.
The tenderness of the government, as well as of the
generals it had appointed, toward slavery, is worthy of note
at this juncture. Mr. Lincoln had always taken great pains
to show that he respected the legal rights of slavery under
the Constitution. The republicans, in national convention
and in Congress, had done the same. The three democratic
generals it had placed in command — Butler, Patterson and
McClellan — went a step further, and promised in advance
that they would not only not interfere with slavery, but
would 
assist 
the 
rebels 
in 
putting 
down 
a 
slave
insurrection. General Butler, of the three, experienced a
healthy reaction from this devotion to slavery at an early
day.
Western Virginia was loyal, and, on the seventeenth of
June, in convention at Wheeling, repudiated the ordinance
of secession passed by the state convention, and promptly
inaugurated a new state government, with Francis H.
Pierpoint for Governor. This was the ﬁrst step toward
“reconstruction,” and it was taken under the direct
sanction of Mr. Lincoln. The doctrine of secession thus
early returned to plague the inventors. Rebel forces and
rebel sympathizers were of course in Western Virginia; and
a campaign was inaugurated there, early in June, for the
expulsion of these forces from the territory. General
Rosecrans and General Thomas A. Morris had this
campaign in hand, and, on the twenty-third of June,
General McClellan arrived. On the tenth of July, a skirmish
 was had with the rebels at Laurel Hill, and two days later
the battle of Rich Mountain was fought, which resulted in
the defeat and surrender of the rebel Colonel Pegram, with
a thousand men. This did not compass the successes of the
day. General Garnett who was bringing supports to General
Pegram was pursued, his forces routed, and himself killed.
This temporarily cleaned out the enemy from Western
Virginia. 
General 
McClellan’s 
dispatch 
to 
the 
war
department announcing this very grateful victory was
direct, spirited and well written, and immediately attracted
the attention of the country. These successes in Western
Virginia, together with the Napoleonic manner of their
announcement, paved the way to that wonderful popular
conﬁdence 
which 
was 
afterward 
accorded 
to 
the
commanding general, although he had very little to do in
planning the campaign in which they were won, or the
battles by which they were secured.
Congress, 
according 
to 
the 
proclamation 
of 
the
President, had assembled on the fourth of July, and was of
course in session when the successes in Western Virginia
were achieved, as well as when the rout of the army at Bull
Run occurred. Indeed, the presence of the members at
Washington added to the pressure which precipitated the
movement that resulted so disastrously. Some of the
members went out to see the ﬁght. One of these was taken
prisoner, and others took such a lesson in retreating as to
cure them of all curiosity concerning battles and battle-
ﬁelds forever.
 On 
the 
meeting 
of 
Congress, 
the 
President
communicated a message which was received with
profound interest, both by Congress and the whole country.
The opening portions of the document were strictly
historical of the events of the rebellion up to the date of its
utterance; and as the most of these events have already
found record in these pages, their reproduction is not
necessary.
By opening ﬁre upon Sumter, when it had not “a gun in
sight, or in expectancy, to return their ﬁre, save only the
few in the fort sent to that harbor years before for their
own protection,” he declared that the rebels had forced
upon the country the distinct issue — immediate dissolution
or blood. “And this issue,” the message proceeds,
“embraces more than the fate of these United States. It
presents to the whole family of man the question whether a
constitutional republic or democracy — a government of
the people by the same people — can or cannot maintain its
territorial integrity, against its own domestic foes. It
presents the question whether discontented individuals, too
few in numbers to control administration according to
organic law in any case, can always, upon the pretences
made in this case, or on any other pretences, or arbitrarily,
without any pretence, break up their government, and thus
practically put an end to free government upon the earth. It
forces us to ask, ‘Is there in all republics, this inherent and
fatal weakness?’ ‘Must a government, of necessity, be too
strong for the liberties of its own people, or too weak to
maintain its own existence?’”
 The attempt of some of the border states to maintain a
sort of armed neutrality — as illustrated in the case of
Kentucky — the arming of those states to keep the forces
on either side from passing over their territory — he
declared would be disunion completed, if for a moment
entertained. It would be building “an impassable wall along
the line of separation, and yet, not quite an impassable one,
for, under the guise of neutrality, it would tie the hands of
Union men, and freely pass supplies from among them to
the insurrectionists, which it could not do as an open
enemy. At a stroke it would take all the trouble oﬀ the
hands of secession, except only what proceeds from the
external blockade.”
Soon after the ﬁrst call for militia, liberty was given to
the commanding general to suspend the privilege of the
writ of habeas corpus in certain cases, or “to arrest and
detain without resort to the ordinary processes of law such
individuals as he might deem dangerous to the public
safety.” Although this liberty was indulged very sparingly,
there 
were 
not 
wanting 
men 
unfriendly 
to 
the
administration who made it the subject of factious
complaint. This fact Mr. Lincoln noticed, and this was his
defense:
“The whole of the laws which were required to be
faithfully executed were being resisted, and failing of
execution, in nearly one-third of the states. Must they be
allowed to ﬁnally fail of execution, even had it been
perfectly clear that by the use of the means necessary to
their execution some single law, made in such extreme
 tenderness of the citizen’s liberty, that, practically, it
relieves more of the guilty than the innocent, should, to a
very limited extent, be violated? To state the question more
directly: are all the laws but one to go unexecuted, and the
government itself go to pieces, lest that one be violated?
Even in such a case, would not the oﬀicial oath be broken,
if the government should be overthrown when it was
believed that disregarding the single law would tend to
preserve it? But it was not believed that this question was
presented. It was not believed that any law was violated.
The provision of the Constitution that ‘the privilege of the
writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless, when
in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may
require it,’ is equivalent to a provision — is a provision —
that such privilege may be suspended when, in case of
rebellion or invasion, the public safety does require it. It
was decided that we have a case of rebellion, and that the
public safety does require the qualiﬁed suspension of the
privilege of the writ, which was authorized to be made.
Now it is insisted that Congress, and not the Executive, is
invested with this power. But the Constitution itself is silent
as to which or who is to exercise this power; and as the
provision was plainly made for a dangerous emergency, it
cannot be believed the framers of the instrument intended
that, in every case, the danger should run its course until
Congress could be called together, the very assembling of
which might be prevented, as was intended in this case by
the rebellion.”
 After recommending that Congress make the contest a
short and decisive one, by placing at the control of the
government four hundred thousand men and four hundred
million dollars, and stating that a right result at that time
would be worth more to the world than ten times the men
and ten times the money, Mr. Lincoln took up the doctrine
of state rights, state sovereignty, the right of secession,
c., and argued against it at length, doubtless as a reply to
the message of Mr. Davis, and to place before the world,
whose governments and people were sitting in judgment on
the case, the grounds of the national struggle with the
rebellion. The passage is too important to be abbreviated:
“It might seem, at ﬁrst thought, to be of little diﬀerence
whether the present movement at the South be called
“secession,” or “rebellion.” The movers, however, will
understand the diﬀerence. At the beginning, they knew
they could never raise their treason to any respectable
magnitude by any name which implies violation of law. They
knew their people possessed as much of moral sense, as
much of devotion to law and order, and as much pride in,
and reverence for the history and government of their
common country, as any other civilized and patriotic
people. They knew they could make no advancement
directly in the teeth of these strong and noble sentiments.
Accordingly, they commenced by an insidious debauching
of the public mind. They invented an ingenious sophism,
which, if conceded, was followed by perfectly logical steps,
through all the incidents, to the complete destruction of the
Union. The sophism itself is, that any state of the Union
 may, consistently with the national Constitution, and
therefore lawfully and peacefully, withdraw from the Union
without the consent of the Union, or of any other state. The
little disguise that the supposed right is to be exercised
only for just cause, themselves to be the sole judges of its
justice, is too thin to merit any notice.
“With rebellion thus sugar-coated they have been
drugging the public mind of their section for more than
thirty years, and until at length they have brought many
good men to a willingness to take up arms against the
government the day after some assemblage of men have
enacted the farcical pretence of taking their state out of the
Union, who could haye been brought to no such thing the
day before.
“This sophism derives much, perhaps the whole, of its
currency 
from 
the 
assumption 
that 
there 
is 
some
omnipotent and sacred supremacy pertaining to a state —
to each state of our Federal Union. Our states have neither
more nor less power than that reserved to them in the
Union by the Constitution — no one of them ever having
been a state out of the Union. The original ones passed into
the Union even before they cast oﬀ their British colonial
dependence; and the new ones each came into the Union
directly from a condition of dependence, excepting Texas.
And even Texas, in its temporary independence, was never
designated a state. The new ones only took the designation
of states on coming into the Union, while that name was
ﬁrst adopted by the old ones in and by the Declaration of
Independence. 
Therein 
the 
“United 
Colonies” 
were
 declared to be “free and independent states;” but, even
then, 
the 
object 
plainly 
was 
not 
to 
declare 
their
independence of one another, or of the Union, but directly
the contrary, as their mutual pledge and their mutual action
before, at the time, and afterwards, abundantly show. The
express plighting of faith by each and all of the original
thirteen in the Articles of Confederation, two years later,
that the Union shall be perpetual, is most conclusive.
Having never been states, either in substance or in name,
outside of the Union, whence this magical omnipotence of
“state rights,” asserting a claim of power to lawfully
destroy the Union itself? Much is said about the
“sovereignty” of the states; but the word even is not in the
national Constitution; nor, as is believed, in any of the state
constitutions. What is “sovereignty” in the political sense of
the term? Would it be far wrong to deﬁne it “a political
community without a political superior?” Tested by this, no
one of our states except Texas, ever was a sovereignty. And
even Texas gave up the character on coming into the
Union; by which act she acknowledged the Constitution of
the United States and the laws and treaties of the United
States made in pursuance of the Constitution, to be for her
the supreme law of the land. The states have their status in
the Union, and they have no other legal status. If they
break from this, they can only do so against law and by
revolution. The Union, and not themselves, separately,
procured their independence and their liberty. By conquest
or purchase the Union gave each of them whatever of
independence or liberty it has. The Union is older than any
 of the states, and, in fact, it created them as states.
Originally some dependent colonies made the Union, and,
in turn, the Union threw oﬀ their old dependence for them,
and made them states, such as they are. Not one of them
ever had a state constitution independent of the Union. Of
course, it is not forgotten that all the new states framed
their 
constitutions 
before 
they 
entered 
the 
Union;
nevertheless dependent upon, and preparatory to, coming
into the Union.
“Unquestionably the states have the powers and rights
reserved to them in and by the national Constitution: but
among these, surely, are not included all conceivable
powers, however mischievous or destructive; but, at most,
such only as were known in the world, at the time, as
governmental powers; and, certainly, a power to destroy
the Government itself had never been known as a
governmental — as a merely administrative power. This
relative matter of national power and state rights, as a
principle, is no other than the principle of generality and
locality. Whatever concerns the whole should be conﬁded to
the whole — to the general government; while whatever
concerns only the state should be left exclusively to the
state. This is all there is of original principle about it.
Whether the national Constitution in deﬁning boundaries
between the two has applied the principle with exact
accuracy, is not to be questioned. We are all bound by that
deﬁning, without question.
“What is now combated, is the position that secession is
consistent with the Constitution — is lawful and peaceful. Is
 is not contended that there is any express law for it; and
nothing should ever be implied as law which leads to unjust
or absurd consequences. The nation purchased with money
the countries out of which several of these states were
formed; is it just that they shall go oﬀ without leave and
without refunding? The nation paid very large sums (in the
aggregate, I believe, nearly a hundred millions) to relieve
Florida of the aboriginal tribes; is it just that she shall now
be oﬀ without consent, or without making any return? The
nation is now in debt for money applied to the beneﬁt of
these so-called seceding states in common with the rest; is
it just either that creditors shall go unpaid, or the
remaining states pay the whole? A part of the present
national debt was contracted to pay the old debts of Texas;
is it just that she shall leave and pay no part of this herself?
“Again, if one state may secede, so may another; and
when all shall have seceded, none is left to pay the debts. Is
this quite just to creditors? Did we notify them of this sage
view of ours when we borrowed their money? If we now
recognize this doctrine by allowing the seceders to go in
peace, it is diﬀicult to see what we can do if others choose
to go, or to extort terms upon which they will promise to
remain.
“The seceders insist that our Constitution admits of
secession. They have assumed to make a national
constitution of their own, in which, of necessity, they have
either discarded or retained the right of secession, as they
insist it exists in ours. If they have discarded it, they
thereby admit that on principle it ought not to exist in ours;
 if they have retained it, by their own construction of ours
they show that, to be consistent, they must secede from one
another whenever they shall ﬁnd it the easiest way of
settling their debts, or eﬀecting any other selﬁsh or unjust
object. The principle itself is one of disintegration, and
upon which no government can possibly endure.
“If all the states save one should assert the power to
drive that one out of the Union, it is presumed the whole
class of seceder politicians would at once deny the power,
and denounce the act as the greatest outrage upon state
rights. But suppose that precisely the same act, instead of
being called ‘driving the one out,’ should be called ‘the
seceding of the others from that one,’ it would be exactly
what the seceders claim to do, unless, indeed, they make
the point that the one, because it is a minority, may
rightfully do what the others, because they are a majority,
may not rightfully do. These politicians are subtle, and
profound on the rights of minorities. They are not partial to
that power which made the Constitution, and speaks from
the preamble, calling itself ‘We, the people.’”
The popular government of the United States, Mr.
Lincoln said, had been called an experiment. Two points of
the experiment had already been settled; the government
had been established, and it had been administered. One
point 
remained 
to 
be 
established: 
its 
successful
maintenance against a formidable internal attempt to
overthrow it. It remained to be demonstrated to the world
that those who could fairly carry an election could also
suppress a rebellion— “that ballots are the rightful and
 peaceful successors to bullets, and that when ballots have
fairly and constitutionally decided, there can be no
successful appeal back to bullets — that there can be no
successful 
appeal, 
except 
to 
ballots 
themselves, 
at
succeeding elections.” Another justiﬁcation of the war in
which he was engaged he found in that article of the
Constitution which provides that “the United States shall
guarantee to every state in this Union a republican form of
government.” If a state might lawfully go out of the Union,
it might also, having gone out, discard the republican form
of government, “so that to prevent its going out is an
indispensable means to the end of maintaining the
guarantee mentioned; and when an end is lawful and
obligatory, the indispensable means to it are also lawful and
obligatory.”
Congress was ready to do all that the President desired,
and even more. Instead of four hundred million dollars,
they placed at his disposal ﬁve hundred millions, and
instead of conﬁning his levy of troops to four hundred
thousand, they gave him liberty to call out half a million.
They also legalized all the steps he had thus far taken for
the suppression of the rebellion, and labored in all ways to
strengthen his hands and encourage his heart. These
measures were passed in the presence, and against the
protest, of secessionists, who still held their places in both
houses of Congress. Burnett of Kentucky and Reid and
Norton of Missouri, in the House, afterwards proved their
treason by engaging directly in the rebellion. Breckinridge
and Powell of Kentucky and Polk and Johnson of Missouri,
 in the Senate, were known at the time to be anything but
loyal. And they had sympathizers who, under any other
government, would have been arrested and held, if not
treated with still greater severity. Vallandigham of Ohio was
afterwards sent into the rebel lines for treason, and it is
undoubtedly true that Kennedy of Maryland, Bayard of
Delaware, Bright of Indiana, and Ben Wood of New York
had personal reason for feeling that he had been very
harshly used. Yet it was best that these men should be
where they were, to bicker and bite, and illustrate the spirit
of that incorporate infamy — a slaveholders’ rebellion.
Such 
toleration 
illustrated 
alike 
the 
strength 
and
moderation of the government. Some of these men were
permitted to rise in the places they had justly forfeited,
and, with perjured lips, to talk treason — to complain of
arbitrary arrests when they were suﬀered to go and come,
and scheme and brawl with perfect liberty, in the streets of
the national capital.
There was plenty of treasonable talk in Congress, but no
treasonable action. The party friends of the government
were in a majority, and they were aided by numbers of loyal
democrats. The schemes of ﬁnance recommended by Mr.
Chase, the Secretary of the Treasury, were adopted
essentially as recommended, a moderate conﬁscation act
was passed, and a resolution adopted by the House —
introduced by Mr. Crittenden of Kentucky — that the war
had been forced upon the country by the disunionists of the
southern states, then in revolt against the constitutional
government and in arms around the capital: that Congress,
 banishing all feeling of passion or resentment, would
recollect only its duty to the whole country: that the war
was not waged on the part of the government in the spirit
of oppression, nor for any purpose of conquest or
subjugation, nor purpose of overthrowing or interfering
with the rights or established institutions of the states; but
to defend and maintain the supremacy of the Constitution,
and to preserve the Union, with all the dignities, equality
and rights of the several states unimpaired: and that as
soon as those objects were accomplished, the war ought to
cease. During the session, Mr. Trumbull or Illinois
introduced a bill in the Senate to emancipate all the slaves
in the rebel states. This was a prophecy and a threat of
what would come as the reward of rebel contumacy.
The session closed on the sixth day of August, having
lasted but little more than a month. The President found
himself abundantly supported, and the means in his hands
for carrying on the great contest.
The message of Mr. Lincoln to this extra session of
Congress, taken with his inaugural, did much to overcome
the unpleasant impressions produced by the speeches he
made on his way to Washington. There is no question that
those speeches seriously damaged him, and shook the
conﬁdence of the country in his ability. The inaugural and
the message had the old ring in them, and betrayed
something of those qualities which had originally attracted
the country to him.
It is true, however, that he did not spend much time in
writing his messages. His later eﬀorts in this line did not
 bear always so many marks of painstaking as the ﬁrst. He
had a great aversion to what he called “machine writing,”
and always used the fewest words possible to express his
meaning. Mr. Defrees, the public printer, an intimate
personal friend of Mr. Lincoln, testiﬁes that he made the
fewest corrections in his proof of any man he ever knew. He
knew nothing of the rules of punctuation, yet the
manuscripts of very few of our public men are as well
punctuated as his uniformly were, though his use of
commas was excessive.
Mr. Defrees, being on easy terms with Mr. Lincoln, took it
upon him to suggest with relation to his ﬁrst message that
he was not preparing a campaign document, or delivering a
stump speech in Illinois, but constructing an important
state paper, that would go down historically to all coming
time; and that, therefore, he did not consider the phrase,
“sugar-coated,” which he had introduced, as entirely a
becoming and digniﬁed one. “Well, Defrees,” said Mr.
Lincoln, good naturedly, “if you think the time will ever
come when the people will not understand what “sugar-
coated” means, I’ll alter it; otherwise, I think I’ll let it go.”
To make people understand exactly what he meant, was his
grand aim. Beyond that, he had not the slightest ambition
to go.
To close this chapter, it only remains to record the relief
of Major General McDowell, a worthy but unfortunate
oﬀicer, and the appointment of General McClellan to the
command of the army of the Potomac. The country had
been attracted to McClellan by his dispatches from Western
 Virginia. General Scott favored him, and to him was
accordingly assigned the work of re-organizing the
shattered army. The public hope was ready to cling
somewhere, and the public heart gave itself to McClellan
with an enthusiastic devotion rarely accorded to any man.
His pictures were in all the windows of the shops, and on
all the center tables of all the drawing-rooms in the land. If
he had done but little before to merit this conﬁdence — if
he did but little afterwards to justify it — he, at least,
served at that time to give faith to the people, and furnish a
rallying point for their patriotic service. For three months,
under 
his 
faithful 
and 
assiduous 
supervision, 
the
organization of troops went on, until he had at his
command a magniﬁcent army which needed only to be
properly led to be victorious.
  ha ter   .
THE VICTORY OF the rebels at Bull Run was singularly
barren of material results to them. It did not encourage the
disloyal masses of the country more than it ﬁlled with new
determination the loyal people who opposed them. They
were as badly punished as the troops they had defeated,
and could take no advantage of their victory; and they
failed to bring nearer the day of foreign recognition for
which they were laboring and longing.
This matter of foreign recognition was a very important
one to Mr. Davis and his confederates. That he expected it,
and had reason to expect it, there is no question. Hostilities
had 
hardly 
opened 
when 
the 
British 
and 
French
governments, acting in concert, recognized the government
established at Montgomery as a belligerent power. If this
was not a pledge of friendliness, and a promise of
recognition, nothing could have been, for the proceeding
was unprecedented. The United States was a power in
friendly intercourse with these two great powers of Europe,
through complete diplomatic relations. Without a word of
warning, without a victory on the part of the insurgents,
without a confederate ﬂeet aﬂoat, with only a half of the
slave states in insurrection, these two governments, with
the most indecent haste, gave their moral support to the
enemies of the United States by recognizing a portion of its
