  ha ter    .
THE PEN HAS been so busy with the record of the great
national events with which Mr. Lincoln was directly
concerned, that no space has been found for entering the
White House, and witnessing the kind of life that was lived
there. The closing paragraphs of the last chapter will give
an intimation of some of the perplexities that attended Mr.
Lincoln’s 
daily 
experience. 
More 
than 
any 
of 
his
predecessors was he regarded as the father of his people.
He was so accessible that they came to him with all their
troubles, from the represeptatives of the factions in
Missouri, to the old woman who applied to him to have a
sum of money reserved from the wages of a clerk in one of
the departments, that he might pay her bill for board.
Every man seemed to think that Mr. Lincoln could settle his
little diﬀiculty, or provide for his little want, whatever it
might be. It was the story of his younger life re-enacted. He
had always been a reconciler of diﬀiculties between men;
and he remarked, while in the presidential chair, that it
seemed as if he was regarded as a police justice, before
whom all the petty troubles of men were brought for
adjustment.
In one matter — and that an important one — he diﬀered
from all who had preceded him in his oﬀice. Such an aﬀair
as a genuine cabinet consultation hardly occurred during
 his administration. His heads of departments were heads of
departments indeed. He intended that they should do the
work of their special oﬀice, and that they should be held
responsible for it. The aﬀairs of state were managed by Mr.
Seward, and not by Mr. Lincoln. The Treasury was almost
as much in the hands of Mr. Chase, during his occupation of
oﬀice, as if he were irresponsible to the head of the
government. The same fact held concerning all the other
secretaries. He was more intimate with the Secretary of
War, probably, than with any other member of the cabinet,
because operations in the ﬁeld were the leading aﬀairs of
interest and importance; and it is probable, also, that his
inﬂuence was more felt in the war oﬀice than in any other
of the departments. Mr. Chase has said that he never
attended a meeting of the cabinet without taking with him
the ﬁgures that showed the exact condition of the Treasury
at the time, and that, during the whole of his oﬀicial life, he
was not once called upon to show these ﬁgures. Mr. Lincoln
contented himself with such knowledge as he gained in a
general way concerning the aﬀairs entrusted to him. The
tenacity with which he clung to his chosen advisers and
oﬀicial family, throughout all the attempts of politicians and
the public to unseat them, was remarkable; and illustrated
not only the faithfulness of his friendship but the
inﬂexibleness of his will.
If any action was ever taken by one of his secretaries
that seemed to him ill-advised, he did not hesitate to
interfere; but, sitting in his place, and performing what
seemed to him to be his special duties, he intended that his
 associates in the government should sit in their places, and
perform their duties; and he left them free to win such
honor as they could, by the administration of the aﬀairs of
their respective departments.
The ﬁrst three years of the war, with all their
excitements, responsibilities and anxieties, produced a
powerful eﬀect upon his physical constitution. He entered
the White House a healthy man, with a frame of iron; and,
withdut indulgence in a single debilitating vice, he became
a feeble man, weary and worn beyond the reach of rest.
The tired feeling very rarely left him. His relief was in
story-telling, 
in 
books 
of 
humor, 
in 
theatrical
representations, and in music. A lady who was, for a time, a
member of his family, related to the writer an incident
touching his love of music and its eﬀect upon him. One
evening he was prevailed upon to attend the opera. He was
very tired, and quite inclined to remain at home; but, at the
close of the evening’s entertainment, he declared himself
so much rested that he felt as if he could go home and work
a month. Simple heart-songs pleased him, however, much
more than the elaborate music of the opera. The poetry of
Burns, and the class of verse to which it belonged, were
subjects of his special admiration; and the music that was
their ﬁtting expression was to him the most delightful of all.
With the soldiers who were ﬁghting the battles of the
country, he had the deepest sympathy. Whenever he was
congratulated upon a success in the ﬁeld, he never failed to
allude gratefully to the noble men who had won it. The
trials of these men — their sacriﬁces of comfort and health,
 of limb and life — touched him with a sympathy that really
sapped the foundations of his constitution. They were
constantly in his thoughts; and not a battle was fought to
whose sacriﬁces his own vitality did not contribute. He
admired the ﬁghting man, and looked upon him as, in one
sense, his superior. Although he did not plead guilty to the
weakness of moral cowardice, he felt that the battle-ﬁeld
was a fearful place, from which, unaided by its special
inspirations, he should run. Indeed, Mr. Lincoln did not give
himself credit for the physical courage which he really
possessed, though he had probably grown timid with his
failing strength.
This sympathy with the soldiers he manifested in many
ways, and in none more than in his treatment of their
oﬀenses against military law. In a letter to the author, a
personal friend of the President says: “I called on him one
day in the early part of the war. He had just written a
pardon for a young man who had been sentenced to be
shot, for sleeping at his post, as a sentinel. He remarked as
he read it to me: ‘I could not think of going into eternity
with the blood of the poor young man on my skirts.’ Then
he added: ‘It is not to be wondered at that a boy, raised on
a farm, probably in the habit of going to bed at dark,
should, when required to watch, fall asleep; and I cannot
consent to shoot him for such an act.’” This story, with its
moral, is made complete by Rev. Newman Hall of London,
who, in a sermon preached after and upon Mr. Lincoln’s
death, says that the dead body of this youth was found
among the slain on the ﬁeld of Fredericksburg, wearing
 next his heart a photograph of his preserver, beneath which
the grateful fellow had written, “God bless President
Lincoln!” From the same sermon, another anecdote is
gleaned, of a similar character, which is evidently
authentic. An oﬀicer of the army, in conversation with the
preacher, said: “The ﬁrst week of my command, there were
twenty-four deserters sentenced by court martial to be
shot, and the warrants for their execution were sent to the
President to be signed. He refused. I went to Washington,
and had an interview. I said: ‘Mr. President, unless these
men are made an example of, the army itself is in danger.
Mercy to the few is cruelty to the many.’ He replied: ‘Mr.
General, there are already too many weeping widows in the
United States. For God’s sake, don’t ask me to add to the
number, for I won’t do it.’”
Whole chapters might be occupied by the record of such
incidents as these. The woe that the war brought upon the
people kept his sympathetic heart always bleeding. One of
the last acts of his oﬀicial life was the granting of a pardon
for a military oﬀense. A friend from Illinois called to plead
for the life of a neighbor — a soldier who was on his way
with his regiment through Washington, and, falling out of
the ranks, entered a drinking saloon, was overcome with
liquor, and failed to join his regiment before it left the city.
He was arrested for desertion, and sentenced to be shot.
The soldier’s friend found Mr. Lincoln with a table before
him literally covered with documents, which were all to be
signed by him. There was not room enough on the table to
hold the paper for a pardon. Mr. Lincoln heard the
 explanation of the case, and remarked: “Well, I think the
boy can do us more good above ground than under
ground;” and then he proceeded to another table to write
his pardon. Afterwards, laughingly regarding the table from
which the mass of papers had driven him, he said: “By the
way, do ydu know how the Patagonians eat oysters? They
open them, and throw the shells out of the window, till the
pile gets higher than the house, and then they move!” He
could not omit his “little story,” even in a case of life and
death.
There never lived a man more considerate of human
weakness than Abraham Lincoln. He always found so many
apologies for the sins of others that he could cherish no
resentments against them, even when those sins were
maliciously committed against himself. When his friends
went to him with the remarks of ill-natured and inimical
persons, he preferred not to have them repeated, and
turned oﬀ his indignant informers with a story, or the
remark: “I guess we won’t talk about that now.” He never
read the public abuse of himself in the newspapers; and of
one of the most virulent attacks upon him he simply
remarked that it was “ill-timed.” Of one of his bitter
political enemies, he said: “I’ve been told that insanity is
hereditary in his family, and I think we will admit the plea
in his case.” Charity, pity, mercy, sympathy — these were
virtues which reigned in the White House during Mr.
Lincoln’s occupation of it.
Yet Mr. Lincoln could be severe. Toward crimes resulting
from sudden anger, or untoward circumstances and sharp
 temptations, — the long catalogue of vices growing out of
human weakness, — toward these, he was always lenient;
but toward a cool, calculating crime against the race, or
any member of it, from ambitious or mercenary motives, he
was severe. The systematic, heartless oppression of one
man by another man, always aroused his indignation to the
highest pitch. An incident occurred soon after his
inauguration which forcibly illustrates this point. Hon. John
B. Alley of Lynn, Massachusetts, was made the bearer to
the President of a petition for pardon, by a person conﬁned
in the Newburyport jail for being engaged in the slave-
trade. He had been sentenced to ﬁve years’ imprisonment,
and the payment of a ﬁne of one thousand dollars. The
petition was accompanied by a letter to Mr. Alley, in which
the prisoner acknowledged his guilt and the justice of his
sentence. He was very penitent, — at least, on paper, — and
had received the full measure of his punishment, so far as it
related to the term of his imprisonment; but he was still
held because he could not pay his ﬁne. Mr. Alley read the
letter to the President, who was much moved by its
pathetic appeals; and when he had himself read the
petition, he looked up, and said: “My friend, that is a very
touching appeal to our feelings. You know my weakness is
to be, if possible, too easily moved by appeals for mercy,
and, if this man were guilty of the foulest murder that the
arm of man could perpetrate, I might forgive him on such
an appeal; but the man who could go to Africa, and rob her
of her children, and sell them into interminable bondage,
with no other motive than that which is furnished by dollars
 and cents, is so much worse than the most depraved
murderer, that he can never receive pardon at my hands.
No! He may rot in jail before he shall have liberty by any
act of mine.” A sudden crime, committed under strong
temptation, was venial in his eyes, on evidence of
repentance; but the calculating, mercenary crime of man-
stealing and man-selling, with all the cruelties that are
essential accompaniments of the business, could win from
him, as an oﬀicer of the people, no pardon.
Two ladies, wives of rebel oﬀicers imprisoned on
Johnson’s Island, applied for their release, with great
importunity, one of them urging that her husband was a
very religious man. As he granted their request, he said to
the lady who had testiﬁed to her husband’s religion: “You
say your husband is a religious man: tell him, when you
meet him, that I say I am not much of a judge of religion;
but that, in my opinion, the religion that sets men to rebel
and ﬁght against their government, because, as they think,
that government does not suﬀiciently help some men to eat
their bread in the sweat of other men’s faces, is not the sort
of religion upon which men can get to heaven.”
Certainly Mr. Lincoln’s religion was very diﬀerent from
this. It was one which sympathized with all human sorrow;
which lifted, so far as it had the power, the burden from the
oppressed; which let the prisoner go free; and which called
daily for supplies of strength and wisdom from the divine
fountains. He grew more religious with every passing year
of his oﬀicial life. The tender piety that breathed in some of
his later state papers is unexampled in any of the
 utterances of his predecessors. In all the great emergencies
of his closing years, his reliance upon divine guidance and
assistance was often extremely touching. “I have been
driven many times to my knees,” he once remarked, “by the
overwhelming conviction that I had no where else to go. My
own wisdom and that of all about me seemed insuﬀicient
for that day.” On another occasion, when told that he was
daily remembered in the prayers of those who prayed, he
said that he had been a good deal helped by the thought;
and then he added with much solemnity: “I should be the
most presumptuous blockhead upon this footstool, if I for
one day thought that I could discharge the duties which
have come upon me since I came into this place, without
the aid and enlightenment of One who is wiser and
stronger than all others.” He felt, he said, that he should
leave Washington a better man if not a wiser, from having
learned what a very poor sort of man he was. He always
remained shy in the exposure of his religious experiences,
but those around him caught golden glimpses of a beautiful
Christian character. With failing strength and constant
weariness, the even temper of the man sometimes gave
way, while his frequent experience of the faithlessness and
cupidity of men made him at last distrustful of those who
approached him.
In February, 1862, Mr. Lincoln was visited by severe
aﬄiction in the death of his beautiful son Willie, and the
extreme sickness of Thomas, familiarly called “Tad.” This
was a new burden; and the visitation which, in his ﬁrm faith
in Providence, he regarded as providential, was also
 inexplicable. Why should he, with so many burdens upon
him, and with such necessity for solace in his home and his
aﬀections, be brought into so tender a trial? It was to him a
trial of faith, indeed. A Christian lady of Massachusetts,
who was oﬀiciating as nurse in one of the hospitals, came
in to attend the sick children. She reports that Mr. Lincoln
watched with her about the bedside of the sick ones, and
that he often walked the room, saying sadly: “This is the
hardest trial of my life; why is it? Why is it?” In the course
of conversations with her, he questioned her concerning
her situation. She told him she was a widow, and that her
husband and two children were in Heaven; and added that
she saw the hand of God in it all, and that she had never
loved him so much before as she had since her aﬄiction.
“How is that brought about?” inquired Mr. Lincoln. “Simply
by trusting in God, and feeling that he does all things well,”
she replied. “Did you submit fully under the ﬁrst loss?” he
asked. “No,” she answered, “not wholly; but, as blow came
upon blow, and all was taken, I could and did submit, and
was very happy.” He responded: “I am glad to hear you say
that. Your experience will help me to bear my aﬄictions.”
On being assured that many Christians were praying for
him on the morning of the funeral, he wiped away the tears
that sprang in his eyes, and said: “I am glad to hear that. I
want them to pray for me. I need their prayers.” As he was
going out to the burial, the good lady expressed her
sympathy with him. He thanked her gently, and said: “I will
try to go to God with my sorrows.” A few days afterward,
she asked him if he could trust God. He replied: “I think I
 can, and I will try. I wish I had that childlike faith you speak
of, and I trust He will give it to me.” And then he spoke of
his mother, whom so many years before he had committed
to the dust among the wilds of Indiana. In this hour of his
great trial, the memory of her who had held him upon her
bosom, and soothed his childish griefs, came back to him
with tenderest recollections. “I remember her prayers,”
said he, “and they have always followed me. They have
clung to me all my life.”
This lady was with the President on subsequent
occasions. After the second defeat at Bull Run, he appeared
very much distressed about the number of killed and
wounded, and said: “I have done the best I could. I have
asked God to guide me, and now I must leave the event
with him.” On another occasion, having been made
acquainted with the fact that a great battle was in
progress, at a distant but important point, he came into the
room where the lady was engaged in nursing a member of
the family, looking worn and haggard, and saying that he
was so anxious that he could eat nothing. The possibility of
defeat depressed him greatly; but the lady told him he must
trust, and that he could at least pray. “Yes,” said he, and
taking up a Bible, he started for his room. Could all the
people of the nation have overheard the earnest petition
that went up from that inner chamber, as it reached the
ears of the nurse, they would have fallen upon their knees
with tearful and reverential sympathy. At one o’clock in the
afternoon, a telegram reached him announcing a Union
victory; and then he came directly to the room, his face
 beaming with joy, saying: “Good news! Good news! The
victory is ours, and God is good.” “Nothing like prayer,”
suggested the pious lady, who traced a direct connection
between the event and the prayer which preceded it. “Yes
there is,” he replied— “praise: — prayer and praise.” The
good lady who communicates these incidents closes them
with the words: “I do believe he was a true Christian,
though he had very little conﬁdence in himself.”
Mr. Lincoln always manifested a strong interest in the
peculiar work of the Christian Commission in the army, and
attended 
the 
important 
meetings 
of 
that 
body 
at
Washington. His oﬀicial and personal approval of the plan
of this charity was one of the greatest encouragements of
those engaged in the work. In the early part of 1864, a
meeting of the commission was held, at which Mr. Lincoln
was a deeply interested spectator. He was particularly
moved on this occasion by the remarks of Chaplain
McCabe, just released from Libby prison, at Richmond, who
described, in a graphic manner, the scene among the
prisoners on the reception of the news of the national
victory at Gettysburg, as they took up Mrs. Howe’s spirited
lyric, beginning with the line,
“Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the
Lord,”
and made the prison walls rock with the melody. The
Chaplain sang it to the meeting, and Mr. Lincoln requested
its repetition. That was a song that he could appreciate;
and it stirred him like a trumpet.
 At another of these meetings, he was greatly interested
and amused by a story told by General Fisk of Missouri.
The General had begun his military life as a Colonel; and,
when he raised his regiment in Missouri, he proposed to his
men that he should do all the swearing of the regiment.
They assented; and for months no instance was known of
the violation of the promise. The Colonel had a teamster
named John Todd, who, as roads were not always the best,
had some diﬀiculty in commanding his temper and his
tongue. John happened to be driving a mule-team through a
series of mud-holes a little worse than usual, when, unable
to restrain himself any longer, he burst forth into a volley of
energetic oaths. The Colonel took notice of the oﬀense, and
brought John to an account. “John,” said he, “didn’t you
promise to let me do all the swearing of the regiment?”
“Yes, I did, Colonel,” he replied, “but the fact was the
swearing had to be done then, or not at all, and you weren’t
there to do it.”
Mr. Lincoln enjoyed this story quite as much as he did
the singing of the previous occasion, and gave himself up to
laughter the most boisterous. The next morning, General
Fisk attended the reception at the White House; and saw,
waiting in the ante-room, a poor old man from Tennessee.
Sitting down beside him, he inquired his errand; and
learned that he had been waiting three or four days to get
an audience, and that on his seeing Mr. Lincoln probably
depended the life of his son, who was under sentence of
death for some military oﬀense. General Fisk wrote his
case in outline on a card, and sent it in, with a special
 request that the President would see the man. In a
moment, the order came; and past senators, governors and
generals, waiting impatiently, the old man went into the
President’s presence. He showed Mr. Lincoln his papers;
and he, on taking them, said he would look into the case,
and give him the result on the following day. The old man,
in an agony of apprehension, looked up into the President’s
sympathetic face, and actually cried out: “Tomorrow may
be too late! My son is under sentence of death! The
decision ought to be made now!” and the streaming tears
told how much he was moved. “Come,” said Mr. Lincoln,
“wait a bit, and I’ll tell you a story;” and then he told the
old man General Fisk’s story about the swearing driver;
and, as he told it, the old man forgot his boy, and both the
President and his listener had a hearty laugh together at its
conclusion. Then he wrote a few words which the old man
read, and in which he found new oocasion for tears; but the
tears were tears of joy, for the words saved the life of his
son.
Only a few months before Mr. Lincoln died, he was
waited upon at the White House by about two hundred
members of the commission, who had been holding their
annual meeting. The chairman of the commission, George
H. Stuart, addressed a few words to Mr. Lincoln, speaking
of the debt which the country owed him. “My friends,” said
Mr. Lincoln in reply, “you owe me no gratitude for what I
have done: and I—” and here he hesitated, and the long
arm came through the air awkwardly, as if he might be
misunderstood in what he was going to say,— “and I, I may
 say, owe you no gratitude for what you have done; just as,
in a sense, we owe no gratitude to the men who have
fought our battles for us. I trust that this has all been for us
a work of duty;” and at the mention of that word, the
homely, sad face was irradiated with the light of a divine
emotion. Looking around for encouragement into the faces
of the eager group, he then proceeded in the simplest
words to say that all gratitude was due to the Great Giver
of all good. At the close of his remarks, Mr. Stuart, who
cared as little for precedent as Mr. Lincoln himself, asked
him if he had any objection, then and there, to a word of
prayer. Quietly, but very cordially, as if he were grateful for
the suggestion, he assented; and Bishop James oﬀered in
the East Room a brief and fervent petition. It was a
memorable scene, which must always be reverted to with
interest by every Christian patriot.
On another occasion, when a number of the members of
the commission were holding an interview with the
President, Rev. J.T. Duryea of New York referred to the trust
that they were encouraged to repose in the Providence of
God, and to the fact that appeal was so constantly made to
it in the prayers of Christian people that even children were
taught to pray for the President in their simple morning
and evening petitions. “If it were not for my ﬁrm belief in
an over-ruling Providence,” responded Mr. Lincoln, “it
would be diﬀicult for me, in the midst of such complications
of aﬀairs, to keep my reason on its seat. But I am conﬁdent
that the Almighty has his plans, and will work them out;
and, whether we see it or not, they will be the wisest and
 best for us. I have always taken counsel of him, and
referred to him my plans, and have never adopted a course
of proceeding without being assured, as far as I could be, of
his approbation. To be sure, he has not conformed to my
desires, or else we should have been out of our trouble long
ago. On the other hand. his will does not seem to agree
with the wish of our enemy over there (pointing across the
Potomac). He stands the judge between us, and we ought to
be willing to accept his decisions. We have reason to
anticipate that it will be favorable to us, for our cause is
right.” It was during this interview that the fact was
privately communicated to a member of the commission,
that Mr. Lincoln was in the habit of spending an early hour
each day in prayer.
It was during this interview, also, that, on some allusion
being made to the unfriendly personal criticisms of the
press, he said: “It has been asserted that we are conducting
the present administration in the interest of a party, to
secure a re-election. It is said that appointments in the
army are made with this view, and that the removals are
intended to put promising rivals out of the way. Now, if any
man shows himself to be able to save the country, he shall
have my hearty support. If he wants to be president, he
ought to be, and I will help him. The charge is absurd.
What matters it who is chosen the next president, if there is
to be no next presidency? What matters it who is appointed
pilot for the next voyage, if the ship is going down this
voyage?” When allusion was made to the carping spirit of
some of the professed friends of the government, who,
 distinguishing 
between 
the 
administration 
and 
the
government, condemned the former while pretending to
defend the latter, he said: “There is an important sense in
which the government is distinct from the administration.
One is perpetual, the other is temporary and changeable. A
man may be loyal to his government, and yet oppose the
peculiar principles and methods of the administration. I
should regret to see the day in which the people should
cease to express intelligent, honest, generous criticism
upon the policy of their rulers. It is true, however, that, in
time of great peril, the distinction ought not to be so
strongly urged; for then criticism may be regarded by the
enemy as opposition, and may weaken the wisest and best
eﬀorts for the public safety. If there ever was such a time, it
seems to me it is now.”
An illustration of Mr. Lincoln’s interest in the eﬀorts of
religious men, is found in his treatment of a case brought
before him by Rev. Mr. Duryea, whose name has already
been mentioned. Colonel Loomis, commandant at Fort
Columbus, on Governor’s Island, was to be removed
because he had passed the legal limit of age for active
service. His religious inﬂuence was so powerful that the
Chaplain of the post appealed to Mr. Duryea to use his
inﬂuence for the good oﬀicer’s retention in the service.
Accordingly, appeal was made to the President for that
object, purely on religious grounds. “What does Mr. Duryea
know of military matters?” inquired Mr. Lincoln, with a
smile, of the bearer of his petition. “Nothing,” replied the
gentleman; “and he makes no request on military
 considerations. The record of Colonel Loomis for ﬁfty years,
in the War Department, will furnish these. He asks simply
to retain the inﬂuence of a man whose Christian character
is pure and consistent, who sustains religious exercises at
the fort, leads a weekly prayer-meeting, and teaches a
Bible class in the Sabbath School.” Mr. Lincoln replied:
“That is his highest possible recommendation. Take this
petition to the Secretary of War, with my approval.” The
result was the retention of Colonel Loomis at his post, until
his services were needed in important court-martial
business.
Mr. Lincoln’s habits at the White House were as simple
as they were at his old home in Illinois. He never alluded to
himself as “President,” or as occupying “the Presidency.”
His oﬀice, he always designated as “this place.” “Call me
Lincoln,” said he to a friend,— “Mr. President” had become
so very tiresome to him. “If you see a newsboy down the
street, send him up this way,” said he to a passenger, as he
stood waiting for the morning news at his gate. Friends
cautioned him against exposing himself so openly in the
midst of enemies; but he never heeded them. He frequently
walked the streets at night, entirely unprotected; and he
felt any check upon his free movements as a great
annoyance. He delighted to see his familiar western
friends; and he gave them always a cordial welcome. He
met them on the old footing, and fell at once into the
accustomed habits of talk and story-telling. An old
acquaintance, with his wife, visited Washington. Mr. and
Mrs. Lincoln proposed to these friends a ride in the
 presidential carriage. It should be stated, in advance, that
the two men had probably never seen each other with
gloves on in their lives, unless when they were used as
protection from the cold. The question of each — Mr.
Lincoln at the White House, and his friend at the hotel —
was, whether he should wear gloves. Of course, the ladies
urged gloves; but Mr. Lincoln only put his in his pocket, to
be used or not, according to circumstances. When the
presidential party arrived at the hotel, to take in their
friends, they found the gentleman, overcome by his wife’s
persuasions, very handsomely gloved. The moment he took
his seat, he began to draw oﬀ the clinging kids, while Mr.
Lincoln began to draw his on. “No! no! no!” protested his
friend, tugging at his gloves; “It is none of my doings: put
up your gloves, Mr. Lincoln.” So the two old friends were
on even and easy terms, and had their ride after their old
fashion.
Let us look a little deeper into this life in the White
House. The writer has before him a private letter written
by a lady of great intelligence and the keenest powers of
observation, from which he has the liberty to draw some
most interesting materials, illustrative of Mr. Lincoln’s
mode of dealing with men and women, and with the
questions which were presented to him for decision. They
will illustrate as well his weakness as his strength; and
show, better than any direct statement, how the duties of
his position had worn upon his nerves and his temper. The
lady was the widow of one who had died while serving the
soldiers of the state of which he was the Governor; and she
 had taken up his work of charity, and pursued it from the
time of his death.
The lady says she was received by Mr. Lincoln after a
brief delay. He was alone, in a medium-sized, oﬀice-like
room, with no elegance around him, and no elegance in
him. He was plainly clad in a suit of black, that ﬁtted him
poorly; and was sitting in a folded-up sort of way, in his
arm-chair. At his side stood a high writing-desk and table
combined; under his feet was a simple straw matting; and
around him were sofas and chairs, covered with green
worsted. Nothing more unpretending could be imagined. As
she entered, his head was bent forward, his chin resting on
his breast, and his hand holding the letter she had sent in.
He made a feint of rising; and, looking out from under his
eyebrows, said inquiringly: “Mrs. — ?” Hastening forward,
she replied: “Yes, and I am very glad to see you, Mr.
Lincoln.” He took her hand, and “hoped she was well,” but
gave no smile of welcome. She had come on business which
interfered with his policy and plans; and she anxiously read
his face, full of its lines of care and thought, and almost
stern in its expression. He motioned her to a chair; and,
while he was reading her letter, she continued the perusal
of his features. After he had ﬁnished, he looked up, ran his
ﬁngers through his slightly silvered brown hair, and with an
air of sad severity said: “Madam, this matter of northern
hospitals has been talked of a great deal, and I thought it
was aettled; but it seems this is not the case. What have
you got to say about it?” “Simply this,” she replied, “that
many soldiers, sick in our western army on the Mississippi,
 must have northern air, or die. There are thousands of
graves along the Mississippi and Yazoo, for which the
government is responsible — ignorantly, undoubtedly; but
this ignorance must not continue. If you will permit these
men to come North, you, will have ten men in one year
where you have got one now.”
Mr. Lincoln could not see the logic of this. Shrugging his
shoulders, and smiling in his peculiar, quizzical way, he
said: “If your reasoning were correct, your argument would
be a good one. I don’t see how sending one sick man North
is going to give us ten well ones.” The lady replied: “You
understand me, I think.” “Yes, yes,” said he, “I understand
you; but if they go North they will desert, and where is the
diﬀerence?” Her reply was: “Dead men cannot ﬁght, and
they may not desert.” “A ﬁne way to decimate the army!”
exclaimed the President. “We should never get a man back
— not one — not one.” “Pardon me,” responded the lady,
“but I believe you are mistaken. You do not understand our
people. They are as true and as loyal to the government as
yourself. The loyalty is among the common soldiers, and
they are the chief suﬀerers.” Almost contemptuously Mr.
Lincoln replied: “This is your opinion!”
The reader will see in this exhibition of petulance,
evidence that the Preaident was conscious of being
undermined in his predeterminations. “Mrs. — ,” said he,
earnestly, “How many men of the army of the Potomac do
you suppose the government was paying at the battle of
Antietam? and how many men do you suppose could be got
for active service at that time?” She replied: “I know
 nothing of the army of the Potomac, except that it has made
some noble sacriﬁces.” “Well, but give a guess,” persisted
the President. “Indeed, I cannot,” was her answer. He
threw himself awkwardly around in his chair, with one leg
over the arm, and spoke slowly: “This war might have been
ﬁnished at that time, if every man had been in his place
who was able to be there; but they were scattered here and
there over the North — some on furloughs, and in one way
and another gone, so that, out of one hundred and seventy
thousand men, whom the government was paying, only
eighty-three thousand could be got for action. The
consequences, you know, proved nearly disastrous.” The
President paused for a response, and it came. “It was very
sad; but the delinquents were certainly not in northern
hospitals, nor were they deserters from northern hospitals,
for we have had none: so your argument is not against
them.”
The President appreciated this logic thoroughly, and
replied: “Well, well; you go and call on the Secretary of
War, and see what he saYs.” He then took the lady’s letter,
and wrote on the back: “Admit Mrs. — at once. Listen to
what she saYs. She is a lady of intelligence, and talks sense.
A. Lincoln.” “May I return to you, Mr. Lincoln?” she
inquired. “Certainly,” said he, gently; and then the lady
found her way to Mr. Stanton’s oﬀice, and was listened to
and treated with great respectfulness and kindness. She
was told by the Secretary that he had sent the Surgeon-
general to New Orleans, with directions to come up the
river, and visit all the hospitals. Mrs. — had no faith in
 these inspections, and told him so — told him, further, that
no good to the western soldiers had ever resulted from
them. She also indicated what she believed to be the
reasons for the favorable reports from the southern
hospitals, that had uniformly been made. “I believe,” said
she, “that it is because the medical authorities know that
the heads of departments are opposed to establishing
hospitals so far from army lines, and report accordingly. I
wish this could be over-ruled. Can nothing be done?”
“Nothing until the Surgeon-general returns,” he replied.
Personally, he expressed himself in favor of hospitals in
every northern state, but he had to be guided by the
medical authorities.
She bade him “good morning,” and returned to the
President. No one was waiting, and at the invitation of the
messenger she passed directly into the President’s room.
She found a gentleman engaged in conversation with the
President, but neither noticed her entrance. Taking a seat
at a distance from the two gentlemen, she waited her
opportunity. The visitor handed a paper to Mr. Lincoln. He
looked it over carelessly, and said: “ Yes, that is a suﬀicient
indorsement for anybody: what do you want?” The reply
was not heard; but the promotion of some person in the
army was strongly urged. She heard the sarcastic words
from the applicant: “I see there are no vacancies among the
Brigadiers, from the fact that so many Colonels are
commanding brigades.”
At this, the President threw himself forward in his chair
in such a way as to expose to the lady the most curious,
 comical expression of features imaginable. He was looking
the man squarely in the face; and, with one hand softly
patting the other, and the funny look pervading every line
of his countenance, he said: “My friend, let me tell you
something about that. You are a farmer, I believe; if not,
you will understand me. Suppose you had a large cattle-
yard, full of all sorts of cattle — cows, oxen and bulls, —
and you kept killing and selling and disposing of your cows
and oxen, in one way and another, taking good care of your
bulls. By and by you would ﬁnd out that you had nothing
but a yard full of old bulls, good for nothing under heaven.
Now it will be just so with the army, if I don’t stop making
Brigadier-generals.”
The man was answered, and he tried to laugh; but the
eﬀort was a feeble one. Mr. Lincoln laughed, however,
enough for both parties. He laughed all over, and laughed
his visitor out of the room.
The lady stepped forward; and, as Mr. Lincoln motioned
her to a chair, he inquired what the Secretary of War had
sad to her. She gave him a full account of the interview, and
added: “I have nowhere to go but to you.” He replied, “Mr.
Stanton knows there is an acting Surgeon-general here,
and that Hammond will not return these two months. I will
see the Secretary of War myself, to-night; and you may
come again in the morning.” He then dismissed her in the
kindest manner and with the kindest words.
No reader can doubt that from this moment he had
determined to grant the lady her request; and this is to be
remembered in the reading of the interviews which
 followed; for in these interviews occurred a strange
exhibition of his penchant for arguing against and opposing
his own conclusions — in this case almost with temper —
certainly not in the most amiable manner.
In the morning, the lady returned, full of hope, expecting
to be greeted by the same genial face and cordial manner
with which Mr. Lincoln had dismissed her. The President
raised his eyes as she entered his room, said “good
morning,” and pointed to a chair. He was evidently annoyed
at something which had occurred during some previous
conversation of the morning, and waited for her to speak.
She waited for him. “Well?” said he, after a minute of delay.
“Well?” replied his visitor. He looked up under his
eyebrows, a little startled, and inquired: “Have you nothing
to say?” “Nothing,” she replied, “until I hear your decision.
Have you decided? You know you bade me come this
morning.” “No, I have not decided; and I believe this idea
of northern hospitals is a great humbug, and I am tired of
hearing about it.” The lady pitied him in his weak and
irritable mood, and said: “I regret to add a feather’s weight
to your already overwhelming care and responsibility. I
would rather have stayed at home.” With a feeble smile, he
responded: “I wish you had.” She was earnest, and replied:
“Nothing would have given me greater pleasure, sir; but a
keen sense of duty to this government, justice and mercy to
its most loyal supporters, and regard for your honor and
position, made me come. The people cannot understand
why their husbands, fathers and sons are left to die, when,
with proper care and attention, they ought to live, and yet
 do good service for their country. Mr. Lincoln, I do believe
you will yet be gratefUl for my coming. I do not come to
plead for the lives of criminals, nor for the lives of
deserters; but I plead for the lives of those who were the
ﬁrst to hasten to the support of this government, who
helped to place you where you are — for men who have
done all they could; and now, when ﬂesh and nerve and
muscle are gone, who still pray for your life, and the life of
the republic. They scarcely ask for that for which I plead.
They expect to sacriﬁce their lives for their country. I know
that, if they could come North, they could live, and be well,
strong men again, — at least, many of them. I say I know,
because I was sick among them last spring, surrounded by
every comfort, with the best of care, and determined to get
well. I grew weaker and weaker, day by day, until, not being
under military law, my friends brought me North. I
recovered entirely by breathing northern air.”
While she was so earnestly speaking, Mr. Lincolns
expression of face changed often, but he did not take his
eyes from her. He was evidently distressed, for he was
convinced that she was speaking the truth. His face
contracted almost painfully as he said: “You assume to
know more than I do.” The tears almost came in the lady’s
eyes as she replied: “Pardon me, Mr. Lincoln, I intend no
disrespect; but it is because of this knowledge, and because
I do know what you do not know, that I come to you. If you
had known what I know, and had not already ordered what
I ask, I should know that an appeal to you would be in vain;
but I believe in you. I believe the people have not trusted
 you in vain. The question only is — do you believe me, or
not? If you believe in me, you will give us hospitals; if not —
well.”
“You assume to know more than surgeons do,” said Mr.
Lincoln, sharply. “Oh no,” she replied; “I could not perform
an amputation nearly as well as some of them do. But this
is true: I do not come here for your favor. I am no aspirant
for military favor or promotion. While it would be the pride
of my life to command your respect and conﬁdence, still,
even this I can waive to gain my object — waive for the
time. You will do me justice, some time. Now the medical
authorities know as well as you and I do, that you are
opposed to establishing northern hospitals; and they report
to please you. They desire your favor. I come to you from no
casual tour of inspection, having passed rapidly through
the general hospitals, with a cigar in my mouth and a ratan
in my hand, talking to the surgeon in charge of the price of
cotton, and abusing our generals in the army for not
knowing and performing their duty better, and ﬁnally
coming into the open air with a long-drawn breath as
though I had just escaped suﬀocation, and complacently
saying to the surgeon: ‘A very ﬁne hospital you have here,
Sir. The boys seem to be doing very well. A little more
attention to ventilation is desirable, perhaps.’ It is not thus
that I have visited hospitals. For eight long months — from
early morning until late at night, sometimes — I have
visited the regimental and general hospitals on the
Mississippi, from Quincy to Vicksburg; and I come to you
from the cots of men who have died, and who might have
 lived if you had permitted it. This is hard to say, but it is
true.”
While she was speaking the last sentences, Mr. Lincoln’s
brow had become severely contracted; and a pained, hard
expression had settled upon his whole face. Then he
sharply asked her how many men her state had sent to the
ﬁeld. She replied: “about ﬁfty thousand.” “That means,” he
responded, “that she has about twenty thousand now.” With
an unpleasant voice and manner he continued: “You need
not look so sober; they are not all dead.” The veins ﬁlled in
his face painfully, and one across his forehead was fearfully
large and blue. Then, with an impatient movement of his
whole frame, he said: “I have a good mind to dismiss them
all from the service, and have no more trouble with them.”
The lady was astonished, as she might well be, for she
knew that he was not in earnest. They sat looking at one
another in silence. He had become very pale, and at last
she broke the silence by saying: “They have been faithful to
the government; they have been faithful to you; they will
still be loyal to the government, do what you will with
them. But, if you will grant my petition, you will be glad as
long as you live. The prayers of grateful hearts will give you
strength in the hour of trial, and strong and willing arms
will return to ﬁght your battles.”
The President bowed his head; and, with a look of
sadness which it is impossible for language to describe,
said: “I shall never be glad any more.” All severity had
passed away from his face, and he seemed looking inward
and backward, and appeared unconscious of the fact that
 he was not alone. The great burdens he had borne, the
terrible anxieties and perplexities that had poisoned his life
at the fountain, and the peaceful scenes he had forever left
behind, swept across his memory; and then the thought
that it was possible that he had erred in judgment, and
done injustice to the noble men who had fought the nation’s
battles, brought back all his child-like tenderness.
The lady heard his mournful utteranoes, and said: “Oh!
do not say so, Mr. Lincoln, for who will have so much
reason to rejoice as yourself, when the government shall be
restored — as it will be?”
“I know — I know,” he said, pressing a hand on either
side; “but the springs of life are wearing away, and I shall
not last.” She asked him if he felt that his great cares were
injuring his health. “No,” he replied; “not directly,
perhaps.” She asked him if he slept well. He never was a
good sleeper, he replied, and of course slept now less than
ever before. Then, with earnestness, he said: “The people
do not yet comprehend the magnitude of the rebellion, and
it will be a long time before the end.”
The lady, feeling that she had occupied too much of his
time, rose to take her leave; and, as she did so, said: “Have
you decided upon your answer to me?” “No,” he replied,
“come to-morrow morning: — stop, it is cabinet-meeting to-
morrow. Yes, come at twelve o’clock; there is not much for
the cabinet to do, to-morrow.” Then he bade his visitor a
cordial good morning, and she retired.
The next morning, the lady found that her interview had
prostrated her; but at twelve o’clock she was at the White
 House. The President sent her word that the cabinet would
adjourn soon, and that she must wait. For three long hours
she waited, receiving occasional messages from Mr.
Lincoln, to the eﬀect that the cabinet woUld soon adjourn,
and he would then see her. She was in distress, expecting
defeat. She walked the room, and gazed at the maps; and,
at last, she heard the sound of feet. The cabinet had
adjourned. Mr. Lincoln did not send for her, but came
shuﬄing into the room, rubbing his hands, and saying: “My
dear Madam, I am sorry I have kept you waiting so long,
but we have this moment adjourned.” “My waiting is no
matter,” she replied, “but you must be very tired, and we
will not talk to-night.” Bidding her to a seat, she having
risen as he entered, he sat down at her side, and quietly
remarked: “I only wish to say to you that an order which is
equivalent to the granting of a hospital in your state, has
been issued from the War Department, nearly twenty-four
hours.”
The lady could make no reply, except through the tears
that sprang at once. Mr. Lincoln looked on, and enjoyed it.
When, at last, she could command her voice, she said: “God
bless you!” Then, as doubts came, touching the nature of
the order, she said earnestly: “Do you mean, really and
truly, that we are going to have a hospital now?” With a
look full of benevolence and tenderness,-such a look as
rarely illuminates any face, he said: “I do most certainly
hope so;” and then he told her to come on the following
morning, and he would give her a copy of the order. But his
visitor was too much aﬀected to talk; and perceiving this,
 he kindly changed the subject, asking her to look at a map
which hung in the room, representing the great battle-
grounds of Europe. “It is a very ﬁne map,” said he; “see —
here is Waterloo, here are all the battle-ﬁelds about the
Crimea.” Then, suddenly turning to the lady, he said: “I’m
afraid you will not like it so well, when I tell you who
executed it.” She replied: “It is a great work, whoever
executed it. Who was it, Mr. President?” “McClellan,” he
answered, and added: “He certainly did do this well. He did
it while he was at West Point.”
The next morning, sick with the excitement through
which she had passed, the lady was at the White House
again. She found more than ﬁfty persons waiting for an
audience; so she sent in her name, and said she would call
again. The messenger said he thought the President would
see her, and she had better be seated. Soon afterward, he
informed her that the President would see her. As she
paeeed in, she heard the words from one of the waiting
throng: “She has been here six days; and, what is more, she
is going to win.” As she entered, Mr. Lincoln smiled
pleasantly, drew a chair to his side, and said: “Come here,
and sit down.” As she did so, he handed her a copy of the
coveted order. She thanked him, and apologized for not
being more promptly at the house; she had been sick all
night. “Did joy make you sick?” he inquired. “I suppose,” he
added, “you would have been mad if I had said ‘no.’” She
replied: “No, Mr. Lincoln, I should have been neither angry
nor sick.” “What would you have done?” he inquired. “I
should have been here at nine o’clock this morning.”
 “Well,” said he, laughing, “I think I have acted wisely then.”
Then he turned suddenly, and looked into her face as he
said: “Don’t you ever get angry?” She replied that she
never did when she had an important object to attain.
Further conversation occurred as to the naming of the
hospital, when the lady rose, and said: “You will not wish to
see me again.” “I did not say that, and I shall not say it,”
said the President. “You have been very kind to me, and I
am very grateful for it,” said his visitor. He looked up at her
from under his eyebrows, in his peculiar way, and said:
“You almost think I am handsome, don’t you?” His face was
full of benevolence, and his countenance lighted by a
cordial smile; and it is not strange that the lady exclaimed:
“You are perfectly lovely to me now, Mr. Lincoln.” The
President colored a little, and laughed a good deal, at the
impulsive response, and reached out his hand to bid her
farewell. She took it reverently, bowed her head upon it,
and, bowing, prayed: “God bless you, Abraham Lincoln!”
Then she turned, heard his “good bye,” and was gone.
“I shall never be glad any more!” The young men of his
people were slain. His enemies were seeking his life. With a
heart that beat kindly toward every human being, his
motives 
were 
maligned, 
and 
his 
good 
name 
was
contemned; greedy politicians and ambitious oﬀicers were
about him, pushing forward their selﬁsh schemes; he had
daily experience of the faithlessness of men; and “this great
trouble,” as he was accustomed to call the war, was always
on his mind and heart. He could not sleep; and, such was
the character of the impression he had received from all his
 toils and cares, that he felt he could never be glad any
more.
In Mr. Lincoln’s senatorial campaign, and during the
course of his debates with Mr. Douglas, it will be
remembered that he was not once betrayed into a loss of
temper. He was misrepresented and abused in every way, in
order to break down his good nature; but, from the ﬁrst to
the last, he did not utter an angry or an impatient word.
Then he was well — in the full strength of a hardy
constitution. The interview just narrated has shown how
much he had become changed by bearing the burdens of
oﬀice. When he saw that his visitor was not only
overthrowing his theory but the policy he had based upon
it, and felt either that he was, or that he might be, in the
wrong, he became peevish and querulous. This was very
unlike Mr. Lincoln in health. He was one of the most
generous of men in his dealings; but weakness and
weariness made him on this, and on some other occasions,
childish and petulant. Exhibitions of this character, which
occurred during the last two years of his life, are all
referable to the prostrated and irritable condition of his
nervous system, resulting from excessive labor, mental
suﬀering, and loss of sleep.
The interview with the lady will show, too, how universal
and how minute were his cares. This case was only One
among ten thousand cases that came to him for decision. It
was a great thing to her, and of itself made her sick. It luted
with her a week. It concerned the establishment of a
hospital, simply. With him, the burden never was laid aside.
 He bore hundreds of matters upon his mind, all as
important as this; and felt pressing upon his shoulders the
interests of freedom, the future of a wonderful nation, and
the destiny of a race; while he wielded as instruments for
the accomplishment of his purposes a great government,
and an army composed of the ﬂower of the national life. It
was killing him. There was always one tired spot in him
that was not reached by rest.
Throughout the rebellion, Mr. Lincoln was the recipient
of many attentions from the various bodies which constitute
the Christian church of America. There was hardly a
denomination that did not take occasion to express itself
upon the war, and the great questions of humanity which it
involved. They visited Mr. Lincoln at the White House; they
approached him with addresses and resolutions; and the
majority of them called forth from him either spoken or
written responses. Representatives of foreign religious and
philanthropic organizations mingled their voices with
these. Expressions of personal sympathy, declarations of
loyalty 
and 
devotion 
to 
the 
national 
cause,
recommendations 
of 
policy, 
counsels, 
prayers,
encouragements, — all poured in, in almost bewildering
profusion, 
and 
of 
themselves 
became 
a 
burden.
McPherson’s History of the Rebellion gives forty-seven
large and ﬁnely printed pages, consisting entirely of
records of the action of the northern churches upon the
rebellion; and the results of this action were communicated
to the President in a way to draw from him either grateful
 acknowledgments, or responses that related to their
subject matter.
The wear and tear of brain and nerve were often
manifested in a deep melancholy, to which he had a natural
tendency. “Whichever way it ends,” said he to Mrs. Stowe,
the authoress, alluding to the war, “I have the impression
that I shall not last long after it is over.” Hon. Schuyler
Colfax met him one morning, after having received bad
news which had not been made public. He had neither slept
nor breakfasted, and exclaimed: “How willingly would I
exchange places to-day with the soldier who sleeps on the
ground in the army of the Potomac!” During the doubts and
disasters of 1862, a member of Congress called on him for
conversation. Mr. Lincoln began to tell a triﬂing story. “Mr.
President,” said the Congressman, rising, “I did not come
here this morning to hear stories. It is too serious a time.”
The smile ﬂed from Mr. Lincoln’s face, as he replied: “A., sit
down. I respect you as an earnest and sincere man. You
cannot be more anxious than I am constantly; and I say to
you now, that, if it were not for this occasional vent, I
should die.” To aother he said: “I feel a presentiment that I
shall not outlast the rebellion. When it is over, my work will
be done.” Of this presentiment he made no secret, but
spoke of it to many of his friends.
Thus sad and weary, working early and late, full of the
consciousness that God was working through him for the
accomplishment of great ends, praying daily for strength
and guidance, with a heart full of warm charity toward his
foes, and open with sympathy toward the poor and the
 suﬀering, this Christian President sat humbly in his high
seat, and did his duty. It is with genuine pain that the
writer is compelled to leave behind, unrecorded, save in the
ﬂoating literature of the day, multiplied instances which
illustrate his tender-heartedness, his pity, his over-ruling
sense of justice, his patience under insult, his loveliness of
spirit, his devotion to humanity, his regard for the poor and
the despised, his truthfulness, his simplicity, and the long
list of manly virtues which distinguished his character and
his career. They would of themselves ﬁll a volume.
Mr. Lincoln’s character was one which will grow. It will
become the basis of an ideal man. It was so pure, and so
unselﬁsh, and so rich in its materials, that ﬁne imaginations
will spring from it, to blossom and bear fruit through all the
centuries. This element was found in Washington, whose
human weaknesses seem to have faded entirely from
memory, leaving him a demi-god; and it will be found in Mr.
Lincoln in a still more remarkable degree. The black race
have already crowned him. With the black man, and
particularly the black freed man, Mr. Lincoln’s name is the
saintliest which he pronounces, and the noblest he can
conceive. To the emancipated, he is more than man — a
being scarcely second to the Lord Jesus Christ himself. That
old, white-headed negro who undertook to tell what “Massa
Linkum” was to his dark-minded brethren, imbodied the
vague conceptions of his race, in the words: “Massa
Linkum, he ebery whar; he know ebery ting; he walk de
earf like de Lord.” He was to these men the incarnation of
power and goodness; and his memory will live in the hearts
 of this unfortunate and oppressed race while it shall exist
upon the earth.
