 people engaged in an insurrection which the government
had not yet undertaken to suppress — as a belligerent
power, with just the same rights on land and sea as if they
were an established government.
But for the decided position assumed by Mr. Lincoln,
through his accomplished Secretary, Mr. Seward, the rebel
government would certainly have had an early and full
recognition. England and France were, without doubt, very
friendly to the United States; but they would have been
friendlier to two governments than to one. In his
instructions to Mr. Charles Francis Adams, on his departure
to represent the government at the court of St. James, Mr.
Seward said:
“If, as the President does not at all apprehend, you shall
unhappily ﬁnd Her Majesty’s government tolerating the
application of the so-called seceding states, or wavering
about it, you will not leave them to suppose, for a moment,
that they can grant that application, and remain the friends
of the United States. You may even assure them promptly,
in that case, that, if they determine to recognize, they may,
at the same time, prepare to enter into an alliance with the
enemies of this republic. You alone will represent your
country at London, and you will represent the whole of it
there. When you are asked to divide that duty with others,
diplomatic relations between the government of Great
Britain and this government will be suspended, and will
remain so until it shall be seen which of the two is most
strongly intrenched in the conﬁdence of their respective
nations and of mankind.”
 Against the recognition of the rebels as a belligerent
power, Mr. Adams was directed to make a decided and
energetic protest; and when, on the ﬁfteenth of June, the
representatives of England and France at Washington
applied to Mr. Seward for the privilege of reading to him
certain 
instructions 
they 
had 
received 
from 
their
governments, he declined to hear them oﬀicially until he
had had the privilege of reading them privately. This
privilege was accorded to him; and then he declined to
receive any oﬀicial notice of the documents. Four days
afterwards, he wrote a letter to Mr. Adams, informing him
of the nature of the instructions, which were prefaced by a
statement of the decision of the British government that
this country was divided into two belligerent parties, of
which the government represented one; and that the
government of Great Britain proposed to assume the
attitude of a neutral between them.
Touching this decision, Mr. Seward said that the
government of the United States could not debate it with
the government of Her Majesty — much less consent to
receive the announcement of a decision thus derogating
from the sovereignty of the United States — a decision at
which it had arrived without conferring with us upon the
question. “The United States,” said Mr. Seward, “are still
solely and exclusively sovereign, within the territories they
have lawfully acquired and long possessed, as they have
always been. They are living under the obligations of the
law of nations and of treaties with Great Britain, just the
same now as heretofore; they are, of course, the friend of
 Great Britain; and they insist that Great Britain shall
remain their friend now, just as she has hitherto been.
Great Britain, by virtue of these relations, is a stranger to
parties and sections in this country, whether they are loyal
to the United States or not; and Great Britain can neither
rightfully qualify the sovereignty of the United States, nor
concede nor recognize any rights or interests or power, of
any party, state or section, in contravention to the
unbroken sovereignty of the federal Union. What is now
seen in this country is the occurrence, by no means
peculiar, but frequent in all countries, more frequent in
Great Britain than here, of an armed insurrection, engaged
in attempting to overthrow the regularly constituted and
established government. But these incidents by no means
constitute a state of war, impairing the sovereignty of the
government, creating belligerent sections, and entitling
foreign states to intervene or to act as neutrals between
them, or in any other way to cast oﬀ their lawful obligations
to the nation thus, for the moment, disturbed. Any other
principle than this would be to resolve government
everywhere into a thing of accident and caprice, and
ultimately all human society into a state of perpetual war.”
Instructions corresponding with these were sent to our
representatives at the French and other European courts.
These governments were plainly given to understand that
our 
government 
considered 
the 
diﬀiculty 
with 
the
slaveholding states to be exclusively its own — that it was
purely a domestic rebellion, which it proposed to extinguish
by its own power, and one in which foreign governments
 had no right to inter-meddle. Our ministers were told by
Mr. Seward that they could not be too decided or explicit in
making 
known 
to 
the 
governments 
at 
which 
they
represented us, that there was not then, and would not be,
any idea existing in the government of suﬀering a
dissolution of the Union to take place, in any way whatever.
Throughout all the war that followed, England and
France maintained their most unjustiﬁable and cruel
recognition of the belligerent rights of the rebels —
unjustiﬁable, because it was an unfriendly act toward a
friendly power, on behalf of a rebellion whose forces were
still unorganized, and whose suppression the government
had hardly entered upon; and cruel, because it encouraged
the rebels to persevere in a war which could only end in
defeat to them, and which was so prolonged that it made a
desolation of their whole country. There is probably nothing
more morally certain than that the expectation of full
recognition by England and France, on the part of Mr.
Davis and his people, helped to continue the struggle of the
rebellion with the government, until tens of thousands of
loyal and disloyal lives were needlessly sacriﬁced. The act
was unfriendly to this government; it was a cruelty to the
hapless insurgents it deceived, for the promise it contained
was never redeemed, and would have accomplished
nothing if it had been; and it was a great blunder, from
which those blundering governments have retreated, amid
the jeers of the nations of the world, and the shuﬄing
apologies of their own people. This sympathy with the
rebellion on the part of these foreign governments is
 something not to be forgotten, because we are to measure
by it the magnanimity of Mr. Lincoln in the treatment of
international questions arising afterwards. This sympathy is
to-day denied; it was then blatant and bellicose. An
American could not pass through England without insult;
he could not speak for the national cause in England
without a mob. England, or all of England that had a voice,
rejoiced in rebel successes and federal defeats, and garbled
and qualiﬁed all the news which favored the prospects of
national success. Whatever may be the professions of
England now, no true American can forget that all the
inﬂuence she dared to give in favor of the rebellion was
given, beginning promptly at the start; and that her
position rendered the task of subduing the rebellion doubly
severe. Whatever may be the professions of her people now,
no true American will forget the insults that were heaped
upon his countrymen abroad whenever an allusion was
made to the national diﬀiculties, and heaped upon the
country by the issues of a press that represented the
British people, and persistently misrepresented our own. It
was not, of course, to be expected that monarchies would
be friendly to the great prosperity of democracies, or that
they would give them their open sympathy and co-operation
in diﬀiculty; but the latter should be spared receiving the
hypocrisies of the former as courtesies; and, after having
been compelled to drink of gall for four years, should be
permitted to remember that it was gall, and to make the
best of it, without being persistently assured that it was
honey.
 The opening of the war found Colonel John C. Fremont in
Europe; and he, with a large number of loyal Americans,
hastened home to give their services to their country.
Colonel Fremont, defeated as the republican candidate for
the presidency four years before the election of Mr.
Lincoln, had had military experience, and was recognized
as a popular man, who would rally to his command, at the
West, large numbers of soldiers, especially among the
German population of the region. He received the
appointment of Major-General, and on the same day (July
25th,) that General McClellan arrived in Washington to take
command of the Army of the Potomac, he arrived at St.
Louis, and entered upon the command of the Department of
the West, to which he had been assigned. Before General
Fremont arrived at St. Louis, a battle was fought on
Wilson’s Creek by General Lyon and General Sigel, with a
large force under the command of Ben McCulloch. It was
the second considerable battle of the war, and resulted in
the death of General Lyon himself, and the ﬁnal orderly
retreat of the federal forces under Sigel. General Lyon had
inﬂicted, with his little force of six thousand men, such
injury upon McCulloch’s twenty-two thousand, that the
latter could not pursue; and, on the whole, there was no
special discouragement as the result of the defeat.
General Fremont’s name had a great charm for the
western masses, and especially for the Germans; and
volunteers in large numbers sought service under him. His
campaign, upon the organization of which he entered with
great energy, contemplated not only the restoration of
 order in Missouri, but the reclaiming the control of the
Mississippi River. For this latter object, he organized a gun-
boat service, which was destined to play a very important
part in the operations associated with the western inland
waters.
Missouri was in a condition of most unhappy disorder. It
was a border slave state, containing many disunionists of
its own, and abounding with secession emissaries from
other states, determined to carry it over to the confederacy.
Brother was arrayed against brother. Neighborhoods were
distressed with deadly feuds. Murders were of every-day
occurrence on every hand, and outrages of every kind were
rife. The civil administration of the state was altogether
unreliable; and on the thirty-ﬁrst of August, General
Fremont issued a proclamation declaring martial law,
deﬁning the lines of the army of occupation, and
threatening with death by the bullet all who should be
found within those lines with arms in their hands.
Furthermore, the real and personal property of all persons
in the state who should take up arms against the United
States was declared conﬁscated to the public use, and their
slaves, if they had any, were declared free men.
This proclamation produced a strong eﬀect upon the
public mind. The proclaiming of freedom to the slaves of
rebels struck the popular chord, particularly among
thoroughly loyal men in the free states. Of course, it
maddened 
all 
the 
sympathizers 
with 
the 
rebellion,
infuriated the rebels themselves, and perplexed those loyal
men who had upon their hands the task of so conducting
 aﬀairs as to hold to their allegiance the border slave states
which had not seceded.
Mr. Lincoln did not approve some features of General
Fremont’s proclamation. As soon as he read it, he wrote,
under date of September second, to the General, that there
were two points in it which gave him anxiety. The ﬁrst was,
that, if he should shoot a man according to his
proclamation, “the confederates would certainly shoot our
best men in their hands in retaliation, and so, man for man,
indeﬁnitely.” He therefore ordered him to allow no man to
be shot under the proclamation without ﬁrst having his (the
President’s) approbation or consent. The second cause of
anxiety was that the paragraph relating to the conﬁscation
of property and the liberation of slaves of traitorous owners
would alarm Unionists at the South, and perhaps ruin the
fair prospect of saving Kentucky to the Union. He,
therefore, wished General Fremont, as of his own motion,
so to modify his proclamation as to make it conformable to
the conﬁscation act just passed by the extra session of
Congress, which only freed such slaves as were engaged in
the rebel service. Mr. Lincoln did not wish to interfere with
General Fremont, or unreasonably to curtail his authority,
although he had assumed an unwarrantable responsibility
in taking so important a step without consultation or notice.
Congress had had that very matter in hand, and had
embodied its opinion in an act. To this act he wished to
have the General conform his proclamation, and that was
all he desired. The wisdom of his criticism of the ﬁrst point
was proved by a document issued by the rebel Jeﬀ
 Thompson on the same day he wrote it. “Jeﬀ Thompson,
Brigadier General of the ﬁrst military district of Missouri,”
acting under the state government, did “most solemnly
promise” that for every soldier of the state guard, “or
soldier of our allies, the armies of the confederate States,”
who should be put to death under the proclamation, he
would “hang, draw and quarter a minion of Abraham
Lincoln.”
General 
Fremont 
received 
the 
President’s 
letter
respectfully, and replied to it September eighth, stating the
diﬀiculties under which he labored, with communication
with the government so diﬀicult, and the development of
perplexing events so rapid in the department under his
command. As to the part of his proclamation concerning
the slaves, he wished the President openly to order the
change desired, as, if he should do it of his own motion, it
would imply that he thought himself wrong, and that he
had acted without the reﬂection which the gravity of the
point demanded. This the President did, in a dispatch under
date of September eleventh, in the words: “It is therefore
ordered that the said clause of said proclamation be so
modiﬁed, held, and construed, as to conform to, and not to
transcend, the provisions on the same subject contained in
the act of Congress entitled, ‘An act to conﬁscate property
used for insurrectionary purposes,’ approved August 6,
1861; and that such act be published at length with this
order.” Before this order had been received, or on the day
following its date, General Fremont, though acquainted
with the President’s wishes, manumitted two slaves of
 Thomas L. Snead of St. Louis, in accordance with the terms
of his proclamation.
Although Mr. Lincoln desired General Fremont so to
modify his proclamation as to make it accordant with the
act of Congress approved August sixth, it is hardly to be
supposed that he did it solely out of respect to that act.
Congressional acts that were passed under certain
circumstances, could not be regarded as binding the hands
of the executive under all circumstances; and when, in a
state of war, circumstances were widely changing with the
passage of every day, they would be a poor rule of military
action. If he had believed that the time had come for the
measure of liberating the slaves of rebels by proclamation,
the act of Congress would not have stood in his way. This
act was an embodiment of his policy at that time, and he
used it for his immediate purpose.
The day after he gave his modifying order, he received a
letter from Hon. Joseph Holt of Kentucky, in which that
gentleman spoke of the alarm and condemnation with
which the Union-loving citizens of that state had read the
proclamation, and begged him to modify it by an order such
as he had already issued. Judge Holt concluded his letter by
saying: “The magnitude of the interest at stake, and my
extreme desire that by no misapprehension of your
sentiments or purposes shall the power and fervor of the
loyalty of Kentucky be at this moment abated or chilled,
must be my apology for the frankness with which I have
addressed you.”
 Complications in the personal relations of General
Fremont and Colonel F.P. Blair, under whose personal and
family inﬂuence General Fremont had received his position,
occurred at an early day. Colonel Blair doubtless thought
that he had not suﬀicient weight in the General’s counsels,
and the General, doubtless, exercised his right, in choosing
his own counselors. Whether he followed the advice of
others, or was guided by his own judgment and impulses,
he conducted himself quite as much after the manner of an
eastern satrap as a republican commander. The public
found it diﬀicult to get at him, he kept around him a large
retinue, and dispensed patronage and contracts with a
right royal hand. The most there is to be said of the matter,
is, that it was his way. Power was in his hands, a great work
was before him, great personal popularity attended him,
and the sudden elevation was not without its eﬀect upon
him. Colonel Blair, who was the gallant commander of the
First Missouri Volunteers, stood in a peculiar relation to
him, and was not, by virtue of that relation, and by reason
of a high and worthily won political and social position, to
be lightly put aside. He came down upon his superior with
a series of charges which covered a long catalogue of sins:
— neglect of duty, unoﬀicerlike conduct, disobedience of
orders, conduct unbecoming a gentleman, extravagance
and the waste of the public moneys, and despotic and
tyrannical 
conduct. 
Among 
the 
speciﬁcations 
were
Fremont’s alleged failure to repair at once to St. Louis to
enter upon his duties; his neglecting to reinforce Lyon and
Mulligan; his suﬀering Brigadier-General Hurlburt, “a
 common drunkard,” to continue in command; his refusal to
see people who sought his presence on matters of urgent
business; his violation of the presidential order in the
matter of his proclamation and the manumissions under it;
his persistency in keeping disreputable persons in his
employ; and his unjust suppression of the St. Louis Evening
News. General Fremont had no better opinion of Colonel
Blair than Blair had of him, and placed him under arrest for
alluding disrespectfully to superior oﬀicers.
It was a very unhappy quarrel, and it is quite likely that
there was blame upon both sides, though it occurred
between men equally devoted to the sacred cause of saving
the country to freedom and justice. It is not necessary to
believe, with the enemies of General Fremont, that he
found the country going to pieces and intended to place
himself at the head of a huge north-western fraction; nor,
with the enemies of Colonel Blair, that he was oﬀended
with his General because he could not have as good a
chance at stealing from the government as was believed to
be accorded to some of the General’s California friends.
Both were loyal men, both were anti-slavery men — Colonel
Blair being quite the equal of General Fremont in this
respect — and both wished to serve their country. Mr.
Lincoln always gave to each the credit due to his motives,
and so far refused to mingle in the general quarrel that
grew out of the diﬀiculty, that he kept the good-will of both
sides, and compelled them to settle their own diﬀerences.
On the sixth of September, General Grant, under General
Fremont’s command, occupied Paducah, Kentucky, at the
 mouth of the Tennessee River. Price and Jackson were
raising a formidable army for service in Missouri, and, on
the twelfth of September, compelled the surrender of
Colonel Mulligan and his forces at Lexington. General
Fremont at length took the ﬁeld in person. On the eighth of
October he left Jeﬀerson City for Sedalia. As he advanced
with his forces, Price retreated, until it was widely reported
that he would give battle to the national forces at
Springﬁeld. Just as Fremont was making ready to engage
the enemy, he was overtaken by an order relieving him of
his command. He was succeeded by General Hunter; but
Hunter’s command was brief, and was transferred at an
early day to General Halleck.
General Fremont was relieved of his command by the
President not because of his proclamation, not because he
hated slavery, and not because he believed him corrupt or
vindictive or disloyal. He relieved him simply because he
believed that the interests of the country, all things
considered, would be subserved by relieving him and
putting another man in his place. The matter was the cause
of great excitement in Missouri, and of much complaint
among the radical antislavery men of the country: but the
imputations sought to be cast upon the President were not
fastened to him; and did not, four years later, when
Fremont himself became a candidate for the presidency,
prevent the warmest anti-slavery men from giving Mr.
Lincoln their support.
The federal army under General Hunter retreated
without a battle; and thus the campaign, inaugurated with
 great show and immense expense, was a ﬂat failure.
In the meantime, General Rosecrans ﬁnished up the work
in 
Western 
Virginia 
that 
General 
McClellan 
had
prematurely declared, accomplished, and the army of the
Potomac, under the latter General, was swelling in
numbers, and active in organization and discipline. General
McClellan’s popularity with the army was very great. They
felt his organizing hand, and regarded him with the
proudest conﬁdence. The country, however, was becoming
impatient with him. He would spare no men for any outside
enterprises, and still rolled up the numbers of his
cumbersome forces, though good roads lay in front, and
pleasant weather invited to action. On the twenty-ninth of
August, General Butler, acting with a naval force under
Commodore Stringham, took possession of the Hatteras
forts, with a force which he had raised independently for
the expedition. This gave great satisfaction to the country,
and helped to keep up the popular courage under the
depressing inﬂuence of delay on the part of the army of the
Potomac.
In the month of August, Munson’s Hill, within view of the
capitol, was occupied by the rebel forces; and, though they
were not strong in numbers, and took but limited pains to
intrench themselves, they remained there undisturbed until
nearly the last of September, when they left of their own
accord. On the twenty-ﬁrst of October, there occurred a
disastrous battle and blunder at Ball’s Bluﬀ. It was a sad
failure to fulﬁll the promise of a magniﬁcent preparation
for action. The country was disappointed and indignant.
 The number killed, drowned, wounded and captured was
eleven hundred — full half that went into the action. Here
Colonel Baker, the President’s friend, fell; and, although
General McClellan, in his report of the aﬀair, said that,
“situated as their troops were — cut oﬀ alike from retreat
or reinforcements — ﬁve thousand against one thousand
seven hundred — it was not possible that the issue could
have been successful,” the unmilitary mind will still inquire
why, with an immense army but a few miles away, they
were left or placed where reinforcement and retreat were
alike impossible?
General Scott did not like the looks or management of
military aﬀairs, and felt that his place was becoming
unpleasant. Only a few days after the aﬀair at Ball’s Bluﬀ,
he made known to Mr. Lincoln his desire to be released
from all active duties, in consequence of his increasing
physical inﬁrmity. In a letter dated November ﬁrst, the
President acceded to his request, and added: “The
American people will hear with sadness and deep emotion
that General Scott has withdrawn from the active control of
the army, while the President and the unanimous Cabinet
express their own and the nation’s sympathy in his personal
aﬄiction, and their profound sense of the important public
services rendered by him to his country, during his long
and brilliant public career, among which will ever be
gratefully distinguished his faithful devotion to the
Constitution, the Union and the ﬂag, when assailed by
parricidal rebellion.” To do all possible honor to the noble
veteran who had stood by the country when so many army
 oﬀicers had gone over to the rebellion under the appeal of
sectional friendship — an appeal made to him with all the
persuasions that ingenuity could devise — the President
and his entire Cabinet waited upon him at his residence;
and there, with his Secretaries around him, Mr. Lincoln
read to him his letter. It was a grand moment in the old
man’s life. “This honor overwhelms me,” he responded. “It
overpays all services I have attempted to render to my
country. If I had any claims before, they are all obliterated
by this expression of approval by the President, with the
unanimous support of the Cabinet. I know the President
and this Cabinet well — I know that the country has placed
its interests in this trying crisis in safe keeping. Their
councils are wise; their labors are untiring as they are
loyal, and their course is the right one.”
Thus, after ﬁfty-three years of service in the armies of his
country, General Scott went into his nobly earned
retirement, with the blessing of his government and the
blessing of his country upon his venerable head; and it is
one of the sweetest satisfactions of both to remember that
he lived to see his country’s enemies vanquished, and to
hear of those who taunted him with faithlessness to his
sectional 
friends, 
humbly 
seeking 
pardon 
of 
the
government which they had outraged, and which he had so
loyally supported.
On General Scott’s retirement, General McClellan held
the highest rank in the army, and was intrusted with the
chief command.
 During the month of November, the Union forces
achieved several important and encouraging successes.
South Carolina was invaded by an expedition under the
joint command of General T.W. Sherman and Commodore
Dupont; the latter of whom achieved a brilliant naval
victory 
in 
Port 
Royal 
Harbor. 
Generals 
Grant 
and
McClernand, with a force of three thousand ﬁve hundred
men, attacked a rebel camp in Missouri under General
Polk, captured twelve guns, burned their camp, and took
baggage, horses and many prisoners. The rebels were
afterwards reinforced, and compelled the Union forces to
return to their transports. Notwithstanding the fact that the
rebels claimed a victory, the results were substantially with
their assailants. General Buckner, with whom McClellan
was alleged to have made his treaty of neutrality, had
thrown oﬀ his neutral mask, and was gathering an army of
rebels in Kentucky, co-operating with General Bragg who
was invading the state with the determination to force it
into secession. To meet and repel this invasion, General
W.T. Sherman advanced with a large force to Bowling
Green, while General Nelson, on his left, gained a decisive
victory over the rebels under Colonel Williams. The various
operations of the Union forces broke up the rebel project of
subjugation, and re-invigorated the eﬀorts of the Union
men to hold the state to its loyalty. General Halleck was
appointed to the command of the army of the West, and
General Buell took General W.T. Sherman’s command in
Kentucky.
 The question of slavery was an ever-present one during
all the operations of the year. The instructions given by the
War Department to General Butler on the eighth of August,
were based upon “the desire of the President that all
existing rights in all the states should be respected and
maintained;” yet it was declared that “the rights dependent
on the laws of the states within which military operations
are conducted must necessarily be subordinate to the
military exigencies created by the insurrection, if not
wholly forfeited by the treasonable conduct of the parties
claiming them.” The diﬀiculty of settling the claims of loyal
masters was such that it was recommended to receive all
fugitives, keep a record of them, and set them to work.
Congress, the Secretary of War believed, would provide for
the repayment of loyal masters. On the departure of
General T.W. Sherman on his expedition to Port Royal, Mr.
Cameron referred him to the letter to General Butler on
this subject. He was directed to receive the services of any
persons, whether fugitives from labor or not, who should
oﬀer them to the national government. These fugitives
might be organized into “squads, companies, or otherwise,”
though that liberty was not intended to mean a general
arming of them for military service. Loyal masters were to
be assured, meantime, that Congress would provide for
them a just compensation for services thus lost to them.
The time for emancipation had not come, in the opinion of
the government. That Mr. Lincoln desired it, none can
doubt; but he had undertaken to save the Union under the
Constitution — to save the Union while preserving inviolate
 all the rights of all the states. He so understood the oath by
which he was invested with power. Whatever might be his
hatred of slavery — and it was the intensest passion of his
life — he could only interfere with it as a military necessity
— an essential means of saving the Union.
