  A   
  A    A  A  
  
  
           
MR. LINCOLN’S REPLY
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — I have been somewhat,
in my own mind, complimented by a large portion of Judge
Douglas’s speech, — I mean that portion which he devotes
to the controversy between himself and the present
Administration. This is the seventh time Judge Douglas and
myself have met in these joint discussions, and he has been
gradually improving in regard to his war with the
Administration. At Quincy, day before yesterday, he was a
little more severe upon the Administration than I had heard
him upon any occasion, and I took pains to compliment him
for it. I then told him to give it to them with all the power
he had; and as some of them were present, I told them I
would be very much obliged if they would give it to him in
about the same way. I take it he has now vastly improved
upon the attack he made then upon the Administration. I
ﬂatter myself he has really taken my advice on this subject.
All I can say now is to re-commend to him and to them what
I then commended, — to prosecute the war against one
another in the most vigorous manner. I say to them again:
“Go it, husband! — Go it, bear!”
There is one other thing I will mention before I leave this
branch of the discussion, — although I do not consider it
 much of my business, anyway. I refer to that part of the
Judge’s remarks where he undertakes to involve Mr.
Buchanan in an inconsistency. He reads something from
Mr. Buchanan, from which he undertakes to involve him in
an inconsistency; and he gets something of a cheer for
having done so. I would only remind the Judge that while
he is very valiantly ﬁghting for the Nebraska Bill and the
repeal of the Missouri Compromise, it has been but a little
while since he was the valiant advocate of the Missouri
Compromise. I want to know if Buchanan has not as much
right to be inconsistent as Douglas has? Has Douglas the
exclusive right, in this country, of being on all sides of all
questions? Is nobody allowed that high privilege but
himself? Is he to have an entire monopoly on that subject?
So far as Judge Douglas addressed his speech to me, or
so far as it was about me, it is my business to pay some
attention to it. I have heard the Judge state two or three
times what he has stated to-day, that in a speech which I
made at Springﬁeld, Illinois, I had in a very especial
manner complained that the Supreme Court in the Dred
Scott case had decided that a negro could never be a
citizen of the United States. I have omitted by some
accident heretofore to analyze this statement, and it is
required of me to notice it now. In point of fact it is untrue.
I never have complained especially of the Dred Scott
decision because it held that a negro could not be a citizen,
and the Judge is always wrong when he says I ever did so
complain of it. I have the speech here, and I will thank him
or any of his friends to show where I said that a negro
 should be a citizen, and complained especially of the Dred
Scott decision because it declared he could not be one. I
have done no such thing; and Judge Douglas, so
persistently insisting that I have done so, has strongly
impressed me with the belief of a predetermination on his
part to misrepresent me. He could not get his foundation
for insisting that I was in favor of this negro equality
anywhere else as well as he could by assuming that untrue
proposition. Let me tell this audience what is true in regard
to that matter; and the means by which they may correct
me if I do not tell them truly is by a recurrence to the
speech itself. I spoke of the Dred Scott decision in my
Springﬁeld speech, and I was then endeavoring to prove
that the Dred Scott decision was a portion of a system or
scheme to make slavery national in this country. I pointed
out what things had been decided by the court. I mentioned
as a fact that they had decided that a negro could not be a
citizen; that they had done so, as I supposed, to deprive the
negro, under all circumstances, of the remotest possibility
of ever becoming a citizen and claiming the rights of a
citizen of the United States under a certain clause of the
Constitution. I stated that, without making any complaint of
it at all. I then went on and stated the other points decided
in the case; namely, that the bringing of a negro into the
State of Illinois and holding him in slavery for two years
here was a matter in regard to which they would not decide
whether it would make him free or not; that they decided
the further point that taking him into a United States
Territory where slavery was prohibited by Act of Congress
 did not make him free, because that Act of Congress, as
they held, was unconstitutional. I mentioned these three
things as making up the points decided in that case. I
mentioned them in a lump, taken in connection with the
introduction of the Nebraska Bill, and the amendment of
Chase, oﬀered at the time, declaratory of the right of the
people of the Territories to exclude slavery, which was
voted down by the friends of the bill. I mentioned all these
things together, as evidence tending to prove a combination
and conspiracy to make the institution of slavery national.
In that connection and in that way I mentioned the decision
on the point that a negro could not be a citizen, and in no
other connection.
Out of this Judge Douglas builds up his beautiful
fabrication of my purpose to introduce a perfect social and
political equality between the white and black races. His
assertion that I made an “especial objection” (that is his
exact language) to the decision on this account is untrue in
point of fact.
Now, while I am upon this subject, and as Henry Clay has
been alluded to, I desire to place myself, in connection with
Mr. Clay, as nearly right before this people as may be. I am
quite aware what the Judge’s object is here by all these
allusions. He knows that we are before an audience having
strong sympathies southward, by relationship, place of
birth, and so on. He desires to place me in an extremely
Abolition attitude. He read upon a former occasion, and
alludes, without reading, to-day to a portion of a speech
which I delivered in Chicago. In his quotations from that
 speech, as he has made them upon former occasions, the
extracts were taken in such a way as, I suppose, brings
them within the deﬁnition of what is called garbling, —
taking portions of a speech which, when taken by
themselves, do not present the entire sense of the speaker
as expressed at the time. I propose, therefore, out of that
same speech, to show how one portion of it which he
skipped over (taking an extract before and an extract after)
will give a diﬀerent idea, and the true idea I intended to
convey. It will take me some little time to read it, but I
believe I will occupy the time that way.
You have heard him frequently allude to my controversy
with him in regard to the Declaration of Independence. I
confess that I have had a struggle with Judge Douglas on
that matter, and I will try brieﬂy to place myself right in
regard to it on this occasion. I said — and it is between the
extracts Judge Douglas has taken from this speech, and put
in his published speeches:
“It may be argued that there are certain conditions that
make necessities and impose them upon us, and to the
extent that a necessity is imposed upon a man he must
submit to it. I think that was the condition in which we
found ourselves when we established this government. We
had slaves among us, we could not get our Constitution
unless we permitted them to remain in slavery, we could
not secure the good we did secure if we grasped for more;
and having by necessity submitted to that much, it does not
destroy the principle that is the charter of our liberties. Let
the charter remain as our standard.”
 Now, I have upon all occasions declared as strongly as
Judge Douglas against the disposition to interfere with the
existing institution of slavery. You hear me read it from the
same speech from which he takes garbled extracts for the
purpose of proving upon me a disposition to interfere with
the institution of slavery, and establish a perfect social and
political equality between negroes and white people.
Allow me while upon this subject brieﬂy to present one
other extract from a speech of mine, more than a year ago,
at Springﬁeld, in discussing this very same question, soon
after Judge Douglas took his ground that negroes were, not
included in the Declaration of Independence:
“I think the authors of that notable instrument intended
to include all men, but they did not mean to declare all men
equal in all respects. They did not mean to say all men were
equal in color, size, intellect, moral development, or social
capacity. They deﬁned with tolerable distinctness in what
they did consider all men created equal, — equal in certain
inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness. This they said, and this they meant.
They did not mean to assert the obvious untruth that all
were then actually enjoying that equality, or yet that they
were about to confer it immediately upon them. In fact they
had no power to confer such a boon. They meant simply to
declare the right, so that the enforcement of it might follow
as fast as circumstances should permit.
“They meant to set up a standard maxim for free society
which should be familiar to all, — constantly looked to,
constantly labored for, and even, though never perfectly
 attained, constantly approximated, and thereby constantly
spreading and deepening its inﬂuence, and augmenting the
happiness and value of life to all people, of all colors,
everywhere.”
There again are the sentiments I have expressed in
regard to the Declaration of Independence upon a former
occasion, — sentiments which have been put in print and
read wherever anybody cared to know what so humble an
individual as myself chose to say in regard to it.
At Galesburgh, the other day, I said, in answer to Judge
Douglas, that three years ago there never had been a man,
so far as I knew or believed, in the whole world, who had
said that the Declaration of Independence did not include
negroes in the term “all men.” I reassert it to-day. I assert
that Judge Douglas and all his friends may search the whole
records of the country, and it will be a matter of great
astonishment to me if they shall be able to ﬁnd that one
human being three years ago had ever uttered the
astounding sentiment that the term “all men” in the
Declaration did not include the negro. Do not let me be
misunderstood. I know that more than three years ago
there were men who, ﬁnding this assertion constantly in
the way of their schemes to bring about the ascendency
and perpetuation of slavery, denied the truth of it. I know
that Mr. Calhoun and all the politicians of his school denied
the truth of the Declaration. I know that it ran along in the
mouth of some Southern men for a period of years, ending
at last in that shameful, though rather forcible, declaration
of Pettit of Indiana, upon the ﬂoor of the United States
 Senate, that the Declaration of Independence was in that
respect “a self-evident lie,” rather than a self-evident truth.
But I say, with a perfect knowledge of all this hawking at
the Declaration without directly attacking it, that three
years ago there never had lived a man who had ventured to
assail it in the sneaking way of pretending to believe it, and
then asserting it did not include the negro. I believe the
ﬁrst man who ever said it was Chief Justice Taney in the
Dred Scott case, and the next to him was our friend
Stephen A. Douglas. And now it has become the catchword
of the entire party. I would like to call upon his friends
everywhere to consider how they have come in so short a
time to view this matter in a way so entirely diﬀerent from
their former belief; to ask whether they are not being borne
along by an irresistible current, — whither, they know not.
In answer to my proposition at Galesburgh last week, I
see that some man in Chicago has got up a letter,
addressed to the Chicago Times, to show, as he professes,
that somebody had said so before; and he signs himself “An
Old-Line Whig,” if I remember correctly. In the ﬁrst place, I
would say he was not an old-line Whig. I am somewhat
acquainted with old-line Whigs from the origin to the end of
that party; I became pretty well acquainted with them, and
I know they always had some sense, whatever else you
could ascribe to them. I know there never was one who had
not more sense than to try to show by the evidence he
produces that some men had, prior to the time I named,
said that negroes were not included in the term “all men”
in the Declaration of Independence. What is the evidence
 he produces? I will bring forward his evidence, and let you
see what he oﬀers by way of showing that somebody more
than three years ago had said negroes were not included in
the Declaration. He brings forward part of a speech from
Henry Clay, — the part of the speech of Henry Clay which I
used to bring forward to prove precisely the contrary. I
guess we are surrounded to some extent to-day by the old
friends of Mr. Clay, and they will be glad to hear anything
from that authority. While he was in Indiana a man
presented a petition to liberate his negroes, and he (Mr.
Clay) made a speech in answer to it, which I suppose he
carefully wrote out himself and caused to be published. I
have before me an extract from that speech which
constitutes the evidence this pretended “Old-Line Whig” at
Chicago brought forward to show that Mr. Clay did n’t
suppose the negro was included in the Declaration of
Independence. Hear what Mr. Clay said:
“And what is the foundation of this appeal to me in
Indiana to liberate the slaves under my care in Kentucky? It
is a general declaration in the act announcing to the world
the independence of the thirteen American colonies, that
all men are created equal. Now, as an abstract principle,
there is no doubt of the truth of that declaration; and it is
desirable, in the original construction of society and in
organized societies, to keep it in view as a great
fundamental principle. But, then, I apprehend that in no
society that ever did exist, or ever shall be formed, was or
can the equality asserted among the members of the
human race be practically enforced and carried out. There
 are portions, large portions, women, minors, insane,
culprits, transient sojourners, that will always probably
remain subject to the government of another portion of the
community.
“That declaration, whatever may be the extent of its
import, was made by the delegations of the thirteen States.
In most of them slavery existed, and had long existed, and
was established by law. It was introduced and forced upon
the colonies by the paramount law of England. Do you
believe that in making that declaration the States that
concurred in it intended that it should be tortured into a
virtual emancipation of all the slaves within their respective
limits? Would Virginia and other Southern States have ever
united in a declaration which was to be interpreted into an
abolition of slavery among them? Did any one of the
thirteen colonies entertain such a design or expectation? To
impute such a secret and unavowed purpose, would be to
charge a political fraud upon the noblest band of patriots
that ever assembled in council, — a fraud upon the
Confederacy of the Revolution; a fraud upon the union of
those States whose Constitution not only recognized the
lawfulness of slavery, but permitted the importation of
slaves from Africa until the year 1808.”
This is the entire quotation brought forward to prove that
somebody previous to three years ago had said the negro
was not included in the term “all men” in the Declaration.
How does it do so? In what way has it a tendency to prove
that? Mr. Clay says it is true as an abstract principle that all
men are created equal, but that we cannot practically apply
 it in all eases. He illustrates this by bringing forward the
cases of females, minors, and insane persons, with whom it
cannot be enforced; but he says it is true as an abstract
principle in the organization of society as well as in
organized society and it should be kept in view as a
fundamental principle. Let me read a few words more
before I add some comments of my own. Mr. Clay says, a
little further on:
“I desire no concealment of my opinions in regard to the
institution of slavery. I look upon it as a great evil, and
deeply lament that we have derived it from the parental
government and from our ancestors. I wish every slave in
the United States was in the country of his ancestors. But
here they are, and the question is, How can they be best
dealt with? If a state of nature existed, and we were about
to lay the foundations of society, no man would be more
strongly opposed than I should be to incorporate the
institution of slavery amongst its elements.”
Now, here in this same book, in this same speech, in this
same extract, brought forward to prove that Mr. Clay held
that the negro was not included in the Declaration of
Independence, is no such statement on his part, but the
declaration that it is a great fundamental truth which
should be constantly kept in view in the organization of
society and in societies already organized. But if I say a
word about it; if I attempt, as Mr. Clay said all good men
ought to do, to keep it in view; if, in this “organized
society,” I ask to have the public eye turned upon it; if I ask,
in relation to the organization of new Territories, that the
 public eye should be turned upon it, forthwith I am viliﬁed
as you hear me to-day. What have I done that I have not the
license of Henry Clay’s illustrious example here in doing?
Have I done aught that I have not his authority for, while
maintaining that in organizing new Territories and societies
this fundamental principle should be regarded, and in
organized society holding it up to the public view and
recognizing what he recognized as the great principle of
free government?
And when this new principle — this new proposition that
no human being ever thought of three years ago — is
brought forward, I combat it as having an evil tendency, if
not an evil design. I combat it as having a tendency to
dehumanize the negro, to take away from him the right of
ever striving to be a man. I combat it as being one of the
thousand things constantly done in these days to prepare
the public mind to make property, and nothing but property,
of the negro in all the States of this Union.
But there is a point that I wish, before leaving this part of
the discussion, to ask attention to. I have read and I repeat
the words of Henry Clay:
“I desire no concealment of my opinions in regard to the
institution of slavery. I look upon it as a great evil, and
deeply lament that we have derived it from the parental
government and from our ancestors. I wish every slave in
the United States was in the country of his ancestors. But
here they are, and the question is, How can they be best
dealt with? If a state of nature existed, and we were about
to lay the foundations of society, no man would be more
 strongly opposed than I should be to incorporate the
institution of slavery amongst its elements.”
The principle upon which I have insisted in this canvass
is in relation to laying the foundations of new societies. I
have never sought to apply these principles to the old
States for the purpose of abolishing slavery in those States.
It is nothing but a miserable perversion of what I have said,
to assume that I have declared Missouri, or any other slave
State, shall emancipate her slaves; I have proposed no such
thing. But when Mr. Clay says that in laying the foundations
of society in our Territories where it does not exist, he
would be opposed to the introduction of slavery as an
element, I insist that we have his warrant — his license —
for insisting upon the exclusion of that element which he
declared in such strong and emphatic language was most
hurtful to him.
Judge Douglas has again referred to a Springﬁeld speech
in which I said “a house divided against itself cannot
stand.” The Judge has so often made the entire quotation
from that speech that I can make it from memory. I used
this language:
“We are now far into the ﬁfth year since a policy was
initiated with the avowed object and conﬁdent promise of
putting an end to the slavery agitation. Under the operation
of this policy, that agitation has not only not ceased, but has
constantly augmented. In my opinion it will not cease until
a crisis shall have been reached and passed. ‘A house
divided 
against 
itself 
cannot 
stand.’ 
I 
believe 
this
government cannot endure permanently, half slave and half
 free. I do not expect the house to fall, but I do expect it will
cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the
other. Either the opponents of slavery will arrest the
further spread of it, and place it where the public mind
shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate
extinction, or its advocates will push it forward till it shall
become alike lawful in all the States, old as well as new,
North as well as South.”
That extract and the sentiments expressed in it have
been extremely oﬀensive to Judge Douglas. He has warred
upon them as Satan wars upon the Bible. His perversions
upon it are endless. Here now are my views upon it in brief:
I said we were now far into the ﬁfth year since a policy
was initiated with the avowed object and conﬁdent promise
of putting an end to the slavery agitation. Is it not so? When
that Nebraska Bill was brought forward four years ago last
January, was it not for the “avowed object” of putting an
end to the slavery agitation? We were to have no more
agitation in Congress; it was all to be banished to the
Territories. By the way, I will remark here that, as Judge
Douglas is very fond of complimenting Mr. Crittenden in
these days, Mr. Crittenden has said there was a falsehood
in that whole business, for there was no slavery agitation at
that time to allay. We were for a little while quiet on the
troublesome thing, and that very allaying plaster of Judge
Douglas’s stirred it up again. But was it not understood or
intimated with the “conﬁdent promise” of putting an end to
the slavery agitation? Surely it was. In every speech you
heard Judge Douglas make, until he got into this
 “imbroglio,” as they call it, with the Administration about
the 
Lecompton 
Constitution, 
every 
speech 
on 
that
Nebraska Bill was full of his felicitations that we were just
at the end of the slavery agitation. The last tip of the last
joint of the old serpent’s tail was just drawing out of view.
But has it proved so? I have asserted that under that policy
that agitation “has not only not ceased, but has constantly
augmented.” When was there ever a greater agitation in
Congress than last winter? When was it as great in the
country as to-day?
There was a collateral object in the introduction of that
Nebraska policy, which was to clothe the people of the
Territories with a superior degree of self-government,
beyond what they had ever had before. The ﬁrst object and
the main one of conferring upon the people a higher degree
of “self-government” is a question of fact to be determined
by you in answer to a single question. Have you ever heard
or known of a people anywhere on earth who had as little
to do as, in the ﬁrst instance of its use, the people of
Kansas had with this same right of “self-government “? In
its main policy and in its collateral object, it has been
nothing but a living, creeping lie from the time of its
introduction till to-day.
I have intimated that I thought the agitation would not
cease until a crisis should have been reached and passed. I
have stated in what way I thought it would be reached and
passed. I have said that it might go one way or the other.
We might, by arresting the further spread of it, and placing
it where the fathers originally placed it, put it where the
 public mind should rest in the belief that it was in the
course of ultimate extinction. Thus the agitation may cease.
It may be pushed forward until it shall become alike lawful
in all the States, old as well as new, North as well as South.
I have said, and I repeat, my wish is that the further spread
of it may be arrested, and that it may be where the public
mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of
ultimate extinction — I have expressed that as my wish I
entertain the opinion, upon evidence suﬀicient to my mind,
that the fathers of this government placed that institution
where the public mind did rest in the belief that it was in
the course of ultimate extinction. Let me ask why they
made provision that the source of slavery — the African
slave-trade — should be cut oﬀ at the end of twenty years?
Why did they make provision that in all the new territory
we owned at that time slavery should be forever inhibited?
Why stop its spread in one direction, and cut oﬀ its source
in another, if they did not look to its being placed in the
course of its ultimate extinction?
Again: the institution of slavery is only mentioned in the
Constitution of the United States two or three times, and in
neither of these cases does the word “slavery” or “negro
race” occur; but covert language is used each time, and for
a purpose full of signiﬁcance. What is the language in
regard to the prohibition of the African slave-trade? It runs
in about this way:
“The migration or importation of such persons as any of
the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall
 not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight.”
The next allusion in the Constitution to the question of
slavery and the black race is on the subject of the basis of
representation, and there the language used is:
“Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned
among the several States which may be included within
this Union, according to their respective numbers, which
shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to service for a term of
years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three-ﬁfths of all
other persons.”
It says “persons,” not slaves, not negroes; but this
“three-ﬁfths” can be applied to no other class among us
than the negroes.
Lastly, in the provision for the reclamation of fugitive
slaves, it is said:
“No person held to service or labor in one State, under
the 
laws 
thereof, 
escaping 
into 
another, 
shall 
in
consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged
from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up, on
claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be
due.”
There again there is no mention of the word “negro” or
of slavery. In all three of these places, being the only
allusions to slavery in the instrument, covert language is
used. Language is used not suggesting that slavery existed
or that the black race were among us. And I understand the
contemporaneous history of those times to be that covert
 language was used with a purpose, and that purpose was
that in our Constitution, which it was hoped and is still
hoped will endure forever, — when it should be read by
intelligent and patriotic men, after the institution of slavery
had passed from among us, — there should be nothing on
the face of the great charter of liberty suggesting that such
a thing as negro slavery had ever existed among us. This is
part of the evidence that the fathers of the government
expected and intended the institution of slavery to come to
an end. They expected and intended that it should be in the
course of ultimate extinction. And when I say that I desire
to see the further spread of it arrested, I only say I desire
to see that done which the fathers have ﬁrst done. When I
say I desire to see it placed where the public mind will rest
in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction, I
only say I desire to see it placed where they placed it. It is
not true that our fathers, as Judge Douglas assumes, made
this government part slave and part free. Understand the
sense in which he puts it. He assumes that slavery is a
rightful thing within itself, — was introduced by the
framers of the Constitution. The exact truth is, that they
found the institution existing among us, and they left it as
they found it. But in making the government they left this
institution with many clear marks of disapprobation upon
it. They found slavery among them, and they left it among
them because of the diﬀiculty — the absolute impossibility
— of its immediate removal. And when Judge Douglas asks
me why we cannot let it remain part slave and part free, as
the fathers of the government made it, he asks a question
 based upon an assumption which is itself a falsehood; and I
turn upon him and ask him the question, when the policy
that the fathers of the government had adopted in relation
to this element among us was the best policy in the world,
the only wise policy, the only policy that we can ever safely
continue upon that will ever give us peace, unless this
dangerous element masters us all and becomes a national
institution, — I turn upon him and ask him why he could
not leave it alone. I turn and ask him why he was driven to
the necessity of introducing a new policy in regard to it. He
has himself said he introduced a new policy. He said so in
his speech on the 22d of March of the present year, 1858. I
ask him why he could not let it remain where our fathers
placed it. I ask, too, of Judge Douglas and his friends why
we shall not again place this institution upon the basis on
which the fathers left it. I ask you, when he infers that I am
in favor of setting the free and slave States at war, when
the institution was placed in that attitude by those who
made the Constitution, did they make any war? If we had
no war out of it when thus placed, wherein is the ground of
belief that we shall have war out of it if we return to that
policy? Have we had any peace upon this matter springing
from any other basis? I maintain that we have not. I have
proposed nothing more than a return to the policy of the
fathers.
I confess, when I propose a certain measure of policy, it
is not enough for me that I do not intend anything evil in
the result, but it is incumbent on me to show that it has not
a tendency to that result. I have met Judge Douglas in that
 point of view. I have not only made the declaration that I do
not mean to produce a conﬂict between the States, but I
have tried to show by fair reasoning, and I think I have
shown to the minds of fair men, that I propose nothing but
what has a most peaceful tendency. The quotation that I
happened to make in that Springﬁeld Speech, that “a house
divided against itself cannot stand,” and which has proved
so oﬀensive to the judge, was part and parcel of the same
thing. He tries to show that variety in the democratic
institutions of the diﬀerent States is necessary and
indispensable. I do not dispute it. I have no controversy
with Judge Douglas about that. I shall very readily agree
with him that it would be foolish for us to insist upon
having a cranberry law here in Illinois, where we have no
cranberries, because they have a cranberry law in Indiana,
where they have cranberries. I should insist that it would
be exceedingly wrong in us to deny to Virginia the right to
enact oyster laws, where they have oysters, because we
want no such laws here. I understand, I hope, quite as well
as Judge Douglas or anybody else, that the variety in the
soil and climate and face of the country, and consequent
variety in the industrial pursuits and productions of a
country, require systems of law conforming to this variety
in the natural features of the country. I understand quite as
well as Judge Douglas that if we here raise a barrel of ﬂour
more than we want, and the Louisianians raise a barrel of
sugar more than they want, it is of mutual advantage to
exchange. That produces commerce, brings us together,
and makes us better friends. We like one another the more
 for it. And I understand as well as Judge Douglas, or
anybody else, that these mutual accommodations are the
cements which bind together the diﬀerent parts of this
Union; that instead of being a thing to “divide the house,”
— ﬁguratively expressing the Union, — they tend to sustain
it; they are the props of the house, tending always to hold it
up.
But when I have admitted all this, I ask if there is any
parallel between these things and this institution of
slavery? I do not see that there is any parallel at all
between them. Consider it. When have we had any
diﬀiculty or quarrel amongst ourselves about the cranberry
laws of Indiana, or the oyster laws of Virginia, or the pine-
lumber laws of Maine, or the fact that Louisiana produces
sugar, and Illinois ﬂour? When have we had any quarrels
over these things? When have we had perfect peace in
regard to this thing which I say is an element of discord in
this Union? We have sometimes had peace, but when was
it? It was when the institution of slavery remained quiet
where it was. We have had diﬀiculty and turmoil whenever
it has made a struggle to spread itself where it was not. I
ask, then, if experience does not speak in thunder-tones
telling us that the policy which has given peace to the
country heretofore, being returned to, gives the greatest
promise of peace again. You may say, and Judge Douglas
has intimated the same thing, that all this diﬀiculty in
regard to the institution of slavery is the mere agitation of
oﬀice-seekers and ambitious Northern politicians. He
thinks we want to get “his place,” I suppose. I agree that
 there are oﬀice-seekers amongst us. The Bible says
somewhere that we are desperately selﬁsh. I think we
would have discovered that fact without the Bible. I do not
claim that I am any less so than the average of men, but I
do claim that I am not more selﬁsh than Judge Douglas.
But is it true that all the diﬀiculty and agitation we have
in regard to this institution of slavery spring from oﬀice-
seeking, from the mere ambition of politicians? Is that the
truth? How many times have we had danger from this
question? Go back to the day of the Missouri Compromise.
Go back to the nulliﬁcation question, at the bottom of
which lay this same slavery question. Go back to the time of
the annexation of Texas. Go back to the troubles that led to
the Compromise of 1850. You will ﬁnd that every time, with
the single exception of the Nulliﬁcation question, they
sprung from an endeavor to spread this institution. There
never was a party in the history of this country, and there
probably never will be, of suﬀicient strength to disturb the
general peace of the country. Parties themselves may be
divided and quarrel on minor questions, yet it extends not
beyond the parties themselves. But does not this question
make a disturbance outside of political circles? Does it not
enter into the churches and rend them asunder? What
divided the great Methodist Church into two parts, North
and South? What has raised this constant disturbance in
every Presbyterian General Assembly that meets? What
disturbed the Unitarian Church in this very city two years
ago? What has jarred and shaken the great American Tract
Society recently, not yet splitting it, but sure to divide it in
 the end? Is it not this same mighty, deep-seated power that
somehow operates on the minds of men, exciting and
stirring them up in every avenue of society, — in politics, in
religion, in literature, in morals, in all the manifold
relations of life? Is this the work of politicians? Is that
irresistible power, which for ﬁfty years has shaken the
government and agitated the people, to be stiﬂed and
subdued by pretending that it is an exceedingly simple
thing, and we ought not to talk about it? If you will get
everybody else to stop talking about it, I assure you I will
quit before they have half done so. But where is the
philosophy or statesmanship which assumes that you can
quiet that disturbing element in our society which has
disturbed us for more than half a century, which has been
the 
only 
serious 
danger 
that 
has 
threatened 
our
institutions, — I say, where is the philosophy or the
statesmanship based on the assumption that we are to quit
talking about it, and that the public mind is all at once to
cease being agitated by it? Yet this is the policy here in the
North that Douglas is advocating, that we are to care
nothing about it! I ask you if it is not a false philosophy. Is it
not a false statesmanship that undertakes to build up a
system of policy upon the basis of caring nothing about the
very thing that everybody does care the most about — a
thing which all experience has shown we care a very great
deal about?
The Judge alludes very often in the course of his remarks
to the exclusive right which the States have to decide the
whole thing for themselves. I agree with him very readily
 that the diﬀerent States have that right. He is but ﬁghting a
man of straw when he assumes that I am contending
against the right of the States to do as they please about it.
Our controversy with him is in regard to the new
Territories. We agree that when the States come in as
States they have the right and the power to do as they
please. We have no power as citizens of the free-States, or
in our Federal capacity as members of the Federal Union
through the General Government, to disturb slavery in the
States where it exists. We profess constantly that we have
no more inclination than belief in the power of the
government to disturb it; yet we are driven constantly to
defend ourselves from the assumption that we are warring
upon the rights of the Sates. What I insist upon is, that the
new Territories shall be kept free from it while in the
Territorial condition. Judge Douglas assumes that we have
no interest in them, — that we have no right whatever to
interfere. I think we have some interest. I think that as
white men we have. Do we not wish for an outlet for our
surplus population, if I may so express myself? Do we not
feel an interest in getting to that outlet with such
institutions as we would like to have prevail there? If you
go to the Territory opposed to slavery, and another man
comes upon the same ground with his slave, upon the
assumption that the things are equal, it turns out that he
has the equal right all his way, and you have no part of it
your way. If he goes in and makes it a slave Territory, and
by consequence a slave State, is it not time that those who
desire to have it a free State were on equal ground? Let me
 suggest it in a diﬀerent way. How many Democrats are
there about here [“A thousand”] who have left slave States
and come into the free State of Illinois to get rid of the
institution of slavery? [Another voice: “A thousand and
one.”] I reckon there are a thousand and one. I will ask you,
if the policy you are now advocating had prevailed when
this country was in a Territorial condition, where would you
have gone to get rid of it? Where would you have found
your free State or Territory to go to? And when hereafter,
for any cause, the people in this place shall desire to ﬁnd
new homes, if they wish to be rid of the institution, where
will they ﬁnd the place to go to?
Now, irrespective of the moral aspect of this question as
to whether there is a right or wrong in enslaving a negro, I
am still in favor of our new Territories being in such a
condition that white men may ﬁnd a home, — may ﬁnd
some spot where they can better their condition; where
they can settle upon new soil and better their condition in
life. I am in favor of this, not merely (I must say it here as I
have elsewhere) for our own people who are born amongst
us, but as an outlet for free white people everywhere the
world over — in which Hans, and Baptiste, and Patrick, and
all other men from all the world, may ﬁnd new homes and
better their conditions in life.
I have stated upon former occasions, and I may as well
state again, what I understand to be the real issue in this
controversy between Judge Douglas and myself. On the
point of my wanting to make war between the free and the
slave States, there has been no issue between us. So, too,
 when he assumes that I am in favor of producing a perfect
social and political equality between the white and black
races. These are false issues, upon which Judge Douglas
has tried to force the controversy. There is no foundation in
truth for the charge that I maintain either of these
propositions. The real issue in this controversy — the one
pressing upon every mind — is the sentiment on the part of
one class that looks upon the institution of slavery as a
wrong, and of another class that does not look upon it as a
wrong. The sentiment that contemplates the institution of
slavery in this country as a wrong is the sentiment of the
Republican party. It is the sentiment around which all their
actions, all their arguments, circle, from which all their
propositions radiate. They look upon it as being a moral,
social, and political wrong; and while they contemplate it as
such, they nevertheless have due regard for its actual
existence among us, and the diﬀiculties of getting rid of it
in any satisfactory way, and to all the constitutional
obligations thrown about it. Yet, having a due regard for
these, they desire a policy in regard to it that looks to its
not creating any more danger. They insist that it should, as
far as may be, be treated as a wrong; and one of the
methods of treating it as a wrong is to make provision that
it shall grow no larger. They also desire a policy that looks
to a peaceful end of slavery at some time. These are the
views they entertain in regard to it as I understand them;
and 
all 
their 
sentiments, 
all 
their 
arguments 
and
propositions, are brought within this range. I have said,
and I repeat it here, that if there be a man amongst us who
 does not think that the institution of slavery is wrong in any
one of the aspects of which I have spoken, he is misplaced,
and ought not to be with us. And if there be a man amongst
us who is so impatient of it as a wrong as to disregard its
actual presence among us and the diﬀiculty of getting rid of
it suddenly in a satisfactory way, and to disregard the
constitutional obligations thrown about it, that man is
misplaced if he is on our platform. We disclaim sympathy
with him in practical action. He is not placed properly with
us.
On this subject of treating it as a wrong, and limiting its
spread, let me say a word. Has anything ever threatened
the existence of this Union save and except this very
institution of slavery? What is it that we hold most dear
amongst us? Our own liberty and prosperity. What has ever
threatened our liberty and prosperity, save and except this
institution of slavery? If this is true, how do you propose to
improve the condition of things by enlarging slavery, by
spreading it out and making it bigger? You may have a wen
or cancer upon your person, and not be able to cut it out,
lest you bleed to death; but surely it is no way to cure it, to
engraft it and spread it over your whole body. That is no
proper way of treating what you regard a wrong. You see
this peaceful way of dealing with it as a wrong, restricting
the spread of it, and not allowing it to go into new countries
where it has not already existed. That is the peaceful way,
the old-fashioned way, the way in which the fathers
themselves set us the example.
 On the other hand, I have said there is a sentiment which
treats it as not being wrong. That is the Democratic
sentiment of this day. I do not mean to say that every man
who stands within that range positively asserts that it is
right. That class will include all who positively assert that it
is right, and all who, like Judge Douglas, treat it as
indiﬀerent and do not say it is either right or wrong. These
two classes of men fall within the general class of those
who do not look upon it as a wrong. And if there be among
you anybody who supposes that he, as a Democrat, can
consider himself “as much opposed to slavery as anybody,”
I would like to reason with him. You never treat it as a
wrong. What other thing that you consider as a wrong do
you deal with as you deal with that? Perhaps you say it is
wrong — but your leader never does, and you quarrel with
anybody who says it is wrong. Although you pretend to say
so yourself, you can ﬁnd no ﬁt place to deal with it as a
wrong. You must not say anything about it in the free
States, because it is not here. You must not say anything
about it in the slave States, because it is there. You must
not say anything about it in the pulpit, because that is
religion, and has nothing to do with it. You must not say
anything about it in politics, because that will disturb the
security of “my place.” There is no place to talk about it as
being a wrong, although you say yourself it is a wrong. But,
ﬁnally, you will screw yourself up to the belief that if the
people of the slave States should adopt a system of gradual
emancipation on the slavery question, you would be in
favor of it. You would be in favor of it. You say that is
 getting it in the right place, and you would be glad to see it
succeed. But you are deceiving yourself. You all know that
Frank Blair and Gratz Brown, down there in St. Louis,
undertook to introduce that system in Missouri. They
fought as valiantly as they could for the system of gradual
emancipation which you pretend you would be glad to see
succeed. Now, I will bring you to the test. After a hard ﬁght
they were beaten, and when the news came over here, you
threw up your hats and hurrahed for Democracy. More than
that, take all the argument made in favor of the system you
have proposed, and it carefully excludes the idea that there
is anything wrong in the institution of slavery. The
arguments to sustain that policy carefully exclude it. Even
here to-day you heard Judge Douglas quarrel with me
because I uttered a wish that it might sometime come to an
end. Although Henry Clay could say he wished every slave
in the United States was in the country of his ancestors, I
am denounced by those pretending to respect Henry Clay
for uttering a wish that it might sometime, in some
peaceful way, come to an end. The Democratic policy in
regard to that institution will not tolerate the merest
breath, the slightest hint, of the least degree of wrong
about it. Try it by some of Judge Douglas’s arguments. He
says he “don’t care whether it is voted up or voted down” in
the Territories. I do not care myself, in dealing with that
expression, whether it is intended to be expressive of his
individual sentiments on the subject, or only of the national
policy he desires to have established. It is alike valuable for
my purpose. Any man can say that who does not see
 anything wrong in slavery; but no man can logically say it
who does see a wrong in it, because no man can logically
say he don’t care whether a wrong is voted up or voted
down. He may say he don’t care whether an indiﬀerent
thing is voted up or down, but he must logically have a
choice between a right thing and a wrong thing. He
contends that whatever community wants slaves has a right
to have them. So they have, if it is not a wrong. But if it is a
wrong, he cannot say people have a right to do wrong. He
says that upon the score of equality slaves should be
allowed to go in a new Territory, like other property. This is
strictly logical if there is no diﬀerence between it and other
property. If it and other property are equal, this argument
is entirely logical. But if you insist that one is wrong and
the other right, there is no use to institute a comparison
between right and wrong. You may turn over everything in
the Democratic policy from beginning to end, whether in
the shape it takes on the statute book, in the shape it takes
in the Dred Scott decision, in the shape it takes in
conversation, or the shape it takes in short maxim-like
arguments, — it everywhere carefully excludes the idea
that there is anything wrong in it.
That is the real issue. That is the issue that will continue
in this country when these poor tongues of Judge Douglas
and myself shall be silent. It is the eternal struggle between
these two principles — right and wrong — throughout the
world. They are the two principles that have stood face to
face from the beginning of time, and will ever continue to
struggle. The one is the common right of humanity, and the
 other the divine right of kings. It is the same principle in
whatever shape it develops itself. It is the same spirit that
says, “You work and toil and earn bread, and I’ll eat it.” No
matter in what shape it comes, whether from the mouth of
a king who seeks to bestride the people of his own nation
and live by the fruit of their labor, or from one race of men
as an apology for enslaving another race, it is the same
tyrannical principle. I was glad to express my gratitude at
Quincy, and I re-express it here, to Judge Douglas, — that
he looks to no end of the institution of slavery. That will
help the people to see where the struggle really is. It will
hereafter place with us all men who really do wish the
wrong may have an end. And whenever we can get rid of
the fog which obscures the real question, when we can get
Judge Douglas and his friends to avow a policy looking to
its perpetuation, — we can get out from among that class of
men and bring them to the side of those who treat it as a
wrong. Then there will soon be an end of it, and that end
will be its “ultimate extinction.” Whenever the issue can be
distinctly made, and all extraneous matter thrown out so
that men can fairly see the real diﬀerence between the
parties, this controversy will soon be settled, and it will be
done peaceably too. There will be no war, no violence. It
will be placed again where the wisest and best men of the
world placed it. Brooks of South Carolina once declared
that when this Constitution was framed its framers did not
look to the institution existing until this day. When he said
this, I think he stated a fact that is fully borne out by the
history of the times. But he also said they were better and
 wiser men than the men of these days, yet the men of these
days had experience which they had not, and by the
invention of the cotton-gin it became a necessity in this
country that slavery should be perpetual. I now say that,
willingly or unwillingly — purposely or without purpose,
Judge Douglas has been the most prominent instrument in
changing the position of the institution of slavery, — which
the fathers of the government expected to come to an end
ere this, and putting it upon Brooks’s cotton-gin basis;
placing it where he openly confesses he has no desire there
shall ever be an end of it.
I understand I have ten minutes yet. I will employ it in
saying something about this argument Judge Douglas uses,
while he sustains the Dred Scott decision, that the people
of the Territories can still somehow exclude slavery. The
ﬁrst thing I ask attention to is the fact that Judge Douglas
constantly said, before the decision, that whether they
could or not, was a question for the Supreme Court. But
after the court had made the decision he virtually says it is
not a question for the Supreme Court, but for the people.
And how is it he tells us they can exclude it? He says it
needs “police regulations,” and that admits of “unfriendly
legislation.” Although it is a right established by the
Constitution of the United States to take a slave into a
Territory of the United States and hold him as property, yet
unless 
the 
Territorial 
Legislature 
will 
give 
friendly
legislation, and more especially if they adopt unfriendly
legislation, they can practically exclude him. Now, without
meeting this proposition as a matter of fact, I pass to
 consider the real constitutional obligation. Let me take the
gentleman who looks me in the face before me, and let us
suppose that he is a member of the Territorial Legislature.
The ﬁrst thing he will do will be to swear that he will
support the Constitution of the United States. His neighbor
by his side in the Territory has slaves and needs Territorial
legislation to enable him to enjoy that constitutional right.
Can he withhold the legislation which his neighbor needs
for the enjoyment of a right which is ﬁxed in his favor in the
Constitution of the United States which he has sworn to
support? Can he withhold it without violating his oath?
And, more especially, can he pass unfriendly legislation to
violate his oath? Why, this is a monstrous sort of talk about
the Constitution of the United States! There has never been
as outlandish or lawless a doctrine from the mouth of any
respectable man on earth. I do not believe it is a
constitutional right to hold slaves in a Territory of the
United States. I believe the decision was improperly made
and I go for reversing it. Judge Douglas is furious against
those who go for reversing a decision. But he is for
legislating it out of all force while the law itself stands. I
repeat that there has never been so monstrous a doctrine
uttered from the mouth of a respectable man.
I suppose most of us (I know it of myself) believe that the
people 
of 
the 
Southern 
States 
are 
entitled 
to 
a
Congressional Fugitive Slave law, — that is a right ﬁxed in
the Constitution. But it cannot be made available to them
without Congressional legislation. In the Judge’s language,
it is a “barren right,” which needs legislation before it can
 become eﬀicient and valuable to the persons to whom it is
guaranteed. And as the right is constitutional, I agree that
the legislation shall be granted to it, and that not that we
like the institution of slavery. We profess to have no taste
for running and catching niggers, at least, I profess no
taste for that job at all. Why then do I yield support to a
Fugitive Slave law? Because I do not understand that the
Constitution, which guarantees that right, can be supported
without it. And if I believed that the right to hold a slave in
a Territory was equally ﬁxed in the Constitution with the
right to reclaim fugitives, I should be bound to give it the
legislation necessary to support it. I say that no man can
deny his obligation to give the necessary legislation to
support slavery in a Territory, who believes it is a
constitutional right to have it there. No man can, who does
not give the Abolitionists an argument to deny the
obligation enjoined by the Constitution to enact a Fugitive
State law. Try it now. It is the strongest Abolition argument
ever made. I say if that Dred Scott decision is correct, then
the right to hold slaves in a Territory is equally a
constitutional right with the right of a slaveholder to have
his runaway returned. No one can show the distinction
between them. The one is express, so that we cannot deny
it. The other is construed to be in the Constitution, so that
he who believes the decision to be correct believes in the
right. And the man who argues that by unfriendly
legislation, in spite of that constitutional right, slavery may
be driven from the Territories, cannot avoid furnishing an
argument by which Abolitionists may deny the obligation to
 return fugitives, and claim the power to pass laws
unfriendly to the right of the slaveholder to reclaim his
fugitive. I do not know how such an arguement may strike a
popular assembly like this, but I defy anybody to go before
a body of men whose minds are educated to estimating
evidence and reasoning, and show that there is an iota of
diﬀerence between the constitutional right to reclaim a
fugitive and the constitutional right to hold a slave, in a
Territory, provided this Dred Scott decision is correct, I
defy any man to make an argument that will justify
unfriendly legislation to deprive a slaveholder of his right
to hold his slave in a Territory, that will not equally, in all its
length, breadth, and thickness, furnish an argument for
nullifying the Fugitive Slave law. Why, there is not such an
Abolitionist in the nation as Douglas, after all!
