 r.  I
 
 
      
I
  .
MY FRIENDS: — Since Judge Douglas has said to you in
his conclusion that he had not time in an hour and a half to
answer all I had said in an hour, it follows of course that I
will not be able to answer in half an hour all that he said in
an hour and a half.
I wish to return to Judge Douglas my profound thanks for
his public annunciation here to-day, to be put on record,
that his system of policy in regard to the institution of
slavery contemplates that it shall last forever. We are
getting a little nearer the true issue of this controversy, and
I am profoundly grateful for this one sentence. Judge
Douglas asks you, Why cannot the institution of slavery, or
rather, why cannot the nation, part slave and part free,
continue as our fathers made it, forever? In the ﬁrst place, I
insist that our fathers did not make this nation half slave
and half free, or part slave and part free. I insist that they
found the institution of slavery existing here. They did not
make it so but they left it so because they knew of no way
to get rid of it at that time. When Judge Douglas undertakes
to say that, as a matter of choice, the fathers of the
government made this nation part slave and part free, he
assumes what is historically a falsehood. More than that:
when the fathers of the government cut oﬀ the source of
 slavery by the abolition of the slave-trade, and adopted a
system of restricting it from the new Territories where it
had not existed, I maintain that they placed it where they
understood, and all sensible men understood, it was in the
course of ultimate extinction; and when Judge Douglas asks
me why it cannot continue as our fathers made it, I ask him
why he and his friends could not let it remain as our fathers
made it?
It is precisely all I ask of him in relation to the institution
of slavery, that it shall be placed upon the basis that our
fathers placed it upon. Mr. Brooks, of South Carolina, once
said, and truly said, that when this government was
established, no one expected the institution of slavery to
last until this day, and that the men who formed this
government were wiser and better than the men of these
days; but the men of these days had experience which the
fathers had not, and that experience had taught them the
invention of the cotton-gin, and this had made the
perpetuation of the institution of slavery a necessity in this
country. Judge Douglas could not let it stand upon the basis
which our fathers placed it, but removed it, and put it upon
the cotton-gin basis. It is a question, therefore, for him and
his friends to answer, why they could not let it remain
where the fathers of the government originally placed it. I
hope nobody has understood me as trying to sustain the
doctrine that we have a right to quarrel with Kentucky, or
Virginia, or any of the slave States, about the institution of
slavery, — thus giving the Judge an opportunity to be
eloquent and valiant against us in ﬁghting for their rights. I
 expressly declared in my opening speech that I had neither
the inclination to exercise, nor the belief in the existence of,
the right to interfere with the States of Kentucky or
Virginia in doing as they pleased with slavery Or any other
existing institution. Then what becomes of all his eloquence
in behalf of the rights of States, which are assailed by no
living man?
But I have to hurry on, for I have but a half hour. The
Judge has informed me, or informed this audience, that the
Washington Union is laboring for my election to the United
States Senate. This is news to me, — not very ungrateful
news either. [Turning to Mr. W. H. Carlin, who was on the
stand] — I hope that Carlin will be elected to the State
Senate, and will vote for me. [Mr. Carlin shook his head.]
Carlin don’t fall in, I perceive, and I suppose he will not do
much for me; but I am glad of all the support I can get,
anywhere, if I can get it without practicing any deception to
obtain it. In respect to this large portion of Judge Douglas’s
speech in which he tries to show that in the controversy
between himself and the Administration party he is in the
right, I do not feel myself at all competent or inclined to
answer him. I say to him, “Give it to them, — give it to them
just all you can!” and, on the other hand, I say to Carlin,
and Jake Davis, and to this man Wogley up here in
Hancock, “Give it to Douglas, just pour it into him!”
Now, in regard to this matter of the Dred Scott decision,
I wish to say a word or two. After all, the Judge will not say
whether, if a decision is made holding that the people of the
States cannot exclude slavery, he will support it or not. He
 obstinately refuses to say what he will do in that case. The
judges of the Supreme Court as obstinately refused to say
what they would do on this subject. Before this I reminded
him that at Galesburgh he said the judges had expressly
declared the contrary, and you remember that in my
Opening speech I told him I had the book containing that
decision here, and I would thank him to lay his ﬁnger on
the place where any such thing was said. He has occupied
his hour and a half, and he has not ventured to try to
sustain his assertion. He never will. But he is desirous of
knowing how we are going to reverse that Dred Scott
decision. Judge Douglas ought to know how. Did not he and
his political friends ﬁnd a way to reverse the decision of
that same court in favor of the constitutionality of the
National Bank? Didn’t they ﬁnd a way to do it so eﬀectually
that they have reversed it as completely as any decision
ever was reversed, so far as its practical operation is
concerned?
And let me ask you, did n’t Judge Douglas ﬁnd a way to
reverse the decision of our Supreme Court when it decided
that Carlin’s father — old Governor Carlin had not the
constitutional power to remove a Secretary of State? Did he
not appeal to the “MOBS,” as he calls them? Did he not
make speeches in the lobby to show how villainous that
decision was, and how it ought to be overthrown? Did he
not succeed, too, in getting an act passed by the
Legislature to have it overthrown? And did n’t he himself
sit down on that bench as one of the ﬁve added judges, who
were to overslaugh the four old ones, getting his name of
 “judge” in that way, and no other? If there is a villainy in
using disrespect or making opposition to Supreme Court
decisions, I commend it to Judge Douglas’s earnest
consideration. I know of no man in the State of Illinois who
ought to know so well about how much villainy it takes to
oppose a decision of the Supreme Court as our honorable
friend Stephen A. Douglas.
Judge Douglas also makes the declaration that I say the
Democrats are bound by the Dred Scott decision, while the
Republicans are not. In the sense in which he argues, I
never said it; but I will tell you what I have said and what I
do not hesitate to repeat to-day. I have said that as the
Democrats believe that decision to be correct, and that the
extension 
of 
slavery 
is 
aﬀirmed 
in 
the 
National
Constitution, they are bound to support it as such; and I
will tell you here that General Jackson once said each man
was bound to support the Constitution “as he understood
it.” Now, Judge Douglas understands the Constitution
according to the Dred Scott decision, and he is bound to
support it as he understands it. I understand it another
way, and therefore I am bound to support it in the way in
which I understand it. And as Judge Douglas believes that
decision to be correct, I will remake that argument if I have
time to do so. Let me talk to some gentleman down there
among you who looks me in the face. We will say you are a
member of the Territorial Legislature, and, like Judge
Douglas, you believe that the right to take and hold slaves
there is a constitutional right The ﬁrst thing you do is to
swear you will support the Constitution, and all rights
 guaranteed therein; that you will, whenever your neighbor
needs your legislation to support his constitutional rights,
not withhold that legislation. If you withhold that necessary
legislation for the support of the Constitution and
constitutional rights, do you not commit perjury? I ask
every sensible man if that is not so? That is undoubtedly
just so, say what you please. Now, that is precisely what
Judge Douglas says, that this is a constitutional right. Does
the Judge mean to say that the Territorial Legislature in
legislating may, by withholding necessary laws, or by
passing unfriendly laws, nullify that constitutional right?
Does he mean to say that? Does he mean to ignore the
proposition so long and well established in law, that what
you cannot do directly, you cannot do indirectly? Does he
mean that? The truth about the matter is this: Judge
Douglas has sung paeans to his “Popular Sovereignty”
doctrine until his Supreme Court, co-operating with him,
has squatted his Squatter Sovereignty out. But he will keep
up this species of humbuggery about Squatter Sovereignty.
He has at last invented this sort of do-nothing sovereignty,
— that the people may exclude slavery by a sort of
“sovereignty” that is exercised by doing nothing at all. Is
not that running his Popular Sovereignty down awfully?
Has it not got down as thin as the homeopathic soup that
was made by boiling the shadow of a pigeon that had
starved to death? But at last, when it is brought to the test
of close reasoning, there is not even that thin decoction of
it left. It is a presumption impossible in the domain of
thought. It is precisely no other than the putting of that
 most unphilosophical proposition, that two bodies can
occupy the same space at the same time. The Dred Scott
decision covers the whole ground, and while it occupies it,
there is no room even for the shadow of a starved pigeon to
occupy the same ground.
Judge Douglas, in reply to what I have said about having
upon a previous occasion made the speech at Ottawa as the
one he took an extract from at Charleston, says it only
shows that I practiced the deception twice. Now, my
friends, are any of you obtuse enough to swallow that?
Judge Douglas had said I had made a speech at Charleston
that I would not make up north, and I turned around and
answered him by showing I had made that same speech up
north, — had made it at Ottawa; made it in his hearing;
made it in the Abolition District, — in Lovejoy’s District, —
in the personal presence of Lovejoy himself, — in the same
atmosphere exactly in which I had made my Chicago
speech, of which he complains so much.
Now, in relation to my not having said anything about the
quotation from the Chicago speech: he thinks that is a
terrible subject for me to handle. Why, gentlemen, I can
show you that the substance of the Chicago speech I
delivered two years ago in “Egypt,” as he calls it. It was
down at Springﬁeld. That speech is here in this book, and I
could turn to it and read it to you but for the lack of time. I
have not now the time to read it. [“Read it, read it.”] No,
gentlemen, I am obliged to use discretion in disposing most
advantageously of my brief time. The Judge has taken great
exception to my adopting the heretical statement in the
 Declaration of Independence, that “all men are created
equal,” and he has a great deal to say about negro equality.
I want to say that in sometimes alluding to the Declaration
of Independence, I have only uttered the sentiments that
Henry Clay used to hold. Allow me to occupy your time a
moment with what he said. Mr. Clay was at one time called
upon in Indiana, and in a way that I suppose was very
insulting, to liberate his slaves; and he made a written
reply to that application, and one portion of it is in these
words:
“What is the foundation of this appeal to me in Indiana to
liberate the slaves under my care in Kentucky? It is a
general declaration in the act announcing to the world the
independence of the thirteen American colonies, that men
are created equal. Now, as an abstract principle, there is no
doubt of the truth of that declaration, and it is desirable in
the original construction of society, and in organized
societies, to keep it in view as a great fundamental
principle.”
When I sometimes, in relation to the organization of new
societies in new countries, where the soil is clean and clear,
insisted that we should keep that principle in view, Judge
Douglas will have it that I want a negro wife. He never can
be brought to understand that there is any middle ground
on this subject. I have lived until my ﬁftieth year, and have
never had a negro woman either for a slave or a wife, and I
think I can live ﬁfty centuries, for that matter, without
having had one for either. I maintain that you may take
Judge Douglas’s quotations from my Chicago speech, and
 from my Charleston speech, and the Galesburgh speech, —
in his speech of to-day, — and compare them over, and I am
willing to trust them with you upon his proposition that
they show rascality or double-dealing. I deny that they do.
The Judge does not seem at all disposed to have peace,
but I ﬁnd he is disposed to have a personal warfare with
me. He says that my oath would not be taken against the
bare word of Charles H. Lanphier or Thomas L. Harris.
Well, that is altogether a matter of opinion. It is certainly
not for me to vaunt my word against oaths of these
gentlemen, but I will tell Judge Douglas again the facts
upon which I “dared” to say they proved a forgery. I pointed
out at Galesburgh that the publication of these resolutions
in the Illinois State Register could not have been the result
of accident, as the proceedings of that meeting bore
unmistakable evidence of being done by a man who knew it
was a forgery; that it was a publication partly taken from
the real proceedings of the Convention, and partly from the
proceedings of a convention at another place, which
showed that he had the real proceedings before him, and
taking one part of the resolutions, he threw out another
part, and substituted false and fraudulent ones in their
stead. I pointed that out to him, and also that his friend
Lanphier, who was editor of the Register at that time and
now is, must have known how it was done. Now, whether
he did it, or got some friend to do it for him, I could not tell,
but he certainly knew all about it. I pointed out to Judge
Douglas that in his Freeport speech he had promised to
investigate that matter. Does he now say that he did not
 make that promise? I have a right to ask why he did not
keep it. I call upon him to tell here to-day why he did not
keep that promise? That fraud has been traced up so that it
lies between him, Harris, and Lanphier. There is little room
for escape for Lanphier. Lanphier is doing the Judge good
service, and Douglas desires his word to be taken for the
truth. He desires Lanphier to be taken as authority in what
he states in his newspaper. He desires Harris to be taken as
a man of vast credibility; and when this thing lies among
them, they will not press it to show where the guilt really
belongs. Now, as he has said that he would investigate it,
and implied that he would tell us the result of his
investigation, I demand of him to tell why he did not
investigate it, if he did not; and if he did, why he won’t tell
the result. I call upon him for that.
This is the third time that Judge Douglas has assumed
that he learned about these resolutions by Harris’s
attempting to use them against Norton on the ﬂoor of
Congress. I tell Judge Douglas the public records of the
country show that he himself attempted it upon Trumbull a
month before Harris tried them on Norton; that Harris had
the opportunity of learning it from him, rather than he from
Harris. I now ask his attention to that part of the record on
the case. My friends, I am not disposed to detain you longer
in regard to that matter.
I am told that I still have ﬁve minutes left. There is
another matter I wish to call attention to. He says, when he
discovered there was a mistake in that case, he came
forward magnanimously, without my calling his attention to
 it, and explained it. I will tell you how he became so
magnanimous. When the newspapers of our side had
discovered and published it, and put it beyond his power to
deny it, then he came forward and made a virtue of
necessity by acknowledging it. Now he argues that all the
point there was in those resolutions, although never passed
at Springﬁeld, is retained by their being passed at other
localities. Is that true? He said I had a hand in passing
them, in his opening speech, that I was in the convention
and helped to pass them. Do the resolutions touch me at
all? It strikes me there is some diﬀerence between holding
a man responsible for an act which he has not done and
holding him responsible for an act that he has done. You
will judge whether there is any diﬀerence in the “spots.”
And he has taken credit for great magnanimity in coming
forward and acknowledging what is proved on him beyond
even the capacity of Judge Douglas to deny; and he has
more capacity in that way than any other living man.
Then he wants to know why I won’t withdraw the charge
in regard to a conspiracy to make slavery national, as he
has withdrawn the one he made. May it please his worship,
I will withdraw it when it is proven false on me as that was
proven false on him. I will add a little more than that, I will
withdraw it whenever a reasonable man shall be brought to
believe that the charge is not true. I have asked Judge
Douglas’s attention to certain matters of fact tending to
prove the charge of a conspiracy to nationalize slavery, and
he says he convinces me that this is all untrue because
Buchanan was not in the country at that time, and because
 the Dred Scott case had not then got into the Supreme
Court; and he says that I say the Democratic owners of
Dred Scott got up the case. I never did say that I defy Judge
Douglas to show that I ever said so, for I never uttered it.
[One of Mr. Douglas’s reporters gesticulated aﬀirmatively
at Mr. Lincoln.] I don’t care if your hireling does say I did, I
tell you myself that I never said the “Democratic” owners of
Dred Scott got up the case. I have never pretended to know
whether 
Dred 
Scott’s 
owners 
were 
Democrats, 
or
Abolitionists, or Freesoilers or Border Ruﬀians. I have said
that there is evidence about the case tending to show that
it was a made-up case, for the purpose of getting that
decision. I have said that that evidence was very strong in
the fact that when Dred Scott was declared to be a slave,
the owner of him made him free, showing that he had had
the case tried and the question settled for such use as
could be made of that decision; he cared nothing about the
property thus declared to be his by that decision. But my
time is out, and I can say no more.
