  I  H  
I
  
  A    A  
A    
 
H
  
          
MR. LINCOLN’S REPLY.
MY FELLOW-CITIZENS: A very large portion of the
speech which Judge Douglas has addressed to you has
previously been delivered and put in print. I do not mean
that for a hit upon the Judge at all. — If I had not been
interrupted, I was going to say that such an answer as I
was able to make to a very large portion of it had already
been more than once made and published. There has been
an opportunity aﬀorded to the public to see our respective
views upon the topics discussed in a large portion of the
speech which he has just delivered. I make these remarks
for the purpose of excusing myself for not passing over the
entire ground that the Judge has traversed. I however
desire to take up some of the points that he has attended
to, and ask your attention to them, and I shall follow him
backwards upon some notes which I have taken, reversing
the order, by beginning where he concluded.
The 
Judge 
has 
alluded 
to 
the 
Declaration 
of
Independence, and insisted that negroes are not included
in that Declaration; and that it is a slander upon the
framers of that instrument to suppose that negroes were
meant therein; and he asks you: Is it possible to believe
 that Mr. Jeﬀerson, who penned the immortal paper, could
have supposed himself applying the language of that
instrument to the negro race, and yet held a portion of that
race in slavery? Would he not at once have freed them? I
only have to remark upon this part of the Judge’s speech
(and that, too, very brieﬂy, for I shall not detain myself, or
you, upon that point for any great length of time), that I
believe the entire records of the world, from the date of the
Declaration of Independence up to within three years ago,
may be searched in vain for one single aﬀirmation, from
one single man, that the negro was not included in the
Declaration of Independence; I think I may defy Judge
Douglas to show that he ever said so, that Washington ever
said so, that any President ever said so, that any member of
Congress ever said so, or that any living man upon the
whole earth ever said so, until the necessities of the
present policy of the Democratic party, in regard to slavery,
had to invent that aﬀirmation. And I will remind Judge
Douglas and this audience that while Mr. Jeﬀerson was the
owner of slaves, as undoubtedly he was, in speaking upon
this very subject he used the strong language that “he
trembled for his country when he remembered that God
was just”; and I will oﬀer the highest premium in my power
to Judge Douglas if he will show that he, in all his life, ever
uttered a sentiment at all akin to that of Jeﬀerson.
The next thing to which I will ask your attention is the
Judge’s comments upon the fact, as he assumes it to be,
that we cannot call our public meetings as Republican
meetings; and he instances Tazewell County as one of the
 places where the friends of Lincoln have called a public
meeting and have not dared to name it a Republican
meeting. He instances Monroe County as another, where
Judge Trumbull and Jehu Baker addressed the persons
whom the Judge assumes to be the friends of Lincoln
calling them the “Free Democracy.” I have the honor to
inform Judge Douglas that he spoke in that very county of
Tazewell last Saturday, and I was there on Tuesday last;
and when he spoke there, he spoke under a call not
venturing to use the word “Democrat.” [Turning to Judge
Douglas.] what think you of this?
So, again, there is another thing to which I would ask the
Judge’s attention upon this subject. In the contest of 1856
his party delighted to call themselves together as the
“National Democracy”; but now, if there should be a notice
put 
up 
anywhere 
for 
a 
meeting 
of 
the 
“National
Democracy,” Judge Douglas and his friends would not
come. They would not suppose themselves invited. They
would understand that it was a call for those hateful
postmasters whom he talks about.
Now a few words in regard to these extracts from
speeches of mine which Judge Douglas has read to you, and
which he supposes are in very great contrast to each other.
Those speeches have been before the public for a
considerable time, and if they have any inconsistency in
them, if there is any conﬂict in them, the public have been
able to detect it. When the Judge says, in speaking on this
subject, that I make speeches of one sort for the people of
the northern end of the State, and of a diﬀerent sort for the
 southern people, he assumes that I do not understand that
my speeches will be put in print and read north and south. I
knew all the while that the speech that I made at Chicago,
and the one I made at Jonesboro and the one at Charleston,
would all be put in print, and all the reading and intelligent
men in the community would see them and know all about
my opinions. And I have not supposed, and do not now
suppose, that there is any conﬂict whatever between them.
But the Judge will have it that if we do not confess that
there is a sort of inequality between the white and black
races which justiﬁes us in making them slaves, we must
then insist that there is a degree of equality that requires
us to make them our wives. Now, I have all the while taken
a broad distinction in regard to that matter; and that is all
there is in these diﬀerent speeches which he arrays here;
and the entire reading of either of the speeches will show
that that distinction was made. Perhaps by taking two parts
of the same speech he could have got up as much of a
conﬂict as the one he has found. I have all the while
maintained that in so far as it should be insisted that there
was an equality between the white and black races that
should produce a perfect social and political equality, it was
an impossibility. This you have seen in my printed speeches,
and with it I have said that in their right to “life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness,” as proclaimed in that old
Declaration, the inferior races are our equals. And these
declarations I have constantly made in reference to the
abstract moral question, to contemplate and consider when
we are legislating about any new country which is not
 already cursed with the actual presence of the evil, —
slavery. I have never manifested any impatience with the
necessities that spring from the actual presence of black
people amongst us, and the actual existence of slavery
amongst us where it does already exist; but I have insisted
that, in legislating for new countries where it does not exist
there is no just rule other than that of moral and abstract
right! With reference to those new countries, those maxims
as to the right of a people to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness” were the just rules to be constantly referred to.
There is no misunderstanding this, except by men
interested to misunderstand it. I take it that I have to
address an intelligent and reading community, who will
peruse what I say, weigh it, and then judge whether I
advanced improper or unsound views, or whether I
advanced hypocritical, and deceptive, and contrary views in
diﬀerent portions of the country. I believe myself to be
guilty of no such thing as the latter, though, of course, I
cannot claim that I am entirely free from all error in the
opinions I advance.
The Judge has also detained us awhile in regard to the
distinction between his party and our party. His he assumes
to be a national party, ours a sectional one. He does this in
asking the question whether this country has any interest
in the maintenance of the Republican party. He assumes
that our party is altogether sectional, that the party to
which he adheres is national; and the argument is, that no
party can be a rightful party — and be based upon rightful
principles — unless it can announce its principles
 everywhere. I presume that Judge Douglas could not go
into Russia and announce the doctrine of our national
Democracy; he could not denounce the doctrine of kings
and emperors and monarchies in Russia; and it may be true
of this country that in some places we may not be able to
proclaim a doctrine as clearly true as the truth of
democracy, because there is a section so directly opposed
to it that they will not tolerate us in doing so. Is it the true
test of the soundness of a doctrine that in some places
people won’t let you proclaim it? Is that the way to test the
truth of any doctrine? Why, I understood that at one time
the people of Chicago would not let Judge Douglas preach a
certain favorite doctrine of his. I commend to his
consideration the question whether he takes that as a test
of the unsoundness of what he wanted to preach.
There is another thing to which I wish to ask attention
for a little while on this occasion. What has always been the
evidence brought forward to prove that the Republican
party is a sectional party? The main one was that in the
Southern portion of the Union the people did not let the
Republicans proclaim their doctrines amongst them. That
has been the main evidence brought forward, — that they
had no supporters, or substantially none, in the Slave
States. The South have not taken hold of our principles as
we announce them; nor does Judge Douglas now grapple
with those principles. We have a Republican State Platform,
laid down in Springﬁeld in June last stating our position all
the way through the questions before the country. We are
now far advanced in this canvass. Judge Douglas and I have
 made perhaps forty speeches apiece, and we have now for
the ﬁfth time met face to face in debate, and up to this day
I have not found either Judge Douglas or any friend of his
taking hold of the Republican platform, or laying his ﬁnger
upon anything in it that is wrong. I ask you all to recollect
that. Judge Douglas turns away from the platform of
principles to the fact that he can ﬁnd people somewhere
who will not allow us to announce those principles. If he
had great conﬁdence that our principles were wrong, he
would take hold of them and demonstrate them to be
wrong. But he does not do so. The only evidence he has of
their being wrong is in the fact that there are people who
won’t allow us to preach them. I ask again, is that the way
to test the soundness of a doctrine?
I ask his attention also to the fact that by the rule of
nationality he is himself fast becoming sectional. I ask his
attention to the fact that his speeches would not go as
current now south of the Ohio River as they have formerly
gone there I ask his attention to the fact that he felicitates
himself to-day that all the Democrats of the free States are
agreeing with him, while he omits to tell us that the
Democrats of any slave State agree with him. If he has not
thought of this, I commend to his consideration the
evidence in his own declaration, on this day, of his
becoming sectional too. I see it rapidly approaching.
Whatever may be the result of this ephemeral contest
between Judge Douglas and myself, I see the day rapidly
approaching when his pill of sectionalism, which he has
 been thrusting down the throats of Republicans for years
past, will be crowded down his own throat.
Now, in regard to what Judge Douglas said (in the
beginning of his speech) about the Compromise of 1850
containing the principles of the Nebraska Bill, although I
have often presented my views upon that subject, yet as I
have not done so in this canvass, I will, if you please, detain
you a little with them. I have always maintained, so far as I
was able, that there was nothing of the principle of the
Nebraska Bill in the Compromise of 1850 at all, — nothing
whatever. Where can you ﬁnd the principle of the Nebraska
Bill in that Compromise? If anywhere, in the two pieces of
the Compromise organizing the Territories of New Mexico
and Utah. It was expressly provided in these two acts that
when they came to be admitted into the Union they should
be admitted with or without slavery, as they should choose,
by their own constitutions. Nothing was said in either of
those acts as to what was to be done in relation to slavery
during the Territorial existence of those Territories, while
Henry Clay constantly made the declaration (Judge Douglas
recognizing him as a leader) that, in his opinion, the old
Mexican laws would control that question during the
Territorial existence, and that these old Mexican laws
excluded slavery. How can that be used as a principle for
declaring that during the Territorial existence as well as at
the time of framing the constitution the people, if you
please, might have slaves if they wanted them? I am not
discussing the question whether it is right or wrong; but
how are the New Mexican and Utah laws patterns for the
 Nebraska Bill? I maintain that the organization of Utah and
New Mexico did not establish a general principle at all. It
had no feature of establishing a general principle. The acts
to which I have referred were a part of a general system of
Compromises. They did not lay down what was proposed as
a regular policy for the Territories, only an agreement in
this particular case to do in that way, because other things
were done that were to be a compensation for it. They were
allowed to come in in that shape, because in another way it
was paid for, considering that as a part of that system of
measures called the Compromise of 1850, which ﬁnally
included half-a-dozen acts. It included the admission of
California as a free State, which was kept out of the Union
for half a year because it had formed a free constitution. It
included the settlement of the boundary of Texas, which
had been undeﬁned before, which was in itself a slavery
question; for if you pushed the line farther west, you made
Texas larger, and made more slave territory; while, if you
drew the line toward the east, you narrowed the boundary
and diminished the domain of slavery, and by so much
increased free territory. It included the abolition of the
slave trade in the District of Columbia. It included the
passage of a new Fugitive Slave law. All these things were
put together, and, though passed in separate acts, were
nevertheless, in legislation (as the speeches at the time will
show), made to depend upon each other. Each got votes
with the understanding that the other measures were to
pass, and by this system of compromise, in that series of
measures, those two bills — the New Mexico and Utah bills
 — were passed: and I say for that reason they could not be
taken as models, framed upon their own intrinsic principle,
for all future Territories. And I have the evidence of this in
the fact that Judge Douglas, a year afterward, or more than
a year afterward, perhaps, when he ﬁrst introduced bills for
the purpose of framing new Territories, did not attempt to
follow these bills of New Mexico and Utah; and even when
he introduced this Nebraska Bill, I think you will discover
that he did not exactly follow them. But I do not wish to
dwell at great length upon this branch of the discussion.
My own opinion is, that a thorough investigation will show
most plainly that the New Mexico and Utah bills were part
of a system of compromise, and not designed as patterns
for future Territorial legislation; and that this Nebraska Bill
did not follow them as a pattern at all.
The Judge tells, in proceeding, that he is opposed to
making any odious distinctions between free and slave
States. I am altogether unaware that the Republicans are in
favor of making any odious distinctions between the free
and slave States. But there is still a diﬀerence, I think,
between Judge Douglas and the Republicans in this. I
suppose that the real diﬀerence between Judge Douglas
and his friends, and the Republicans on the contrary, is,
that the Judge is not in favor of making any diﬀerence
between slavery and liberty; that he is in favor of
eradicating, of pressing out of view, the questions of
preference in this country for free or slave institutions; and
consequently every sentiment he utters discards the idea
that there is any wrong in slavery. Everything that
 emanates from him or his coadjutors in their course of
policy carefully excludes the thought that there is anything
wrong in slavery. All their arguments, if you will consider
them, will be seen to exclude the thought that there is
anything whatever wrong in slavery. If you will take the
Judge’s speeches, and select the short and pointed
sentences expressed by him, — as his declaration that he
“don’t care whether slavery is voted up or down,” — you
will see at once that this is perfectly logical, if you do not
admit that slavery is wrong. If you do admit that it is
wrong, Judge Douglas cannot logically say he don’t care
whether a wrong is voted up or voted down. Judge Douglas
declares that if any community wants slavery they have a
right to have it. He can say that logically, if he says that
there is no wrong in slavery; but if you admit that there is a
wrong in it, he cannot logically say that anybody has a right
to do wrong. He insists that upon the score of equality the
owners of slaves and owners of property — of horses and
every other sort of property — should be alike, and hold
them alike in a new Territory. That is perfectly logical if the
two species of property are alike and are equally founded in
right. But if you admit that one of them is wrong, you
cannot institute any equality between right and wrong. And
from this diﬀerence of sentiment, — the belief on the part
of one that the institution is wrong, and a policy springing
from that belief which looks to the arrest of the
enlargement of that wrong, and this other sentiment, that it
is no wrong, and a policy sprung from that sentiment,
which will tolerate no idea of preventing the wrong from
 growing larger, and looks to there never being an end to it
through all the existence of things, — arises the real
diﬀerence between Judge Douglas and his friends on the
one hand and the Republicans on the other. Now, I confess
myself as belonging to that class in the country who
contemplate slavery as a moral, social, and political evil,
having due regard for its actual existence amongst us and
the diﬀiculties of getting rid of it in any satisfactory way,
and to all the constitutional obligations which have been
thrown about it; but, nevertheless, desire a policy that
looks to the prevention of it as a wrong, and looks hopefully
to the time when as a wrong it may come to an end.
Judge Douglas has again, for, I believe, the ﬁfth time, if
not the seventh, in my presence, reiterated his charge of a
conspiracy or combination between the National Democrats
and Republicans. What evidence Judge Douglas has upon
this subject I know not, inasmuch as he never favors us
with any. I have said upon a former occasion, and I do not
choose to suppress it now, that I have no objection to the
division in the Judge’s party. He got it up himself. It was all
his and their work. He had, I think, a great deal more to do
with the steps that led to the Lecompton Constitution than
Mr. Buchanan had; though at last, when they reached it,
they quarreled over it, and their friends divided upon it. I
am very free to confess to Judge Douglas that I have no
objection to the division; but I defy the Judge to show any
evidence that I have in any way promoted that division,
unless he insists on being a witness himself in merely
saying so. I can give all fair friends of Judge Douglas here
 to understand exactly the view that Republicans take in
regard to that division. Don’t you remember how two years
ago the opponents of the Democratic party were divided
between Fremont and Fillmore? I guess you do. Any
Democrat who remembers that division will remember also
that he was at the time very glad of it, and then he will be
able to see all there is between the National Democrats and
the Republicans. What we now think of the two divisions of
Democrats, you then thought of the Fremont and Fillmore
divisions. That is all there is of it.
But if the Judge continues to put forward the declaration
that there is an unholy and unnatural alliance between the
Republicans and the National Democrats, I now want to
enter my protest against receiving him as an entirely
competent witness upon that subject. I want to call to the
Judge’s attention an attack he made upon me in the ﬁrst
one of these debates, at Ottawa, on the 21st of August. In
order to ﬁx extreme Abolitionism upon me, Judge Douglas
read a set of resolutions which he declared had been
passed by a Republican State Convention, in October, 1854,
at Springﬁeld, Illinois, and he declared I had taken part in
that Convention. It turned out that although a few men
calling themselves an anti-Nebraska State Convention had
sat at Springﬁeld about that time, yet neither did I take any
part in it, nor did it pass the resolutions or any such
resolutions as Judge Douglas read. So apparent had it
become that the resolutions which he read had not been
passed at Springﬁeld at all, nor by a State Convention in
which I had taken part, that seven days afterward, at
 Freeport, Judge Douglas declared that he had been misled
by Charles H. Lanphier, editor of the State Register, and
Thomas L. Harris, member of Congress in that district, and
he promised in that speech that when he went to
Springﬁeld he would investigate the matter. Since then
Judge Douglas has been to Springﬁeld, and I presume has
made the investigation; but a month has passed since he
has been there, and, so far as I know, he has made no
report of the result of his investigation. I have waited as I
think suﬀicient time for the report of that investigation, and
I have some curiosity to see and hear it. A fraud, an
absolute forgery was committed, and the perpetration of it
was traced to the three, — Lanphier, Harris, and Douglas.
Whether it can be narrowed in any way so as to exonerate
any one of them, is what Judge Douglas’s report would
probably show.
It is true that the set of resolutions read by Judge
Douglas were published in the Illinois State Register on the
16th of October, 1854, as being the resolutions of an anti-
Nebraska Convention which had sat in that same month of
October, at Springﬁeld. But it is also true that the
publication in the Register was a forgery then, and the
question is still behind, which of the three, if not all of
them, committed that forgery. The idea that it was done by
mistake is absurd. The article in the Illinois State Register
contains part of the real proceedings of that Springﬁeld
Convention, showing that the writer of the article had the
real proceedings before him, and purposely threw out the
genuine 
resolutions 
passed 
by 
the 
Convention 
and
 fraudulently substituted the others. Lanphier then, as now,
was the editor of the Register, so that there seems to be but
little room for his escape. But then it is to be borne in mind
that Lanphier had less interest in the object of that forgery
than either of the other two. The main object of that forgery
at that time was to beat Yates and elect Harris to Congress,
and that object was known to be exceedingly dear to Judge
Douglas at that time. Harris and Douglas were both in
Springﬁeld when the Convention was in session, and
although they both left before the fraud appeared in the
Register, subsequent events show that they have both had
their eyes ﬁxed upon that Convention.
The fraud having been apparently successful upon the
occasion, both Harris and Douglas have more than once
since then been attempting to put it to new uses. As the
ﬁsherman’s wife, whose drowned husband was brought
home with his body full of eels, said when she was asked
what was to be done with him, “Take the eels out and set
him again,” so Harris and Douglas have shown a disposition
to take the eels out of that stale fraud by which they gained
Harris’s election, and set the fraud again more than once.
On the 9th of July, 1856, Douglas attempted a repetition of
it upon Trumbull on the ﬂoor of the Senate of the United
States, 
as 
will 
appear 
from 
the 
appendix 
of 
the
Congressional Globe of that date.
On the 9th of August, Harris attempted it again upon
Norton in the House of Representatives, as will appear by
the same documents, — the appendix to the Congressional
Globe of that date. On the 21st of August last, all three —
 Lanphier, Douglas, and Harris — reattempted it upon me at
Ottawa. It has been clung to and played out again and
again as an exceedingly high trump by this blessed trio.
And now that it has been discovered publicly to be a fraud
we ﬁnd that Judge Douglas manifests no surprise at it at
all. He makes no complaint of Lanphier, who must have
known it to be a fraud from the beginning. He, Lanphier,
and Harris are just as cozy now and just as active in the
concoction of new schemes as they were before the general
discovery of this fraud. Now, all this is very natural if they
are all alike guilty in that fraud, and it is very unnatural if
any one of them is innocent. Lanphier perhaps insists that
the rule of honor among thieves does not quite require him
to take all upon himself, and consequently my friend Judge
Douglas ﬁnds it diﬀicult to make a satisfactory report upon
his investigation. But meanwhile the three are agreed that
each is “a most honorable man.”
Judge Douglas requires an indorsement of his truth and
honor by a re-election to the United States Senate, and he
makes and reports against me and against Judge Trumbull,
day after day, charges which we know to be utterly untrue,
without for a moment seeming to think that this one
unexplained fraud, which he promised to investigate, will
be the least drawback to his claim to belief. Harris ditto. He
asks a re-election to the lower House of Congress without
seeming to remember at all that he is involved in this
dishonorable fraud! The Illinois State Register, edited by
Lanphier, then, as now, the central organ of both Harris
and Douglas, continues to din the public ear with this
 assertion, without seeming to suspect that these assertions
are at all lacking in title to belief.
After all, the question still recurs upon us, How did that
fraud originally get into the State Register? Lanphier then,
as now, was the editor of that paper. Lanphier knows.
Lanphier cannot be ignorant of how and by whom it was
originally concocted. Can he be induced to tell, or, if he has
told, can Judge Douglas be induced to tell how it originally
was concocted? It may be true that Lanphier insists that
the two men for whose beneﬁt it was originally devised
shall at least bear their share of it! How that is, I do not
know, and while it remains unexplained I hope to be
pardoned if I insist that the mere fact of Judge Douglas
making charges against Trumbull and myself is not quite
suﬀicient evidence to establish them!
While we were at Freeport, in one of these joint
discussions, I answered certain interrogatories which Judge
Douglas had propounded to me, and then in turn
propounded some to him, which he in a sort of way
answered. The third one of these interrogatories I have
with me, and wish now to make some comments upon it. It
was in these words: “If the Supreme Court of States cannot
exclude slavery from their limits, are you in favor of
acquiescing in, adhering to, and following such decision as
a rule of political action?”
To this interrogatory Judge Douglas made no answer in
any just sense of the word. He contented himself with
sneering at the thought that it was possible for the
Supreme Court ever to make such a decision. He sneered
 at me for propounding the interrogatory. I had not
propounded it without some reﬂection, and I wish now to
address to this audience some remarks upon it.
In the second clause of the sixth article, I believe it is, of
the Constitution of the United States, we ﬁnd the following
language:
“This Constitution and the laws of the United States
which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties
made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the
United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the
judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in
the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary
notwithstanding.”
The essence of the Dred Scott case is compressed into
the sentence which I will now read:
“Now, as we have already said in an earlier part of this
opinion, upon a diﬀerent point, the right of property in a
slave 
is 
distinctly 
and 
expressly 
aﬀirmed 
in 
the
Constitution.”
I repeat it, “The right of property in a slave is distinctly
and expressly aﬀirmed in the Constitution”! What is it to be
“aﬀirmed” 
in 
the 
Constitution? 
Made 
ﬁrm 
in 
the
Constitution, so made that it cannot be separated from the
Constitution without breaking the Constitution; durable as
the Constitution, and part of the Constitution. Now,
remembering the provision of the Constitution which I have
read — aﬀirming that that instrument is the supreme law of
the land; that the judges of every State shall be bound by it,
any law or constitution of any State to the contrary
 notwithstanding; that the right of property in a slave is
aﬀirmed in that Constitution, is made, formed into, and
cannot be separated from it without breaking it; durable as
the instrument; part of the instrument; — what follows as a
short and even syllogistic argument from it? I think it
follows, and I submit to the consideration of men capable of
arguing whether, as I state it, in syllogistic form, the
argument has any fault in it:
Nothing in the Constitution or laws of any State can
destroy a right distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in the
Constitution of the United States.
The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly
aﬀirmed in the Constitution of the United States.
Therefore, nothing in the Constitution or laws of any
State can destroy the right of property in a slave.
I believe that no fault can be pointed out in that
argument; assuming the truth of the premises, the
conclusion, so far as I have capacity at all to understand it,
follows inevitably. There is a fault in it as I think, but the
fault is not in the reasoning; but the falsehood in fact is a
fault of the premises. I believe that the right of property in
a slave is not distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in the
Constitution, and Judge Douglas thinks it is. I believe that
the Supreme Court and the advocates of that decision may
search in vain for the place in the Constitution where the
right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly
aﬀirmed I say, therefore, that I think one of the premises is
not true in fact. But it is true with Judge Douglas. It is true
with the Supreme Court who pronounced it. They are
 estopped from denying it, and being estopped from denying
it, the conclusion follows that, the Constitution of the
United States being the supreme law, no constitution or law
can interfere with it. It being aﬀirmed in the decision that
the right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly
aﬀirmed in the Constitution, the conclusion inevitably
follows that no State law or constitution can destroy that
right. I then say to Judge Douglas and to all others that I
think it will take a better answer than a sneer to show that
those who have said that the right of property in a slave is
distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in the Constitution, are
not prepared to show that no constitution or law can
destroy that right. I say I believe it will take a far better
argument than a mere sneer to show to the minds of
intelligent men that whoever has so said is not prepared,
whenever public sentiment is so far advanced as to justify
it, to say the other. This is but an opinion, and the opinion
of one very humble man; but it is my opinion that the Dred
Scott decision, as it is, never would have been made in its
present form if the party that made it had not been
sustained previously by the elections. My own opinion is,
that the new Dred Scott decision, deciding against the right
of the people of the States to exclude slavery, will never be
made if that party is not sustained by the elections. I
believe, further, that it is just as sure to be made as to-
morrow is to come, if that party shall be sustained. I have
said, upon a former occasion, and I repeat it now, that the
course of arguement that Judge Douglas makes use of upon
this subject (I charge not his motives in this), is preparing
 the public mind for that new Dred Scott decision. I have
asked him again to point out to me the reasons for his ﬁrst
adherence to the Dred Scott decision as it is. I have turned
his attention to the fact that General Jackson diﬀered with
him in regard to the political obligation of a Supreme Court
decision. I have asked his attention to the fact that
Jeﬀerson diﬀered with him in regard to the political
obligation of a Supreme Court decision. Jeﬀerson said that
“Judges are as honest as other men, and not more so.” And
he said, substantially, that whenever a free people should
give up in absolute submission to any department of
government, retaining for themselves no appeal from it,
their liberties were gone. I have asked his attention to the
fact that the Cincinnati platform, upon which he says he
stands, disregards a time-honored decision of the Supreme
Court, in denying the power of Congress to establish a
National Bank. I have asked his attention to the fact that he
himself was one of the most active instruments at one time
in breaking down the Supreme Court of the State of Illinois
because it had made a decision distasteful to him, — a
struggle ending in the remarkable circumstance of his
sitting down as one of the new Judges who were to
overslaugh that decision; getting his title of Judge in that
very way.
So far in this controversy I can get no answer at all from
Judge Douglas upon these subjects. Not one can I get from
him, except that he swells himself up and says, “All of us
who stand by the decision of the Supreme Court are the
friends of the Constitution; all you fellows that dare
 question it in any way are the enemies of the Constitution.”
Now, in this very devoted adherence to this decision, in
opposition to all the great political leaders whom he has
recognized as leaders, in opposition to his former self and
history, there is something very marked. And the manner in
which he adheres to it, — not as being right upon the
merits, as he conceives (because he did not discuss that at
all), but as being absolutely obligatory upon every one
simply because of the source from whence it comes, as that
which no man can gainsay, whatever it may be, — this is
another marked feature of his adherence to that decision. It
marks it in this respect, that it commits him to the next
decision, whenever it comes, as being as obligatory as this
one, since he does not investigate it, and won’t inquire
whether this opinion is right or wrong. So he takes the next
one without inquiring whether it is right or wrong. He
teaches men this doctrine, and in so doing prepares the
public mind to take the next decision when it comes,
without any inquiry. In this I think I argue fairly (without
questioning motives at all) that Judge Douglas is most
ingeniously and powerfully preparing the public mind to
take that decision when it comes; and not only so, but he is
doing it in various other ways. In these general maxims
about liberty, in his assertions that he “don’t care whether
slavery is voted up or voted down,”; that “whoever wants
slavery has a right to have it”; that “upon principles of
equality it should be allowed to go everywhere”; that “there
is no inconsistency between free and slave institutions” —
in this he is also preparing (whether purposely or not) the
 way for making the institution of slavery national! I repeat
again, for I wish no misunderstanding, that I do not charge
that he means it so; but I call upon your minds to inquire, if
you were going to get the best instrument you could, and
then set it to work in the most ingenious way, to prepare
the public mind for this movement, operating in the free
States, where there is now an abhorrence of the institution
of slavery, could you ﬁnd an instrument so capable of doing
it as Judge Douglas, or one employed in so apt a way to do
it?
I have said once before, and I will repeat it now, that Mr.
Clay, when he was once answering an objection to the
Colonization Society, that it had a tendency to the ultimate
emancipation of the slaves, said that:
“Those who would repress all tendencies to liberty and
ultimate emancipation must do more than put down the
benevolent eﬀorts of the Colonization Society: they must go
back to the era of our liberty and independence, and
muzzle the cannon that thunders its annual joyous return;
they must blow out the moral lights around us; they must
penetrate the human soul, and eradicate the light of reason
and the love of liberty!”
And I do think — I repeat, though I said it on a former
occasion — that Judge Douglas and whoever, like him,
teaches that the negro has no share, humble though it may
be, in the Declaration of Independence, is going back to the
era of our liberty and independence, and, so far as in him
lies, muzzling the cannon that thunders its annual joyous
return; that he is blowing out the moral lights around us,
 when he contends that whoever wants slaves has a right to
hold them; that he is penetrating, so far as lies in his power,
the human soul, and eradicating the light of reason and the
love of liberty, when he is in every possible way preparing
the public mind, by his vast inﬂuence, for making the
institution of slavery perpetual and national.
There is, my friends, only one other point to which I will
call your attention for the remaining time that I have left
me, and perhaps I shall not occupy the entire time that I
have, as that one point may not take me clear through it.
Among 
the 
interrogatories 
that 
Judge 
Douglas
propounded to me at Freeport, there was one in about this
language:
“Are you opposed to the acquisition of any further
territory to the United States, unless slavery shall ﬁrst be
prohibited therein?”
I answered, as I thought, in this way: that I am not
generally opposed to the acquisition of additional territory,
and that I would support a proposition for the acquisition of
additional territory according as my supporting it was or
was not calculated to aggravate this slavery question
amongst us. I then proposed to Judge Douglas another
interrogatory, which was correlative to that: “Are you in
favor of acquiring additional territory, in disregard of how it
may aﬀect us upon the slavery question?” Judge Douglas
answered, — that is, in his own way he answered it. I
believe that, although he took a good many words to
answer it, it was a little more fully answered than any
other. The substance of his answer was that this country
 would continue to expand; that it would need additional
territory; that it was as absurd to suppose that we could
continue upon our present territory, enlarging in population
as we are, as it would be to hoop a boy twelve years of age,
and expect him to grow to man’s size without bursting the
hoops. I believe it was something like that. Consequently,
he was in favor of the acquisition of further territory as fast
as we might need it, in disregard of how it might aﬀect the
slavery question. I do not say this as giving his exact
language, but he said so substantially; and he would leave
the question of slavery, where the territory was acquired, to
be settled by the people of the acquired territory. [“That’s
the doctrine.”] May be it is; let us consider that for a while.
This will probably, in the run of things, become one of the
concrete manifestations of this slavery question. If Judge
Douglas’s policy upon this question succeeds, and gets
fairly settled down, until all opposition is crushed out, the
next thing will be a grab for the territory of poor Mexico,
an invasion of the rich lands of South America, then the
adjoining islands will follow, each one of which promises
additional slave-ﬁelds. And this question is to be left to the
people of those countries for settlement. When we get
Mexico, I don’t know whether the Judge will be in favor of
the Mexican people that we get with it settling that
question for themselves and all others; because we know
the Judge has a great horror for mongrels, and I
understand that the people of Mexico are most decidedly a
race of mongrels. I understand that there is not more than
one person there out of eight who is pure white, and I
 suppose from the Judge’s previous declaration that when
we get Mexico, or any considerable portion of it, that he
will be in favor of these mongrels settling the question,
which would bring him somewhat into collision with his
horror of an inferior race.
It is to be remembered, though, that this power of
acquiring additional territory is a power conﬁded to the
President and the Senate of the United States. It is a power
not under the control of the representatives of the people
any further than they, the President and the Senate, can be
considered the representatives of the people. Let me
illustrate that by a case we have in our history. When we
acquired the territory from Mexico in the Mexican War, the
House of Representatives, composed of the immediate
representatives of the people, all the time insisted that the
territory thus to be acquired should be brought in upon
condition that slavery should be forever prohibited therein,
upon the terms and in the language that slavery had been
prohibited from coming into this country. That was insisted
upon constantly and never failed to call forth an assurance
that 
any 
territory 
thus 
acquired 
should 
have 
that
prohibition in it, so far as the House of Representatives was
concerned. But at last the President and Senate acquired
the territory without asking the House of Representatives
anything about it, and took it without that prohibition. They
have the power of acquiring territory without the
immediate representatives of the people being called upon
to say anything about it, and thus furnishing a very apt and
powerful means of bringing new territory into the Union,
 and, when it is once brought into the country, involving us
anew in this slavery agitation. It is therefore, as I think, a
very important question for due consideration of the
American people, whether the policy of bringing in
additional territory, without considering at all how it will
operate upon the safety of the Union in reference to this
one great disturbing element in our national politics, shall
be adopted as the policy of the country. You will bear in
mind that it is to be acquired, according to the Judge’s
view, as fast as it is needed, and the indeﬁnite part of this
proposition is that we have only Judge Douglas and his
class of men to decide how fast it is needed. We have no
clear and certain way of determining or demonstrating how
fast territory is needed by the necessities of the country.
Whoever wants to go out ﬁlibustering, then, thinks that
more territory is needed. Whoever wants wider slave-ﬁelds
feels sure that some additional territory is needed as slave
territory. Then it is as easy to show the necessity of
additional slave-territory as it is to assert anything that is
incapable of absolute demonstration. Whatever motive a
man or a set of men may have for making annexation of
property or territory, it is very easy to assert, but much less
easy to disprove, that it is necessary for the wants of the
country.
And now it only remains for me to say that I think it is a
very grave question for the people of this Union to consider,
whether, in view of the fact that this slavery question has
been the only one that has ever endangered our Republican
institutions, the only one that has ever threatened or
 menaced a dissolution of the Union, that has ever disturbed
us in such a way as to make us fear for the perpetuity of
our liberty, — in view of these facts, I think it is an
exceedingly interesting and important question for this
people to consider whether we shall engage in the policy of
acquiring additional territory, discarding altogether from
our consideration, while obtaining new territory, the
question how it may aﬀect us in regard to this, the only
endangering 
element 
to 
our 
liberties 
and 
national
greatness. The Judge’s view has been expressed. I, in my
answer to his question, have expressed mine. I think it will
become an important and practical question. Our views are
before the public. I am willing and anxious that they should
consider them fully; that they should turn it about and
consider the importance of the question, and arrive at a
just conclusion as to whether it is or is not wise in the
people of this Union, in the acquisition of new territory, to
consider whether it will add to the disturbance that is
existing amongst us — whether it will add to the one only
danger that has ever threatened the perpetuity of the
Union or our own liberties. I think it is extremely important
that they shall decide, and rightly decide, that question
before entering upon that policy.
And now, my friends, having said the little I wish to say
upon this head, whether I have occupied the whole of the
remnant of my time or not, I believe I could not enter upon
any new topic so as to treat it fully, without transcending
my time, which I would not for a moment think of doing. I
give way to Judge Douglas.
