 3 Arrivals 
ST. PETERSBURG 
Industrialisation poses problems everywhere it is attempted; and not 
the least of them is the question about the political place of the 
workers. Public debate raged through the nineteenth century in 
Britain. It commenced later in Russia, but by the 1880s it was in full 
spate. Official tsarist attitudes were authoritarian. But they possessed 
an admixture of paternalism; the government hoped that the working 
class, like the peasantry, would continue to revere the emperor as 'the 
little father'. The revolutionaries were striving to reverse this subordi-
nate status. The narodniki, though conceiving of the workers as 
peasants temporarily removed from the land, increasingly treated the 
working class as the prime force to pull down the autocracy. Marxists 
put the working class even higher in their scheme of things; the 
proletariat was expected by them to refashion the whole of society in 
its own image. All cities in Russia witnessed the struggle for the 
workers' loyalty. But naturally the competition was at its most 
ferocious in Petersburg: not only was it the seat of government; it also 
contained a large number of vast factory complexes. The profit motive 
had triumphed over notions of town-planning, and the result was an 
interspersing of gaunt industrial blocks with palaces and administra-
tive buildings. There was little residential segregation on a class basis. 
The discrepancy between the lifestyles of the upper orders and the 
oppressed manual labourers was therefore superabundantly visible. It 
was a matter that the authorities ignored at their peril. 
Ulyanov decided to pull up his Volga roots and move there. His 
mother, now in her late fifties, was well capable of tending to her affairs 
independently. He had yet to make acquaintance with his first factory 
worker. His theories were still untested by practical observation of 
industrial urban life, and he desired to rectify the situation. He arrived 
in the capital on 31 August 1893 and quickly started work in the 
lawyer's offices of M. F. Volkenshtein. 1 
Political considerations held his thoughts. On his way from Samara 
48 
 Arrivals 
49 
he had stopped off in Nizhni Novgorod and contacted a Marxist circle 
led by P. N. Skvortsov and S. I. Mickiewicz. Skvortsov told him how 
and where to link up with Marxists in the metropolis. Ulyanov also 
made a stop-over in the town of Vladimir in order to meet N. E. 
Fedoseev; but Fedoseev was in prison and the meeting did not take 
place.2 Ulyanov's initiative did not secure him an automatic welcome 
in st. Petersburg. He had been put in touch with the group founded in 
1892 by S. I. Radchenko. Its members opposed the use of terror in any 
form as a means of bringing down the autocracy; and they apparently 
learnt that Ulyanov, like Plekhanov, was not absolutely hostile to 
assassinations. They interviewed him carefully. No doubt he reas-
sured them that he did not share the narodnik-terrorists' belief in 
terror as the primary immediate tactic. They allowed him to join.3 He 
must have convinced them that he no longer supported People's 
Freedom; otherwise it is inexplicable why he did not try to enter the 
organisation of populist terrorists already in existence in the capital. 
Ulyanov nonetheless took some months to make his influence felt 
upon the Petersburg Marxists. Radchenko's priority was to spread 
propaganda in the workers' educational circles. Propagandists were 
scarce. Yet it was not until autumn 1894, fully a year after the move 
from Samara, that Ulyanov became exercised by pedagogical activity.4 
Nor did Ulyanov participate in the group's negotiations with other 
workers' organisations in the winter 1893-94. The 'organisation man' 
of future years was not yet known for his administrative talents. 
Ulyanov's initial pre-occupation, in fact, was with his books. He was 
completing his self-education as an economist. He analysed the latest 
agrarian statistics. He returned to the first two volumes of Das Kapital, 
correcting mistakes in the Russian translation as he went.5 
He also encouraged Radchenko's group to hold its own discussion 
sessions. This gave him the chance to shine. In October 1893 G. B. 
Krasin delivered a paper on Russian economic trends; but it was 
Ulyanov who showed himself to be the more cogent critic of agrarian 
socialism.6 Pursuing his investigations, he completed an article entitled 
New Economic Directions in Peasant Life. The general content 
differed little from Plekhanov's earlier material. A particular point was 
nonetheless noteworthy. Ulyanov re-organised zemstvo statistical 
data so as to show that it was the peasant households with the greater 
acreages which were achieving the higher agricultural productivity.7 
This was a technical refinement beyond Plekhanov's aspirations. A 
second point of interest is discoverable in another article written by 
Ulyanov in 1893, Concerning the So-Called Question of Markets. In it 
 50 
Lenin: A Political Life 
he argued that narodnik writings were pre-occupied by discussions on 
consumer goods and had ignored the goods used in further stages of 
production. This was in his view a crucial neglect. He maintained, 
against the narodniki, that the growth rate in output of producer's 
goods was always greater than the rate for goods made for consumers; 
and that the market for capitalist development did not depend upon 
the existence of a massive affluent peasantry.8 Ulyanov's contribution 
was already a significant extension of Plekhanov's original claims. 
It was not unusual for Marxists to take their intellectual self-
preparation so seriously;9 and nobody in Radchenko's group said that 
Ulyanov was neglecting his duty. Disputes about socialist theory 
gained in importance in the Petersburg labour movement in the 
mid-nineties. Agrarian socialists and Marxists clashed. Workers were 
asked to choose between the two rival views on the future. They did 
not rush to choose. 
Among the working class there lingered ambivalent feelings about 
intellectuals. In 1889, three workers had established a Central 
Workers' Circle to provide popular educational facilities. Student-
intellectuals were invited as teachers under the workers' control. 
Strikes broke out in the Thornton textile factory in the winter of 
1890-91. The Circle created a Central Workers' Fund to help strikers 
financially and to print leaflets. A trade union was in the making. Both 
agrarian socialists and Marxists contributed teachers for the Circle's 
activities. Arrests in 1891 and 1892 failed to catch all the Circle's 
activists, and Radchenko persisted with his attempt to make it a 
stronghold for Marxism. 10 Success was not easily obtained. Radchenko 
believed in the primary role to be played by intellectuals in the fight for 
socialism; and his organisational code, with its heavy emphasis upon 
secrecy, impeded even the operation of the education circles. On the 
other hand, the workers as students were un attracted by narodnik-ter-
rorist talk of immediate insurrection. Their foremost demand was for 
cultural and political tuition. This gave the Marxists a distinct 
advantage over People's Freedom; and the course of training offered 
by Radchenko's group gained dozens of recruits in 1893 and 1894.11 
Ulyanov too involved himself, offering himself as tutor to a workers' 
circle in autumn 1894.12 
It was around this time, however, that Marxists elsewhere in the 
empire began to reform their tactics. Courses tended to isolate the 
worker-students from the rest of their work-mates. The circles had 
little contact with factory life. Jewish and Polish activists pressed the 
need to conduct 'agitation' among ordinary workers. This would 
 Arrivals 
51 
involve speeches and pamphlets on particular issues. Activists should 
campaign against low pay, unsafe machinery and management abuses; 
they should organise strikes. A handbook, On Agitation, was printed in 
Vilno to summarise the tactics. The assumption was that strikes would 
attract an attempt at repression by the government and therefore 
would steadily draw the working class into political opposition to the 
regime. On Agitation was carried to St. Petersburg in September 1894 
by Yuli Osipovich Martov (who was shortly to become a close 
collaborator of Ulyanov's); and he brought news of the success of the 
tactics in western regions of the empire.13 Radchenko's group baulked 
at first, not wanting to be deflected from their instructional pro-
gramme. But opinion had swung round in favour by the end of the 
year. The group awaited its opportunity. And when strikes occurred in 
a number of armaments works in January 1895 it was Ulyanov who 
composed the proclamatory leaflets.14 
He combined this work with maintained interest in economics. In 
spring and summer 1894, writing furiously, he finished a three-part 
manuscript called What Are 'the Friends o/the People'? It filled out the 
analysis offered in his previous work. It was also his first attempt to 
attack the interpretation of Marx's ideas by the narodnik 
Mikhailovski; Ulyanov very reasonably stressed Marx's affirmation 
that Russia's chance of experiencing a unique social transformation 
would vanish once capitalism had started to develop.ls This develop-
ment, Ulyanov declared, had now commenced. He had his manuscript 
reproduced in a few dozen copies on a duplicating apparatus. In 
August he was informed of a more sophisticated machine available in 
Vladimir province, and he took a trip out from St. Petersburg to 
arrange for the production of a further hundred copies.16 This 
time-consuming practicality galled him when he contemplated the ease 
with which certain other exponents of Marxian economics in the 
capital managed to publicise their views. Petr Bernardovich Struve, a 
young graduate, had already achieved fame through his contributions 
to open debates at the Free Economic Society. In September 1894 
Struve's book Critical Remarks sneaked past the censorship and was 
published legally. Through their common friend Aleksandr Potresov, 
Ulyanov met up with Struve around New Year 1895. Ulyanov wanted 
help with publication of his economic studies. An agreement was 
struck to produce a symposium of articles. At the last moment, in April 
1895, the censor intervened and nearly all the copies were burned 
before they could be sold.17 
 52 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ULYANOV, STRUVE AND PLEKHANOV 
Vladimir Ulyanov's relations with Petr Struve were an alliance of 
convenience. It catches the eye that Ulyanov, who in the 1900s was 
often portrayed as the incarnation of implacable irreconcilability, did 
not appear in this light to his early comrades in St. Petersburg. Many 
indeed thought him too ready to be reconciled. What business, they 
asked, had a Marxist revolutionary to talk with those self-proclaimed 
followers of Marx like Struve who seemed to have an aversion to the 
very goal of socialist revolution?18 
The answer clarifies the singular stance in matters of theory assumed 
at the time by Ulyanov. His interest in Struve was not limited to 
publishing opportunities. It was also political. Struve was at the centre 
of a group of writers. His associates M. I. Tugan-Baranovski, S. N. 
Bulgakov and N. A. Berdyaev were already emitting glimmerings of 
the contributions they would each make to Russian public life. They 
were very independent thinkers; they felt no compulsion, unlike many 
other Marxists like Ulyanov, to anchor all their statements to the 
writings of Marx and Engels. They were a well-heeled bunch. With the 
single exception of Plekhanov, they were the best-known Marxists in 
the Russian empire in the 1890s. Word of their emergence reached the 
Emancipation Of Labour Group in Geneva. Initially Plekhanov hoped 
to combine with them in publishing ventures. Struve, Tugan-
Baranovski and Bulgakov were sophisticated economists and had 
deployed their learning against Vorontsov. Tugan's material was most 
remarkable. Working on developmental economic theory, he invented 
a series of mathematical schemata to represent the interrelationship of 
capital and labour in an industrialising society. Like Ulyanov, he 
argued that capitalism could grow largely through the production of 
industrial machinery and other producer's goods and would not have 
to depend predominantly upon the creation of a mass consumerist 
market. Capitalism would not be inhibited by the pauperisation of the 
majority of the peasantry. Neither Struve nor Tugan were at all 
worried that the country's material progress would be achieved at 
enormous social expense.19 
These arguments were an essential reason for Ulyanov's approaches 
to Struve's group; he liked their unflinching acceptance of what they 
believed to be the logical outcome of capitalist development. The issue 
was the principal item of debate until the late 1890s. Ulyanov 
disagreed about details in their depiction of the pattern of capitalism's 
growth;20 but he evidently derived intellectual benefit and perhaps also 
 Arrivals 
53 
a degree of psychological support from his discussions with Struve, 
Tugan and Bulgakov. 
The conditionality of Ulyanov's alliance, however, was manifest 
from the start. Struve agreed that the working class was the most 
dependable instrument for removing the monarchy; and he yielded to 
no one in his belief in Russia's need for political freedom. But he made 
no unambiguous recommendation of violent methods to that end. This 
reluctance pervaded his strategy. He refrained, too, from condoning 
the use of force to advance socialism's cause in the more distant period 
when the autocracy had been dismantled. He preferred evolution to 
revolution. He expected capitalism to give way to socialism not 
through bloody upheaval but as the result of peaceful, transitional 
measures. Struve believed in the virtues of reform. But how could a 
'bourgeois state' be made to inaugurate a programme for the death of 
capitalism? Struve anticipated the question. In Critical Remarks he 
denied that the state always needs must be the guardian of the interests 
of the propertied classes;21 he implied that its powers were autonom-
ous enough to allow it to carry through radical reforms regardless of 
opposition by industrialists. In general, moreover, Struve made no 
direct criticism of capitalism itself. He noted Marx's suggestion that a 
socialist transformation of society would begin to be politically feasible 
only when the capitalist economy faced crisis and ruin. Struve opposed 
this approach. For him it was intolerable that socialists should aim to 
come to power at a time of economic disruption. He emphasised 
capitalism's progressive role. Critical Remarks was a song of praise for 
its capacity to raise levels of production, create conditions of plenty, 
introduce educational facilities and modernise the country's culture.22 
Plekhanov was disconcerted. Critical Remarks was already moving 
towards a repudiation of the Communist Manifesto. This movement 
was to continue. In the late 1890s Struve and Tugan-Baranovski would 
argue that many fundamental ideas of Marx and Engels were wrong. 
Struve would reject Marx's labour theory of value as being simplistic; 
Tugan would assert that recent empirical data undermined the 
credibility of Marx's predictions about the rate of return of investment 
under capitalism.23 Plekhanov was to look on them as mere 'Legal 
Marxists'. He was to treat them as outriders for a pan-European 
'revisionist' movement threatening to disfigure Marxism by making it 
indistinguishable from liberalism. Indeed Struve was to become a 
leading inspiration for the Russian liberal party, the Constitutional 
Democrats.24 
Yet Plekhanov desisted from waging war upon Struve and company 
 54 
Lenin: A Political Life 
in 1894. He even agreed, yielding to Potresov's persuasion, to 
contribute articles to collections organised by Struve. His objections 
remained in force. He showed no displeasure when he heard of attacks 
upon Struve by other Marxists in Russia. Ulyanov was the most 
notable aggressor. In mid-1894 he already referred to Struve as 
'mister': a term of conscious literary abuse among Marxists.25 Ulyanov 
flailed out at Struve's sins of omission, most notably his failure to state 
the need for 'class struggle' .26 He depicted Struve as a prophet of the 
politics of civil peace. Ulyanov anticipated a faster and more violent 
transition to socialism. Taking Struve to task, he stressed the revolu-
tionary perspective of Marx's writings. Struve was also alleged to have 
underestimated the extent of industrial growth already achieved in 
Russia. Ulyanov highlighted the 'bourgeois direction' of his country's 
economy. 'Did it not,' he asked, 'express itself completely clearly even 
in the 1860s? Did it not dominate too in the entire course of the 
1870s?,27 He knew, of course, that industrialisation still had a long way 
to go. Russia still lagged behind Britain, Germany and the USA. Yet 
Ulyanov called attention to the fact that, at the time of the writing of 
the Das Kapital, even England (which was the most industrially-
advanced nation in Europe) had a factory labour force which 
constituted a mere twelfth of its population.28 Revolutionaries in 
Russia could take heart from this. Ulyanov refused to accept that 
Marxists should confine their political appeals to factory employees. 
He looked further afield; his stirring contention was that industrial 
workers were 'merely the upper layers of the immense mass of the 
peasantry which already lives through the selling of its labour power 
more than by its own economy' .29 
Struve found Ulyanov's description of Russian reality hopelessly 
hyperbolical. The two spent many evenings in conversations; it was 
Struve's hope that, if Ulyanov succeeded in obtaining an exit visa, 
Switzerland would demonstrate to him what a true 'bourgeois order' 
looked like.30 Arguments out of books were clearly incapable of 
achieving this. But Ulyanov's confidence was boosted not only by the 
discovery that he was Struve's equal in his knowledge of Marxian texts 
but also by his feeling that he would be welcome as an ally by the 
Russian Marxist he most admired, Plekhanov. 
His presentiments were correct. And yet it behoves us to note that 
the views of Ulyanov and Plekhanov were not identical even in the 
1890s. Plekhanov did not assert that capitalism 'dominated' the 
Russian economy; he merely said that 'it can become and is becoming' 
 Arrivals 
55 
the dominant force.31 Nor did he enthuse about talk of the revolu-
tionary potentiality of the peasantry. Since leaving Black Repartition, 
Plekhanov had come to regard the peasants as being too easily drawn 
towards support for the political status quo. He also disliked Ulyanov's 
insulting remarks about middle-class liberals. It was Plekhanov's 
contention that Marxists should exhibit all possible tact in order to 
attract the liberals into an all-out war against the autocracy.32 Already, 
too, Plekhanov objected to Ulyanov's depiction of Russian feudalism. 
Ulyanov claimed that Russia's feudal traditions had been motivated by 
essentially the same conglomeration of social forces as in the West. For 
Plekhanov, this ignored the state's primary role in entrenching 
feudalism in Russia in centuries past. He judged that Russian 
feudalism held important features in common with Asiatic despot-
isms.33 These differences of opinion would gather in significance in the 
years ahead. But, for the moment, the two men happily put them aside 
and sought the fulfilment of their common immediate aims. Together, 
they would confront agrarian socialism; and they would try to 
minimise the advances made by 'revisionist' Marxism. 
THE EMERGING LEADER 
Vladimir Ulyanov at the age of twenty five was recognised by his 
comrades as 'a person of great calibre' .34 And he knew his own worth. 
But he was not vain; and others noted that this gave him the 
self-assurance to listen to fellow activists ratherthan merely impose his 
opinions upon them.3s He was mature beyond his years. The impres-
sion was enhanced by his physical appearance: he was losing hair on 
the dome of his cranium and bore a close resemblance to his deceased 
father. He was nicknamed Old Man by workers in his education circle 
(who also informed him that his loss of hair came from reading too 
inany books).36 He retained a severe demeanour. He was a demanding 
teacher, expecting his charges to tackle Das Kapital almost as soon as 
they could read and write.37 Study and writing had confirmed his 
intuition that he had found his vocation as a full-time revolutionary. It 
was an intensely serious calling for him, and never in the years ahead 
would he allow the slightest frivolity get in the way of his pursuit of 
political goals. But fun was not alien to him. Chess, hunting, walking 
and reading novels and philosophy were his pleasures (although 
Potresov claimed that Ulyanov was the only man in the world who 
 56 
Lenin: A Political Life 
derived positive enjoyment from refusing a second beer).38 Neverthe-
less everything took a subordinate place to politics. Revolution was 
Ulyanov's career and his dream. 
His mother's monthly allowances were crucial.39 The job with 
Volkenshtein's was a cover; Ulyanov hoped it would shrug off the 
police's attentions. He limited himself to some minimal work as a 
part-time consultant and gave up court appearances as a barrister.40 
Life was comfortable. Summer holidays in summer 1894 were spent 
with cousins in Moscow province. This was a further sign of the gap of 
privilege separating him from the industrial workers (who, if they 
visited the countryside at all, did so to help their families with the 
harvest). His only personal trouble was his health. In March 1895 he 
was stricken by pneumonia. Fortunately it was a mild bout and his 
mother, hurrying to Petersburg, nursed him over the worst of it.41 
It was in the capital that Ulyanov met Nadezhda Konstantinovna 
Krupskaya. She was a Marxist activist belonging to the political milieu 
joined by Ulyanov, and was present at those early sessions where he 
attracted respect as an economist. She never forgot her first impres-
sion. It was aural: Ulyanov's sarcastic laughter. Krupskaya detected 
something 'wicked and dry' in it.42 She was attracted to him, and he to 
her. In 1894 he was her usual escort home after political meetings. 
Contrary to the jibes later made at her expense, Nadezhda Konstan-
tinovna was not a bad-looking girl; but she suffered from a worsening 
thyroid complaint which, in middle age, was to bulge out her eyes. 
Ulyanov himself was physically agreeable in the eyes of very many 
women. The relationship started slowly. It seems to have been 
conducted entirely within the ambit of contemporary proprieties.43 
Neither he nor she spoke much about the days of their courtship. But 
Ulyanov was obviously the dominant partner. He was clearly going to 
make a reputation for himself in politics, and he confided to her that he 
was incapable of becoming emotionally entangled with anyone not 
sharing his general beliefs.44 Nadezhda was not intimidated by him. 
She is often presented to us as 'the constant, trusty friend' of Ulyanov, 
as if she were a canine companion rather than a spouse.45 But she did 
not always do his bidding. And there were certain areas, such as 
educational theory (and perhaps educational practice too), where she 
probably thought herself his better.46 Ulyanov was contented. His first 
steady girlfriend was someone who could hold her own in political 
debate and whose commitment to enduring the travails of a revolu-
tionary's existence was no smaller than his own. 
Ulyanov's liking for Nadya, as he called her, did not prevent him 
 Arrivals 
57 
from being away from her for several months. For years he had desired 
to see foreign countries. As early as 1888, after his expulsion from 
Kazan University, he had applied for permission to pursue his 
undergraduate studies abroad. In March 1895, finally, his request was 
granted.47 He remained under surveillance after his move from Samara 
but, whether through an insufficiency of policing resources or because 
Ulyanov's time had been taken up more by literary work than by 
underground activism, he evaded detection. 
His real aim was to contact Plekhanov's Emancipation Of Labour 
Group in Geneva. He had a plausible alibi. It was conventional for 
persons of his social station to travel round the rest of Europe on trips 
devoted to education or amusement. Paris, Berlin and Florence 
bustled with affluent Russian visitors. Ulyanov's appetite for tourism 
did not diminish with the years. There was hardly a cathedral town of 
northern France or a Swiss mountain resort not explored by him on his 
travels. On 25 April 1895 he took a train from the Russian capital with 
a ticket for Switzerland.48 Plekhanov, despite their differences over 
many issues, was Ulyanov's idol; nobody alive, except Frederick 
Engels (who died that August), evoked commensurate respect from 
him. He journeyed to pay homage. Awe mingled with affection; 
Ulyanov would later recollect that he had had the feeling of 'being in 
love' with Plekhanov.49 Such a metaphor is extreme, especially for a 
man of Ulyanov's reticence. It is therefore all the more suggestive of 
the profound importance attached by Ulyanov to the world of ideas. It 
is interesting in a further sense as well. Throughout his career he 
displayed vigour, even daring, in his intellectual development; but he 
felt insecure in his convictions unless he could corroborate them with 
citations from the works of his heroes. In the 1890s he made no 
pretension to sit upon the high pedestal occupied in his imagination by 
Georgi Plekhanov. Only Marx and Engels sat even higher. 
Indeed Ulyanov's intellectual style looked like an exaggeration of 
Plekhanov's own. True, he could still feel nervous in face-to-face 
disputes. In Moscow, at a political gathering, he delivered a caustic 
denunciation of Vorontsov's economics. At the end of the meeting he 
was told that Vorontsov had been in the audience. Confusion 
overwhelmed him. He raced from the room.50 
And yet he was unaffected by such sensitivities when it came to 
debates in print; his literary mode sounded its characteristically 
aggressive notes at the outset of his career.51 Indulgence to opponents 
appeared to him as mere quietism. As yet he identified popUlism as the 
main polemical enemy; his comments on Struve though combative, 
 58 
Lenin: A Political Life 
still lacked the unbridled offensiveness of his ridiculing of the 
narodniki. He was unashamed about his pugnaciousness. Why mollify 
criticisms when you know you are right? Why not emasculate the 
arguments of your antagonists if this can persuade others to accept 
your own? Ulyanov was convinced, in every fibre of his body, that 
Marxism supplied the only mode of social investigation which could 
produce 'correct' answers to analytical and practical problems; he 
spoke of it as if it were a faith and not open to re-examination and 
possible refutation. It was also part and parcel of his mental make-up 
to suggest that, however complicated a political situation might 
appear, there was always only a single policy adoptable by 10gicaIIy-
thinking revolutionaries. Correctness, in his view, was the twin sibling 
of consistency; and no sharper charge did he level at his opponents 
than that they wore their opinions lightly. In instincts, mannerisms and 
technique it is remarkable how closely Ulyanov the rising theorist and 
activist resembles Lenin the experienced premier of the Soviet 
government. 
TO SWITZERLAND AND BACK 
And so to Switzerland. The mission entrusted to him in St. Petersburg 
was to put communications between Geneva and Russia on a more 
regular basis. He was to promise financial assistance, drawn from local 
membership dues, to the emigres. It was hoped that a Russian Marxist 
newspaper might be set up in Geneva. A Moscow activist, E. I. Sponti, 
was in Switzerland at the same time and with similar intentions. At last 
the disparate groups were coming together to lay the ground-work for 
a political party. On 2 May 1895 Ulyanov arrived in Lausanne and 
obtained Plekhanov's address. He spent the month in conversations 
with Plekhanov and Akselrod. He stayed for a week with Akselrod's 
family in the mountainous countryside outside Zurich. Both his elders 
were favourably impressed by Ulyanov. He seemed precisely the type 
of undergrounder needed by the movement: accomplished in socialist 
theory and adept at administrative business. They compared him 
favourably with Sponti, who appeared to retain an excess of narodnik 
insurrectionary impatience (and who, unlike Ulyanov, had the temerity 
to carp at the Geneva group for not writing material accessible for 
ordinary workers). Plekhanov, Akselrod and Ulyanov found it easy to 
come to terms with each other. A plan was drawn up. Plekhanov and 
 Arrivals 
59 
Akselrod would act as newspaper editors in Western Europe while 
Ulyanov headed a co-editorial committee in St. Petersburg.52 
Ulyanov spent the remainder of that summer in excursions around 
continental Europe. He was blithely unaware that the police in St. 
Petersburg had just broken his cover and reported that he stood 'at the 
head of a circle involved with revolutionary propaganda among 
workers'. The purpose of his trip abroad was ascertained.53 Ulyanov 
continued with his tour: in June 1895 he moved to Paris and visited 
Marx's son-in-law Paul Lafargue; in July and August he transferred to 
Berlin, working daily in the Prussian State Library. Plekhanov secured 
him an interview with German Social-Democratic Party leader 
Wilhelm Liebknecht.54 
He returned to Russia on 7 September.55 Marxists in St. Petersburg 
were by then optimistic about starting a mass working-class move-
ment. Factory strikes were in the offing. Yuli Martov campaigned for 
the unification of all clandestine groups in the capital. Radchenko's 
and Martov's organisations combined activity. The Bureau selected to 
direct the new grouping included V. 1. Ulyanov, Y. O. Martov and G. 
M. Krzhizhanovski. The priority was to produce a series of agitational 
leaflets and get them scattered around as many plants and works as 
possible.56 Despite a search at the border, Ulyanov had succeeded in 
smuggling home half a suitcase of literature from Switzerland. This was 
still far from enough. The Peters burgers negotiated with adherents of 
People's Freedom in hiding in Finland and in possession of typo-
graphical facilities. Apart from Martov, Ulyanov was the only fluent 
writer in the group; and the switch of plans towards leaflet-printing 
augmented his importance. When textile-workers went on strike in 
November, he wrote a rousing leaflet addressed To the Working Men 
and Women of the Thornton Factory. He helped, too, to produce a 
pamphlet entitled Russian Factory Legislation. This was not work he 
did by shutting himself away in his rooms. The effectiveness of a leaflet 
or pamphlet depended upon the writer's acquaintance with specific 
conditions in the factories where copies were to be distributed. 
Ulyanov compiled his information directly from the workers them-
selves. He visited working-class streets to ascertain the progress of 
strikes in the Thornton textile factory and the Laferme tobacco 
factory. For the first time he was involved in day-to-day underground 
activism.57 
This necessitated frequent changes of residence in order to keep one 
move ahead of the police. Yet Ulyanov had not fogotten his agreement 
 60 
Lenin: A Political Life 
with Plekhanov and Akselrod. The Petersburg organisation still 
wanted to assist the foundation of an emigre newspaper, and Ulyanov 
wrote and sent material to Akselrod in November.58 But his organisa-
tion also wished to set up its own news-sheet. It was to be called 
Rabochee Delo (or Workers' Cause). Ulyanov was to be editor.59 
Workers were still wary of calls to rise against the autocracy. Ulyanov's 
leaflets were deliberately apolitical (though he assumed that economic 
strife would draw workers into politics). Newspapers, on the other 
hand, would reach out to a more sophisticated readership, attracting 
both intellectuals and labourers with political awareness. Therefore 
Workers' Cause would propose the formation of a workers' political 
party.so 
On 8 December 1895 the Department of Police acted. The proofs of 
Workers' Cause were confiscated; forty Marxist activists, not far short 
of the entire St. Petersburg organisation, were arrested. Ulyanov was 
among those caught. So lucky in avoiding the police's clutches when in 
Samara, he now faced his first lengthy spell of incarceration. He was 
put in cell 193 by himself. Interrogation began on 21 December; 
physical coercion was forbidden under prison rules (and least of all 
would officers break them in the case of Ulyanov, who was not only of 
the gentry estate but also a legal expert). He was to remain in prison for 
fourteen months.61 Anyone joining a revolutionary group had to 
accept risks; Ulyanov was philosophical. He took a detached, almost 
'economic' view of his fate. For he would worry, when hearing of a 
comrade's imprisonment, not so much about the ensuing material and 
emotional hardships as about the 'waste' incurred by the loss of an 
activist's contribution to the cause.62 Not that his own activism was 
extinguished in jail. No longer free to organise support for St. 
Petersburg strikers, Ulyanov concentrated upon expanding his eco-
nomic writings into a full-length book with a view towards demolishing 
agrarian-socialist theories once and for all. He had monastic peace for 
his studies. He took precautions against becoming physically unfit. The 
daily exercise walk in the yard was obviously inadequate, and Ulyanov 
adopted a daily regimen of press-ups and trunk-rolls. For recreation he 
used the prisoners' wall-tapping code to play chess with other 
inmates.63 
But research was his pre-occupation. The regulations allowed 
twice-weekly visits from relatives and friends; and Ulyanov got his 
sisters to borrow textbooks and journals from libraries. He was 
interrogated again in early 1896, but the interruption to his labours 
was negligible.64 In prison he was a full-time writer. 
 Arrivals 
61 
He also had plentiful time to reflect upon the fortunes of the labour 
movement. A few leaders such as Martov and Radchenko had eluded 
the police in December 1895 and perpetuated the existence of their 
organisation (which they renamed the Union of Struggle for the 
Emancipation of the Working Class). Difficulties had increased. The 
organisation had greatly relied upon the Central Workers' Group, 
which was the successor of the Central Workers' Circle, for establish-
ing contact with factory workers; and the arrests had involved many 
leaders of this Group. The remaining middle-class activists could less 
easily stay in touch with workers. But the Union of Struggle pressed 
on, undaunted by the arrest of Martov in January 1896. Fedor Dan 
took over the leadership. The Union's disparagers commented that the 
few leaflets composed in 1895-96 were the merest drop of water in the 
stream that turned the mill of labour discontent; it was pointed out that 
the great textile strike of summer 1896 took the Marxist activists by 
surprise. Employers, moreover, would seldom make more than 
nugatory concessions. Count Witte as Minister of Finances instructed 
provincial governors to stand firm against disobedient workers. Yet 
police reports demonstrated that, although Marxist activists were not 
always the instigators of unrest, they and their leaflets were welcomed 
by the work-force once industrial conflict had begun.65 
PRISON THOUGHTS 
Ulyanov heard of these events from his prison cell; he was kept 
informed by legal newspapers and his permitted visitors. Plekhanov's 
vision was apparently being justified by the march of history. It was 
Ulyanov's acute expectation of the autocracy's imminent demise that 
led him, in the winter of 1895-96, to review the party programme 
projected by Plekhanov a decade previously. Ulyanov found nothing 
in it to reject. But he thought it failed to provide the comprehensive 
range of policies vital for a political party aiming to be in the thick of 
the final battles against the Romanov dynasty. The main goal of 
Plekhanov, in his project's agrarian section, had been to facilitate 
capitalist development by abolishing both redemption payments and 
compulsory commune membership. This had Ulyanov's assent. But in 
order to secure active peasant support he proposed an enticement: the 
party should call for the restitution to the peasantry of the so-called 
'cut-off strips'. This was the term for the segments of peasant-
cultivated land which had been lost to the gentry under the Emancipa-
 62 
Lenin: A Political Life 
tion Edict of 1861. Such a policy, according to Ulyanov, would arouse 
the oppressed inhabitants of the countryside from political torpor .66 It 
was not, by a long chalk, as comprehensive an appeal to the peasantry 
as the populists had made: Ulyanov was not promising the transfer of all 
agricultural land. But he hoped that the strips would be attraction 
enough. 
He added little that was new to the section to be aimed at factory 
workers. This did not signify neglect of urban issues. From the end of 
1896 his mind was exercised by the many problems encountered by 
Marxists in disseminating socialist ideas in the towns. 
The outbursts of working-class discontent posed a nagging question. 
The Marxist activities had to decide how much control they should 
seek to obtain over the labour movement. The issue became acute in 
Petersburg in early 1897. Factory strikes had led dozens of workers to 
join the Union Of Struggle; and, because most intellectual organisers 
had fallen prey to the police, the working-class recruits had come to 
constitute the majority of the organisation. The newcomers wanted to 
alter the perspectives of the Union Of Struggle. In particular, they 
disliked the idea of broadening the current fights over wages into an 
immediate struggle against the autocracy; and they desired to put 
workers in full charge of strike funds. Some talked of founding a 
newspaper written and edited entirely by factory labourers. Workers 
were to take over the leadership inside both the party and the trade 
unions; they were determined to keep the intellectuals under control.67 
Such demands exasperated Radchenko. He was reluctant to admit any 
worker to a leading position in the Union Of Struggle. He was an 
intellectual elitist. It was his assumption that working men and women 
lacked the skills and free time necessary for effective underground 
administration. Radchenko and his colleagues from the early 1890s 
were dubbed the Veterans; the newcomers to the Union Of Struggle, 
who attracted experienced activists like K. M. Takhtarev and A. A. 
Yakubova to their side, became known as the Youngsters.68 
Ulyanov entered this discussion. As luck would have it, in February 
1897 the authorities were winding up their investigations into the case 
of the Union Of Struggle. Ulyanov was sentenced to three years' exile 
in eastern Siberia. Permission was granted for prisoners to be released 
for a few days in St. Petersburg to gather their belongings prior to 
departure. Apart from seeing his family, Ulyanov again contacted the 
Union Of Struggle. He sided with the Veterans in most respects. 
Neither he nor Radchenko believed that socialism was a doctrine 
which would be acquired by the working class unless socialist 
 Arrivals 
63 
intellectuals provided ideological guidance. On the other hand, 
Ulyanov did not expect this state of affairs to last forever; in fact he 
enthusiastically welcomed individual workers into the direction of the 
Union Of Struggle so long as they possessed the requisite level of 
education and training, and he assumed that such promotions would 
shortly increase as the result of the Union's pedagogical activities. But 
he agreed with Radchenko that workers should not run the Union 
simply because they were workers.69 The discussion between the 
Veterans and the Youngsters was ill-tempered, neither side being 
willing to make a compromise. At stake stood the choice of the path for 
the labour movement to follow in the hazardous conditions of 
nineteenth-century Russia. But no binding decision was taken by the 
Union Of Struggle before the exiles left St. Petersburg for Eniseisk 
province in Siberia on 17 February 1897.70 
Middle-class convicts making such a trip would seek to render it as 
comfortable as possible firstly by undertaking to pay the rail-fare (and 
thereby securing an upholstered compartment) and secondly by 
requesting to live out their Siberian term in the comparatively 
hospitable climate of the city of Krasnoyarsk rather than the frozen 
wastes of villages further to the north. The first but not the second 
request was satisfied in Ulyanov's case.71 His mother made a successful 
third plea that, because of his recent pneumonia, he should be allowed 
to stop over with relatives in Moscow for a week en route to exile. He 
even managed to study for a day in the Rumyantsev Museum Library. 
On 23 February he boarded the train for Siberia, accompanied as far as 
Tula by his mother and sisters Mariya and Anna.72 
It was not until April that he was officially informed that his place of 
exile was to be Shushenskoe village near the small town of Minusinsk. 
He was permitted to spend the previous weeks in freedom in 
Krasnoyarsk; and, pressing on with his economic treatise, he visited 
local libraries to arrange borrowing facilities. Shushenskoe was not a 
total disappointment. It was not very far north of Krasnoyarsk, and 
postal communications were reasonably frequent. His tireless mother 
offered to come to live near him. He would not countenance it, earning 
a rebuke from his sister Mariya for his 'terrible inhospitality'; but he 
pointed out that the trip to Shushenskoe was 'a pretty bothersome 
affair and not very pleasant'.73 Officialdom in Eniseisk province was 
not inordinately oppressive. The political exiles were granted leave to 
visit each other in their various villages. Occasional sojurns in 
Minusinsk were sanctioned. The government made Ulyanov a 
monthly allowance of eight roubles; this was not a large sum but it 
 64 
Lenin: A Political Life 
bought a sufficiency of food, and in any case his mother continued to 
supplement his account.74 His period of exile was not laden with 
gloom. He set aside a portion of each day for leisure; unlike many 
contemporary revolutionaries he recognised the importance of keep-
ing fit. His acquaintances disagreed about the identity of his favourite 
sport: was it country walking or skating or gamebird shooting? In 
essence they were all correct. For everything he did, at the time of 
doing it, elicited from him the same passionate intensity. He overbrim-
med with primal enthusiasm, treating fellow exiles as a mass resource 
for competitive 'relaxation'. If fortunate, they might get away with a 
quick game of chess. But friends learnt to beware of him on days when 
he had more than his normal store of surplus energy to burn; they knew 
he was quite likely to insist upon a wrestling contest or some other such 
horseplay.75 
Politics, though, laid claim to most of his waking hours. Initially he 
dreaded exile; he made the quip that prison had provided an excellent 
environment for a writer.76 But his family in Russia kept him 
well-stocked with books and journals as required. In 1897 he 
researched indefatigably. He was cut off from regular, detailed news 
about Marxist groups in the empire as a whole. Nobody writing to him 
could include politically sensitive remarks. For information about 
fresh developments he relied upon those activists falling into detention 
in Eniseisk province later than himself. Such arrivals were few in 
Ulyanov's first twelve months of residence in Siberia (although it was 
in this fashion that he received the compliment from Plekhanov and 
Akselrod that 'he wrote better than anyone else in Russia for the 
workers').77 The frustrations were endless. Yet they were not over-
whelming, if only because he appreciated the usefulness of the time 
vouched to him to reflect upon his achievements and set-backs in St. 
Petersburg and to apply his conclusions to the needs of the Marxist 
movement in the Russian empire. 
