 10 
Doubts and Certainties 
TOWARDS THE BREAK 
The desire of Russia's political intelligentsia for an integral view on the 
universe grew strongly in the nineteenth century. The country's 
Marxists inherited a commitment to science and rationalism. The same 
may be said about their counterparts in Germany; but in Russia the 
intensity of the search for comprehensiveness was greater. It is striking 
how eagerly Russian Marxists read the latest research in physics, 
psychology and philosophy. And practical tactics, they assumed, were 
undecidable without reference to general premises. Lenin stoutly 
defended this tradition. The failure of the 1905 revolution did not 
depress him: victory could be delayed but not postponed forever. His 
high morale was unusual. The defeats of 1906-7 had a widely 
demoralising effect upon revolutionaries. Political disarray was 
accompanied by a mushrooming interest in religion and metaphysics, 
and poets and artists sought solace in outlandish imagery and 
techniques. The intellectual's usefulness to Russian society came 
under question. The Pole Jan Machaisky declared that the intelligent-
sia, though proclaiming its democratic motivations, would contrive to 
dominate the mass of the population after a revolution no less heavily 
than the tsarist regime had done. This attack from the left was followed 
by another from the right. A group of liberal conservatives, former 
Marxists and religious mystics combined in 1909 to produce Land-
marks, a book which urged intellectuals to abstain from politics and 
concentrate upon their individual moral self-perfection.1 
Lenin reinforced his emphasis upon organisational control and 
ideological 'purity'; he discerned no other antidote to the dissolute and 
dissolving conditions he diagnosed. The autocracy's counterrevolution-
ary offensive, he guessed, might be effective for a further three or 
four years.2 His tactical aggressiveness to opponents inside the party 
increased in 1908. The Mensheviks, now that the Third Duma 
elections were over and Bolshevik deputies were taking their seats, 
were less use to him than before. Lenin's campaign against them in the 
Central Committee was relentless. 
175 
 176 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The involuntary emigration of leaders like himself called for some 
institutional re-organisation. The Central Committee left some mem-
bers behind to handle party affairs in Russia. Four Bolsheviks were 
particularly active: Dubrovinski, Goldenberg, Nogin and Rozhkov. 
Meanwhile, the Menshevik presence in the Central Committee was 
depleted by arrests.3 Bolsheviks exploited their advantage. They 
ensured that their factional newspaper Proletari appeared frequently 
from autumn 1907.4 By contrast Social-Democrat, which was intended 
to serve the party as a whole, was reduced by the Bolshevik-Menshevik 
strife to only fitful publication both then and in the following year. 5 
The Menshevik N. V. Ramishvili demonstratively resigned from the 
Central Committee in February 1908; and Polish members like A. 
Warski expressed growing distaste for the virulence of Bolshevik 
assaults upon adversaries.s The Central Committee met abroad on 21 
August. A bipartite sub-structure was created. A five-man team would 
direct the party in Russia while a new troika would handle affairs in 
Western Europe. The Bolsheviks' influence was diminished. Golden-
berg was to be their single representative in the team for Russia. He 
was to be balanced by the Menshevik M. I. Broido.7 The other three 
members were to be a Pole, a Latvian and a Bundist; it was expected 
that their influence would keep the factional rivalries to a minimum. 
This was not to Lenin's liking. But it should not be assumed that 
Bolshevik opinion in general took his attitude. There was much, in any 
event, for the Bolsheviks to be pleased about. By late 1908 they were 
doing well in local party committees in Russia proper (even though 
their record against the Mensheviks in the Ukraine and the Caucasus 
remained less satisfactory).8 
But such committees often had little contact with rank-and-file 
members; Dan and Martov challenged the Bolsheviks to put their 
position to the test of a Party Congress. The Bolshevik Centre ignored 
them, and instructed its representatives in the Central Committee to 
repudiate the Menshevik request.9 
Yet the Russian social-democrats incurring Lenin's fiercest wrath 
were found among his own Bolsheviks. To his consternation, he heard 
in spring 1908 that the idea of 'recalling' social-democratic deputies 
from the Duma was gathering a strong following in Russia. The Duma 
social-democratic fractions behaviour exacerbated the problem. A 
number of instances were reported showing that the party's deputies 
had disregarded the Central Committee's instructions. lO The strong-
hold of 'Recallism' was the Moscow region. u But the hostility to 
having party members in the Duma also found favour with committees 
 Doubts and Certainties 
177 
elsewhere in the empire. l2 Maksim Gorki strove to effect a reconcilia-
tion between Lenin and Bogdanov. He invited them to stay with him in 
his house on the island of Capri off the Italian mainland.13 Unlike 
Bogdanov, Lenin for some time refused. But a minimal level of 
co-operation was unavoidable. Lenin and Bogdanov, with Dubrov-
inski, were Proletari's editors. The newspaper had to be attended 
to. Lenin persuaded Dubrovinski to remain in the anti-Bogdanov 
camp. Proletari must not go Recallist. Ignoring Gorki's peace-making 
gestures, Lenin made clear that he would shortly engage in an attack 
upon Bogdanov's philosophical writings. The intra-Bolshevik truce 
about philosophy was to be terminated. Coaxed out to Capri in April 
1908, Lenin rejected any compromise with his former partner; he was 
also worried lest all Bolsheviks should become branded by Plekhanov 
as renegades from Marxist philosphical 'orthodoxy' by virtue of being 
in the same faction as Bogdanov. Lenin's political views might be seen 
as 'heretical' by the guilt of association with Bogdanov.14 
Lenin spent several weeks in the British Museum beginning the 
preparation of his onslaught. In May 1908, he equipped Dubrovinski 
with criticisms of Bogdanov's epistemology to be delivered by 
Dubrovinski when Bogdanov lectured in Paris.15 Bogdanov objected 
to Dubrovinski's vituperative comments. When Lenin rallied to 
Dubrovinski's side, Bogdanov resigned from Proletari (though not 
from the Bolshevik Centre) rather than submit to further editorial 
humiliation.16 First blood to Lenin. 
Yet the Bolshevik Centre declined to appoint any of Lenin's 
confederates in Bogdanov's stead. Its nominee was V. L. Shantser.17 
He and G. A. Aleksinski from August 1908 were initiators of a 
modified version of Recallism which became known as Ultimatum-
ism.1s lt was simply not in the party's power, they pointed out, to recall 
deputies from the Duma, Shantser and Aleksinski also argued that the 
eighteen social-democrats, after a poor start, had done much to 
discomfit governmental ministers and to help in the Duma's prepara-
tion of useful legislative projects on labour reforms. Rather than make 
a futile attempt to prise them out of their Duma seats, the party should 
'allow' them to remain on condition that they obeyed the Central 
Committee's instructions. The Ultimatumists wanted to give a formal 
warning to the Duma fraction: either you do as you are bid, or you will 
be expelled from the party.19 This was too strong for Lenin's taste, but 
not to the extent that he could not work with Shantser. Recallism was 
another matter. He resolved to quit the Bolshevik faction altogether 
should Recallism win a majority in the Centre.20 Meanwhile he plotted 
 178 
Lenin: A Political Life 
strategy for the Fifth Party Conference, due to meet in Paris on 21 
December 1908. RecaIlists and Ultimatumists could muster only a 
handful of votes; and again it was Lenin's 'centrist' motion that 
willy-nilly won their support as being at least better than that of the 
Mensheviks.21 But Lenin was by no means contented. Ultimatumism 
involved a down-grading of the significance of legal political activity. 
Bogdanov himself endorsed a policy similar to Ultimatumism; and it 
seems that he combined this, even in late 1908, with a belief in the need 
for immediate steps to be taken to organise armed insurrection. 22 
Lenin would move heaven and earth to get Bogdanov removed from 
the Bolshevik Centre. 
'MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIOCRITICISM' 
The product of Lenin's philosophical studies was Materialism and 
Empiriocriticism. Its subject was epistemology. Bogdanov had refined 
his ideas between 1904 and 1906 in his trilogy Empiriomonism. 
Lenin's assault took a year to prepare. It appeared in April 1909. He 
had always thought that his socio-economic analyses were fragile 
unless supported by sound philosophical struts. But he had shown only 
sporadic interest in theories of cognition. Now he made a virtue of his 
limited expertise. His purpose, he declared, was merely to re-state the 
'orthodox' precepts of Marx and Engels; he described himself as a 
'rank-and-file Marxist' in epistemology. He re-read Marx. But it was 
Engels, Plekhanov and Chernyshevski who seem to have claimed the 
lion's share of his attention. 23 He foresaw that he would be accused of 
being 'uncritical' towards his favoured authors; he defiantly pro-
claimed at the outset: 'And don't cry, Machist gentlemen, that I rely 
upon "authorities"!' He asserted that it was better to rely upon Marx 
and Engels than upon 'bourgeois' scholarship.24 Stridency pervades 
the book. No stylistic means of deriding Bogdanov was neglected. 
Lenin's sister Anna, who handled the book's legal publication in 
Russia (under his old nom de plume ofV. I1in), urged him not to 'spoil' 
the contents by an excess of denigration; she liked his poking fun at 
people, but drew the line at his questioning of Bogdanov's honour. 
Brother Volodya was stubborn. He agreed to withdraw only such 
passages as might offend the censor.25 
Many of the main positive propositions of Materialism repeat 
Plekhanov's work. Dispute already raged between Plekhanov and 
Bogdanov. In 1906 Plekhanov had gathered some early philosophical 
 Doubts and Certainties 
179 
pieces into a book called Critique of Our Critics; in 1908 he issued the 
first instalments of Materialismus Militans with Bogdanov as his target. 
Plekhanov's old themes were reiterated. He made affirmations about 
the independent reality of the external world, about the primacy of 
matter over mind and about man's ability to have exact knowledge of 
the world.26 
Bogdanov was accused of repudiating the independent reality of the 
external world. In fact this was not quite what he said. He made no such 
express repudiation; for him, such a proposition about reality was 
simply unamenable to verification. He began from different premises. 
Cognition in his estimation was not a process whereby an external 
entity, 'matter', imposed itself upon 'mind' .27 The mind-matter 
dichotomy was untenable. Rather the universe was 'an endless web of 
complexes consisting of elements identical to elements of sensation' .28 
And all these elements, according to Bogdanov, existed in a perma-
nent state of interaction and mutual alteration. Cognition was not a 
'pure' act of contemplation. It was conditioned by sense-organ 
chemistry and by historically changing circumstances. 'Absolute' truth 
was therefore a chimera.29 That which is true, he asserted, is that 
ideology or those ideas which 'most harmoniously and elegantly' 
organise society in the existing social environment. Thus Catholicism 
had a truthful function in mediaeval Europe inasmuch as it consoli-
dated the contemporary socio-economic order. Das Kapital was 
analogously describable. Marx's treatise in Bogdanov's view was not of 
eternal validity but, rather, 'an objective truth' for the pre-socialist, 
industrial societies of the epoch.30 For Bogdanov, ideas were a 
powerful organising 'force'. He, more than any other leading Marxist 
theorist after Marx, emphasised the impact of 'culture' (as distinct 
from 'economics') upon the course of history. 
Plekhanov and Lenin regarded this as anti-Marxist. Bogdanov's 
phrasing gave them temporary advantage; he had stated, in 1904, that 
'social being' and 'social consciousness' were the same.31 Marx by 
contrast had said that social being gives rise to such consciousness.32 
Charged with confounding cause and effect, Bogdanov justifiably 
replied that his original intention had been to indicate that conscious-
ness, though conditioned by 'being', also has an interactive relation-
ship with it.33 But Plekhanov and Lenin had other criticisms too (and in 
any case Lenin the polemicist refused to take any notice of Bogdanov's 
rejoinders). Lenin adduced Engels's remark that materialists, among 
whom Engels classified himself, believed in the ontological primacy of 
matter.34 This led to a further assertion. Marxism, according to 
 180 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Plekhanov and Lenin, held that the universe exists independently of 
human perception.3s Engels's materialism lacked a definition of matter 
itself. Plekhanov, with Lenin's approval, obliged. He defined matter as 
'nothing other than the totality of things in themselves inasmuch as 
these things are the origin of our sensations' .36 
Bogdanov retorted that Plekhanov's definition, far from amplifying 
Engels's materialism, had reduced it to tautology.37 Plekhanov's 
interpretation of Engels was equally unacceptable to Bogdanov. 
'Things in themselves', according to Bogdanov, were used by Engels as 
a convenient terminological short-hand and were not part of his 
considered epistemological standpoint. This does not entirely con-
vince. Nor, for that matter, did Bogdanov address himself to Lenin's 
quotation of Engels on the subject of materialists. Yet Engels was not 
lost to Bogdanov completely. Anti-Diihring, as Bogdanov delighted in 
repeating, insisted on the relativity of social knowledge. Engels 
deemed absolute truth about society to be unattainable.3s Bogdanov 
derived even greater succour from Marx's own texts; and he took the 
view that Engels's occasional 'lapses' made him a less reliable 
interpreter of Marxism than Marx himself. Marx's Theses on Feuer-
bach explicitly attacked the eighteenth-century treatment of cognition 
as the passive contemplation of object by subject. His own conception 
was dynamic. It proposed that man not only was the product of 
material and social circumstances but also could act upon and change 
circumstances; and that the verisimilitude of his ideas is testable only 
by practical activity.39 Admittedly, Marx often referred to 'laws' 
governing socio-economic behaviour;40 and this lent some support to 
Lenin's declaration that Marx felt that human perception could be 
absolutely accurate. But Marx's work was not without its own 
contradictions. His more directly philosophical remarks, especially in 
his Theses on Feuerbach, jar against a great deal of Materialism and 
Empiriocriticism. There is justice in Bogdanov's claim to be closer than 
Lenin and Plekhanov to Marxian epistemological theory.41 
The dispute, of course, was not merely about 'orthodoxy' but 
equally about who was right. Discussions among philosophers in 
ensuing years have not produced agreement. Views on the question of 
the independent existence of the external world still differ; but Lenin's 
attitude undoubtedly has strong current backing. He would secure 
fewer sympathisers on other points. It is now more or less generally 
accepted that what knowledge we have is conditioned by the proces-
sing effects of our sense organs. And it is a rare philosopher who 
affirms the attainability of absolute truth.42 
 Doubts and Certainties 
181 
Lenin's epistemological optimism was extreme. Plekhanov, while 
characterising our mental impressions as 'signifying exactly' what 
existed in the external world, avoided the concept of absolute truth.43 
Moreover, he called these impressions 'hieroglyphs'.44 Lenin thought 
Plekhanov to have introduced an unnecessarily indeterminate factor. 
He rejected all talk of intermediary hieroglyphic signs. Instead he 
conceived of the mind as a sort of camera; he thought that it could copy 
reality and produce photographically accurate pictures.45 Lenin's more 
defiant opposition to Bogdanov was buttressed by points that were not 
strictly epistemological. He offered a sociological survey. Most 
contemporary natural scientists, he 
declared, were 
avowed 
'materialists' like himself. Thus the viewpoint of Engels and Plekhanov 
could be represented as progressive and scientific.46 This brought him 
to a second contention. Lenin, following Engels, asserted that there 
were essentially only two possible positions in epistemology: 
materialism and idealism. But rather than positions Lenin spoke of 
'parties' .47 His language had a political nuance. His 'party', he 
affirmed, was that of the materialists. On the other side stood the party 
of the idealists, and Bogdanov was to be regarded as among its newly 
paid-up members. Lenin proceeded to a third point. He claimed that 
philosophical idealism, traditionally and currently, was associated with 
religious faith (whereas Marxism endorsed atheism). Plekhanov and 
he noted the recent writings of Lunacharski on the subject of 
'god-building'. They were horrified. Lunacharski proposed a humanist 
'religion'; he wished to canalise society'S existing religious feelings into 
a form of worship which rejected belief in a heavenly deity and 
directed all reverence to Man himself.48 Bogdanov was criticised for 
having epistemological opinions remarkably like Lunacharski's.49 
For his part, Lenin stated that Kapital was eternally true. It was an 
inalienable basis for all future knowledge. He concurred that not 
everything about the world was yet known. But absolute truth was still 
attainable. It would be gained through a cumulative process. Partial 
truths of an absolute nature would be piled up on one another and would 
eventually constitute the comprehensive science of the universe.5o 
Bogdanov made a scathing, though nowadays little-known, riposte in 
his book Faith and Science. He repeated his view on the relativity of 
knowledge; he again adduced Marx and Engels in support.51 In his 
general offensive against Plekhanovite epistemology, he included 
particular attacks on Lenin. He took up Lenin's camera analogy. 
Without knowing it, Bogdanov teased, Lenin had adopted an 
Empiriomonist viewpoint through his references to chemically-based 
 182 
Lenin: A Political Life 
photographic processes.52 He also tackled Lenin's points on the beliefs 
of scientists, on 'party-mindedness', on religion. Bogdanov suggested 
that his opponent had displayed a wholly unscientific, authoritarian 
spirit.53 Allegedly, Lenin had not shown philosophical competence. 
His brandishing oflists of authors was, according to Bogdanov, merely 
a device to disguise ignorance; it did not even mean that he had 
genuinely read his supposed sources.54 Lenin hoped to intimidate. His 
quotations of Engels, moreover, were so ritualistic as to testify to the 
same religious frame of mind that he claimed to oppose.55 Bogdanov 
pursued the point. The essence of Lenin's position was that Marx's 
writings were un assail ably true.56 This was hardly science as conven-
tionally understood. Furthermore, Lenin's description of the attain-
ment of absolute truth was not only un-Marxist: it was also absurd. 
How, asked Bogdanov, was it logically possible to reach the infinite by 
a finite series of steps?57 
Evidently these mutual criticisms by Lenin and Bogdanov were not 
merely about cognitive psychology. Lenin in a single instance dis-
cussed political implications. Reversing his earlier contention that 
Bogdanov's practical policies were uninfluenced by his epistemology, 
he stated that Empiriomonism was a recipe for 'voluntarism' in politics; 
and that Bogdanov, by assigning no credence to absolute truth, was in a 
position to dream up whatever mad-cap policies he liked.58 Bogdanov 
had never disowned the connection between his philosophical and 
political opinions. He felt that the same was not true of Lenin. For 
Bogdanov, Materialism and Empiriocriticism was a piece of oppor-
tunistic posturing designed to win immediate factional advantage.59 
In fact, both of the rival works were reflections of differing political 
attitudes. Materialism and Empiriocriticism, so far from being a 
monument of dissembling (or, as some would have it, an aberration), 
was an autobiographical fragment. It eulogised, by implication, the 
individual human mind's ability to understand the world. It was, 
indirectly, a paean to the intellectual. The veracity of an idea, asserted 
Lenin, was not increased in proportion to the rise in the number of 
persons believing it. Materialism was a philosophical counterpart to 
the politics of What Is To Be Done? Through the doctrines of Marx and 
Engels, according to Lenin, the party could explain reality to the 
masses and win them over to the revolutionary cause.60 None of this 
was stated explicitly in Materialism; and indeed he refrained from 
comment on many sections of Empiriomonism regarded by Bogdanov 
as being crucial to his world-view. Bogdanov did not confine himself to 
analysing ideologies of the past and the present. He' called for the 
 Doubts and Certainties 
183 
creation of a 'proletarian ideology' .61 Believing that the middle class 
held workers in thrall as much by the dissemination of capitalist 
ideology as by direct political and economic pressure, he wanted the 
party to establish working-class schools and organisations directed at 
the extirpation of the influence of 'bourgeois culture'. The socialist 
movement should begin by cleansing its own house. Revolutionary 
leaders were too wedded to 'bourgeois' modes of thought; they should 
cease to presume that the intelligentsia could anticipate all the answers 
to the problems of the introduction of socialism. The party's internal 
behaviour before the revolution should prefigure the collectivist, 
democratic forms of organisation to be encouraged when society as a 
whole was launched into the transition from capitalism.62 It was up to 
the workers themselves to start to develop a 'proletarian' ideology, 
using Marxism as a broad guide, to carry the revolutionary process 
onward.6a 
Lenin saw Bogdanov's case as an unwarranted attack upon the 
intelligentsia (even though he himself had had harsh words about it in 
the past); he also had a higher regard for the scientific and cultural 
achievements of capitalism than Bogdanov.64 Yet Lenin refused to be 
drawn further, limiting himself to the implicit argumentation of 
Materialism. His refusal is tantalising. He talked to no one about it. We 
can only hazard guesses as to the reasons; but one possibility must 
surely come into the reckoning: an attack upon Bogdanov's cultural 
programme would only have invited accusations of hostility to the 
notion of independently-minded workers; he would also be branded as 
a devotee of authoritarianism. Such charges would have been simplis-
tic (though not without a large area of foundation). But mud sticks. 
Probably Lenin wished to avoid the pillorying he had received when he 
published What Is To Be Done?65 
THE BOLSHEVIK CENTRE 
Lenin's forays against groups inside the party did not signify that he yet 
aimed to abandon all co-operation with those social-democrats who 
were not his closest supporters. In fact his self-distancing from 
Bogdanov was complemented by moves towards a rapprochement 
with Plekhanov. Here Lenin was pushing his luck. Materialism 
contained several acidic statements about Plekhanov's works, and 
Plekhanov's friends unsurprisingly replied to Lenin in kind in their 
reviews.66 In addition Materialism, though sincere, was not an exhaus-
 184 
Lenin: A Political Life 
tive exposition of its author's attitudes to cognition. Exact knowledge 
and predictability were its reiterated theme. But in other writings, both 
before and after 1909, Lenin had emphasised the need for 
revolutionaries to take gambles. Already he had often strained to 
foreshorten the schedule of political change more than was warranted 
by the 'objective' socio-economic environment; and there were 
aspects of his policies in 1905 had risked horrendously adverse 
consequences should they have been tried in action. Lenin had his 
contradictions. This reverse side of his epistemological outlook 
implied that 'practice' was the test of 'theory'. It carried him close to 
Bogdanovist positions. 
But he referred to his own 'experimentalism' only in later wntmgs; It 
may even be the case that he only became conscious of its existence 
when he resumed his philosophical studies in the First World War. 
Plekhanov was anyway not unresponsive to his overtures in 1909. The 
two leaders shared a growing concern about trends in the Bolshevik 
and Menshevik factions. Both men rejected Ultimatumism. They noted 
that many followers of Bogdanov wanted to boycott not only the 
Duma but also legally-permitted mass organisations such as the trade 
unions.67 Lenin and Plekhanov had no intention of abandoning illegal 
party activity. The clandestine party apparatus was to be preserved. 
But they thought it naive to neglect opportunities of influencing the 
working class through whatever legal channels might be available. On 
the other hand, both were opposed to the trend of so-called Liquida-
tionism in the Menshevik faction. Many Mensheviks, led by Potresov, 
argued that the underground party committees had atrophied in 
1907-8 to an extent that made it inappropriate to make them the focal 
point of social-democratic energies. Work should be concentrated in 
the trade unions. Potresov did not specifically urge the liquidation of 
clandestine party activity. He simply said that such activity was already 
moribund and should not be revivified.68 The niceties of this policy did 
not interest Lenin and Plekhanov. They called Potresov a Liquidator. 
To let the illegal party expire for want of care, in their opinion, was 
tantamount to killing it. Plekhanov urged Mensheviks to ostracise the 
Liquidators. Martov and Dan, while disagreeing with Potresov's 
indifference to the underground party, ignored Plekhanov's summons. 
Plekhanov thereupon abandoned the Menshevik faction. 69 His action 
meant that there were now three organised trends in Menshevism: 
Martov's Mensheviks, the Liquidators and Plekhanov's Party Men-
sheviks. 
Neither Lenin nor Plekhanov ceased to object to each other's 
 Doubts and Certainties 
185 
programmatic intentions in other areas. Theirs would be a conditional 
alliance.7o They vied even about the matter which had brought them 
together in the first place: legal activity. Until 1907 it had been party 
policy to spread revolutionary ideas in the unions without insisting that 
the unions give formal allegiance to the party. Plekhanov continued to 
hold this view, as did Mensheviks of all types.71 
Lenin, however, shifted his ground. Now he called on the party to 
seek to get trade unions to affiliate themselves to it.72 He reportedly 
even toyed with the suggestion to accord voting rights to affiliated 
unions at Party Congresses on a parity with the normal underground 
committees;73 But he had second thoughts, perhaps recoiling from a 
plan which would infringe the principle of the party's hegemony of the 
labour movement (or perhaps simply because he foresaw insuperable 
opposition from his own section of the Bolshevik faction). In any case 
the episode revealed how strongly committed he remained to con-
solidating the party's influence in the trade unions. This necessitated a 
settling of organisational accounts with Bogdanov. Lenin's objective 
was clear. He aimed to win the Bolshevik Centre to his side and force 
Bogdanov's exodus. His tactics were attributable to his political 
forcefulness. And they were facilitated to some extent by the financial 
independence he at last in 1908 enjoyed from Bogdanov and Krasin. A 
wealthy young man called N. P. Shmidt had died in 1907. He had left 
hundreds of thousands of roubles for disbursal to organisations 
supporting the cause of revolution in Russia; his two sisters were to 
supervise the distribution. The Bolsheviks V. K. Taratuta and A. M. 
Andrikanis paid court to the women in a successful attempt to get 
control of the monies. Taratuta handed over his fortune, or a goodly 
portion of it, to Lenin.74 
Animosity between Lenin and Bogdanov increased. On 8 February 
1909 Lenin broke off personal relations, ending a friendship begun in 
1904.75 The battle was on for the Bolshevik Centre. The scene was set 
for a final confrontation at a meeting of the editorial board of the 
Bolshevik newspaper Proletari; all members of the Bolshevik Centre 
were to be invited.76 
The board meeting, lasting from 8 to 17 June, was basically a 
conference of the Bolshevik faction. Lenin proposed a resolution 
condemning Recallism and Ultimatumism. He grumbled that the 
Mensheviks were amused that members of his faction were accusing 
him of being a Menshevik; and that Bogdanov had refrained from 
defending him against the charge. The conclusion was obvious: 
differences of principle separated the two tendencies in Bolshevism. 
 186 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin declared: 'There is nothing worse than an absence of open 
struggle'.77 Recallism and Ultimatum ism were denounced as being 
un-Bolshevik; it was urged that a 'decisive fight' be begun with all such 
'deviations from the path of revolutionary Marxism'.78 The meeting 
denounced Lunacharski's 'god-building'. It also criticised Bogdanov 
for planning to set up a school for party workers on the island of Capri. 
Bogdanov protested that his views were being misrepresented. He 
claimed in particular that he was not hostile to the party's participating 
in legal mass organisations. M. P. Tomski, who had just left Russia, 
rounded on him. Bogdanov's claim did not alter the fact that few 
Recallists or UItimatumists were entering trade unions. Still moving 
with Lenin, the meeting approved Dubrovinski's motion seeking an 
alliance with Plekhanov's Party Mensheviks.79 The meeting's next step 
was to confirm the anti-Recallist policy organisationally. Bogdanov 
was to be driven out of the Bolshevik faction. Lenin had been charging 
him with aiming at a total 'split'; but, on Tomski's suggestion, the 
meeting reformulated the indictment: Bogdanov was said not to have 
divided the faction but to have broken away from it. Lenin approved.80 
He liked the implication that Bogdanov's real influence over party 
committees in Russia had never been great enough to threaten a split. 
With the departure of Bogdanov on 12 June, Lenin had won his 
victory. The Bolshevik Centre could now quickly complete the 
remaining business. This was in fact a trying time for Lenin. In the 
moment of his triumph he was to witness the Bolshevik Centre taking 
decisions which made his organisational position weaker in many ways 
than it had been before the meeting. Trouble began with I. P. 
Goldenberg's report. Goldenberg supported the request of the Duma 
deputies to found their own newspaper in St. Petersburg. Lenin was far 
from keen. He hinted that such a newspaper would not necessarily 
pursue a consistently Bolshevik line.8 But Goldenberg's proposal was 
carried.82 The meeting then discussed the work of the Central 
Committee. Arrests in 1908 had again undermined activity. It was 
agreed that the situation would be improved if the emigre press were 
re-organised. Proletari was criticised. Delegates from Russia felt that 
Lenin's editorial policy had given too much space to theoretical 
disquisitions; they urged the creation of a popular workers' daily. A. I. 
Rykov proposed Proletari's closure but in the end Goldenberg's 
compromise was accepted: Proletari was to be turned from a weekly 
into a monthly.83 This was bad enough for Lenin. But worse ensued 
when it was decided to undertake negotiations with Trotski, who 
already ran a popular social-democratic newspaper called Pravda (or 
 Doubts and Certainties 
187 
Truth) in Vienna. The plan was to persuade Trotski to make Pravda a 
joint venture with the Bolsheviks.84 Lenin's reservations were ignored. 
Most delegates, while approving Bogdanov's expulsion from the 
faction in order to exploit more fully the legal political opportunities in 
Russia, were reluctant to regard the Plekhanovite Party Mensheviks as 
their only allies.85 A more general worry was also voiced. The meeting 
concurred that emigre factitiousness had got out of hand. A cure was 
proposed. Bolshevik Centre members operating in Russia were to be 
permitted to take decisions without constant reference to members 
abroad; the 'Russian' party was to be freed from 'foreign' entangle-
ments.86 
Not only was this an implicit indication to Lenin that certain of his 
basic tactical recommendations were unacceptable. It was also a 
practical limitation on his activity in the immediate future; he had 
disengaged himself from Bogdanov only to find himself even more 
closely controlled by his colleagues than before. 
LENIN'S DEFEAT 
Initially he accepted the position phlegmatically. But a great lassitude 
came over him (as it had in his previous time of trial in 1904). Wanting 
fresh air, he retreated to a rented villa in the countryside outside 
Paris.87 Thoughts about his position gnawed at him. It annoyed him to 
consider what Rykov and Goldenberg might be getting up to in Russia. 
Matters were no better in France. The Bolshevik leadership chose A. I. 
Lyubimov to act as the Centre's secretary. Lyubimov had taken a 
constant stand against Lenin's divisive tactics.88 He was a leading 
Bolshevik Conciliator. Lenin could have been forgiven for feeling 
nostalgic about his earlier years in Switzerland. Before 1905 he had 
not won every political battle inside the Bolshevik fold; but at least he 
had been in operational control of the faction's emigre team. In 
mid-1909 the sensation of organisational impotence bore heavily upon 
him. He complained about his 'nerves' .89 He was not eating very well, 
and it was noticed how thin and pale he had become.9o Not until 
mid-August did he feel recovered; and around the middle of Sep-
tember he returned to Paris.91 He had formulated tactics. He aimed at 
the overturning of all the resolutions made in June 1909 which had 
displeased him. He had attempted, as early as August, to keep 
Lyubimov from negotiating too gently with Trotski. Apparently the 
Bolshevik Centre was finding it difficult to secure parity of editorial 
 188 
Lenin: A Political Life 
authority over the Viennese Pravda; Lenin urged Lyubimov to stand 
firm.92 It was Lenin's hope that Trotski would be discouraged from 
further co-operation with the Bolsheviks. To Zinoviev, he was candid. 
Trotski was to be seen as 'the basest careerist'.93 
Lyubimov took no notice. Nor did Rykov and Goldenberg in Russia. 
A Duma by-election in St. Petersburg led to the setting up of an 
electoral commission of social-democrats. Rykov joined it. The other 
members included a Menshevik and a Liquidator.94 
Lenin then exercised the little power left to him in Paris. Krupskaya 
belonged to the Bolsheviks' Financial Commission, which was respon-
sible for sending funds to Russia.95 Rykov, in Lenin's view, was in 
breach of the anti-Liquidator decisions of June 1909. The Financial 
Commission was therefore persuaded to cut off monetary support to 
him.96 But this was but one small victory, achieved at the price of 
alienating Rykov still further. It occurred, moreover, at a moment 
when Lenin's own financial management was coming under scrutiny. 
The Mensheviks raised a hue and cry about Lenin's insistence that 
Bolsheviks should retain the Shmidt inheritance for their own 
exclusive use even though the deceased man had not specified a single 
faction as the sole beneficiary.97 Opinion was hardening against Lenin 
among his Bolshevik colleagues. Why, they wondered, was he 
persistently calling for a 'war' upon Martov's Mensheviks when 
nobody doubted that Bolshevik influence in the unified central party 
apparatus was strong? Was this not evidence of obsessive intransig-
ence? Goldenberg believed so, and went ahead with overtures to 
Martov in late 1909.98 Even Zinoviev's loyalty was eroded. In the 
autumn, Lenin submitted an article to the party's central newspaper 
Social-Democrat calling for a renewed assault upon Recallists and 
Liquidators.99 The editorial board discussed this at a two-day meeting 
starting on 21 October. Zinoviev pointedly abstained from voting, and 
Lenin's article was turned down for publication. 10o Lenin was furious. 
He instantly resigned his editorial post with Social-Democrat. 101 
It is difficult not to sympathise with those of his colleagues who were 
losing patience with him. Nobody has been able to show that Recallism 
had more than very slight support in Russia in late 1909; and the 
Ultimatumists had in any case never stood very distant from Lenin's 
own attitude to Duma deputies: he had always urged that the 
social-democratic fraction comply with Central Committee policies. 102 
Outright Liquidationism too was a declining force. Few activists any 
longer expressed disinterest in the illegal party apparatus. A meeting 
was held, in the autumn, of leaders involved in the legal labour 
 Doubts and Certainties 
189 
organisations of St. Petersburg; it was attended by the prominent trade 
unionist R. V. Malinovski. The necessity of keeping clandestine party 
cells was endorsed overwhelmingly.l03 Apparently such views were 
held widely across the Russian empire.l04 
The Bolshevik Centre set itself the task of pulling the entire 
social-democratic movement together under its leadership. Lenin had 
sustained an organisational set-back. He also had another of his 
bicycling accidents, injuring himself sufficiently badly to impel him to 
start legal proceedings against the driver of the car that hit him. lOS But 
his colleagues were not unduly brutal to him. Kamenev, Lyubimov and 
Zinoviev persuaded him to retract his resignation from Socia/-
Democrat; and he acceded, probably relieved that nobody had called 
his bluff, on 23 October 1909.106 Lyubimov pressed on. Unlike Lenin, 
he wished to see representatives of all Bolsheviks and all Mensheviks 
working together in the Central Committee; his other priority was to 
re-establish the Central Committee's organisational presence in 
Russia. Bolshevik leaders in Russia supported him.l07 A meeting of the 
Bolshevik Centre was held in Paris on 1 November. The decision was 
taken to convoke a plenum of the Central Committee to be attended 
by all the party's factions. Lenin appended his signature to the 
decision. lOB It can scarcely have been a joyful occasion for him. 
Throughout 1909 he had behaved as if only his group inside 
Bolshevism and Plekhanov's inside Menshevism were legitimate 
constituent elements of the party. Now his own group opposed such 
behaviour and wanted to re-combine with Martov, albeit in the hope 
that this would not lead to a significant diminution of Bolshevik 
authority in the Central Committee. Bogdanov would be in attendance 
as a candidate member; and Trotski too would be invited along (in his 
capacity as editor of Pravda) .109 
The plenum lasted from 2 to 23 January 1910. Lenin's tactics were 
akin to those of a general who, receiving reconnaissance information 
that conditions are unfavourable for an offensive, nevertheless goes 
through with it on the grounds that inactivity is bad for the morale of 
the troops. There was, however, a crucial difference. Lenin had few 
troops. 
He went to the sessions with a motion entitled 'The Situation in the 
Party'. It apparently repeated the summons to a struggle against the 
Recallists and the Liquidators.llo The Central Committee agreed that 
Recallism and Liquidationism were harmful. Yet Lenin's militance 
was rejected. The plenum accepted an amendment from Trotski to the 
effect that the two 'deviations' should be dealt with by means of a 
 190 
Lenin: A Political Life 
'widening and deepening of social-democratic work' .111 Comradely 
persuasion, not administrative sanction, was to be the method used. 
The plenum recognised that verbal formulations alone would not alter 
the real state of affairs. Concrete measures were needed. It was even 
decided that the various factional centres should be abolished. The 
Bolshevik Centre was to dissolve itself. Factional newspapers such as 
Proletari were to cease publication.ll2 Past disputes in the party had 
been exacerbated by the behaviour of the emigres. Accordingly the 
seven-person Russian Board of the Central Committee was given the 
right to act autonomously in the Central Committee's name.113 The 
Mensheviks were determined to spare Lenin no humiliation. His 
treatment of the Shmidt monies was discussed. And, to his mortifica-
tion, he was obliged to agree to hand them over. Some were to pass 
immediately to the Central Committee; the rest were to be held in 
trusteeship by the German Social-Democratic Party leaders Karl 
Kautsky, Franz Mehring and Klara Zetkin.114 His own Bolsheviks 
were no less keen on the changes than were Martov, Trotski and 
Bogdanov; the turnabout that had occurred in the Bolshevik Centre in 
June 1909 was being repeated just a few months later in the Central 
Committee. 
REPUTATION AND STATURE 
As we leave Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov-Lenin in his fortieth year, after the 
January 1910 Central Committee plenum, we note that his impact on 
the party had never been smaller, his prestige never lower. His 
isolation was greater even than in the first half of 1904. 
And yet we must not dismiss him so casually. If he had died in 1910, 
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party would have remembered 
him as something more than just a troublemaker. He remained a 
leader of stature. He occupied a place in the uppermost storey of the 
party. Others did the same. It was tacitly understood that figures like 
Plekhanov, Martov, Maslov, Bogdanov, Trotski and Lenin had earned 
themselves a position above the rest of the leadership. There was an 
immeasurable but real 'weight' about them. They did not bar acess to 
newcomers. With its high regard for the articulation of theory and 
strategy, the emigre fraternity accepted several younger men with 
fresh ideas such as Nikolai Bukharin and Yuri Pyatakov.ll5 But there 
was little replacement of personnel at the top; the older leaders 
remained. They knew each other well, having been together in a 
 Doubts and Certainties 
191 
variety of testing conditions: in clandestine activity in Russia, in the 
community of emigration, and in the semi-open politics of Russia in 
1905-6.116 Each had proved his mettle in the general estimation of his 
peers. Of course, all of them were building careers before a very 
restricted world of observers; no more than a few thousand persons in 
the Russian empire can have heard of their names and read their 
works. Inside that world, however, their fame was boundless. They 
were indeed the party's luminaries. 
To be sure, disagreements had dogged their relationships. They 
were not a happy family. Yet they had valued the ties of kinship. 
Polemicism, even for them, had its limits. And it was largely because 
Lenin in 1909 continued to propose the dissolution of the family that 
his fellow leaders queried whether he deserved their esteem any 
longer. 
The decline in Lenin's reputation by no means plumbed the lowest 
possible depths. His emigre colleagues continued to acknowledge his 
gifts as a theorist. Even Bogdanov, who treated his philosophising as 
ignorant cant, saw him as an economist of importance.ll7 Bolshevik 
Conciliators, moreover, did not disown his writings on political theory. 
Menshevik leaders were loather to pay him compliments; but they 
rarely were as contemptuous of his economic expertise as Martynov 
had been at the Fifth CongressYs Undeniably, no Menshevik spared 
criticism of Lenin's political ideas. His strategical statements were 
regarded by Martov's group as dangerous nonsense. Charges of 
'populism' and 'lacobinism' had been made in 1905. Lenin, it had been 
said, was quintessentially a 'voluntarist' who would not recognise 
environmental constraints.ll9 By contrast, left-wing Bolsheviks in 
1908-9 accused him of the diametrical opposite: historical fatalism. 120 
His entire oeuvre was controversial. But the many critics, in all their 
variety, conceded that a residue of substance existed in his theoretical 
output. By 1910, his career's wheel had therefore turned full circle. 
Until the late 1890s he had impressed primarily as a writer, not as an 
organiser. He had developed his practical skills gradually. He had 
shown ruthless flair in founding Iskra and co-ordinating communica-
tion with groups in Russia. 121 But his organisational divisiveness 
alienated an ever-increasing number of emigre social-democrats. 
Moreover, there was no longer a shortage of leaders who could cope 
with administrative duties. He was not indispensable. His own nearest 
colleagues implied that his activity led to greater disorganisation than 
organisation. Ex-collaborators like Martov and Bogdanov denounced 
his authoritarian style; Gorki came to regard him as a misanthrope.122 
 192 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Thus what was left of Lenin's positive reputation abroad had come to 
rest upon his ideas and his writings. 
His standing in the party in Russia itself is less easy to assess. He had 
his admirers. V. S. Dovgalevski offered the following description to 
provincial colleagues: 'This is a magnificent propagandist and agitator, 
a brilliant diplomat and politician, wholly intelligible to the broad 
masses, valuable alike in the professorial chair and at the workers' 
gathering, combining in himself everything necessary for a party 
chief.'123 
Such glowing approval was far from universal, even among Bol-
sheviks. For years there had been hostility to emigre disputatiousness. 
It was difficult for underground activists to follow the details of the 
wranglings in Western Europe; but they were acquainted well enough 
with the basic situation. And, when police files were seized in 1917, the 
record of arrests of social-democratic groups indicated that Lenin's 
major works were widely known.124 This was tribute to his status as a 
theorist. But it also meant that activists across Russia were aware of his 
disruptive role. F. I. Goloshchekin, a Bolshevik who opposed Bog-
danov's attitude to the Duma, wrote from St. Petersburg in late 1909 
imploring the emigres to terminate disputes about Recallism (which, 
he suggested, was withering on the vine in Russia without need of 
artificial poison).125 Negative evidence reinforces the point. It is 
altogether remarkable how little material has been produced to 
demonstrate that elements in the Russian party continued to hold him 
comprehensively in esteem as a practical leader. His reputation for 
crankiness grew. Even Stalin, who was operating in the oil-town of 
Baku and who was not unknown for a penchant for vehement 
polemics, thought that Lenin had overdone his assault on Bogdanov. 
Materialism and Empiriocriticism, he stated, was 'a storm in a glass of 
water' .126 
This fall-off in the appreciation of his qualities irritated Lenin, but 
did not crush him. There remained much to be pleased about. True, he 
was accused of dishonourable conduct; he was also notorious for 
perceiving great issues of principle where others saw only practical 
minutiae. Yet few indicted him on grounds of complete insincerity.127 
Consequently, however underhand and ruthless he was in action, he 
was still widely treated as a serious man with serious ideas. The fact 
that he obviously relished the possession of authority did not detract 
from this. His enormous potentiality as a party chief was commonly 
recognised. Even in 1908-10, when his behaviour had never been 
 Doubts and Certainties 
193 
more intemperate, he could often charm his adversaries.128 The 
contents of his statements and policies were frequently provocative. 
But he usually refrained from angry public outbursts; Vladimir 
Medem, a member of the Bund and no friend of the Bolsheviks, was 
amazed by Lenin's capacity to remain impassive when being haran-
gued or insulted.129 Lenin's passion was poured into his politics. He 
was chary of any activity that might deflect his commitment even 
marginally; he gave up both playing chess and listening to Beethoven 
on these grounds. He explained that the beauty of the Appassionata 
disturbed him so much as to make him forget that in order to create a 
better political order it was necessary to 'bang people over the head' .130 
He was, then, not devoid of candour. Little wonder that not only 
admirers but also critics sensed that he was every inch a Leader. A 
short sentence from a private letter of Anatoli Lunacharski to his wife 
gives a neat illustration. Relations between him and Lenin had 
worsened after 1905. Yet Lunacharski could write, in self-
congratulation, about a conversation with Lenin: 'He is terribly 
satisfied with me.'131 These are the words of someone who feels 
another's dominance to be in the natural order of things. 
And so the vista of opportunities perceived by Vladimir I1ich 
Ulyanov-Lenin in early 1910 was not uniformly sombre. At the nadir 
of his fortunes, this irrepressible optimist intended to re-scale the 
heights. He aimed to climb higher than before. He would not give up 
the struggle for his policies, even should the entire party condemn him. 
There was to be no relenting. He felt that his colleagues' indulgence to 
other social-democratic factions constituted peril for the entire 
revolutionary movement; and the keenness of this feeling imparted 
urgency to his campaign. He had to win back his Bolsheviks. Without 
them, nothing was achievable. He needed a firm organisational base. 
The current condition of his reputation and influence did not worry 
him unduly. It was not an accurate gauge of his significance. Works like 
What Is To Be Done? and Two Tactics of Russian Social-Democracy 
had made a durable imprint upon Bolshevism. He had never, not even 
in late 1903, held a monopoly of power in the Bolshevik faction,132 and 
several of his strategic aims had persistently been rejected by his 
co-factionalists.133 It is true, too, that several portions of his writing 
merely summarised general opinion amongst Bolsheviks and were 
bereft of originality. Yet he also at times showed both practical 
brilliance and intellectual profundity. His thought and his methods had 
left a mark. In 1910 he was still only forty. He was full of zeal and 
 194 
Lenin: A Political Life 
resolve. Time alone would show whether he could re-take his faction, 
transform it into a powerful party, and prepare that party to win the 
favour of Russia's working class and peasantry. 
