 7 Sturm und Drang 
BLOODY SUNDAY 
Yet it was not only expatriate social-democrats like Lenin who were 
caught unprepared by the political storms of 1905. All parties in 
Russia and in the emigration were astounded. Nor did the government 
itself, despite its hundreds of police informants, show any greater 
prescience. The events in Paris in 1968 prove that unanticipated 
general conturbations may shake even countries enjoying universal 
adult suffrage. But the problem of unpredictability is greater in 
undemocratic states. The suppression of civil liberties makes popular 
opinion difficult to gauge; and the absence of other outlets of political 
activity renders it likely that opposition, when it eventually reaches the 
streets, will take the most violent forms. 
So it was in Russia on 9 January 1905. Georgi Gapon had arranged 
for an unarmed procession of workers to make its way to the Winter 
Palace in St. Petersburg. The marchers carried a petition calling for the 
transfer of agricultural land to the people, for the instant cancellation 
of redemption payments and for the legalisation of independent trade 
unions. They wanted the emperor to grant popular representation in 
government. Nikolai II disdained to receive the petition. Despite fears 
about a forcible dispersal of the march, Gapon refused to alter his 
plans. l The Putilov strike had not been settled and, by early January, 
the work-force of other factories also were engaging in industrial 
conflict. 125 000 employees were striking. The demonstration itself 
attracted a crowd of 200 000 men and women. Cossack troops were 
ordered to charge into them. Still Gapon urged his followers onward. 
Disorder ensued. Upon arrival at the Winter Palace, the demon-
strators were fired upon. Hundreds of unarmed civilians, gathered 
under the banners of Tsar and Church, fell killed or grievously 
wounded. 2 Thus ended Bloody Sunday. The brutality of the authorities 
was notorious in the Russian empire; and yet until 9 January 1905 the 
population had generally absolved the monarchy of direct responsi-
bility. The killings dispelled illusion. Emperor Nikolai II had rejected 
his people's loyal petition.3 
122 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
123 
Military violence neither broke the Putilov strike nor restored calm 
to the capital. Nikolai II met a delegation of St. Petersburg workers; 
and on 29 January he appointed a commission under N. V. Shidlovski 
to determine the causes of unrest.4 A concession was made to workers. 
They were permitted to elect representatives to contribute to the 
commission's investigation. Social-democrats competed in the elec-
tions with reluctance: they felt that the commission would steer the 
workers away from making political demands. Nonetheless compete 
they did. And, though securing only a fifth of the votes, they were 
beginning to make up the lost ground of 1904.5 Throughout the empire 
there were strikes in sympathy with the victims of Bloody Sunday. 
Moscow and other cities in central Russia witnessed demonstrations; 
and clashes between urban crowds and the authorities took place in 
Poland and Latvia.s The growing turbulence stiffened the resolve of 
the Petersburg workers to elicit wage rises and the freedom to organise 
unions. More strikes broke out. This intransigence made Shidlovski's 
strictly-circumscribed job impossible; the commission was aborted. 
On 18 February, the emperor instructed his new Minister of Internal 
Affairs, A. D. Bulygin, to announce the intention of calling 'worthy 
representatives of the people to participate in the preliminary con-
sideration and elaboration of proposed laws'. Simultaneously the 
emperor asked for support for the autocracy.7 
Events in Russia had their own momentum; the situation changed so 
fast that no emigre leader, not even an epistolary zealot such as Lenin, 
could provide detailed advice to committees at home. The strikes 
tailed off in March. But the Russian army had suffered another defeat 
in late February at Mukden; and it was the navy's turn three months 
later: the Baltic fleet was annihilated in the Tsushima Straits. As 
before, military reverses increased the government's unpopularity. 
In May 1905, 200 000 industrial workers were involved in strikes. 
Labour unrest was severe in Ivanovo-Voznesensk. 70 000 textile 
workers downed tools on 12 May and formed their own Assembly of 
Plenipotentiaries. Their expressed grievances were mainly economic. 
They wanted an eight-hour working day and a guaranteed minimum 
wage. The Assembly demanded the right to negotiate on behalf of all 
workers in Ivanovo's factories; it called upon the authorities to legalise 
strikes. But the Assembly was not only a strike committee. It assumed 
responsibility for keeping civil order on the streets. Thus it marked a 
stage on the road towards the elective, administrative bodies created 
by St. Petersburg workers in autumn 1905 and given the name of 
'soviets' (or 'councils').8 Social-democrats, mostly Bolsheviks, led the 
 124 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Ivanovo Assembly. Elsewhere they were often unenthusiastic about 
leading strikes, on the grounds that workers should be dissuaded from 
'economistic' ambitions. But industrial conflict was pulling an increas-
ing number of social-democrats, both Mensheviks and Bolsheviks, into 
the fray despite such inhibitions. The summer of 1905 witnessed 
further strikes and demonstrations in Tver, Lodz and Nizhni Nov-
gorod. Cossacks re-imposed control; the employers made only slight 
concessions. Yet the government was deeply worried by the persistent 
challenges to the status quo.9 
Lenin had for years been preaching a fire sermon against tsarism; 
and his cursing of the government had been equalled in ferocity only by 
his blackguarding of those revolutionaries who seemed to him to lack 
the fullness of his own resolve to pull down the entire autocratic order. 
It surprised no one in the first half of 1905 that his pronouncements in 
these months were shot through with Sturm und Drang. 
The rebellious mood of the industrial worker was shared by the 
peasant. Seventeen rural disturbances were reported in January 1905; 
the number rose to 492 by June.lO Illegal felling of timber and illegal 
use of pastures occurred widely. Rent strikes were frequent; and 
peasants working as wage labourers on the latifundia struck for better 
pay and conditions. The socialist-revolutionaries struggled to consoli-
date their network of party groups in the rural areas; but, as in the 
towns, the population required little goading from political parties 
before taking action in each locality. Liberals and socialist-
revolutionaries vied to put the peasant movement on a national basis. 
The result was the founding Congress of the All-Russian Peasant 
Union, held in July and attended by elected delegates from most 
provinces in European Russia. The Congress called for the transfer of 
all agricultural land to the peasantry.l1 The liberals were also active in 
the formation of unions inside the middle-class professions; and in 
May 1905 they combined them in a Union Of Unions.12 Whatever 
proposals came out of Bulygin's constitutional enquiries, the liberals 
intended to exert continued pressure upon the government. Even in 
the armed forces, discontent grew; ministers distrusted the loyalty of 
Russian soldiers in the Far East. Trouble erupted in the Black Sea 
Fleet. The crew of the battleship Prince Potemkin went to the full 
length of a mutiny.13 
The autocracy was in crisis. Those sections of the population which 
called for the overthrow of the monarchy still constituted a minority; 
yet the emperor perceived that this phenomenon might not be 
long-lasting. Revolution seemed imminent. 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
125 
LENIN IS THWARTED 
The salient facts of Russia's tumult were quickly transmitted to 
revolutionaries in Switzerland. Lunacharski learnt of the Winter 
Palace massacre on 10 January. He and his wife hurried off to inform 
Lenin and Krupskaya. All then hastened to the centre of social-
democratic life in the city, Lepeshinski's eating-house.14 
The tables were crowded, the mood exultant. To many in that 
restaurant it appeared that the party's bickerings were a bizarre 
episode now best forgotten. But not to Lenin. From the last fortnight 
of 1904 he had been calling for a complete organisational split between 
supporters and opponents of the Bureau Of The Committees Of the 
Majority; and, to widespread consternation, Bloody Sunday induced 
no change in his position. Krupskaya, writing on his behalf to 
Bogdanov on 17 December, had mentioned 'the total split' as if it were 
a fait accompli. 15 This reflected Lenin's wishes, not organisational 
actuality. His Vpered first-issue editorial on 22 December demanded a 
severance of 'all relations' with the Mensheviks; and, in case his 
message might not have been clear enough, six days later he dispatched 
a staccatoed summons to Bogdanov: 'Now a complete split, for we 
have exhausted all means. A Third Congress against the will of the 
Central Committee and the Council and without them. A complete 
break with the Central Committee. A direct declaration that we have 
our own Bureau. The complete removal of Mensheviks and supporters 
of the new Iskra from all places.'16 The Central Committee and Iskra, 
he announced to Bolshevik comrades in Zurich on 5 January 1905, 
had forfeited their claim to legitimate authority; by their own actions 
they had 'placed themselves outside the party'. The recurrent images 
had a medical quality. 'We also felt ourselves far better,' he affirmed, 
'when we broke with the Minority.'17 
The recipients of his correspondence found no detailed explanation 
of his switching of tactics; he apparently assumed that Iskra's recent 
articles left the Bolsheviks no choice. It was a reckless assumption. 
Even before December 1904, when he first demanded scission, he 
had encountered resistance inside the Bureau Of Committees Of The 
Majority to his tactical proposals. He had pushed for the breaking of 
the regulations governing the calling of a Party Congress. He simply 
wanted a Congress called, and did not care how it was done.1s 
Zemlyachka opposed him. She had always contended that such an 
infringement would bring the Bolsheviks into unnecessarily bad 
odour; and the Bureau agreed with her. The Bureau would not 
 126 
Lenin: A Political Life 
convoke the Congress until the Central Committee had definitely 
refused to do so. Lenin pooh-poohed such feelings as formalism. 
Zemlyachka accused Lenin of having lost touch with Bolshevik 
opinion in Russia.19 Lenin was enraged. His mood was not improved in 
November 1904 when he heard rumours that the Central Committee 
might indeed agree to a Congress. The thought of Noskov was quite 
odious to him. Convinced that he had been improperly treated in 
summer 1904, Lenin had broken off personal relations with Noskov.20 
It would be difficult for Lenin to dominate the central party apparatus if 
Noskov returned to the scene. Noskov's Bolshevik Conciliators would 
insist that Mensheviks be allowed to be elected as Congress delegates.In 
late 1904 the Mensheviks were increasing their strength in many 
committees in Russ!a.21 To Lenin's way of thinking, Menshevism was a 
cancer in the body pf the party: it had to be cut out immediately. 
Lenin's one-mad proclamation of the parting of the ways was saluted 
by a number of Bolsheviks in Geneva and Zurich.22 It obtained paltry 
favour in Russia. Zemlyachka stuck to the tactic of presenting an 
ultimatum to the Central Committee; and Bogdanov pointed to the 
ever firmer evidence that the Central Committee would indeed 
convoke a Congress. Even Gusev, who until then had mirrored Lenin's 
ideas, thought it wise to make an agreement with the Central 
Committee about joint actions in St. Petersburg in December 1904.23 
The Winter Palace massacre reinforced this mood. The Bureau 
instructed Gusev to explain to Lenin that the policy of following the 
constitutional procedures for calling a Congress must stand. 24 Lenin 
replied on 29 January 1905. It horrified him that the Iskra group would 
be invited to the Party Congress. He now despised his own associates. 
Nine tenths of them, he raged, were 'pitiful formalists'; and he added: 
'I'd hand the lot of them over to Martov.'25 Second thoughts prevailed. 
He cut out the more offensive phrases before Krupskaya encoded the 
letter. Yet his essential position was unchanged: 'Either by truly iron 
discipline, we bind together all who want to wage war, and through this 
small but strong party we will smash the crumbling monster of the 
ill-assorted elements of the new Iskra; or else we will prove by our 
behaviour that we deserve to perish as contemptible formalists.'26 This 
was wartime, Lenin declared. Half-heartedness and pessimism were 
dangerous to the party's interest; Lenin urged that social-democrats 
spreading despondency should be 'shot on the spot'. 27 The war 
referred to by Lenin was not the military conflict in the Far East but 
rather the struggle among social-democrats; and the Bureau members 
repudiated his metaphors as counter-productive rhetoric. 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
127 
On 9 February, furthermore, the Central Committee finally met to 
discuss the proposal for a Third Party Congress. The police had been 
alerted. They burst indoors to arrest the seven members of the Central 
Committee who were present. Among them was Noskov. But two 
members evaded capture: L. B. Krasin and A. I. Lyubimov. These by 
now eagerly desired a Congress.28 Negotiations between the Bureau 
and themselves produced an agreement, on 12 March, to form a joint 
Organisational Committee. The request for a Congress was to be 
relayed to the Party Council. If the Party Council rejected it, the 
Organisational Committee was to proceed independently.29 Lenin 
would at last get his Congress. And yet he scarcely derived satisfaction 
from these events: he resented the Bureau's rejection of his tactics; 
and he can hardly have been pleased not to be asked to join the 
Organisational Committee. His editorials continued to be less than 
conciliatory to the Central Committee.30 
But he accepted the agreement; the alternative was political suicide. 
Not for the last time, his colleagues wrongly inferred that they had put 
an end to Lenin's disruptions. No good word was offered for his 
organisational divisiveness. And yet we cannot leave the matter at 
that. It must also be noted that he did not regard his machinations as an 
end in themselves. He genuinely believed, in so far as his inner 
calculations may be assessed, that Menshevik strategy as it was 
evolving in the winter of 1904--5 constituted a menace to the prospects 
of successful revolution; he was therefore equally intent upon breaking 
with any Bolsheviks like Noskov who refused to engage in uncondi-
tional struggle with the Menshevik leaders. The point to be made is not 
that Lenin was being fundamentally insincere. Rather it is that his 
judgement, affected as it was by the prickles and jabs of a year's 
polemics, had played him false. He failed to perceive the harm he 
might be doing to the chances of amicable co-operation among 
Bolsheviks of all shades; and this was all the more regrettable a failure 
since he himself recognised that revolution was impossible without a 
large corps of experienced, militant activists.31 He also made it harder 
for Mensheviks to come over to the Bolshevik side.32 Factional 
adherences were always fluid. Lenin's intemperate mode of behaviour 
harmed his own cause. His activity had made him a less effective 
pursuer of his faction's strategic goals than he could have been. Only 
much later in the year, towards autumn, would he show that he 
eventually made a similar assessment.33 
 128 
Lenin: A Political Life 
'TWO TACTICS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE 
DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION' 
Evidence for the authenticity of his belief in the imminence of 
revolutionary upheaval is found in his theoretical writings. He 
composed a series of articles for Vpered from February to May 1905, 
and by June he was ready to sum up his considerations in a treatise. 
Two months' further work led to the completion of Two Tactics of 
Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution. It was his most 
important book since What Is To Be Done? He had it quickly published 
and transported clandestinely to Russia; and the rapid approval of its 
strategical outline by virtually every Bolshevik demonstrates his 
continuing popularity as a theorist even at a time when his prestige as a 
practical leader was entering a partial eclipse.34 
In his Vpered editorials and in Two Tactics, he announced it as the 
party's supreme, urgent task to organise armed insurrection. Since 
1902 he had called for the preparation of measures to bring about the 
autocracy's demise. Bloody Sunday, he argued, marked the finish of 
the preparatory stage. The moment for revolt was approaching. He 
acknowledged that Martov, Plekhanov and Akselrod accepted the 
need for violence after Bloody Sunday; but he objected to the 
assumption, which surfaced from time to time in Iskra, that the 
revolution could simply be 'unleashed' .35 No, said Lenin: the uprising 
had to be planned and co-ordinated from above by the social-
democratic party central leadership. Revolutions required organisa-
tion. Naturally too, he maintained, success could not be achieved 
unless the insurrection had the support and participation of industrial 
workers. In addition, agitators should be sent into the army and the 
countryside. Soldiers and peasants should be dissuaded from allowing 
themselves to be used as counterrevolutionary forces; the party should 
aim to create a ubiquitous condition of insurgency. Tsardom should be 
confronted by 'the people in arms' .36 No matter what concessions 
might be introduced by Nikolai II's government, popular uprising 
should remain the objective. Social-democrats should co-operate with 
all political parties seeking a democratic revolution; but it had to be 
anticipated that the liberals, as untrustworthy as ever, would grasp at 
any chance to cobble together a settlement with the monarchy.37 
Nothing short of revolt would therefore suffice. 
As soon as published, Lenin's words attracted a familiar accusation: 
populism! His scenario appeared to Mensheviks as further indication 
of his fondness for a conspiratorial elite acting in the name of the 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
129 
people and yet not caring about the people's own aspirations.3s Lenin's 
reply was caustic. He enquired whether the Iskra editors thought that a 
revolution could happen by spontaneous self-generation.39 
The Vpered and Iskra standpoints on the organisation of insurrec-
tion came closer together in the rest of 1905.40 As this gap narrowed, 
another widened. Social-democrats, feeling that the regime's last days 
might be at hand, started to deliberate about their policies towards the 
post-autocratic government. Lev Trotski quickly formulated his 
proposal. We should lead the uprising, he said, and we ourselves 
should constitute the new central administration. The party should 
establish a 'workers' government' .41 The idea had been suggested to 
Trotski by Alexander Parvus. It was Parvus who composed the preface 
to Trotski's pamphlet on Bloody Sunday (which was published in 
February). Parvus contended that Russia's socio-political history 
diverged from the route already taken by 'Western' countries such as 
Britain and Germany. He regarded Russian industrialisation as 
primarily the product of the state's military exigencies; and, like the 
nineteenth-century narodniki, Parvus viewed Russian capitalism as 
almost completely a governmentally-directed development. This con-
sideration led Parvus and Trotski to a striking conclusion. The Russian 
bourgeoisie lacked not only the political will to destroy the autocracy 
but also the social and economic power necessary for the governance 
of Russian society once the popular insurrection had occurred. It 
would therefore fall to the Russian working class to carry out the 
democratic reforms vital to the reconstruction of state and society: 
workers would carry through the democratic revolution.42 
Parvus and Trotski touched a raw nerve. Did not their plans 
contradict the Russian Marxist prognostication that a socialist revolu-
tion could occur in any country only after a lengthy epoch of 
government by the bourgeoisie? Had not Engels warned against 
premature seizure of power? Was it not true that Russia's cultural and 
economic level of development was too primitive to permit the 
immediate transition to socialism? Parvus's answer was ready. He did 
not expect his 'workers' government' to rule forever. Its task would be 
to lay the fundaments of a democratic state structure in Russia; and it 
would eventually be pushed aside, through the ballot box, by the 
political parties of the bourgeoisie. Thus Parvus attempted to avoid the 
charge of populism.43 Trotski's ideas veered away from his friend's at 
this point. Instead he called for 'permanent revolution' .44 He scrapped 
the timetable which prescribed separate epochs for the democratic and 
socialist revolutions. Immediately he was accused of offering a 
 130 
Lenin: A Political Life 
disguised version of populism. His retort was twofold. Firstly, his 
government would not try to introduce socialism overnight. It would 
preside over a period of capitalist economic development. Secondly, 
he predicted that social-democrats would swiftly be ejected from 
power unless fraternal socialist revolutions occurred in the more 
mature industrial societies of Europe. His revolution would need 
political and economic support from abroad, or else it would perish.45 
The webs spun by Parvus and Trotski momentarily encoiled Lenin. 
Admittedly, he made occasional criticisms. Yet he mounted no 
sustained barrage; he fired many more salvoes in 1905 at Iskra than at 
Trotski.46 Sometimes he seemed to borrow Trotski's lexicon, using 
phrases such as 'uninterrupted revolution' .47 Lenin assured his follow-
ers: 'We shall not stop halfway.'48 But such comments occurred only 
fitfully in his Vpered output. He drafted two articles, entitled The 
Picture of the Provisional Revolutionary Government and Conditions, 
Direction and Prospects of Revolution, which offered his own version 
of Trotski's perspective.49 Both lay unpublished. Intellectual scruples 
conquered intuitive inclination. 
In fact, Marx himself in 1850 had used terminology remarkably like 
Trotski's; and he too had spoken against treating the bourgeois and 
socialist revolutions as distinct phases.5o Lenin exhibited no knowledge 
of this. Yet it is inconceivable that he could not have found some 
support in Marx's writings if he had really planned to draw still nearer 
to Trotski's position. Two Tactics remained his doctrinal summary in 
mid-1905. This fact alone shows how simplistic it is to represent him as 
a mere maximalistic opportunist. The Russian Marxist notion of the 
two-stage transition to socialism was not yet jettisoned. Lenin 
nonetheless argued that socialists should constitute the first temporary 
government after the absolute monarchy's removal. But he rebutted 
the call for a 'workers' government'. Russia's population was still 
overwhelmingly rural. Lenin maintained that, if the revolutionary 
potentiality of the peasants was to be realised, their political 
representatives had to obtain a share in power. Social-democrats might 
not necessarily gain a monopoly of authority. Allying with the Party Of 
Socialist-Revolutionaries, they should aim to form a 'provisional 
revolutionary government'. Such a coalition, even with social-
democrats in the minority, would reconstruct the Russian state. It 
would achieve the reforms demanded by the Russian Social Demo-
cratic Labour Party. Opposition by the former ruling groups would be 
ruthlessly smashed. Initially the middle and upper classes would be 
subjected to a 'revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
131 
and the peasantry'; they would be deprived of political rights until such 
time as the provisional government's democratic reforms seemed 
durable enough to permit it to proceed with elections based on 
principles of universal adult suffrage.51 
Lenin emphasised that his provisional revolutionary government 
would not be introducing socialism. In his opinion, indeed, the reforms 
would foster the maturation of a capitalist economy. Russia was not yet 
ripe for socialist revolution; and the socialist coalition presumably 
would eventually lose power to other political parties as economic 
modernisation was realised.52 The monarchy's destruction could not be 
immediately followed by 'the dominion of the proletariat' .53 
Lenin's disclaimers, like Parvus's and Trotski's before him, did not 
convince the Iskra group. Martynov was now his principal adversary. 
He and the Mensheviks referred Lenin to the decision of the Second 
International, taken in 1904, forbidding socialist parties to enter 
coalition governments.54 Lenin had his reply to hand. The Second 
International's intention had been to prohibit socialists from forming 
coalitions which would prop up a capitalist order in advanced 
industrial countries. The Russian provisional revolutionary govern-
ment's task would be entirely different. It would involve the destruc-
tion of feudalism. Lenin's enterprise had nothing in common with the 
entry of the French socialist leader Alexandre Millerand into a 
coalitional ministry with 'bourgeois' politicians.55 Less easy to brush 
aside was Martynov's further point. To the Mensheviks it mattered 
little that Lenin did not intend to decree instant socialism: Lenin's 
subjective aims did not greatly bother them.56 They were concerned 
rather by the practical consequences likely to arise. Lenin's revolu-
tionary dictatorship, unbridled by legal constraints, would quickly 
become oppressive. It would simply amplify the authoritarian charac-
teristics of tsarism. According to Martynov, massive violence would 
have to be meted out not only to the bourgeoisie but to the peasantry 
too. The rural population would not voluntarily accept Bolshevik 
agrarian policy; and immense discontent would occur if the socialist 
coalition was determined to carry out its policies. Civil war would 
result.57 
Lenin had hoped to pre-empt such criticisms by enlarging the 
enticements to the peasantry in the party programme. In 1903, the 
Second Party Congress had called for the return of the 'cut-off strips' to 
peasant households. In 1905, Lenin observed the countryside'S 
ferment. He recognised that his party's policy was unlikely to gather 
rural support when that of the socialist-revolutionaries demanded so 
 132 
Lenin: A Political Life 
much more: the socialisation of the land. He urged his party to raise its 
bid. 
He demanded that all agricultural soil owned by the gentry, the 
aristocracy, the church and the royal family be expropriated. Property 
in land should be nationalised.58 And yet, far from reassuring the 
Mensheviks, Lenin's proposals alarmed them. P. P. Maslov argued 
that land nationalisation, even if undertaken originally by a socialist 
coalition, would provide the upper classes with limitless latitude to 
augment even tsarist dimensions of oppression and exploitation if a 
counterrevolution should take place.59 Lenin argued that he had been 
misunderstood. Although he wanted the state to have rights of 
ownership, he explained, it would be left to elected committees of the 
peasantry to distribute the land among those wishing to work on it and 
make private profit from it. His further reasoning was not yet stated in 
detail. But the broad intention was evident by implication: the rent 
payable to the state would be fixed at a low level; and sub-letting of 
land would be forbidden so as to prevent rent-racketeering. The 
peasant farmer would flourish as never before. No longer would he pay 
cripplingly high rents to the local landlord. The profitability of peasant 
agriculture would soar. Under such a regime, asked Lenin, where 
would counterrevolutionaries get the necessary backing to form an 
army to destroy the democratic institutions created by the provisional 
revolutionary government?60 
As with so many other discussions inside the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party, the argument ultimately returned to the 
agrarian question. It is difficult to judge who was more right, Lenin or 
Maslov. The problem is beset by hypothetical considerations. The 
political framework envisaged by Lenin in 1905 was destined never to 
come into existence in precisely the shape described by him. The 
October Revolution of 1917 gave rise to policies which differed 
importantly from Lenin's earlier projections. But Soviet rural history 
still offers clues for the adjudication of the Lenin-Maslov controversy. 
The Bolshevik government encountered stiff resistance when it 
intervened directly and heavily in the operations of the peasant 
economy: the New Economic Policy of 1921 was a recognition by the 
government that the peasants were intent upon ordering their 
economic life as they saw fit. Lenin's writings in 1905 overestimated 
the Russian peasantry's predisposition to welcome policies designed to 
effect rapid modernisation of agriculture. Maslov, moreover, was 
correct in saying that a government insistent on steeply increasing the 
pace would have to resort to force. On the other hand, Lenin's 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
l33 
performance as Soviet premier demonstrated his acumen in adjusting 
policy to circumstances. Probably his proposals of 1905, if modified so 
as to avoid peasant revolts, provided greater chance of success in 
stimulating change than Maslov's. Central governmental interven-
tion, as the experience of countries in Africa and Asia as well as the 
European Economic Community shows, lends important assistance to 
agricultural development.61 
THE THIRD PARTY CONGRESS 
The disputes of 1905 covered vast canvasses, and the projects of the 
theorists were still rudimentary sketches. The war against the monar-
chy was yet to be won. Obviously the Third Party Congress would lack 
the time to give a ruling on every single question in the air; but it would 
at least be able to adumbrate plans of immediate practical moment. 
The arrangements for the Congress were out of Lenin's hands.62 As 
things turned out, the composition of the delegations was closer to his 
wishes than he had expected. Suitably unobtrusive premises were 
rented in London. Apart from a scare when customs officers showed 
interest in the trunk holding Central Committee material, there was 
little bother. The Central Committee's participation encouraged 
several pro-Menshevik organisations to send representatives from 
Russia; but these, on arrival, found that little effort at reconciliation 
with Iskra had been made. They departed to a Menshevik Conference 
hurriedly organised in Geneva.63 Krasin was disappointed. He had 
made the Central Committee's participation conditional upon three-
quarters of the local committees sending delegates. He used his 
disappointment as a bargaining counter. He steered the Congress away 
from allowing representation to Bolshevik splinter groups in cities 
where the legitimately-constituted committees favoured the Men-
sheviks. Bogdanov gave ground, worried lest the proceedings should 
lose all approximation to status as the Third Party Congress. 'It is not 
our business,' he affirmed, 'to form another party.'64 
Proceedings started on 12 April 1905. Disagreements proliferated. 
Krasin's conciliationism attracted many delegates; and Bogdanov won 
favour from others on questions which found him at odds with Lenin. 
Such set-backs were predictable. So that perhaps the most intriguing 
fact made manifest by the Congress was that he could not safely rely 
even upon those 'Leninists' who had supported him staunchly in the 
past. 
 134 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin's mood, however, was buoyed up by the early broadly-based 
support he obtained for his call for a strategic offensive. Insurrection 
was his vital concern. Lunacharski and Bogdanov took his side, 
arguing that uprisings could not be 'unleashed' but had to be 
'organised'. This was universally approved.6s Yet Krasin was not the 
only delegate to express doubt that Russian workers acknowledged the 
necessity of political revolution.66 D. S. Postolovski warned pointedly 
against the menace of 'revolutionary adventurism' .67 Preparatory 
propaganda was needed. Lenin found this acceptable: he and his 
associates agreed to modify the motion. The finally-agreed clauses 
obliged the party not only to prepare for insurrection but also to 
conduct a vigorous, preliminary campaign for the idea among the 
working class.6s Lenin was content. Concurrence on the need for revolt 
had been his towering goal, and he had achieved it. His speeches were 
almost light-hearted, quite different (as he delighted to remark) from 
his reputation as 'an irreconcilable' .69 Ensuing debates reinforced his 
claim to have been the victim of political caricaturists. P. P. Rumyant-
sev, an associate of Bogdanov's, proposed a motion deploring the 
maintenance of purely clandestine modes of party activity. Bloody 
Sunday had caught the party unawares. The lesson to be learned was 
that, at a time of street demonstrations, social-democrats had to offer 
leadership of a more overt kind.70 Lenin sided with Rumyantsev.71 
On the connected issue of participation in trade unions, Lenin went 
even further than Rumyantsev. Lenin wanted the party to start 
forming trade unions. Rumyantsev was unpersuaded; he retained that 
widespread Bolshevik distaste for activity that appeared directed 
towards non-political ends. He wished party activists to work inside 
trade unions but not to dedicate their energies to forming them.72 The 
Congress's drafting commission overruled Lenin.73 And, when the 
commission's motion came before the Congress itself, many delegates 
still regarded even Rumyantsev's formulations as an unpardonable 
departure from Bolshevism. M. Tskhakaya, in particular, contended 
that the Russia of mid-1905 differed little from the Russia of 1902.74 
Eventually only minor amendments were passed, and the resolution 
offered by Rumyantsev became official policy.7s At all events the 
discussion had shown how far removed was Lenin from seeking the 
eternal application of What Is To Be Done? 's organisational prescrip-
tions. 
Lenin's first report to the Congress dealt with entrance into a 
'provisional revolutionary government'. Plekhanov was the butt of his 
remarks. Marx, according to Plekhanov, would never have espoused 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
135 
Lenin's proposals; and the corroborative evidence was supposedly to 
be found in articles inveighing against those socialist 'opportunists' 
who were ready to do a deal with the middle class.7s Lenin rehearsed 
the case already mounted in reply to Martynov. Bolshevik policy was 
designed to prevent, not to engineer a Millerandist sell-out. In addition 
Lenin urged the Congress not to be browbeaten by Iskra's taunts about 
lacobinism. The founders of Marxism, he maintained, had despised 
those who despised the Jacobins. Lenin went further. He claimed that 
Marx had generally enthused about mass terror as a means of 
consolidating revolutions; his evidence was a remark in 1848 that 
Robespierre's guillotine in 1793-4 had been 'the plebeian method' of 
eradicating the old order. 77 This particular citation was accurate. But it 
was also selective; for Marx, while sometimes condoning the French 
terror unequivocally, on other occasions condemned it severely. In 
The Holy Family in 1844 he had stated that Robespierre had 
inadvertently and against his own designs created the conditions for his 
regime's overthrow.78 Lenin drew a veil, presumably consciously, over 
Marx's changeability. And indeed there was something akin to 
anticipatory relish in Lenin's further statement that the revolutionary 
dictatorship of the workers and the peasantry in Russia should 
organise its own terror. 79 The narodnik element in his thought was 
strong in 1905. He recommended populists like Petr Tkachev as 
essential reading matter for his close associates.8o His advocacy of 
terror did not reach the pages of Vpered. Lenin must have sensed the 
need not to supply the Mensheviks with additional literary gunpowder 
to fire against him. But Congress speeches were never so carefully 
planned as newspaper articles. It may well be that Lenin was carried 
away in the heat of the moment, and that he revealed a policy which he 
otherwise preferred to cosset with euphemisms.81 
Bolsheviks of all complexions anyway warmed to his speech; not a 
single delegate rose to oppose him. Krasin was euphoric. He put 
forward an amendment to Lenin's motion, but it was an amendment 
readily accepted by Lenin. Krasin argued that the revolutionary 
government should be installed in the process of the insurrection. This 
would guarantee the social-democrats a toe-hold in the new admini-
stration. The Lenin-Krasin resolution won a massive majority.82 A few 
delegates were confused by the debate. P. A. Krasikov confessed to 
being unable to see how such a government, with all its power and with 
all its radical reforms, could be said to be initiating 'the dominion of the 
bourgeoisie' .83 But his objections were rejected.84 Thus encouraged, 
Lenin opened the discussion on the agrarian question. He omitted 
 136 
Lenin: A Political Life 
mention of land nationalisation. The drafting commission had appar-
ently insisted upon a vaguer formulation invoking the party to support 
all revolutionary measures to improve the peasantry's lot; and these 
measures were not to stop short of 'the expropriation of gentry land'. 
Lenin defended the formulation loyally at the Congress.8S It at least 
gave him a huge extension of peasant-oriented concessions, and he 
postponed consideration of his specific arguments for nationalisation. 
Again a delegate asked the question about historical stages. M. K. 
Vladimirov enquired where the party should in fact stop with its 
agrarian reforms. 'Never stop!' was Lenin's response.86 Not for the 
only time in 1905 the urge to move towards Trotski's 'permanent 
revolution' showed itself in Lenin's reflex reactions. 
Next on the agenda came Bogdanov's motion to induce more 
workers to join the party. Postolovski recounted how easier it was for a 
student than for a worker to obtain the acquaintance with Marxism 
often demanded as an entrance qualification.87 To many delegates 
(such as V. S. Desnitski, L. B. Kamenev and A. I. Rykov) this 
appeared demagogical.88 Lenin, however, sided with Bogdanov. He 
also backed Bogdanov's suggestion that a greater 'dose of demo-
cratism' would facilitate the entrance of workers to the party. He was 
dismayed by the narrow focus of the Bolshevism of the Kamenevs and 
the Rykovs.89 True, Lenin and Bogdanov obtained the scrapping of 
Martov's definition of the terms of party membership in favour of 
Lenin's;90 but their other recommendations encouraged a relaxation of 
hierarchical arrangements. Lenin also voted to accord greater freedom 
to local committees to run their own newspapers.91 And this reflected 
the opinion of most delegates.92 
Lenin and Bogdanov, however, disagreed about the structure of the 
central party apparatus. Both wished to abolish the unwieldy Party 
Council. But Lenin wanted to retain a bipartite arrangement whereby 
the Central Committee was situated in Russia and the party newspaper 
in Switzerland; Bogdanov held that both should be based on Russian 
soil. Delegates from Russia sided with Bogdanov.93 They had had their 
fill of the emigre disputes of 1903-4; many hinted that Lenin had been 
among the most offenders. M. G. Tskhakaya went the nearest to 
outright attack. He objected to the growth of a cult around Lenin, 
declaring: 'I am not a Leninist, I'm a party activist, a revolutionary 
social-democrat, a Marxist.'94 Engels had not talked of Engelsism. And 
Lenin's admirers, insisted Tskhakaya, should desist from elevating 
Lenin to a higher pedestal than that of Marxism's co-founder.95 
Nobody rose to repudiate Tskhakaya. In addition, the vote on the 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
137 
central party apparatus was a triumph for Bogdanov. Only V. V. 
Vorovski, himself an emigre, supported Lenin's proposal to keep the 
party newspaper abroad.96 So as to prevent Lenin's total humiliation, 
Desnitski proposed a vote of thanks for V pered' s services to the party. 
A substantial minority of delegates abstained. 97 Lenin's contribution 
to party life was highly esteemed, but not regarded as being indispens-
able. His behaviour at the Congress itself was perfectly proper. But this 
was an all-Bolshevik affair. Lenin still exhibited fractiousness towards 
those social-democrats not espousing Bolshevism. Before the Con-
gress he had proposed a motion denouncing Plekhanov.98 The 
Congress drafting commission rejected it. Equal impatience was 
shown to Lenin's motion to excoriate the Mensheviks as 'disorganis-
ers' who should be treated as 'standing outside the party' .99 A more 
schismatic suggestion was hardly conceivable. Bogdanov sought the 
re-unification of the party, albeit a party united under Bolshevik 
leadership. He forced compromise upon Lenin. They agreed upon a 
motion criticising the Mensheviks for their 'partial deviation from the 
principles of revolutionary social-democracy' .10~ The Mensheviks 
were not to be expelled. They need not even recant their general 
opinions so long as they were willing to obey party policies in 
practice .101 
Lenin had the sense to retreat with composure. He defended the 
compromise in debate.102 And he secured himself a position in the new 
Central Committee. There were four other members of this all-
Bolshevik body: Bogdanov, Krasin, Postolovski and Rykov.103 Each 
was independently-minded and had a record of standing up to Lenin. 
There was little possibility of Lenin's railroading his policies through 
the new central party apparatus in the months to come. 
AUTOCRACY IN RETREAT 
Third Congress delegates, when proceedings ended on 27 April 1905, 
felt sure that political unrest in Russia was about to increase in 
severity; the debates had put Lenin in closer touch with his native land, 
if only through the medium of activists who had journeyed thence to 
London. The Bolsheviks wanted insurrection. Until midsummer they 
had reason to feel that their optimism was justified, and their leaflets 
underlined the autocracy's growing incapacity to govern autocrati-
cally. 
Returning to Geneva, Lenin still shared this optimistic ebullience. 
 138 
Lenin: A Political Life 
But gradually the news began to make him reconsider. Russian factory 
workers found it difficult to sustain the strike movement. It is true that 
certain cities such as Odessa witnessed fierce street confrontations in 
midsummer; but there were many more places where order was 
maintained with ease. 104 Industrialists were facing down wage 
demands. The government was cheered by the entrance of organised 
groupings of landowners into politics. The most influential was the 
Union Of The United Gentry. The war with Japan was coming to a 
close. The Japanese government refrained from imposing humiliating 
terms. A treaty was signed on 23 August. A rise in confidence in 
Russian stocks and shares was registered abroad. In February 1905 the 
government had undertaken to convoke a representative assembly; 
but the gathering lull of midsummer induced Nikolai II to make the 
barest political concessions. A manifesto was issued on 6 August. The 
assembly was to be called the State Duma and its powers would be 
exclusively consultative. The method of election would be socially-
discriminatory. Voters were to be divided into their respective social 
estates and to choose representatives to serve in electoral curiae. 
These representatives would meet to elect the Duma's members. The 
unfairness of the system consisted in the allocation of 34 per cent of 
Duma places to the landowning gentry. Property qualifications were 
mandatory for urban inhabitants. The effect was to deny the franchise 
to factory workers and to many low-ranking members of the profes-
sions and the civil service.105 
But the public mood was still hostile. Printing workers struck in 
September, their demands being political as well as economic. 
Industrial disputes occurred across central Russia. In October, a strike 
of railwaymen began. lOS Liberals, moreover, felt cheated by the 
August Manifesto. Inside the Union Of Unions, P. N. Milyukov led a 
moderate group inclined to participate in the forthcoming Duma 
elections. The government ill-advisedly arrested him. All liberals 
became hell-bent upon extracting more substantial concessions; and 
they lent expression to their resolve by holding the founding congress 
of the Constitutional-Democratic Party on 12 October.lo7 
As Lenin and the other emigres pondered the struggle from afar, 
their doubts began to be balanced again by more sanguine feelings. 
The cause for their joy was the activity of the workers of St. Petersburg. 
On 13 October they formed a Soviet. The Russian word means 
Council; and the Petersburg Soviet's original purpose was to provide 
leadership of the current wave of strikes in the capital. There were 
about forty delegates at the Soviet's opening meeting. By 15 October, 
 'Sturm und Drang' 
139 
the number had risen to 226; and these delegates represented the 
workforce of 96 factories and five trade unions. lOS The original 
chairman was G. S. Khrustalev-Nosar, a left-wing liberal. But Lev 
Trotski with his tactical and oratorical skills quickly came to the fore. 
The Mensheviks, the Bolsheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries 
were invited to send activists to work in an advisory capacity inside the 
Executive Committee. The Soviet declined to advocate the pro-
gramme of any single political party or group; it aimed, as a 'non-party 
organisation', to unite the capital's workers. On the other hand it still 
pursued political goals. The strikes were intended to achieve civic 
freedoms as well as higher wages; the Petersburg Soviet's slogans 
called for the formation of a democratic republic. lo9 The Soviet 
introduced its own administration, including a workers' militia. Trotski 
regretted that the Soviet could not manage to re-unite the social-
democratic factions in the capital. The Mensheviks collaborated with 
him willingly, but the Bolsheviks baulked for a time at the Soviet's 
insistence upon its 'non-party' status. Nevertheless the government 
was deep in trouble. Nikolai II made concessions. On 17 October 1905 
he issued a further Manifesto. It guaranteed the freedoms of opinion, 
assembly and association. It abolished the censorship. It promised to 
extend the franchise for the State Duma. It granted not only 
consultative but also legislative authority to the Duma.llo On 19 
October, an amnesty for political offences was granted.lll 
Lenin had to read all about this in the Swiss press. It was not yet 
obvious how he would react to such events; he had rampaged inside his 
party for the past year, and few were aware that he was at that very 
moment having second thoughts about policy. The last months of 1905 
were to reveal how drastically he had altered his mind. 
