 6 From this Accursed 
Distance 
pOST-CONGRESS IMBROGLIO 
Organisational cohesion does not come easily to an oppositional 
political party in emigration. A governing party experiences a myriad 
of impulses conducive to minimising internal fractiousness; and this is 
of assistance to any cabinet wishing to adopt policies as circumstances 
seem to require. The political will for unity is not universally secure in 
such situations. But a party in government possesses a further asset in 
the shape of its capacity to dispense patronage: it can move its 
favoured members to posts associated with authority and material 
comfort. Parties in opposition confront difficulties by comparison. 
Opportunities for the disbursement of office and affluence are 
restricted (although the German Social- Democratic Party's record 
before 1914 shows that they can still be substantial). Political 
frustrations are enormous. Fissiparous debates about strategy con-
tinually threaten to replace constructive practical operations. Collec-
tive support for unification has to be cultivated. This task is beset by 
problems all the more severe in organisations which are not only 
oppositional but also illegal, clandestine and partly based abroad; the 
technical as well as the political strains are immense. Their need for 
concerted action is in many ways more pressing than for legal, 
domestic groupings. And yet every attempt to bring about organised 
unity runs the risk of raising even higher the temperature in the 
political greenhouse of emigration. 
Intemperate discourse and behaviour had made Russian expatriate 
revolutionaries notorious in the rest of Europe long before the birth of 
Russian Marxism. The reputation was beginning to attach itself to 
Russian Marxists too by the turn of the century. Emigre disputatious-
ness contrasted with the more restrained modes of disagreement 
characteristic of debates among the Marxists in Russia in the 1890s; 
and the susceptibility ofthe Swiss-centred groups to disruptiveness was 
106 
 From this Accursed Distance 
107 
made acute by the presence of theorists like Lenin and Plekhanov who 
had become so averse to compromise in party discussions. 
Lenin was after the total exploitation of his triumph in the elections 
to the central party apparatus. His group called itselftheBolsheviki (or 
'Majoritarians'), hoping to enhance its status as the legitimate 
leadership. Martov's group took the name of Mensheviki (or 
'Minoritarians'). Martov himself re-opened hostilities. He wanted to 
win back Plekhanov. The opportunity arose at a gathering of the 
Foreign League Of Revolutionary Russian Social-Democracy in 
Geneva in October 1903. The Party Congress had established the 
League as the party's sole organisation abroad. Martov led the assault 
upon Lenin's position. Lenin learned that he had placed a gun in 
Martov's hands in early summer by making him privy to Iskra's 
pre-Congress manoeuvres. Martov told of Lenin's plan to reduce the 
size of the editorial board to three persons. The intended victims 
included not only Akselrod, Potresov and Zasulich but even 
Plekhanov himself. 'Don't you see,' Lenin had purred to Martov, 'that 
if we stick by each other, we'll keep Plekhanov constantly in a minority 
and he'll be able to do nothing about it?' 1 The revelation shattered 
Lenin's composure. He made no defence. Having calculated the 
balance of forces at the League's gathering, he knew that he would be 
outvoted. He stormed out, slamming the door. Martov's allegations 
disturbed Plekhanov too. The 'state of siege' in the party had anyway 
been depressing him, to the point that he stated that 'suicide would be 
preferable to schism'.2 Factional reconciliation was now his professed 
objective. To effect a truce he was ready to step down from Iskra. If 
Plekhanov resigned, many would take it as proof that Lenin truly was 
the party's tyrant. Lenin suddenly seemed to be facing defeat. On 3 
November he announced his resignation from Iskra and the Party 
Counci1.3 
Lenin soon cursed himselffor having panicked.4 Plekhanov revealed 
his alienation from Lenin; his scheme to reconcile the two warring 
groups would not be undertaken evenhandedly. Privately he called 
Lenin the party's Robespierre. And the removal of Lenin from Iskra 
by painless surgery induced the Mensheviks to think that their 
problems had disappeared forever. Not so. In abandoning Iskra, Lenin 
had not forgotten 'to keep a stone in his sling'. He asked to be co-opted 
to the Central Committee. The Central Committee consisted of 
Bolsheviks. And when, in mid-November 1903, Krzhizhanovski 
arrived in Switzerland from Russia it was an easy formality for Lenin to 
obtain membership. Lenin and fellow Bolshevik L. E. Galperin were 
 108 
Lenin: A Political Life 
appointed Central Committee representatives on the Party Council.s 
Plekhanov had to act with dispatch. Iskra presently had no Council 
representative apart from Plekhanov himself. Lenin could seize back 
control of the newspaper through his dominance inside the Central 
Committee. Plekhanov's responded by co-opting Mensheviks to the 
Iskra board.6 
Stalemate resulted, and the Mensheviks anticipated that Lenin 
would be constrained to restore amicable working relations with them. 
Lenin, however, felt cheated by Plekhanov, and fought on for 
unconditional victory. But he reckoned without Krzhizhanovski. On 
17 November 1903 there was a session of the Party Council and 
Krzhizhanovski, fearful of a party split, guaranteed to have Galperin 
withdrawn from Council membership; Krzhizhanovski also agreed to 
press the Central Committee to co-opt Mensheviks into its member-
ship. Few Bolsheviks craved the exclusion of all Mensheviks from 
leading positions; and Krzhizhanovski asked Lenin whether he really 
could be right when so impressive a majority thought him wrong.7 
Krzhizhanovski's concessions were expected to initiate a new era in 
party relations. Lenin had other plans. He demanded the convocation 
of a Third Party Congress so that the party as a whole might adjudicate 
the Bolshevik-Menshevik dispute. In December, he bombarded 
groups and activists in Russia with letters of self-justification. In 
January 1904 he attended the Party Council, repeating his call for a 
Congress; he denounced the Mensheviks as opportunists and disor-
ganisers. Martov in retort castigated Lenin as a power-crazed 
egomaniac; and he treated the idea of a Congress as financially 
insupportable and organisationally productive only of schism. Lenin's 
hopes of prising Plekhanov away from Martov faded. The Council 
turned down Lenin's proposals. Plekhanov was so infuriated by 
Lenin's belligerence that he denounced him in Iskra as a 'Bonapar-
tist' .8 
The 
Central 
Committee 
too 
was 
annoyed 
with 
Lenin. 
Krzhizhanovski, Noskov and the recently-co-opted L. B. Krasin were 
all Bolsheviks appalled by the possibility of an organisational rupture; 
they spurned Lenin's request that his supporter P. A. Krasikov be 
seconded to the Central Committee. In February 1904 they wrote: 
'We all implore the Old Man to give up his quarrel and start work. We 
await leaflets, pamphlets and advice of all kinds - the best way of 
soothing the nerves and answering slander.' 9 Lenin replied that he was 
not a machine; and that he could not obliterate Martov's and 
Plekhanov's criticisms from his mind.lO Krzhizhanovski thought him to 
 From this Accursed Distance 
109 
have lost touch with Russian reality. The Central Committee invited 
him to leave Switzerland and join them in the underground. Lenin was 
unmoved and unmoving.ll 
In spring 1904 it became the conviction of other Bolsheviks in the 
Central Committee that Lenin was the greatest obstacle to the 
re-unification of the central party apparatus. Lenin had overstretched 
himself. In February, his friend R. S. Zemlyachka clashed with L. E. 
Galperin in the Central Committee. Galperin too had ceased to 
support Lenin. Zemlyachka in the heat of the moment announced her 
resignation from the Central Committee; and, to her horror, the other 
members were unwilling to allow her to retract.12 Lenin blustered on. 
He endeavoured to browbeat the Central Committee firstly by 
resigning from the Party Council and then by threatening to withdraw 
from the Central Committee too. His bluff called, he resumed his 
positions before he lost them permanently.I3 Accordingly the all-
Bolshevik Central Committee now had eight members: V. A. Noskov 
and G. M. Krzhizhanovski (who had been elected by Congress) 
together with M. M. Essen, L. E. Galperin, N. V. Gusarov, L. B. 
Krasin, F. V. Lengnik and Lenin himself (all of whom had been 
co-opted). Of these, only Essen and Lengnik were firmly with Lenin; 
and they wrote to Russia in hope of winning over the rest. They still 
considered that, if only the Russia-based leaders could see how the 
Mensheviks were behaving, the Central Committee would drop its 
peace-making proposals.14 Noskov, however, took the initiative. He 
got the Central Committee members to issue him with a reprimand to 
deliver to Lenin. In May 1904 he reached Switzerland and, with the 
Central Committee's authority, forbade Lenin to campaign for the 
convocation of a Party Congress. Noskov objected to the savagery of 
Lenin's writings. He sought to halt publication of the anti-Menshevik 
tract One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. Again Lenin threatened to 
resign. Noskov compromised, feeling strong enough in the Central 
Committee in the contingency of further serious dispute. An agree-
ment was made. Thenceforward Noskov and Lenin were to be joint 
representatives of the Central Committee abroad, and neither man 
would take any important decisions without the other's consenes 
'ONE STEP FORWARD, TWO STEPS BACK' 
The same agreement permitted the continued distribution of One Step 
Forward, Two Steps Back. It had first appeared on 6 May 1904.16 
 110 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Drafted and redrafted since February, its empirical basis was an 
extensive psephological analysis of the Second Party Congress. It was 
'instant history'. The style was hectoring; What Is To Be Done?, in 
comparison, seems like exemplary disinterested research. No self-
doubt, no self-criticism. 
The work constituted the thrust of his counter-attack. It was an 
uncustomary operation for him. Always before, he had been the 
aggressor, the initiator of conflict. His earliest attackers after the 
Congress had been Akselrod and Plekhanov. Trotski then declared his 
support for them; and, when One Step Forward came out, he published 
his booklet Our Political Tasks in reply. Lenin's pronouncements had 
unexpectedly become an issue for European social-democracy as a 
whole. Rosa Luxemburg, the Polish Jew who was prominent in the 
German Social-Democratic Party, arraigned him in her Organisational 
Questions in Russian Social-Democracy. For a while, Kautsky thought 
of taking sides against Lenin; but he was deterred in the end by both 
fear of aggravating the dispute and recognition that his knowledge of 
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was far from being 
comprehensive.17 Akselrod, Plekhanov, Trotski and Luxemburg had 
been amazed and offended by Lenin's activity at the Second Party 
Congress; his polemical techniques struck them as mere abusiveness. 
They also challenged his doctrinal positions. They were picking up and 
extending arguments aimed against Lenin's What Is To Be Done? by 
Martynov and Akimov. Plekhanov openly acknowledged this; and 
Martov publicly regretted that he had not taken writers like Akimov 
seriously in the first instance.1s Lenin's enemies, though making their 
forays independently of each other, drew upon a similar arsenal of 
ammunition. 
Their assault upon Lenin's ideas was multi-directional. It was 
asserted that they were anti-worker; that they were the embodiment of 
bureaucratic centralism; and that they would, objectively, open the 
gates to precisely the political opportunism which they had been 
designed to disbar. 
Akselrod maintained that Lenin expected factory workers to act as 
political cannon-fodder under the generalship of the radical middle-
class intelligentsia.19 Plekhanov concurred with Akselrod, and added 
that Russian socialism had been formed not by intellectuals in isolation 
but through a process of interaction between middle-class activists and 
discontented urban labourers.2o This may possibly have been the gist of 
his original objection to What Is To Be Done? at the time of its 
publication. Be that as it may, Luxemburg expanded on Plekhanov's 
 From this Accursed Distance 
111 
arguments. What Is To Be Done?, she maintained, eulogised the 
obedience and discipline instilled in the working class by the factory 
system. She, by contrast, saw rebelliousness against 'authority' as the 
primary desirable attribute of the true socialist. Lenin seemed to her to 
be crazed with regimentative pretensions and menace.21 Plekhanov 
predicted that Bolshevik organisational theory, if taken to its logically 
consistent end, would establish not the dictatorship of the proletariat 
but 'a dictatorship over the proletariat'. Lenin would realise 'the ideal 
of the Persian Shah' .22 Trotski agreed with Plekhanov and uttered the 
following prophecy: 'The organisation of the party takes the place of 
the party itself; the Central Committee takes the place of the party 
organisation; and finally "the dictator" takes the place of the Central 
Committee.' 23 
Such an internal regime, according to Lenin's adversaries, would be 
bureaucratic centralism. Akselrod accused Lenin of 'organisational 
fetishism': the Bolsheviks were politically so introspective that they 
risked overlooking opportunities for the advancement of the revolu-
tionary cause in Russia.24 Trotski went further. For him, What Is To Be 
Done? proposed a party structure which could not long endure.25 
Lenin's followers would become disillusioned with so strict an 
insistence upon their servility to him. The most talented activists would 
inevitably desert Bolshevism. It worried Trotski, though, that Lenin's 
prescriptions might become identified by Russian social-democrats as 
the only possible variant of centralism. The goal of centralisation 
would lose favour. And this would prepare the ground for 'socialist 
opportunists' . The discrediting of Lenin would lead to the discrediting 
of the entire programme of revolutionary social-democracy.26 
Trotski's fears were shared by Luxemburg. She stressed the tendency 
of party leaderships to take an increasingly conservative view of their 
duties. Her solution, as explained in her pamphlet, was for rank-and-
file members to be encouraged to keep their committees on the path of 
revolution.27 
Unrepentant, Lenin charged his critics with hypocrisy. He was 
helped in this by the fact that no social-democrat was yet fully 
convinced that epoch-making questions of principle underlay the 
Bolshevik-Menshevik dispute.28 Even Plekhanov took months to 
complete his doctrinal case.29 Lenin pounced on this. He claimed that 
the verbal violence of the Second Party Congress had occurred mainly 
because a minority of delegates had refused to accept majority 
decisions. The Bolsheviks had won by fair means. In order to justify 
the struggle after the Congress, the Mensheviks had been compelled to 
 112 
Lenin: A Political Life 
exaggerate the ideological importance of their differences with the 
Bolsheviks. Originally, according to Lenin, Menshevism was more a 
ploy than a doctrine. He despised its 'rhetoric'. When the Mensheviks 
called for guarantees of the right of freedom of speech for oppositions, 
he claimed, they did so from selfish motives. Underneath them lay no 
terrain of principle.30 He was not alone in making this claim: Bogdanov 
and Lunacharski said equally forcefully that the Mensheviks were 
playing at politics and not articulating a doctrinal alternative. Neither 
Bogdanov nor Lunacharski had much time for emigres in general. 
They considered that even Lenin was not entirely au fait with the 
Russian party's needs; but they treated the Menshevik leaders as the 
real villains of the piece in the disputes in Geneva.31 
Yet the anti-Lenin phalanx had nevertheless made at least a few 
substantive theoretical points; and Lenin was obliged to offer his 
defence. He omitted to reply in detail to the charge that What Is To Be 
Done? drastically down-graded the functions of the working class in 
revolutionary struggle; he stuck to a curt, unelaborated denial that he 
regarded obedience as the greatest positive characteristic of factory 
labourers.32 Bogdanov and Lunacharski were more forthcoming. They 
highlighted the sections of Lenin's book which emphasised the 
working class's 'vanguard' role; and themselves stressed the important 
strides made in political self-organisation by Russian workers. 33 It was 
only in later years that Bogdanov came to see Lenin's failure to provide 
a similarly strong pro-worker case as something sinister.34 
At all events, Lenin in One Step Forward wished to focus on 
middle-class intellectuals rather than workers. His counter-charge 
against the Mensheviks was that they, with their abhorrence of 
Bolshevik discipline, were leaning towards 'anarchic individualism'. 
Menshevik ideas, if implemented, would give succour to desk-bound 
professors who would not work for the party and yet would quibble 
over the minutest aspects of party policy. 'Opportunists' would enter 
the party in an uncontrolled flood. Thus Lenin hoped to turn the tables 
on his opponents in debate: it was allegedly the Mensheviks who 
wanted to raise the power of middle-class intellectuals, not Lenin.3s 
Yet his accusation does not entirely convince. The Menshevik criti-
cisms had been directed at a different sort of intellectual: the full-time 
activist. Akselrod's main argument had been aimed against the 
emergence of an uncontrollable elite of professionals.36 One Step 
Forward, judged as political theory rather than political invective, was 
consequently a disappointing work. In their own faltering way, his 
opponents had exposed the Achilles' heel of his organisational ideas. 
 From this Accursed Distance 
113 
What Is To Be Done? had indeed implied a certain condescension 
towards workers; its concrete recommendations were also potentially 
more injurious to the democratisation of party life in the years ahead 
than he supposed; and it assuredly did get centralisation and discipline 
a worse name than they would otherwise have attracted.37 
ALPINE HOLIDAY 
Lenin's wife and friends saw the strain telling on him. Even before the 
Second Party Congress he had been tired, and the ensuing winter of 
1903-4 brought no relief. His physical condition was poor. While 
bicycling through Geneva, he had run into the rear of a tramcar and 
sustained gashes to the head. For some weeks he appeared at 
gatherings becowled in a white bandage.38 He cut a somewhat 
terrifying figure. 
The Bolshevik-Menshevik dispute, its rights and wrongs, pushed 
everything else to the back of his mind. Rarely has there been a more 
single-minded politician. At anyone time it was his custom to 
elaborate a supreme immediate goa\. Once defined, it had to be 
pursued at any expense. He doubted the efficaciousness of trying to 
follow a cluster of goals at once. He liked to keep his short-term politics 
uncomplicated (while yet being cognisant of the complexity of the 
continuing struggle for socialism in the years to come). This was both 
asset and draw-back for him. In 1917 it would be distinctly advantage-
ous; from February to October, whereas his enemies were pondering 
the complications of policy, he had one main prodding thought: to 
seize power. But in 1904 monocentrism was less fruitful. Since the late 
1890s he had believed that the party should cleanse its ranks of 
ideological impurity, should centralise its operations, should cleave to 
thtt strictest disciplinary code. It did not matter to him that many 
Mensheviks agreed with him about other aspects of revolutionary 
strategy. He conceived of political activity as being best undertaken in 
stages. And the current stage, he reasoned, should be taken up with the 
organisational formation of the party. Hence this otherwise flexible 
leader (and indeed his flexibility would become more and more 
notorious in many social-democratic milieux) saw no room for 
compromise. 
But the pressure increased. The rift with Plekhanov and Martov 
affected his health. P. N. Lepeshinski described the change: 'I 
witnessed him in such a depressed condition of spirit as it was never my 
 114 
Lenin: A Political Life 
lot to see him in either before or after that period.' Despite his 
prodigious capacity for rapid writing, he had toiled like a novice over 
One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. 'It looks as though I shan't finish 
the booklet,' he had complained, 'I'll throw up everything and go off to 
the mountains!'39 
The remark is doubly interesting. Unusual as it was for Vladimir 
I1ich Ulyanov-Lenin to lose his panache, it was still more extraordinary 
for him to communicate such a loss to his comrades. Among emigres, 
his name was a by-word for optimism. His self-belief was crucial to the 
maintenance of a trusting group of activists around him. He sensed 
that a political party in autocratic Russia needed a leadership with 
more than intellectual self-assurance and organisational cohesion. 
Leaders had to supply emotional strength. At the slightest expression 
of doubts by his followers, Lenin would state and re-state the articles of 
faith: 'But look here: I myself, let me be allowed to inform you, am 
most profoundly convinced that I shall survive until the socialist 
revolution in Russia.'40 Lenin treated it as his duty to offer the 
maximum of psychological support. If a Bolshevik fell into police 
custody, he and Krupskaya would dispatch a comforting letter. Lenin 
also tried to be the first to make personal contact with Russian 
social-democrats newly arriving in Switzerland. Martov, though 
well-meaning, lacked the self-application to compete with Lenin as an 
organiser. Lenin was the good shepherd to his flock.41 Nikolai 
Valentinov, later a prominent anti-Bolshevik, never forgot the down-
to-earth assistance rendered him on one particular day in Geneva. 
Lacking a private income, Valentinov had to work as a barrow-pusher. 
On an occasion when he was given a particularly heavy consignment 
for removal, he could find many comrades sympathetic with his plight; 
but no one's sympathy, except Lenin's, stretched as far as an offer of 
active help. Valentinov and Lenin pushed the load across the city to its 
destination; and Valentinov received his vital wage.42 
In early 1904, however, this attractive component of Lenin's 
personality was slipping its gear. Lenin diagnosed the symptoms. He 
needed a break from the routine of politics. Since coming to Western 
Europe, he had not had much time for the sportive sort of relaxation he 
enjoyed. His regular afternoon strolls were too undemanding.43 
He decided to take a couple of months' holiday in the Swiss Alps. 
Such a project did not then require plutocratic funding. Lenin was 
anyway not stinted for finances. He received an allowance from the 
party as Central Committee member; he was sent royalties on his 
legally-published books. And his mother supplemented his account 
 From this Accursed Distance 
115 
when he felt hard-pressed.44 Lenin and Krupskaya set off in the first 
fortnight of June 1904. They threw up their rented Geneva house; and 
Lenin drafted a note devolving his authority as foreign representative 
of the Central Committee to close supporters.45 They limited the 
number of books in their baggage and, to their own astonishment, 
succeeded in avoiding reading most of what they took. Baedeker's 
Switzerland took pride of place in their knapsacks. They promised not 
to talk about political business, nor even, 'insofar as it was possible', to 
think about it.46 They drew up no itinerary programme. By steamer 
they travelled to Montreux and visited the castle of Chillon. 
Mountain-walking was their principal recreation. They were not 
always alone, being accompanied for some days by Mariya Essen. 
Vladimir set them a fast pace. He chuckled at their discomfiture; in 
playas in work, he believed that personal satisfaction rose in 
proportion to effort expended. Postcards depicting Mount Jungfrau 
were sent by the self-styled 'vagabonds' .47 Lenin's health and mood 
steadily improved. Towards late July they settled temporarily in a 
pension overlooking Lac de Bre, near Lausanne. There they stayed 
until the start of September (when they returned to Geneva).48 They 
had partaken of the pleasures of contemporary tourism with the same 
zeal which, in the test of 1904, they devoted to the overthrow of the 
European bourgois political order. Lenin's spirit was restored.49 
THE BUREAU OF COMMITTEES OF THE MAJORITY 
Yet his game in the Central Committee in early summer had been 
played with weak cards. Noskov held trumps. Lenin knew Noskov 
could mobilise a Central Committee majority in favour of reconcilia-
tion with the Mensheviks. Before going off on vacation, Lenin had 
warned sympathisers in Russia that a coup d'etat was possible; and 
privately he took a more dismal view, reckoning that an offensive by 
Noskov was not just a possibility but a likelihood.50 Noskov asked for 
discussions with Lenin. Lenin refused. Noskov had already dragged 
him to the limits of what he regarded as conscionable compromise. But 
Noskov was determined to re-unify the factions. He proposed to 
co-opt two Mensheviks into the Central Committee in return for the 
co-opting of Lenin on to the Iskra board.51 Neither Noskov nor his 
friends withdrew their admiration for What Is To Be Done?; and they 
still felt that the Second Party Congress had given the Bolsheviks the 
right to greater influence at the apex of the party than the Mensheviks. 
 116 
Lenin: A Political Life 
But Lenin's policy, they feared, would split the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party needlessly and destructively into two 
separate organisations.52 Lenin in fact was not yet calling for a schism. 
Rather he demanded a reduction in Menshevik influence in the central 
party apparatus, and he had left for his holiday in a mood of angry 
self -righ teousness. 
Noskov, meanwhile, visited Russia. He contacted Galerin and 
Krasin. The three of them considered themselves entitled to act as the 
Central Committee. Zemlyachka had resigned. Lengnik had just been 
arrested. Gusarov and Krzhizhanovski were so dispirited by the 
in-fighting that they too had resigned. Mariya Essen was incarcerated 
upon return to Russia in midsummer.53 Noskov, Galperin and Krasin 
could easily now outvote Lenin. They co-opted three more like-
minded Bolshevik 'Conciliators' to the Central Committee: I. F. 
Dubrovinski, L. Y. Karpov and A.1. Lyubimov. A statement of regret 
and reproof was made that Lenin had recently written so few 
pamphlets; and Noskov was enjoined to communicate their so-called 
July Declaration to Lenin. They wanted a rapprochement between 
Bolsheviks and Mensheviks in the central party apparatus, and they 
hoped that Lenin would bow before the fait accompli .54 
All along, Lenin had set his face against this. He had radiated the 
determination that his sterner version of Bolshevism would win the 
day in the party as a whole; and he had sworn to abandon the Central 
Committee and conduct 'a desperate struggle' if Noskov went through 
with a COUp.55 Receiving the Declaration in August, he was ready with 
his counter-stroke. He summoned a meeting outside Geneva. Twenty 
two Bolsheviks signed a letter of protest, To The Party. The place of 
the meeting was not mentioned; Lenin wanted to give the impression 
that the protesting voices had originated in Russia rather than 
Switzerland. To The Party demanded that a Congress be convoked 
immediately.56 Among the signatories was M. S. Olminski. He had 
previously been based in Paris; he and his confederates in France had 
taken Lenin's side in the Bolshevik-Menshevik controversy. They 
were talented writers and organisers and had contacts with party 
groups in Russia. They had also welcomed Lenin's invitation to join 
him by Lac de Bre. Their leading lights were Aleksandr Bogdanov and 
Anatoli Vasilevich Lunacharski. Lenin and Bogdanov got on well 
personally; and, with appropriate interludes of mountain-walking and 
swimming, they formulated tactics to regroup the forces inside the 
party supporting the pro-Lenin Bolshevik cause. The Central Com-
mittee and Iskra were in the hands of the enemy. The two men 
 From this Accursed Distance 
117 
concluded that the time had come to construct new organisational and 
publishing institutions.57 
In autumn 1904, their emissaries hastened to Russia to arrange 
three regional conferences of Bolsheviks. The regions were northern 
Russia, southern Russia and the Transcaucasus. Each conference 
selected representatives to serve on a body which, on Lenin's 
suggestion, was dubbed the Bureau Of Committees Of The Majority.58 
The Bureau was to stimulate the convocation of a Party Congress. It 
had no fewer than eight members, including Bogdanov. It also 
contained several leading organisers such as P. P. Rumyantsev, A. I. 
Rykov and R. S. Zemlyachka.59 The Bureau's creation was com-
plemented by a Bolshevik literary venture which was initiated by 
Lenin even before Bogdanov's arrival. This was the 'publishing house 
of social-democratic party literature of V. Bonch-Bruevich and N. 
Lenin'. Pamphlets and leaflets were issued.so Noskov's Central 
Committee obstructed progress by prohibiting access to the official 
party printing facilities. Funds too were running short. But to the 
rescue came Bogdanov. He knew of potential providers of subsidy in 
Russia and sped off to trace them. Lenin raged at him for not writing 
back regularly. Cursed by Lenin for his 'swinish' behaviour, Bogdanov 
went his own way.61 By 27 November 1904 Lenin was changing his 
attitude. He wrote glowingly to M. M. Litvinov about Bogdanov's 
prospective success in attracting literary contributors and making 
approaches to a sympathetic millionaire.62 Lenin's further aim was to 
set up a newspaper to compete with Iskra, now under Menshevik 
control. The name would be Vpered (or Forward). He expected to rely 
heavily upon the newcomers from Paris. Discussions led to agreement 
on an editorial board of Lenin, Bogdanov, Lunacharski, Olminski 
and V. V. Vorovski. Arrangements went well and Vpered's publica-
tion commenced on 22 December; and, in a short while, Lenin was 
producing the newspaper on a weekly basis.63 
Lenin's position inside his faction was now seemingly impregnable. 
He had worked for the creation of a factional Bureau and a factional 
newspaper; and, far from being swept overboard by Noskov, he had 
sailed on to achieve both objectives. The Central Committee, headed 
by Bolshevik Conciliators, was shocked by his group's ease in 
consolidating its network of agents in Russia. A. I. Lyubimov fell into 
despondency. He urged Noskov to face up to the fact that nearly all 
social-democratic organisations in Russia proper, except those in the 
south, were held by supporters of the Bureau.64 This turnabout 
appeared to many as Lenin's personal victory. Yet his authority inside 
 118 
Lenin: A Political Life 
his faction was by no means dictatorial; and, within weeks, he was 
destined to lose his leading position to Aleksandr Bogdanov. 
RUSSIAN TURMOIL AND THE CALL FOR A SPLIT 
The urgent practical purpose of What Is To Be Done? had been to 
prepare Russian social-democrats to take advantage of a political 
situation likely to explode into revolution at any moment. The year 
1904 was the most disturbing yet in Nikolai II's reign. Bolshevik 
leaders in Russia were keen to treat the crisis of the autocracy as the 
principal focus of social-democratic activity. 
War had started in January between Japan and Russia. V. K. von 
Pleve, Minister of Internal Affairs, warned that military conflict might 
detonate ungovernable turbulence at home. Nikolai II ignored his 
counsel. For years there had been rivalry between the Russian empire 
and Japan over territory, trade and influence in the Far East. Russian 
armies were transported eastward by the Trans-Siberian railway, while 
the Baltic fleet set out on its voyage of twenty six thousand miles to the 
Pacific. But disasters occurred immediately. Japan's industrial growth 
made her a redoubtable adversary in her own sphere of operations in 
the Far East. In April, Japanese troops overwhelmed the Russians in 
the land battIe of the Yalu river. Russia's Far-Eastern fleet was 
beseiged in Port Arthur. 65 The war had never been welcomed by the 
Russian empire's national minorities. Poles and Finns hoped for a 
Russian defeat. Anti-tsarist demonstrations occurred in Warsaw. As 
the set-backs in the Far East were reported, hostility to the govern-
ment spread to Russia proper. Pleve clamped down. Already in 1903 
he had dismissed Zubatov from his police post and thus terminated the 
experimental development of trade unions. The slightest weakening of 
state power was anathema to him. In spring 1904 he obstructed the 
activity of liberal-dominated zemstva.66 Throughout the empire there 
were reports of unrest among workers and peasants. Strikes increased 
in number. The socialist-revolutionaries initiated a terrorist campaign. 
In July 1904 they struck. Sazonov, leader of their Combat Organisa-
tion, assassinated PI eve in St. Petersburg. 
The emperor, convinced that appeasement of popular opinion was 
unavoidable, appointed P. D. Svyatopolk-Mirski as Pleve's successor. 
Mirski sought to attract the liberal activists' support by affording 
greater freedom to the zemstva; he even tried, unsuccessfully, to 
persuade the emperor to allow a handful of elected public representa-
 From this Accursed Distance 
119 
tives to take office in the central state administration. He relaxed the 
censorship somewhat. He withdrew the government's covert support 
for the progroms against the Jews. The emperor, worried for the 
loyalty of the peasants, abolished the discriminatory legal provision 
whereby they could be subjected to corporal punishment for misde-
meanours.67 Yet the concessions were correctly interpreted as evi-
dence of weakness. In August, Russian warships were sunk in an 
engagement off Vladivostok. Public disorder intensified at home. 
Demonstrations were organised in Warsaw, Baku and Riga. The 
boldness of the liberals, who had formed their Union Of Liberation in 
1903, steadily increased. A conference of oppositionist groupings 
convened in Paris in autumn. Alongside Milyukov from the Union Of 
Liberation sat Chernov from the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries, 
and these were joined by delegates from clandestine parties operating 
in the ethnically non-Russian areas of the empire. A concordat was 
produced to unite in an assault upon tsardom. It was commonly hoped 
that a democratic structure of state would be introduced in very short 
order.68 
The liberals spread their ideas through speeches delivered in 
banquets held to commemorate dates of historical significance (such as 
the fortieth anniversary of the legal reforms of 1864). Execration 
showered down upon the autocratic regime. News from the Far East 
increased the monarchy'S unpopularity: the Japanese took Port 
Arthur on 20 December 1904. 
Social-democratic activists, in Russia and in emigration, were 
surprised at the government's failure to quell the liberals in thezemstva 
and in the Union Of Liberation. Absorbed for a year in internal 
wrangles, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was being 
overtaken by events in the country. There were still only around 
10 000 party members.69 Their committees and propaganda circles 
existed in every major industrial town; and yet they recognised that 
they were losing their hegemony over the movement of political 
opposition to the autocracy. Social-democratic committees had not 
everywhere managed to attract the sympathy of the urban working 
class. There had been 550 strikes in 1903. Even so, contact between 
the factory workers and the party was not satisfactorily close. This was 
true even in Petersburg. At the Putilov Works, the largest armaments 
plant in the empire, the labour force struck for higher wages and better 
conditions in December 1904. Social-democratic activists had no part 
in the strike's organisation. Leadership was in fact provided by the 
Assembly Of Russian Factory And Mill Workers Of The City Of St. 
 120 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Petersburg; and this Assembly was an off-shoot of the police-
controlled unions formed by S. V. Zubatov. The Assembly's inspirer 
was an Orthodox priest, Father Georgi Gapon. It was not guided by St. 
Petersburg social-democrats of either Menshevik or Bolshevik inclina-
tion. Circumstances now compelled the Russian Social-Democratic 
Labour Party to abandon its organisational distractions. 
On the eve of 1905, its leaders asked how they could exploit the 
social tumult in Russia; and, in particular, they pondered the policy to 
be adopted towards the oppositional movement of middle-class 
liberals and striking workers.70 
The Mensheviks were first into the field with their answers. Martov 
perceived the situation's dangers. It was distinctly possible, he warned, 
that liberal groupings might set up their own labour organisations. 
Social-democrats could not afford to stand aside from the liberals' 
campaign against the government; abstention would edge the working 
class towards support for the Union Of Liberation. He was exaggerat-
ing; and he did so in order to press home the argument that 
social-democrats and liberals should form an anti-monarchical 
alliance. This would involve a combination of legal and illegal activity; 
and it would contradict Lenin's prescription for exclusively under-
ground party organisations.71 Iskra followed this up with a special 
leaflet. The purpose was to explain that, while fighting alongside the 
liberals, social-democrats should nonetheless make workers aware of 
the half-heartedness of the Union Of Liberation's democratic inten-
tions. An alliance would give a chance to put pressure upon the 
liberals. The Union Of Liberation had to be prevented from accepting 
a constitutional settlement restricting the electoral rights of the 
working class and peasantry.72 Such a policy required tact. Akselrod 
affirmed that social-democrats should discourage public disorders 
necessitating the intervention of the police and army. Violent street 
clashes would scare the liberals back into political passivity.73 Many 
social-democratic committees in Russia, even some of those domi-
nated by Bolsheviks, saw sense in Iskra's plan.74 
Lenin was outraged by it. Immediately, in November 1904, he wrote 
a piece castigating Iskra's proposed pact with the liberals. The party 
could not rule out violence against the state authorities. In Lenin's 
view, social-democrats should therefore concentrate not on being 
tactful but on savagely criticising Russian liberalism. In essence this 
was a call to snub any alliance with the Union Of Liberation:5 
Lenin's altercations with the Mensheviks had never been gentle, not 
least on his side; he had intended to shove them out of leading 
 From this Accursed Distance 
121 
positions in the party. The new articles by Akselrod and Martov 
impelled him further. Now, for the first time, Lenin demanded a total 
splies The Bolsheviks should have their political party and the 
Mensheviks theirs. It was a summons of epochal importance. He had 
been prepared to tolerate the Menshevik presence, however disconten-
tedly, so long as their theorists did not act unequivocally against what 
he regarded as 'orthodoxy'. Their present policies were fundamentally 
unacceptable to him. They implied that the middle class would lead the 
revolution against the absolute monarchy. This robbed the working 
class of its 'vanguard' role.77 Iskra replied that Lenin's fulminations 
exhibited a lack of acquaintance with developments in Russia; and that 
chances of political advance would be lost unless liberal groupings 
were handled with care. 7S Both sides of the argument had cogent 
aspects. The Mensheviks were indeed starting to defer to liberal 
political leadership; the Bolsheviks, however, were largely abandon-
ing the old social-democratic commitment to seeking out the liberals as 
political allies. Indubitably it was vital for Russian Marxists to decide 
what forms of political struggle were in the interests of industrial 
workers in the winter of 1904-5. Yet the whole debate had a 
surrealistic quality. Neither Iskra nor Vpered addressed itself in a 
timely fashion to the burning question: what is the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party going to do about the Assembly Of Factory 
And Mill Workers Of The City of St. Petersburg? The year 1905 was to 
jolt social-democratic activists and theorists into taking such questions 
seriously. 
