 5 
Straightening Sticks 
'ISKRA' IS FOUNDED 
The need to establish a political party was unquestioned among 
Russian Marxists at the turn of the century. Not even the so-called 
Economists objected. Russian social-democracy was following Euro-
pean precedents; German and, to a lesser extent, British socialists had 
already established influential parties. In France the situation had 
changed somewhat. Parties had come into disfavour with large sections 
of the French working class, and many intellectuals too distrusted 
them: the result was a campaign to base the workers' movement upon 
thesyndicats operating at the factory level. Syndicalism dispensed with 
parties. Such an attitude had little attraction for the majority of 
Russian Marxists, at least until after 1905. It was generally recognised 
that parties were essential for the overthrow of tsarism; even those 
early narodniki who had been suspicious about the need for specifi-
cally political activity had nonetheless concurred that the party was the 
most appropriate vehicle for socialism's advance. This commitment 
was still stronger among the Russian Marxists. And, although the 
debate was as yet at an embryonic stage, there was widespread 
agreement about the practical shape to be taken by the party. The 
undemocratic system of power in Russia compelled certain responses. 
Russian Marxists would have to operate clandestinely. Their party 
would have to be centralist. It would naturally emphasise discipline 
and hierarchy; and some of its leaders would have to live and work 
abroad. 
There, however, consensus ended. No agreed guidelines existed as 
to how the initiative for forming the party should be undertaken. The 
dissolution of the Central Committee left the options open. Ulyanov, 
joining the emigres of Russian social-democracy in 1900, was ready 
and willing to snatch whatever opportunities came his way (or could be 
manipUlated so as to do so). 
His first task was to get his newspaper into production. Iskra had a 
print-run of a few hundred copies; and, compared with the legal 
85 
 86 
Lenin: A Political Life 
conservative dailies of Petersburg, it seemed a Lilliputian affair. But 
Ulyanov was not so unrealistic as to expect Iskra to be read by every 
Russian factory worker. He had a narrower readership in mind. He 
wanted to reach the organisers of existing Marxist groups. The variety 
of Marxism's manifestations had never been greater. Not all the 
precepts of Plekhanov had gained universal approval before the turn 
of the century; and now the opposition was becoming better organised. 
Iskra was created to rally the groups still faithful to Plekhanovite 
standpoints. The first issue was made on 11 December 1900.1 The 
lay-out was clear and there were no misprints. Ulyanov's name did not 
appear. Anonymity was customary for most contributors (although the 
Russian political police already knew who was on the editorial board). 
Ulyanov wrote a good deal of the copy: three lengthy articles flowed 
from his pen for the initial publication. Truly Iskra was Ulyanov's 
child. 2 Reportage on the labour movement was blended with discus-
sion of political strategy. Disquisitions on philosophy and sociology 
were left to the sister journal Zarya (or Dawn), which appeared three 
times between 1901 and 1902. Ulyanov and his fellow writers 
expected a lot of their readers; they assumed an acquaintance with the 
current arguments and lexicon of European Marxism. Iskra had a 
cosmopolitan ambience. Ulyanov, while recognising the need to 
communicate with activists based in Russia, nevertheless lapsed 
frequently into French quotations and Italian catch-phrases. This was 
not exhibitionism (though doubtless it was authorially enjoyable). 
Iskra wanted to demonstrate its intellectual weightiness. Its accent did 
not fall only upon practical policies; questions of theory, too, were 
prominent. Slogans peppered every page. Ulyanov succeeded in 
producing twenty nine issues of Iskra in its first two years and in 
maintaining substantial uniformity of content. Repetitiousness was 
treated as a virtue. Clarity was all-important. Iskra called again and 
again for 'the overthrow of the autocracy' and the consolidation of 'the 
democratic revolution'.3 
Neither Ulyanov nor Plekhanov would brook rival journalistic 
enterprises. K. M. Takhtarev, taking over the editorship of Workers' 
Thought from Kok, proposed in 1900 to put the newspaper under 
Plekhanov's direction. Plekhanov spurned the suggestion. Takhtarev 
was given to understand that Plekhanov could not break a prior 
commitment to Iskra. 
But this alone would hardly have held Plekhanov back. Plekhanov's 
mind was probably also mulling over the likelihood of Takhtarev's 
policies changing abruptly again in the future (as indeed they did very 
 Straightening Sticks 
87 
shortly).4 Ulyanov continued to point to the Economistic orientation 
of Workers' Thought and Workers' Cause. In fact no Russian 
social-democratic publication was preaching 'Economism' in 1900: 
political struggle against the monarchy was a commonly recognised 
priority. Not a few activists in Russia already objected to Iskra's 
defamatory methods. Southern Worker did so with particular anger. 
This was a newspaper founded in Ekaterinoslav in 1900; it aimed to fill 
the gap caused by the arrest of the editorial board of Kiev's Workers' 
Newspaper in 1898. Southern Worker had initially held Ulyanov in 
esteem. It had even invited Ulyanov, Martov and Potresov to serve on 
its editorial board; but the 'troika' refused. Southern Worker's 
subsequent effort to unite the warring sections of the party was 
regarded by Iskra as a futile attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable.5 
Nothing short of total victory would satisfy Ulyanov and Plekhanov. 
Their natural abrasiveness was strengthened by their fear lest the party 
should prove incapable of fulfilling its self-ascribed historic destiny. 
Their minds were therefore transfixed by the dangers of 'tailism'.6 
They despised those, like Kuskova, who implied the need to stand at 
the tail, not the forefront of the revolutionary movement. 
They also knew that social disorder was increasing in Russia. The 
years of economic boom had ceased in 1899; whole industries were hit 
by a world trade recession. The immediate effect was a decrease in the 
number of strikes.7 Yet discontent remained. The students in the 
universities organised demonstrations in 1899. Gradually their ex-
ample began to be followed by workers. A May Day demonstration in 
Kharkov in 1900 halted production in the factories; troops were used 
to restore imperial order. Strikes picked up in number in 1901, and 
May Day demonstrations could not be prevented in St. Petersburg, 
Tiflis, Simferopol and Kharkov. In November 1901 the workers in 
Rostov-on-Don conducted a week-long series of marches and public 
meetings. The city was sealed off militarily and hundreds of demon-
strators were taken into custody.8 Not only the towns were turbulent. 
Disturbances were increasing in the countryside. Provincial governors 
warned that peasant passivity could no longer be taken for granted.9 
Iskra reported on a political system in decay; its editorials trium-
phantly described the manoeuvres forced upon the government. S. V. 
Zubatov, in charge of the political police in Moscow, had argued that 
the prohibition of trade unions undermined the regime'S stability by 
delivering discontented workers into the hands of the revolutionaries. 
His recommended solution was the creation of labour organisations 
under covert police control. The new unions would be kept clear of 
 88 
Lenin: A Political Life 
politics, confining their activity to economic wrangles between work-
ers and employers. The Moscow scheme was copied elsewhere in 
1900.10 The government also cautiously began to reconsider agrarian 
policy. Even Witte, the arch-industrialiser, urged change. The com-
mune no longer appeared to guarantee conservative restraint. In 1899 
the emperor abolished joint responsibility for taxes in those communes 
where land tenure had not been subject to repartitions. In 1901 he 
appointed a commission to investigate all aspects of the peasant 
question in European Russia; and in 1903 joint fiscal responsibility 
was ended even in areas where the commune frequently repartitioned 
the land among its households.ll The belief was taking hold in court 
circles that prudence called for the fostering of a social class of 
independent peasant smallholders. Another attempt was being con-
sidered to prevent revolution by means of reform from above. 
'WHAT IS TO BE DONE?' 
Ulyanov, writing for Iskra, poured his greatest effort into considera-
tion of the party's condition. The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement 
appeared in the first issue; it resumed the organisational proposals of 
his Siberian period. But he wanted to expand his argument in a full 
book. The result was What Is To Be Done? It was printed in spring 
1902. He had meant to have it finished earlier but his newspaper 
responsibilities slowed him down.12 The book contains over fifty 
thousand words; its central points are clearly made, even though the 
language signals the haste of its composition. Its contents have 
frequently been misunderstood. What Is To Be Done? has been 
viewed, by numbers of apologists and detractors alike, as a univeral 
practical blueprint. Ulyanov has been said to have tendered a schema 
of organisational mechanics fit for all socialist parties in all times and in 
all countries. In fact he announced restricted aims. His immediate 
recommendations were addressed specifically to Russia and presented 
not as an eternal panacea but as solutions to 'the painful questions of 
our movement' .13 
All the same, Ulyanov's analysis comes encased in general theoreti-
cal propositions. Leadership is the dominant theme. The urban 
working class is to lead the democratic revolution; but it will not 
discharge its historic duties unless given direction by the social-
democratic party. Left to themselves, workers cannot develop socialist 
ideas. They will limit themselves to an apolitical quest for marginal 
 Straightening Sticks 
89 
improvements in their material conditions. Socialist 'consciousness' 
has to be introduced from without. The job of educating the working 
class in the first instance falls inevitably to those middle-class 
intellectuals disaffected from the capitalist order .14 Only the intel-
ligentsia possesses 'scientific' knowledge. Armed with the 'correct' 
theory, the party will be able to implement the 'correct' forms of 
organisation. 'Incorrect' strategies like 'Economism' inhibit unifica-
tion. For the party should strive after centralisation and discipline; it 
should operate with the techniques of clandestinity elaborated by 
Russian agrarian socialists in the 1870s.15 Working-class members, 
being habituated to the regulations of factory life, will accept the need 
for hierarchical subordination. Leadership, leadership, leadership. In 
proffering his prescription for the Russian party, he yet praised the 
looser organisational arrangements possible for the German social-
democrats. He attached, however, a remark of theoretical significance. 
He declared that even in Germany, where a measure of political liberty 
prevailed, socialists were unable to ignore the necessity of maintaining 
a stable core of talented, experienced leaders. 'Primitive' democracy 
simply could not work.16 
Floating buoyantly in the jerky course of his prose were sentences of 
rousing clarity. 'Give us an organisation of revolutionaries,' he 
exclaimed, 'and we shall turn all Russia upside down' .17 He extolled 
the revolutionary fire and administrative competence of the early 
narodniki.18 His earnestness was unmistakable. 'Without a revolu-
tionary theory', he asserted, 'a revolutionary movement can not even 
exist' .19 Science was a weapon of political struggle. Disciplined 
cohesion and strict recruitment stipulations were others. Ulyanov 
declared that the party organisation should 'consist mainly of persons 
engaged full-time in revolutionary activity'. 20 Electivity to party offices 
was fine in principle. But in Russian political conditions it was 'an 
empty and dangerous plaything' .21 This conclusion was not intended to 
discourage or depress. It was offered as a realistic assessment which 
would advance Russian social-democrats nearer to their ultimate 
goals. Ulyanov wanted to inspire. Indeed he announced it as his 
slogan: 'It is necessary to dream.'22 
The book possessed a high emotional charge. It was also a polemical 
extravaganza; Ulyanov virtually boasted of his 'uncomradely 
methods', and confessed that his work included 'exaggerations'.23 But 
the Iskra board supported him. Its public posture of unanimity was 
belied by reservations expressed privately. Plekhanov and Akselrod 
had criticisms to make in 1901. Their substance is unknown; yet it was 
 90 
Lenin: A Political Life 
serious enough for Plekhanov to feel annoyed that Akselrod would not 
help him to take the matter further. 24 Akselrod's refusal is mysterious. 
Possibly he wanted to avoid the fragmentation of the newspaper 
board; and he may also have been loathe to castigate a work which at 
any rate attacked revisionism in Marxism. Potresov was less inhibited. 
He told Ulyanov that the book gravely underestimated the 'spontane-
ous' development of socialism among working-class people. 25 Such 
comments, however, were kept within the family of the Iskra board. 
And Ulyanov in any case did not lack admirers elsewhere. N. 
Valentinov testified to the book's electrifying effect. He instantly felt 
that Ulyanov had supplied Russian social-democrats with something 
that had been unavailable: an up-to-date comprehensive rationale for 
the party's existence. Ulyanov delineated the immediate tasks ahead 
gave and a justification for immediate optimism.26 A. A. Bogdanov 
and A. V. Lunacharski too were attracted. They liked the book's stress 
upon what could shortly be achieved in Russia; they approved of its 
contempt for bookish theorising (which they associated with the 
Swiss-based emigres). What Is To Be Done?, for them, was a highly 
estimable account of the modes of activity appropriate to circum-
stances in contemporary Russia.27 No practical advice since On 
Agitation had won such praise. Ulyanov's sympathisers ignored the 
book's darker side. Some, such as L. B. Kamenev, apparently found his 
arguments on 'socialist consciousness' entirely acceptable. 28 Others, 
like Bogdanov, in fact firmly believed in the workers' capacity for 
political self-development; but, for the moment, they were caught up 
by the sheer enthusiasm and apparent practicality of What Is To Be 
Doner9 
Yet the book also had many critics. Its controversial approach was 
quickly perceived; and the main reason why it did not straightaway 
evoke enormous controversy was that the dispute about the party 
programme held greater attention in 1902-1903.30 
Among the early adversaries was B. I. Krichevski. He assailed 
Ulyanov's views on consciousness. He believed that the book accorded 
importance to the party at the working class's expense; and that, 
moreover, it envisaged the central party apparatus as the military high 
command of the revolution.31 Krichevski's writings in 1902 initiated a 
tradition. Years passed before all the possible implications ofthe book 
were teased out; probably not even Ulyanov had fully appreciated 
them at the time of composition.32 The conflict steadily sharpened in 
1903. It already touched upon a matter which profoundly annoyed 
Ulyanov. The principal opponents were A. S. Martynov and V. P. 
 Straightening Sticks 
91 
Akimov. Ulyanov's attitude to organisation, they asserted, was not 
Marxist at all. They described it as narodnik. In their view, Ulyanov 
had not merely utilised secondary elements of populism but had 
restored the nucleus of Tkachevian organisational doctrine. These 
were grievous charges. The critics claimed that the book's recommen-
dations would effectively exclude workers entirely from the party. 
Ulyanov was arraigned for proposing to create a conspiratorial 
organisation, isolated from the mass of the people and constituted by 
the middle-class intelligentsia. Such a party of 'professionals' would try 
to seize power through the bomb-throwing plots beloved of narodnik 
terrorists; it would ignore the Marxist tenet that social revolutions 
occur only when whole classes of the population become involved in 
the struggle.33 
In fact, Ulyanov maintained his hostility to narodnik social theory. 
He could note also that his works had for years involved a conventional 
contemporary Marxist perspective of the stages of political changes: 
bourgeois democracy followed by the dictatorship of the proletariat.34 
Angered by his critics, he wrote his Letter to a Comrade About Our 
Organisational Tasks. He disowned any desire for a party of middle-
class activists. He wanted workers to be recruited toO.35 But he 
reiterated that every member should give a commitment to active 
participation in party life. Membership would cover a large scale of 
degrees of activity. Ulyanov expected the full-time revolutionaries in 
each local committee to be privy to more secrets and to exercise 
greater authority than their colleagues. The more full-timers in the 
committees, the better it would be for the party as a whole. But the 
rank-and-file members also had their duties; and unless the party could 
attract thousands of such entrants it would remain an ineffective force 
against the autocracy. Ulyanov envisaged the local party structure as a 
series of concentric circles. The core would be provided by full-timers; 
the middle circles by part-time activists; the outer circles by rank-and-
filers.36 The onus of commitment and authority would increase in 
proportion to the member's nearness to the innermost circle. Local 
committees had to be allowed some autonomy. The Central Com-
mittee should not arbitrarily appoint officials from above, even though 
the need for clandestinity ruled out the full application of the elective 
principle.37 The central party apparatus would not be all-powerful and 
unchecked; and, by the same token, it was unjust to accuse him of 
aspiring to be party despot. He objected to personalised arguments. 
He also re-affirmed that he accepted individual terrorism as a 
'defensive' tactic only.38 
 92 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Letter showed that he did not want a middle-class clique of 
militarily-disciplined conspirators. Yet Akimov still had telling points 
to make. He emphasised the prominent contribution made by the 
workers themselves in the Russian empire to the formulation of 
socialist ideas.39 Akimov, had he so desired, could also have adduced 
English data. Brandishing the Webbs' researches, Ulyanov had 
declared that socialism could never have existed without direction by 
middle-class intellectuals (and that Karl Kautsky had said something 
similar in 1901).40 But neither the Webbs' data nor later scholarship 
proved any such thing. English artisans and labourers in the early 
nineteenth century had elaborated varieties of socialism without the 
imposition of ideas by an intelligentsia.41 Certainly, socialism has 
subsequently failed to attract the British working class as a whole; but 
the reasons for this lie in the country's pattern of socio-economic 
development, not in the irresolution of intellectuals. 
Ulyanov's critics continued to contrast him with Marx and Engels. 
Martynov quoted extensively in order to show that Marx had assumed 
that workers of themselves moved towards socialism because of the 
nature of the capitalist system which oppressed and exploited them.42 
In 1869, Marx had stated: 'Trade unions are the schools of socialism. It 
is in the trade unions that workers educate themselves and become 
socialists, because under their eyes and every day the struggle with 
capital is taking place.'43 These predictions of Marx's remain unful-
filled, as the English case shows. Nevertheless the point at issue here is 
different. It is that Marx emphasised the spontaneous growth of 
socialist consciousness whereas Ulyanov's book asserted a require-
ment for rigorous guidance by the intelligentsia. Martynov's case was 
powerful, but not completely invulnerable. Marx had also spoken 
about the virtues of communists who 'have over the great mass of the 
proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, 
the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian 
movement.'44 Evidently his concepts were not as clear-cut on spon-
taneity as Martynov supposed and, for that matter, Marx had not tried 
to produce a 'theory of the party'. Even so, Ulyanov had undoubtedly 
dispensed with an inconvenient but basic portion of the Marxian 
heritage. He was more pessimistic than Marx about workers. Undeni-
ably, he had highlighted the 'elemental' force of the massed working 
class; he had said too that the party could not impose an insurrection-
ary time-schedule upon the urban crowds. Nonetheless he empha-
sised a 'negative' side. Workers who were not party members, in his 
portrayal, were good at destroying regimes through direct action on 
 Straightening Sticks 
93 
the streets; but this seemed to exhaust'their virtues, save only that they 
took easily to discipline because of their factory training.45 Justifiably, 
his critics complained of his underestimation of the organisational 
achievements of ordinary workers. They objected to his assertion that 
trade unions built up without assistance from the intelligentsia were 
bound to be amateurish, fragmented, localist affairs. Again the Webbs 
could be cited against him.46 
What Is To Be Done? and Letter to a Comrade, moreover, were 
most evasive on a final matter raised by critics: how can it be ensured 
that the central party apparatus does not run out of control by the 
party? Ulyanov was concerned predominantly with the implementa-
tion of hierarchical command. He had no scheme for formal demo-
cratic accountability beyond the regular convocation of party con-
gresses; this left the central apparatus with enormous latitude for 
organisational manipulation. It would be many years, not until the 
time of his last illness, before he would consider such commentary as 
anything other than the mental meanderings of those who had fallen 
under the spell of 'bourgeois' sociologists' .47 
THE RUSSIAN POLITICAL ARENA 
Iskra's editors aimed to rally support among Russian social-democrats 
and convoke a Second Party Congress; their intention was to get their 
strategy accepted as that of the party as a whole. Thus they would 
entrench themselves as party leaders. Thus, too, they expected to head 
the Russian revolutionary movement in its entirety. For Marxism had 
held sway over oppositionist thinking and activity in the 1890s.48 The 
narodnik terrorists were disunited and ineffective; their agrarian 
socialist rivals who concentrated upon mass propaganda made little 
headway among peasants and workers. Meanwhile the liberals 
appeared as endless talkers. Social-democratic activists formed the 
most effective clandestine groups; even the catastrophe of 1899, when 
the police rounded up five hundred undergrounders, was a sign of the 
Marxist movement's gathering strength. No other political trend 
possessed so large a network of leaders. Marxist theory had also made 
a mark on the legal press. Books on Russian historical development 
were available in the shops of major cities. And the clandestine 
printing-presses made increasing quantities of political material 
available to activists and sympathisers. Their pre-eminence in the 
camp of the forces of opposition to the monarchy seemed unchallenge-
 94 
Lenin: A Political Life 
able; and it corroborated their belief that the 'vanguard' class in the 
democratic revolution was bound to be neither the middle class nor the 
peasantry but the factory workers. 
This complacency was shattered at the turn of the century. The 
liberals moved towards forming a party. Their spokesman was Struve. 
By 1900 he was talking wholly negatively about Marxism. Ulyanov 
was surprised by his truculence. They met in Munich. The purpose of 
their discussions, which continued until mid-February 1901, was to 
cement their earlier agreement over joint publishing activity. A 
late-night session in December 1900 finally convinced Ulyanov that he 
would have to trim his demands; but, even so, he wanted to avoid loss 
offace: he made sure that Struve saw him laughing dismissively as they 
parted.49 Neither Ulyanov nor Struve divulged whether they made a 
financial settlement. Nonetheless Struve now regarded liberalism as an 
independent movement in clandestine Russian politics. In 1902 he 
founded his journal Liberation. Its campaign for constitutional change 
was to do much to swing sections of the industrial bourgeoisie and the 
professions into a posture hostile to the autocracy.50 
The Iskra editors were still more worried by the emergence of 
another political grouping. Agrarian socialism was again attracting 
support; its intellectual troubles in the late 1880s and early 1890s, 
when all its vivacity seemed to have been bequeathed to Russian 
Marxism, had not really been death-throes. In 1901 the new leaders 
established the Party Of Socialist-Revolutionaries.51 The outstanding 
theorist and organiser was Viktor Mikhailovich Chernov. His ideas 
hearkened back to the narodniki. He refused to accept the argument of 
Russian social-democrats that the peasantry and the factory workers in 
Russia could be categorised as distinct classes of the population. 
Socialist-revolutionaries treated them together as 'the toiling people'. 
Unlike the narodniki of the 1880s, Chernov recognised that capitalist 
economic development was practicable in Russia. In fact he accepted 
that capitalism would and should exist for several more years; and he 
refrained from calling for the immediate introduction of socialism after 
the fall of the autocracy. The next stage in the country's political 
development would be a democratic republic. Even so, the socialist-
revolutionaries intended to press for the 'socialisation of the land' 
without delay. Landed property would thereby be abolished. Agricul-
tural soil would not be nationalised but transferred into 'the possession 
of the entire people'. This would not be socialism; the land would be 
divided up among those working on it but they would continue to 
produce for private profit. Chernov anticipated a lengthy epoch of 
 Straightening Sticks 
95 
propaganda before Russia would move from the 'bourgeois' to the 
'socialist' phase.52 
Not all his comrades agreed with him. A grouping which became 
known as the Maximalists wanted to instal a socialist government as 
the immediate successor to the Romanovs. They were less sceptical 
than Chernov about the rapid acceptability of socialist ideas to the 
Russian peasantry. They also re-introduced political terrorism. Both 
factions looked to the workers as well as the peasants for potential 
recruits.53 
Iskra rejected Chernov's projects as being unscientific. All that 
Ulyanov would say in favour of the socialist-revolutionaries was that 
they did at least recognise that social differentiation was presently 
occurring in the village commune; he scorned their notion that 
governmental action could halt the process.54 Agrarian capitalism was 
inevitable. So that, although Chernov's populism moved even closer to 
Russian Marxism than Aleksandr Ulyanov's had done, a gap still 
remained. Iskra, however, worried about the attractiveness that 
slogans like 'land and freedom' might have for urban workers. The 
Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries might snatch hegemony of the 
revolutionary forces. Young intellectuals in the Volga region were 
beginning to rally to Chernov's ideas, impressed as they were by the 
recrudescence of peasant turbulence after the quiescence of the 
1890s.55 In the Economist controversy, Iskra had been fighting 
heretics. The socialist-revolutionaries could be a more potent enemy: 
they were infidels. They inserted a dangerous element of sUbjectivism 
and diffuseness into debates among revolutionaries.56 Indeed the 
internal life of the Russian Marxist movement itself already gave cause 
for concern. L. Nadezhdin, after emigrating to Switzerland, had 
formed a group called Freedom; he made his call for an immediate 
terrorist campaign ever more forcefully. Iskra had begun life fighting a 
'right-wing' foe, which it dubbed Economism. From mid-1901 it was 
struggling on two fronts inside the party. The vehemence and 
frequency of its articles against Freedom show just how seriously the 
'left-wing' threat was regarded.57 
Ulyanov came to the fore as the implacable harrier of heretic and 
infidel. In March 1902 the security of Iskra's typesetting facilities in 
Munich could no longer be guaranteed, and the editorial board by a 
majority vote (with Plekhanov and Akselrod constituting the minor-
ity) decided to move premises to London.58 Ulyanov's influence was 
increasing. This was partly the result of the low level of literary 
productivity of three of the six editors: Akselrod, Potresov and 
 96 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Zasulich.59 It also derived from his own superabundance of hard work 
and verve. His colleagues found him fastidious in life-style; Martov, 
Potresov and Zasulich set up their commune in the English capital, but 
nothing would induce him to become enveloped by what he saw as 
their bohemian muddle.60 Krupskaya emigrated in 1901. She kept 
house for him, freeing him to study daily in the British Museum. He 
was turning into an excellent administrator. He was industrious in 
keeping tabs on the Russian underground; he and Krupskaya main-
tained a voluminous correspondence by means of invisible inks and 
laboriously-translated codes. He welcomed newcomers into emigra-
tion, especially those like Lev Davydovich Trotski who could be asked 
to write for Iskra. 61 Ulyanov revelled in his position of primus inter 
pares. 
And with such a team, Ulyanov was in a fine position to campaign to 
win supporters in Russia; he saturated Iskra with the strategical and 
organisational concepts developed in What Is To Be Done? In a literal 
sense the book made his name. He had signed it with the pseudonym of 
'N. Lenin' (which he had first used in 1901 in a letter to Plekhanov).62 
The book won him a fame among underground activists rivalled only 
by Plekhanov. Although he was to employ at least 160noms de guerre 
in his career,63 it was as Lenin that he ascended to general prestige 
inside the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party; his Iskra writings 
consolidated a reputation already acquired as Marxist economic 
theorist and Petersburg activist. Ulyanov-Lenin moved to establish a 
tightly cohesive party. His old underground friends served him well. 
Men like B. I. Gorev, P. A. Krasikov and V. P. Nogin were sent into 
Russia to campaign for Iskra. 64 They made extensive tours, outdoing 
rival newspapers in energy and resources. Police at the border became 
efficient at intercepting packages of Iskra; but more devious routes of 
transport were found to expedite their arrival.65 The pugnacity of 
Ulyanov-Lenin in Western Europe was emulated by his followers back 
in Russia. A Congress was to be called with all speed, and Iskra's 
supporters were to ensure that provincial committees selected pro-
Iskra representatives. Ulyanov-Lenin was unrestrainedly militant: 'A 
fight perhaps causes irritation to a few persons, but thereby it clears the 
air; it defines relations directly and precisely; it defines which 
disagreements are basic and which secondary, defines where there are 
people taking a completely different road and where there are true 
party comrades dissenting only about particularities.'66 
 Straightening Sticks 
97 
THE PARTY PROGRAMME 
It worried Ulyanov-Lenin that the Iskra board had not yet drafted a 
party programme; in 1901 he pestered Plekhanov to undertake the 
job. Plekhanov was respected as the party's primary theoretician. 
Ulyanov-Lenin was reluctant to make the first draft. Plekhanov, 
however, saw his own priority of the moment as being to crush Struve 
in philosophical debate.67 Only late in the year did he succumb to 
Ulyanov-Lenin's badgerings. 
Plekhanov offered up his manuscript around New Year 1902, and 
the six editors of Iskra met on 8 January to discuss it.6s Ulyanov-Lenin 
turned up with an armful of proposed corrections. The other four 
watched in bemused horror as combat commenced. Plekhanov had 
always played the schoolmaster in disparaging Vladimir Ilich's prose 
style. Revenge was now exacted. The master was corrected magisteri-
ally. Plekhanov was taken to task for implying that the proletariat 
constituted a majority ofthe Russian population.69 Ulyanov-Lenin was 
a harsh examiner. He laughed at Plekhanov's assumption that no 
consumer goods were available to factory workers.70 Plekhanov's draft 
lacked punch. Why say 'discontent', asked Lenin, when you can say 
'indignation'?71 Months of contention followed, with Akselrod vainly 
calling upon the protagonists to mitigate their comments about each 
other. Plekhanov was asked to compose a second draft, which he 
completed by March. Lenin was no less displeased. Plekhanov's 
project was still repetitious and abstract; it was 'not the programme of 
a practically fighting party but a Prinzipienerkliirung, it's more a 
programme for students'.72 Zasulich lost patience. She could not see 
why Lenin was so aggressive when Plekhanov, for once, was obviously 
not averse to compromise. Lenin backed down. Even so, he continued 
to snipe at Plekhanov with remarks such as the following: 'I bow and 
give thanks for this little step towards me' .73 No wonder that it was not 
until 1 June 1902 that the agreed programme oftheIskra board could 
be published.74 
The final version was close to Lenin's draft of 1899; the sections on 
factory legislation were largely his creation, and the agrarian sections 
too bore his imprint.'5 Akselrod was content with the final product. 
Even Plekhanov was pleased. He teased Lenin over his inelegant use 
of brackets and punctuation marks, but the tensions eased between the 
two men in late 1902; both were willing to profess contentment with 
the Iskra programme. The party was to struggle for the greatest 
possible extension of civic freedoms in the post-autocratic state. It 
 98 
Lenin: A Political Life 
would call for the universal suffrage, for an elective administration, for 
a people's militia, for the secularisation of the state, and for the right of 
national self-determination. Its social goals would include compulsory 
universal education and a state pension scheme. The party would press 
for workers to obtain an eight-hour working day, more effective safety 
regulations, representation on arbitration tribunals, and the general 
opportunity to organise themselves in defence against employers; and 
for peasants to be allowed to form their own local committees as well as 
to possess the 'cut-off strips'. Lenin and Plekhanov presented a 
common front. They anticipated the maturation of the Russian 
capitalist economy under a bourgeois government constrained to 
concede political and social reforms which would facilitate the 
eventual coming to power of the social-democratic party.76 
The front was a triumph over personal jealousies. It also was 
achieved despite disagreements over questions of substance. 
Plekhanov's preamble stated that 'capitalism is becoming more and 
more the dominant mode of production' in Russia. Lenin pressed that 
capitalism was 'already the dominant' mode. 77 Plekhanov accepted the 
amendment. As yet, in 1902, no differences in practical policy were 
hinged upon the contrasting phrasings; it was only in 1917, when Lenin 
began to call for the inception of the transition to socialism, that his 
higher estimation of the level of Russian economic development came 
to obtain direct political significance.78 
No serious dissension was easily detectable in the discussion about 
the methods to be employed when socialism was introduced. Broad 
consensus existed. Both men expected that the social-democrats would 
take power only after a period of 'bourgeois rule' (which would follow 
the autocracy's overthrow). Both also characterised the transition to 
socialism under the term of 'the dictatorship of the proletariat'. 
Plekhanov mentioned this in his first drafe9 When Lenin attacked his 
offering as being generally too 'noisy', Plekhanov substituted 'the 
political power' ofthe proletariat for 'dictatorship of the proletariat' .80 
But Lenin had in fact liked the original phrase, and encouraged its 
restoration. He noted that this was in line with their common 
interpretation of Marx's thinking.81 Initially Plekhanov resisted the 
restoration; in his opinion there was no distinction between the two 
formulations under discussion since, as he proceeded to argue, 'in 
politics he who holds power is the dictator' .82 But he saw no sense in 
further dispute and soon accepted Lenin's view.83 Plekhanov would 
not foreswear the necessity of the working class to resort to force 'for 
the defence of its own interests and for the suppression of all social 
 Straightening Sticks 
99 
movements directly or indirectly threatening such interests'. Other 
classes in the population would have no guarantees of democratic civic 
rights.84 Accordingly dictatorship, for both Lenin and Plekhanov, 
would be a stern business; neither leader committed himself to the 
principle of universal suffrage. 
Again, however, the Iskra board's visible accord was not devoid of 
hints of fundamental disharmonies in later years. These nuances were 
partly a matter of tactical differences. But they also impinged upon 
basic political problems. Perhaps in 1902 they were too obscure for the 
potential significance to be discerned. 
Firstly, Lenin was keener than Plekhanov to mention the party's 
suspicions about the peasantry. Rural attitudes were a mixture of 
progressive and reactionary qualities. The future socialist government, 
declared Lenin, should certainly attempt to persuade the peasants to 
accede to the abolition of private-enterprise practices. But it would be 
necessary to 'use power' if persuasion failed;85 and therefore Lenin 
deplored Plekhanov's lack of reference to the peasantry's 'conserva-
tiveness' .86 Plekhanov made no objection. He had in any case, ever 
since turning to Marxism, taken a dimmer view of the peasants than 
others like Lenin. Only Zasulich on the Iskra board objected to the 
proposed deployment of power: 'On millions of people! Just try 
then! .. .'87 A further problem indicated a more serious implicit divi-
sion between Lenin and Plekhanov. It concerned mass terror. What is 
To Be Done? contained a passage lauding the narodnik Tkachev's 
standpoint on the subject as 'magnificent' .88 Plekhanov approved the 
dictatorship's right to turn to violence in the case of political resistance; 
but he was not an enthusiast for terror: he never commended the 
execution of persons, regardless of their actions or opinions, just 
because they happened to belong to a particular social class. Lenin's 
approach was far cruder. He did not specifically threaten to organise a 
post-revolutionary terror. But, to put it mildly, his position was hardly 
typified by vehement opposition to such a policy; and his approval of 
this kind of terror was to re-surface from time to time well before the 
grim days of 1918.89 
Iskra's leaders were anyway pre-occupied by the defence of their 
proposed programme from attack by other social-democrats. Dispute 
ensued between Iskra and its rivals. There was agreement that Iskra's 
legislative schema for the post-autocratic republic was mostly accept-
able; everyone in the party welcomed the extensive political and social 
rights to be demanded for the workers. 
But controversy attended other matters. Martynov was a prominent 
 100 
Lenin: A Political Life 
critic. For him, the social-democratic party should be a workers' party 
aiming to represent the interests of the working class alone; its 
programme had no need for a section directed towards peasants. In 
any case, the party's general premise was that the overthrow of the 
absolute monarchy should lead to the removal of all remnants of feudal 
practice inhibiting capitalist economic development. Martynov asked 
how this would be assisted by the mere grant of the 'cut-off strips' to 
the peasantry. The assistance would be trivia1.90 P. P. Maslov, Lenin's 
old adversary in agrarian questions, pursued the point. He asked what 
was to stop Iskra's peasant committees from seizing not only the 
'cut-off strips' but the entire land. Maslov, unlike Martynov, recog-
nised the party's need for an agrarian policy. His own proposals went 
further than Lenin's. He wanted the large gentry-owned latifundia to 
be transferred to local governmental agencies after the monarchy's 
overthrow.91 Lenin's replies were caustic. He re-stated, answering 
Martynov, that the peasantry was doomed as a social class; and that it 
was 'tailism' to sit back and let the bourgeoisie dominate agrarian 
reform. He was less persuasive in retort to Maslov. He re-affirmed, 
bluntly and without further argumentation, that the implementation of 
his own ideas would deliver a deathblow to feudalism in Russian 
agriculture.92 He also repeated his attitude to governmental ownership 
of land after the forthcoming revolution. His position was exactly as it 
had been when he had opposed L. Nadezhdin's demand for national-
isation as dangerously premature. He announced his abhorrence of 
'idiotic experiments in state socialism' .93 
Practical policies were not the only source of dissension from Iskra's 
programme. General theory was involved. Neither Martynov nor 
Akimov accepted the down-playing of the workers' capacity for 
political self-development, and they harrassed Plekhanov as fiercely as 
they had Lenin over What Is To Be Done?94 Martynov let the matter 
rest at that.95 Not so Akimov: he was disturbed by other breaks with 
the conventional European understanding of Marxism which were 
made by Iskra; he especially objected to the demand for a proletarian 
dictatorship.96 
THE SECOND PARTY CONGRESS 
Russian social-democracy was riven by divisions over nearly every 
basic problem of revolution in 1902. Terrorism, peasants, organisa-
 Straightening Sticks 
101 
tion, workers, historical stages: all these vexed questions coiled around 
each other to produce an entanglement of programmatic uncertainty.97 
The Iskra leaders strove, by means of the forthcoming Party 
Congress, to shape and fix official social-democratic opinion in their 
mould. The organisational controls were to be in their hands. The 
Congress's outcome would be affected by the composition of the 
delegations. Iskra's plans were nearly frustrated in March 1902. 
Social-democratic leaders back in Russia, notably those belonging to 
Southern Worker's editorial board and to the Bund, joined with the 
League Of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad to convoke a meeting in 
Bialystok. Iskra dispatched Fedor Dan. The meeting elected a 
three-person Organisational Committee to arrange a Congress.98 Dan 
was one of the three; his presence would ensure that Iskra was not left 
uninvolved. Most attenders, however, were quickly arrested. Dan was 
among the victims. The sole member of the Organisational Committee 
remaining at liberty was K. Portnoi, a Bundist and Iskra's enemy. 
Lenin had to resume the initiative quickly. He encouraged measures to 
call a further meeting in Pskov in November. Portnoi was persuaded to 
attend; and thus the Pskov sessions had some form of descent from the 
earlier meeting in Bialystok. An Organisational Committee was again 
chosen, this time with Iskra's supporters in command. A further series 
of arrests weakened Iskra's position in the winter of 1902-1903; but 
the determination of the agents on tour in Russia bore fruit. Party 
committees in Nizhni Novgorod, Saratov and Rostov announced 
loyalty to the theoretical and organisational principles of Iskra. Such 
victories were not always permanent; opponents were able in places 
like Ekaterinoslav to stir up worker members against the Iskra agents' 
contempt for elective practices. But the campaign was going Iskra's 
way in spring 1903. And the Organisational Committee used its 
authority, in cases of dispute among local social-democrats, to validate 
the mandate of the faction siding with Iskra. 99 
The Second Congress itself began on 17 July 1903. The first venue 
was Brussels; but the attention of the Belgian police was aroused, and 
the Congress adjourned to London. Two days were consumed by 
exchanges about the Organisational Committee. The Bundists com-
plained that their groups, which united tens of thousands of party 
members, were granted only five voting places at the Congress while 
tiny groups in central Russia had received a place apiece!OO The critics' 
target was Lenin. But Plekhanov exonerated his colleague: 'Napoleon 
had a passion for making his marshals divorce their wives: some gave in 
 102 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to him in the matter even though they loved their wives. Comrade 
Akimov is like Napoleon in this respect - he desires at any cost to 
divorce me from Lenin.'lol And the Congress, with its built-in Iskra 
majority, sanctioned the Organisational Committee's actions. 102 
The question of the Bund came next on the agenda. Bundist leader 
M. I. Liber put the case that the Jewish population of the empire 
confronted special problems, not least the pogroms; and that the 
Bund should therefore be granted broad organisational autonomy 
inside the party. Martov and Trotski, Jews themselves, opposed. 
Passions ran high. Yet the resultant voting had never been in doubt: 
the Bund's proposal was rejected by forty six delegates against five. l03 
The Congress turned to decide the party programme. Lenin, already 
pleased by the Bund discussion, took as prominent a role in debate as 
Plekhanov. Iskra's project was taken as the basis for discussion.l04 
Martynov headed the critics, assailing Iskra's editors for implying that 
workers could not come to socialism without the guidance of middle-
class intellectuals. Lenin admitted to exaggerations: 'We all know now 
that the Economists bent the stick in one direction. In order to 
straighten the stick it was necessary to bend it over in the other 
direction, and that is what I did.'104 Plekhanov backed Lenin. He 
defended, too, the reference to the 'dictatorship of the proletariat'. 
After the socialist takeover of power in the distant future, Plekhanov 
argued, a social-democratic government might well not immediately 
feel safe to submit itselfto electoral competition at regular intervals. lOG 
The Congress accepted the general analysis afforded by the Iskra 
board. 
The delegates then considered the programme's specific policies. 
The section on factory legislation was greeted with acclaim. The 
agrarian section was less warmly received. Seven speakers criticised it, 
and only Trotski spoke in Lenin's favour. l07 Most critics harried Lenin 
for offering too little to the peasantry: an interesting occurrence in 
view of attacks on him for being a crypto-populist. But Lenin's 
suggestions were accepted by a thumping majority. The Iskra project, 
with few amendments, became the official party programme. lOB 
The travails of Congress were just beginning. Its commission 
drafting the party rules was at odds; the Iskra team itself was divided. 
Martov disliked Lenin's proposal on the conditions of party member-
ship. He took Potresov and Trotski with him. Lenin wanted to define a 
party member as someone 'who recognises the party programme and 
supports it by material means and by personal participation in one of 
the party's organisations' .109 Martov's formulation ran slightly dif-
 Straightening Sticks 
103 
ferently. His member would be someone 'who recognises the party 
programme and supports it by material means and by regular personal 
assistance under the direction of one of the party's organisations';llo 
and Martov recommended his own definition as being less 
authoritarian and exclusive than Lenin's. The precise literal contrast is 
elusive. So much so that many would attribute the disputes to 
vapourisings induced by the over-heated expatriate political atmo-
sphere. But there was also a fundamental issue at stake; Lenin and 
Martov each knew what the other meant in broad terms. Martov 
wanted a slightly more 'open' party than Lenin. His current priority 
was to maximise the recruitment of factory workers to the party, 
whereas Lenin's was to take precautions against infiltration by persons 
with no intention of active participation in party life. The Congress 
decided in Martov's favour. Twenty eight 'softs' took his line while 
Lenin could muster only twenty two 'hards'.111 
The split in Iskra's ranks lasted the rest of the Congress. Lenin 
proposed a tripartite structure for the supreme party apparatus. The 
central newspaper, Iskra, would be based abroad and produced by 
three editors. The Central Committee, which was to supply organisa-
tional guidance to local committees, would be a three-person team 
located in Russia. Co-ordination between Iskra and the Central 
Committee would be ensured by a Party Council with five members -
two to come from Iskra, two from the Central Committee and one to 
be elected directly by Congress. l12 
Martov found the proposal anything but innocuous. A three-person 
editorial board could only mean the removal of Akselrod, Potresov 
and Zasulich. Plekhanov and Lenin would lord it over Iskra. Martov's 
speech caused a surprise, since he had assented to Lenin's proposal 
before the opening of the Congress.ll3 Angry exchanges occurred. 
Outside the hall there was trouble when A. V. Shotman threatened to 
beat up an Iskra 'hard' who had gone over to the 'softs'. Lenin raced 
out to tug back Shot man with the admonition that 'only fools use their 
fists in polemics' .114 Non-violent dirty tricks, however, were not ruled 
out. Lenin's supporter S. I. Gusev circulated a forged list purporting to 
contain Martov's nominees for the central party apparatus; it included, 
as a ploy to discredit Martov, several advocates of the 'Economistic' 
ideas already condemned by the entire Iskra faction.us Lenin strove to 
weld the 'hards' together. He made the rounds of the delegates, 
ascertaining their political stance and jotting them down as either 
'hards' or 'softs' in his notebook. A meeting of 'hards' was held on 3 
August. Still Martov did not despair of restoring harmony. There were 
 104 
Lenin: A Political Life 
many issues which saw both groupings inside Iskra united. In particular 
it was their common wish that the party should be centralised, 
disciplined and clandestine; the 'softs' felt no less strongly than the 
'hards' that Russian political conditions disallowed the formation of an 
open mass party on the model of German social-democrats. But 
Plekhanov and Lenin would not compromise. In order to keep their 
supporters' loyalty in quarantine they denied the floor to Martov at 
their grouping's session.llS 
The Congress sanctioned Lenin's tripartite central structure. 
Plekhanov and Lenin thereupon had a stroke of luck. The Bundists 
walked out on 5 August, affronted by their treatment by the Congress. 
These would certainly have sided with Martov. In the event, the Iskra 
ballot gave places to Plekhanov, Lenin and Martov. 117 Martov declined 
to serve as the solitary 'soft'. His supporters knew that the battle was 
lost for the Central Committee, and they refused to cast votes. The 
'hards' coasted home. The Central Committee was to consist of G. M. 
Krzhizhanovski, F. V. Lengnik and V. A. Noskov. Plekhanov's own 
position was reinforced by his simultaneous election as the Congress's 
representative on the Party Council.1l8 
Even now the marathon was not ended. On 10 August the delegates 
discussed the party's attitude to other anti-autocratic political groups. 
This was the Cinderella debate of the Congress. The earlier disputes 
could not quickly be erased from the memory. Even Lenin was 
exhausted. Yet this last question required some answers: how close 
could social-democrats draw to the political parties of the middle class? 
Potresov's proposal allowed for temporary alliances, so long as they 
did not harm 'the interests of the working class'. The Plekhanov-Lenin 
axis found this phrasing too bland. Plekhanov's counter-proposal, 
while permitting 'support' for other anti-autocratic groups, required 
the party nevertheless to 'unmask before the proletariat the limited 
and inadequate nature of the bourgeois liberation movement'.119 
Plekhanov desired a campaign against Struve. Martov, Akselrod and 
Trotski stood by Potresov. Lenin stood by Plekhanov. The Congress 
had already lasted over three weeks, and time and funds and patience 
were running out. Discussion was terminated. The Congress opted to 
approve both projects and to turn a blind eye to the discrepancies 
between them.120 It was the peace-making of fatigue. Disagreements 
about attitudes to the liberals would soon in fact acquire even greater 
importance than those about organisation. Potresov and his fellow 
'softs' were developing a sturdier belief in the possibilities of co-
 Straightening Sticks 
105 
operation with Struve's adherents; the 'hards' offered an ever more 
dismal judgement upon the liberals as allied. The embryonic growth of 
two separate Marxist parties for Russia had begun. 
