 9 For the Good of the Cause 
ON THE RETREAT 
If political reactionaries in Russia exaggerated the efficaciousness of 
repression, it is equally true that the country's liberals (as well as many 
socialists) underestimated the difficulties that would be posed by the 
inception of a fully democratic order. Their aspirations were under-
standable and worthy of emulation. But the events of 1917 were to 
show how many, how potent and how mutually antagonistic were the 
social forces held down by the autocracy. Parliamentary compromises 
would have been extremely hard to achieve in any event. The later 
experiences of other countries offers further food for thought. It is by 
no means self-evident that India's political democracy has aided 
economic modernisation; or that the absence of such a democracy in 
China in the post-war years retarded the advance from a backward, 
feudal economy. 
Be that as it may, the clamour of Russian oppositional groups for 
elective, representative government had never been stronger than in 
1906. The Duma duly convened on 27 April. No single political party 
held a majority, and the emperor's expectation of a right-wing victory 
was not fulfilled. Out of 499 deputies, over a hundred were of the 
peasant estate; but few of these supported the government. Most 
peasants in the Duma affiliated themselves to a quickly-improvised 
grouping which called itself the Trudoviki. The largest Duma fraction 
was constituted by 161 Kadets! The government offered no full-scale 
legislative programme, and not surprisingly attracted vehement criti-
cism from Kadet and other deputies. 2 There were only seventeen 
representatives from the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, 
and only two from the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries. The 
social-democratic fraction, consisting entirely of Mensheviks, sought 
to co-operate with the Kadets. The tactic was approved by the Central 
Committee. It was disliked by Bolsheviks, including those like Lenin 
who had been unhappy about boycotting the Duma elections in the 
first instance.3 For a while, in May 1906, the emperor altered his 
156 
 For the Good of the Cause 
157 
stance. Confronted by a Kadet-led alliance inside the Duma, he 
empowered his new premier Petr Stolypin to parley with the Kadets 
with a view towards their entry into ministerial office. But Milyukov 
refused to attenuate the demands of the Kadet programme. Nikolai II, 
resuming his earlier posture, dissolved the First Duma on 9 July.4 
The Kadets appealed to the population to withhold taxes and 
conscripts.5 Milyukov endorsed peaceful methods of resistance. But it 
appeared that his bargaining position with the government was only 
strengthened when many socialist activists took to the streets again. 
Mutinies broke out in the naval garrisons of Sveaborg and Kronstadt.6 
As Lenin had feared, Stolypin's reaction was fierce and effective. 
The mutineers were swiftly crushed. The government had been 
dispatching punitive expeditions into the countryside throughout the 
year; rebel peasants had been arrested in their thousands. Police and 
army were active in the towns. In the months after the October 
Manifesto, tens of thousands of persons were sent into prison or exile 
inside the country.7 Stolypin now strengthened the attack. In August 
1906 he invoked article 87 of the Fundamental Laws to create field 
courts-martial to mete out summary punishments. He also continued 
to harass the legally operating political parties.8 But Stolypin perceived 
that courts-martial would not intimidate the peasantry forever. He 
introduced a series of agrarian reforms. He had extensive royal 
domains handed over for sale by the Peasant Land Bank. He issued 
ordinances to undermine the peasant commune, believing that the 
collective ties of contemporary village life fostered mass pauperisation 
and thereby encouraged anti-governmental discontent. Stolypin 
wanted to put an end to strip-field methods and repartitional practices. 
His legislation was meant to facilitate voluntary exodus from the 
commune and to supply each household elder with ownership rights to 
the land he cultivated; he wanted also to help those leaving the 
commune to receive their land in the form of a single, consolidated 
holding.9 
Meanwhile the Bolshevik Centre's activity was focused on the 
towns. It set up a factional newspaper, Proletari. The Centre's leading 
figures were Bogdanov, Krasin and Lenin.lO The Fourth Congress, 
with its Menshevik majority, had enjoined committees to desist from 
raising funds through bank raids. The Congress had been equally keen 
to discourage the formation of armed 'partisan' squads.ll The Bol-
shevik Centre flouted both injunctions. But Lenin, unlike Bogdanov 
and Krasin, was unhappy that the Centre should remain involved in the 
organisation of military training; 12 he knew too that his two colleagues 
 158 
Lenin: A Political Life 
retained objections to official party policy on participation in the 
Second State Duma. 13 Even so, a spirit of compromise pervaded the 
Centre's internal relationships. It was strengthened by an external 
factor. So long as the three leaders concurred that the Menshevism 
constituted the most pernicious trend inside the party it would remain 
their common goal to main tain the offensive against Martov, Dan and 
their associates. 14 
On the other hand it was not in his interest to drive the Mensheviks 
to break with the Bolsheviks. The electoral campaign to the Second 
State Duma was set to occur in the coming winter; the Duma itself 
would convene in February 1907. Bogdanov and Krasin demanded an 
electoral boycott. Lenin called for participation. The Party Central 
Committee called a Conference, in Tampere again, from 3 to 7 
November 1906. The Mensheviks did Lenin's job for him. Leading a 
majority of delegates, they flatly rejected any reconsideration of the 
principle of electoral participation. The question for debate was 
different. Martov wanted party committees to be permitted to form 
electoral alliances with the Kadets. Lenin's reaction was the same as 
that of Bogdanov and Krasin. His momentary thoughts of agreements 
with representatives of liberalism were a thing of the past; he joined all 
the other Bolsheviks in an anti-Menshevik front. But the Menshevik 
proposal won by eighteen votes to fourteen. 1s Bolsheviks, though by 
no means all of them, then campaigned to get social-democrats elected 
to the Duma. Police intensified harassment of oppositional parties. 
Social-democratic rank-and-file membership remained numerically 
buoyant; there was a rise from 10000 to nearly 150000 between 
Bloody Sunday and early 1907.16 Party work was conducted cauti-
ously; and the environment of repression began to tip the balance of 
social-democratic opinion in the Bolsheviks' favour, however margi-
nally, after the closure of the First State Duma.17 Bolshevik doubts 
about the Central Committee's higher hopes about parliamentarism 
seemed justified. Nevertheless the electoral battle for the Second 
Duma had yet to be fought. In the event the party fared not too badly. 
It obtained sixty five seats. And Bolsheviks were among them for the 
first time; eighteen of the faction's candidates secured election.1s 
The Second State Duma, meeting in February 1907, was somewhat 
dissimilar from its predecessor. The Kadets lost ground, having won 
only ninety eight seats. They also lost nerve. Afraid lest the emperor 
should again dissolve the proceedings, they avoided assault upon 
governmental policy. They hoped by persuasion to bring an end to the 
policy of field courts-martial; and to persuade Stolypin to extend his 
 For the Good of the Cause 
159 
agrarian reform with a scheme for the compulsory expropriation, with 
compensation, of the gentry's agricultural land.19 Their trepidation 
was despised by the Duma's social-democratic and socialist-
revolutionary fractions. The Trudoviks too found the Kadets too 
deferential to the throne, and their peasant deputies called for the 
expropriation of gentry-held land without compensation.20 Adminis-
trative repression was another vexed issue (and even the Kadets 
demanded the realisation of the civic freedoms promised in the 
October Manifesto). The Second Duma, while witnessing a strength-
ened influx of socialist deputies, was a very divided assembly. The 
monarchist political parties had increased their representation. 
Right-wing deputies pointed out that terrorist activity, undertaken 
mainly by socialist-revolutionaries, had led to the deaths of over three 
thousand government officials in 1906. And monarchist organisations 
in the country urged the emperor to dismiss the Duma forthwith.21 
PARLIAMENTARISM, THE STATE AND AGRICULTURE 
The articles produced by Lenin to interpret the developing trends in 
the Russian empire in 1906-7 make a mixed impression. None attains 
his usual level of confident, comprehensive generalisation. His analyti-
cal framework has to be carpentered together from scattered 
materials;22 his ideas were more probative than definitive. The result is 
a structure forever threatening to collapse through internal strains and 
incompletenesses. And yet this relative looseness of thought yields 
penetrating insights. The range of his considerations is remarkable. In 
addition, his writings immediately after 1905 are pervaded by modes 
of discussion closely identifiable with Marx and Engels. So much so 
that both friends and enemies in the party were to accuse him of an 
uncritical willingness to perceive the Russian historical experience as 
the mere repetition of a German model. The charge that he was a 
crypto-populist faded somewhat, if not completely; and it is difficult to 
accept many later scholars' judgement that the entirety of his work was 
essentially traditional Russian revolutionism without connection with 
Marxism. 
His themes were the current concerns of Russian social-democratic 
debate. He wrote about pariiamentarism as a revolutionary tactic, 
about the nature of the Russian imperial state and about the 
Stolypinian agrarian reform. His standpoint was idiosyncratic. He was 
unmoved by Trotski's Results and Prospects, which was published in 
 160 
Lenin: A Political Life 
1906;23 he objected equally to the multi-volume studies on con-
temporary Russia produced by the Menshevik leadership from 1909 
onwards.24 He also rejected the general political scenario painted in 
Bogdanov's various works (although it was not until the latter half of 
1907 that Lenin engaged his rival in open disagreement at a Party 
Conference).25 His views were at their most direct on the parlia-
mentary question. For him it was axiomatic that Marxists should not 
ignore opportunities to have their deputies in Houses of Commons, 
Reichstags and Dumas. Such neglect would constitute a drift into 
anarchism.26 Marxism held that tactics and methods had to be adjusted 
to circumstances. It offered no invariable operational schema; it 
adjured its proponents to accept 'compromises' as the necessary 
accompaniment to the onward march ofhistory.27 At times a boycott of 
parliamentary elections would be appropriate. Lenin still defended the 
Bolshevik refusal to participate in the First State Duma. That boycott, 
he argued, had been of the 'active' kind. It had been conducted in a 
period of 'revolutionary upsurge'. The chance had existed to over-
throw the monarchy. At such a moment there was no sense in entering 
a parliamentary institution whose powers had already been so tightly 
restricted by the monarch himself.28 
As the old regime re-asserted itself, however, the prospect of 
successful insurrection faded. Consequently Lenin now found a 
boycott quite unjustifiable. It would only rob the party of a means, 
however limited, of undertaking nationwide agitation and prop-
aganda. The Duma should be used as an instrument for 'enlighten-
ment, education and organisation' .29 Lenin's position was 'centrist' 
inside Russian social-democracy on the parliamentary question; he 
disagreed with both Bogdanov to his 'left' and Martov to his 'right'. 
Bogdanov was accused of unconditional anti-parliamentarism. Lenin 
correctly noted that the German Reichstag was elected on principles 
which were far from wholly democratic, and that the German 
Social-Democratic Party nevertheless did not boycott it.30 
In fact Bogdanov's views were distorted in Lenin's presentation.3! 
Bogdanov fully expected Bolsheviks to enter a Constituent Assembly 
in Russia once a democratic republic has been established; but he 
argued that the Duma was an utterly paltry constitutional body when 
compared with such a future Assembly or even with the existing 
Reichstag. The Russian political situation, moreover, was inherently 
unstable. The explosion of 1905 might recur at any moment. By 
participating in the Duma, Russian social-democrats would help to 
 For the Good of the Cause 
161 
legitimate the existing political order and fail to concentrate upon 
mobilising the workers and the peasantry into armed action against the 
monarchy.32 In reply, Lenin agreed that politics in Russia were 
susceptible of sudden transformation; he, no less than Bogdanov, 
expected violent political 'breaks' and 'leaps' to take place.33 The 
current task, as Lenin saw it, was to design tactics which would permit 
the party to consolidate itself nationally in advance of the recrudes-
cence of a revolutionary situation. Bogdanov, in his turn, declared that 
Lenin's tactical shimmyings amounted to a sell-out of Bolshevik 
programmatic goals to Menshevism.34 Lenin retorted that he was no 
Menshevik. He stressed repeatedly that he was urging the Duma 
fraction never to trim the demands of the party programme or collude 
with the Kadets in parliamentary dealings.3s 
The discussion on parliamentarism was tied to considerations on the 
nature of the Russian state. Along with other social-democratic 
theorists, Lenin had written little specifically about the autocracy. 
Society, rather than the state, had attracted their attention. Until 1905 
their main aim had been to demonstrate that, however unmodern its 
general appearance, the Russian economy had decisively embarked 
upon a course of capitalist development. 
On the whole, they had assumed that the Romanov monarchy was a 
relic from Russia's past which inhibited further economic modernisa-
tion.3s Lenin's own Development of Capitalism in Russia implied 
agreement with this. Feudal 'vestiges' had to be destroyed if capitalism 
was to mature. Yet the party's theorists, including Plekhanov, had also 
pointed out that the state's role was not uniformly retardatory in the 
economic sphere. They recognised the powerful impetus imparted to 
Russian industrial growth by Peter the Great at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century and by the government's ministers at the end of the 
nineteenth. 37 Such references to the ambivalent impact of the govern-
ment had not yet been proposed in book-length form. Trotski'sResults 
and Prospects filled the gap. Its central supposition was that Russia had 
followed an idiosyncratic course of historical development, combining 
features characteristic of 'backward' and 'Asiatic' countries with 
features associated with the 'modern' industrial countries such as 
Britain or Germany. Russia was a hybrid. Economically speaking, her 
condition expressed itself in technologically up to date, vast factory 
complexes existing cheek by jowl with small-scale, out-moded peasant 
agricultural communities. Trotski, like most other social-democratic 
writers (ranging from Bogdanov on one side through to Martynov and 
 162 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Maslov on the other), emphasised how little the position of the 
monarchy had been changed by the post-1905 'constitutional' 
reforms; the political edifice was basically unaltered.3s 
Lenin had often in the past referred to the' Asiatism' of Russian 
political life, nor did he cease to do so; but he also maintained that the 
Russian state had been greatly altered by 1905. It was now directed, he 
proposed, by a 'bourgeois monarchy' .39 This phrase was unacceptable 
to his opponents, Bolshevik and Menshevik.40 Was he not thereby 
claiming an excessively 'progressive' function for tsarism? In terms of 
the long-standing consensus in Russian Marxism, was his standpoint 
not heresy? Lenin's response drew attention to two matters: German 
history and 'Bonapartism'.41 The German state under Bismarck's 
leadership rested upon support by the traditional Junker landlords and 
the rising industrial bourgeoisie. Bismarck, according to Lenin, had 
manoeuvred between these two groups. He had played them off 
against each other. At the same time he had ensured that the balance of 
state policy felI increasingly in favour of industrial capitalism. The 
German monarchy's mediaeval trappings were therefore a superficial 
phenomenon. Lenin added that Bismarckian politics were not a 
novelty. He noted that Marx himself had described how Napoleon III, 
in mid-nineteenth century France, had established his power by 
attracting support from influential social groups (including above alI, 
in this instance, the peasantry) which yet had clashing economic 
interests. Thus both Germany and France had effected economic 
modernisation through a 'Bonapartist' programme.42 Premier Stoly-
pin, in Lenin's judgement, was introducing such Bonapartism to 
Russia. His government promoted the interests of the landed gentry 
and industrial bourgeoisie; it also alI owed both groups, with their 
mutualIy antagonistic claims, to influence policy informalIy while it 
reduced the Duma to the status of a talking-shop.43 
Lenin's approach shows him not to have been strait-jacketed by the 
prejudices of his colleagues. His thought here has a freshness about it. 
He understood that capitalist development was achievable through a 
variety of class coalitions; and his perception of the possibilities open 
to the autocracy continues to offer valuable guidance to historians 
(even though that guidance has been largely overlooked outside the 
USSR). 
But Lenin did not trumpet his conclusions as early as was usual for 
him; occasionally he undermined his own 'Bonapartist' interpretation 
by suggesting that the gentry alone did indeed still govern Russia.44 
This uncustomary tentativeness may well have stemmed from prob-
 For the Good of the Cause 
163 
lems of reconciling his view of the post-1905 Russian state with his 
observations on trends in the peasant economy. Like all social-
democrats, Lenin regarded Stolypin's agrarian reforms as a project to 
feather-bed the landed gentry. Russian agriculture was thus being 
pushed down 'the Prussian road'. Social-democrats noted that land 
reform in Germany in the nineteenth century had not curtailed the 
gentry's political and economic power in the countryside. Stolypin too, 
in their estimation, had set his face against such curtailment. While 
fostering the emergence of a group of small-holding farmers from the 
ranks of the peasantry, he simultaneously protected the landed gentry 
by refusing to expropriate their land and by consequently ensuring that 
many peasant households still had to buy or rent land to subsist. All the 
social-democratic alternatives involved expropriation. Virtually all 
Mensheviks wanted to do this through the 'municipalisation' of 
property in land, most Bolsheviks through letting the peasants seize it 
for themselves; and Lenin had his own policy of 'nationalisation'.45 
Expropriation would terminate the government's attempt at a Prus-
sian solution to the agrarian question. Lenin made a striking contrast 
between the 'Prussian' and' American' roads of development;46 he was 
in agreement with his entire party that capitalism would fully flourish 
in the rural areas of Russia only when the retarding influence of the 
average landed nobleman had been removed, and he suggested that 
the peasants would then be able to compete among themselves just as 
small-holders had done in the USA when the prairies had been thrown 
open to agricultural exploitation.47 
Disagreement, however, remained about the impact of the Stolypin 
land reform. Maslov still felt that The Development of Capitalism in 
Russia had massively over-stated the possibilities for capital accumula-
tion inside the contemporary peasant economy.48 He himself empha-
sised the adverse effects of the rural population explosion.49 Above all, 
he tried to show that tsarist taxation and absentee landlordism were 
bound to keep even the better-off sections of the peasantry at a 
permanently low economic leveJ.5° Few Marxists after 1905 were 
inclined to challenge Maslov's argumentation, especially as it accorded 
with notions of the regime's reactionary, feudalistic aspirations; and 
his studies gained increasing popularity in the party in the years before 
the First World War.51 
If there was going to be such a challenge, Lenin was the likeliest 
person to make it. He had indeed always underlined the Russian 
peasant economy's inherent dynamism; and now he lost no opportun-
ity to castigate Maslov's stress upon popUlation statistics as being 
 164 
Lenin: A Political Life 
non-Marxist.52 Starting from his own usual premises, Lenin would 
hardly want to affirm that the Stolypin reform did other than facilitate 
the further embourgeoisement of the richer households in the village. 
Once he did in fact ascribe 'progressive' characteristics to it as an 
economic policy.53 But his remarks were patchy. Moreover, he did not 
believe that Stolypin's gambit would work out satisfactorily for the 
government. At the very best it would require 'decades and decades'; 
and Lenin remained convinced that a revolutionary political crisis 
could re-emerge at any time.54 Beyond that, he ventured the thought 
that the amount of economic progress achieved under Stolypin was 
'negligible' .55 But he made no fresh attempt to tackle the Menshevik 
assertion that the better-off peasants were not really turning into rural 
capitalists. Indeed it was in 1907 that he at last conceded that his early 
writings had exaggerated the level of Russian capitalist development; 
and that feudalistic practices were stronger than he had once 
imagined.56 Little attention was adverted to this statement at the time. 
Perhaps his opponents were more interested in the fact that he still 
maintained that the general direction of change as described in The 
Development of Capitalism was correct. 57 So there was no total 
recantation. 58 But there was no characteristically militant self-defence 
either. This was not without irony. On the whole, later research has 
shown that the years immediately before the First World War, like the 
last two decades of the nineteenth century, were a period when both 
capital accumulation and agricultural output by the Russian peasantry 
increased substantially.59 
But if Lenin could have protected his empirical case more vigorously 
than he did, he was completely uninhibited in attacking Maslov on the 
level of general economic theory. Maslov contended that the analysis 
of capitalist development offered by writers like Tugan-Baranovski 
was fundamentally flawed. He acknowledged virtues in narodnik 
economic thought. In particular, he held that a mass consumer-
oriented market was essential for capitalism's maturation. He claimed 
that textiles and other consumer products had been the springboard 
for the USA's economic modernisation;60 and he criticised those 
Marxists who saw producer's goods as more important.6! Lenin held 
fast to his original position. And his logic was not unimpressive. In the 
first place he, unlike Tugan, had never prescribed that industrialisation 
was achievable exclusively through the producer'S goods sector. He 
had constantly recognised the need for products of mass con sump-
tion.62 Of course, he had nevertheless argued that producer's goods 
would inevitably require by far the greater share of investment. And 
 For the Good a/the Cause 
165 
here we come upon a controversy as unresolved today as it was in the 
lifetime of Lenin and Maslov. Some economists would perceive 
Lenin's accent upon heavy industrial production as realistic; others 
would attribute practicality rather to Maslov's insistence upon mass 
social welfare.63 
THE FIFfH PARTY CONGRESS 
The Fifth Party Congress opened in London on 30 April 1907. Over 
three hundred delegates with voting rights were present. It was 
announced that the Party had increased the number of its members to 
150000.64 The Bund, the Social-Democracy Of Poland And Lithuania 
and the Social-Democracy Of The Latvian Region had made formal 
arrangements about entrance to the party, and a delegation of 
Armenian social-democrats did the same at the Congress.65 All 
organised Marxists in the Russian empire were, for the first time, 
represented at a Party Congress. Speakers from Britain appeared. 
Harry Quelch and Ramsay MacDonald greeted the Congress.66 This 
warm reception was not offered by everyone in East Ham. Several 
delegates were beaten up by hooligans.67 Finances too were a problem. 
Dozens of delegates were workers whose money ran out when the 
Congress moved into its third week. Appeals for donations were made 
to wealthy supporters of the party.68 Monetary stringency, however, 
impeded discussions less than political division. Factionalism was rife. 
Fedor Dan's first sally was directed against Lenin. He wanted him 
excluded from the Congress's presidium for having written that the 
Mensheviks had prostituted their Marxism.69 It took three whole days 
for the Congress to finalise its agenda. The Mensheviks objected to the 
delay. The Bolsheviks detected questions of principle in every item 
proposed by their opponents; and they charged them with disregard 
for the importance of 'theory' .70 This Congress would patently be more 
disputatious than its predecessor. 
All but three days of the remainder of the proceedings were given 
over to discussions which in one way or another centred upon the State 
Duma; and Lenin's speeches and behind-the-scenes activity showed 
how deft he was at extracting the maximum political advantage 
available. Bargaining was necessary. No faction or group could obtain 
everything it wanted. Lenin, through tactical astuteness, got as much as 
he could reasonably have hoped for. 
Martov reported on the Central Committee.71 Bogdanov too 
 166 
Lenin: A Political Life 
volunteered a report, prompting Martov to surmise that his adver-
sary's task would be to comment on the work of 'another secret 
institution'.72 This was a reference to the Bolshevik Centre. As 
evidence of Bolshevik duplicity, Martov noted that Bogdanov, Krasin 
and Lenin had refused to hand over to the Central Committee the sum 
of 60 000 roubles left to the party in the will of the industrialist Savva 
Morozov.73 On they argued, each side claiming that the other had a 
Duma policy which damaged the prospects of revolution. The 
Menshevik Martynov jibed that, while he stood for 'permanent 
revolution', the Bolsheviks preferred 'permanent chatter'.74 But the 
Mensheviks were no less chattersome. The Polish, Latvian and 
Bundist delegations found the Bolshevik-Menshevik altercations 
tiresome. Their impatience could not be neglected. The Bolsheviks, 
having won only a handful of places at the Congress more than the 
Mensheviks, did not command an absolute majority. Consequently 
Bogdanov (who had kicked up yet another furore by denouncing 
Martynov as 'a desperate opportunist')15 was unable to resist the 
motion to pass on to the next item of business. This was the Menshevik 
Tsereteli's report on the Duma fraction 76 G. A. Aleksinski, a deputy in 
the Duma and also a Bolshevik, delivered a hostile co-report;77 and 
Lenin dismissed Tsereteli's words as 'the purest revisionism' .78 Trotski 
stepped between the two factions.79 But his pleas had no effect. 
Plekhanov stirred up further wrangling when he suggested that the 
philosophical standpoint of Mach and Avenarius, so beloved of many 
Bolsheviks, was irreconcilable with Marxism; he also asserted that 
syndicalist ideas might soon take hold inside the Bolshevik faction.80 
Again the Poles and other non-Russian delegates intervened and the 
Congress was hauled forward to its third item: Lenin's report on the 
party's 'relation to the bourgois parties' .81 He argued that social-
democrats in the Duma should ally themselves with the Trudoviki and 
the Socialist-Revolutionaries and not with the Kadets. He based this 
upon his optimism about the peasantry's democratic leanings.82 
Mensheviks opposed him. They agreed with him that the owners of the 
larger industrial and commercial enterprises had turned their face 
against revolution; but they claimed that the 'middle bourgeoisie', 
especially the members of the various professions, constituted a 
powerful anti-monarchical force. Martynov tried to ridicule Lenin's 
Development of Capitalism, comparing it unfavourably with Maslov's 
economic studies.83 Lenin was accused of using the slogans of the 
narodniki.84 
But the Bolsheviks obtained strong support from the Congress floor. 
 For the Good a/the Cause 
167 
Trotski and Luxemburg spoke out against the Menshevik view on the 
middle class.8s So too did Leo Jogiches, of the Polish delegation.8s 
Trotski, Luxemburg and Jogiches thought Lenin over-optimistic about 
the scale of potential assistance from the peasantry; but the Bolsheviks 
this time stood their ground and, after some vacillation, most Poles 
voted for the Bolshevik motion.87 Thus the Bolsheviks recorded their 
first unqualified victory at the Congress. They continued their 
offensive in the following debate on Akselrod's proposal that the party 
approve the organisation of a 'workers' congress'. Akselrod stated that 
the party was dominated by 'petit-bourgeois' intellectuals; he also 
declared that ways should urgently be found to promote the direct 
involvement of workers outside the party in the revolutionary cause. A 
'workers' congress' remained his recommendation.ss Speaking for the 
Bolsheviks, G. D. Leitezen branded Akselrod's policy as syndicalist.s9 
The Mensheviks knew that the Bolsheviks would win the resultant 
vote. Nevertheless they made some rebarbarative criticisms. Why was 
it, they asked, that the Bolsheviks looked upon workers' soviets as 
nothing better than a 'necessary evil'? Should not socialists welcome 
independent activity by the mass of the working class?90 Neither 
Bogdanov nor Lenin responded. Bolshevik opposition to Akselrod's 
scheme earned the Congress's approval.91 Lenin also won the day on the 
Duma question. Because of Polish pressure, the Congress had so far 
desisted from framing a resolution lest factional bitterness be aggra-
vated. Yet some policy declaration was plainly a necessity. On 18 May 
the Bolsheviks finally won most of the Latvians and the Poles to their 
side. They paid a price. The Latvians insisted that the Bolsheviks make 
excisions from their motion, especially the clause justifying the boycott 
of the First Duma. Thus modified, the Bolshevik motion was passed by 
Congress.92 
Dan assailed the Bolshevik leaders as wheeler-dealers: 'And it is 
impossible by your words to paint over the fact that you were against 
participation in the State Duma, and now you're sitting in it' .93 On all 
sides he saw signs of Bolshevik trickery. He opposed Lenin's effort to 
put off the Congress's discussion on armed robberies.94 The Bolsheviks 
had ignored the Fourth Congress's prohibition on bank-raids; and the 
Fifth Congress reprimanded them for it. Robberies were repudiated as 
symptoms of 'anarchist tendencies'. They were said to discredit the 
party in society'S eyes and to invite the government to become even 
more repressive.9s 
The sessions came to their end on 19 May 1907. It had been in 
near-panic that the delegates attended to three final crucial items of 
 168 
Lenin: A Political Life 
business before returning to Russia. They were presented with a joint 
motion on the trade unions by the Bolsheviks, the Poles and the 
Latvians. Its chief point was a call to get unions to acknowledge the 
'ideological leadership of the party'; it also demanded closer links 
between the party and the unions.96 The motion was passed. The 
Congress then, very quickly, debated the Party Rules. Membership 
qualifications remained unchanged.97 The Congress also re-asserted 
the authority of the Central Committee. It had already specified that 
the Duma fraction should operate 'under the Central Committee's 
leadership'; it now affirmed also that the Central Committee should 
have full control over the central party newspaper.98 Finally the 
Congress turned to elect the Central Committee. There were to be 
fifteen members. Five were Bolsheviks: I. P. Goldenberg, N. A. 
Rozhkov, I. F. Dubrovinski, I. A. Teodorovich and V. P. Nogin.99 
There were four Mensheviks. The six other places were divided 
equally among the Poles, the Latvians and the Bund.1Oo The Poles 
would be useful allies for the Bolsheviks on many issues. But the Bund 
would be hostile. It was already crystal-clear that the Bolshevik faction 
would not be able to do just as it liked in the Central Committee, no 
more than it had in the stormy proceedings of the Congress. 
STOL YPIN'S COUP 
No Fifth Congress delegate, not even highly circumspect ones like 
Lenin, had elaborated a policy for the contingency that the emperor 
might again dissolve the Duma. On 3 June 1907 this possibility became 
reality. Stolypin had been complaining about Marxist propaganda in 
the armed forces, and his police had been working to establish that 
social-democratic deputies to the Duma were implicated. The flat of 
deputy I. P. Ozol was raided. Stolypin asked the Duma to waive Ozol's 
immunity from arrest. The Duma's non-compliance led Stolypin to 
disperse it. 101 He also announced that the government, would convoke 
a Third State Duma only after altering the electoral rules. He wished to 
increase the representation of the landed gentry at the expense of the 
peasantry. His new regulations cut back still further the electoral force 
of the urban workers. And the ethnically Russian sections of the 
population were to be accorded a disproportionately large number of 
Duma seats; the rebellious non-Russian nationalities were to be 
under-represented. 102 Stolypin aimed to acquire a Duma more to his 
political liking, even if this required measures which amounted to a 
 For the Good of the Cause 
169 
coup d' etat. The Third State Duma convened on 1 November 1907. By 
and large, Stolypin had got his way: by far the largest fraction in the 
Duma were the conservative Octobrists, with 150 members and with a 
leader in A. I. Guchko who was ready to work in harness with the 
government. The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party mustered 
only nineteen places. l03 
Most Bolshevik leaders had called for a boycott, pressing their case 
at an emergency Party Conference in the Finnish town of Kotka on 21 
July. Bogdanov believed that participation in the Duma amounted to 
collaboration with class enemies.l04 The Mensheviks still felt other-
wise; and they were able, with Lenin and his associates, to block the 
passage of Bogdanov's motion. They themselves, however, had 
insufficient backing for their scheme for a parliamentary alliance with 
the Kadets. Lenin therefore held the ring between Bogdanov and Dan. 
He announced that he considered boycottist plans to be against the 
party's interest.lOs He spoke openly against Bogdanov for the first 
time. He trimmed his own motion a little. He agreed to include a 
sentence which stated that many factory workers were indifferent to 
the results of the Third Duma elections; and he incorporated a call for 
anti-government meetings and demonstrations. lOS This made his 
proposal somewhat more attractive to Bogdanov's group. Bogdanov 
had his reservations about Lenin's motion recorded for dissemination 
to the party at large, but in the end he voted for it as a lesser evil than 
the project of the Mensheviks. l07 
Lenin's 'centrist' resolution was victorious at the Party Conference. 
Nonetheless the time had passed since the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
worried about the party's official decisions. Repression increased after 
June 1907. The entire labour movement, with its trade unions and its 
welfare-scheme organisations, was affected. The prison population 
more than doubled in the four years after Bloody Sunday. lOS About 
five hundred trade unions were closed down from 1906 to 1910; and 
the number of union members declined from 250 000 in 1907 to 
13 000 in 1909.109 The police hunted down revolutionary parties. 
According to Trotski's estimate, the Russian Social Democratic 
Labour Party's membership dropped from 150 000 in 1907 to 10 000 
in 1910.110 A harassed labour movement was unable to maintain its 
previous level of opposition to the state and to the employers. Millions 
of workers had gone on strike in 1905. By 1910 the situation had so 
changed that only 222 cases of industrial stoppage, involving merely 
46 000 workers, were reported; and, of those 222, only 8 were linked 
to political demands. lll State coercion was not the only reason. 
 170 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Unemployment increased. Under Stolypin's premiership, the indus-
trial sectors of the economy were gripped by a recession caused by 
world trade problems as well as by the disruptions of 1905 at home. 
Average real wages did not rise. In addition the government, laden by 
its immense foreign debt and deprived of peasant redemption pay-
ments as a source of revenue, felt itself in no position to lower indirect 
taxes. Workers were paying more for their food and other consumer 
products. 112 
But Stolypin's legislative energies were directed towards agrarian 
reform. By late 1907, repression had pacified the countryside and he 
anticipated years when the 'sober and strong' among the peasants 
would quit the commune and become solid, prosperous supporters of 
the social order. 
The results were disappointing. Between November 1906 and May 
1915 only fourteen per cent of allotment land in European Russia was 
decommunalised.1l3 There was a further difficulty. Stolypin desired 
that peasants abandoning the commune should consolidate their 
allotments into a single, enclosed holding. Such enclosures were 
thought important for agricultural progress. In fact only 1 260 000 
households achieved this by 1916, and they constituted a mere tenth of 
all the households in European Russia. 114 Stolypin's aims were not 
approved by the mass of the peasantry. After 1909 the spate of 
applications to leave the commune subsided. Stolypin introduced laws 
restricting the rights of commune members to refuse to allow others to 
leave; it also loffered free land in Siberia for cultivation. 11s But social 
relationships in the first half-decade after 1905 remained remarkably 
unaffected. On the other hand, the government could also report 
successes. There was a sharp rise in the empire's grain production. 
Output increased by thirty seven per cent in the period 1909-13 as 
compared with 1900.116 The gentry-owned latifundia were not alone in 
contributing to this. The richer peasants too, whether or not they had 
left the commune, were marketing steadily larger quantities of grain; 
and it is calculated that four fifths of the modern equipment in use in 
Russian agriculture in 1917 belonged to the peasantry.l17 
While fostering this economic improvement (as Lenin, almost alone 
among Russian social-democrats, had predicted to be possible), 118 
Stolypin endeavoured to keep the majority of the Third State Duma 
with him. At times his own respect for the monarch was cast into doubt. 
The Octobrists in 1908 prevailed upon Stolypin to concede power to 
the Duma to vet affairs in the imperial navy. Nikolai II overruled 
him.ll The Octobrists too found cause to distrust Stolyp:n. They went 
 For the Good of the Cause 
171 
into outright opposition to him when, in March 1911, he temporarily 
suspended the Duma in order to introduce legislation on the empire's 
western provinces.12o Isolated from tsar and Duma, Stolypin was in 
trouble. Even among industrialists he had enemies.l2l By 1911, the 
difficulties facing him were enormous: he had not built up the 
peasantry as a bastion of the imperial state; he was losing the affections 
of the middle class. The working class was cowed, but its quiescence 
was unlikely to be permanent. Stolypin did not live to tackle these 
problems. On 1 September 1911 he was assassinated.122 
THE FINNISH BASE 
Stolypin's government had constrained all Russian revolutionaries to 
re-polish all their underground skills. Throughout 1906, Lenin had 
avoided exposing himself to the danger of arrest;123 and his caution was 
strengthened when the Second Duma was suspended in June 1907. 
Police agents infiltrated the party's ranks. Lenin knew that among the 
various caches of literature frequently confiscated by the authorities 
were copies of his own pamphlets.124 He was high on the government's 
list of politicians to be apprehended. 
Yet he could cope with the situation. Rejecting thoughts of 
emigration, he accused Plekhanov of presuming to pontificate on the 
Russian revolution from the safety of the Alps.125 The Bolshevik 
Centre recognised, even in 1906, the importance of acquiring a safe, 
secret base. Proximity to St. Petersburg was desirable. And the 
decision had been taken to move headquarters to G. D. Leitezen's 
dacha, outside the Finnish town of Kuokkala.126 There Lenin lived 
with Bogdanov and Krasin, and the troika had Krupskaya as their 
secretary. The working atmosphere grew stickier in the aftermath of 
Stolypin's coup. The fact that Bogdanov and Krasin fought all the way 
against the party's taking part in the Third Duma elections steadily 
soured relations. Nevertheless joint activity continued. Contact with 
the Central Committee was maintained. Both Bogdanov and Lenin 
had been elected as its candidate members at the Fifth Party Congress, 
and they encouraged their colleagues to come out to their hideaway on 
frequent visits.127 The Petersburg party organisation too held meetings 
nearby in Terioki.128 Lenin and Bogdanov also managed to find time to 
write lengthy theoretical pieces.129 While in Finland, Lenin lived under 
the pseudonym of Ervin Veikov. He also revived his ambition to get his 
books published legally in Russia through his old pen-name of V. Bin. 
 172 
Lenin: A Political Life 
A contract was signed for a multi-volume edition of his works, to be 
entitled Over the Past Twelve Years .130 And on one of his trips to St. 
Petersburg, back in 1906, he addressed a covertly-organised gathering 
of over two thousand persons. He was nervous in advance about his 
oratorical abilities, never having spoken to so large an audience 
before. But on the night he was well received. l3l There is even a story 
that he contemplated standing as social-democratic candidate for the 
State Duma.132 
The tale cannot be corroborated in its own terms. But it is suggestive 
in another sense. It strengthens the impression that Lenin now thought 
of himself as a permanent body in the Russian political firmament. At 
times he delivered statements of 'statesmanlike' soronity and pat-
riarchal serenity. He called grandly upon activists to work together 
'more amicably', 133 and once even asserted that social-democracy was 
of a single mind about political policy.134 
Such pronouncements, however, were not evidence of a change of 
heart or even style. He was still the bilious commentator, the spiky and 
cantankerous in-fighter. Useful as the Mensheviks were to him, he 
disapproved of their ideas and did not refrain from inveighing against 
them. He wondered, provocatively, whether Maslov could continue to 
be regarded as a 'comrade' .135 He fostered divisiveness in the 
Petersburg party organisation, so much so that in spring 1907 the 
Central Committee established a 'trial' to investigate his behaviour.13B 
He was impenitent. Indeed he advised his co-factionalists to intensify 
'military operations against the opportunists' .137 His intransigence was 
not unique among Bolsheviks. Mensheviks frequently complained 
about the rival faction's breaches of etiquette. But this only encour-
aged the Bolshevik Centre to persist in its kind of behaviour. Martov, 
Maslov, Martynov and their like were not cowards; they knew how to 
trade punch for punch. But they did not like to hit below the belt. The 
Bolshevik leaders by contrast revelled in a machismo of personal 
insensitivity in debate. Several followers enjoyed the spectacle. 'I 
heard Lenin', wrote a girl about a conference of St. Petersburg activists 
held in Terioki, 'and I was enraptured.' 138 But her adoring attitude was 
not universal. Party Congresses always witnessed speeches by Russia-
based delegates who resented the disputatiousness of party chiefs.139 
What sustained Lenin was his total conviction that his policies were 
totally right. He seemed to have inexhaustible energy. He kept up this 
appearance right through 1906 and until the end of the Fifth Party 
Congress in May 1907. The Congress was an emotional turning-point. 
The chance of an alliance with the Poles in order to defeat the 
 For the Good a/the Cause 
173 
Mensheviks was a chance not to be missed; but it required the long, 
tedious back-room sessions of cajolement and concession. Such 
manoeuvring wore him down. He fretted about the Central Com-
mittee and the Bolshevik Centre's far from secure grasp on it. Even 
sharper was his concern about Bogdanov's influence in the Bolshevik 
Centre. Bogdanov's ally Krasin held the Centre's purse strings; and 
Lenin, without Krasin, would lack the finances to run a newspaper.140 
In 1907 Lenin minimised personal reference to Bogdanov both in his 
writings and, apparently, in his speeches; he attacked policies, not 
personalities.141 But his patience was becoming wafer-thin. A Party 
Conference, attended by twenty seven delegates, was held between 5 
and 12 November in Helsinki to discuss how the social-democratic 
deputies should operate in the Third State Duma. Lenin's anti-Kadet 
motion won the day.142 Yet it did not reflect the attitude of all 
Bolsheviks; and many boycottists, having failed to prevent the party's 
electoral participation, soon began to think of ways to stop the 
Bolshevik Duma deputies from attending the Duma. A split between 
Lenin and Bogdanov was in the making. 
That Lenin should contemplate such a break is used by his critics as 
proof of his schismatomania. The Bolsheviks were a mere faction. 
How could Lenin justify cleaving them into two mini-factions? It 
would be fruitless to deny that Lenin had a factitious trait in his 
character; or that he was not un attracted by the notion of being 
king-pin in the organisations to which he belonged. But it also must be 
appreciated that the State Duma, for him, posed the central immediate 
question for Russian social-democracy. In addition, there was an 
underlying intellectual rationale for his behaviour. He believed that a 
political group's numerical weakness in a period of political repression 
had only limited significance for the future. A revolutionary explosion 
was to be expected. And political parties would be made great not by 
virtue of having built up a large organisation before the revolution.143 
Greatness would accrue rather to those which, in the course of the 
revolution itself, had programmes and policies which corresponded 
with the interests of particular social classes. Lenin declared: 'Indi-
vidual parties can hide in the underground, give no sign of themselves, 
disappear from the political centre-stage; but, at the slightest revivifi-
cation, the basic political forces will again reveal themselves, perhaps 
in altered form but with the same character and direction of activity, 
until the objective problems of a revolution which has suffered this or 
that defeat have been resolved.' 144 
Such thoughts yielded the conclusion that revolutionary leadership 
 174 
Lenin: A Political Life 
in times of unfreedom was better undertaken by a few men with correct 
theory than by many who united around a hotchpotch of incorrect 
ideas. In 1907 Lenin was not ready to break with Bogdanov. He must 
have been tempted. For he had before him the prospect of gaining 
financial independence from Krasin when V. K. Taratuta, Lenin's 
supporter in the Central Committee, inherited a vast sum of money.145 
In any case, other practical considerations interposed themselves in 
the second half of 1907. Stolypin's coup led to increased anti-
revolutionary vigilance. The St. Petersburg authorities were given 
clues about Lenin's whereabouts by police agents in Paris.146 But 
nothing untoward followed. Lenin may unconsciously have thrown his 
pursuers off the scent by departing for Stuttgart in Germany on 1 
August as his party's representative on the International Socialist 
Bureau and at the ensuing congress of the Socialist International.147 He 
also gave up the Kuokkala house in favour of another deeper in the 
Finnish countryside.148 But the police continued to close in. A watch 
was placed on Lenin's movements on 14 November. Official orders 
were given to suspend publication of his collected works, and it looked 
most unlikely that the Bolsheviks would succeed in putting out a party 
newspaper legally.149 Reluctantly the Central Committee decided to 
send most of its members abroad. Lenin became a fugitive. His daily 
physical exercises stood him in good stead. With the help of Finnish 
social-democrats he eluded chase by moving, under cover of darkness, 
from island to island in the archipelago of the Gulf of Bothnia. His plan 
was to catch the Finland-Sweden passenger steamer which started 
from Abo. But police officers were scanning the Abo boarding area. 
He therefore had to make a dash, this time by walking and climbing 
over the icefloes, to the steamer's next port of call in the bay of Nagu 
island. The ice gave way. Lenin was nearly cast down into the Gulf's 
bitterly cold waters. But he had both the agility and the luck to jump on 
to a solid icefloe and to reach Nagu. On 12 December 1907 Lenin 
joined the steamer bound for Stockholm; on 21 December, joined at 
last by Krupskaya, he left Sweden for his second period of emigration 
in Western Europe.150 
