 1 Cross-Currents 
VLADIMIR'S FAMILY 
Early formative influences are not entirely comprehensible even by 
the person who has experienced them. These are general problems for 
the observer. They are particularly formidable when the subject of 
enquiry is dead. Lenin's case is among the most difficult; he died so 
long ago that none of his acquaintances is alive either. He also had that 
important defect as an autobiographer that he disliked writing about 
himself. The memoirs by his friends and enemies are thin gruel. And 
the information on his background, never very generously served, is at 
its meagrest for the years of his childhood and adolescence. 
But let us begin with a few incontrovertible facts. He was born on 10 
April 1870. He was christened as Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov; it was only 
many years later that he adopted his more illustrious pseudonym. His 
birthplace was Simbirsk, a town on the river Volga in the east of 
European Russia. He was the second son of Ilya Nikolaevich and 
Mariya Aleksandrovna Ulyanov. In 1869, a year before Vladimir's 
birth, Ilya had been appointed as schools inspector for the province of 
Simbirsk. It was the summit of a meritorious career. It meant, too, that 
he entered the social estate of the gentry. Ilya's material conditions as a 
young boy are not totally clarified; but they are unlikely to have been 
very prosperous. He was brought up in Astrakhan (which is situated in 
Russia's far south, where the Volga flows into the Caspian Sea). His 
father, Nikolai Ulyanov, was a tailor. Nikolai's ethnic background is 
undetermined. It is uncertain whether he was Russian or Kalmyk or 
Tartar; and the truth is unlikely to emerge so long as the Soviet 
authorities are embarrassed about data thought to detract from the 
'Russianness' of Lenin. In any case, Nikolai married an illiterate 
Kalmyk girl called Anna Alekseevna Smirnova. He was in his 
seventies when he died. Unremitting toil had enabled him to acquire 
some capital and to change his status from serfs to townsman's. But 
Ilya Ulyanov was a lad at the time of his father's death. He would have 
suffered immediate destitution had it not been for his elder brother's 
undertaking to finance his education. Ilya was a brilliant pupil. In 1850 
11 
 12 
Lenin: A Political Life 
he left the Astrakhan secondary school after being awarded its silver 
medallion for scholarly excellence.l 
Contemporary fiscal regulations were an impediment to youths of 
non-gentry stock wanting to proceed to university. Months of negotia-
tion passed. But eventually, with his headmaster's intervention, the 
way was cleared and Ilya began his degree course in mathematics in the 
nearby city of Kazan.2 He was an outstanding student and graduated 
with distinction in 1859. He obtained a job as senior master of maths 
and physics in the secondary school in Penza. Ilya had his father's 
qualities of perseverance. He made a name for himself locally not only 
as a fine teacher but also as director of Penza's meteorological centre. 
He gained acceptance among the town's professional classes. In the 
summer of 1863 he paid court to and wedded Mariya Aleksandrovna 
Blank.3 
Mariya Aleksandrovna's background is no less uncertain than her 
husband's. Her father was Aleksandr Dmitrievich Blank, a doctor by 
occupation. Blank was possibly a Russified German; suggestions have 
also been made that he was Jewish. The sources leave the question 
unresolved. We know more about his wife, Anna Ivanovna Gross-
chopf. Her father was a German merchant from Lubeck who had 
married a Swedish girl. The merchant Johann Grosschopf was Lenin's 
wealthiest ancestor. Emigrating to St. Petersburg in 1790, he had 
achieved a commercial success which allowed him the pleasures of a 
fashionable town-house and a well-endowed personal library. His sons 
made notable careers for themselves. Two rose high in the civil 
administration, a third took a commission in the army. Anna Gross-
chopf inherited a considerable fortune; and, when she died, her money 
and possessions passed to her husband. Not long afterwards, Dr Blank 
retired from medical practice. He purchased the land and the serfs of 
Kokushkino village in the province of Kazan. Thus Dr Blank, now the 
landlord of an estate, moved into the ranks of the gentry.4 His daughter 
Mariya Aleksandrovna, in marrying IIya Ulyanov, was evidently not 
worried about the enhancement of her social status. At all events, 
Russia was not quite as rigid a society as previously; and perhaps 
Mariya's family's immigrant past rendered it still less hidebound than 
Russian families of similar social position. 
The marriage was a miniaturised image of the Russian empire of that 
epoch. The genealogy of Ilya and Mariya was a turbulent mixture of 
class, nationality and material conditions; it comprehended noble and 
serf, European and Asian, commercialist and pauper.5 
Next to nothing is known about the impact of this variegated set of 
 Cross-Currents 
13 
circumstances upon the marital life of the couple. Some commentaries 
on Lenin have bordered upon being racist. Cultural differences among 
the empire's ethnic groups undeniably existed; but it is a long step 
from this consideration to the hypothesis, often not stated expressly, that 
the possession of non-Russian grandparents deeply affected Lenin's 
world-view. There were many fierce Russians who had no Kalmyk 
connections (and many Kalmyks who were not fierce); and innumer-
able Russians were industrious without having a vestige of German, 
Swedish or Jewish ancestry. What is more, it has yet to be demon-
strated that either Ilya's humble origins or Mariya's prosperity 
predetermined particular attitudes. Our comprehension of Russian 
social psychology in general is primitive; and the specific evidence 
about the Ulyanov family is of minimal assistance.6 Only a negative 
point can be made with confidence. This is that nobody has recorded 
sensitivity about their national and social background on the part of 
Ilya and Mariya.7 Nor does Vladimir appear to have been bothered 
about it. No source shows that he was distressed by his family's past, or 
even that he either knew or thought much about it. What is striking 
about Ilya and Mariya, in any case, is their purposefulness. They do not 
seem to have been the kind to fret about times past; they thought 
rather about the future. Their marriage was imbued with a sense that 
improvement would gradually come about in the Russian empire 
through the efforts of persons like themselves. They did nothing to 
undermine the tsarist political order.8 
It is only when we look at Vladimir's childhood itself that the quality 
of evidence improves. Mariya bore six children. The first arrived in 
1864 and was named Anna; the second was Aleksandr, born in 1866. 
Then came Vladimir, to be followed in 1871 by Olga. Dmitri was born 
in 1874 and the youngest of all, Mariya, arrived in 1878. It was not a 
large family by the standards of the day. The children tended to play 
together in pairs. Young Vladimir romped around with sister Olga. 
The household was happy. The Ulyanov children never lacked 
attention from their mother. They also kept dutifully busy. Sloth was 
the cardinal sin. An emphasis on hard work was not unusual among 
families occupying a middling rung upon the Russian social ladder; but 
Ilya Ulyanov was possibly exceptional in his extreme concern about his 
progeny's studies. A daily hour was set aside for silent reading. 
Trouble befell any infant who infringed the rules; the punishment was 
an uncomfortable period of sitting in 'the black chair' while the others 
got on with their books.9 Mariya Aleksandrovna managed the home 
admirably. Like other middle-class families, the Ulyanovs employed a 
 14 
Lenin: A Political Life 
peasant woman, Varvara Sarabatova, to help with the children and to 
do the housework. The orderliness may well have been rather beyond 
the ordinary. The domestic arrangements certainly impressed out-
siders. Friends of the children noted how Mariya Aleksandrovna 
insisted upon having a spotless white cloth on the table at tea-time; 
they also remarked on the unusual degree of courtesy shown to the 
parents by their offspring.1O Ilya and Mariya Ulyanov were worthy 
people, even if rather austere, and plainly deserved the esteem in 
which they were held by their neighbours." 
Ilya was ambitious too. In 1863 he had obtained a teaching post in 
Nizhni Novgorod. The rise in salary was useful. The couple would not 
have to move far: Nizhni too was a Volga city. And they savoured the 
prospect of its theatres, concert-halls and libraries. Ilya had an interest 
in pedagogical theory. In Nizhni he would be able to attend debating 
societies and conferences; he would be conveniently situated to visit 
Moscow regularly. 
In 1869 he earned further promotion, and the family readied itself 
for the move to Simbirsk. It was not a transfer which the children in 
retrospect were to feel enthusiastic about; Aleksandr would allegedly 
express blunt disappointment: 'No books, no people.'12 But this was 
the reaction of a developing intellectual. Simbirsk was undoubtedly a 
'nest' of the most conservative elements of the Russian nobility. But it 
was more than that too. It lacked the refinements oflarger cities, yet it 
bustled with riparian trade up and down the Volga. Peasants crowded 
into its suburbs seeking employment as dockers. A national market in 
grain and industrial goods was growing vigorously, and Simbirsk was a 
place of commercial importance. Russia's era of economic and social 
modernisation was at hand. The role to be played in this transforma-
tion by men like IIya Ulyanov was crucial. They were society's 
enlighteners. lIya's job in the Simbirsk schools inspectorate involved 
him in the establishment of teaching premises in the Russian coun-
tryside. Educational policy was scarcely egalitarian, but popular access 
to schooling was undeniably becoming less restricted.13 It is easy to 
imagine lIya's excited belief that training in reading and writing was no 
longer to be the privilege of the rich (and of the minority of the poor, 
like himself, who had enjoyed extraordinary luck). lIya Ulyanov 
worked tirelessly. He was adept at finding ways round bureaucratic 
obstacles; he had a keen eye for talent among local teachers; and he 
accelerated progress by organising private fund-raising ventures. 
lIya and Mariya raised their children with the manners and 
comportment typical of the Russian gentry of their day. Their children 
 Cross-Currents 
15 
continued to speak like nobles throughout their lives.'4 Perverse 
delight is occasionally shown by Lenin's critics that he should have 
come from such a family. But this attitude is misleading. Not all 
members of the gentry were reactionary; and men like lIya, who had 
acquired their status by effort and merit rather than genetic accident, 
were often to be found among those who welcomed change in their 
country. Vladimir would eventually nurse objections to his father's 
liberal politics. And yet it is not unreasonable to propose that he 
received his own trait of optimistic determination from this middle-
class domestic ambience; and that the rapid evolution of Simbirsk, 
taking shape before his eyes as he grew up, fortified his conviction that 
old Russia was dying and being replaced by a Russia that belonged to 
the modern world. 
RUSSIA AFTER 'THE GREAT REFORM' 
The first crisis struck the Ulyanovs in 1884. IIya was informed by the 
Ministry of Education in St. Petersburg that he would be asked to 
retire prematurely within a year. 'S This was a heavy blow. He had 
dedicated his life to popular education; he had worked for fifteen years 
in projects of school construction, had created nearly five hundred new 
schools, and yet was only fifty-three years of age. 
IIya's personal misfortune was a symptom of the imperial govern-
ment's shift away from the reforms of the 1860s. Russia's transforma-
tion caused intense strains in state and society. It occurred in a cycle of 
surges of governmental encouragement followed by back-tows of 
governmental obstruction; and each forward surge was subjected to its 
own constant and powerful cross-currents. The first major attempt at 
reform came with the Emancipation Edict of 1861. The empire, ruled 
by an absolute monarchy, had a predominantly agrarian economy and 
a rural labour-force consisting mainly of serfs. The humiliating end to 
the Crimean War in 1855 had induced disquiet about fundamental 
inadequacies in the administration, the economy and the army. The 
emperor Aleksandr II, succeeding to the throne in 1858, decided upon 
a course of change. His Edict released millions of serfs from personal 
bondage to the landed gentry. He followed this with a series of 
re-organisations in governmental, military and educational institu-
tions. The monarchy also made concessions to principles of social 
representation. A jury system was introduced to law courts; elective 
procedures were laid down for the formation of new provincial 
 16 
Lenin: A Political Life 
councils (or zemstva) with a limited administrative authority. By 1880 
Aleksandr II and his minister M. T. Loris-Melikov were contemplating 
giving permission for the establishment of a national elective assembly 
with consultative powers. The beginnings of a constitutional monarchy 
seemed near. 16 
The new social and political dispensations did not result from a 
preconceived plan. Even less prior judgement was applied to the 
economy. Nonetheless output increased impressively. Agricultural 
production rose. The peasantry, to meet the redemption payments for 
land received through the Emancipation Edict, cultivated more grain 
for sale. Monetary exchange was replacing bartering; and the growth 
in the purchasing power of a minority of peasants gave a boost to 
domestic industrial activity. Sales of agriculture-linked goods to the 
countryside became larger.17 
Industrial production rose in general. Many rural inhabitants went 
off in search of urban employment. Factories welcomed the influx of 
cheap labour. Russia's industries had grown apace in the early 
eighteenth century under the emperor Peter the Great. Her coalmines 
and iron foundries had been at the forefront of European production 
methods; and her textile works had augmented their output 
immensely. Yet her advance thereafter lost impetus. Britain, the USA 
and other countries widened the gap in economic capacity between 
Russia and themselves in the nineteenth century. Various advisers to 
the throne, especially in the Ministry of Finances, watched the 
situation with concern. From the 1870s the government sponsored an 
accelerated programme of industrial growth. New railways were built 
across the country; new mineshafts were sunk in the Donbass; new 
factories were established in St. Petersburg. State intervention and 
subsidies gave additional fuel to the drive. The Russian industrial 
middle class grew in size. In fact the passion for industrialisation 
outstripped the country's financial resources; and Sergei Witte, 
Minister of Finances in the 1890s, looked abroad for investment 
capital. Loans were raised in Western Europe. Foreign enterprises 
were officially encouraged to set up branches in Russia. The metamor-
phosis of the country's economy had become a priority.tB 
These signs of progress, however, had menacing aspects. The social 
costs were enormous. The Edict of 1861 left the peasantry discon-
tented; it offered them, on average, four per cent less land to sow 
than before; and the gentry, keeping areas of arable soil in its 
possession, succeeded also in holding on to many local woods and 
pastures. Redemption payments further embittered the peasants. At 
 Cross-Currents 
17 
the same time a population explosion occurred in the Russian 
countryside. Disease did little to slow down the birth rate. Each village 
had its group of ill-fed, poverty-stricken families. 19 
Peasant disturbances took place in the early 1860s and at the end of 
the 1870s. Government officials were acutely aware that a popular 
revolt led by Emelyan Pugachev in the previous century had nearly 
overthrown Catherine the Great. As yet few believed such an upheaval 
was imminent. Yet the government's position was unenviable. The 
landowning gentry, a bulwark of tsarism in the past, played a 
diminishing role in the Russian agricultural economy (except in the 
latifundia of the South). Bankruptcies were common. Meanwhile the 
urban bourgeoisie had not yet matured into a robust social class in its 
own right. It depended heavily upon the governmental contracts. 
Russian capitalism was still at an early stage; and the state's troubles 
were aggravated by the unsympathetic attitude to the autocracy taken 
by so many members of the 'free professions'. But the group that 
potentially constituted the direst threat was the urban working class. 
True, there were less than two million factory workers in the empire 
out of a population of 125 000000.20 Strikes had been rare in the 
pre-Emancipation epoch. But in the decade before 1895 they were 
taking place at an annual rate of thirty three. This was not many by 
international standards. Yet 'the labour question' had arrived in 
Russia. Workers in the factories, the mines and construction sites 
endured degrading conditions. Wages were barely above subsistence 
level. Trade unions were illegal. Employers could announce mass 
lay-offs in periods of low profit; managers and foremen could line their 
pockets by means of regulations allowing them to fine labourers for 
indiscipline. The government enacted safety norms, but enforcement 
was slack. Housing and other social amenities were fearfully inade-
quate. In instances of labour unrest, employers could call upon the 
state to supply mounted Cossacks to break the picket lines.2i 
It was not extraordinary in Europe for capitalism's birth and 
development to create hardship and tumult. But Russia's experience 
was particularly arduous. The breakneck speed of industrialisation 
hugely intensified the material deprivations and the sense of spiritual 
loss; and the fact that the government was so visibly insisting on rapid 
economic growth was bound to make its own position doubly 
precarious. 
Direct political opposition was suppressed. Covert criticism of the 
government was still made in public, but mainly in novels and artistic 
journals. Dostoevski, Tolstoi and several other authors were promi-
 18 
Lenin: A Political Life 
nent social commentators. The feeling was widespread that con-
temporary state and society were deeply flawed and in need of radical 
alteration; and it was no coincidence that not a few Russian writers, 
living in an epoch of such unpredictability, should have formulated 
notably extreme ideas. This grasping at visions of totality affected 
others too. Many political thinkers refused to content themselves with 
moderate proposals. Clandestine anti-governmental groups began to 
be formed in the 1860s; their adherents were mostly what later became 
known as narodniki (or populists). Most of these were agrarian 
socialists, although some of them inclined rather to anarchism. They 
were horrified by the pauperisation of hundreds of thousands of 
peasant households. They dreaded the inception of capitalism. They 
had faith in peasant virtues. It was their assumption that the village 
commune, if protected, could supply a miniature model of a socialist 
society. The commune was looked upon as an essentially egalitarian 
institution. The authorities exploited it as a rural self-taxation system 
whereas the narodniki hoped to extend its customs of village-wide 
deliberations and collective welfare to the country as a whole. Russia 
could thereby immediately 'leap over' the capitalist economic stage. 
She need never experience the human devastation that had been 
endured in Western Europe. And this above all necessitated the 
overthrow of the monarchy. 22 
The practical progress to this goal, however, was slow. The police 
invariably broke up the early underground groups; and the peasantry 
as a whole was not much affected by narodnik propaganda. Workers 
proved more responsive. The great textile strike in St. Petersburg in 
1870 encouraged the populists. By 1874 the first soundly-based 
clandestine party had been created. Its designation was Land And 
Freedom. It did in fact manage to attract peasant members, especially 
in the Volga area. But it made progress mainly in the towns. 
Working-class strikes were already beginning to show traces of 
political motivation; and the Union Of Workers Of Southern Russia, 
formed with help from narodniki, was unambiguously revolutionary in 
a;ims. Relations between intellectuals and workers were somewhat 
tense. Nevertheless activity continued. Leaders of Land And Freedom 
joined in a mass demonstration against the monarchy on Kazan Square 
in the capital in 1876. But the difficulties for Land And Freedom were 
not confined to attracting popular support. They were also of an 
internal nature. A perennial issue of controversy among populists had 
been how to overthrow the regime; many leaders regarded the 
assassination of state officials as a means of casting the authorities into 
 Cross-Currents 
19 
disarray and enabling the populists to seize power with popular 
backing. Matters came to a head at a secret congress of Land And 
Freedom in 1879. The party split shortly afterwards. The terrorist 
faction set up People's Freedom while those who favoured a strategy of 
long-term preparatory propaganda created Black Repartition. 23 
In 1881, People's Freedom organised a successful bid to assassinate 
Aleksandr II himself. Yet no revolution ensued. On the contrary 
Aleksandr III, heir to the throne, dispelled all expectations of further 
reforms too. His police crushed both People's Freedom and Black 
Repartition; and he made plain his distaste for liberals as much as for 
socialists. 
Thenceforward economic modernisation was to be accompanied by 
increased political repressiveness. It would be astonishing if some 
inkling of this latest back-tow in government policy was not conveyed 
by IIya Ulyanov to his children. Educational measures became more 
and more obscurantist. IIya's job was laden with additional administra-
tive difficulties; it is easy to believe that Vladimir thereby gained some 
acquaintance with the stultifying nature of Russian bureaucratic 
practices. Such knowledge would have come to him through literature 
even if his father had avoided the subject. IIya took his children's civic 
education most seriously. He read and discussed the major Russian 
literary classics with them; and Vladimir, for one, developed an early 
passion for the novels of I van Turgenev. 24 The intellectual forcefulness 
of contemporary Russian letters became known to him. Its precise 
impact remains, unfortunately, a matter of guesswork. Yet it is entirely 
credible that Turgenev's cautious liberal outlook, with its keen sense of 
the uncertainties of the path of change pursued by his country in the 
latter half of the nineteenth century, imparted the attitude that 
Russia's transformation was unlikely to be a peaceful, straightforward 
affair. The brusque anti-liberalism of the new emperor can only have 
strengthened such an opinion. Seldom had the tsarist political order 
been so unpopular among those progressive strata of the Russian 
gentry to which IIya Ulyanov belonged. 
BOYHOOD AND BEREAVEMENT 
The family until then had been free of stress (even though IIya's 
frequent weeks away from home on official work cannot have made 
life easy for Mariya). Vladimir Ilich had been a boisterous baby. He 
was slow to learn to walk, but he was agile enough at crawling to satisfy 
 20 
Lenin: A Political Life 
his primordial passion to wreck the toys his parents set before him. He 
tugged at furniture and was noisier than any of his brothers and sisters. 
There was a charm to his mischief. He was seldom ill, being very robust 
and active. He was teased because of his shortish legs; his trunk was 
bulky and his head, like his father's, was disproportionately large. 
Ulyanov family discipline never quite tamed him. He liked to boss his 
younger sister Olga around, and was always eager to rival Aleksandr, 
his elder by four years and the favourite of the whole family.25 Huge, 
imposing structures of analysis have been erected on this narrow 
factual ground. It has been suggested that Vladimir's destructive, 
active and competitive traits of behaviour give an identikit profile of 
the future revolutionary leader.26 This is far-fetched. The youngster 
Vladimir Ulyanov is unmistakably perceptible in Lenin the man. But 
too much should not be deduced from this; we must also bear in mind 
that Vladimir as a baby was acting like most other babies. 
Schooldays started for Vladimir when he was nine years old. His 
mother had already been to work on him. She taught her children their 
letters and numbers; she helped them with French and German 
grammar. As a proficient pianist, she tried to get Vladimir interested in 
leaming the instrument; but it seems that he dropped practising before 
his adolescence. She steered clear of religious education, perhaps 
because she herself was agnostic. I1ya Ulyanov, however, was a 
regular attender of Orthodox church services and took the children 
along.27 
Both boys and girls were showered with plaudits at school; they 
passed examinations like graceful swans moving over a tranquil lake. 
Vladimir lived up to expectations. Night after night he ran home to his 
parents to say that he had obtained full marks for his day's work. 
Indeed the ease of Vladimir's success bothered his father. I1ya worried 
lest his son should not acquire the ability to work hard. Vladimir (or 
Volodya, as he was affectionately called) shook off this langorous 
reputation. It became difficult to tear him away from his books in 
term-time. He was an exemplary pupil. Later, once he had become 
famous, his classmates were encouraged to write accounts of his 
behaviour: they could dredge up few instances of cheekiness or 
disobedience.28 At home it was a different picture. He was the family's 
daredevil. He terrified his parents with antics like diving into the river 
Volga and swimming through the dangerous currents. Twice he had to 
be rescued by passers-by. The rough-and-tumble of games delighted 
him, and he would continue to love outdoor pursuits in later life. His 
playmates came from his own social grouping. In the Russian empire of 
 Cross-Currents 
21 
the last century it would have been unthinkable for middle-class 
town-dwellers like the Ulyanovs to let their infants run loose with 
children ofthe working class (many of whom would in any case be out 
on the streets earning their living before they were teenagers). It was 
impossible to play around the riverside and not notice the poverty; and 
Volodya's father, as a liberal, was committed to its eventual eradica-
tion. Yet politics hardly impinged upon the lives of the Ulyanov 
children. Volodya would recall these carefree days with nostalgia: 'We 
did not know hunger or cold; we were surrounded by all kinds of 
cultural opportunities and stimuli, books, music and distractions.'29 
Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov was a disciplined pupil and a playful 
risk-taker. This contrast was to be a distinct advantage for him in his 
career as a revolutionary; those playing him at chess saw how he 
enjoyed the pleasures of calculation and gamble simultaneously. His 
father taught him the game, and took it in good spirit when his son 
started to beat him regularly. Volodya was conventional but strict 
about rules. His brother Dmitri complained that Volodya would insist 
upon the regulation that noone should take back a move once his 
fingers had released a piece. Not that Volodya relished easy victories. 
Like other able players, he preferred to compete without a rook or a 
knight if the opposition was obviously too weak; such contests gave 
him the thrill of trying to 'extricate himself' .30 His punctiliousness 
contrasted with the easy-going ways of elder brother Aleksandr. The 
Ulyanov children recorded Volodya's keenness to emulate him. But it 
seems that his effectiveness in controlling his outbursts of bad temper 
remained smalJ.31 
In 1881 his father returned from work with the news that terrorists 
had assassinated Aleksandr II. Ilya Ulyanov was outraged. He 
attended the service of mourning in Simbirsk Cathedral in his civil 
servant's uniform; perhaps he already suspected that the emperor's 
death would usher in an age of reactionary legislation. The revolu-
tionary contagion was spreading everwhere. A teacher at the local 
secondary school had been sacked because of his political activities. 
lIya's son Aleksandr was showing an interest in Nikolai Chernyshevski 
and other revolutionary writers, and this before he had even left 
school. Ilya Ulyanov became more concerned about the future. Three 
years later, in 1884, there came confirmation of his presentiments in 
the form of the notice of his compulsory retirement. Eventually his 
appeal against the decision succeeded. He still worked hard. But he 
started to suffer from insomnia in 1885. On 12 January 1886 he was 
brought home early from work. Next day he had difficulty in eating and 
 22 
Lenin: A Political Life 
lay down on a sofa in his study. In the late afternoon his wife Mariya 
went to him. He was shuddering painfully. She ran to fetch Volodya 
(since Aleksandr was away in St. Petersburg). Nothing could be done 
to help. He had suffered a severe haemorrhage in the brain; his doctors 
were unsure of the cause but the symptoms suggest the same disease as 
would kill Volodya too: cerebral arteriosclerosis. Volodya acted as the 
man of the family; it speaks volumes about the family's commitment to 
education that Aleksandr was not summoned back for his own father's 
funeral. Volodya, the sixteen-years-old second son, took his place 
among the pall-bearers at the Cathedral.32 
Volodya grew up fast. Bereavement and responsibility were a 
burden that deprived him of enjoyments of late adolescence taken for 
granted by most lads of his social class. He threw himself into his 
school-work. He had no weak subjects, being noted for his prowess in 
Latin, Greek, history, geography and Russian literature. 
His headmaster F. M. Kerenski (who was father of the future 
premier of the Provisional Government in 1917) made a sole point of 
criticism: his 'excessive reserve' and 'unsociable attitude' to other 
pupils.33 Kerenski was well-disposed towards the Ulyanovs. Presum-
ably his judgement was made in full knowledge of the family's 
misfortune. Volodya's introspectiveness can only have been increased 
by the loss of his father. Mariya Aleksandrovna was eager to take the 
children off for a holiday at her father's estate in Kokushkino village. 
Aleksandr joined them. He brought his books with him, and every day 
spent hours studying political literature and conducting biological 
experiments.34 The younger children played around the country house 
with their cousins. It seemed as if Mariya Aleksandrovna's aims were 
steadily reaching fulfilment. The Ulyanovs were together again as a 
family and were coping with the trauma of losing their father. The 
emotional strain was undeniably severe. Yet we have to be cautious in 
interpreting its long-term effects. Medical science has made enormous 
progress since the nineteenth century, and many diseases such as 
tuberculosis and typhoid are no longer so widely encountered in 
advanced industrial societies. Premature death was a much more 
common phenomenon in nineteenth-century Russia. Vladimir's 
experience, profoundly painful as it was, was not abnormal in those 
times. And accounts that adduce his father's death to explain his 
subsequent career fail entirely to show why there was only one Lenin. 
 Cross-Currents 
23 
THE TRIAL OF ALEKSANDR 
Mariya Aleksandrovna and the family were weathering the bereave-
ment when another crisis arose. Aleksandr (or Sasha, as the family 
called him) had secretly involved himself in political activity. Biology 
lecturers at Petersburg University knew him only as an undergraduate 
of academic promise. But his mother noticed his disaffection from the 
ruling establishment. She may also have caught sight of his reading 
material in summer 1886; he was even starting to make translations of 
Karl Marx. In November 1886 he attended a demonstration com-
memorating the death of the oppositionist writer Dobrolyubov.35 It 
was broken up by troops. 
Sasha had reached his point of decision. In January 1887 he 
managed to contact activists intent upon resurrecting the People's 
Freedom organisation; he was convinced that terrorism alone would 
induce the authorities to effect constitutional changes and introduce 
democratic forms of government. His group intended to assassinate 
Aleksandr III. They arranged to produce proclamations, on a primi-
tive hectograph-machine, to be issued on the emperor's death; and 
they used their scientific expertise on the manufacture of a bomb. 
Sasha impressed the others by the unshakability of his intentions. But 
this was not enough to kill a tsar. In March, the group was penetrated 
by police and arrested. Sasha demanded that the other conspirators 
should allow a greater share of guilt to fall upon him than was in accord 
with the facts. He had always perceived the personal dangers of the 
conspiracy. He had seen the political problems too. Like many 
terrorists after 1881, he did not delude himself with the expectation 
that assassination would spark off a peasant revolt. But despair was not 
in his nature. Even his incarceration was to be turned to account; his 
trial would give the chance to explain his reasoned hatred of the 
Russian autocracy to the world. His only regret was the anguish caused 
to his mother. Upon hearing of the arrest, she hurried off to Petersburg 
and secured permission to see her son in Shlisselburg prison. Nonethe-
less Sasha stuck to his plan to admit guilt in court.36 
Nobody was more grief-stricken than Sasha's brother Volodya. It 
was still noted that Volodya, in his teens as in his younger years, 
founded his ambitions upon Sasha's record. Yet Sasha and Volodya 
had not been close. Sasha was disturbed by his brother's sarcasm; and 
annoyance changed to hostility when Sasha heard Volodya being 
uncivil to their mother after the death of their father. Sasha's 
description of his brother was curt: 'Indubitably a very gifted person, 
 24 
Lenin: A Political Life 
but we don't get along.'37 The remembrance of these past dissensions 
must have exacerbated Volodya's sadness. 
The trial of Aleksandr Ulyanov and his feHow conspirators began in 
April 1887. The prosecutor did not confine himself to the practical 
details of the plot but accused the defendants of intending to impose 
their idiosyncratic opinions upon society by means of violence. 
Aleksandr repudiated the charge. Despite interruptions by the judge, 
he argued that it was the state authorities who were depriving the 
people of democratic freedoms and committing the original acts of 
coercion. He spoke about the Russian intelligentsia. Not even 
scientific research was safe from political interference. Even more 
fiercely he denounced the social structure of the Russian empire as the 
cause of the immiseration of the mass of the population. There could 
be no alleviation while the absolute monarchy remained. Revolution 
was the only solution. The court was left little choice by Aleksandr's 
self-inculpation: he was duly condemned to death by hanging. His 
conduct during the proceedings scandalised a society not yet ready to 
abandon faith in the monarchy. But he became a martyr in the minds of 
those who sought revolution in Russia. His conduct conformed to the 
political rebel's code. At dawn on 8 May, nonetheless, Aleksandr 
Ulyanov was executed together with four fellow activists in the 
courtyard of Shlisselburg prison.38 
Mariya Aleksandrovna was overwhelmed by misfortunes. She was 
ostracised by her Simbirsk acquaintances. She faced problems at every 
turn. She could not yet even count upon her late husband's pension 
being regularly forwarded. 
By chance, Volodya was meant to set his final school examinations 
around the time of the hanging. His mother insisted upon his 
attendance. He took his place in the exam hall on the day of Sasha's 
execution; and he continued to do so for the remainder of a week 
dominated nationally by discussion of the terrorist affair.39 Astonish-
ingly, Volodya's academic performance was undimmed by the terrible 
circumstances. Like his brother, he won the school's gold medal for 
scholarly excellence. The iron self-control disguised his remorse. 
Grimness and taciturnity replaced brashness; outsiders began to 
remark that he had ceased to joke, even to smile. Only with the 
younger Ulyanov children was he able to revive his rumbustious self.40 
At the age of seventeen, with his father and elder brother in their 
graves, he was the male head of the family; and contemporary 
photographs of him suggest a person of almost middle-aged solemnity. 
But his depression of spirit was not permanent. His acquaintances in 
 Cross-Currents 
25 
the years ahead often commented upon his raucous laughter.41 In fact 
such accounts as we have of his demeanour in his late adolescence 
indicate that, once recovered from the initial shock, his personality was 
already shaped for the rest of his life. His temperament was an 
aggregation of choleric explosiveness and patient self-restraint; he was 
intellectually self-confident; he was indomitably purposeful in pursuit 
of his ends. He could not easily tolerate anyone's sovereignty over him. 
He was never more combative and ruthless than when he felt checked 
in the course of doing his duty. Though modest in personal relation-
ships, he set a high value on his potential contribution to the cause of 
radical change in Russia. 
He told nobody the date of his conversion to revolutionary ideals; 
but his brother's execution was almost certainly the spur. It did not 
take much to turn sensitive young people into political fighters against 
the Russian autocracy. We can only guess whether Volodya would 
have joined the revolutionaries in any case; all we know for certain is 
that he had experienced greater propulsion towards revolt than most. 
His executed brother had been a revolutionary. And the shunning of 
his mother by the family's neighbours may well have persuaded 
Volodya that Russian liberals were unreliable allies in the struggle for 
change. His shift towards activism was affected by his reading. 
Turgenev's novels no longer satisfied.42 Volodya worked through 
Sasha's bookcase and discovered the revolutionary writings of the 
narodnik Chernyshevski. His explorations were probably in part a 
quest for his brother. He was consumed by the desire to make sense of 
Sasha's life and ideas; and, like Sasha, he found Chernyshevski's moral 
and political summons to revolution irresistible. While on holiday at 
Kokushkino in summer 1887, he began to re-plan his life. He no longer 
thought of studying Latin when he left for the university in the autumn. 
Instead he would take Law.43 This was a choice widely favoured by 
sons of the gentry.44 At a time of rising graduate unemployment, it 
offered the best chance of entrance to the civil service or the legal 
profession itself. Yet his calculations may well have been more 
political than careerist. Barristers were a profession which included 
many who wanted to see the autocracy dismantled.45 By joining them, 
Vladimir Ulyanov would be able to play his part by taking up the 
defence of the downtrodden and oppressed in courts of la w. 
 26 
Lenin: A Political Life 
RUSSIAN AGRARIAN SOCIALISM 
The intellectual world of discourse that had been inhabited by 
Aleksandr Ulyanov was complex, and its elements were in a condition 
of constant flux; and Vladimir, in seeking to understand it, was 
initiating an interest that engaged him intermittently over the next two 
decades of his life. 
Russian populism was not only an active political movement: it was 
also a compendium of serious cultural thought. Numerous narodniki 
looked to the European socialist movement. They drew copiously 
from the considerations and experience of political rebels in the West; 
their works abounded in references to Proudhon, Owen, Saint-Simon 
and Blanqui.46 They did not receive the European influences uncriti-
cally. They adapted them to their own perceptions of Russian 
conditions and also to their own psychological inclinations. Russian 
and Western revolutionaries, indeed, exchanged ideas. M. A. Baku-
nin, in the middle years of the century, emerged as a political theorist 
and leader of continental distinction.47 The European contacts of the 
narodniki did not blind them to the contrasts of Russian society with the 
societies of Britain, Germany and France. Russia's economy was stilI 
largely agrarian and technically backward. The Russian populists were 
in any case influenced also by earlier intellectual traditions of thought 
in their own country which, though inimical to socialism, held the 
peasant commune in high esteem.48 In addition, they conducted 
economic research.49 And, by the 1880s, it was difficult to deny that 
capitalism had made deep inroads into the country's industrial and 
agricultural economy. An immediate, direct transition to a socialist 
society seemed less practicable as year succeeded year. Russian 
agrarian socialists appeared increasingly defensive when they wrote 
about the contemporary transformation of Russian social life. 
What could a young narodnik do in the face of this? The first 
generation of fighters were dying; M. A. Bakunin and A. I. Zhelyabov 
were in their graves, and N. G. Chernyshevski was to die in 1889. The 
luminaries of Russian agrarian socialism in the late 1880s and early 
1890s were N. K. Mikhailovski, V. P. Vorontsov and N. F. Danielson. 
Mikhailovski had once concurred that violent revolution would lead to 
fundamental political improvement. But now he appeared haunted by 
fears of a general bloodbath; and he drew steadily closer to the 
reformist ideas being spread in particular by Vorontsov.50 
Such a perspective was unattractive to many underground groups, 
and Aleksandr and Vladimir Ulyanov were not alone in deeming that 
 Cross-Currents 
27 
the surviving patriarchs of agrarian socialism had betrayed the cause. 
Mikhailovski, Vorontsov and S. N. Yuzhakov implied the need for a 
policy of 'small deeds'. They advised their followers to seek employ-
ment in the zemstva and in the state's welfare and education 
institutions. A war of propaganda should be waged from within the 
bureaucracy. Mikhailovski Ie ant on Vorontsov's economic arguments 
(which in turn were amplified and refined in 1893 by Danielson). 
Vorontsov endorsed Russia's need for industrialisation. Cher-
nyshevski and several other early narodniki had accepted this as a 
necessity; but, with Vorontsov, such an acceptance had turned itself 
into a matter of emphasis too. Vorontsov and Danielson rejected 
capitalism. Their motivation was as much practical as moral. They 
proposed an 'underconsumptionist' argument, holding that capitalism 
could be sustained only if entrepreneurs were in a position to sell 
products on a mass market; and that this was unrealisable in Russia 
since economic expansion was being financed through a level of 
taxation which reduced millions of peasants poverty. They argued 
also that capitalism could develop only in countries whose industrial-
ists could export their manufactures. Russia's industrial growth, they 
declared, would be hobbled by the absence of a suitable foreign market 
now that the globe had been divided up by Great Britain and the other 
imperial powers. It followed that, if the Russian state desired 
industrialisation, it would succeed only if it fostered the people's 
material well-being. Indeed Vorontsov wanted an alliance between 
tsar and peasantry. The heights of the industrial economy should be 
nationalised; capitalists should be expropriated. Peasant communes 
should be invited to tender for contracts from the state and to found 
their own small-scale industrial associations. Economic policy should 
be geared to the consumer demands of the mass of the population.51 
The attempt was made to consolidate this position through an all-out 
assault upon Marxism. Mikhailovski denounced what he regarded as 
the absence of any ethical concern in Marx's writings. Both he and P.1. 
Lavrov urged that all true revolutionaries should seek moral self-
perfection; and amoral doctrines, they asserted, were inappropriate to 
a political movement bent upon the construction of a better world for 
all mankind.52 The ends could not always justify the means. When 
famine hit the Volga region's peasantry in 1891, Mikhailovski's 
anti-Marxist campaign reached an intense pitch. How could Marxists 
regard capitalism as a 'progressive' stage in the country's development, 
he enquired, when it produced such appalling distress? Mikhailovski 
charged that Marxism worked with a deterministic model of historical 
 28 
Lenin: A Political Life 
change; he challenged the claims of 'scientific validity' made for the 
world-view of Marx and Engels.53 
These considerations were unpersuasive to many young activists. 
Marxism gained in popularity. The youngsters despised the language 
of compromise and indeterminacy. They sought to re-examine 
agrarian socialism now that its original economic rationale was, in their 
reckoning, mistaken. But they did not drop every single element in the 
narodnik tradition, a tradition which had never been a homogeneous 
entity in any case. Agrarian-socialist ideas were a notable ingredient in 
Russian Marxism's constitution. This should not surprise us. The 
writings of Marx and Engels, voluminous and impressive as they were, 
did not amount to a definitive and unambiguous prescription for their 
followers; and there was always a need, in particular, for adaptations to 
national circumstances. The agrarian socialists had already attempted 
to confront the problems of Russia's historical development. They had 
been harrassed by the same police state. The nascent circles of Marxist 
activists did not despise the traditions elaborated by the narodnik 
enrages of the 1860s and 1870s; it was commonly accepted by the 
generation of the late 1880s that earlier generations could offer 
guidelines of practical and theoretical value. The first political material 
read by Vladimir Ulyanov was narodnik in content. His brother had 
been a notable narodnik. And the first political groups attended by 
Vladimir too were to hold narodnik ideas. It would be passing strange 
if Russian agrarian socialism were to have left no trace in the thinking 
of his mature years. 
Yet it is hard to demarcate precisely the notions taken by him from 
the narodniki. Even less surely can the process be dated. He made a 
few brief references in the 1900s. He professed respect for the courage 
of the narodnik activists and their organisational techniques. 54 This has 
been well publicised. He made an additional and much less famous 
acknowledgement in 1894. It occurred in a comment on populist 
economics. While making basic criticisms, he nevertheless perceived 
virtues. He specified several useful narodnik contributions to socialist 
theory.55 He praised their approval of the need to expand national 
industrial and agricultural output. He highlighted their admiration for 
up-to-date forms of technology. He paid tribute to their zeal to spread 
learning and science among the people.56 He was ever eager to 
commend Chernyshevski in particular; he was to declare, in 1909, that 
this hero of his had grasped many essentials of a materialist philosophi-
cal standpoint.57 
Ulyanov's express statements, furthermore, are almost certainly not 
 Cross-Currents 
29 
an exhaustive list of the narodnik influences upon him. The argument 
must remain tentative, based as it is upon coincidences between the 
ideas of Vladimir Ulyanov and various prominent narodniki; yet the 
similarities are too strong to be dismissed as merely accidental. Like 
Petr Tkachev, not only was he drawn to notions appearing to rest upon 
scientific principles. He also yearned for a similar condition of 
all-conquering certitude.58 He attached enormous significance to the 
need for socialist intellectuals. He concurred with Tkachev's vision of 
the intelligentsia as the educator, organiser and guide of the 'masses' .59 
Ulyanov, like Lavrov, placed a high value on the potentiality of 
individual thinkers; and, like Chernyshevski, he assumed and empha-
sised that exact truth about the world was in man's capacity to 
acquire.60 He admired the Land And Freedom organisation. He too 
placed emphasis upon discipline and hierarchy and centralism.61 His 
strategy, with its accent upon a worker-peasant alliance, had obvious 
populist resonances.62 But there were further echoes as well. Both 
Tkachev and A. I. Zhelyabov had said that socialism would be 
introduced only through violent popular upheaval; and Tkachev had 
also anticipated that an epoch of socialist dictatorship would be 
required to extirpate all elements of the old regime.63 In Tkachev's 
opinion, mass terror would be needed for the task.64 
Such notions pervaded the thought of the future Russian Marxist 
Vladimir Ulyanov. They would become interfused and bonded with 
other notions derived directly from Marx and Engels. It would be a 
powerful compound; and, because so many of these populist ideas in 
any case had trace elements in Marx's own works, it is ultimately 
impossible to discern which tradition influenced him more deeply in 
various particular matters. The two traditions were never totally 
separate.6S Time would elapse before Vladimir's debt to populism 
would fully manifest itself. He was still only seventeen years old. But 
he had made his start in politics. And, as he spent that summer of 1887 
poring over his executed brother's books, he was taking his first large 
strides towards the formation and elaboration of his outlook upon the 
world. 
