 8 Predicting the Tide 
ST. PETERSBURG 
Voices were raised at court, as well as in monarchist organisations in 
the country, urging Nikolai II to retract his Manifesto. They recom-
mended a harsher regime. By this they did not simply mean that 
undisguised revolutionaries like Lenin should be caught and hanged. 
They demanded a yet more pervasive repression; and they suggested 
that the political tumult had occurred precisely because the autocracy 
had conceded too much to its liberal and socialist critics. Yet such 
recommendations overestimated the power available to the tsarist 
government. Nikolai II never in fact envisaged introducing the 
methods which were later to characterise the rule of Stalin in the USSR 
and Hitler in Germany; but, even if he had so inclined, the results 
would not have brought him advantage. Tsarism lacked a mass 
movement of support; there was no social class, save for the gentry, 
which it could reliably mobilise. Its ideology, such as it was, was 
associated with a past held in contempt by the population at large. Its 
rituals no longer secured social cohesion. Its police lacked the 
large-scale technology of control developed in subsequent years. Its 
army's ranks were filled with peasants who were a dubious instrument 
of the monarchical will in times of crisis. Consequently the semi-
constitutional manoeuvres of 1905-6 were probably the nearest that 
the imperial government could prudently move towards the main-
tenance of its centuries-old prerogatives. Any more aggressive posture 
would have invited further revolutionary upheavals. 
In any case, the Constitutional Democrats (or Kadets, as they were 
abbreviated) agreed to participate in the elections.1 November and 
December were testing months for the regime. Soviets were springing 
up in towns and cities; as many as fifty had established themselves by 
the end of 1905.2 Strikes dislocated industrial production. Mutinies 
broke out in regiments in the Far East. The countryside seethed with 
discontent. 792 rural disturbances were recorded for the month of 
November alone. 3 
140 
 Predicting the Tide 
141 
Until 
the 
Manifesto's 
promulgation, 
few 
leading 
emigre 
revolutionaries would countenance returning to Russia. Safety still 
mattered. Plekhanov, Lenin, Martov and Akselrod were career 
politicians; they viewed the possibility of arrest as an unacceptable 
risk: the party's loss would be irredeemable. Not all the 'lords' of the 
party, as they were dubbed,4 felt this way. Bogdanov hastened back 
into Russia in 1904.5 Trotski followed in 1905.6 Lenin refused all 
invitations to emulate their action. 7 Nonetheless the frustrations of 
Switzerland mounted; he bemoaned 'the accursed distance' separating 
him from St. Petersburg.8 After the Third Party Congress, the Central 
Committee had appointed him as its representative abroad and as 
editor of Proletari (or Proletarian). Proletari was the new mast-head 
for Vpered , claiming status as the entire party's central newspaper. The 
editorial routine was onerous. And Lenin felt that the Central 
Committee, with its anti-emigre animus, deliberately kept him short of 
assistants and financial support.9 This was painful enough. But in July 
1905 he also learned that Central Committee members were taking 
important decisions without consulting him. A meeting had taken 
place between the Central Committee and the Menshevik Organisa-
tional Commission. It appears that agreement was reached to reconsti-
tute the Central Committee with representatives from both factions.lO 
Lenin was irate that no one had even asked his opinion. His plea for a 
Central Committee meeting to be held abroad was greeted with the 
suggestion of Finland as the venue.l1 This too displeased him. The 
Finnish border was only a few miles from St. Petersburg; the 
possibility of his imprisonment could not be discounted. He wrote back 
proposing Stockholm.12 Thus the Manifesto came to his rescue in 
October: he would return, he would tackle his colleagues face to face at 
last. 
They had plans, well before the Manifesto, to start a legal Bolshevik 
newspaper based in Russia (and perhaps its creation would have 
compelled Lenin to go back to St. Petersburg even if no Manifesto had 
been issued). The newspaper's name was to be Novaya Zhizn (or New 
Life). He looked forward to joining the editorial board. 13 He also 
aimed to introduce practicality to the Central Committee's affairs. 
Valuable time was being lost on trivia. In Lenin's opinion, the Central 
Committee should concentrate upon the regular production of 
bulletins; it should sketch general plans, leaving it to lower party 
committees to flesh out the details.14 
Those acquainted only with the Lenin of Two Tactics knew solely a 
prophet of all-out strategical offensive. But there was another Lenin 
 142 
Lenin: A Political Life 
(and many more besides). Right from his alliance with Struve's coterie 
in the mid-1890s he had been adept at tactical manoeuvres and 
adjustments in policy. In the second half of 1905 it was this Lenin who 
came to the fore. He now claimed, to Bogdanov's bemusement, to be 
quite unbothered by the prospect of joining up again with the 
Mensheviks; he even chided those Bolsheviks who 'exaggerated' the 
points of dispute between the two factions.15 Bogdanov too wanted to 
secure Bolshevik dominance inside a re-unified social-democratic 
party; but many local groups of Bolsheviks were destroying his 
bargaining position by recombining with Menshevik groups without 
the Central Committee's permission. He continuingly made acerbic 
anti-Menshevik remarks. He was to warn, too, against a 'unificatory 
orgy'.1S Lenin by contrast was almost benign. He conceded that the 
Bolshevik Central Committee (as if he himself had played no role in 
the matter) had in the past unfairly cashiered social-democratic 
committees led by Mensheviks.17 His magnanimity was a prudential 
calculation. He sensed, along with the Mensheviks, that Bogdanov and 
Krasin might be contemplating a hasty attempt at insurrection. Lenin 
wanted to delay it until spring 1906; but he again noted ruefully that 
the Central Committee had not invited his advice.1s He worried even 
more about the attitude of many Bolsheviks to non-party working-
class organisations. The reluctance to participate in trade unions 
persisted. The Mensheviks took part with zest. Lenin did not endorse 
their general viewpoint any more than previously; but he shared the 
priority given by Martov and Akselrod to ensuring that social-
democrats did not let other political parties dominate the organisations 
of the Russian labour movement.19 Lenin now welcomed the Men-
sheviks in the party as a means of putting pressure on his own 
Bolsheviks to bend more readily in his own direction of policy.20 
Winding up Proletari's affairs, he packed his case for St. Petersburg. 
He travelled across Germany, stopping over in Stockholm (to pick up a 
false passport) and arriving in Russia around 8 November 1905.21 He 
already knew of the Petersburg Soviet. He brought with him a draft 
article advocating Bolshevik participation, expecting to get it pub-
lished in Novaya Zhizn.22 
He had read the newspaper's early issues and was shocked by the 
editorials expressing suspicion and even antipathy towards the 
Soviet.23 He steeled himselffor a struggle. He was allotted rooms in P. 
P. Rumyantsev's apartment. Lenin now learnt, for the first time, the 
details of the Central Committee's recent activity. Bogdanov's policy 
had been that the Central Committee should involve itself in the 
 Predicting the Tide 
143 
Petersburg Soviet only on condition that the Soviet accepted the 
social-democratic programme. The Soviet had predictably repudiated 
this demand. The Central Committee had thereupon urged all 
Bolsheviks to withdraw from the Soviet.24 It took weeks for Lenin to 
soften this intransigence. Indeed his article remained unpublished.25 
The day-to-day grind of the Novaya Zhizn editorship lay claim to his 
energies.26 The Central Committee's posture gradually changed. It 
could hardly have been otherwise; the Bolsheviks, if ever they were 
going to organise an insurrection, were bound to have to enter mass 
working-class organisations. Nevertheless the diffidence remained. 
Lenin himself, possibly under Central Committee pressure, attended 
the Soviet only infrequently. He seldom spoke. For so eloquent a 
leader, it must have been intensely irritating to attend mainly as a 
spectator. But, according to his colleague B. Gorev, he 'sat and kept 
silent' .27 There was still no answer to the question whether he could 
adjust himself to an era of 'mass politics'. Trotski's name, not Lenin's, 
was on Petersburg workers' lips. 
ON PHILOSOPHY AND ON THE SOVIETS 
Lenin and Bogdanov announced their differences over soviets and 
trade unions as being of secondary importance in the winter of 1905-6; 
the overriding task was to prepare an uprising to instal a provisional 
revolutionary government. This consensus fortified Lenin's factional 
loyalty. But outward allegiance was accompanied by the conviction 
that he was right about the soviets and Bogdanov wrong; and he 
attempted to put his thoughts into coherent order. His determination 
was reinforced by chagrin. He, the founder of Bolshevism, knew 
scarcely any Bolshevik leader in st. Petersburg not claiming to 
interpret Bolshevism better than he. 
Lenin objected to Bogdanov's essential conception of Marxism.28 
Philosophy divided them. In epistemology, Lenin sided with 
Plekhanov. In the 1890s he had rejected the suggestions of Struve and 
others that Marx's philosophical standpoint was unsatisfactory.29 And, 
while in exile in Shushenskoe, he had warned fellow social-democrats 
against adopting the neo-Kantian notions then becoming popular 
among 
Austrian 
Marxists.30 
Kant's 
'categorical imperative', 
together with its political moralism, was unattractive to Lenin. So far, 
Bogdanov and Lenin were in agreement.31 But Bogdanov, unlike 
Lenin, felt that writings by contemporary non-Marxists could 
 144 
Lenin: A Political Life 
nevertheless be useful in refining Marxist philosophy. He had in mind 
not Immanuel Kant but Ernst Mach and Richard Avenarius. He liked 
their work on human perception; they seemed to him to have 
demonstrated the fallacy of the psychological model which drew a 
sharp distinction between subject and object, between the observer 
and the thing that is observed. Bogdanov linked their outlook with 
Marxism. For him, Mach had inadvertently supplied an epistemologi-
cal basis for Marxist social theory.32 The interfusion of subject and 
object meant that absolute truth was unattainable; and this, in 
Bogdanov's opinion, entirely accorded with Marx's arguments that 
every society'S ideas are historically-conditioned and amenable to 
change in response to changing circumstances. Bogdanov made 
particular study of Marx's Theses on Feuerbach. He was very far from 
being a slavish admirer of Mach, Avenarius and the other 'Empiriocri-
tics'; indeed he tried to show that they treated problems of perception 
in too individualist a mode and neglected the effects of collective social 
experience. He referred to his own doctrine as Empiriomonism.33 
Lenin dismissed all this as mumbo jumbo.34 He, in contrast with 
Bogdanov, believed in the independent objective reality of the 
external world; in the ontological primacy of matter over mind; and in 
the attainability of incontrovertible truth.35 He felt that Marx and 
Engels could be shown to have supported Plekhanov's basic position.36 
As early as 1904 he communicated his criticisms to Bogdanov.37 
Nevertheless Lenin and Bogdanov concurred that philosophical 
disagreements need not affect their political alliance. They made 
epistemology a truce zone.3S Lenin expressed outrage when Plekhanov 
declared that a causal link existed between Bogdanov's 'subjectivist' 
philosophy and his 'voluntarist' pursuit of a revolutionary dictator-
ship.39 
Lenin was of the opinion, all the same, that Bogdanov lacked the 
intellectual flexibility appropriate to the politician. The charge was not 
without foundation. Free-ranging in philosophy, Bogdanov in 1905 
was dogmatic about the concept of the 'vanguard party'. If the soviets 
would not accept leadership from the Russian Social-Democratic 
Labour Party, he implied, then too bad for the soviets.40 And too bad 
also for the workers who elected delegates to those same soviets. He 
was as doctrinaire about this as any Bolshevik hardliner (even though 
such an attitude was not in fact a logically unavoidable conclusion to be 
drawn from What Is To Be Done?). Lenin's view, as sketched in 
November 1905 and elaborated in his 1906 pamphlet Victory of the 
 Predicting the Tide 
145 
Kadets, was different: he wanted the soviets to act as 'the embryos of 
the new revolutionary power' .41 He warned against fussing about the 
procedural niceties. The Petersburg Soviet should initiate the process 
by selecting representatives to announce themselves as 'the pro-
visional revolutionary government of all Russia' .42 His views were not 
yet phrased definitively. He was not entirely clear about the task to be 
fulfilled by the soviets. Nevertheless he did not envisage them as an 
enduring institutional network for the country's governance. The 
soviet, he declared, was a 'fighting organisation for the attainment of 
specific goals'. And seemingly the principal goal in his mind was armed 
uprising to overthrow the monarchy and construct a democratic 
structure of state.43 
But how could there be certainty that the soviets would be adequate 
to their task? Lenin's reactions tugged him in opposing directions. At 
times he wrote exultantly about popular creativity;44 he attacked those 
who doubted that the people could perform 'miracles' .45 He even 
characterised workers as being 'instinctively social-democratic' .46 It 
was almost as if his pronouncements of 1902, with their denial that the 
working class could spontaneously evolve socialist ideas, had never 
been made. He scourged the party's 'committee-men'. In his view they 
were obsessed by hierarchy and insufficiently attuned to the need to 
encourage popular initiative. The party required renovation. Lenin, 
who had once sung the praises of the 'professional revolutionary', 
wanted to fling open the gates of the party to ordinary, inexperienced 
workers without a smattering of Marxist doctrine: all to prod the 
committees out of their 'inertia' .47 Workers should be given leading 
positions in local organisations; they should be promoted to committee 
membership to put intellectuals in a minority in places of authority.48 
Thus revitalised, the party should encourage workers outside the party 
on to further stages of self-liberation. Bomb-making instructions 
should be distributed and workers be allowed to get on with the 
business. Let them blow up a police station.49 Let them organise raids 
to steal money for funds, let them conduct military training for 
street-fighting.50 
Yet Lenin simultaneously repeated that the party alone was the re-
pository of revolutionary wisdom. Ideological education, he averred, 
remained indispensable. The party was needed to transmute the 
social-democratic instincts of workers into true 'social-democratic 
consciousness' .51 The party's tutelary duties were not to be forsaken. 
Organisational discipline too had to be preserved; and party com-
 146 
Lenin: A Political Life 
mittees should ensure that their activists in the soviets toed the party 
line.52 Lenin occasionally spoke as if it was a pity that Bolsheviks had to 
join the soviets at all. But circumstances, he noted, 'can compel US'.53 
Consequently Lenin, however far he swam out towards the notion 
that the working class was Marxist by instinct, did not toss away his 
lifebelt of traditional Bolshevism; and, though he had pragmatic 
reasons for continuing with his overtures to the Mensheviks, he still 
also conceived of Menshevism itself as an impractical strategy. He 
censured Akselrod, Dan and Martov even though they were the party's 
only theorists who produced articles which prefigured the emergence 
of the soviets in late 1905. Akselrod's dream of a 'workers' congress' 
now seems a not uneffective work of prophecy.54 Even before the 
government's announcement of the highly restrictive franchise for the 
State Duma in August, he had proposed that workers should take 
politics into their own hands by electing their own delegates and 
demanding the convocation of a Constituent Assembly. The delegates 
to each workers' congress would automatically arrange local 'revolu-
tionary self-government'. Social-democrats should work to ensure 
their own election to the congress-cum-soviet.55 Whenever he read of 
such plans, Lenin returned to his centralist premises. Revolutionaries 
should not aim merely to prevent the government from ruling the 
localities. They should also, as a first measure indeed, establish their 
own central state authority. Like Trotski, Lenin thought that the 
'democratic dictatorship' could be installed only by simultaneous 
processes of central direction and local self-organisation.56 
FAILURE OF INSURRECTION 
If Lenin's thinking in 1905 was more tension-laden than was custom-
ary even for him, it must be appreciated that Russian politics changed 
with bewildering rapidity inside a few months. But there is a further 
difficulty. Lenin was an active politician, not an armchair commen-
tator. He wrote to achieve impact over his party and through his party. 
Rhetorical flourish and exaggeration were fair play. Since Lenin was 
concerned lest the Bolsheviks might float adrift of working-class 
opinion, it was natural for him to make a strong case for the instinctive 
virtues of the factory labourer. No statement of theory made by him 
was unaffected by his immediate political goals. His 'political thought' 
is therefore mishandled when, as was done in his day and is still done 
today, it is treated as a thing unto itself. The parts lack ultimate 
 Predicting the Tide 
147 
definition; they are constantly in motion. The system of his ideas is an 
interplay of tendencies: it is not a static, particularised code. 
Before 1905 he had experienced small difficulty in communicating 
policies to his Bolsheviks; but his editorial job in Novaya Zhizn, upon 
his return to Russia, was in the gift of a Central Committee suspicious 
of his pro-soviet enthusiasms. His articles were often therefore 
cautious in their phrasing.57 His departure from Switzerland had a 
second untoward result from his angle of view. He no longer presided 
over correspondence with committees throughout Russia; by coming 
back to Petersburg he had placed a greater distance, organisationally 
speaking, between himself and the rest of the country. Semen Shvarts 
was then a Bolshevik agitator in the capital. He read and contributed to 
Novaya Zhizn. Yet he knew nothing of Lenin's idiosyncratic stance in 
the Central Committee (even though Shvarts himself much approved 
of participation in the soviets).58 Many Bolshevik committee-men at 
lower levels shared the Central Committee's distrust of non-party 
organisations. On 21 November 1905 there began a conference of 
party committees in the Moscow region. The delegates accepted the 
soviets' right to existence, but only where the party 'cannot direct the 
proletariat's mass action in any other way'. Soviets should be treated 
merely as 'the technical apparatus' for carrying the party's leadership 
to the working class.59 Yet circumstances indeed obliged. The months 
from October to December witnessed the entrance of Bolsheviks into 
more mass organisations such as the trade unions and the soviets. Their 
purpose was always the same. They sought to use the soviets as a base 
for propaganda in favour of armed insurrection. They helped in 
strengthening the Moscow Soviet in December (which contrasted with 
their behaviour in St. Petersburg, where they were half-hearted 
participan ts). 60 
Events spurred them on. In November 1905 a sailor's mutiny broke 
out on the island of Kronstadt, a few miles from the capital. The 
Petersburg Soviet called upon the people to withhold tax payments. 
Workers in Nizhni Novgorod and Ekaterinoslav took to the streets. In 
the Transcaucasus, Georgia was already under a revolutionary admini-
stration of Mensheviks. But the Ministry of Internal Affairs under its 
new head P. N. Durnovo went on the offensive. On 3 December, 
Durnovo ordered the arrest of the Soviet. No resistance was offered. 
The Petersburg Soviet's life was ended as suddenly as it had begun.61 
Lenin's influence over events in St. Petersburg was slight. It was no 
greater elsewhere. The Moscow Bolsheviks, who held the party's city 
committee, decided to mount an insurrection before the authorities 
 148 
Lenin: A Political Life 
repeated their attempt at suppressing revolutionary activity. The 
Moscow Committee consulted with representatives from the Central 
Committee, but the armed initiative seems to have been local.62 The 
Moscow Soviet sanctioned the uprising.63 The insurgents lacked 
sophistication; they had no plan to seize the telegraph offices or cut the 
rail link with the capital. The Soviet possessed only a poorly-armed 
militia. Efforts were made to secure sympathy from garrison soldiers, 
but the main hope was reposed in the workers in Moscow's industrial 
quarters. The violence lasted several days. Neither party nor soviet 
exerted great impact over operational details. Troops were hurried by 
the government from St. Petersburg and, by 17 December, the fighting 
was over. At least a thousand persons perished, most of them 
civilians.64 The workers had not risen in the manner necessary to give 
any chance of success. Social-democrats tried to assess the reasons for 
failure; and it was agreed that the venture had been undertaken 
without the necessary consultation and preparation of opinion outside 
the party. Lenin's doubts, expressed in early autumn, had proved 
well-founded. Paradoxically it was the incautious policy which he and 
others had urged on the party in spring 1905 that led to the disaster. 
TAMPERE AND THE DUMA 
While insurrection took place in Moscow, a Conference of Bolsheviks 
was being held to the north. The venue was Tampere (or Tammerfors). 
This was a Finnish town, just over the border from St. Petersburg. The 
original intention was to hold the Fourth Party Congress there; but the 
detainment of the Moscow Committee by the street-fighting induced 
the other delegates to declare their meeting, less weightily, a Confer-
ence. Forty-one representatives were present.65 Sessions were held in 
the house of an indulgent police chief. A musical concert was arranged 
to celebrate the Conference's commencement. A Red Guard patrolled 
outside. Lenin was elected as Conference chairman; his deputies were 
B. I. Gorev and M. M. Borodin.66 The crisis in Moscow led to a 
breakdown of communications between Russia and Finland. Krasin, 
travelling back and forth to Petersburg to keep abreast of events,67 
brought unexpected news: on the 11 December the government had 
published its electoral law for the State Duma. Representatives were 
to be elected by each social estate separately. The government wished 
to keep working-class representation to a low level. The gentry would 
receive a deputy for every two thousand voters whereas the workers 
 Predicting the Tide 
149 
would for every ninety thousand. Nikolai II, expecting the peasants to 
show faith in the monarchy, approved regulations designed to provide 
them with a majority of the seats in the Duma.68 
The Tampere Conference's reaction was almost monolithic: the 
electoral law was a travesty of parliamentarism, it was a 'police Duma'. 
The elections should be boycotted. The urgent task was to dissuade the 
people from casting votes. Insurrection remained the Bolshevik 
priority.69 Initially there were two dissenters: Gorev and Lenin. They 
viewed a policy of boycott as yet another sign of the Bolsheviks' naive 
inflexibility. Lenin had dreaded this since summer. In a note to 
Lunacharski, he had stated that social-democrats might have to ally 
with liberals in order to constrain the emperor to grant democratic 
methods of election.70 Evidently his anti-liberal vehemence was 
temporarily in suspension; he refused to hold to unvarying tactics. By 
contrast, nothing would have induced Bogdanov to proffer a hand to 
Milyukov. Bogdanov was equally hostile to the law of 11 December. 
Lenin's attitude was less rigid. Like all Bolsheviks, he denounced the 
law's provisions as a mockery of constitutionalism. But he believed 
that the electoral rules could be cleverly exploited. The law called for 
workers from each factory employing over 150 persons to send a 
representative to a town assembly. The representatives were then to 
choose a number of electors; and the electors from all towns in each 
province would come together to select their Duma deputy. Under the 
cover of this process, Lenin argued, it would be possible for workers to 
re-establish the soviets.71 Gorev, agreeing with Lenin, offered to 
present the case to the Conference. Lenin continued to discuss the 
matter with other delegates. Intense hostility to his plan caused him 
abruptly to abandon it, and he fell back into line with the call for 
insurrection.72 But Gorev knew nothing of this. His speech on the 
Duma met extreme disfavour. He turned to Lenin for backing. Lenin 
said he had changed his mind. His 'confession' earned stormy 
applause, and he evoked the Conference's sympathy with the quip that 
he was 'retreating in full military order'.73 
The debate sheds light on politics inside the Bolshevik faction. 
Mensheviks often remarked that Lenin could not abide to work 
alongside leaders of intellectmll prowess equal to his own. The secret 
of his alleged domination over all things Bolshevik, it was asserted, lay 
partly with his ability to beguile committee-men of inadequate formal 
education. Undoubtedly Lenin deployed his erudition to advantage. 
But he was not always successful. Among the boycottist leaders at the 
Conference was Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, whose lack of a university 
 150 
Lenin: A Political Life 
degree in no way inhibited him from expressing himself forcefully. 
Men of humble social origin were legion in the Bolshevik faction. Their 
speeches exuded confident judgement; the Stalins and Nogins felt that 
their own experiences in life gave them a proper and full understanding 
of the socialist movement's needs. Throughout his career as a party 
boss, Lenin had to take their feelings into account.74 
In its other debates, between 12 and 17 December, the Conference 
agreed on the need to re-unite the Russian Social-Democratic Labour 
Party. A Fourth Party Congress should be arranged.75 Preliminary 
measures could be taken forthwith: the central bodies of the two 
factions should coalesce on terms of parity. Local committees should 
also recombine activity. The principle of democratic centralism should 
be established. Committees should everywhere be elected from below 
and should be accountable before the party's lower echelons. Central-
ism was not to be abandoned. Once elected, committees should be 
accorded 'the entire fullness of power in the matter of ideological and 
practical leadership'. 76 The Conference also discussed the agrarian 
question. The reporter was Lenin. The record of his speech is not 
available; it is not known whether he tried to present the case for land 
nationalisation. In any event, the Conference avoided so precise a 
declaration of policy. The Tampere delegates, following the line of the 
Third Party Congress, called simply for the expropriation of territory 
held by the crown, the church and the gentry; they left open the 
problem as to who would hold the property rights, the peasantry or the 
state.77 Negotiations between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks followed 
hard on the Conference. Lenin and Martov were present. Organisa-
tional re-unification was agreed.78 Lenin also loyally pressed the 
Bolshevik argument for boycotting the Duma. Martov demurred. 
Ironically, he made a case not dissimilar from Lenin's earlier one: that 
the Duma elections should be exploited as an instrument for revolu-
tionary self-organisation by the working class. Bolshevik opposition, 
however, was strong; and the Mensheviks, being themselves suspicious 
about the Duma, bowed to their arguments.79 
Over the winter of 1905-6, however, the political situation in the 
country became clearer. Tsarism was not on the verge of collapse. And 
the Mensheviks warmed further towards the elections. Akselrod urged 
unconditional participation. It became the Menshevik position that the 
chances of a insurrection were waning; and the priority, according to 
Akselrod, was the acquisition of seats in the Duma.80 But the 
conversion of policy came too late for the mounting of a full-scale 
electoral campaign. Furthermore, Menshevik enthusiasm was checked 
 Predicting the Tide 
151 
by the government's announcements in early 1906 restricting the 
Duma's authority. The tsar aimed to counterweight the Duma with an 
Imperial Council, whose members would be chosen by himself and 
various public institutions. The emperor retained control over the 
army and foreign policy. He could veto any legislation passed by the 
Duma. He could disperse the Duma at will; and, under article 87, he 
could promulgate laws without hindrance until the next Duma was 
elected. Important aspects of the state budget were to remain 
'iron-clad': no parliamentary pressure was to hold Nikolai II to 
ransom.81 
THE FOURTH PARTY CONGRESS 
The elections to the First Duma were not yet completed when the 
Fourth Party Congress began on 10 April 1906. The United Central 
Committee, formed from an equal number of Bolsheviks and Men-
sheviks, chose Stockholm as the location. Fifty seven party organisa-
tions were represented by 112 delegates with voting rights.82 A bureau 
was elected to manage Congress business. The successful candidates, 
in order of popularity, were Plekhanov, Dan and Lenin.83 This order 
revealed the balance of forces at the Congress. The Mensheviks were 
going to have a majority. Lenin accepted imminent defeat calmly, and 
to Stalin he confided his motto in such situations: 'Don't whine!'84 
Party Congresses nearly always revealed dissensions which would 
otherwise been barely visible. Initially the Fourth Congress seemed to 
be an exception. Agrarian policy was its first agenda item.85 The 
discussion occupied nearly a third of the time of the entire proceedings. 
Lenin's report proposed land nationalisation. Apparently he expati-
ated on his pamphlet Review of the Workers' Party's Agrarian 
Programme, which had been written specially for the Congress.8S He 
denied that he aimed at immediate socialist revolution. He described 
his scheme as essentially 'a bourgeois measure'; he underlined and 
repeated that the peasant who rented his land from the state would be 
producing for an economy dominated by capitalist relations. The 
Development of Capitalism in Russia had suggested that the peasantry, 
if left to itself, would shortly develop an agricultural system as modern 
as any known in the world at that time. Without fully abandoning this 
position, Lenin now also contended that intervention and control by 
government would powerfully increase the rate of economic change.87 
He knew to expect criticism from the Mensheviks, and was quite happy 
 152 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to be provocative. He attacked Plekhanov, who supported Maslov on 
the peasant question, for inconsistency; he noted that the Emancipa-
tion Of Labour Group, back in the 1880s, had called for a 'radical 
revision of agrarian relations' .88 Lenin's remark implied that 
Plekhanov had originally not opposed nationalisation. This was both 
devious and incorrect. In any case Lenin himself could hardly claim 
complete consistency in policy. Even he admitted that his 'cut-off 
strips' scheme of 1902 had been too small a concession to peasant 
aspirations.89 
The Menshevik project, drafted by Petr Maslov, remained just as 
insistent that the land should be taken away from the monarchy, the 
church and the gentry. But Maslov, in accord with his ideas of 1902, 
wanted ownership to pass to local urban authorities. In this fashion he 
hoped to curtail central bureaucratic interference.9o 
The disagreement between Maslov and Lenin over agrarian policy 
reflected differing expectations about the post-tsarist Russian state. As 
a Menshevik, Maslov anticipated the immediate installation of a 
'bourgeois' government'. Nor did he discount the possibility of a 
monarchical counterrevolution.91 Lenin, as a Bolshevik, envisaged a 
different scenario. The Romanov dynasty's overthrow was to be 
followed by a temporary dictatorship which would initiate socio-
economic reforms that might render the chances of counterrevolution 
infinitely remote.92 The cut-and-thrust of Congress debate compelled 
the protagonists to broaden their arguments still further. Discussion 
covered the entirety of Russian history. Feudalism became the 
principal issue. Maslov, Plekhanov and Martynov maintained that, 
whereas in western Europe it had been social conflicts and technologi-
cal discoveries which had caused the emergence of the feudal state, in 
Russia it had been the state itself which transformed society. Russian 
feudalism was a bastard variant. Martynov called it 'state feudalism' .93 
Plekhanov maintained that the country's agrarian history had affinities 
to oriental despotism as well as to the feudalism of France and 
England.94 Lenin had challenged this view in the 1890s. Suddenly, a 
decade later, his historiographical differences with Plekhanov were 
seen to underpin a question of enormous immediate relevance: what 
was the nature of this tsarist state and how best could social-democrats 
dismantle it?95 
The dispute continued for years. But it was already obvious from the 
Congress's composition that Maslov would carry the majority with him 
on this occasion. Another fact had been less self-evident. This was that 
 Predicting the Tide 
153 
Lenin, for all his agro-economic expertise, was unable to keep most 
Bolsheviks with him. 
S. A. Suvorov, a Bolshevik who was politically and philosophically 
close to Bogdanov, baulked at land nationalisation; instead he 
proposed a scheme which would designate all agricuituralland as the 
property of the peasantry.96 Peasant committees could distribute it as 
they saw fit. Suvorov made a single exception in his planning: the 
large-scale capitalist farms were not to be broken up but to be turned 
over to 'organs of local self-government' .97 Suvorov obtained backing 
from delegates like Stalin who, while unruffled by Menshevik warnings 
about oriental despotism, predicted that nationalisation would be 
unattractive to peasants. Such Bolsheviks considered it impossible to 
prevent the peasantry from appropriating whatever they wanted in the 
countryside once the revolutionary conflagration had begun.98 Lenin 
came some way to accommodating Suvorov's objection. Abandoning 
reference to nationalisation, he called for the land to become 'the 
common property of the entire people' .99 But most Bolsheviks stayed 
with Suvorov. And Lenin, thinking Suvorov's ideas to be incorrect but 
not fundamentally damaging to Bolshevik strategy, voted in his 
support and against Maslov. lOo It is an illuminating episode. Not only 
does it show us Lenin the practical politician under pressure to back 
policies which were not entirely to his liking. It also reveals how, even 
on a major question of policy such as land tenure, Lenin was not the 
master of the Bolshevik faction. And it also demonstrates, if we look 
forward a few years from 1906, that the Bolshevik disavowal of land 
nationalisation as governmental policy in October 1917 by no means 
represented an abrupt reversal of Bolshevik traditions. 
The Congress accepted Maslov's motion by fifty two votes to forty 
four.lOl Bolshevik attitudes remained under fire. Already in the 
Congress, Lenin had been accused by Plekhanov of talking like a 
socialist -revol utionary .102 The charge was repeated by Martynov in the 
debate on 'the contemporary moment and the class tasks of the 
proletariat'. Lenin's insurrectionism was said to have blinded him to 
other political opportunities. 103 This made painful listening for Lenin; 
it had been the Central Committee, not he, which had been reluctant to 
participate in the soviets in 1905. But Martynov's mistake also brought 
advantages to Lenin. The Mensheviks, by publicly over-estimating his 
influence, helped to increase it in reality. 
As the debate was descending into a desultory slanging-match, the 
Mensheviks moved to proceed to next business. This was Akselrod's 
 154 
Lenin: A Political Life 
report on the Duma. Akselrod recalled that most Menshevik activists 
in Russia had originally opposed the entrance of social-democrats into 
the Duma; and that the tardiness of their change of position had left a 
clear field for rival parties.l04 Lenin led off for the Bolsheviks in reply. 
He spoke to a draft resolution, written by himself in collaboration with 
Lunacharski and I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov, which defended the boycot-
tist line of the December 1905 Conference. He ridiculed Akselrod's 
expectations about the Duma's role. Yet he himself did not expressly 
mention the boycott. He retained reservations about Bolshevik policy; 
but factional ties prevented him from stating them openly. lOS It fell to 
Krasin to put the boycottist case. He impugned Akselrod for implying 
that pro-boycott workers were guilty of 'political indifferentism'.106 
Akselrod jabbed back: 'I was talking not about the proletariat but 
about you, the leaders.' 107 Then Rykov took another swing at 
Akselrod, claiming that there was 'a scent of Alpine air' about his 
speech. lOB Momentarily the Fourth Party Congress looked like turning 
into a repetition of the Second. This was the last thing Akselrod 
wanted. He stated that he did not hold comrade Lenin exclusively to 
blame for the party's past troubles.l09 Conflict faded. The Mensheviks 
went on to ratify their proposal to sanction the party's participation in 
the State Duma.llo 
Lenin accepted the result with equanimity. At times he had 
displayed considerable graciousness, even agreeing to Akselrod's 
being given greater time for his Duma report than himself.lll He also 
announced that he did not believe that Bolsheviks and Mensheviks 
could not work together in the same party.ll2 The Mensheviks, for 
their part, refrained from stirring up controversy about the party 
rules.ll3 But they were not uniformly placatory. They spoke against the 
armed robberies that the Bolsheviks had undertaken to increase their 
faction's treasury.ll4 Lenin's support for such 'expropriations' was 
well-known. And the resolution passed by the Fourth Congress, at 
Menshevik instigation, was an embarrassment for him.lls Yet Lenin's 
generally low-key performance does not demonstrate that he was 
intimidated. It was surely politically-motivated. He knew very well 
that the Mensheviks wanted to enter the Duma and to avoid further 
premature attempts at insurgency; he needed them still to countervail 
against Bogdanov's insurrectionary impatience. Only once at the 
Congress did Lenin break cover about such calculations. This hap-
pened when the Mensheviks made a previously-un tabled proposal to 
participate in the Duma electoral campaign still in progress in the 
 Predicting the Tide 
155 
Caucasus. Unlike the majority of Bolsheviks present, Lenin sided with 
the Mensheviks. 11s 
The Party Congress then chose officials for the central party 
apparatus. Negotiations evinced an accord to include seven Men-
sheviks and three Bolsheviks in the Central Committee. Lenin was not 
among them. The Bolsheviks chosen were Desnitski, Krasin and 
Rykov (who was to be replaced by Bogdanov upon his release from 
prison).117 Lenin's non-inclusion cannot have been a random occur-
rence. It was possibly a signal from his factional associates that he and 
his close supporters had moved too far away from their line of policy; 
but they cannot have felt extremely strongly about this since he 
continued for the rest of 1906 to assume a leading position, alongside 
Bogdanov and Krasin, in Bolshevik discussions.11s Conceivably the 
main intention was to keep administrative decision-making out of his 
grasp. His energies were to be reserved for his widely-acknowledged 
specialism: editing Bolshevik newspapers and other publications.119 
At any rate, the entire Bolshevik leadership was at least agreed on the 
need to maintain an autonomous factional central apparatus inside the 
formally re-united party. A Bolshevik Centre was secretly established. 
Plekhanov closed the Congress with a speech of thanks for the ending 
of the organisational schism.120 He knew of course that the wrangles 
were unresolved; but he had at least some grounds for thankfulness. 
Lenin found the Congress less gratifying. He had lost a faction and not 
yet gained a party. 
