 2 Roads to Freedom 
KAZAN 
The Russian government's dilemmas were abundantly evident in the 
contortions of its educational policy. School and university curricula 
were state-controlled. Officialdom held that several branches of the 
humanities and the sciences induced modes of thought pernicious to a 
political system steeped in traditional privilege and ritual. Aleksandr 
III re-introduced obstacles to the access of non-noble adolescents to 
higher education. Sons of landowners were adjudged inherently more 
loyal to the regime. The emperor also empowered the Ministry of 
Education to tighten up the student disciplinary code. It was not 
unusual for ex-army officers, with their robust approach to punishment 
of disobedience, to obtain posts in university administration. Yet this 
line could not be pursued too far. Economic and military reconstruc-
tion was unrealisable without an expansion of educational facilities. 
Any industrialising state faces this fact of life. And the tsarist political 
police was under-equipped to organise surveillance of all undergradu-
ate groups and gatherings. In any event, the government scarcely 
wished to provoke the hostility of literate young people gratuitously. 
The sanctions against insubordination remained insufficient to deter. 
But the rules and restrictions affecting undergraduates were still 
oppressive; and students were acquiring a reputation for rebellious-
ness. l 
Unsurprisingly, the police opposed Vladimir Ulyanov's entrance to 
university. Sasha's hanging was still recent news, and the authorities 
might have continued to make life difficult for the Ulyanov children 
except for their headmaster F. M. Kerenski's intervention. He 
described his pupil's academic excellence. His mother promised to 
move house to be near to him. Objections were waived. Vladimir 
handled the correspondence about his brother Dmitri's transfer to 
school in Kazan. 2 He found rooms for himself in the city in August 
1887. He started to attend lectures. The family were to take up 
residence in town in November. 
The Volga region, where Vladimir had so far spent all his days, was 
30 
 Roads to Freedom 
31 
of growing economic importance; it also witnessed political unrest. 
Kazan was the most unruly city on the river's banks. The administra-
tion was Russian, but Tartars constituted a substantial minority of the 
inhabitants and were unreconciled to tsarist dominion. His stay in 
Kazan must have intensified Vladimir's awareness of the 'nationalities 
question' in the empire.3 Kazan was also a place chosen by the 
government since the 1860s to which to exile arrested revolutionaries.4 
Underground political groups were active. A young person in revolt 
against the regime could without difficulty contact kindred spirits 
there. Students in Kazan, as elsewhere, were required to swear not to 
enrol 'even in legally permitted societies, without the explicit sanction 
of the nearest authority in each individual instance'. Vladimir took the 
oath, but only as a tiresome formality.5 The government had banned all 
students associations based upon the criterion of geographical origins. 
Such associations survived in Kazan. Vladimir joined the Sam-
ara-Simbirsk association, and made a quick impact. The other 
members elected him, though only a first-year student, as their 
representative on the secret council uniting all such associations inside 
the university. This council met in November to discuss ways to 
support the anti-tsarist disturbances organised by the students of 
Moscow university. A demonstration was arranged for 4 December.6 
Scarcely had he become an undergraduate than Vladimir Ulyanov was 
immersed in potential trouble. He knew the risks. As brother to a 
would-be regicide, he was a marked man. 
His activities were not confined to academic matters; he also 
involved himself with a group of revolutionaries led by Lazar Bogoraz. 
The plan was to reconstitute the People's Freedom organisation. 
Bogoraz was no mere talker. His group was arranging to produce 
pamphlets and proclamations; it communicated with activists in St. 
Petersburg.7 The beliefs of the group are known only sketchily. 
Circumstantial evidence suggests that its members wanted a terrorist 
campaign; and that they doubted whether 'the people' was capable of 
carrying out its own political revolution.8 Aleksandr Ulyanov would 
probably have felt happy among them. This is not complete surmise. It 
has come to light that a former associate of Aleksandr's was on close 
terms with an associate of Lazar Bogoraz's.9 The resemblance in ideas 
extends to a further matter. Bogoraz's group was like Aleksandr's in 
wishing to maintain contacts with local Marxist activists. Fraternal 
solidarity among revolutionaries of all varieties was approved.10 
Bogoraz himself is a shadowy figure. Though being the group's leader, 
he did not lead unopposed. Disagreements about policy divided the 
 32 
Lenin: A Political Life 
membership.ll It would be instructive to possess the details, but 
apparently nothing has been recorded for posterity. 
Vladimir Ulyanov's role in the group remains obscure. It cannot 
have been very weighty. Shortly after joining Bogoraz, he had to 
concentrate his attention upon the Samara-Simbirsk student associa-
tion. The Kazan demonstration of 4 December caused an uproar. It 
was met with the official suspension of lectures. A hundred students 
were arrested, Ulyanov being among them.12 When asked why he had 
risked such trouble, he reportedly replied: 'What is there to think 
about? My road has been laid out by my elder brother.'13 Ulyanov 
behaved recklessly. Along with others, he announced his withdrawal 
from the university in protest againt 'existing conditions' in academic 
life.14 The rector already intended to expel him. The Ministry of 
Internal Affairs meted out a sentence typical for first offences of this 
kind: Ulyanov was exiled to Kokushkino, the estate recently inherited 
by his mother upon the death of Dr Blank. The police were instructed 
to keep him under surveillance. IS His mother wrote letters begging that 
he be re-admitted to his studentship; but to no avail. He continued 
independently with his reading in jurisprudence. At the same time he 
returned to his brother's book collection and worked through tomes of 
Russian revolutionary literature. He read and re-read Chernyshevski's 
novel What Is To Be Done? Its impact upon him was profound. As 
Ulyanov was to confide to a friend, Chernyshevski 'ploughed him over 
and over' .16 We have seen that Vladimir I1ich borrowed some political 
and philosophical attitudes from Chernyshevski. He also experienced 
a powerful emotional influence. Chernyshevski's novel leant dignity 
and heroism to socialist ideals. Such was Ulyanov's admiration that he 
took the dangerous step of writing to Chernyshevski (but he received 
no reply since the exiled oppositionist was already mortally iII).17 
The Ulyanov family was allowed to move back to Kazan in 
September 1888. Vladimir remained banned from the university and 
denied permission to go abroad to complete his studies. He again 
contacted local revolutionaries. Bogoraz had fled to Rostov; but 
Ulyanov managed to track down M. P. Chetvergova, an ex-member of 
People's Freedom. He attended her political circle.1s Chetvergova's 
group, like Bogoraz's, had contacts outside Kazan. It associated itself 
with the terrorist leader M. V. Sabunaev, who was travelling the 
country making arrangements for a convocation of all the local 
groupings.19 Both Chetvergova and Sabunaev are dimly-known per-
sonages. But quite possibly their ideas were similar to those of 
Aleksandr Ulyanov.2o Again we cannot be sure about the nature of 
 Roads to Freedom 
33 
Vladimir's contribution to the group. Obviously, however, this 
eighteen-year-old former Kazan student was in serious jeopardy of 
arrest.21 
And, if caught, he would not have been punished as leniently as 
before. His mother in fact had a deterrent effect upon him for the last 
time. Worried by his involvement with revolutionaries in Kazan, she 
sold up the family house and purchased a landed estate at Alakaevka in 
Samara province. They moved in May 1888.22 The police broke up 
Chetvergova's group mere months later; had it not been for his 
mother's action, Vladimir would probably have joined the others in 
prison. Ulyanov brought his legal textbooks and his political reading 
material to Alakaevka. In the winter of 1888-89 he reportedly began 
to study Karl Marx's Das Kapital. 23 The effect upon him was 
enormous. Marx was shortly to emerge as the focus of his political 
world; there would be no other writer, not even Chernyshevski, who 
would be so revered by Ulyanov. It is impossible to say whether 
intellectual appreciation was as yet accompanied by an attraction of 
the emotions. But this was not long in coming. Ulyanov's collected 
writings will be combed in vain for traces of adverse comment on Karl 
Marx. The tone is uniformly not just approving but adulatory. He did 
not abandon non-Marxist authors. Darwin's books too seem to have 
appealed to him at this time. 24 But Marx was obviously becoming the 
towering intellectual force in his thinking. Expulsion from Kazan 
University gave him leisure for cultural exploration. Steadily his 
political viewpoint was clarifying itself. 
His mother's transportation of the family to Samara province did not 
prevent him from striking up friendships with local revolutionaries; 
and many of these, like N. S. Dolgov and M. P. Golubeva, were 
veterans of the terrorist wing of the agrarian-socialist movement.25 But 
Vladimir nursed doubts about the strategy of People's Freedom. He 
joined A. P. Sklyarenko's narodnik group in Samara. Sklyarenko was 
only a little older than Ulyanov; he had once been influenced by the 
ideas of People's Freedom but he too was entering a period of 
reconsideration which would lead him to Marxism. Ulyanov found 
himself among congenial colleagues in his own period of intellectual 
ferment. 26 
MARX AND ENGELS 
Marx's ideas and Russian populism, while coinciding in several 
 34 
Lenin: A Political Life 
important areas, diverged in others of equal significance. The young 
Vladimir's debt to Marx is hard to define with precision. They did not 
know each other personally. Marx died in 1883. Such impression as he 
made upon Ulyanov was achieved through his books. Our sources are 
exiguous. The winter of 1888-89 is probably the correct date of 
Ulyanov's first reading of Kapital, but we cannot be categorical: a few 
accounts suggest that it was in fact earlier. 27 Ulyanov was a bibliophile. 
He read fast, he read voraciously. We do not possess the record of his 
initial encounter with Marx. Das Kapital is unlikely to have been the 
only book. Ulyanov's earliest extant writings offer some clues. 
Citations made by him in his articles of 1893-95 suggest that, if Kapital 
was the most closely scrutinised text, The Communist Manifesto 
(written by Marx together with Frederick Engels) and Engels's 
Anti-Duhring were also works of influence.28 It is quite likely that 
these same books were familiar and important to Ulyanov in 1889. If 
we are uncertain about chronology and bibliography, moreover, we 
must be still more cautious about thematic influences. Ulyanov the 
anti-autobiographer has left no account. In order to gauge how he 
initially reacted to Marx it is necessary to make guesses based upon 
indirect comments made by Ulyanov in his own early writings. It was, 
furthermore, an evolving relationship. From the end of the 1880s until 
his death in 1924, Ulyanov was an assiduous Marxologist; he was 
engaged more intensively in the study of Marx and Engels than of any 
other theorist (including the populists).29 He continually returned to 
the works of his great inspirers in order to receive inspiration afresh. 
We must therefore tread tentatively in our assessment of Marx's 
impact upon Ulyanov while he was yet a young man. 
The economics of Karl Marx were an enduring interest of Ulyanov's. 
The analysis of capitalism was especially attractive. Marx had 
described in Das Kapital how industrialists, introducing new forms of 
machinery and a new division of labour into their factories, had 
inaugurated transformations of epochal significance. Capitalism 
enormously expanded the production of goods. It spread educational 
facilities more widely and raised the level of popular consciousness.3o 
Unlike the narodniki, Ulyanov condoned capitalist development. He 
also shared Marx's enthusiasm about capitalism's organisational 
principles (whereas the populists, though welcoming modern inven-
tions in technology, did not accept the need for a hierarchical 
distribution of duties inside factories).31 Ulyanov also approved of 
large-scale social units. The characteristic agrarian-socialist affection 
for the small, self-contained community found little echo in Ulyanov's 
 Roads to Freedom 
35 
writings. And perhaps Kapital, with its withering critique of proposals 
to preserve 'communalistic' social relationships once capitalist 
development had begun, leant further strength to his Russian fol-
lower's standpoine2 
Ulyanov did not eulogise capitalism. His aim was to indicate that the 
modernisation of the Russian economy would afford advantages 
exploitable by socialists in the future. For capitalism was not to be 
regarded as a cul-de-sac. It was the penultimate rather than final epoch 
in global social change. Das. Kapital exposed capitalism's internal 
contradictions. Capitalism operated upon principles of competition: 
the capitalist maintained his business by hiring labourers to work in his 
factory, to maximise his competitiveness he was obliged not only to 
extract as much labour power as possible from his work-force but also 
to invest an increasing proportion of his revenue in the acquisition of 
the latest types of equipment.33 Inexorably some capitalists would be 
more successful than others. Economic power would fall into fewer 
and fewer hands. The general effect would be that the capitalist system 
would periodically get the supply of goods out of balance with the 
demand for them. Massive economic crises would recur.34 The 
solution would be for the working class to establish a 'dictatorship of 
the proletariat' .35 Both culturally and politically, the workers would be 
well-suited to such a role. Of all social classes, they had least interest in 
a private-enterprise economy; they should be encouraged to engage in 
'class struggle'. This would necessitate a lengthy political campaign. 
On the whole, the narodniki had denied that a parliament, even if it 
were to be set up in Russia, was a suitable forum of activity for 
revolutionaries. Marx had no such self-denying ordinance. Nor had 
Ulyanov.36 He also enthusiastically concurred (and here Tkachev was 
fully with them) that force was the midwife of radical political change. 
Only when the working-class dictatorship had swept away all remnants 
of the capitalist system would a more relaxed regime be initiated.37 
And the transition would then be made to communism itself. 
Eventually a new society would be created which would take as its 
guiding rule: from each according to his ability, to each according to his 
needs.3s 
Such a denouement is a common theme in Ulyanov's work. He did 
not expect it to be realised immediately. Kapital and Anti-Diihring 
postulated that inherent laws governed the workings of a socio-
economic formation such as capitalism. Marx, in addition, sketched a 
majestic sequence of stages in historical change. Feudalism gave way 
to capitalism. And capitalism would be supplanted, ultimately, by 
 36 
Lenin: A Political Life 
communism.39 A social and cultural stage could not simply be 'leaped 
over'. Again this was an attractive pattern of thought to Ulyanov, who 
aimed to counter the narodnik contention that Russia had an 
exceptional destiny in store if only the political will was shown by the 
revolutionary movement.40 
In general, Ulyanov argued that Marxism offered a satisfactory basis 
for the explanation of social relations. It was 'scientific'. Marx himself 
had frequently contrasted himself with those other socialist theorists 
who, founding their ideas upon moral inclination, produced only 
'utopian' programmes. Ulyanov propounded this view avidly.41 He 
maintained that scientific analysis, not sentimentality, should direct 
policy; and that the bedrock of such an analysis was provided in the 
writings of Marx and Engels. Ulyanov spoke of Kapital as incontest-
able truth. It was not, in his opinion, open to refutation.42 This did not 
mean that no questions about society remained to be answered. Marx 
and Engels had laid the foundations. It was up to their followers to 
deploy and adapt their ideas in the light of different conditions. Each 
country was bound to be in some sense unique; and political 
circumstances, too, could not help but change over the years. Thus no 
specific recommendation of policy was automatically applicable to a 
universal pattern. Marxism had to be handled 'creatively'.43 On the 
other hand there were limits, in Ulyanov's presentation, to the 
experimentation allowable. Even in his first published writings, he was 
quick to raise the cry of delinquence and even heresy whenever his 
interpretations of the Marxist canon were challenged.44 'Orthodoxy' 
was to be his unfailing demand. 
There were many Marxists who objected to his interpretations. This 
was understandable. Marx was an exceptionally broad-ranging 
thinker; he never formulated his exuberant analysis into a single, final, 
uncontradictory synthesis. Engels's Anti-Duhring was an attempt at 
such a formulation. It probably made Marx's ideas appear more 
clear-cut than they really had been.45 The complexity and inchoateness 
of Marx's Marxism were recognised even in the years shortly after his 
death; and these qualities are even more obvious now that we possess 
several important tracts which lay unpublished until the 1920s and 
1930s.46 
It has been pointed out that Marx allowed for a variety of routes of 
social development in the epochs prior to socialism; and that he used 
the concept of 'Asiatic despotism' rather than 'feudalism' to designate 
a number of societies in the East.47 It has been shown too that he did 
not discount the practicability of a peaceful transition to socialism 
 Roads to Freedom 
37 
where political freedom existed. He speculated upon such an outcome 
in Britain and the USA.48 Doubts about Lenin's version of Marxism 
exist in further areas. It has been noted that Marx never treated Kapital 
as completely incontrovertible; and that, moreover, it is in the nature 
of scientific propositions that they are capable of being tested. For all 
the divergences between Marx and Engels (and these are too often 
exaggerated, because Marx had the opportunity to criticise the 
Anti-Duhring before publication), there is nothing in Engels's literary 
output which suggests belief in the possibility of attaining knowledge 
of eternal validity.49 Ulyanov, furthermore, played down the working 
class's ability to develop its own socialist ideas. Marx was not so 
pessimistic.50 In addition Ulyanov had a penchant for political 
violence. He certainly repudiated individual repudiating terrorism as a 
primary tactic of overthrowing the Russian autocracy; but he nonethe-
less was to approve of mass terror, even before the events of 1917-18, 
as a positive means of eradicating all vestiges of the ancien regime once 
a revolutionary government was esconced in power. It is doubtful that 
Marx always felt so unambivalently.51 Ulyanov's Marxism was, 
accordingly, a legitimate version in most respects. But not in all. This 
was not unusual; indeed it was typical for Marxist thinkers to be 
selective and to modify, alter and inadvertently distort Marx's notions 
in order to produce an interpretation which seemed to them to be most 
suitable for their time, their country and their own political 
preferences. 
RUSSIAN MARXISM AND RUSSIAN POPULISM 
This meant that debate among Russian Marxists could not be confined 
to the generalities of Marxism. The discussion also had to come to grips 
with details. Russia's particularities required consideration. Marx 
himself caused problems. On certain issues of immediate political 
relevance he gave a degree of succour to the narodniki. In 1877 he 
wrote to the populist Mikhailovski denying that Das Kapital pre-
scribed a model of historical development for all countries. Russia, he 
stated, might take a different path from Western Europe's.52 In 1881 
the Russian Marxist Vera Zasulich approached him for clarification. 
The reply was depressing, at least for her. He repeated that the Russian 
peasant commune might well be usable as a vehicle for making a direct 
transition to socialism.53 He encouraged the sociologist M. M. 
Kovalevski to pursue his researches on communal practices. In his 
 38 
Lenin: A Political Life 
later years, Marx himself collected notes on Russian village tradi-
tions.54 This was not the only encouragement he gave to narodnik 
attitudes. He admired the terrorists of People's Freedom. Both he and 
Engels felt that the assassination of the emperor might so destabilise 
the political situation as to detonate revolution in Russia. Engels after 
Marx's death continued to sanction terrorist activity.55 He was not 
initially attracted, moreover, by the Russian Marxists emerging in 
the 1880s; he treated them as somewhat bookish specimens who 
lacked the revolutionary instincts of the courageous narodnik 
undergrounders.56 
Mikhailovski made play with his correspondence with Marx; and 
Zasulich found her own response from Marx so embarrassing that she 
withheld it from public knowledge.57 Yet Marx had not rejected her 
unconditionally. His remarks were qualified. He affirmed that once 
the Russian economy had embarked upon the capitalist road of 
development there would be no means of preventing capitalism from 
taking a hold; and he felt in any case that a commune-based revolution 
in Russia would fail without aid from revolutions in industrially-
advanced countries elsewhere.58 
Marx's self-disentanglement from the populist embrace did not 
wholly dispel the admiration for him felt by many narodniki. N. 
Danielson was a persistent suitor. It was he who, in 1872, had made the 
first translation of Marx's Kapital into any foreign language; and his 
ensuing correspondence with Marx and Engels is replete with attempts 
to persuade them that the narodnik belief in the impracticability of 
capitalist development in Russia by no means contradicted Marxian 
economics. In addition Petr Tkachev, theorist of narodnik terrorism, 
was also one of Europe's most distinguished Marxologists in the 1870s. 
Marx's economics commended itself to the populists in general. 
Tkachev's respect went further. He liked also what he took to be 
Marx's politics. He argued that Marxism, properly interpreted, did not 
discount the possibility of countries taking a direct path from feudalism 
to socialism without an intermediate capitalist stage; he claimed that 
Germany itself had had such an opportunity in the sixteenth century. 
This was unacceptable to Engels. Tkachev seemed to him to place 
altogether too much emphasis upon the capacity of revolutionary 
leaders to change history's course. Engels and Tkachev engaged in 
public dispute in 1874. It was an intriguing spectacle, not least because 
it provided the first sight of Marxism's co-founder being castigated as 
having drawn incorrect conclusions from his own works.59 
But even this did not irretrievably damage the reputation of Marx 
 Roads to Freedom 
39 
and Engels among populists; Mikhailovski's anti-Marxist tirades were 
not universally approved. A case of continuing sympathy is found in 
Vladimir Ulyanov's narodnik brother Aleksandr. In writing a new 
draft programme for People's Freedom in 1887, he expressly 
described the Marxists in Russia as comrades.60 His ideas too had a 
Marxist aspect. He regarded the eventual achievement of socialism as 
'inevitable'. He called for the nationalisation of the land and of 
industrial enterprises. He conceded that the peasantry was not a 
uniform social class and that a petite bourgeoisie was already being 
formed in the countryside; he stated also that urban workers would 
have to be the main conveyors of the idea of revolution to the people. 
He did not idealise the peasant. Nor did he have a simplistic view on 
how to organise political activity. He perceived a need for an alliance 
with middle-class groupings such as the liberals in order to bring down 
the autocracy. He supported terrorism. But he did so not because he 
though it would destroy tsarism but rather with the ambition of 
pressuring the government to grant political freedoms. Aleksandr 
Ulyanov bestrode two periods in revolutionary endeavour, and he 
appealed for revolutionary unity on the grounds that the dis-
agreements between Marxists and his own group of narodniki covered 
questions that were not 'essential' ones.6l 
Such appeals, however, fell upon increasingly deaf ears among 
Marxists after the late 1880s. Aleksandr Ulyanov was still too 
populistic for them. For all his eclecticism, he believed in the direct 
transition from feudalism to socialism; he also wanted to base the 
future society upon the unit of the village commune. And he did not 
abandon the narodnik view of capitalism as a retrogressive historical 
stage.62 
These were attitudes justifiably taken by Russian Marxists to be 
quintessentially opposed to the thrust of Das Kapital and The 
Communist Manifesto (which had claimed a much greater portion of 
Marx's time and mental effort than his letter to Mikhailovski). 
Nevertheless other populist ideas lived on in Russian Marxism. In 
some aspects, their influence was stronger upon others than upon 
Vladimir Ulyanov himself. Agrarian policy supplies an example. 
Mikhailovski accused the Russian Marxists of callous disregard for the 
sufferings ofthe peasantry in the 1891 famine; they were charged with 
condoning any phenomenon, however oppressive to the mass of the 
population, so long as it helped capitalist development. The Marxist N. 
E. Fedoseev rejected this claim. He described his own programme as 
involving not the expropriation of most peasant households but rather 
 40 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the preservation of a large social class of independent small-holders.63 
An analogous rejection was made by P. P. Maslovin the 1890s. Maslov 
criticised governmental financial policy to allow agricultural prices to 
soar; it was his view that cheap food was essential for society's 
well-being and for capitalist development.64 Some Marxists went 
further than Maslov. Activists such as A. I. Rykov would argue that, 
when the autocracy was overthrown, all gentry-held land should be 
handed over to the peasantry.65 This was a traditional populist 
demand. Narodnik ideas were far from being moribund. In fact, by the 
turn of the century, there even appeared Russian Marxists (among 
whom the most notable was L. Nadezhdin) who called for the 
restoration of terrorism as a primary tactic of struggle against the 
monarchy.66 
Ulyanov shrugged off such suggestions. He did not support calls for 
the lowering of agricultural prices; he did not, at least in the 1890s and 
indeed until 1905, favour the proposal to transfer all agricultural land 
to the peasantry. Nor did he approve of the use of assassinations as a 
primary revolutionary tactic. Populistic though he was in certain 
leanings, he was unpopulistic and antipopulistic in others. 
GEORGI PLEKHANOV'S MARXISM 
He was not without assistance from other Marxists in elaborating his 
Marxism; and the Russian who most influenced him was Georgi 
Valentinovich Plekhanov. In his younger days Plekhanov had been a 
leader of Black Repartition and been forced to flee to Switzerland in 
1880. He saw that the chances of preventing capitalist development 
were receding fast; and he was shocked by the peasantry's abstention 
from wholesale revolt. He gradually accepted Marxist political posi-
tions. Controversy ensued. Russian Marxism received its baptism of 
fire in a struggle with agrarian socialism. This made the early Russian 
Marxists keen to demonstrate the validity of their self-description as 
Marxists; and their edginess was exacerbated by the statements made 
in the 1880s by Marx and Engels. Perhaps it was only in 1892, when 
Engels at last declared that capitalism had decisively gripped the 
Russian economy,67 that the coolness towards the experiments in 
Russian Marxism fully vanished. Plekhanov in any case addressed 
himself mainly to a Russian readership. Attacking People's Freedom, 
he ridiculed the notion that a small band of conspirators could effect a 
revolution. Premature attempts by socialists to seize power in Russia 
 Roads to Freedom 
41 
had to be averted.68 According to Plekhanov, the next stage in the 
country's political transformation would be not an agrarian-socialist 
government but a government representing the interests of the rising 
bourgeoisie. This would come about only through bloody revolution. 
Parliamentary democracy was attainable in the empire only through 
the forcible overthrow of the absolute monarchy.69 
Plekhanov's Socialism And Political Struggle, written in 1883, put 
this case at length; he expanded his reasonings in 1885 with Our 
Disagreements. Both books were acclaimed in most respects by all 
young Russian Marxists. Ulyanov reiterated its arguments. 
He also sided with Plekhanov over those matters in his books that 
sparked off Russian Marxism's earliest internal dispute. Plekhanov 
saw that it went against the grain, for most socialists, to propose the 
emplacement of the middle class in power; and he knew his policy to 
sanction the further immiseration of most, though not all, peasants. 
Plekhanov was unflinching. He argued that the economic trends were 
irreversible;70 and Ulyanov ranged himself with him against the 
Fedoseevs and Maslovs who took a less indifferent attitude to the 
peasantry's plight.71 In addition, Ulyanov approved of Plekhanov's 
insistence that capitalism was no longer a distant projection. It had 
arrived in Russia. Das Kapital contained little about the peasantry; but 
Plekhanov endeavoured to show that Marxian categories of analysis 
were applicable to the changing economic relationships in the depths 
of rural Russia.72 Plekhanov used data from V. E. Postnikov and other 
zemstvo statisticians. He was an aggressive, sarcastic debater (and this 
must have been an element in his attractiveness to Ulyanov, who was 
to become notorious for his polemical zeal). He was especially skilled 
in drawing attention to the long-term economic effects of the Edict of 
1861; there was nobody who put the view more vividly that the 
government's reforms were a watershed in capitalist development. His 
two early books were a crucial contribution to the Russian Marxist 
doctrine that capitalism was on the verge of pervading all economic 
relations in town and countryside. 
Georgi Plekhanov was not alone in his thinking. Other ex-narodniki 
joined him in 1883 to propose the adoption of a Marxist programme 
for Russian socialists. Among them were Pavel Akselrod, Vera 
Zasulich and Lev Deich. Plekhanov and his associates called them-
selves the Emancipation Of Labour Group. 
They saw urgent tasks to perform; they did not intend to wait upon 
events.73 European history contained many examples of slow, steady 
processes of change interrupted by unexpected explosions of discon-
 42 
Lenin: A Political Life 
tent. The Paris Commune had been precisely such a phenomenon. In 
1871 the workers of the French capital threw up the barricades and 
installed their own administration. The Commune lasted only weeks, 
being suppressed by troops dispatched from Versailles. But it lived on 
in the memory of Europe's revolutionaries. The Emancipation Of 
Labour Group wished to be in a position to take full advantage of any 
similar situation which might arise in Russia. Plekhanov drew atten-
tion to The Communist Manifesto; he pointed out that Germany, at the 
time of its publication in 1848, had been at a level of economic and 
political development comparable with Russia's in the 1880s. What 
had been sauce for the Prussian goose was sauce for the Russian 
gander. The Emanicipation Of Labour Group perceived no reason 
why they should not eventually be able to form a mass political party 
like the German Social-Democratic Party. By the mid-1890s, the 
German social-democrats had won the loyalty of millions of their 
nation's workers; they were sending more and more representatives to 
the Reichstag. The German Social-Democratic Party was Marxist in 
ideology and was the main force inside the Second International 
(which united Europe's socialist movement). Plekhanov's perspective 
was optimistic. Even Russian economic backwardness was to be 
regarded as an asset: it would mean that socialist ideas could be 
disseminated among Russia's working class at an earlier stage in the 
country's economic transformation than had been possible in Britain, 
France or Germany.74 
Such ideas were endorsed by Ulyanov and the young generation of 
Marxists. They admired a further argument. This was that industrial 
workers were the 'vanguard' of the social forces opposed to the 
Russian monarchy. They were to lead the 'democratic revolution'. 
They would need allies, since the proletariat still constituted a minority 
of the population. They would have to tug the middle class, the 
peasantry, the non-Orthodox religious groups and the non-Russian 
nationalities into a coalition. Only the working class, however, had the 
potential to act as an unambiguously revolutionary body. All the other 
classes and groups were likely to make compromises with tsarism. 
Plekhanov's colleague Akselrod therefore urged that industrial work-
ers should maintain 'hegemony' over the anti-monarchical movement 
in Russia.75 
The Group said little about the immediate steps to be taken. 
Plekhanov called upon the socialist elements of the intelligentsia to 
guide the workers towards Marxism; and, again, Ulyanov was to warm 
to Plekhanov's belief in the intellectual's capacity to attain exact 
 Roads to Freedom 
43 
knowledge of society - a belief that was not universally accepted by 
Marxists inside and outside Russia.76 But Plekhanov offered no 
counsel about the organisational forms of the political party which 
would eventually be founded. Nor did he describe the means to be 
employed to overthrow the monarchy. He assumed generally that 
mass action would be needed; he criticised People's Freedom for 
suggesting that assassination campaigns should be the primary tactic.77 
The Emancipation Of Labour Group thought that the workers, as the 
vanguard of the anti-monarchical forces, would be in a position to 
demand comprehensive reforms from the succeeding middle-class 
government. The Russian Marxist programme should call for a system 
of parliamentary elections based upon universal, secret-ballot suf-
frage. Freedoms of conscience, expression, organisation and assembly 
should be declared. The professional army should be abolished; there 
should be a 'general arming of the people'. Plekhanov wanted 
legislation protecting the rights of factory workers at the place of 
employment; he also desired to lift the restrictions upon the peasan-
try's right to leave the village commune at will. He sought the abolition 
of redemption payments.78 His Group felt that such a programme 
would provide the political and economic framework necessary for the 
maturation of Russian capitalism. It would also equip socialists with 
the chance to propagate their ideas and construct a mass political 
party. 
Plekhanov claimed to have sketched a programme in line with the 
contours of European Marxism as it was widely interpreted in the years 
after Marx's death. For the most part, his claim was just. But there 
remained elements that did not fit the pattern. 
This was discernible in his refusal to make an absolute rejection of 
assassinations as a method of fighting the autocracy. He opposed 
terrorism as a primary means of bringing down the regime, yet still 
regarded it as an acceptable auxiliary tactic.79 Such a viewpoint was not 
in keeping with the outlook of Karl Kautsky and other theorists of the 
German Social-Democratic Party in the 1890s (even though Marx 
himself had approved of an assassination campaign in Russia).80 There 
were further contrasts. Plekhanov certainly expected the overthrow of 
the autocracy to be followed by a period of bourgeois government. 
This was entirely unexceptionable doctrine. But his programme also 
demanded a plenitude of rights for workers and peasants; he even 
expected the bourgeois government to give financial aid to their 
self-organised co-operatives.81 His capitalism was not going to be of an 
untrammelled variety. His un typicality does not end here. It is equally 
 44 
Lenin: A Political Life 
visible in his treatment of the subsequent measures for the eventual 
dismemberment of capitalism itself. Our Disagreements emphasised the 
need for a 'working-class dictatorship' .82 This accorded with Marx's 
call for 'the dictatorship of the proletariat'. Plekhanov was somewhat 
more categorical than Marx; for Marx had not entirely discounted the 
possibility of a peaceful transition to socialism. In any case, phrases 
like 'dictatorship' were already an embarrassment to the German 
Social-Democratic Party in the 1890s. Instead, Kautsky tended to 
emphasise the benefits of universal suffrage.83 Ulyanov was on 
Plekhanov's side. The version of Marxism produced by Plekhanov 
seemed to his young follower to be both entirely acceptable in doctrine 
and wonderfully suited to the political tasks facing Russian Marxists in 
the years ahead.84 
ACTIVISM IN SAMARA 
It took time for the Marxist circles in the Russian empire to acquire 
their organisational identity. Plekhanov arranged to have his pam-
phlets smuggled back from Switzerland. In 1886 he made contact with 
Marxist activists in St. Petersburg led by the Bulgarian D. I. Blagoev. 
But Blagoev was quickly arrested, and Plekhanov's role as a practical 
leader became negligible for the rest of the decade.8s Nevertheless his 
own intellectual odyssey towards Marxism was being repeated by 
many revolutionaries. Poles and Jews were in the forefront. Their 
groups, located in the empire's western regions, led the way in forming 
disciplined, cohesive underground local organisations. Indeed the 
Bund, as the Jewish Marxist party was called, shortly enrolled 
thousands of workers.8s But revolutionaries of Russian origin also 
were bestirring themselves in the same direction: towards Marxism. 
Among them, in Samara, were Vladimir Ulyanov and A. P. 
Sklyarenko. The Volga city of Samara was not as politically volatile as 
Kazan; but, from the standpoint of the revolutionaries, it compensated 
for its quiescence by its intellectually more bracing discussions. Local 
journals in the 1890s contained articles by writers of national 
renown.87 Evening debates were a feature of the city's clandestine 
political activity. Sklyarenko's group was invited to contribute to 
narodnik meetings; and these invitations were accepted. They offered 
the chance to win further recruits to Marxism. Nobody has pinpointed 
when Sklyarenko's organisation made its own crossing over to Russian 
Marxist doctrines. Vladimir Ulyanov was reportedly even more 
 Roads to Freedom 
45 
enthusiastic about the new ideas than Sklyarenko and to have been the 
force behind the group's transformation. He proved his mettle in 
debate with leading terrorists who visited Samara in search of 
supporters. M. V. Sabunaev made such a trip in December 1889. He 
was persisting in his endeavour to re-establish a network of People's 
Freedom groups; and apparently he argued, like Aleksandr Ulyanov, 
that revolutionaries of different persuasions should not exaggerate 
their differences. Accounts of the meeting in Samara suggest that 
Ulyanov revealed himself as a devastating critic of Sabunaev's 
strategy.88 He seems to have become his group's most trenchant 
polemicist. When P. I. Rossinevich repeated Sabunaev's attempt in 
March 1891, it was again Ulyanov who took up the intellectual 
cudgels.89 
Yet it remains a matter of speculation whether he had opted 
decisively for a Plekhanovite position in this period. Autobiographical 
fragments are again scarce. No activist with even the barest sense of 
self-preservation would jot down such details at the time; but later in 
life Ulyanov was to date his revolutionary career as having started in 
1892-93.90 It is possible that this signified the time of his conversion. 
Could it be that in 1890 and 1891 he detected the inadequacies in 
agrarian-socialist views without yet embracing a Russian Marxist 
perspective? Such a condition was not unusual in those years. It would 
certainly have allowed him to take issue with the Sabunaevs and the 
Rossineviches. But it would not have forced him to avoid contact with 
the terrorists; indeed he was happy to have the chance to discuss 
politics with veterans of People's Freedom exiled to Samara. He 
retained the agrarian-socialist interest in the mechanics of the 'seizure 
of power'.91 Yet Ulyanov, as M. P. Golubeva's memoirs indicate, 
refused to put high hopes in the peasantry: 'He could in no way 
understand on what kind of "people" we expected to base ourselves, 
and he began to explain at length that the people was not some single 
and undifferentiated entity, that the people was constituted by classes 
with differing interests.'92 These were formative years in Ulyanov's 
career. It is frustrating that the published sources are so sparse. 
Nonetheless Ulyanov's life was not yet wholly absorbed in political 
activism. Though modest in size, his mother's estate at Alakaevka 
required someone to run it; it was natural for her to turn to her oldest 
surviving son. His encounter with economic management was brief. 
He was reticent about the reasons, except for an opaque later remark 
that 'relations with the peasantry became abnormal' .93 It would be 
instructive to know more about the episode. Ulyanov was having his 
 46 
Lenin: A Political Life 
first working contact with non-privileged sections of the rural popula-
tion; and we may wonder whether the experience simply confirmed his 
convictions about them or altered them in some way. Once more the 
sources fail us. 
Ulyanov made no other attempt at the practical application of his 
economics until becoming leader of the Soviet government; hencefor-
ward his knowledge of the world of toil was to come through books and 
from activists with first-hand acquaintance with economic affairs in the 
village and town. He had not abandoned hopes of a lawyer's career. 
His mother's pleas to the authorities were rewarded on 17 May 1890 
with official notification that he could register himself as an external 
student attached to the university of his choice. The fates were with 
him. The police department in Samara, though aware of his friendship 
with 'persons of doubtful reliability', were unable to supply concrete 
proofs of 'anti-state' behaviour.94 He selected Petersburg as his 
university city. He spent three months there on a study-trip, leaving 
Samara in August 1890. On his return, in October, he undertook the 
reading which would enable him to sit the final examinations in spring 
and autumn 1891. He acquired digs in St. Petersburg in March. He had 
no involvement in political activity (although he used the chance to 
look up his brother Aleksandr's friends and to enquire about the last 
months of his life). It was not a happy sojourn. Yet another tragedy 
afflicted the Ulyanov family. Vladimir's favourite sister Olga, herself a 
student in St. Petersburg, caught typhoid and died on 8 May 189l. 
Hers was the third funeral that it fell to twenty-one years old Vladimir 
Ulyanov to organise.9s But he resumed his studies with his already 
proven powers of detachment and resilience; and, when the exam 
results were published in November 1891, he received the Russian 
equivalent of a first-class honours degree.96 
. 
In January 1892 he started work as a temporary assistant barrister in 
the offices of A. N. Khardin, a Samara lawyer who was also his chess 
partner. He seems to have been an effective defence counsel. In July he 
obtained papers for permanent employment; he showed outward signs 
of being a young man who, after a flirtation with revolutionism, had 
settled down to mundane respectability. A discreet watch was kept on 
him by the police, but nothing compromising could be ascertained. In 
fact his political commitment was as strong as ever. The descriptions of 
governmental abuses given in Anton Chekhov's short stories set off a 
charge of emotion in him: 'I felt quite literally sick; I couldn't stay in 
my own room, I got up and went outside.'97 
Throughout 1892 the Sklyarenko-Ulyanov group continued their 
 Roads to Freedom 
47 
meetings. They began to expand their membership, welcoming 
newcomers like I. K. Lalayants. Their common thirst for study was 
prodigious. They combed their way through Kapital and Anti-Duhring; 
they were also attracted by Engels's Condition of the Working Class 
in England. They maintained an interest in works by non-Marxist 
writers. It is likely that Ulyanov was familiar with the writings of 
Ricardo, Guizot and Ashley. The group also kept abreast of events in 
the German Social-Democratic Party. Kautsky's Die Neue Zeit 
sometimes arrived in Samara, and Ulyanov would pounce on copies 
eagerly. Pamphlets by Plekhanov too would occasionally reach him.98 
The labour of self-instruction proceeded. And, as confidence 
increased, the Samara activists sought to do something of their own to 
strengthen the plausibility of Russian Marxism in general. Plekhanov's 
economics were a sketch of trends. Ulyanov and Sklyarenko agreed on 
the need to conduct more detailed work on agrarian statistics. They 
commenced research on the contemporary peasant economy; and this 
led Ulyanov not only to investigate zemstvo statistical handbooks but 
also to grasp every opportunity to talk directly with peasants. His 
brother-in-law Mark Elizarov was a peasant's son with a clerical job in 
Samara. Elizarov introduced him to rural inhabitants. So too did A. A. 
Preobrazhenski.99 Ulyanov's own work as a lawyer, which not 
infrequently involved the defence of individual peasants, gave him 
further insights into the operation of the village commune. lOO He began 
to write articles. Alakaevka provided an enclave of calm for his studies. 
Determined to organise his work effectively, he marked out an area in 
the garden to serve as his office; the family called it Volodya's 
Corner. lOl 
Reportedly, by the end of 1892, he had drafted three articles 
intended to expose weaknesses in Vorontsov's economic standpoint. 
There is a story too that Ulyanov and Mikhailovski met face to face in 
debate in the summer of that year, and that Mikhailovski came off 
worsted. The tale is probably fictitious. lo2 But there is no denying that 
Ulyanov had by now emerged as a competent exponent of Marxism. 
He was firm in conviction, savage in discussion. It remained for him to 
prove that he was not only a promising economist but also a practical 
political leader. 
