 4 
Capitalism in One 
Country 
'THE DEVELOPMENT OF CAPITALISM IN RUSSIA' 
Socialist scholar-politicians had become notable figures in Russian 
public life by the turn of the century. Mikhailovski and Plekhanov were 
outstanding in the older generation; and younger men like A. A. 
Bogdanov, V. M. Chernov, P. P. Maslov and V. I. Ulyanov were 
already set fair to emulate them. The combination of scholarly 
accomplishment and political eminence was not a uniquely Russian 
phenomenon. The German socialists had their Kautsky, and the 
Italians would later produce their Gramsci. The emergence of this 
species of political leader is not easily explicable. But it would appear 
to be no coincidence that the countries which bred such specimens 
were embarking upon economic transformation. Their young intellec-
tuals grew up in societies where the contrast between the old and the 
new was sharply delineated. Opposition to the political establishment 
might lead them to take up arms. Equally, they might be induced to 
take to the pen. Activists sensed that radical alternative policies were 
unlikely to attract sufficient following unless they could be shown to be 
rooted in a 'scientific' understanding of the world. Books on history, 
philosophy and economics were therefore popular with the Russian 
reading public. The day of the literary essay was drawing to a close. As 
the expansion of higher-educational facilities took place after 1861, so 
the number of readers who would countenance tackling drier and more 
scholarly tomes on matters of immediate interest rose dramatically. 
The learned journals of the 1890s were full of such material. 
The book to confirm Ulyanov's claims as a scholar was The 
Development of Capitalism in Russia. The manuscript was completed 
in October 1898. Ulyanov's erudite footnotes referred to over six 
hundred books and articles. The argument was carefully constructed.1 
The text of the first edition ran to 480 pages. 1200 copies were put on 
sale. It was published legally under the pseudonym of V. Hin. Each 
65 
 66 
Lenin: A Political Life 
chapter contains lengthy sections written in a style characteristic of 
academic treatises; but his many derogatory remarks about 
Mikhailovski and Vorontsov testified to lively political aims. He was 
launching an offensive on a limited front. Subsequent generations 
would often regard The Development of Capitalism as a comprehen-
sive textbook on the country's economic transformation in modern 
times.2 But in fact Ulyanov stated narrower intentions: he wished to 
examine the process of formation of the Russian domestic market for 
capitalism.3 The particularity of Ulyanov-IIin's theme is discernible in 
the gaps, which he freely acknowledged, in his treatment. Peter the 
Great, who launched Russia's first industrialising drive in the 
eighteenth century, is mentioned only once. Count Witte attracts only 
fleeting references. No attention is given to Russia's balance of trade 
with foreign countries, to governmental loans raised abroad, or to 
foreign industrial ownership in st. Petersburg and the Donbass.4 
These lacunae were intentionally provocative. It was a nostrum of 
Plekhanov, Struve, Tugan and Ulyanov that capitalist development 
would not be impeded by the expropriation of the mass of the 
peasantry. They pointed to the boost to industrialisation given by the 
countryside. Many poor peasants worked for low wages in urban 
factories; and some richer peasants bought agricultural equipment 
from the towns. All these writers argued also that capitalist relations 
were beginning to characterise the internal workings of the village 
commune.s 
Nonetheless Plekhanov, Struve and Tugan had ventured little 
further in sketching the agrarian sector's importance for capitalist 
growth; they descried connections between urban and rural 
phenomena but interpreted them as but one factor among many which 
explained Russia's industrial drive. Ulyanov found this too tentative. 
Russian agriculture, in his view, was no second-level influence upon 
industrialisation. Rather it was the provider of an essential and basic 
domestic market for capitalist goods. His general presentation of 
economic development resembles a picture of an ecological chain. The 
habitat of huge mammals like the elephant is sustained by the existence 
of millions of microscopically small insects; and, in Ulyanov's opinion, 
the growth of large-scale heavy industrial production depended upon 
the rise of a minority of the peasantry to financial prosperity. He 
argued that their demand for agricultural machinery took up a vital 
share of the market for industrial goods. Wealthy peasants were set 
upon emulating those gentry landowners who created capitalist farms 
(unlike most landords, who rented out land to peasants rather than 
 Capitalism in One Country 
67 
farm it themselves). And these farms too gave impetus to manu-
facturing industries to produce machinery for a modernised agricul-
ture. The implication was plain. Russian industrialists could promote 
the country's economic advance even without the props of govern-
mental contracts and foreign loans. They had a domestic market of 
their own. And, if only the many semi-feudal restrictions upon 
industrial competition were removed (which was as near as Ulyanov 
could come to call for revolution without annoying the censorship 
office), there would be no limits to the potential of Russian economic 
growth.s 
The Development o/Capitalism offered a picture of steady, irrevers-
ible change. Ulyanov implied that social differentiation was a unilinear 
process; and that it brought ever-increasing gains in agricultural 
efficiency through the application of machine-powered equipment on 
larger and larger tracts of soil. Big was not only beautiful: it was also 
cost-effective. The extension of territory owned by rich peasants 
involved them in the buying out of poor peasants. But the landless 
would be able to better their situation. They would earn more money 
in wages than they had obained as inefficient peasant cultivators.7 
This vista was the most inspiriting of all those painted by Russian 
Marxists. Capitalism, according to Ulyanov, still confronted an epoch 
of maturation but Russia was already a capitalist country. The social 
structure had been altered fundamentally. He conceded that factory 
workers, miners and railwaymen had reached only one and a half 
million in number. But there were also a million workers in the 
construction trade; and a further couple of millions were employed in 
timber-felling and other less skilled occupations. There were about 
three and a half million hired labourers in the agricultural sector; there 
were also around two million workers employed in 'putting-out' 
industry in their own village homes. Hired labour was therefore the 
condition of ten and a half million souls out of 125 millions. Even this 
computation did not exhaustively comprehend the 'proletariat and 
semi-proletariat'. Poor peasants with land were in practice hardly 
distinguishable from landless rural labourers: both groups had 
recourse to employment by gentry landlords and rich peasants. From 
Ulyanov's tabulations it therefore emerged that 'proletarians and 
semi-proletarians' constituted over sixty-three million souls. This was 
over half of the entire imperial populace.B Censorship difficulties 
prevented him from spelling out his political conclusions; but the 
experienced Marxist reader could detect that Ulyanov's analysis was 
directed against Struve as much as against Mikhailovski. Russian 
 68 
Lenin: A Political Life 
industrialisation, according to Ulyanov, was at a more advanced stage 
than was generally allowed. 9 
Ulyanov hoped to spark off a controversy; his friends relished the 
possibility of a literary furore ignited by his book's sarcastic asides. 10 Its 
reception, upon publication in 1899, was in fact rather quiet. Russian 
Marxist theorists could appreciate that Ulyanov, in marked contrast 
with Struve, did not praise non-socialist economists like List or 
Sisrnondi. But no reviewer properly enthused about the work. 
Plekhanov refrained from comment, perhaps displeased that the 
younger man had not modified his views on the nature of Russian 
feudalism. Nor did Struve enter the debate. Indeed he had been acting 
as Ulyanov's literary agent: the united front of Russian Marxism in all 
its variants had still not been completely broken (although Struve did 
permit himself a brief sally, in late 1899, against the Marxist 
movement's increasingly hagiographic deployment of Marx's texts).l1 
At the time the only Marxist to write a lengthy review of the book was 
P. N. Skvortsov, who had himself written on the peasant commune12 
and now spared Ulyanov no criticism.13 Ulyanov composed a suitably 
aggressive retort. 14 The dispute faded away. Ulyanov's economic 
studies had not caught the reading public's imagination like Struve's 
Critical Remarks. But the balance sheet was not at all depressing. For 
his book, though not a best-seller, at least had solidly confirmed his 
status as a Marxist writer of seriousness and distinction. 
But how cogent is its analysis? His definitions are problematical. He 
was particularly vague about what he meant by capitalism; the nearest 
he came towards a verbal formulation was his comment that 'the 
degree of the domestic market's development is the degree of 
capitalism's development in a country' .15 
Skvortsov's main theoretical criticism had been that Ulyanov left no 
room for the occurrence of economic crises. 16 This remark especially 
riled Ulyanov. The susceptibility of capitalism to periodic economic 
crises was a cornerstone of Marxism, and Skvortsov expressly accused 
Ulyanov of misrepresenting Das Kapital. The charge was that The 
Development of Capitalism assumed the existence of an economy 
whose various sectors and sub-sectors operated in harmony with each 
other. 17 Thus supply appeared always to equal demand. 'Proportional-
ity' seemed achieved. In truth, Ulyanov's book scarcely mentions 
disproportionality; its main message is indeed devoted to the ease Qf 
capitalist development in Russia. But Ulyanov, when taken to task by 
Skvortsov, convincingly disclaimed any intention of proving the 
practicability of proportional co-operation between branches of the 
 Capitalism in One Country 
69 
economy.1S Such a demonstration was in fact Tugan-Baranovski's 
goaJ.19 And in 1898 Ulyanov published articles not only in riposte 
to Skvortsov but also against Tugan. He argued that the instability of 
capitalism resided not only in the difficulties of regulating supply and 
demand as between economic sectors. It also derived from conflicts of 
social interest. The growth of capitalism, Ulyanov emphasised, 
inevitably caused unrest among the ever more numerous body of the 
working class. Workers would always need to consume more than the 
capitalist system could permit.20 
Both Tugan and Ulyanov claimed to have understood Marx better 
than the other did. Their arguments continue to be debated (as do 
those of the three volumes of Das Kapital itself). For our purposes, 
though, it is perhaps most useful to note the differing political lines 
lurking behind the theoretical positions. Tugan was centring upon the 
technical perfectibility of capitalism, Lenin upon the revolutionising 
effects of capitalism's growth. 
Skvortsov made other points of a more practical import. Above all, 
he called attention to mediaeval economic history. It was Skvortsov's 
contention that a national market in grain had existed long before the 
advent of capitalism; and that Ulyanov's account of nineteenth-
century phenomena failed to show why they should be defined as 
specifically capitalist.21 This criticism was later to be repeated by 
several writers ranging from liberals like N. N. Chernenkov to 
agrarian-socialist sympathisers such as A. V. Chayanov. The 
Development of Capitalism, in their opinion, was excessively taken up 
with macro-economics. It paid insufficient attention to the internal 
workings of the peasant commune. Differences of wealth among the 
peasantry were a centuries-old phenomenon and were not exclusively 
a sign of capitalist development. Ulyanov had assumed that kulak 
families would accumulate riches from generation to generation. 
Chernenkov and Chayanov, however, showed how accumulation was 
obstructed by those Russian peasant customs of inheritance which 
made household elders divide their possessions among all their sons. 
Dismemberment of agricultural units was the consequence. They also 
demonstrated that, in many regions, it was not so much the entre-
preneurial spirit that made a particular household rich as the relatively 
large number of its young male members. More sons meant greater 
labour-power and greater entitlement to communalland.22 
These were criticisms that could not lightly be brushed aside; and 
Ulyanov's later critics inside the Russian Marxist movement itself were 
to make much of them. In fact Ulyanov later admitted that his case was 
 70 
Lenin: A Political Life 
not entirely watertight; he blamed the absence of inter-generational 
peasant statistics (and he continued to make this argument even 
though his own data on horse ownership between generations 
undermined his contention that a steady division of the peasantry into 
rural proletariat and rural bourgeoisie was under way).23 In any case, 
he would also prove willing to concede in his post-1905 writings that 
his book had grossly over-stated the extent of Russian agrarian 
capitalist development. This was damning self-criticism. But it was 
balanced by a penetrating counter-thrust against his critics. His very 
reasonable argument was that the cyclical trends described by them 
might impede but would not ultimately halt the maturation of rural 
capitalism in Russia.24 Thus he stuck proudly by his book as an analysis 
of general trends. In addition, recent empirical research has tended to 
corroborate his assertions about the huge importance of agriculture's 
contribution to Russian industrialisation; and about the increasing 
commercialisation of grain output in the years before the turn of the 
century. And peasants, it is now agreed, were already producing about 
four fifths of the empire's grain marketings in the late tsarist period.25 
And so The Development of Capitalism is a work of great weak-
nesses and great strengths. Few writers in the field of general economic 
developmental theory would nowadays be so inattentive either to state 
intervention (although, admittedly, he rectified this in his later 
writings) or to foreign loans . Nor is it proven that agricultural 
efficiency always rises proportionately with size of landholding; or 
even that landless labourers are usually better off than poor peasants. 
Ulyanov's vision of an ineluctable process of industrialisation appears 
sanguine in the light of the difficulties experienced today by Third 
World countries seeking economic modernisation. On the other hand, 
his work has its merits too even on this theoretical plane. His thoughts 
on capitalism's underlying susceptibility to crisis have an impressive 
subtlety. His analysis of the process of industrialisation also has lasting 
value; he was especially effective in showing the significance of rural 
handicraft production for the consolidation of capitalist relationships. 
He was clearly no mean economist.26 
THE PARTY IN RUSSIA 
The intrinsic qualities of Ulyanov's scholarship give the lie to 
suppositions that his book's economic optimism originated exclusively 
from a populistic zeal, albeit transmuted into a Marxist form, to 
 Capitalism in One Country 
71 
foreshorten the schedule for revolutionary change (even though the 
foreshortening instinct was undoubtedly a deep-seated part of his 
make-up ).27 But this does not mean that he was economist first, and 
political activist second. He was both at once. His unashamed 
distortion of Vorontsov's views point to this. So, too, does the fact that 
he was formulating ideas on political strategy years before the 
completion of his economic magnum opus. 28 
The precise path of his approach to the intellectual formulations of 
The Development of Capitalism will, for want of the requisite personal 
details, always remain mysterious. His reticence continued after 
publication. It was accompanied by a certain nervousness; he was not 
yet the completely confident litterateur of later years. Fortunately for 
Ulyanov, 1899 was also the year when Karl Kautsky published The 
Agrarian Question; and Ulyanov delightedly noted that he had 
analysed industrialisation in a manner not dissimilar from his own.29 
This was not the only cause of his feeling of well-being. Nadezhda 
Krupskaya was arrested by the police in 1897. She was sentenced to 
exile. In January 1898 Ulyanov wrote to the authorities requesting 
that his 'fiancee' be permitted to join him in Shushenskoe. Such 
engagements between revolutionaries were often fictions enabling 
members of a group to congregate while serving sentence. Affection as 
well was involved in this case. At any rate, the authorities took 
Ulyanov at his word but insisted upon marriage. Nadezhda gave her 
consent.30 Her mother accompanied her to Shushenskoe. There was a 
last-minute hitch: no wedding rings were available. But a factory-
worker in exile with them found a piece of copper and hammered out 
two home-made ones for the bride and groom; and on 10 July 1898 
Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov and Nadezhda Konstantinovna Krupskaya 
were joined in wedlock.31 It was a union which provided him with 
emotional support for the rest of his life. More immediately, Krups-
kaya as a new exile conveyed information about the underground 
Marxist movement. She and Vladimir sat up for long nights discussing 
the drafts of his treatise, helping with his translation assignments 
(which included a Russian-language edition of Sidney and Beatrice 
Webb's History of Trade Unionism), and talking about revolutionary 
strategy in Russia. He did not bother to try to escape from Siberia. 
Knowing that his term of exile would be completed by 1900, he waited 
patiently and concentrated on thinking, planning and writing. 
Ulyanov and Krupskaya had been among those St. Petersburg 
Marxists who believed that the time had arrived to found a political 
party. Stirrings towards unification occurred simultaneously else-
 72 
Lenin: A Political Life 
where; and the Workers' Newspaper editors in Kiev summoned other 
clandestine groups to a congress in Minsk in March 1898. Nine 
delegates arrived. They claimed mandates to represent groups in St. 
Petersburg, Moscow, Ekaterinoslav and Kiev as well as the entire 
Jewish Bund. Workers' Newspaper representatives also attended. This 
effort was not praised everywhere: the group in Ivanovo-Voznesensk 
suspected that the Kievan comrades had omitted to invite it because of 
known political disagreements. Groups in other places expressed 
unease. But the Workers' Newspaper leaders maintained that the call 
for a congress would have been futile if they had not been able to 
operate with exceptional powers of discretion.32 Ulyanov was to 
become notorious for his heavy-handed manipulation of Congress 
arrangement,.. Evidently he was reinforcing a pre-existing tradition. 
A sense of historic occasion, however, permeated the proceedings. 
A party was being born. A name had to be found for it, and the 
delegates agreed on the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
Thus they aligned themselves with the German Social-Democratic 
Party. The Minsk Congress sought an end to the Russian autocracy and 
the creation of a democratic republic. Factory workers would lead the 
opposition to the regime. The delegates committed the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labour Party to political perspectives hammered 
out by Plekhanov and Akselrod for more than a decade. 33 The 
Congress also approved a notional party structure and elected a 
Central Committee to guide party affairs in periods between Con-
gresses. The Central Committee's powers were defined broadly. It was 
to be allowed to co-opt further members for the contingency that the 
police might succeed in arresting those already elected. But the rights 
of local groups (or committees, as they were thenceforward to be 
known) were to be safeguarded. Activists in the provinces were 
permitted free choice of policy so long as they kept inside the ambit of 
the party programme. The obvious drawback was that no official 
programme existed. Approaches had been made to Plekhanov but he 
had not yet supplied a draft. Next best to a programme was a brief 
manifesto of the party's intentions. Literary composition was 
entrusted to Struve; and he discharged it dutifully: it was his last act as 
a Marxist; his political sympathies would shortly impel him to declare 
himself a liberal. Finally, the Congress recognised Workers' News-
paper as the party's official organ.34 
Russian Marxists, whether at liberty or (like Ulyanov) in exile, 
believed they were beginning to have their government on the run. The 
emperor Nikolai II had succeeded to the throne of Aleksandr III upon 
 Capitalism in One Country 
73 
his death in 1894. He urged liberal constitutionalists to give up their 
'puerile dreams'. The only serious manifestation of social unrest 
occurred in working-class quarters of industrial cities. As yet the 
government was not pushed to political reforms. But the crescendo of 
strikes in 1895-96 compelled ministers to acknowledge that some 
concession to the grievances of workingmen had to be made. A factory 
law was promulgated in 1897. Jubilant social-democrats, as the 
Marxists increasingly called themselves, noted that the maximum 
working day was to be reduced to eleven-and-a-half hours. Stricter 
regulations about child labour were enacted. Safety standards were 
announced. Factory inspectors were accorded functions in the super-
vision of industrial relations. Lobbying by employers had led to a 
dilution of the law's clauses; and Russian labour legislation had some 
distance to go before it gave the freedoms prevailing in Western 
Europe. But Russian workers had extracted their first instalment. 
They had accentuated weaknesses in the autocracy's position, and the 
outbreaks of industrial conflict in 1898 showed their determination to 
be accorded both higher wages and greater dignity of treatment. There 
were 215 strikes in that year.35 The Russian Social-Democratic Labour 
Party aimed to tug political advantage out of an economic strife that 
appeared to follow a path of inexorable embitterment. 
The police had had no prior intelligence about the First Party 
Congress. When news reached the government, the order was given to 
arrest all social-democratic supporters at large. Five hundred were 
incarcerated by January 1899. The victims included eight out of the 
nine delegates to the Congress; and the three-man Central Committee 
was destroyed before its members could co-opt others to take their 
place.36 The practical constructions of the Party Congress lay in ruins. 
Even if Ulyanov had evaded capture in 1895 and survived to make his 
influence felt in Minsk, he would almost certainly have still joined his 
comrades in prison and exile. 
PROJECTS FOR THE PARTY 
News of the Congress in fact reached Ulyanov in May 1898. Before 
finishing The Development of Capitalism ,he had resumed his delibera-
tions about the party's programmatic and organisational require-
ments. Politics and economics co-existed in his thoughts. Ulyanov had 
written an entire pamphlet in late 1897, and had it published in 
Geneva as The Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats; and in 1899 he 
 74 
Lenin: A Political Life 
produced a series of draft articles ending with his Project for Our 
Party's Programme. 
From the outset, he re-affirmed his admiration for the earlier 
attempts by Plekhanov and Akselrod; his own aim was only to offer 
'particular editorial changes, corrections and additions' .37 He again 
endorsed the view that the next stage in Russia's political development 
would be not a socialist seizure of power. Capitalism had yet to mature 
in Russia. Ulyanov also approvingly cited Akselrod's contention that 
only the working class could act as 'the advance-line fighter' against the 
autocracy. He refused to predict the precise mode of assault to be used: 
he thought it futile to discuss whether it would be a general strike or an 
armed uprising. The point was to get on with preparations for the 
struggle.3s Mildly remonstrating with Plekhanov and Akselrod, he 
sought the inclusion of paragraphs describing the course of capitalist 
development in their country. He wanted, too, a more obvious 
emphasis upon the need for 'class struggle'. And, in order to combat 
those like Peter Struve in Russia or Eduard Bernstein in Germany 
striving to revise Marxism, Ulyanov wanted to insert a statement on 
the inevitability of 'the growth of poverty, oppression, enslavement, 
humiliation and exploitation' under the capitalist order.39 He stuck to 
the Geneva Group's picture of the state structure to be set up upon the 
autocracy's dismantlement. He repeated the call for a general arming 
of the people. He added a stricture of his own. So as to reinforce the 
democratic nature of the civil administrative institutions it would be 
essential to introduce the elective principle to the tenure of public 
office. Bureaucrats should no longer be appointed from above.40 
Plainly, if ever such a revolution took place, it would produce a 
government more nearly under popular control than any state in 
history. Ulyanov then added a list of social reforms. The maximum 
working day should be lowered to eight hours; every worker should be 
guaranteed a break of at least thirty six hours per week. Child labour 
and night work should be banned altogether. Industrial courts should 
be instituted, and these should allow for equal representation to 
employers and employees. Officers of the factory inspectorate should 
be elected to their jobs. Employers should be made responsible before 
the law for accidents occurring at the place of work. Such limitations on 
the rights of industrialists, Ulyanov maintained, were vital if workers 
were to obtain the cultural environment necessary for them to take full 
advantage of the political reforms envisaged by the party.41 
In his proposals for the countryside, Ulyanov cited Akselrod's 
recommendation that social-democrats should adopt 'the revolu-
 Capitalism in One Country 
75 
tionary side' of Russian agrarian socialism.42 Narodnik ideas, he 
repeated, were not automatically unacceptable. At the same time 
Ulyanov declared that his programme, despite outward resemblances, 
did not seek the ultimate goals of agrarian-socialist 'utopianism'. His 
measures were designed to foster the consolidation of rural capitalism. 
They were also meant to attract the peasantry into associating itself 
with the worker-led revolution; but their net economic result would be 
to nurture the system of exploitation of peasant by peasant.43 
Nonetheless there lingered a nervousness among many Russian 
Marxists about appearing too 'populistic' on the agrarian question. 
Discussions were becoming heated. It was in this period, around the 
turn of the century, that several activists like A. I. Rykov and theorists 
like L. Nadezhdin amplified their demand for the expropriation of all 
gentry-held land; and that Nadezhdin proposed a policy of land 
nationalisation.44 Ulyanov still baulked at such ideas; he felt that they 
would place excessive power in the hands of what, after all, he 
presumed would be a bourgeois-led government.45 Peasants might well 
end up worse oppressed than ever. Yet he ceased now to be quite as 
cautious as his elders in Geneva. He remained committed to the return 
of the cut-off strips; and he demanded not only the abolition of 
redemption payments but also the restitution to the peasants of all 
monies paid to the state under this system since 1861. The fiscal system 
should also be changed. Tax collectors were to deal with individual 
peasant households, not whole communes. Ulyanov opposed the 
dismemberment of capitalist latifundia. But he was bent upon 
curtailing the rights of those landlords who rented out land to the 
peasantry. He proposed the creation of special courts to allow 
households to secure reduction of 'excessive' rents. Absentee land-
lordism would be attacked. He also called for the formation of 'peasant 
committees'. Ulyanov's intentions were two-sided. He did not want 
only to facilitate a rise in agricultural output: he desired equally to 
effect the entrance of the peasantry into politicallife.46 
Thus he exhibited a concern for details in his draft party programme. 
His practicality led him also to consider the party's organisational 
condition; there was little point in speculating about the post-
autocratic future if the party was in no fit shape to guide the working 
class and the peasantry in the present. The police had broken up the 
Petersburg Union Of Struggle as well as the Central Committee. In 
Ulyanov's opinion, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was 
an organisational mess. 
As early as 1897, in The Tasks of Russian Social-Democrats, he 
 76 
Lenin: A Political Life 
asserted that 'the struggle with the government is impossible without a 
strengthening and development of revolutionary organisation and 
conspirativeness' .47 In The Essential Question, written in 1899, he 
refined his proposals. It was his belief that the party's overriding 
priority should be to introduce a 'division of labour' into its affairs.48 
He loved to use analogies from the economic field. Functional 
specialisation would permit the party to train experts in agitation, 
pamphleteering, fund-raising and spy-hunting. It also made for greater 
safety from arrest. Specialisation would mean that information about 
the names and whereabouts of other activists would be less freely 
available.49 Such an 'economy of forces' should be welcomed. But in 
order to consolidate this transformation it would be necessary, too, to 
implement the concept of centralisation. Democratic control from 
below was desirable in principle. But the enforced clandestinity of 
operations restricted the scope for 'heavily-attended revolutionary 
meetings' .50 Hierarchical discipline was a priority. Ulyanov did not go 
completely overboard into organisational authoritarianism. Not quite; 
for he recognised the validity of a further problem. It centred upon 
democratic control. He defined the difficulty as being 'how to collocate 
the need for the full freedom of local social-democratic activity with 
the need to form a single and therefore centralist party?'51 But, 
significantly, he left his cumbersomely-phrased question unanswered. 
His preoccupation was to get the party to accept his arguments for 
specialisation and centralisation; everything else was a secondary issue 
which could be tackled in the due course of time. 
Such an approach was shared by many former comrades in the 
Union Of Struggle. It also appealed to numerous activists currently 
associated with Workers' Newspaper and Workers' Banner. 52 
Plekhanov and Akselrod did not demur. And Vladimir Ulyanov 
justifiably represented his programmatic and organisational proposals 
as a valid development of the doctrines of Plekhanov. He contended 
unremittingly that assassinations should not be viewed as a primary 
tactic of assault on the autocracy. Again Nadezhdin was causing 
problems. He suggested that narodnik terrorism had not been as 
politically misguided as other Russian Marxists had been wont to 
declare. But Ulyanov stood by Plekhanov. Neither Ulyanov nor 
Plekhanov opposed terrorist acts in principle. Ulyanov clarified his 
position. It was, he said, possible to envisage assassinations as a 
'defensive' tactic.53 He seems to have had in mind the killing of 
persons, such as police spies, capable of breaking up party organisa-
tions. 
 Capitalism in One Country 
77 
AGAINST 'ECONOMISM' 
In his Shushenskoe writings he had sketched a party programme and a 
plan of party organisation. He had barely mentioned a further issue: 
what was to be the relationship between this party and the urban 
working class? His past career gave evidence of his beliefs. Like 
Plekhanov, he saw the party as the political guide of the industrial 
labour force. The party should not necessarily tack to the wind of 
popular moods of the moment; it should seek to pull workers along in 
its wake.54 Ulyanov had not altered his mind in Siberia. If anything, he 
was even more strongly convinced of the leading role to be played by 
the party. It had to canalise the rising flood of discontent into 
revolution. He urged social-democrats to set about 'the education, 
disciplining and organisation of the proletariat' .55 The imagery is 
trenchantly hierarchical; it bursts through all the qualifying language 
of the sentences around it. Discipline was always a key theme in his 
thought. 
In summer 1899 such views were suddenly subjected to a criticism 
even more severe than by the attack already made by the Youngsters in 
St. Petersburg. The critics were E. D. Kuskova and S. N. Prokopovich. 
As Russian social-democrats in emigration, they had studied the 
Belgian labour movement and been impressed by the material and 
social amelioration obtained through legal methods. Kuskova wrote a 
brief article which became known as her Credo. Its suggestion was that 
workers should forget about revolutionary politics and struggle 
exclusively for their own economic well-being. The fight against the 
absolute monarchy could safely be left to the middle class. This was 
anathema even to those who had sided with the Petersburg Young-
sters; for they, while acceding to workers' demands to influence party 
policy, had never envisaged that this would result in a lengthy 
abstention from political conflict. The apoliticism of Kuskova's Credo 
horrified Veterans and Youngsters alike from the old Union Of 
Struggle. Both Kuskova and Prokopovich were scholars rather than 
organisers; they had no following in Russia, and Prokopovich was 
arrested in 1899 when he attempted to return from emigration. The 
campaign for their ideas, which were dubbed Economism by their 
adversaries, seemed defunct.56 But not to Plekhanov. Emigre political 
developments worried him. His example in forming the Emancipation 
Of Labour Group in Geneva had been followed by dozens of Russian 
emigrants in other major cities of Europe such as Paris and Berlin. In 
1898 they banded together into a European organisation proclaiming 
 78 
Lenin: A Political Life 
itself as the League Of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. The First 
Party Congress in Minsk had recognised the League as the party's 
official foreign branch. Plekhanov's authority was on the wane. His 
tetchiness towards the younger emigres was bad enough; but he also 
maintained few lines of communication with social-democratic 
organisers in Russia itself. Irritation with Plekhanov and Akselrod 
helped to push the Berlin section of the League temporarily towards 
Economism in 1898.57 
A counterattack was mounted by Plekhanov; and his criticisms took 
little heed that the league's dalliance with 'Economism' did not last 
into 1899. The League's newspaper was called Workers' Cause. So far 
from advocating an apolitical strategy, every issue carried the slogan: 
'The social emancipation of the working class is impossible without its 
political liberation.' 58 It smuggled May Day leaflets back to Russia in 
1899, calling for the promulgation of political liberties. Workers' 
Cause supported political demonstrations in Russia whenever they 
occurred. In other respects, however, it differed from Kremer's On 
Agitation. Editor B. I. Krichevski believed that the fight for higher 
wages would gradually transmute itself into political struggle against 
the autocracy; he also highlighted what he saw as the cultural 
immaturity of the broad strata of the Russian working class. On 
Agitation by contrast had not spoken of gradualism. It had urged 
Marxists to grasp opportunities to politicise the labour movement; and 
it was free from Krichevski's evident belief that peasant newcomers to 
the factories were improbable material for the organisation of the 
growing opposition to the monarchy.59 
Plekhanov was wrong to treat Kuskova and Krichevski as politically 
indistinguishable. Yet he had a point when he said that Workers' Cause 
had rejected the early consensus that the workers should lead Russia's 
democratic revolution60 
Plekhanov campaigned simultaneously 
against another social-democratic newspaper. Its name was Workers' 
Thought; it had been founded in St. Petersburg itself and, though 
subsequently printed abroad, had kept links with the metropolis. 
Arrests of older leaders gave it a dominant position inside the Union 
Of Struggle. The first editor was a certain Kok. He made the 
newspaper a forum of discussion of the viewpoints of the workers 
themselves. Letters about management abuses filled its columns. Kok 
and his collaborator K. M. Takhtarev (who had been a Youngster in 
the social-democratic dispute in 1896) castigated what they perceived 
as the malignant influence exerted by the middle-class intelligentsia 
upon the labour movement.61 This to Plekhanov appeared a betrayal 
 Capitalism in One Country 
79 
of Marxism. His suspicions were confirmed in 1899 when Workers' 
Thought produced a Supplement. It contained an article by the 
German revisionist social-democrat Eduard Bernstein arguing for an 
'evolutionary' rather than 'revolutionary' interpretation of Marxian 
ideas. The accompanying editorial endorsed Bernstein's approach. 
Workers should involve themselves in politics, but should pursue their 
ends by exclusively peaceful means.62 
Ulyanov, hearing of the controversy in August 1899, took 
Plekhanov's part. A copy of Kuskova's Credo had reached Eniseisk 
province; and a little was known about Kok too. Ulyanov was as 
infuriated as Plekhanov. Among the exiles he was the pre-eminent 
intellectual; he was also their most inspiring organiser: it was he who 
wrote letters of cheer to comrades like Martov who had been placed in 
less comfortable villages much further to the north.63 He wrote a 
declaration of protest against Kuskova and Kok. Workers' Thought 
was accused of Economistic ideas (even though its enthusiasm for 
Bernstein signified a rejection of apoliticism). He was not trying to be 
fair; he was trying to crush Plekhanov's opponents.64 Sixteen social-
democratic exiles in the locality appended their signatures to 
Ulyanov's protest.65 
This dispute was the first truly open breach in Russian Marxist unity; 
and the question was instantly posed why Plekhanov and Ulyanov 
risked such a rupture. Their whole strategy had been founded upon the 
assumption, correct as events were to show, that the autocracy's fall 
was inevitable and would not long be postponed; they had also rightly 
predicted that workers, chafing against economic oppression, would 
eventually turn to the politics of revolution. So why worry so much 
about the Credo? Neither Plekhanov nor Ulyanov wrote down their 
justification for the benefit of posterity. But doubtless they felt 
strongly about the need for preventive action; they observed Bern-
stein's continuing influence in the German Social-Democratic Party 
and desired to pre-empt any such development in Russia (however 
unlikely it was to occur). If anything, Plekhanov at this moment was 
even less tolerant than Ulyanov. Both agreed on the offensive against 
the 'Economists'; but Plekhanov also wished to terminate the state of 
semi-truce with Struve. Ulyanov resisted a severing of organisational 
links.66 Struve in 1899 still held that the workers were the major 
political force against the autocracy; and Plekhanov was asked to 
refrain from precipitate action. But even Ulyanov's patience was 
wearing thin. He had never been known for his tolerance. It is difficult 
to imagine either Ulyanov or Plekhanov doing as Fedoseev had done 
 80 
Lenin: A Political Life 
in writing respectful letters to Mikhailovski.67 Admittedly, they 
rejected 'dogmatism'. Both considered Marxism to be a creative 
science.6s They justifiably felt that their own adaptation of Marxian 
policies to Russian circumstances showed that they were not vapid 
regurgitators of hackneyed German ideas. But their protestations of 
open-mindedness were not universally valid. And Ulyanov in particu-
lar, in the years ahead, would increasingly write and behave as if he 
alone among the exponents of Russian socialism understood Marxism 
correctly.69 
RELEASE FROM EXILE 
Until the First World War, however, Ulyanov's focus was upon 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party; he commented about 
disputes racking the German Social-Democratic Party, but resisted the 
temptation to intervene vigorously. Plekhanov proffered advice to 
Kautsky. Ulyanov experienced inhibitions. For him, Kautsky and 
Plekhanov were now the world's two greatest living Marxists. 
Ulyanov's deference had its instrumental side. He knew Kautsky to 
be a supporter of Plekhanov's political strategy for Russia. He knew 
too that Kautsky, as a man of the pen, would be pleased by Ulyanov's 
proposed remedy for the Russian party's nagging ills. Ulyanov wanted 
to establish a central party newspaper. This ambition absorbed his 
attention as he left Shushenskoe and exile on 29 January 1900.70 He 
had pondered a great deal about journalism while in Siberia. A 
clandestine political newspaper would have immense possibilities. It 
would allow the party to give a thorough airing to all its troublesome 
problems. There was too much uncertainty about policy. Ulyanov had 
remarked in 1894 that the existence of many contradictory opinions 
was a sign of the social-democratic movement's strength.71 This was no 
longer his claim. Now the purpose of debate, he said, was primarily to 
set a clear line for the party. Every member had to know where the 
party stood. He presented the plan as if intending to act impartially as 
editor-in-chief. The impression was effaced by his other statements. 
He saw his projected newspaper as an organiser of party life; its 
function would not be to preside over free discussion but to use all 
means at its disposal for the victory of Ulyanov's ideas.72 He had 
started the venture in Siberia, inviting Yuli Martov and Aleksandr 
Potresov to join him in an editorial 'troika'. Both accepted. As they 
 Capitalism in One Country 
81 
were the first to admit, they had entered the ambit of Ulyanov's 
magnetism of personality; he seemed to them to be a born leader.73 
Practical details had yet to be settled. No decision had been taken 
even about the newspaper's geographical base, whether in Russia or 
abroad. The order for Ulyanov's release from exile forbade residence 
in metropolitan, industrial or university towns of the empire. He chose 
to live in Pskov, nearly two hundred miles from Petersburg.74 It was a 
prudent selection, since he could expect to meet dozens of former 
political prisoners there. 
But it meant separation from Krupskaya. Her own term of exile was 
not due to expire until 1901 and, when Ulyanov left Shushenskoe, she 
was permitted to take up residence in the Urals town of Ufa. All his 
pleas for her to be transferred to Pskov came to nought. They travelled 
together by the Trans-Siberian line to Ufa. Staying with her a few 
nights, he contacted local social-democrats.75 He stopped over in 
Moscow, Nizhni Novgorod and Petersburg too; by the time of his 
arrival in Pskov on 26 February he had greatly expanded the number 
of his acquaintances and assured himself of assistance from dozens of 
activists.76 The next problem was funding. In St. Petersburg he had met 
Vera Zasulich, in the course of her mission to Russia on behalf of the 
Geneva Emancipation Of Labour Group; she announced the Group's 
approval of the project but could not offer financial subsidy.77 Ulyanov 
and Potresov had made a start on getting the necessary monies. A. M. 
Kalmykova, a wealthy sympathiser with the revolutionary cause, 
donated two thousand roubles. Yet tens of thousands were needed to 
pay for paper and printing. Negotiations were opened with Struve and 
Tugan. Martov had always viewed Struve with distaste, and tried to 
dissuade Ulyanov from meeting him. Ulyanov, however, insisted. He 
pursued a paradoxical aim: one hand beckoned Struve to supply 
money and literary material to a journalistic enterprise; the other 
waved at him contemptuously, promising that editorial space would be 
reserved for criticism of his policies. To Martov's amazement, a 
preliminary deal was struck. Struve's initial reservations were over-
come by the concession that he would be allowed to contribute articles 
in his own right, albeit under the title of discussional articles and 
without official imprimatur.78 
By late spring 1900 Ulyanov and Potresov were convinced that 
police surveillance would make it difficult to set up the presses in 
Russia; and their fear increased when, on 21 May, Ulyanov was 
arrested while making a trip to St. Petersburg. Upon release, Ulyanov 
 82 
Lenin: A Political Life 
made hurried last contacts with potential agents for the newspaper. He 
paid a quick visit to his wife in Ufa. And on 16 July he crossed the 
border.79 As he alighted on the station platform in Zurich some days 
later, he could hardly contain his elation; he looked forward to closer 
collaboration with Georgi Plekhanov. Plekhanov lived in Geneva. 
Akselrod's house was near Zurich and Ulyanov spent a while there 
before moving on. The two got on splendidly, as if they had been 
lifelong friends. The only unpleasantness, which was to appear 
important to Ulyanov solely in the light of ensuing events, occurred in 
connection with Plekhanov. Akselrod too adored Plekhanov. His 
devotion, moreover, had undergone the trial of its object's vanity. 
Plekhanov would not be crossed even in trivial matters. Akselrod 
groped towards the main point. Plekhanov liked the idea of the 
newspaper; he approved of its proposed name, Iskra (or The Spark). 
But he did not fancy the plan to base it in Germany: he preferred 
Switzerland. Indeed he was holding out for Geneva. No reason was 
offered. Ulyanov was being braced to accept a dictatorial reluctance to 
let slip a chance to dominate a major social-democratic publication.80 
Plekhanov and Ulyanov came face to face in late July. If anything, 
Akselrod's warnings turned out to be too mild; both Ulyanov and 
Potresov were astounded by their elder's prickliness. 'I tried to observe 
caution,' Ulyanov recalled, 'by avoiding the "sore spots"; but this 
constant keeping oneself on one's guard could not help but reflect itself 
heavily upon one's mood.'81 
There were rows about the Jewish Bund, with Plekhanov indicating 
objections to its inclusion in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour 
Party. Plekhanov was touchy about Kautsky (who, Ulyanov surmised, 
had not opened the pages of Die Neue Zeit to him as often as he felt he 
deserved). Worse than his tantrums were his acts of duplicity. 
Plekhanov was loathe to collaborate with Struve. Ulyanov conceded to 
Plekhanov the right to edit the terms of Struve's involvement with 
Iskra; but the days passed by in Geneva, and still Ulyanov had not 
received Plekhanov's version. Ulyanov tried to do the final editing for 
himself. Still Plekhanov quibbled, and only when harried by an 
exasperated Ulyanov at a formal meeting did Plekhanov divulge his 
true motives: he did not want Struve's participation under any 
conditions whatever.82 Outraged, Ulyanov retired to Steindl's Wiener 
Grand-Cafe and tried to get his anger off his chest by committing his 
account to paper. The language is revealing. No other piece of prose by 
Ulyanov carries us so directly to the heart of his emotions. He had, he 
stated, lost his 'feeling of being in love' with Plekhanov. He believed 
 Capitalism in One Country 
83 
that he and Potresov had been treated 'like children', indeed like 
'slaves'. It was 'an unworthy thing'. His sense of humiliation was 
overpowering. The conclusion he drew, however, was hardheaded: 'It 
is necessary to behave to everybody "without sentimentality", it is 
necessary to keep a stone in one's sling.'83 
There is little reason to challenge Ulyanov's estimation of the low 
cunning in Plekhanov's behaviour; but perhaps he himself was more 
boisterous and intimidating than he admitted. In any case, the dispute 
was already prising Plekhanov away from his refusal to have dealings 
with Struve. But other matters remained divisive. Ulyanov wanted to 
base the newspaper in Munich with himself and Potresov as chief 
editors. Plekhanov threw one of his fits. And, when faced down by the 
two young 'careerists' (as Ulyanov felt sure he now thought of them), 
he submitted his resignation from the project.84 Ulyanov and Potresov 
fell for the ploy and begged him to reconsider. Plekhanov laid down 
fresh conditions. He demanded double the voting power of any other 
editor. Ulyanov and Potresov instantly gave in. But hours later they 
saw how they had been duped, and they took a leaf out of Plekhanov's 
book: they resigned. Akselrod duly padded round to see them and duly 
took Plekhanov's side. Zasulich was so distressed that friends worried 
that she might kill herself. Another meeting was held with Plekhanov. 
Again he attempted to get his way with the help of hysterics. Ulyanov 
and Potresov were unperturbed this time. Plekhanov announced his 
intention to withdraw entirely from public life. The young men left the 
room. They refused to be fooled.85 
As yet, though, their victory was Pyrrhic: Iskra would not be 
published. They therefore reverted to an honourable compromise; 
they proposed to Plekhanov that they all jointly print a collection of 
articles. If this worked out well, they stated, they would retract their 
Iskra resignation. Plekhanov conceded the necessary ground.86 Subtle 
manoeuvrer that he was, Ulyanov had made the vital discovery that the 
way to defeat Plekhanov over Iskra was to avoid open pitched battles 
and to conduct a war of attrition. Plekhanov's bullying days were over. 
Compelled to make that first retreat, he was already too disorientated 
to stop further backward movement. A triumphant Ulyanov packed 
his bags and departed for Munich on 24 August 1900.87 The squabble 
over location fizzled out. Nor was Ulyanov troubled by worries about 
the composition of the editorial board. Formally there would be six 
editors. The older emigres would be represented by Plekhanov, 
Akselrod and Zasulich; and the newcomers by Ulyanov, Potresov and 
Martov. In practice, however, geography would have an influence. The 
 84 
Lenin: A Political Life 
three hundred miles separating Geneva from Munich were bound to 
put Ulyanov into an authoritative position. There he would also be 
able to conduct negotiations with potential subsidisers like Struve 
without being badgered to distraction by Plekhanov. Ulyanov had 
carried off the spoils. Though inexperienced in committee work, the 
novice had picked up the necessary skills and techniques with 
consummate ease; and Plekhanov, whose glacial manner had chilled 
all who had approached him as fellow Marxists, was having to treat his 
former disciple as a leader of equal worthiness and power. 
