<e Man
During my years in India I kept a collection of photographs of Nehru taken
from the Indian press. <e day was infrequent when some newspaper or
other did not publish one. <e photographs are a revelation of his many
sides and many moods. <ey leave no doubt that in any discussion on him
the Arst question to be disposed of is: Which Nehru are you talking about?
Is it the internationalist with hankerings after paciAcism? or Nehru the
planner of the Goa takeover? or the Nehru who made the moving speech on
Gandhi’s assassination? or the Nehru who risked his life when the Hindu
mob fell on the Muslims in 1948? or the agnostic Nehru who was drawn to
Buddhism? or the revolutionary in a hurry? or Nehru the wily politician? or
Nehru the connoisseur of poetry and roses? His variousness was also
reCected in the variety of people he was happy to give his time to—
scientists, writers, artists, actors, social workers, and certain men of religion,
as well as the administrators, politicians and soldiers native to a political
leader’s world. <ere were two men in Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde; there were
more like twenty in Nehru.
Of at least one thing, then, can we be certain: Nehru was complicated—
even more than the average man, who is complicated enough. He was
divided within himself as few men could be who at the same time retain
overriding purpose and essential balance. It is because of this complexity
that one cannot be sure of having penetrated to the core of his motivation in
any particular action or policy, let alone to the core of the man himself.
<ere is more than one passage in his life which is still to be explained.
And we can be certain of another thing. Politics was far from being the
whole world of Nehru; which it is of many, if not of most, ruling men.
Aesthetic
<e dominant impression left on a person meeting Nehru for the Arst time
would be aesthetic—his elegance. He was always well dressed, not foppishly
but in good material, cut well, worn well, and usually adorned with a
rosebud in his buttonhole; the whole matching his good looks and the grace
with which he bore himself. Up until the last year or two, when his health
was failing, there was little of the old man about him. He never got slovenly.
<e elegance was more than just clothes; more even than the good breeding
which was an inseparable part of him. At times his face took on an
expression which got near to beauty; the kind of expression sometimes seen
on the face of Yehudi Menuhin98 (for whom Nehru had regard) or in
portraits of Cardinal Newman99 or the young Dickens. <e clothes were an
expression of an internal elegance—an absence of all coarseness. It was not
for nothing that one of his severest animadversions was ‘vulgar’.
Nehru arrived at Bandung for the Arst Afro-Asian Conference in 1955
after a long tiring motor journey under an equatorial sun. His entourage
arrived dishevelled and weary, as did most of the delegates. Nehru arrived
looking as though he had just had a bath after a refreshing sleep. It was the
same after his journeyings in hot dusty India. His comeliness stayed with
him, whatever his surroundings.
His body was slight but well shaped and athletic; his features were clearcut
and handsome; his skin, light brown in colouring, was perfect in texture
and healthiness; and his eyes, even more than Indian eyes in general, were
large and striking. Grace was as natural to him as it is to a leopard.
His manners were punctilious and his courtesy Ane. He was scrupulous
in such things as not keeping people waiting, or seeing them to the door.
<ere was, doubtless, some acting; there usually is some acting in civilised
living, and, still more, in political leadership. Nehru certainly did some
acting on public occasions and before the TV cameras; but never much. <e
acting was never worse than the pose of Cha Cha (Uncle) Nehru with the
children. <is was at its worst on his birthday for a few years when
sycophants organised groups of children, with Cowers and copious
photographing, to parade with him. It was out of character; his interest in
children was slender. But his acting was on the periphery of his personality.
He did not fake. His readiness to grant TV or newspaper interviews sprang
in part from the fact that he enjoyed doing what he did so well, but also in
part from the fact that he was reluctant to disappoint people who had come
to India to see him. Most of the TV and radio interviewers got a rich haul
for their pains. And whatever little acting he might have gone in for, it
never made him self-conscious. Normally, too, if he was angry he did not
conceal it. If not pleased he was apt to project his lower lip. <ose familiar
with him at once recognised this for what it was, a storm signal.
His grace was heightened by his aliveness, his mobility of face, his taking
in and responding to everything around him, which gave him, to a degree
seen in few men, a Came-like quality. At times, such as when confronting
the opposition, there was, for all his sensitiveness, in later years his
tormented sensitiveness, something eagle-like about him. And for all his
sensitiveness he was never touchy. His charm lost nothing from a whiff of
natural hauteur.
He spoke quietly as a rule. He was not talkative; at times he was taciturn.
His speech was in a voice which rose and fell engagingly and was clearly
articulated. It was well suited to his conversation, which was usually
reasoning as well as reasonable. In later years his voice had an undertone of
pathos. He was never loud or trivial or gossipy.
It was due to his fastidiousness that Nehru found a certain type of
American, and certain American ways, uncongenial, though he had an
admiration for some Americans and for some aspects of America. After his
death his family found amongst his papers some verses he had recently
copied in his own handwriting from the American poet Frost. Nor were
some Australian characteristics, or Agures, to his taste though he had a
regard for others. He saw a good deal of Lord Casey.100
A mixture of distinction and charm was the keynote to Nehru’s presence,
be it in parliamentary debate, or around his dining table, or on such banal
occasions as presenting prizes or laying foundation stones. He was a master
of the art of saying nothing of substance to his interlocutors if need be and
yet of leaving them feeling unoffended or even Cattered. On occasions he
heightened his charm by Cashes of wit unexpected in a man often serious to
the point of greyness, and on occasions even by funny stories. Once I heard
him ask a foreign visitor, who was a little dashed by the Indian practice of
eating with one’s Angers, whether he knew what a Shah of Persia had said:
the Shah found eating with a fork like making love through an interpreter.
(Nehru himself always ate with a knife and fork.) Most people found Nehru
captivating. I certainly did. When in his presence I usually found it
necessary to keep jolting myself back into detachment.
Body
Nehru would have been an exceptional man if he were judged by his
physical endowment alone. In the words of an Indian who worked closely
with him during the Arst twelve years of independence, he was a ‘miracle of
health’. His outpouring could have had few parallels in this or in any age.
During the years I knew him, in his sixties and early seventies, Nehru
worked seven days a week. He rose at dawn, or even earlier, took exercise,
including yogic asanas, and including for some years the dubious exercise of
standing on his head. He sometimes went horse-back riding. He used to be
fond of swimming in earlier years. It was only after seventy that the yogic
exercises were given up or curtailed. For a time he followed the regime of a
Kashmiri master of yoga who came to the house. (Yogic exercises are
normally aimed not at muscle development but at harmoniousness and lack
of tension.) For a time, too, he had a herbalist attached to his household.
But no man was less hypochondriacal than Nehru. Sukarno’s addiction to
medicine bottles was foreign to him.
After bathing he used to prepare his own breakfast, which was frugal,
though latterly it was being prepared for him. For years anyone could come
to his garden at about 8:30 in the morning and bring grievances, or just talk
to, or look at, him for half an hour or so. From then onwards he worked
through the day without let except for lunch and dinner—state papers, staff,
political and other conferences and committees, interviews, visitors of every
conceivable variety, sitting in and running Parliament or cabinet, giving
decisions, writing minutes, and letters, and, several times a week, not
unoften several times a day, making speeches. <e background to this
outpouring of energy was never-ending crisis, and therefore never-ending
stress. In addition to being prime minister he was foreign minister,
chairman of the Planning Commission (which meant minister in charge of
the national economy), minister for atomic energy, at times minister for
defence, as well as leader of the Congress Party with its governments in
sixteen or seventeen states to watch over. Lunch and dinner, especially until
the last Ave or six years, were used as occasions for talking to, or receiving,
or showing attention to, people. At 10:00 or 10:30 at night, when he parted
from his dinner guests, he would go the office in his house and work until
about midnight or 1:00 in the morning. <e minutes memoranda and
letters he then wrote, tersely and with effect, must add up to hundreds of
thousands of words over the years. He usually read for ten to thirty minutes
in bed until he dropped off to sleep.
He slept about Ave to six hours a night. In his seventies he took to
having a half-hour nap occasionally on Sunday afternoons and in the
hottest weather; and for some years he had been dropping off to sleep in
aeroplanes. <ough using up relatively few hours of the twenty-four in sleep
he had a life-saving capacity for putting himself to sleep whenever he
wanted to—he either worked out a problem or he put it out of his mind. He
had never known insomnia, just as he had never known headaches. In his
seventies he sometimes dropped off to sleep for a while at meetings.
On an average he used to receive in the latter years about 500 letters and
100 telegrams each day; callers from outside (i.e. not his officials), chosen
out of 50 or 60 applicants, averaged about seven each day; he made about
25 speeches a month; and he was away from Delhi on official tours about
sixty days, or two months, each year. He kept up this pace until his Arst
illness, in 1962; and he had got back to most of it before his stroke hit him
early in 1964.
Anyone associated for some years with government in Delhi became so
familiar with Nehru’s capacity for sustained effort that he took it for
granted. And Nehru’s example somehow affected his departments of state.
You could always tell whether he was in Delhi or not, without asking. <ere
was a spring about the senior officials when Nehru was in town.
Of the many examples of his capacity for work which could be cited here
are two.
A governor of the Reserve Bank, who was once Nehru’s principal private
secretary, recounted one of his experiences.* In August 1947, during the
partition troubles, Nehru and his party set out at six one morning. <ey
Cew for an hour and then travelled by car and jeep through the scenes of the
massacres in the Punjab, where, in addition to the physical strain was the
nervous strain of experiencing ‘his hopes, his dreams, his faith in human
nature … crashing down’. It was nine at night when they got back to base.
<en, after a meal, Nehru held discussions with the Pakistani prime
minister until midnight. He then worked on papers, writing or dictating
minutes and instructions, until two. He was up again at 5:30. ‘Something
like it,’ his principal private secretary wrote, ‘some sixteen to seventeen
hours out of twenty-four, has been the practice with him day after day, week
after week, month after month, all these thirteen years. <e members of his
staff, who are all much younger than himself, have never been able to keep
pace with him … this extraordinary vitality.’
Another Indian official who worked closely with him for several years as
head of the external affairs ministry told me how after a gruelling four-day
official tour of Nepal Nehru slept a little on the plane on the way back to
Delhi but as soon as he got to his house he set to work on urgent papers and
continued working until four in the morning. After a couple of hours of
sleep he was at work again until midday. He then went to the airport to
keep an appointment with the Gliding Club to try a new glider. He spent
an hour in the air, though it was a day of dust and with the thermometer
standing at 110. <is informant had already been astonished by Nehru’s
performance in Bhutan in 1958 when he trekked on foot tirelessly and
outpaced men some twenty years younger than himself.
For years he took no holiday.
It is said by those who have lived with him, for instance in prison, that
Nehru while not fussy, and never hypochondriacal, always took care of his
health. He did not drink alcohol and though he smoked he rationed himself
(ten cigarettes a day in latter years), he took exercise regularly, and he ate
moderately though well. <is care, or prudence, however, was the mere
fringe to a physical endowment which, like Churchill’s, amounted to genius.
During the years I knew him I can recall only two occasions when he had to
take to his bed other than for the kidney ailment in 1962. Both occasions
were for a cold and they lasted only a day or two. His physical capacity was
paralleled by a will to live every minute of his life—his zest was as great as
his vitality. And both zest and vitality were at the command of an unusual
will power.
Mind
Nehru’s intellectual endowment was also exceptional. It was not better than
that of Rajagopalachari, the sharpest mind in Indian public life for many
years; and it did not have the originality of Gandhi, for Gandhi had a power
of mind to match his power of spirit. And, in general, Nehru was probably
clever and wide-ranging and lively rather than profound. But few indeed
have been heads of government in our time with such a force, or such a
range, of mind. In history he is to be compared in this, as also in his
capacity for the written word, and for his sustained physical effort, with
Napoleon. Napoleon in office, however, was nearly thirty years younger
than Nehru, he ruled for a shorter time, and he suffered little from the
lashings of conscience. Once when I took a scientist to Nehru, a biologist
and Nobel Prizeman, the latter made a careless statement about some work.
Nehru pounced on it, politely, and demolished it. <is was typical. Few
errors in reasoning escaped him. I have seen and heard a dozen or more
prime ministers at Nehru’s table: all but two or three were yokels beside
him. If his knowledge lacked solidity, this was normally because he lacked
time, though there are those knowing him who insist that it was his nature
to skim the surface. For many years his reading had to be done in odd
minutes snatched from public cares.
Nehru began with the advantage of the best formal education possible;
and just as he improved on his physical capital so too throughout his life he
improved on his intellectual capital, by the study of books and of men. In
particular his years in jail were put to use for a rigorous and systematic
course of reading and writing; in particular he used them for developing his
sense of history.
An Indian official who for some years was permanent head of a
department of which Nehru was the minister used to say that he never
ceased to be astonished at how Nehru managed to do real thinking—
probing analytical thinking. Nehru’s mind, he would add, was extremely
quick. He was struck, too, with Nehru’s power of concentration, with his
memory, and with his natural orderliness. As a result his mind could be
brought into instant and effective play, like a gun always loaded.
Nehru’s range of interests extended over science (especially physics and
biology), and literature as well as over history and statecraft. He had a fair
knowledge of French. He kept up a lively, emphatic, though not always
well-informed, interest in natural history and especially in animals; an
example of which will be found in his introduction to Gee’s101 book, 