<e Last Journey
Nehru was not himself when he got back to India from his overseas tour in
November 1961. By spring, in 1962, he went down with what the doctors
diagnosed as a kidney infection; and for the Arst time in his life he had to
take prolonged treatment and to remain in bed. He made a good recovery
during the second half of next year. <e doctors warned him that he would
have to go at a slower pace. He heeded the warning for a while; but
throughout most of 1963 he was back at his old pace. What at this time
struck those who knew him was not so much the diminution of his physical
strength as the diminution of hope.
Early in January 1964 he went to Orissa for a Congress Party meeting. It
was to have been an important meeting as Nehru wanted a reaffirmation of
his socialist policies; but not long after getting there he collapsed with a
stroke. At the end of January it was announced officially that he had
recovered ‘completely’. He began to make occasional public appearances.
On February 10, for instance, he was present at the opening of Parliament.
Most of his mental acuity remained though it was failing towards the end of
the day. Everyone could see that he was paralysed on one side. He walked
slowly, with a dragging gait; he had to speak sitting; and he articulated with
difficulty. In April he began to stand up when speaking. He was coming to
his office for a few hours each day. Much of the work of a more or less
routine nature was left to Lal Bahadur Shastri but Nehru was making the
decisions on major matters. <at superb body was broken at last, but not the
spirit which it housed. He never accepted defeat. <ose who wanted to help
him or fuss over him were rebuffed. His sense of the dangers crowding in on
the India he had tried to build spurred him on to relentless effort. He
became convinced that some new and drastic measures could not be
delayed.
Nehru needed no reminding of the transience of human life and the
nearness of death to every man. He always claimed to have no time for
astrologers: they were now forecasting a year of malignancy. <e number of
people counting with Nehru who were removed by death that winter and
spring must have sharpened his awareness of how short was time and how
much remained to be done. President Kennedy had been struck down in
November. In February Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, a member of the Christian
branch of the Kapurthala princely family, died suddenly with a heart attack.
She had returned to India from her studies in England at the same time as
Nehru, over Afty years ago, and she had spent many years near to him, Arst
in Gandhi’s ashrams and then for ten years as a minister in his cabinet. Next
V.T. Krishnamachari118 died. He had headed the Planning Commission
during its Arst ten formative years, and so had been closely associated with
some of Nehru’s dearest projects. <en followed the deaths of Verrier
Elwin.119 who had been close to Nehru in policies for dealing with the
NEFA peoples, and of Harishwar Dayal, the brilliant and reliable
ambassador to Nepal and the leading Indian expert on Tibet and the
Himalayan border states. Finally, Dr Baliga dropped dead in London. He
was the leading surgeon in India and for years had been a wealthy and
disinterested supporter of Krishna Menon as well as a tireless seeker after
good relations between India and the communist states. Nehru respected
him and when he heard of his death, a few days before his own, said that a
good man had gone, ‘a good man devoted to good causes … a patriot of
great merit and accomplishment’.
A time of troubles. <e China border affair was still unresolved; so too
was the rebellion of the Nagas, now in its tenth year; so too the
reconciliation in Goa, where bomb explosions had just occurred. Outside
India overseas Indians, with the ending of British rule in one colony after
another, were being threatened with apartheid or mass expulsions. Inside
India prices were rising, food shortages were so great as to be causing riots,
the machinery of government from top to bottom was creaking, and, worst
of all, communal passion was rising. Would India remain a secular state?
<e massacres of Muslims in March had roused little condemnation or
revulsion amongst the bulk of Indians. <e bad relations with Pakistan, now
particularly bad because of the new inCammability in Kashmir, stimulated
recklessness amongst the Hindu extremists as well as irritating the Indian
public in general. Nehru decided that his former policy on Kashmir would
have to be reconsidered. In April, against opposition, he had Sheikh
Abdullah released. A little later he decided to see Ayub.
Nor could Nehru, who for years had resisted all pressures either to
indicate the dauphin or to appoint a deputy prime minister, avoid any
longer choosing what was in effect his deputy. His choice fell on Lal
Bahadur Shastri.* He had been a member of Nehru’s cabinets since 1952
and before then had played some minor roles in Nehru’s home state. He was
hardly known to the public and was not much known outside the inner
political circle. In recent years Nehru had been using him for conAdential
work, such as in Kerala at the one end and Kashmir at the other, and was
said to value his judgement and his honesty. But as Nehru’s deputy would
stand rather more than a fair chance of becoming his successor the choice of
Lal Bahadur Shastri caused surprise in some quarters.
Pitt is to Addington
What London is to P addington
<is is what the wits were saying a century and a half earlier when the great
Pitt gave place to Addington. In some quarters the choice caused concern as
well as surprise. Lal Bahadur Shastri in any case would be an anticlimax
after Nehru. So small in size and voice, so frail in health, and so withdrawn
in manner, was the new deputy that Nehru himself, according to reports,
used to say that you didn’t know if he was in the room or not. On the other
hand there were others who greeted the appointment with relief because he
was a man whose pace and preferences were nearer to the Indian average
and who made no one feel uncomfortable. <e yearning for mediocrity and
parochialism was not unrepresented in this sense of relief. It became clearer
when Lal Bahadur Shastri became prime minister. One paper then wrote:
‘He is much closer to the common man than his predecessor.’* Another
paper wrote: ‘He has not got the Cambridge accent but he is not the poorer
for it … he is not decked with red roses, restless and impatient, but plain,
collected, and sweet-tempered … A child of the soil, he is as far from
Cambridge as he is near to the village mud-houses of India.’**
A time of troubles. In April Nehru received the Santhanam Report on
Corruption.120 <e Das Report121 on the Kairon regime in the Punjab was
not quite ready but he knew the general tenor of its Andings. In April,
seeking, as always, for better relations with Nepal, a difficult neighbour, he
journeyed to the Nepal border to have talks with the king. And in April,
having got Abdullah released, he made a speech to Parliament on IndoPakistan
relations. <ere was no other way for India and Pakistan to live, he
said, except in peace. ‘<e Pakistanis are a decent folk, but when you excite
the people with religious slogans nobody remains decent; they become
brutal, be it Hindu or Muslim.’ Referring to the massacres in Orissa and
Bihar he went on: ‘It was scandalous in the extreme that anybody should do
what our people have done there. We Indians should not become selfrighteous…
We Indians think that every evil is being done by Pakistan and
China and that we are completely free from wrongdoing.’ As for intrusions
over the Indo-Pakistan border, ‘the big difference is that our intrusions do
not give rise to questions in our Parliament whereas the Pakistan intrusions
do’. <is brave and moving speech provoked interjections but Nehru,
maimed in body though he was, insisted on his points.*
In May he continued discussions over Kashmir. In mid-May he went to
Bombay for a Congress Party meeting and, little to the taste of his
audience,** he stressed the gravity of anti-Muslim feeling in India and the
urgency of the need for a new approach to the great questions of Pakistan,
Kashmir, and China. Sheikh Abdullah, now free again, was making
statements to the effect that Kashmir’s accession to India in 1947 was not
irrevocable and that the people of Kashmir had not yet come to a decision.
He exasperated Indian public opinion still more by hinting that the best
solution would be an independent Kashmir guaranteed jointly by India and
Pakistan. On China, Nehru repeated his offer of talks; his offer was
couched in reasonable terms.
Back in Delhi from the Bombay meeting he gave some time to the
president of Sudan, who was in India on a state visit. He also saw the Dalai
Lama. On May 18 he gave a TV interview for America. On May 22 he
held a press conference. It was then, in reply to a journalist who asked about
his successor, that he said that he had made no arrangements and that his
end was some time off yet. During these days he also attended celebrations
of the Shakespeare quarter-centenary. On Saturday, May 23, he held long
talks with Sheikh Abdullah, who had come to Delhi to see him; back in
Nehru’s house again after the eleven years in jail. Late in the afternoon
Nehru Cew in a helicopter to Dehra Dun for the weekend. While he was
there he worked on papers. He also saw an old family friend and Congress
Party colleague, Sri Prakasa, who was also an old and loyal associate of Mrs
Annie Besant, and since independence had spent about ten years as
governor Arst of Madras and then of Bombay; a man of elevated and lovable
character. <e helicopter brought Nehru back to Delhi on the afternoon of
Tuesday, May 26. He spent a normal evening at home. In the course of it he
asked Lal Bahadur Shastri, half jokingly, half seriously, to order some new
achkans (Indian formal clothing) for the Conference of Commonwealth
Prime Ministers. He had decided to take him to London with him and he
was looking forward to the conference. He retired to his study in the usual
way, Anished working on some papers, and went to bed about eleven. His
own circle was as conAdent as the public that Nehru’s recovery was assured.
Next morning, Wednesday, May 27, he woke about Ave. He complained
of pains in the abdomen. Considerate as usual, he refused to allow his
daughter to call a doctor; he thought the pain would pass and he need not
wake up a doctor. But the pain increased, and shortly afterwards he
collapsed. Doctors were called; but he never regained consciousness. It was
evident that the aorta artery had burst. One of the surgeons wanted to make
an emergency operation as the one last chance. Mrs Gandhi consented, but
the cabinet group, like some of the too numerous doctors consulted, fearing
to take responsibility, insisted on telephoning one of the prime minister’s
sisters a thousand miles away. She asked them to wait until she got to
Delhi. He was dead by 2 pm; she did not get there until a couple of hours
after that. Blood transfusions had been tried, though with some difficulty
because of Nehru’s belonging to a rare blood-group. Mrs Gandhi gave her
blood. After his death it was rumoured that he died at about nine o’clock
and that the news had been concealed for political reasons until two o’clock;
but according to one of the doctors in attendance this rumour is untrue. He
was six months short of seventy Ave.
<e news of his death soon spread over Delhi; and from Delhi it spread
that afternoon and evening throughout India. Shock and sorrow and
foreboding accompanied the news. Normal business stopped. Shops were
closed immediately, spontaneously. Even the small sophisticated critical
minority in Delhi and Bombay were sobered. <at a life of a signiAcance
above the average had gone out was also felt throughout the world. In most
countries Nehru’s death took priority over all the other news. Tributes
began pouring in from all quarters, from the Pope, from kings and
presidents and prime ministers, and from innumerable individuals. Several
important foreign governments decided at once that they would be
represented on a level above the normal at the funeral, though it was to take
place next day: the Queen of England and Head of the Commonwealth
(who was reported to have arranged to offer Nehru at the forthcoming
Prime Ministers’ Conference the Order of Merit) by Lord Mountbatten,
Great Britain by the prime minister and the deputy leader of the
opposition, the United States by the secretary of state, Japan by her foreign
minister, General de Gaulle122 by a favourite minister. President Ayub,
surprisingly and uncharacteristically, decided not to go to the funeral. Many
humble people not important enough to telegraph or publish their tributes,
felt, as did millions of Indians, that the world was somehow the darker for
Nehru’s going and that his life had done honour to humanity.
<at Wednesday was overcast, the air heavy and tense with the premonsoon
storm which burst in the afternoon. <is is the hottest time of the
year in north India. <e crowds took no heed of the weather. <ey began
Aling past the body as soon as they were allowed. <e body had been
brought down to the ground Coor in the afternoon and Mrs Gandhi, in the
Indian way, sat beside it. A vigil party drawn from high-ranking officers of
the armed services stood by. Hour after hour the people Aled by, many of
them weeping. <ey included both sexes and all ages and from every class
and group in Delhi. <is went on most of the night, and it continued
throughout the next morning, <ursday. <e police estimated that half a
million had Aled by when, in order to make the Anal preparations for the
funeral procession, the gates were shut towards midday on <ursday. People
then tried to get over the gates and had to be driven off, which resulted in a
stampede: three were trampled to death and others were injured. <e
funeral was to have taken place at dawn but had been delayed so that Sir
Alec Douglas-Home123 and other foreign dignitaries could get there in
time for it.
A little before noon an earthquake shook Delhi.
A little later the pall-bearers, men of high rank, removed the body to a
gun-carriage, placing it in a tilted position with the head uncovered and the
rest draped with the Indian Cag. Flowers were spread over the gun-carriage.
Hindu priests were in attendance, some chanting mantras; and some
Christians were also there, singing Gandhi’s two favourite hymns ‘Abide
with Me’ and ‘Rock of Ages’. About 1:20 the procession set off. For Afty
years Nehru had been drawing the biggest crowds in India. Now on his last
journey he drew the biggest crowd of all. Some said a million, some said 2
million, some said 3 million, watched the passage of his corpse.
<e journey lay along the six miles from Nehru’s house to the place on
the banks of the Jamuna near where Gandhi’s body had been cremated
some sixteen years before; along the roads and streets where Nehru had
driven countless times since then; past the secretariat where he had worked
such long hours, skirting Parliament House where over the years he had
dominated Indian politics, up Rajpath (Kingsway) the same route followed
by the Republic Day parades which he had so much enjoyed, down Tilak
Marg (Hardinge Avenue), and so under the railway bridge and out to the
Ring Road, and on to the banks of the Jamuna. <ere a brick plinth about 5
feet high and 10 feet square had been built, and the pyre of sandalwood was
ready for the body.
<e funeral procession was headed by a jeep with the general
commanding the Delhi-Rajastan area, with servicemen marching in slow
time with arms reversed. Men from each of the services pulled the gun
carriage. <is was followed by an open car with Mrs Gandhi and her
younger son, Sanjay (the elder boy had not been able to get back in time
from Cambridge), and then followed a cavalcade of cars containing the
chief mourners, Mrs Pandit, Mrs Hutheesingh and some other members of
the Nehru family, the pall-bearers, the president, the cabinet, the service
chiefs, and foreign dignitaries.
<e immense crowd kept reasonable order until the cortège left Rajpath.
<ey were weeping or chanting or throwing Cowers towards the gun
carriage or just looking on; but they kept pushing closer and closer to it. By
the time the cortège passed down Hardinge Avenue the crowd did what
angered Nehru often in his lifetime: in a herd-like mindless stampede it
broke through the police cordon. <e police, reinforced by police from the
neighbouring states, and at certain points by army detachments, were
overrun. <e gun carriage and the Arst couple of cars were allowed to
proceed on their way but the remaining cars were cut off. Some of the
dignitaries followed on foot and were fortunate not to have been crushed to
death. <e heat too was suffocating. <e crowd was not hostile; in general it
was reverent; but it was a crowd, and its behaviour conformed with that
quality of the mixed up, tears and laughter, reverence and inquisitiveness,
considerateness and inconsiderateness, which is characteristic of so much in
India. Scores of people fainted or were injured. And so on his last journey
was Nehru accompanied by the crowdedness, the disorder, the
ineffectiveness of the half-Anished, the colour, and the peoples’ goodwill,
which had accompanied him in life for the last twenty years.
It was a little after four when the cortège reached the cremation-ground.
A helicopter showered rose petals on the gun-carriage as it moved in place.
To the sound of muffled drums the body was taken from the gun carriage
and placed on the pyre, among the pall-bearers being Bakshi, the ousted
ruler of Kashmir. Hindu and Buddhist priests chanted; the sacred water was
sprinkled; and a small group, including the vice-president (a Muslim), some
cabinet ministers, and Krishna Menon, Aled past the body for the last time,
placing little pieces of sandalwood on the pyre. <en the Cag was replaced
with a white silk scarf and more petals were scattered on it. A little after
half past four Sanjay lit the pyre and the Cames rose briskly. <at part of the
ceremony came from India. <e next part came from England: a volley of
small arms was Ared three times and twenty-four buglers sounded ‘<e Last
Post’. While the Are was burning the body to ashes thus was symbolised the
inexorability of India and England in Nehru’s life. Before the Are had died
down Sheikh Abdullah leapt on the platform and, weeping unrestrainedly,
threw Cowers on to the Cames; thus was symbolised the inextricability of
the Muslim world in Nehru’s life and the pathos of the Kashmir affair.
On the following day, Saturday, May 30, at dawn, in the presence of the
President and several cabinet ministers as well as of Mrs Gandhi and her
two sons (the elder had by this time reached Delhi) and Nehru’s two sisters
and other members of the family, the ashes were collected. <ey were
sprinkled with water from the sacred Ganges and with milk and were put
into copper urns. Early as it was, the crowd standing by numbered several
thousands. Many were chanting the ‘Ram Dhun’.
<e urns were taken to Nehru’s house and placed under a tree in his
garden. During the days they remained there people Aled past, hour after
hour.
On June 2 Lal Bahadur Shastri was chosen as prime minister.
A week after the death, on June 3, passages from Nehru’s will were read
out over the All India Radio by Mrs Pandit. It had been written ten years
earlier, in June 1954.*
<e will laid down, amongst other things, ‘with all earnestness’ that no
religious ceremonies should be associated with his funeral. ‘To submit to
them, even as a matter of form, would be hyprocrisy—an attempt to delude
ourselves and others’. But he asked that a handful of ashes be thrown over
the river Ganges. <is, he explained, was not intended to have any religious
signiAcance; the Ganges was ‘a symbol of India’s agelong culture and
civilisation, ever changing, ever Cowing, and yet ever the same. She reminds
me of the snow-covered peaks and deep valleys of the Himalayas which I
have loved so much and of the vast plains below where my life and work
have been cast.’ <e remainder of his ashes were to be carried high in an
aircraft and ‘scattered over the Aelds where the peasants of India toil so that
they might mingle with the dust of the soil of India and become an
indistinguishable part of her…’ <e will again referred to ‘the shackles of
religion that bind and constrict her and blind her people…’
Much of Nehru is in this will. Here was the man who all his life stood
for rationalism; here was the father who had refused to allow Indira when a
little girl to hear fairytales. But the poetical strain in him was not without
religious overtones. For all Indians in any case the Ganges had a religious
signiAcance which was beyond words. From beginning to end the longdrawn
funeral ceremonies were to the accompaniment of priests and the old
priestly cults. And here too was the English strain once more: the will was
written not in Hindi but in English.
On Tuesday, June 9, the Anal ceremony took place. <is was to drop the
greater portion of the ashes into the river at Sangam, a sacred place near
Allahabad, where the Jamuna Cows into the Ganges. A train brought the
urns from Delhi and reached Nehru’s home town at daybreak. With them
were Mrs Gandhi and her two sons and Nehru’s two sisters and other
members of the family, together with members of the central and local state
governments. <ey also brought Kamala’s ashes; Nehru had been keeping
them in his room for the twenty eight years since her death.
Once more there were huge crowds; the authorities estimated them at
half a million. Once more there was Sheikh Abdullah, and, also, the Dalai
Lama, two unofficial mourners, thus symbolising the incongruities of the
world in which Nehru had played out his life. Once more there were priests,
as well as detachments of the armed forces, and the old Hindu cults as well
as British Army rituals. <e procession had six miles to go to Sangam. On
the way it went into the grounds of the home where Nehru had spent his
childhood and much of his adult life; the urns were placed under a longlived
gulmohar tree near the house and Cowers were thrown on them. After
a pause of about an hour the procession set off again. When it got to
Sangam the urns were taken out into the river and the grandsons emptied
the ashes into the waters. A helicopter showered petals over the scene,
cannons were Ared, Vedic mantras were chanted, buglers sounded ‘<e Last
Post’, and the Jat Regiment band played ‘Abide with Me’.
So ends the long, winding, battle-strewn, course of Samson Agonistes:
Samson hath quit himself
Like Samson, and heroica lly hath
Finished a life heroic.
* His true name is Lal Bahadur, ‘Shastri’ (which can mean a caste name but does not in this case)
being tacked on after he got his diploma at an educational institute, the Kashi Vidyapeeth. To call
him ‘Mr Shastri’ is thus the same as calling a man Mr BA or Mr Dip.Educ. But it is unlikely that the
correct usage will now prevail any more than it will in the case of the French word expertise now
irrevocably established as jargon; the less so as, like most Indians, he has no surname.
* Ananda Bazar Patrika, June 3, 1964.
** Jugantar, June 3, 1964.
* April 13, 1964. On May 13, 1964 the Patriot, Krishna Menon’s paper, wanted Sheikh Abdullah
arrested again.
** Cf. criticism, e.g. in Ananda Bazar Patrika, May 19, 1964.
* Cf. Sir R. Pillai’s letter in the Statesman, June 5, 1964. He witnessed the will.