Prime Minister of India
In 1946 Nehru became head of government with the title of vice-president
of the Executive Council. Next year, with the departure of Jinnah and his
men, Nehru became prime minister of India. <at was in August 1947. He
was Aty eight at the time.
It is unusual for agitators to be saddled with the responsibility of running
a government at this age, after a lifetime of agitation. It is still more unusual
for agitators to survive the responsibility for long. Nehru was head of
government for eighteen years without interruption, a performance
exceeded in very few parliamentary regimes.
So long an unbroken term would be remarkable if it had taken place in
an established state, and of normal size, and with nothing much happening.
Nehru’s prime ministership was in a state containing over 350 million
people who grew in this period to nearly 500 million, a revolutionary
change in itself; and it carried through a series of revolutionary changes of
its own devising. Moreover, this was done under the shadow of war, both
inside and outside India. During the ten years I was observing India, on the
spot or from the outside, there was scarcely a fortnight without a crisis of
some sort to worry the cabinet.
Nehru did not begin his new career auspiciously. Shortly after he took
office one of the more pessimistic predictions of British officials came true:
the Indian subcontinent did not hold together. <e majority of the Muslims
broke away and founded the state of Pakistan. <e breakaway involved a
transfer of population, largely in the form of a wild stampeding of terriAed
Hindus into India and of terriAed Muslims into Pakistan, totalling between
15 and 20 million.* And it involved massacres, of an unknown number but
running into hundreds of thousands, on a scale of butchery, on both sides,
which were bound to have left Nehru with broken hopes about the
inhabitants of the Indian subcontinent and with shaken conAdence in his
old speeches on the theme of the British-made artiAciality of Hindu–
Muslim communalism. <is breakaway of Pakistan, moreover, did not solve
the Muslim problem for India because about 50 million Muslims remained,
or were stranded, in India. Some millions of Hindus remained, or were
stranded, in Pakistan.
In addition to having to settle millions of refugees, Nehru and the
successive governments he headed had to deal with the creation of the
Republic of India (during the Arst three years of its independence India was
a British dominion); with integrating over 600 princely states into the
republic; a feat engineered by Patel which was comparable with Bismarck’s
integration of Germany or Cavour’s integration of Italy; with working out a
constitution, including, in particular, with seeing that the republic was made
a secular, not a Hindu, state; with organising and carrying out general
elections covering 150 to 210 million voters, in 1952, in 1957, and in 1962;
another remarkable feat, as the elections were both efficient and fair; with
drawing and redrawing the boundaries of the states; with working out plans
for economic development; with working out social legislation, often
bitterly resisted, dealing with women’s rights, children’s protection,
education, outcastes, and the non-Hindu tribes; with coping with crop
failures and famine; with coping with the population explosion; and, Anally,
with working out and executing a foreign policy.
No man could run a government for so long, or deal with such a range of
problems, without incurring criticism. Indians of the highest standing,
including those with long and high office in the independence movement,
such as Rajagopalachari, President Rajendra Prasad, and Kripalani,
deplored Nehru’s policies increasingly in the last Ave or six years of his
prime ministership.<e press, for so long so docile, indeed in the Arst half of
his prime ministership so sycophantic, had by the end of the 1950s become
more and more critical.
Internal Affairs
We will now look at his performance, and we will begin with what he did
inside India.
His Arst concern was to see that India did not fall apart. To this end he
encouraged a nationalism which would make Indians feel that they were
Indians instead of feeling that they were Tamils or Punjabis or Dogras or
Assamese or Brahmins or Kshatriyas or this or that caste, as they are apt.
He gave special consideration to the Muslims so as to induce them to feel
Indian. For the same reason Christians and other minorities could always be
sure of Nehru’s unCinching protection. <e ‘secular state’, that is to say, a
non-Hindu and all-Indian state, was fundamental to this concern.
His second concern was to modernise India in the way he had long
dreamed of—change the status of women and outcastes; industrialisation;
socialism; planning; and parliamentary democracy. India, it must be
repeated, was still mainly a status society, having little in common with the
money-nexus society.
Nehru, it is said by Indians who have known him well, was a man of
voltes-faces: he could change overnight. <is seems to be true as regards
particulars and perhaps as regards a few big things, such as the policy of
dividing India into states according to their languages, a policy which was
thought to be dangerous for Indian unity but which he accepted
precipitately in 1953. Yet, and this is the point to be emphasised, a
comparison of Nehru’s letters and speeches in the 1930s, while he was still
an agitator, with what he said and did as prime minister, shows that what is
remarkable has been his consistency, above all as regards economic and
social policy.
For Nehru nationalism, as has been seen, was largely a preliminary step
to the major step, which was to modernise India, and, especially, to bring in
socialism. Nehru’s socialism had been held with such conviction that he
would have been a communist were it not for the rigid dogmatism on the
one part—his favourite taunt to the communists was that they were oldfashioned
and out of date—and the mixture of coercion and violence on the
other which go, or which have gone, with the communist’s sort of socialism.
For Nehru the end rarely justiAed the means. A minister in Nehru’s cabinet
once said to me, ‘What the Americans’—this was in the days of Dulles
when some Americans thought, and one of Dulles’ ambassadors was known
to have said, and had no doubt reported to Washington, that Nehru was a
crypto-communist—‘What the Americans don’t see is that Nehru is the last
of the Liberals.’ How much Nehru was misunderstood about communism
was shown in the idiotic rumours current in some quarters in the early
1950s that he was secretly supplying arms to the Chinese communists over
the new Indian road into Kashmir. In Nehru’s make-up there was a strong
strain of what passed for Marxism in the 1920s and 1930s, but a still
stronger strain of nineteenth-century humanistic liberalism which in turn
had been inCuenced by the Christian socialists. It was this strain in him
which made him almost excitedly appreciative of the encyclical Pacem in
Terris of Pope John XXIII. What Ared Nehru was that men and women
could be and should be given opportunities for living better lives and, in
particular, should be spared avoidable ills. His political ideas, including his
version of Marxism, were nearly all derived from English sources. Also, like
so many Indians, he shared with the English the pragmatic, instead of the
doctrinal, approach. In particular he was too much of the Western humanist
ever to reconcile himself to any communist requirement of giving up
freedom of thought.
On the other hand, just as Nehru was never taken in by the dogmas of
communists so too he had never been taken in by clichés against
communism, such as those which were supreme during the Dulles’ years
and were associated with ‘the Free World’, ‘the free men’, ‘monoliths’, and
so on. He, like Pope John, rejected the communist system but not
communist men. Nor could he ever overlook the fact, which is still
overlooked too often in the West, that when poverty is so great that
millions of men count themselves fortunate if they get two poor meals a day,
the quickest way to achieve economic development is by communism; that
is to say, by totalitarian planning and by totalitarian mobilisation of
resources. About 100 million men in India are partly if not wholly
unemployed, just sitting about in idleness, their massive capital and
productive value unutilised. It is also overlooked in the West that in
backward societies communism is the transmitter of certain important
Western values: thus it suppresses polygamy and other aspects of the servile
status of women, astrology, beggars, illiteracy, and exploiting priest-craft.
Given Nehru’s feelings on these things, as also his feelings on poverty, and
given his appreciation for people like Aruna Asaf Ali,49 it says much for the
strength of his liberal humanism that he had foregone the temptations of
taking the communist’s short cut. Further, it is overlooked in the West that
indiscipline can reach the point where communism becomes the counterrevolution.
In latter years Nehru’s time and energy were taken up more and more
with just running the apparatus of government, and less and less with
initiating new policies or with testing or developing those already adopted.
Few ministers in any government have the intellectual or nervous energy to
master the details or to grasp the full operation of their ministry. Nehru had
this energy; but more and more his old pioneering drive was lost in the
routine job of keeping a very large and complicated machine in action, of
keeping his party in control, and of keeping himself in control of his party.
He could not do much more than get from one crisis to another. <is
politician work made ever heavier demands on his time; and it also had a
good deal to do with his supporting, or conniving at, ministers who were
notoriously corrupt and at times got near to gangsterism.
Achievements
An undoubted achievement of the government headed by Nehru—until his
last four years or so he was so much the head as to be the government—was
to hold India together. Eighty million Muslims were lost and formed
Pakistan; but the rest of India, now running into nearly 500 million people,
with fourteen different official languages and many others spoken which
have no official status, is a going concern. <is is comparable to running
Europe as a single political entity; and it remains an achievement to Nehru’s
credit even though it was the British who created India as a single political
entity and even though their creation was not seriously threatened during
Nehru’s prime ministership. Nehru’s Aght to keep the English language,
though he wobbled on the matter in his last weary years, was due to his
understanding of the unifying forte of English in India over and above the
intellectual and international advantages which English gave to India.
His next achievement was to encourage the growth of the parliamentary
and cabinet system which the British started in India. He made it work; and
he also made the majority of Indian politicians in his time want to make it
work. Moreover, he maintained his own leadership by democratic means.
Over and over again Nehru demonstrated that he had no equal, let alone
superior, in the game of parliamentary politics in India. In his later years he
was living too much on his wits; but what wits they were, and what political
wits! However much of myth or magic there might have been in Nehru’s
prestige with the masses there could be no doubt about the reality of the
weapons in his politician’s armoury. <us he usually displayed the acutest
sense of timing. It was displayed brilliantly in the debates on the Sino-
Indian border affair in 1959–60; an affair which would have destroyed
almost any other prime minister in any other country; and again in getting
rid of S.K. Patil and Morarji Desai50 and other ministers through the socalled
Kamaraj Plan51 in 1963. <anks to his timing, combined with his
Aghting courage and his agility of mind, Nehru dominated Parliament even
when the majority were critical and, in the last years, in their moods of
disillusionment, actively hostile. Further, he had resilience in uncommon
measure. Again and again I have seen him so tired and worn out that I
thought the beginning of the end was in sight; then, a couple of days later, I
have run into him and found him looking as though nothing had happened.
Even disloyalty of the ominous kind, such as President Prasad’s kite-Cying
speech on the President’s powers in 1960, or the same President’s
opposition, not always above board, to Nehru’s social policies, seemed to
leave Nehru unshaken. (He defeated Prasad’s moves by astute moves of his
own, including spells of silence and then referring the memorandum on the
President’s powers, which he lured Prasad into writing, to a technical group
for a report on it. <eir report in effect killed the President’s pretensions.)
So with disloyalty and ingratitude from other quarters. Finally, Nehru
countered any Indian tendency to Cy to extremes. He was nearly always the
moderator and the conciliator, seeking out how to smooth away and not to
ruffle the prickles among his colleagues. He had learnt, though not easily,
that the Arst rule in politics is to suffer both fools and self-seekers gladly.
And he had learnt another lesson, namely, when he must bow to opposition
and to retreat.
His third achievement was the modernising of India—making it a
secular state, free to all religions and to atheism; piloting through a variety
of social reforms, notably the legal changes on behalf of women’s rights as
against Hindu orthodoxy; and, as the basis of the great revolution he
wanted to bring about, the three Ave-year plans.
<e Plans
<e Ave-year plans aimed at raising the standard of living by modernisation
in general and by industrialisation in particular, and by setting down what
Nehru called, with a vagueness typical of his pragmatism but prudent under
the circumstances, ‘a socialist pattern of society’.
Nehru had long been interested in planning. Before the war he insisted
on trying to interest Congress in it. He got little support except from the
left-wing group which later formed the spearhead of the communist
movement in India. When he became prime minister he gave the plans the
highest priority, and members of the Planning Commission the rank of
cabinet ministers with himself as the chairman. A large secretariat was set
up.
<e plans run into thousands of pages and were being enlarged
continuously. <ey began in 1951; the <ird Five-Year Plan Anishes in
1966.
<eir main emphasis was on investment for capital formation, and
especially for heavy industry and its subsidiaries. <ey could be carried
through only by reducing popular consumption, low as this already was, in
order to put savings into hydroelectric schemes, steel plants, factories, and
so on. <e promised rise in the standard of living was therefore for the
future, not for this generation.
As home savings could not be enough for the great size of the plans, aid
had to be got from the foreigner. <e degree of Anancial dependence on the
foreigner was (and remains) another major characteristic of the plans. <is
had gone so far that by 1963 even essential imports were dependent on the
bounty of the foreigner. Hence Indian efforts to get aid in cash (preferably)
or in goods untied to any speciAc project. By the end of 1960 India had
already received Rs 18,000 million in the shape of loans and Rs 6,000
million in the shape of grants. In the Arst half of the 1960s the required
Agure was estimated to be not less than £12,000 million. <e Aid to India
Consortium52 has been raising over $1,000 million a year in recent years.
Yet India’s unfavourable balance of payments continued to get more and
more unfavourable. <e fruition of the plans will in fact depend upon the
willingness of the foreigner to go on pouring in aid. India at times had been
using the Cold War, much as she attacked the Cold War as an institution,
for getting both sides to give her aid, though usually she had no need to do
this as she could count on both sides playing against each other, the East
against the West and the West against the East. <e US and other Western
powers committed themselves to a heavy load of aid as an insurance against
communism in India; risky insurance to say the least, even if communism
has any solid prospects in India; and in any case the foreign aid will
probably have slight effect on communism, one way or the other. <ey have
in effect underwritten India’s planning programme. Lovers of India hope
they will continue to do so; but in such a way as to avoid taking on a
bottomless pit. India was well aware of the emotional compulsions behind
the West’s interest in her plans, and, at least until the defeat inCicted on her
troops by the Chinese in 1962, not a few Indians were secretly rather
contemptuous of them—of the West’s fear of communism. Indian leaders
cannot be blamed for taking advantage of these compulsions. <ere was not
much inhibition about asking for aid; and, according to some critics, not
much gratitude. A frequent note was: aid should be bigger. Will India be
able to retain complete independence under these circumstances? <e
independence of the foodless or the heavily mortgaged debtor is normally
precarious. Or will the future see some saviour of the people, some Indian
Sukarno,53 rising in India to agitate for the repudiation of the huge foreign
debt, in the name of breaking the neo-colonial yoke?
Meanwhile inCation has been playing its usual baneful role of social
damage; for ‘deAcit Anancing’, the contemporary euphemism for falling
back on the printing press for money, became an accepted part of the plans
in Nehru’s time. Prices nearly doubled during the time I was in India. <ey
are still rising. Taxation has gone up even higher. <e landowning classes
have been obliterated; peasants cannot own more than about 30 acres of
land; even this Agure might be reduced, thanks to the land ceiling
legislation,54 which is some of the most ill-considered and merely emotional
or merely political legislation of post-independence India. (<e abolition of
landlords not only infringed the property rights promised by the
Constitution but, combined with the land ceiling legislation, has deprived
the Indian village and countryside of the class which, alone living above the
animal subsistence level, could aid rural civilisation and at the same time
could afford to experiment in farming and to improve its techniques.)
Further, the professional and middle class, already ground down by taxation
and by premature social legislation and trade union restrictiveness as well as
by inCation, sink lower in the economic scale. <e classes which have
beneAted most have been the speculators, the urban developers, and, above
all, the Baniya and Marwari magnates,55 perhaps the vilest money-making
group on earth. <e outcastes in the urban areas have also beneAted.
Government, if the parliamentary regime holds, will, it must be
remembered, depend upon the votes of the majority cast in secret ballot
boxes. <e majority are the very needy; besides being ignorant they are not
likely to take the forward-looking public-spirited view. Once they discover
their power, the discovery being made for them by politicians seeking their
votes, the damaging process will be accelerated.
State intervention, too, grew apace under Nehru’s plans. Permits,
licences, controls, foreign exchange prohibitions, were always increasing.
With them corruption increased too. A good deal of state regulation is no
doubt unavoidable under the circumstances of the time; but as regulations
and the bureaucracy multiply so too does the freedom of the individual
diminish. In the end, with ‘the revolution of rising expectations’ amongst
the urban proletariat well under way, the frail structure of democracy will
risk being crushed by a dictatorship or an oligarchy.
As for what the plans will achieve, they will no doubt achieve—they
already are achieving—some industrialisation, and some increase in
irrigation. <is fact remains though some of the industrialisation will be
expensive for what it returns, and inefficient as well as jerry-built. Industry
in India is high cost; reports have recently been published showing average
factory costs at 40 percent above British and still more above American
costs. What the plans will assuredly achieve is to bring about still bigger
cities, and with bigger slums; Calcutta, for instance, conceivably growing
from 6 million to 15 million. Planners never seem to think about planning
cities. In some places or sectors the plans might even raise the standard of
living a little. And they have had the effect of increasing the power of the
Centre over the states and to that extent they have been a factor for
cementing India together—assuming, what is not certain, that it is a good
thing for India to be a union instead of a federation.
But agriculture, and the whole process of producing food for the
millions, showed little advance. Before long there will be no escape from
giving them the overriding priority which the plans in Nehru’s time failed
to give. <e parlous food position in India, including the low, and still
falling, yield per acre, was concealed, purposely but dangerously concealed
for years by some of the ministers concerned, through the millions of tons
of free or dumped food from the United States; for which reason the longterm
effects of PL 48056 could be bad for India both as regards inCation and
as regards the agricultural output. <e latter remained about stationary for
the last four or Ave years of Nehru’s life. <ough an urgent need, and
obvious from the time of the Bengal famine in the 1940s, there was still no
proper granary or storage system in Nehru’s time. Famine thus followed
glut, and the grain speculators and hoarders Courished.
For the Ave-year plans reCect the urban mind. Nehru, like most Indian
politicians, was urban. Outside of their towns the politicians are like Ash
out of water. <is is why agriculture, though given thousands of pages,
millions of words, and various huge schemes, such as community
development or the Grow More Food campaigns, was not given enough
effective action; and while thought and money could be spent instead on
plans for a people’s car, India-made jet planes, and so on. Since 80 percent
of Indians live in villages and depend, directly or indirectly, on agriculture,
the case for basing the whole planning effort on the villages, and for
building up from that base, instead of on heavy industry and the like, was
overwhelming. <is is what Gandhi would have done. But of no country is
it so true as of India that the nearer one gets to the capital the further one
gets from the realities. <e majority of villagers after more than a decade of
the plans, and of the publicity for them, knew little about them. And it is
certain that over most of India the low standard of living in the villages has
not risen; over much of India it has fallen, in the last ten years.* Socialist
governments, notoriously, run into difficulties over food production; as
Communist China did in recent years, and as Soviet Russia has been doing
even forty-odd years after the Revolution.
Mechanisation, moreover, will not lessen unemployment. It is bound to
increase it, at least for a generation or so. Already there are probably more
than 20 million fully unemployed, and perhaps as many as another 80
million partially unemployed, in India.
Finally, can Indians with their genius for verbal Cuency as contrasted
with executive ability, and with their penchant for dilatory lolling, organise
or carry through huge economic changes under an easygoing parliamentary
system at this stage in their development? Have they trained up enough
managers—in the way the British trained up enough Indian administrators
for the needs of their time? Is there enough of the executive’s temperament
or art yet?
As for the Nehru plans considered speciAcally, and apart from the
general strategy, they run into hundreds of different projects, ranging from
small technical schools to big hydroelectric schemes, but they have tended
to be too imprecise in priorities or aims; too lacking in a groundwork of
solid intellectual and then solid technical preparation; too much slanted
towards big schemes as well as too much slanted towards industrialisation
and non-agricultural development; too much intruding of politicians’
interests (a road or bridge or school in this constituency, a railway in that,
harbour works here, this or that factory there); too much defectiveness in
execution so that there has been a shortfall as regards many, perhaps most,
targets, and virtual failure as regards some like the huge Damodar Valley
Scheme;57 and too much propaganda of the extravagant kind while at the
same time too many of the country people were either ignorant of the plans
or felt no personal involvement in them. Amongst other things it should
have been explained to the people why controls were unavoidable—as some
undoubtedly are—and why consumer goods must be sacriAced in the
interests of future well-being.
It is hard to escape the fear that the main achievement of Nehru’s
economic and social policy will turn out to be social disruption; and that
this will break out into violence, thanks on the one hand to the legacy of
violence from the days of nationalist agitation, and, on the other, to the vast
mass of detribalised neo-literates being turned out in the postindependence
schools. For in the haste to modernise, universities and
university students have been multiplied, with the result that there is an
inCation in educational standards, which have become as diluted as the
money. Moreover, there are not enough jobs for the graduates. <e same is
true of the schools and the school matriculates. India has thus acquired
some of the essential ingredients of the classical prescription for
communism.
It is certain that Nehru had no wish to pave the way for communism.
But it is equally certain that he, like many Indians in authority at the time,
shared the illusions which Courished in the West from the time of President
Truman’s famous Point Four speech58 in the late 1940s about the relative
ease of developing undeveloped or underdeveloped economies, and about
the potential role of foreign aid in this transformation. It was not seen that
the gap in economic productivity is a gap in total or general historical
development, and that a gap of centuries cannot be bridged in a few years,
however beguiling the phrases about ‘the take-off ’, ‘know-how’, landlords,
or reactionaries. A great part of foreign aid in most recipient countries has
so far been a waste; and inevitably.
Two defences could be pleaded on behalf of Nehru’s plans.
<e Arst defence would be the poverty of India. <is is so great that
something must be attempted to alleviate it.* If the European visitor looks
over Calcutta and the poverty there he will feel that Europe’s problems of
poverty or shortages are so triCing in comparison that they no longer rate as
problems. For all but a fraction of Indians the food is vegetarian, and for a
very large proportion it consists of the cheap coarse grains. <e sanitation
and comfort we take for granted for our poorest is for only a minority in
India. And with an absence of sufficiency goes a level of health below par.
According to recent FAO publications, the annual per capita income of the
United States is $2,164, of the United Kingdom $960, of Japan $250, of
India only $60; the daily consumption of animal protein is 66 grams in the
United States, 51 in the United Kingdom, 15 in Japan, and 6 in India.
Statistics of this sort must be taken with a grain of salt,* but other
indications of the poverty could be multiplied. In Calcutta, for instance,
according to a semi-official survey made in 1961, 17 percent of the
population have no living accommodation of any kind; they live on the
street pavements; 30 percent live three families to a room, 33 percent live
one family to one room, only 4 percent live one family to three rooms; or, to
take lavatory facilities, 15 percent have none at all, 4 percent have one
lavatory to 100 families, only 9 percent have one lavatory per family; 70
percent share one lavatory for 10 to 100 families. Poverty in India is so great
that millions are reduced to an animal level.
<e second defence which could be pleaded on Nehru’s behalf is the
population problem. <is is the Arst problem in India, and the gravest by
far. Since I went to India early in 1952 the population has increased by
about 100 million. <ese are Agures of doom. <e population problem, like
some other real and concrete problems, was lost sight of for three decades
during the euphoric agitation against the British raj. <e urgency of the
need for increasing food production cannot be much longer evaded; still less
can the urgency of the need for slowing down the rate of population
growth. <e birth rate is high, but the new and explosive factor is the fall in
the death rate. As a result life expectancy has risen from twenty six years in
1940 to forty one years now. Although there are few religious or social
inhibitions against family planning, the efforts, organised by the
government itself, to spread it have so far won few adherents. Indifference is
the cause. <e difference is due in part to lack of education, but only in part.
Indians amount to a seventh of the human race. <eir numbers are swollen
each year by 12–15 million. About 20 percent of the population in most
villages is already surplus—no work for them to do as well as too little food
for them. At current rates of growth the population will have grown to
about 1,000 million by the end of the century. Apart from the wastage of
human life and spirit involved in this pullulation, it makes the plans,
whatever their merits or demerits, futile. <e increase of wealth cannot
catch up with the increase of mouths. <e statistics collected by the Central
Statistical Institute leave little doubt that population has grown faster than
the net economic growth achieved by the plans. <e disparity may be as
great as 2–5 percent for population growth to 1–6 percent for net economic
growth. Indeed there will soon be a problem not only to feed the millions
but to get enough water for them. Much of the wildlife in India will
disappear under the rising tide of human beings. And the immense social
disarray caused by the population explosion, and exacerbated by wellmeaning
economic and social legislation of the Nehru years, predisposes to
the shortcut of dictatorship.
Can effective alleviation of these two root material problems of India,
poverty and overpopulation, which Nehru wished to give, be given, without
totalitarian methods?
I am omitting any discussion of the case for industrialising India from
the point of view of defence needs in a world of power politics for I think
Nehru was not much concerned with them when launching the plans. It is
probable that in latter years they did come to count. <ese needs indeed will
confront India with terrible dilemmas, especially if the new nuclear weapons
proliferate and the world does not acquire a stable balance of power.
What was wrong with Nehru’s plans is that on the one hand they were
not big enough, not drastic enough, to produce a signiAcant rise in the
standard of living or a real dynamic of change; but, on the other, they were
big and drastic enough to bring in disarrangement, and, in particular, to eat
into India’s greatest wealth: the traditional spirit of contentment of the
Indian people, the capacity to put up with life, the capacity to suffer, even
hunger itself. So far the plans, together with Congress Party political
promises over the years, have made Indians unwilling to accept hunger as
they did over the past centuries; but they have not produced the
wherewithal to alleviate hunger. <e Marxist and the liberal strains in
Nehru remained muddled and were not worked out into a functioning
synthesis.
How much did Nehru go astray over the plans through his alienation
from traditional India and more particularly through his love of machines?
He loved machines as the expression of man’s mastering of Nature. He was
too observant not to be aware of certain dangers going with mechanisation.
I have heard him say that the machine way of life is likely to turn men more
and more into robots; the vision of a world of steel and concrete and glass
and the hygienic but bored millions carrying on their automated lives did
not escape him. He was in two minds about TV for India. And latterly he
did some speaking up for decentralisation. I have also heard him on some of
the inevitable effects of government by parliaments elected by majority vote,
about which he also had no illusions. Yet his enthusiasm for, getting close at
times to a mystic adoration of, the machine remained. Hence his
dithyrambic praise of the Arst Indian jet planes as ‘gazelles of the sky’, or of
hydroelectric plants and factories as ‘the temples of our age’; or his
enthusiasm for the architect Le Corbusier,59 who was the senior planner of
the new Indian city of Chandigarh, that emblematic creature of modern
noise and tension and ferro-concrete to whom a Atting memorial stands in
the high court building until the discontented judges refuse to use it any
more. <e plans, the result of Nehru’s values and drive, were to a large
degree wrongly conceived—too imitative of America on the one hand and
of Russia on the other; not sufficiently indigenously Indian.
Gandhi knew that instead of machines enabling men to master Nature
they are more likely to master men; what the motor car is now doing is a
reminder for us; and he knew that Nehru took too little account of this. He
once wrote to him:
<ough I was beginning to detect some differences in viewpoint
between you and me, I had no notion whatever of the terrible extent
of these differences. I see quite clearly that you must carry on an open
warfare against me and my views. <e differences between you and me
appear to be so vast and so radical that there seems to be no meeting
ground. I suggest a digniAed way of unfurling your Cag.*
Gandhi had his fads, he could carry subtlety to the point to trickiness,
and he accepted hospitality from Marwari plutocrats like the Birlas. But
Gandhi knew that there are worse evils than poverty.
Nehru was right in wanting to plan; and the case for some
industrialisation, as also for some socialism, was strong. But he cannot be
acquitted of at least some superAciality; and this, as not infrequently
happens in political decisions, led to pseudo solutions rather than to
solutions. <e ultimate practical question confronting the rulers of India
was not industrialisation versus non-industrialisation but how much could
be spared out of India’s scarce resources for industrialisation after providing
for proper food supplies or a proper basis. <e superAciality had been made
the worse by the intellectual arrogance which marked his Arst (and most
powerful) decade as prime minister. He ridiculed criticism of the plans; for
instance when Sucheta Kripalani60 criticised his vague scheme for
cooperative farming in 1958. And so he swung from one enthusiasm to
another, such as big hydroelectric dams, land ceilings, Grow More Food
campaigns, cooperative farming, steel plants, the 30,000 acre farm at
Suratgarh (‘the biggest farm in Asia’), and from one magician to another
who promised to produce quick answers. Nehru was superAcial mostly
because he was in too much of a hurry; in a tempestuous hurry to set India
irrevocably on the road to industrialisation and socialism before he left the
scene.
But if all the facts were known a major responsibility for the failures in
the plans would, after the population explosion, lie on the sycophants who
surrounded him. <e Planning Commission, or certain inCuential members
(for there were others who were both disinterested and able), took up his
ideas, or enthusiasms, or prejudices, with the servility of lackeys.
<roughout the 1950s neither the Congress Party nor Parliament nor
cabinet had the courage to controvert Nehru, not even on his enthusiasm
(shortlived) for cooperative farming, which, if it meant anything, meant
Russian-type collective farms. Such was the sycophancy that a senior
departmental official of my acquaintance, whose minister had announced
again and again that India was about to become self-sufficient in food, but
who himself believed that it would take Afteen years at the earliest for the
plans to achieve this self-sufficiency, when chided about his minister’s
misleading optimism, replied, ‘How can I tell my minister that we will not
be self-sufficient next year? It is politically impossible.’ A long series of
eminent or allegedly expert foreign visitors, most of them in India at the
cost of the Indian or other taxpayers, added to Nehru’s myopia by assuring
him that the plans were good and realistic. Almost any visitor, with or
without any relevant competence, just above the tourist level could be sure
to be written up in the Indian press if he praised the plans; rather in the
same way as any visitor to Australia can be written up in the Australian
press if he announces that the future of wool is secure. Month after month
over the years some foreign visitor would be praising the plans. I remember
after a visit of some international banking magnates, in India for only a few
days, the gleeful satisfaction with which Nehru told me that they had
praised the plans and said that they were not at all too ambitious. <at was
two or three years before his death. As late as December 1963 he told
Parliament that the plans were without parallel anywhere.
Rajagopalachari’s attacks61 on Nehru’s economic and social philosophy
annoyed Nehru considerably. To a foreign observer valuing both men, and
loving India, much of what Rajagopalachari was saying was more than
telling. It was the truth. Yet, such is the intractability of Indian poverty and
overpopulation that Rajagopalachari failed to establish convincing solutions
for the problem as a whole. And for how long could India withdraw into
Indian-ness? Whatever his mistakes it can be said for Nehru that he did try
to And solutions in terms of the modern world.
Parliamentary Democracy
After planning for industrialisation and socialism Nehru’s next great
concern was to set India off securely on the road to parliamentary
democracy.
Is India after Nehru’s disappearance likely to retain such degree of
parliamentary democracy as she achieved under him? It is enough to say
here that although India is the only parliamentary democracy functioning in
the whole area lying between the Far East and Western Europe, its future is
not assured. <ere might be a Hindu raj, Fascist in shape; as would be the
case if the Hindu revivalist movement triumphed, a prospect which haunted
Nehru like a recurrent nightmare. <ere might be a communist type of
dictatorship. <ere might be a military dictatorship. <ere might be a
characteristically Indian amalgam of all three. India’s genius for survival
would make it possible for her to combine what we would regard as
incompatibles. <is amalgam could prevail over India as a whole; or there
could be a confederation with a Fascist type of dictatorship in some regions,
communist-type dictatorships in other regions, and military dictatorships in
others, and perhaps even parliamentary democracy in others. Much variety
is possible among 500 to 1,000 million Indians. All one can be certain of is
unsettlement—the unsettlement caused by the millions of children now at
school and college who when they leave will see themselves as too good for
the work and station of their illiterate parents and whose vision of the life
they want will be coloured by the cinema, but who will be unable to get
jobs. Here is the readymade market for mass-circulation papers or for
subversive tracts; politicians buying votes with the promise of plenty and a
good time; essentials outstripped by ever-rising population; millions of
unemployed; continual inCation; the popular press buying circulation
through playing on hatreds and irrationality; and the outcastes and the low
castes—the majority—discovering their power in the secret ballot box.
Two factors working for dictatorship, and for the discipline which goes
with dictatorship, be it Fascist, or communist, or military, have to be borne
in mind. <ey have a bearing on the shortfalls in Nehru’s plans, too. One is
the slap-dash inefficiency universal in India: engine drivers and railway
employees who incur serious accidents by not bothering to carry out the
elementary precautions, doctors and nurses who don’t bother with
elementary hygiene or the right medicines, and so on endlessly. <e other is
the corruption, equally universal in India; as endemic as dysentery or
malaria. <e British raj held it in hand but could never eradicate it. It has
swollen to vast proportions since independence, and especially, as has been
said, since the plans introduced a network of licences, permits, and
protectionism.
And what hurts the average man more than the corruption, which in any
case is in most Asian countries accepted as unavoidable, like bad weather, is
the law and order situation. Banditry, crime, and personal violence are, to
say the least, not on the decrease.
But there is another side to the picture—and this is the case for
optimism—devoted officials; much ability; a temperamental preference for
what is moderate and sane; and that remarkable capacity for surviving
already noted. <ose who know India well mostly feel that somehow, and in
the end, and despite all the signs to the contrary, and all the strains on
stability, she will come through and will remain more or less what she is
now, namely, the parliamentary democracy which Nehru left behind him.
<e Indians share with the British a long-term preference for the middle of
the road.
An incidental point is worth touching on here, and that is that friends as
well as enemies used to complain that government in India was bad or
deteriorating because, amongst other reasons, Nehru was no administrator.
Only a senior official inside the cabinet secretariat or the external affairs
ministry could speak with authority on this. What is true is that Nehru did
not husband his time well, being too generous with it, for instance in
receiving foreign visitors who would not be received by their mayor, let
alone their prime minister, in their own countries;* and perhaps, too, in
making too many speeches and too many public appearances, though this
seems to be an unavoidable part of the process of leadership in a
parliamentary democracy. But there is no cabinet minister known to me in
any country I have served in who was more orderly, and more insistent on
seeing a process through from the talking stage to the practical stage, than
Nehru. <e leader of the Socialist Party once commended to his party the
example set by Nehru in dealing with correspondence promptly. ‘You will
always get a reply from him within 48 hours.’* <is was common knowledge
in Delhi. Nehru was not one of those ministers who have a safe full of
awkward ‘pending papers’.
On the other hand, his administrative work did suffer from defective
judgement of men, and sometimes of things; and also from a failure to
delegate work and responsibility. He was, of course, far from being the only
prime minister of whom these things, especially the former, could be said.
He undoubtedly had too much to do, as well as wasting too much time in
seeing too many people and in attending too many merely formal
ceremonies. As a result, especially in his later years, he could not read
essential papers, or master essential details, or get time for reCection.** <is
increased his superAciality and also his predisposition to be taken in by
plausible talkers. But he was genuinely a practitioner as well as a believer in
efficient administration no less than in democracy.
Democracy is a tender plant in the Indian soil and though the smooth
change-over from Nehru to his successor was a good omen there should be
no illusions about its fragility. He cherished democracy and nurtured it; yet
he did one great disservice to it. <is was that he held so many offices, and,
especially, that he held on to the office of prime minister for so long.
<ere is a great deal of ability available in India, some courage, and a
widespread desire amongst politically minded Indians, that is to say, largely
the literate and largely the English-speaking minority, to carry on with the
present parliamentary regime. India is no Indonesia.62 It is therefore strange
that Nehru, who was given his chance by Gandhi while he was still in his
thirties, and whose mistakes were covered up again and again by his elders
—he ‘began at a high level on the ladder’, as he told one of his biographers*
—did not consciously gather around him a band of younger men, including
from that corps d’élite, the ICS, men already adept in the techniques of
modern government, who could be counted on for carrying on the torch
after he went. It was much more than a matter of his selecting or
foreshadowing his successor; there was much (but not everything) to be said
in excuse of his reluctance to have a dauphin. <e case of Smuts63 is not
irrelevant. For forty years Smuts was a name to reckon with outside South
Africa as well as in it. But Smuts had trained up no band of assured
potential successors of the quality required. Today most of the things Smuts
stood for are in ruins. It is no less strange that Nehru clung to office for so
long. It would have been of help to the cause of parliamentary democracy in
India if he had stood down and let the confusion inevitable on his
withdrawal from the scene take place in his own lifetime, and while he was
still in good health, so that he was at hand to steady the ship of state if the
weather became too rough. <is is what Kemal Ataturk did. Further, his
very domination had so many elements of dictatorship, unintended, or even
disliked, by Nehru though they were, that it militated against the
parliamentary democracy sending down as deep roots as it could have under
his protection. He would never have truck with ideas of dictatorship in any
form, but he did have a strong strain of the authoritarian in him. For one
thing his long domination sapped the opposition; the opposition is an
essential part of parliamentary democracy. For another, he kept too much
power in his own hands, and so in effect he encouraged bad habits of
dependence. Cabinet responsibility might have been collective in principle
but in practice there was much more primus than primus inter pares; the
position being made the worse by the circumambient mixture of sycophancy
and Cattery. And here is the main cause of Nehru’s domination—the gaping
inequality in ability and character between himself and his ministers or his
party or his fellow politicians. What one of his ministers once said is near
the truth: Nehru was like the banyan tree, so big and so overshadowing that
nothing could grow under it.
Foreign Affairs
We will now look at Nehru’s performance in foreign affairs. <is was a
subject in which he had always taken a lively interest. His special
contribution to the nationalist movement had been his unCagging demand,
Arstly, that the nationalists think about the kind of India they wanted after
they got independence, and, secondly, that they think about a foreign policy.
He antagonised not a few on the Arst account; and bored most on the
second. Nehru’s enthusiasm for discussing the international situation
became a subject of joking. As prime minister he showed an interest in it
not second even to his interest in the economic and social reconstruction of
India. He was criticised for giving too much time to it.
He insisted on keeping the portfolio of external affairs for himself. It was
a disadvantage to him that he did so, because, as head of the whole
government of India, he had to deal with a range of internal problems
already too much for one mind. And it was a disadvantage to the Indian
foreign office and the Indian diplomatic service. In effect he did damage to
both, and at a formative and impressionable stage of their growth.
Notwithstanding some able men in it, such as N.R. Pillai, M.J. Desai, and
the Dayals,64 it was not a good service—nothing like good enough for a
country of India’s importance. <ere was not enough training or
professional competence, not enough esprit de corps, and too much eagerness
to please the boss. It had been made the worse by an excessive habit of
propaganda.* Nehru was too busy and too preoccupied to get to know the
necessary detail, or to get to know the officers except for a handful of very
senior ones or a few favourites. <is encouraged sycophancy, personal ad hoc
approaches, and a mixture of amateurishness and subjectivity. Indian
embassies were too often sending back to Delhi the kind of reports which
they thought would be congenial to their master. It was scarcely improved
by the ambiguous position allowed to Krishna Menon, who in some Aelds
was virtually second foreign minister for Ave years or so prior to his fall in
1962; whence resulted liveliness and initiative but also subjectivity and
extra-office approaches and manoeuvres, not to mention short shrift to
‘American stooges’ ‘British dupes’ or ‘Fascists’. Another effect of Nehru’s
monopolising foreign affairs was that members of his party were excluded
from a training in the subtleties of the subject, or from a basic knowledge of
international relations.
As for Nehru’s own concern for foreign affairs, for years little of moment
happened anywhere without his making a public statement on it, often
lecturing some government or other; often, in the Arst half of his term, a
Western if not the British government itself; and often in a lofty way. His
speeches and statements on foreign affairs must run into hundreds of
thousands of words; perhaps millions.* In the early days of his government,
while the speeches were apt to be scolding they consisted at the same time
too much of vague generalities. <ey gave a good deal of offence in
Washington, and sometimes in London. On the other hand the Cold War,
the armaments race, and the looming menace of a thermo-nuclear
holocaust, were of interest to every human being; India had a concern no
less than America or Russia; and reasons were certainly not lacking for
pointing the Anger at the fomenters of the Cold War. When the documents
become available they will probably establish that on the whole Nehru was a
valuable counterpoise to the brinkmanship of the most dangerous of the
Dulles’ years.
Non-alignment and realpolitik
<e starting point of Nehru’s foreign policy was non-alignment. <is had
variations in detail from time to time which led to a good deal of confusion
about it for some years. It did not mean, for instance, neutrality (e.g. of the
Swiss kind). Nor did it mean that either Nehru or India would ordinarily be
neutral in a conCict between freedom and the opposite, the 1956 Hungary
affair65 notwithstanding. Still less did it mean non-violence, though Nehru
himself was not without paciAst inclinations. It was essentially a refusal to
align India with either one of the two power blocs around which the world
was then polarised; in particular, a refusal to join with the United States or
to allow the United States to have bases on Indian soil. Nehru claimed a
freedom to judge every issue on its merits.
After the Chinese invasion of Indian territory in 1962 non-alignment
was much criticised in India, partly as an indirect attack on the Communist
Party, on socialism, and on Nehru himself, but partly, too, for itself. Yet for
the preceding Afteen years there were very few Indians who had questioned
it; very few who did not praise it. It responded, in fact, to that nonattachment
which is deeply rooted in Hindu psychology, as well as in
Nehru’s own predisposition to avoid all emotional involvement with others.
Nehru once said that he would rather India be reduced to dust than to give
up non-alignment. It responded, too, surely, to the best interests of India; at
least up until the Chinese attack in 1962. Whether one of the claims made
repeatedly by Nehru, namely, that the extension of armed alliances made
the Cold War more likely to become a Hot War, was correct or not, and
whether ‘international communism’ from after Stalin’s death was or was not
the danger Dulles and his associates said it was, there could be no doubt
that an American alliance was not worth the price of Russian enmity to
India. Russia is much nearer to India than America; and, further, she, like
India, shares a long frontier with China—and the troubles which common
frontiers bring. It is true that the policy of non-alignment was sometimes
conducted in such a way, or with such hectoring words, as to make India
disliked unnecessarily. It is true, too, that Indians were inconsistent in
1962–63, in being shocked that their fellow protagonists of, and former
pupils in, the doctrine of non-alignment, such as Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia
or Ghana, refused to align themselves with India against China; and that
India while moralising against the Cold War was up to the eyes in a cold
war of her own with Pakistan. How she was angered by non-alignment in
others as regards the Indo-Pakistan cold war was demonstrated again and
again. But non-alignment paid India. <e Agures for the aid she has
received from both sides show this. <e West has in fact virtually
committed itself to India’s defence as well as to its plans; and Russia no less
than the West goes on giving both civil and military aid. Non-alignment
has been found proAtable by other new or undeveloped countries, too. And
did it really do harm to the cause of peace or to the true, as distinct from the
imaginary, interests of the West?
India’s attitude to armed alliances was often confused, even by Indians,
perhaps at times by Nehru himself, with the policy of non-alignment. Both
attitudes were connected with India’s and Nehru’s genuine concern for peace
and to stop the spread of the Cold War, especially in Asia. But a good deal
of Nehru’s condemnation of armed alliances derived from his objection to
the United States giving arms to Pakistan and to Pakistan’s being a member
of SEATO and of CENTO (originally known as the Baghdad Pact66).
Nehru, like most Indians, feared that Pakistan by virtue of this tie-up would
be given a military advantage over India which might be decisive in the
event of war breaking out between them. And, of course, it was largely for
this reason that Pakistan had, in Dulles’ words, been willing to ‘stand up
and be counted’ (against international communism). So many high
principles were proclaimed so often on all sides that the basic motivation
became lost in the deceiving or rationalising verbiage.
During Nehru’s long domination of Indian foreign policy there were
changes, naturally. For one thing India’s relations with the outside world
expanded greatly. In 1950 there were about thirty foreign missions in Delhi;
today there are about eighty. In an average year a score or so of international
conferences now meet in India. Accompanying this change in the quantity
of India’s external relations there has been a change in their quality—a
change from a sort of paciAst internationalist idealistic approach to a sort of
macht politik. <e Gandhian doctrine of Soul Force came to count for little.
Krishna Menon, not Gandhi, became the symbol of Indian foreign policy.
<e Indian armed forces came to take up a sizeable proportion of the Indian
budget, even before the Chinese attack in 1962. At the end there were also
some second thoughts on the Afro-Asian brotherhood.67 Without tracing
steps in the progress from Soul Force to power politics, from Gandhi to
Krishna Menon, or without disentangling policies from the three separate
levels between which they were apt to oscillate in Nehru’s time, namely,
idealist, emotional, and realpolitik, I will now deal with the subjects which
were of main concern.
Relations with Pakistan
First, relations with Pakistan.
Two alternative policies had been possible as regards Jinnah’s agitation
for Pakistan. First, accept the fact that religion is the great divider; and so,
in the interests of that homogeneity without which no state can function,
let the Muslims go, let them have Pakistan. Muslims, it can be added, had
some reason for distrust about their security in India, at least as far as some
Hindus of importance were concerned; and, further, their religion was based
on an entirely different, often on an antithetical worldview, as well as on
different social customs and different laws, from that of the Hindus. Or,
second, refuse to accept that religion need be a divider, at least for long, and
accept the fact that all Muslims in India will not or cannot go to Pakistan.
<e corollary of this policy would be that India should either have fought a
civil war, just as the Americans fought their Civil War, in order to prevent
the dismemberment of the subcontinent; or, more wisely, that they should
have played along with Jinnah and his successors, leaving the door open, at
almost any cost, so that the Pakistanis could make their return, or at least
that they could be brought into a confederation. Until as late as the 1937
Congress cabinets, perhaps even as late as the war years, the proponents of
Pakistan probably did not expect, or even want, Pakistan to be created.
Gandhi’s Quit India movement of 1942 had much to do with making
Pakistan practical politics for Jinnah, the vain, cold-hearted, clever,
impressive demagogue, himself so little Muslim that apparently he had not
mastered the prayer ritual. How much Nehru’s famous gaffe at a press
conference decided, or enabled, Jinnah to turn the agitation for Pakistan
from a bargaining point into a commitment for a separate sovereign Muslim
state can be left to the historians. It is enough to say here that after both
Congress and the Muslim League, following on the Attlee government’s
decision in July or August 1945 to give India independence as soon as
possible and to send Cripps and two other ministers out to India to arrange
the terms, had accepted the British Cabinet Mission’s plan of a centre with
control over defence, foreign affairs, and communications, while other
matters were to be left to the control of Muslim provinces and non-Muslim
provinces, Nehru, following Azad as president of Congress, suddenly
announced, without consulting his party, that the plan, a precarious
compromise in a very difficult situation, was not binding on Congress. He
blurted this out because he was hungering for the strongly centralised state
dear to all revolutionaries and socialists and was still refusing to see the
reality of Muslim fears and hatred and separatism. Jinnah decided to strike.
<e Congress–Muslim interim government of 1946 thus never really
functioned. When Mountbatten arrived in Delhi in March 1947 he decided
that the only way to avoid bloodshed and chaos was to accept partition and
for England to quit that summer instead of in June 1948, the date
mentioned by Attlee just before Mountbatten had left London.
From time to time it is said by journalists—who often repeat one another
—that the partition of the subcontinent, that is to say, the creation of
Pakistan, was ‘the supreme failure of the British’. <e truth, on the contrary,
is that the British had no blame for it. <e blame was religious hatred.
Religious hatred was stirred up to the pitch where the two communities
lacked the necessary minimum homogeneity for constituting a single state.
<is is the reason why Ireland is partitioned, and Korea (for ideological
hatreds are the same as religious hatreds); just as it is the reason why some
Swiss cantons or German principalities were entirely Protestant and others
entirely Catholic, on the well-established principle of cuius regio eius religio.
Rajagopalachari, with his usual penetration, saw, and was reconciled to, the
case for partition years before it came. If Mountbatten can be blamed at all,
which is questionable, it would be for hastening with so much speed that
the boundaries were not decided upon before Pakistan was created, and that
the necessary protective measures against communal disturbances had not
been worked out.*
Partitioning Bengal should have been resisted. At least an attempt
should have been made to set it up as a third republic. Here again the blame
belongs to the Hindu and Muslim leaders and to religious hatred.
<e creation of Pakistan was a disappointment to Nehru; probably a
mortifying disappointment as it cut against his conviction that the state
must always be secular, and therefore against his sense of the rational. But
his own record in the affair was one of exasperation rather than cold
statesmanship, and of a hurry to get independence. He certainly did not
agree with those, reportedly Gandhi among them at the end, who thought
that it would have been better to delay independence for a generation or
two rather than to pay the price of partition. About Muslims he was always
ambivalent—insisting on protecting them and encouraging them on the
ground that they were Indians but at the same time irritated, often angered,
with them because they took their religion, which he little valued, so
seriously.
Confronted with the existence of Pakistan as a fact, however, Nehru did
try his best to coexist with it—to live and let live. Unluckily, after the death
of Liaqat Ali Khan68 he had to deal with heads of state and heads of
government in Pakistan, such as Nazimuddin,69 Ghulam Mohamed,70 and
the two Mohamed Alis,71 most of whom were incomparably inferior to him
in intellect or in integrity and all of whom were incomparably inferior to
him in political standing inside their own country. It was not unreasonable
that he should be circumspect or distrustful. Ayub72 was another matter;
but Ayub did not arrive until the end of 1958.
On the issues dividing India and Pakistan, with one exception only,
Nehru always insisted, often against the advice or wishes of his ministers or
of his senior officials, on the generous view and on giving Pakistan the
beneAt of the doubt. <is was so in the case of the Anancial disputes, in the
canal waters affair, in frontier readjustments, and in movement of persons.
In India itself he always made it clear that he was the unCinching protector
of the Muslim minority; by then a rather frightened demoralised minority.
<us the Muslims were allowed to retain customs which Nehru himself
regarded as barbarous, such as polygamy, and which were made illegal for
Hindus. He also gave place and promotion to more than one Muslim who
was inferior to Hindu candidates just because he was a Muslim. He refused
to exchange missions with Israel because he wanted the goodwill of the
Arab countries, which are Muslim.
<e one exception was Kashmir.
Kashmir, like other such cases, Schleswig-Holstein or Trieste or Danzig,
attained an emotional and political status altogether out of proportion to its
intrinsic importance. <e emotionally political is always very difficult to deal
with rationally. <e millions of words uttered on Kashmir by both sides
inCamed public opinion and produced rigidities and quasi-commitments
which made it almost impossible to negotiate. <e Security Council had
held no less than 124 meetings on Kashmir up to April 1964. <e millions
of words also befogged the truth. <us the weaknesses on Pakistan’s side
were sometimes overlooked. <us, too, little men and big scoundrels were
given an importance and a respectability they could not have dreamed of
otherwise.
Without going into details it is enough to say here that after Aghting
broke out in Kashmir Nehru, in effect, undertook to have ‘a fair and
impartial plebiscite’73 and to abide by its results. <at is the Arst plain truth.
<e Indian delegate told the Security Council in 1948—I happened to be
there at the time—that the accession to India was not unalterable and that
after the emergency Kashmir would be free to ratify the accession to India,
or to accede to Pakistan, or to become independent.* <e second plain truth
is that after making that promise India refused to hold the plebiscite.
Splitting straws and trailing red herrings, such as about aggression—the
Indian claim being that Pakistan had sent the Pathan marauders into
Kashmir—or about the validity of the instrument of accession signed by the
fugitive maharaja, or about the validity of its conArmation by the packed
Kashmir Assembly, and building up a huge sandhill of legalism, has been on
a scale, and with a subtlety, familiar to those who know the workings of
lawyers and the courts in India and Pakistan. <e detached student,
however, can And little escape from the presumption that Nehru
circumvented the plebiscite because, in the Valley at least—and it is the
Valley which is wanted—it would have gone against India.
Why did he persist in this circumvention?
<e Kashmir affair is one of the mysteries in Nehru’s political life. It
remains a mystery even when we allow that the West exaggerated Pakistan’s
innocence or Pakistan’s Westernism; Pakistan, as we have noted, joined
SEATO and CENTO as an insurance policy against Are from India. By
1963, when India, under the stress of her fears of China, and of Anglo-
American pressures, was offering concessions unimaginable a little earlier,
Pakistan refused to compromise. <e West on more than one occasion
increased the tension between the two countries by well-meaning but illformed
efforts to mediate instead of letting the two countries feel their own
way to a solution. But why, in the Arst instance, did Nehru promise a
plebiscite? Was it because he thought at the time that he could win it? If so
he made a big mistake in not holding the plebiscite at once. And why did
he take the issue to the United Nations? And, not long after promising a
plebiscite and taking the issue to the United Nations, why did he do so
much, and go so far, to get out of the plebiscite? Had he come to believe
that he could not win it? Had he some personal infatuation for Kashmir?
His family was Kashmiri Brahmin by origin but they left Kashmir seven
generations ago. Or was his motivation political?
If the motivation was political what exactly were the considerations?
Foreigners in Delhi in my time used to be told by officials and ministers
what delegates were told at the UN, namely, that Nehru and India must
insist on keeping Kashmir because Kashmir, the whole of Kashmir, had
legally acceded to India and its accession was irrevocable, so that there was
thus no need and no case for a plebiscite; indeed, it was added, the portion
of Kashmir occupied by Pakistan was held by aggression and that portion
should also rightly be under India. Officials and ministers would then go on
to say that India must have this Muslim community in order to show both
Indians and the world that India was really a secular state, unlike Pakistan
which was a theocratic state. Further, if India let Kashmir go to Pakistan
there would be a terrible Hindu uprising against the Muslims inside India,
for instance in UP and Bihar, and another terrible carnage like that of 1947.
Few found this official Indian line convincing. Nor, when foreign observers
were assured that India was ready to make concessions to Pakistan, could
they get more than vague generalities. And since 1954 most foreign
observers, not to put too Ane a point on it or to go into details, were curious
about Krishna Menon’s part in official policy.*
<ough wavering about Kashmir for a month or so after the Chinese
attack in October–November 1962, Nehru soon became adamant again.
And, in fairness to him, it must be admitted that Indian public opinion,
once it recovered from the shock of the Chinese attack, as expressed in
Parliament or the Congress Party or the press, was by then no less adamant
than Nehru, and much less restrained. How easy it was to inCame Indian
public opinion (by which is meant, as always, the politically minded groups
—a fraction of the total Indian population—and which had always been
kept ignorant by the Indian press as to how the UN or the world at large
felt about India’s case in Kashmir) was shown in the excited reaction to the
request made by Britain in the Security Council when Pakistan once more,
in January 1964, brought to it the Kashmir question. <e British delegate
was unable to accept the Indian plea that no dispute existed and that
therefore there was nothing to negotiate; he requested that both parties
hold constructive and sincere talks. <is was denounced in India as a
betrayal by Britain and there was the familiar clamour for leaving the
Commonwealth. Krishna Menon brightened his armour, somewhat
tarnished since his fall a year or so earlier, by denouncing, with much
applause in Parliament, ‘the temerity of Britain’ in asking India to negotiate
with Pakistan ‘after Britain had misruled India for 150 years’. Britain, he
went on, was trying to get the empire back by the side-door.* Chou En-lai’s
choosing to visit Pakistan in that February (1964), and while there to
express China’s support for Pakistan’s case for a plebiscite in Kashmir, did
nothing to cool the excitement. Pakistan had been Cirting with China for
some time in a way which could only irritate when it did not alarm Indians.
As usual in India, however, one could count on some cool and objective
heads.** But the excitement was enough to ensure the defeat of the
proposals put up to India at this time by the United States for an
independent Kashmir guaranteed jointly by India and Pakistan under the
UN. <ese proposals were in fact close to what Sheikh Abdullah, at that
time prime minister of Kashmir, cautiously but quite unmistakably
adumbrated to me twelve years earlier in 1952 when I met him in Kashmir.
India’s reaction to the American proposals was, once more, that Kashmir is
an integral part of India—rather as Portugal had said that Goa was an
integral part of Portugal—that the union is irrevocable and so there is
nothing to discuss.
After the fever of nationalism fomented by the Sino-India border
dispute Nehru would have seen the acutest political difficulties in changing
his old stand on the plebiscite, or to make signiAcant concessions to
Pakistan. Yet after the massacres in Bihar and Orissa74 in 1964 he came to
believe that the change must be made; that communal feeling was rising so
dangerously that it risked war with Pakistan as well as massacres inside
India on a scale which might end the secular state. So he had Sheikh
Abdullah released in April,75 after eleven years of jail. <is was a very
courageous step.
According to one of the members of the Arst UN Commission sent out
to Kashmir (1949–51), Nehru was adamant already by 1950. <is
Commission consisted of Ave members,* and one of the members happened
thirteen years later to be a fellow ambassador of mine in a certain European
capital and used to talk about his experiences on the Commission. He said
that the Commission had come to the conclusion privately that the
plebiscite ought to be held; that a plebiscite would result in a majority for
Pakistan; and that Nehru, knowing this, was determined to get out of a
plebiscite. He recounted how he and two other members had a meeting
with Nehru in Delhi and, on a personal basis, made the suggestion that the
only solution was to hold the plebiscite. <is apparently provoked Nehru
into one of his tempers. <e outburst impressed my informant deeply. ‘We
saw all at once,’ he said, ‘that inside this Ane man was a gorilla.’ Nehru was
no gorilla; but for years he always bared his fangs at the mention of a
plebiscite or of any real UN intervention in Kashmir.
<e damage done by Kashmir to Nehru’s enviable moral prestige
throughout the world was great. His prestige in Pakistan itself, which was
second only to his prestige in India, was also thereby sullied and largely
squandered. For Kashmir he threw away the one chance since Partition,
presented to him by Ayub, of moving towards reasonable relations with
Pakistan through an able and honourable ruler of Pakistan. And when
Nehru was forced to make the offers he did in 1963 Ayub was no longer
strong enough inside Pakistan to accept them, though they would have been
a sensation Ave years earlier. Nehru lost a big chance when he visited Ayub
in Pakistan in 1962; just as Ayub has lost a big chance by failing to attend
Nehru’s funeral. <e long years of Nehru’s rule thus left the Kashmir
question exactly where it was in 1947, even to returning Sheikh Abdullah,
that experienced and not unattractive but diffuse politician, to the scene.
But having said this we must be clear the Kashmir was not the basic
divider between India and Pakistan. It was the symbol of the basic division
between them: a testimony of the fear and the hate which had yet to be
exorcized. Will the historians, even when allowing for the extreme
difficulties of Nehru’s dilemma, conclude that he had become too static, too
legalistic, too weary in dealing with Pakistan? <ere was little or no growth
in his Pakistan policy over seventeen years until a few weeks before his
death. <ere was none of the dynamism which could have worked for at
least some confederal arrangement. Even the Pakistan proposals for a nowar
declaration had received little courtesy and no attention. Suggestions
for looking into common defence arrangements between the two countries
met with the same reception. A boldly imaginative stroke like offering to
see whether Bengal could be reunited occurred to no one, not even to
Nehru, in that world of fear and hate. Kashmir did most to keep alive the
fear and hate.
Is there any escape from the conclusion that the price paid by Nehru for
Kashmir was out of balance?
What value, strategic or economic, did Kashmir have for India? For years
India was pouring money into the coffers of a satellite government which
was as corrupt, as repressive, as inefficient, and as unreliable to India, as it
was unrespected by its subjects. Far from being a parliamentary democracy
it was a one-party regime and virtually a dictatorship. <e rule was as bad as
that of the bad princely governments which Nehru used to condemn so
passionately. Bakshi,76 though not without likeable traits, after supplanting,
some say betraying, his old master, Sheikh Abdullah, and keeping him in
jail for eleven years, turned his family of cab men and stable boys into
magnates. Pilfering and exploitation went so far that ministers interfered
with school and university examiners to see that their relatives or protégés
were given passes. <ere is no doubt that there were some ministers of
quality in Kashmir who preferred their country to be part of India; but the
indications, which could be proved or disproved only by a plebiscite, were
that they did not represent the majority.
How much Nehru distrusted, and perhaps feared, Pakistan was
illustrated by his violent outbursts against United States military aid to it in
1953–54, and by his attitude to Pakistan’s membership of SEATO and
CENTO. <e high commissioners sent by Pakistan to India would, with
one or two exceptions, not have predisposed him to different feelings. Such
was the mental climate that the emergence of China as an enemy did little
to soften or to reorientate his own feelings, or Indian feelings in general. So
Nehru’s lack of directness with Ayub in 1960–62; his pouring ridicule on
efforts and notions for an Indo-Pakistan military agreement; and his
acquiescing in Krishna Menon’s line that the real enemy was Pakistan. <is
line allowed Krishna Menon, from his world-wide coverage at the UN and
his bellicose speeches in India, to build up a picture of himself invaluable to
a man who was mostly unknown to the Indian public before then, but
damaging to Indo-Pakistan coexistence.
During the ten years I was watching India relations between India and
Pakistan got worse, not better, and by 1961 I was prepared for a war
between the two. It was only China’s rout of Indian troops at the end of
1962 which mitigated this risk. But it did not obliterate it. War could be
precipitated by Pakistan in some or other onrush of resentment over a
massacre of Muslims in India, for these have been happening every year; or
by an accident on the frontier, where the bulk of the armed forces of both
countries have been facing each other, and where shooting incidents have
been common; or by a nationalistic or a leftist group in India, for instance
the Jan Sangh on the one hand or some demagogic leftist group on the
other, seeking votes or popularity by operating on the familiar principle that
nationalism is the last refuge of the scoundrel. <e documentary Alm on
Kashmir brought out in 1961 by the government, apparently under the
direct supervision of a minister, and seen by millions of Indians in the
movie-houses, was not a reassuring precedent. For the essence of the
predicament, which is tragic and beyond any moralising on our part, or
denials by Indians themselves, is that for the average Hindu in north India
the enemy of the heart is the Muslim. <is is true to a surprising degree
even of normally balanced persons, even of sophisticated rationalists, and
not merely of the people. Nehru, who never got over his experiences with
Jinnah, but alarmed by the massacres in March 1964, saw that nothing less
than a drastic reversal was called for. He alone could hope to force through
the reversal. No one else had the authority to try to do it. He arranged to
meet Ayub in June. But it was too late. He was dead by May.
Relations with China
<e second subject of main concern in Nehru’s foreign policy was China.
India’s relations with Communist China seemed, until the end of 1959,
at least to the outside world, and to nearly all Indians, to be very friendly.
Pakistan and the European colonialists were the only enemies; China was
not often thought of but when it was it was only as a friend and sterling
Asian. When it was urged that a common defence arrangement for the
subcontinent should be made with Pakistan Nehru crushed the suggestion
with the sarcastic retort, ‘Defence against whom?’
Nehru had had amicable personal relations with Chiang Kai-shek,77 but
this did not prevent India from being among the Arst to recognise the
communist regime. Sardar Panikkar,78 that brilliant quicksilver Indian
intellectual, after being ambassador to the Kuomintang of China (KMT)
government stayed on as ambassador to the communist government. India
showed an equal speed in recognising China’s ‘liberation of the Tibet
Region of China’, as the Chinese styled the invasion and occupation of
Tibet in October 1950. When the Dalai Lama put out feelers in 1950 for
Ceeing to India the Indian government discouraged him. When in
November, a month after the Chinese invasion, the Dalai Lama appealed to
the UN against Chinese aggression, adding that Tibet did not recognise
China’s claim, that it had been exercising independence since 1914, and
that in any case China’s claims did not justify the use of force, India
obstructed the appeal and got consideration of it adjourned sine die. <e
British delegation supported India, apparently at the request of the Indian
government; and the United States announced that she too would accept
India’s plea. So the UN heard nothing more of Tibet until nine years later
when the Dalai Lama, having Ced to India, appealed to the UN once again.
It was being said in Delhi in 1952–53 that Nehru, in private and semiprivate,
justiAed the Chinese invasion of Tibet; but I did not hear him do
this.*
In 1952 and 1953 cultural delegations were exchanged between India
and China, and there were many speeches by Indian political leaders, and
many articles in the Indian press, on the theme that ‘for thousands of years’
there had been undisturbed peace and brotherhood between the two great
Asian friends and neighbours. It was implied, and sometimes said explicitly,
that only Europeans could be imperialists; Asians never. <is was a familiar
theme of one of Nehru’s kinsmen, a senior member of the Indian foreign
office. <e wife of the Indian ambassador in Peking claimed a little later to
be running enthusiastic classes in Hindi for the wives of highly placed
Chinese Communist dignitaries, including Mrs Chou En-lai; these
Chinese ladies so loved India that they wanted to learn ‘the national
language’. But the theme of India–China brotherhood was common not
only in the circle around Nehru but throughout India in these years,
including in the newspapers which were attacking Nehru most strongly in
1962–63 for his China policy.
In 1954 Chou En-lai came to India as a state guest and was accorded
receptions and banquets, at some of which I happened to be present. He
was given a warm welcome by the public. <e famous declaration of Panch
Shil,79 the Five Principles of Coexistence, sealed the visit. In 1955, largely
through the efforts of Nehru, Chou En-lai, with a sizeable entourage, came
to the Afro-Asian Conference80 at Bandung and, as I could see during that
memorable week, he had a similar success there. His intelligence and drive
were manifest; he had not a little charm; but whether his voice had the same
depreciatory effect or not on those who understood Chinese it came as a
shock to others to hear someone so good looking and with such deportment
speaking in so high-pitched a tenor—rather like the shock of hearing big
burly men like Chesterton81 or Belloc82 piping in their trebles. Bismarck
seems to have had a similar effect; and Chou En-lai might well have had
more of Bismarck about him than the voice.
India, step by step, renounced the hard-won special position in Tibet
which Britain had bequeathed to her, and she accepted Chinese suzerainty
in principle and Chinese sovereignty in fact. Nehru dismissed the notion of
Tibet as a buffer state—‘A buffer between whom?’—and described India’s
previous special position there as an outmoded relic of imperialism. India’s
renunciation was sealed in a series of Sino-Indian agreements, the most
important being the Agreement on Trade and Intercourse between the
Tibet Region of China and India signed in 1954. From 1952 onwards,
India gave up all her old rights. <us the Indian Mission at Lhasa was
reduced to a Consulate-General and the trade agencies, at Gyantse, Gartok,
and Yalung, were brought under it; and a Chinese Consulate-General was
opened at Bombay and trade agencies at Kalimpong (notorious as a spy
centre), New Delhi, and Calcutta (where China already had a Consulate-
General). India, moreover, agreed to withdraw her military escorts and to
hand over her rights and equipment for posts, telegraphs and telephones;
and the twelve Indian rest houses or compounds and the land she owned
were also handed over.
In the UN India pleaded year after year for seating Communist China.
In 1956 Chou En-lai was back in Delhi as a state guest. <e Dalai Lama
happened to be in India at the same time; he asked Nehru secretly if he
could stay on in India. Nehru advised him to go back. <e Dalai Lama
dragged on his stay so much that it was March 1957 by the time he got
back to Tibet.
Two years later, in March 1959, the Dalai Lama Ced to India as a
refugee. <is was a world sensation for the next three months or so.
<en followed in India, for the ensuing year, and with increasing heat, a
series of statements in Parliament, a series of press articles, and a series of
public meetings, which were new to Nehru’s India. I had returned to India
for a second term a few months before the Dalai Lama made his Cight; the
criticisms of Nehru voiced in Parliament and in the press from then
onwards were unthinkable to anyone who had seen Nehru dealing with
foreign affairs and his critics three years earlier. Much conAdence had
manifestly been lost in Nehru’s conduct of foreign policy; his monopoly was
cracked. By 1960 his monopoly was broken. He now had to explain, and to
defend, his foreign policy moves instead of just announcing them or, as at
times in the past, saying nothing about them.
In September 1959 the Arst of the White Papers on Sino-Indian
relations was published.* It covered the period 1954–59 and came as one
more sensation, revealing that India and China had been having border
disputes, unknown to the public, indeed unknown to all but a handful of
officials and political leaders, as far back as Ave years. <ree more White
Books followed, bringing the story up to the end of 1960. In 1961 this was
capped by the lengthy report, published as a White Book, of the discussions
on the boundary question carried out between the officials of the
Government of India and of China.**
<e result of these revelations was an upsurge of nationalism in India of a
bitter, at times of a frenzied, kind. It equalled the nationalism against
Britain at its most fervid a couple of decades earlier, and that against
Pakistan after Partition. In China, on the other hand, there was some, but
apparently less, or at least a less vocal, upsurge of nationalistic feeling
against India. <e exchanges between the two governments, however,
became rancorous; so much so that, possibly at the instance of the
Communist Party of India, the Chinese government early in 1960 made
conciliatory gestures. Chou En-lai offered to come to India to discuss the
border. He came in April 1960. It was rumoured, and it is probable, that he
offered to accept India’s claims to NEFA in return for a recognition of
China’s claims to Aksai Chin; for it was through Aksai Chin that the
Chinese had built the important strategic road linking Tibet and Sinkiang.
<ere were no results. In view of the political compulsions there scarcely
could have been any. Such was the nationalistic excitement in India that
Nehru could have negotiated a settlement with Chou En-lai only at the risk
of his own party unseating him. <e press clamoured that not an inch of
India’s sacred soil must be lost.
I will touch on some of the main points in the question of Sino-Indian
relations brieCy, only at enough length to show, in so far as is now known,
what Nehru did, why he did it, and what he was up against.
<e border between India and China is about 2,500 miles long, and runs
through wild, largely mountainous, largely unsettled, and largely
unproductive land. <e disputed areas can be divided into three sections, of
which only two have importance, namely, the north eastern border (the socalled
NEFA area), which involves the complexities of the McMahon
Line,83 and, second, the Ladakh (West Tibet) border, which, involves the
greater complexities of the MacDonald Line84 and much other vagueness.
India is more interested in the former; China is more interested in the
latter. A quid pro quo settlement would have been practicable, and sensible,
if Indian public opinion, or Chinese patience or goodwill, would have
allowed it.
Since the boundary dispute became important, and especially since the
Chinese attack of 1962, claims are commonly made in India that the
boundary—to quote from a recent Indian book—is ‘deAnitively settled by
history … determined by geography, conArmed by tradition and custom,
sanctiAed by treaties, and reinforced by continuous exercise, through the
centuries, of administrative jurisdiction’. <e truth is much more
amorphous. <ere has been little that has been deAnitive. And, whatever
the truth, it is hard to dig it out from the vast sandheap of legalistic and
propaganda verbiage which has been piled up on both sides. As the
boundary question is technical it will be enough for our purposes merely to
say that there is no such deAnitiveness as that claimed by the Indian author
cited, just because no one cared very much about the boundary, certainly
not until China became a neighbour of India through occupying Tibet.
Both sides, India and China, put up cases which were weaker in law, and in
history, than either allowed. It is not excluded that the Chinese believed
that Aksai Chin did not belong to India, though they, no less than India,
subsequently overstated their case. <is wild and virtually uninhabited land
had not been brought under Indian control. <e fact that the Chinese could
have built the Sinkiang–Tibet road through it without the Indians knowing
for some years is signiAcant. As for the NEFA Area, where India had a
stronger case than China, though whether or not a ‘deAnitive’ case can be
left to the experts, that area is peopled by Mongolian tribes who have little
or no affinities, in blood or languages or culture or past history, with the
Indians. Temperamentally they are unlike Indians. <e rebellion of the
Nagas is connected with this fact. In British times most of the area was left
unoccupied and unadministered; subsidies—a species of Danegeld—were
given to dissuade the Mongolian tribesmen from raiding into India proper;
and in Nehru’s time it was not until from 1954 that the Indians occupied
much of it, apparently in order to anticipate possible Chinese occupation.
<at troubles over the Indo-Tibetan border were to be expected, and
that it was not Axed incontrovertibly, was shown before the Chinese
communists took over. <us when the Indian government informed the
Dalai Lama’s government at Lhasa that India had become independent and
that Lhasa could count on relations being not less friendly than they were in
the days of the British raj, the Tibetan authorities replied, in effect, ‘<ank
you. <is is all very Ane; but what about the border?’ <e Lhasa authorities
then proceeded to enumerate, as points at issue, just about every point
which came up for dispute between India and China after 1955.* I have
been told by some officials concerned that Nehru himself from the early
1950s expected trouble over the border, and his policy was to play for time
and let sleeping dogs lie. But other officials have told me that he was
indifferent or complacent about the problem. Historians will certainly want
to look into Bajpai’s minute written at the time of the Chinese occupation,**
allegedly warning the government, and opposing Panikkar’s reasoning; and
into what Nehru’s reactions were. (<ey will also want to know Nehru’s real
thinking on the Korean War.) It was said in my day by some retired senior
officers, both from the external affairs ministry and from the general staff,
that when Nehru had been advised against losing Tibet as a buffer state, or
losing the privileged Indian position in Tibet, he refused to listen, and in
some cases was scornful of the advisers concerned and virtually reprimanded
them. Did he, as used to be said in high places in Delhi, refuse to discuss
with U Nu of Burma, or, later, Ayub of Pakistan or the king of Nepal, not
to mention the prime minister of Japan, relations with China in general or
the border question in particular when these dignitaries visited Delhi and
sought to discuss them?
It must be remembered, on the other hand, that at the time when the
Chinese invaded Tibet, in 1949–50, India was preoccupied with her
millions of refugees and with strained relations with Pakistan, including the
Kashmir affair. A war with China over Tibet, for instance, would at that
date have been impossible for India. <e external affairs ministry, too, was
small, amateurish, and overstretched, while the cabinet ministers were
mostly new to government itself, over and above their ignorance of foreign
and military affairs. <e Indian embassy in China, notably Panikkar,
appears to have recommended to Nehru to give in to Chinese claims
because the gratitude and goodwill of the Chinese communists thereby
resulting would provide the best guarantee for the Sino-Indian border. <e
Indian embassy also explained how Chinese plans for internal developments
would keep them busy for years and make expansionism both impracticable
as well as unwanted. Nehru certainly made this last point about Communist
China to various ambassadors and foreign visitors as well as to his party.
What the historians will want to know is not whether Nehru should have
fought a war with China in 1950 but what were the motivations of his
policy and his estimates of the India–China situation. <ese are not fully
known yet.
A great deal of material on the Sino-Indian border affair has already
been published. Exchanges between India and China, and government
speeches in the Indian Parliament and to the Indian public, run into
thousands of pages; and Indian newspaper comments at the time, and
Indian books since then, run into hundreds of thousands of words. But
some essential facts are still unrevealed. Indians in high places showed
themselves, not for the Arst time, to have a capacity for secretiveness which
is remarkable. Did any diplomat in Delhi in 1955–58, not to go back
further, guess at the state of Sino-Indian relations which was revealed in the
White Books?85 <e same secretiveness had been practised over Kashmir.
Was it due to orders from Nehru? Again and again serious diplomats
known to be well disposed to India tried to And out from the Indian
external affairs ministry what was happening on the border; they were
invariably put off with banalities.
Nehru’s fundamental approach to China seems to have been
compounded of beliefs that Asians would in this Asian century be brotherly,
especially the polite and now socially minded Chinese; that China would be
busy for years with her internal socialist revolution; and that the only
conceivable subject of dispute was Tibet, and Tibet had been liquidated
through India’s renouncing all rights and claims there. In the absence of
documented facts one can only guess, and my guess, for what it is worth, is
that until about 1959 Nehru did not see the border as a subject of much
importance to either country, let alone as a likely cause of bitter disputation.
<e Panch Shil declaration, proposed by the Chinese in the Arst instance,
had been approved in draft form in February–March 1954. Chou En-lai
visited India and signed the declaration in June of that year. In the
following month, July (it was revealed some years later), the Arst border
incident took place, at Bara Hoti. Nehru, however, attached, as far as one
can see, no signiAcance to it; he felt secure in the Panch Shil declaration.
For the same reason he continued to feel secure as the other border
incidents took place, in 1955, 1956, 1957, 1958, and perhaps into 1959.
When Chinese maps showing as Chinese territory what the Indians
regarded as theirs had come to the notice of the Indians and they pointed it
out, the Chinese would reply, in effect, ‘Don’t worry. <ese are old KMT
maps and we’re too busy now to bring out our own maps.’ It is probable that
by 1957 or 1958 Nehru would have felt uneasy at times over the border
incidents, but if so he could well have judged it wiser to keep the matter
from the public, and to avoid any excitement, against the day when the
whole border question could be taken up and settled sensibly. Perhaps he
had in mind a deal with the Chinese, such as Aksai Chin to China in return
for India’s incontrovertible title to NEFA. <is would have suited China
and it would have betrayed no real interest of India. As for the Panch Shil
declaration, this was a better move from the viewpoint of India’s interests
than Indian critics were allowing in the next decade. It was tantamount to a
no-war declaration.
It must be remembered that in these years, on the whole the most
satisfying and the most conAdent in his prime ministership, Nehru was
concentrating on internal Indian matters, like the plans, and on standing up
against much of the foreign policy associated with Dulles. He almost
certainly had more distrust for Dulles than he had for Chou En-lai.
Was China trying to trick India all along, as is now commonly thought?
Or were there genuine misunderstandings?
<ere are several puzzles still to be solved, as regards India’s as well as
regards China’s part.
Why did Nehru publish the White Books? <ey were bound to unleash
nationalist passion in India, probably to a degree which could deprive him
of any leeway for negotiating. Pique? Nationalist passion in himself ? Or
Calculation, for instance to exert pressure on China as well as to anticipate
criticisms of his border policy in India? Perhaps all three were part of the
motivation; but probably the biggest factor was that after the leak of
information about the road in Aksai Chin, and still more after the
exposures made in Parliament in 1959, the safest course was to make a clean
breast of it.
But why did India set up the forty new checkposts in the disputed area
in 1962? Could China accept this Forward Policy without reaction? <is
must surely have risked a military confrontation.
And if India was going to play this provocative game why did she still
have most of her armed forces facing Pakistan and not China? Further, if
the border dispute was serious should not India have tried to work out a
common border policy with India’s fellow-neighbours of China, notably
Nepal, Burma, and <ailand, if not Pakistan itself ?
What seems certain is that the Chinese had lost trust in the Government
of India and had become as convinced that they were being tricked by it as
the Indians had become convinced that they were being tricked by the
Chinese government.
It would throw some light on motivations if we knew whether the Dalai
Lama, when he escaped from Tibet in 1959, slipped through the Angers of
the Chinese to get into India, or whether the Chinese intentionally let him,
and perhaps in essence encouraged him, to go. One of the men best
informed on the subject, a former head of the Nepal Foreign Office,
expressed to me the latter view. <e ruler of one of the border states, a
protectorate of India, and also well informed, expressed to me the former
view, which also accords with the Dalai Lama’s account in his
autobiography.* <e Chinese, it seems, already knew of the Dalai Lama’s
wishes to Cy to India in 1950, and again in 1956. In 1954 they took him to
China. (It was on that occasion that the Indian secretary general of external
affairs on meeting the Dalai Lama at Peking and asking him politely,
through a Chinese interpreter, how he was doing, received the answer,
through the interpreter, equally politely, that he was doing well and was
‘most happy to be in the capital of the Motherland’.) Moreover, the Dalai
Lama had been inAltrating some treasure into Sikkim; which the Chinese
knew of or suspected. Did the Chinese decide in 1956 or thereabouts that
they would not succeed in getting the Dalai Lama to collaborate in, or to
refuse to oppose, their policies, and therefore fell back on the traditional
enemy of the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, using him until they were
ready to destroy him? For this reason, and for some others, they would have
had an advantage in getting the Dalai Lama out of Tibet and into India.
His going would be a sensation at the moment, but would be no more than
a nine-day wonder. <ey could assume that nothing concrete would come
out of his presence in India; in a few months, or years, he would be
forgotten. Whatever the background to the Dalai Lama’s Cight, the train
which accompanied the Dalai Lama to India consisted of about 80 mules,
and a retinue of 95 Tibetans. As this conspicuous group followed wellknown
paths it is possible, but it seems hardly probable, that the Chinese
were unaware; the less so as by that time they knew the geography of the
Tibetan border country well besides having a fairly efficient control of the
totalitarian kind. <e Chinese seem, too, to have had knowledge,
presumably by interception, of wireless telegraphy messages passing
between the Dalai Lama and India. As far as Sino-Indian relations are
concerned, the Dalai Lama’s Cight would in any case have sharpened
Chinese suspicions of India, which were already sharp by then.*
Virtually nothing is known about why the Chinese took this or that step
in Sino-Indian relations. Did Chou En-lai in 1954 think that he was
outwitting Nehru? Or did the two men fail in directness, or even in
communication, with each other? <ere are signs that the barrier of
language did exist, and that there was genuine misunderstanding on both
sides. <at the barrier continued to exist was suggested in the condolences
which Chou En-lai telegraphed to Nehru’s daughter in 1964. He then
described her father’s death as ‘unfortunate’. At all events, by 1956–57 the
Chinese were highly suspicious of India. By the time the Indian Forward
Policy86 was launched they were convinced of trickery and bad faith.
<ere is evidence that after his talks with Nehru in 1954 and in 1955,
increasingly in 1956, and again in 1960, Chou En-lai came to feel that he
had got little understanding with Nehru, and that Nehru was not straight.
Nehru’s manner and indirectness had over the years caused more than one
interlocutor to feel like that. Nehru, on the other hand, came to feel the
same about Chou En-lai. <ere is evidence in fact for an oddly personal
factor on the side of both men, difficult though this might be to credit in a
world of power politics. According to a foreign minister of a certain Asian
country, Chou En-lai, speaking about the Sino-Indian boundary dispute,
told him that Nehru was impossible to negotiate with, being both unreliable
and impenetrable. <is is not the only suggestion that a personal
disenchantment grew up, and developed into personal dislike, between the
two prime ministers. In 1963 I found, in the course of a talk with Nehru
when I returned to Delhi on a visit, for all his guardedness, an unusual
personal note in his remarks. He was puzzled over China because the points
at issue—this or that piece of land—were not important in themselves; but,
still more, he was disappointed and aggrieved. He spoke of the strain of
arrogance in the Chinese character, and about the stage through which the
communist revolution there was going, and he wondered about their deeper
purposes. In talks with India they had been both rigid and calculating.
From other sources one heard in 1963 that Nehru had become rigid himself
and did not want to negotiate though he must have known that Aksai Chin
was beyond recovery. A member of Nehru’s family circle made it still more
personal: Chou En-lai from Bandung onwards had shown himself jealous of
Nehru, and the jealousy increased because of India’s getting aid from Russia
which China coveted as hers of right.
<e important point about the Sino-Indian border dispute is not what
areas belong to India or China but that China, at the risk of making
enemies of a neighbouring state numbering 500 million, hitherto well
disposed to her, and speaking up repeatedly for her full acceptance in the
comity of nations, should go to the lengths of treating India as an enemy.
Was any real interest of China involved which justiAed so high a cost? Did
it not matter if India should be provoked into giving up non-alignment and
into making an alliance with the West? Did it not matter that the
communist movement in India should have the ground cut from under its
feet? Did it not matter that the Panch Shil declaration should be seen as a
mere piece of paper?
<e explanations favoured in the West, or in India, at the time need not
be examined here. <ere were many, and some seem oversophisticated.
As for the fundamental factors in the relations between China and India,
China, under population pressure, or under fear of attacks from enemy
bases in weak neighbouring states, could conceivably spill over into the rice
bowl of South-East Asia, but what motive could she have for coming down
into poverty-stricken overpopulated India? Nehru was surely right in
thinking that China and India can live and let live; and surely he was not
surprising in feeling that his goodwill had been recompensed with guile and
brutality. But China is bound to be more powerful than India; and the two
peoples, moreover, are antithetical in temperament. <e theme song in
1950–58 of three thousand years of unbroken peace between the two Asian
brothers had been a manifestation of Indian nationalism in its racial or anti-
European form as well as nonsense.
Anti-colonialism
A third speciAc concern of Nehru’s foreign policy was anti-colonialism.
<is cannot be understood without account being taken of the deeply
formative effect of his long years as a Aghter against the British empire, and
of feelings born of his resentments of European domination. His
suspiciousness about European policies got near at times to being racialist;
though it must be admitted that there were at times reason for his
suspiciousness.
Nehru had scarcely become head of the Congress–Muslim coalition
government in 1946, which, as we have seen, was formed before the
Muslim League broke away in the following year to set up Pakistan, and he
therefore had more than enough to occupy him with in India, when he took
in hand the calling of the Asian Relations Conference. It met in March–
April 1947, while the rumblings of hatred between Hindu and Muslim
were already sounding ominously. He addressed it enthusiastically on Asiaism.
<is looked to some like anti-Europe-ism but was nothing much more
than anti-European-colonialism. A few weeks later the die was cast for the
division of the Indian subcontinent into India and Pakistan; and a few
months later the great Hindu–Muslim massacres began.
In January 1949, not many months after the massacres, though sporadic
killings were still taking place, Nehru called a Second Asian Relations
Conference in New Delhi, this time as a move against the Dutch in
Indonesia. Amongst the 19 powers invited were Australia and New
Zealand. Australia, then under a Labour government, attended but China,
Nepal, New Zealand and <ailand sent only observers, while Turkey
declined the invitation. Australia and New Zealand were the only non-
Asian countries invited. Nehru had already decided that anything like a
line-up of ‘coloured’ peoples would be deplorable and could be disastrous. It
was for the same reason that he put out feelers in 1954 for inviting Australia
to the Bandung Afro-Asian Conference of 1955; a signiAcant gesture on his
part which has not been sufficiently noted.
Year after year the anti-colonial passion of India manifested itself in one
episode or over one place after another—South East Asia, Tunisia, Algeria,
Negro Africa, South Africa. At times there was good reason for Indian
passion, as what went on in Algeria for example was of a horrifying
bestiality; but at times it was ill-informed and unconstructive, and
occasionally unreasonable. India did all she could to break up the European
empires, with little thought as to what might follow their break-up, and
with little done to save Indians in Ceylon from treatment which was worse
than the treatment meted out to Africans in European colonies in Africa.
Not a few Africans, who to the astonishment of India disliked the Indians
in their midst sometimes more than they disliked the Europeans, soon
showed signs that they would mete out similar treatment to Indians as the
Ceylonese were meting out once they had got the independence which
Nehru was demanding for them. Nehru himself was often in high
indignation at some manifestation or other of what he saw as colonialism or
Europe-ism, but feelings ran even higher amongst the Indian intelligentsia,
which was anti-colonialist to a man.
<e driving force behind Indian, and more particularly Nehru’s, anticolonialism
was disapproval of foreign over-lordship—‘good government is
no substitute for self-government’. But there was also in it, as there had
been in the old anti-British nationalist movement in India, a strong
undercurrent of racial feeling born of sensitiveness about colour. <at is why
maharajas and Brahmins even more than the low castes hated colonialism,
or South Africa, or immigration laws excluding people on the basis of
colour. What caused particular resentment was the lumping of all non-
European peoples, and independently of cultures, into a single category.*
It is questionable whether the best interests of the colonial peoples
themselves were always served by the manner or the speed with which
independence came to them. In more than one case the new state consisted
of a congeries of tribes which India officially insisted on treating as a nation.
At Bandung in 1955 Nehru said, ‘I think there is nothing more terrible
than the inAnite tragedy of Africa in the past few hundred years.’ Such was
his emotion that he did feel that Europeans were largely responsible for the
fact that Africa was not ‘developed’—like France or Denmark. Most
politically minded Indians shared these feelings to the full. <ey also
concurred, as the politically minded majority in most countries concur, in
double standards—in insisting on one code of behaviour for India and
another for others, one as regards the Nagas in NEFA but another as
regards Africans in French Guinea.
<e affairs of the Congo and Indian reactions thereto provided a
characteristic example of India’s, and of Nehru’s, emotional involvement in
anti-colonialism. Only a few points need be mentioned here though the
Congo story is complex. After the breakdown of Belgian rule in 1960
Indian passions became quickly engaged. As a result, the bulk of the
military force Arst sent to the Congo to carry out UN policy, which
expressed the wishes of the majority of the Afro-Asian bloc in association
with the United States, was Indian. Indian troops and aircraft were sent to
the Congo at the personal request of Hammarskjold, the Secretary-General
of the UN.* At the same time he arranged personally with his own
Government, that of Sweden, to send a Swedish contingent. Various
African troops were brought in later. But Indian forces were the spearhead;
and they remained the decisive force for a long time. Some of the Indians
concerned in the enterprise saw it as a crusade.
In December 1961 India, dedicated to breaking the Katanga secession,87
tried to force the hands of the British government to send 24 half-ton
bombs from Britain for Indian planes to drop on Katanga. (<is was the
moment when the Goa attack was being worked out.) It was hoped that in
this way the ground lost in the unsuccessful effort to crush Tshombe’s
Katanga regime in September could be recovered. <is Indian initiative
came only two months or so after Hammarskjold’s plane had crashed,
which caused excitement and indignation in India. Some newspapers
described it as ‘a British murder’, and ‘a crime engineered by the British
Secret Service’. <e Indian Express, for instance, wrote, ‘Never have British
hands been so bloodstained …’ Nehru himself, who had recently taken part
in the memorial celebrations for Lumumba, made some dark hints.
<e UN forces did not pull out of the Congo until the summer of 1964.
By then the anarchy was similar to that in 1960–61; Tshombe had returned,
with American blessings this time; and the UN had spent over £150 million
on its intervention.
By colonialism most Indians meant both more and less than colonies.
Relatively few Indian anti-colonialists would be worried about their
country’s subjugation of the Mongolian peoples of Nagaland,** or about
Indonesia’s subjugation of Papuans. What most Indians had in mind about
colonialism was any superior place or advantage in the world for the
Europeans. It was largely social. Indians, sober and sane as they are on most
relations of life, can sometimes lose their balance on race relations as quickly
as they can on Muslims or Pakistan. It is the more confusing because it is
confused in their own minds. In private they have an infatuation with fair
complexions, and, conversely, a distaste for the African’s complexion.
African students in India have sensed this and have voiced their resentment
of what they regard as Indians’ race prejudices against Africans just as in
Communist China African students have sensed and protested against
Chinese race prejudices. Yet no African or Asian people become so
passionate about race relations as do Indians. <is fact stands though the
Indian authorities are now doing their best for African students, and
though all race, like all caste, discrimination is illegal in India.
<e fall of the European empires was ardently worked for by Nehru’s
India. Towards the end Indians lost some of their ardour, disenchanted by
the discriminatory treatment meted out to Indians in some of the new
African states, or by the warrings between Indians and Negroes in British
Guiana, and by the decline in the prestige and popularity of India itself
throughout Africa. In general, and increasingly in later years, Nehru’s own
part was moderating. What was humanist and universalist in him revolted
against racialism, including the vestiges of racialism remaining in himself.
He knew after the Nazi and other European behaviour that Africans and
Asians had nothing to teach Europeans in the way of atrocities; but he also
knew, and felt strongly, that what was bad was not just European racial
cruelties or prejudices but all racial cruelties and prejudices.<us at the
Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung in his closing speech, reacting against
Sukarno’s environment, and against the self-pity of some of the delegates,
he urged them to move from merely thinking about the faults of their
erstwhile masters on to reconstructing their countries; and he urged them to
remember that people who had been under colonial regimes had normally
fallen under them because of defects of their own. <is advice was not
popular at Bandung. Remembering racial fears amongst certain peoples of
European origin he went on:
We mean no ill to anybody. We send our greetings to Europe and
America. We send our greetings to Australia and New Zealand. And
indeed Australia and New Zealand are almost in our region. <ey
certainly do not belong to Europe, much less to America. <ey are
next to us and I should like Australia and New Zealand to come
nearer to Asia.
And reacting against Sukarno once more, this time at the Conference of
Non-Aligned Powers held in Belgrade in 1961, Nehru, with typical
courage, opposed the Indonesian president’s attempt to turn the conference
from a move against the atomic armaments race into merely one more
occasion for anti-colonialist slogans.
If Smuts and Nehru could have been thrown together and cut off from
everyone else in some mountain hut for a week or two they would have
astonished each other by discovering how much they had in common,
including their doubts.
<e Commonwealth
Nehru insisted on India’s remaining in the Commonwealth. It is true that
India got a good deal out of it while she was required to give little or
nothing in return. It is true, too, that the Arst country India turned on in
any mood of ill-temper was usually the United Kingdom, as the Suez
affair,88 the Congo,89 Hammarskjold’s death,90 African affairs in general,
the Common Market.91 Kashmir, or the British immigration restrictions,
bear witness. No claims or distortions could be too extravagant in these
attacks; and the refrain was often accompanied with a threat about leaving
the Commonwealth. It is true, again, that as regards relations with other
Commonwealth members, the country India regarded as her worst enemy,
Pakistan, was a fellow member, and the country she hated most next after
Pakistan, namely, South Africa, was until latterly another fellow member.
<e attitude of India to the Commonwealth in Nehru’s day was thus one
of wanting the best of both worlds—to be treated as part of England, and a
part of the West, and to be given aid and comfort from it, and yet to be free
to damn it when feeling so disposed. But it was also tempered with a strain
of goodwill, even of sentimentality, especially as regards England. Indians’
attitude to England has been a tangle of love–hate. Krishna Menon, as an
actue English diplomat once said, has been at once the worst enemy and the
best friend of Britain in India. <e Indian regard for Britain might be
eroded away as the generations trained by Englishmen die off, but the
British have been wise enough to be forebearing and, usually, silent under
irritable Indian press attacks, like those noted above. Indian ill-temper
rarely endures for long. In view of the historical connections—a large
proportion of British families have had some connection with it at some
time or other—England owes something to India.
An example of both the destructive and the constructive side of Nehru
was provided by the question of South Africa’s place in the Commonwealth.
He had something to do with South Africa’s leaving the Commonwealth.
South Africa is a hard case; but keeping her out of the Commonwealth had
not a little in common with keeping China out of the UN. Nehru, however,
was convinced that the Commonwealth could have no reality unless it was
multi-racial, and sincerely multi-racial. It was on that ground that he was
using his inCuence to keep the new African states in the Commonwealth.
Nehru, in short, had a good deal to do with making the Commonwealth
the multi-racial group it is today.
<e Cold War
Nehru’s attitudes to the West and to the East respectively came in for much
criticism in the West.
His power and his sense of achievement and fulAlment were at their
highest in the years 1952 to 1958. <ese were also the years during which
McCarthy Courished, symbolising the hysteria and conformism which
gripped many Americans; the years when Dulles dominated the foreign
policy of the United States and, as Nehru thought, the foreign policy of the
West as a whole. Nehru saw Dulles’ policy as misconceived and as
encouraging the arms race and thereby involving grave risk of war, and so
nothing less than the survival of humanity.
As late as 1956, Dulles, who distrusted Nehru as much as Nehru
distrusted him—as was not concealed when Dulles visited India in 1954—
said that ‘the conception of neutrality is obsolete, immoral, and shortsighted’.
For Dulles neutrality in all forms, including non-alignment, was a
refusal to choose between evil and good; that is to say, between communism
and anti-communism. Nehru, who did not much bother about some of
Dulles’ men describing him as a crypto-communist, felt that this was too
uncomplicated a deAnition of good and evil. Nor did he miss the irony that,
as regards the sanctity of the Free World and the Free Life proclaimed by
Dulles, he, damned by Dulles, was carrying India through a gargantuan
effort towards parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, freedom and
equality for all religions, and social and economic reforms, while among the
countries which Dulles praised and subsidised because they were ‘willing to
stand up and be counted’ as anti-communist were effete or persecuting
tyrannies, oligarchies and theocracies, sometimes corrupt as well as
retrograde. Dulles was as disinterested and as brave as Nehru himself, as
rock-like in character, and he had no difficulty in showing up the
discreditable part played by many communist intellectuals and communist
parties over the years, and the results of their doctrine that the ends justify
the means or that the interests of a certain foreign power always take
precedence. But he never changed the conviction of most educated Indians
that foreign policy, including American foreign policy, dealt mostly, and
inevitably, if regrettably, with the world as it is, which is to say with power.
It dealt with the interests and the security of States rather than with
morality. Still less were most educated Indians convinced that Americantype
capitalism was the only moral or, in every case, the most utilitarian,
way to run an economic system.
Some of the conditioning factors in Nehru’s outlook have already been
touched on. <us all along he refused to see the communist states as a
monolith. He was early aware of the frictions and rivalries among them. He
was aware, too, already in the early 1950s, on the one hand of developments
inside Russia, which would mean a richer and different Russia from the
war-wrecked Russia of Stalin, and, on the other hand, of certain basic
similarities and affinities between Russians and Americans. I recall his
talking on these matters with great force, as also on relations between
Russia and China, as far back as 1954. For some years before others sensed
the position, Nehru was convinced of tensions between China and Russia,
and that the tensions grow. Later he came to see in Russia a counterpoise to
China. Perhaps he felt that in the long run China would inevitably be more
powerful than Russia.
On the other hand Dulles was correct in feeling that Nehru’s neutralism
was not always strictly neutral between East and West; that Nehru was apt
to show an indulgence towards the communist states which he did not show
towards the United States. <e socialist in Nehru, and the enthusiast for the
kind of planning and constructiveness and hopefulness which he credited to
Russia ever since his visit there in 1927, did predispose him that way. His
obituary speech on Stalin delivered in the Indian Parliament in 1953 carried
the praise rather further than these obituary occasions require and so
conArmed some Americans in their worst fears about Nehru. <e rein he
gave to Krishna Menon in certain Aelds of foreign relations reinforced their
fears. Year after year he sent him to the UN where he became a byword for
a certain line of action as well as for occasional eccentric exhibitionism; in
an environment which stimulated exhibitionism to a peculiar degree, over
and beyond the fact that men in public gatherings tend to vanity and a
lower level of behaviour than in private life. It is true, too, that Nehru’s
indignant outburst on the Suez affair was not matched by any outburst on
Russia’s suppression of the Hungary uprising; though, from the books
coming out on the Suez affair, it is not manifest why it should have been.
Over the years Nehru’s foreign policy was not pro-communist nor pro-East.
It was punctilious about non-alignment, and for the rest it exerted itself on
the side of good sense and peace. Nehru undoubtedly had a deep abiding
uneasiness about America’s Atness for her primacy in the world but his
opposition to American talk of military intervention in South East Asia in
1954 after Dien Bien Phu,92 or to the activities of the CIA, or to the threats
of brinkmanship and massive retaliation voiced by American admirals and
generals before President Kennedy restored normal service discipline, was
approved of by many people in the West, and indeed by some people in the
United States. Nor did Nehru’s conviction that some kind of neutralisation
was the least dangerous policy for Laos93 in particular and for South East
Asia in general have anything to do with the pro-East prejudices which
were alleged against him. Nehru found the communist’s only-one-way
absolutist account of life, and grounds for policy, as unacceptable as Dulles’
categories of good and evil. Both were far too simple for him.
To sum up, Nehru’s attitude to the Cold War between West and East
was based not on any communist sympathies but on a concern to safeguard
peace in the world, qualiAed by a concern to safeguard India’s interests. He
did contribute to peace, notably in Korea.94 <ere is reason to believe that
he refused certain Russian overtures about the Congo. Whether this nonalignment
was a luxury which India could permit herself only because she
could always come in under the American umbrella in case of need is a
question which can be answered only when we have more documentary and
other knowledge than we have now. <e answer will depend on whether
Soviet Russia really had expansionist and revolutionary designs, or could be
reasonably assumed from the information then available to Dulles and other
leaders in the West to have any, and really was a threat to the peace,
especially after Stalin’s death.
<e question remains, however, whether, given the potentiality and the
mood of Communist China, India might now have a case for giving up
Nehru’s policy and of aligning itself with the West. Rajagopalachari, for
instance, has argued that, given the facts of the world as they are, there is no
sense in India’s bankrupting itself by trying to go it alone, and that India’s
independence sought through second-class armaments, purchased on credit,
is liable to be apparent not real independence. <e answer to this question
must depend on the degree to which China is a danger to India or to world
peace. In any case it would still seem to serve no interest of India to align
herself with the West at the cost of Russia’s enmity. Rajagopalachari meets
this point by looking forward to the day when Russia will also be aligned
with the West, indirectly if not directly. At all events Indians will probably
come to see what Nehru declined to admit, namely, that in the world of
power politics as it exists some countries, owing to their geographical or to
other circumstances, have good reason for entering into a defensive alliance.
Nehru was too absolutist in his condemnation of SEATO, NATO and
CENTO.
Other Foreign Policy Matters
Little need be said about the other subjects in foreign relations with which
Nehru was concerned. As regards the arms race, he was sincere in wanting
to stop it, but any role he could have played was defeated partly by his
failure to offer anything constructive and partly because, thanks largely to
Kashmir and Goa, his own bona Ades were suspect in some quarters. He
refused to allow India to have any part in the making of thermonuclear
weapons. <e pressure to make them is likely to grow signiAcantly now that
he has gone.
As regards the UN, he valued it as a potential peacemaker and as a step
towards the world-government which he believed inevitable in the long run
if mankind was not to destroy itself. But he valued it no less as an
institution which gave India, and other Afro-Asian or non-aligned nations,
almost powerless in the world from the military point of view, a forum
where their voice could not be ignored. <e UN gave a majority to the
Afro-Asian countries. <ey could pass resolutions which were treated as of a
quasi-legislative validity (for instance on the Congo), and which
continuously needled the developed countries into giving money for aid
programmes, while towards the huge costs of running this institution
(including its dozen specialised agencies) India and her Afro-Asian allies,
though calling so much of the tune, paid a mere triCe. It was the West, and
mainly half a dozen countries, which bore the Anancial burden as well as the
political burden of the UN. Why Nehru did not press for India’s being a
permanent member of the Security Council is not clear. India’s claim is
already nearly as strong as that of Britain or France. It will no doubt be
pressed in the future; and then a similar claim will come from Pakistan and
others.
As for aid, India under Nehru sought to get as much of it as she could
out of the West though for some time Nehru had been opposed to
accepting it, fearing its effects on non-alignment or independence. His
passion to push on with his plans, which could not survive without aid,
ended his opposition. India, like Indonesia, soon learnt that she need do
little in order to get the aid in huge volume, and that its Cow would be
neither diminished nor interrupted by policies of hers disliked by the West,
because the West had so great a fear of communism that it would spare no
effort which it reckoned on as keeping India away from communism. India
became conAdent that even Belgium and Holland, two countries she had
denounced unsparingly over colonialism, would in the end join the Aid
India Club; as in fact they did by 1963.
As regards the essential international problem, namely, how to replace
the law of the jungle with the rule of civilised law, Nehru, like many
Indians, was keenly aware of the need. In Indians in general there remains,
as has been noted earlier, in spite of so many signs and so much activity to
the contrary, not only an instinct for tolerance, for live and let live, but also
another heritage left by the Buddhists, a dislike of force or violence.
Gandhi’s doctrine of Soul Force was not an accident. Nehru himself, a
Brahmin, traditionally a caste which had nothing to do with arms, had
yearnings after paciAcism. So long as he lived those Indians who wanted to
embark on a programme of thermonuclear weapons would not have their
way. But Indians, like most of mankind, also want things the getting of
which means resorting to the law of the jungle. <eir nationalism, more
emotional than they usually allow, or we usually believe, predisposes them
to courses which would ordinarily end in violence. <eir tendency, too, to
hold at the same time mutually incompatible propositions (for instance
Nehru’s speeches on peace just before and just after the Goa affair)
undermined, inevitably if unjustly, conAdence in their sincerity.
Nehru spoke much and often about the need for world peace, sometimes
censoriously. Men of goodwill in all countries listened to him for years with
respect and with hope. <ey knew he had negligible military power but they
saw him as a representative of light, of moral authority, of Soul Force. Some
of the more naif saw him through the roseate hues of notions about ‘the
spirituality of India’—notions well advertised by swamis, commercially or
otherwise, and by a few Indian diplomats. <at was not Nehru’s fault. He
did render practical service to the cause of peace. <us he played a personal
mediatory role between Russia and the West; a valuable service in Dulles’
days and prior to the time Macmillan broke the ice by his visit to Moscow;
he kept world attention on the thermonuclear armaments race; he was a
steadying inCuence in the Afro-Asian group at a time when it much needed
steadying; he was a steadying inCuence on nationalist passion inside India;
and, in particular, he insisted on a level of restraint and patience in dealing
with small neighbours often acting unjustly to India, such as Burma,
Ceylon, and Nepal, which is rare in foreign relations. Where he was mainly
at fault was that in passing judgement on the international situation he
often failed to offer any concrete plan for achieving world peace; and that
was so because he had in fact mastered no basic intellectual analysis of this
very difficult problem, and had no solution. Who has? Furthermore, as
regards certain interests of India Nehru’s policy, whether unavoidably or
otherwise, was founded on force; nor was it invariably innocent of double
talk.
Nehru’s unresting concern with international relations, damned by
certain Indians as much as by Dulles, came not from eccentricity or vanity
or any desire to shine on the world stage. It came from his interest in the
total human situation, and from the fact that he had vision enough to
distinguish the bigger things from the smaller things—for instance to see
that if a thermonuclear or poison gas or bacterial war could befall us all
other human endeavour is futile. <is truth is not altered by any failure in
himself to resolve the conCict between national interests and the
international order. <e dilemma faced by men of goodwill who acquire
power and responsibility is remorseless. Speaking of Nehru’s imprisonment
of Sheikh Abdullah, Toynbee has said, ‘It is more blessed to be imprisoned
for the sake of one’s ideals than to imprison other people, incongruously, in
the name of the same ideals. Nehru lived to have both experiences.’* <is
was the nemesis of his taking on the responsibility of governing India.
What passed between Nehru and Sheikh Abdullah during their talks a few
days before Nehru died, and just after the Sheikh had been released from
his eleven years in jail, is not yet known. It is a theme for great drama; and,
if men will ever recover the art of poetry again, a theme for great verse. If
only we could know what passed in Nehru’s mind, that strong yet emotional
mind, during those hours!
Anticlimax
Nehru began his Afteenth year as prime minister with the Goa affair, in
November and December 1961. He began his sixteenth year with the
Chinese rout of Indian forces and the Chinese occupation of some
thousands of square miles of territory hitherto occupied by India, in
October and November 1962. Both events shook India’s standing in the
world; the Chinese attack shook Nehru’s standing in India as well. His long
prime ministership was thus brought to an anticlimax. By the time 1963
dawned there remained to him only a fraction of his former authority. His
old inner self-assurance had been undermined.
Goa
Towards midnight on Sunday, December 17, 1961, Indian forces invaded
Goa. <ree columns of infantry, led by parachutists and supported by tanks
and artillery, crossed the Indo-Portuguese border at three points, while the
Indian Air Force bombed the one Portuguese airport and the Indian Navy,
marshalled in strength along the Goa coast, shelled the only Portuguese
craft in Goa, an old-fashioned frigate. Armed services attaches in the
various embassies in Delhi later, after study, believed that there was no
cause for either air or naval bombarding except to allow the air force and the
navy to share in the glory of the conquest. At the same time as the attack on
Goa was launched the two other, and much less important, Portuguese
territories, Damao and Diu, were occupied.
On the following day, Monday, December 18, the Security Council of
the United Nations was seized of a Portuguese complaint of Indian
aggression. Soviet Russia vetoed discussion of the subject.
Nehru had been back only a few weeks from a peace tour which had
taken him to Belgrade, Moscow, Washington, Mexico and the UN. At the
UN he had proposed a year devoted to peaceful cooperation.
Goa, with an area of about 1,500 square miles, and lying about 200 miles
south of Bombay, had been under Portuguese sovereignty for four and a half
centuries. Nearly half the population of Goa were Catholics of long
standing; a large proportion of the non-Catholics were of immigrant stock
from India. <e standard of living was higher, and taxes were lower, than in
India; for which reason Indians liked to migrate there. Life was easygoing
and relaxed in the Portuguese way; there was no self-government of the
British kind but government was paternalistic as well as more efficient than
in India, and, except for a handful of malcontents, most of whom had
migrated to Bombay, and, in spite of Indian money or other support given
to the agitators among this handful of malcontents, there was no
appreciable discontent and no appreciable demand for absorption into
India. <e Portuguese governor-general was respected, and by all accounts
deserved to be. Portugal’s retention of Goa might have been an
anachronism but it was not resented by most Goans. India’s claim to Goa
was never stronger than that she had a right to the whole peninsula (saving
Pakistan); by which logic Spain has a right to Portugal or the Irish Republic
has a right to Ulster. <is is simply the claim of I want it.
<e Indians had worked for a coup d’état in 1954; but their plans had
failed. Indian propaganda about an uprising inside Goa for joining India
had been exposed at the time. <e reports of the Times correspondent
exemplify the position. As is usual in Portuguese colonies, race and personal
relations were good. Nehru appears to have had little or no part in the 1954
affair, but he did break off diplomatic relations with Portugal. Since 1954
considerable effort had been made from time to time to whip up a pro-India
movement. Among the people in Goa the movement met with indifference
when not with hostility; just as throughout India as a whole there was no
interest in Goa. <e only success was in Bombay amongst the Goanese
migrants, mostly professional people; and it was difficult to know how
sincere their agitation was. One of these people, a medical man, for
instance, gained Nehru’s attention in the 1950s and got a good medical
appointment, though he was not well regarded by leaders of the medical
profession in Delhi. Agitating inside India and amongst Indians against
Portugal gave such Goanese a certain standing which they would not
otherwise have had; an escape from anonymity. Now that Goa has been
taken over they have relapsed into a few hundred or thousand amongst 500
million Indians and count for nothing.
In the last week of November 1961 the Indian press, on information
supplied by government, reported an incident of what was officially
described in headlines as ‘Portuguese Aring on an Indian passenger ship’. (It
later turned out, though this was reported in only a few papers, that ‘the
passenger ship’ was a ‘country craft’ sailing-boat of yawl size, and that it was
in Portuguese territorial waters apparently Couting warning signals.) <is
was followed by what was played up, on government prodding, as ‘another
Portuguese Aring incident’, this time an Indian Ashing boat. <is incident
was blown up enough to awaken the ever-acute nationalistic sensibilities in
India. It was not revealed that the boat was poaching in Portuguese waters.
Some missions at Delhi believed (but as far as I know produced no evidence
for their belief ) that the boat had been sent there by the Indian authorities
as an agent provocateur. Next came a series of reports, blown up more and
more, about what were described, again in headlines, as ‘Portuguese attacks
on Indian villages’. <e information was highly coloured, but also highly
vague; as were the accompanying allegations about ‘Portuguese troops
massed on the Indian border’. Some of the Indian newspapers, presumably
not by accident, published articles on the Inquisition in the Goa of the
sixteenth–seventeenth centuries at the same time as they published the
reports alleging Portuguese aggression. By the beginning of December
troop movements from all over India towards the Portuguese territories,
more particularly towards Goa, were on such a scale that they could not be
concealed. Passenger and ordinary freight services were cancelled by the
railways for some days on end. Around Delhi itself we could see the trains
moving troops and material to the south, day after day.
Nehru made many statements from late November. As was not unknown
with him, the statements could mean several things; the blankets of
verbiage wrapped up his meanings so thickly that they were hard to unravel.
But two points were repeated. First, there is a crisis. <e crisis was indicated
only vaguely. Second, and more boldly, if Portugal does not renounce
sovereignty over Goa in favour of India, and do so forthwith, there can be
no peace. <e time for negotiation has passed.
Foreign governments, receiving reports from their missions in Delhi,
began to sense that something untoward might be afoot. Diplomatic efforts
were therefore initiated from several quarters to forestall violence. Several
Latin American governments, notably Brazil, offered help and suggested
mediatory courses. <e British government also offered its services, asked
Nehru to give an assurance that India would not resort to force (which he
refused), and pressed for a diplomatic solution. U <ant on behalf of the
UN, like the United States, also asked India not to resort to force, but with
more perfunctoriness than the British or the Latin Americans. U <ant did
offer to send UN observers to the Indo-Portuguese border; Nehru rejected
the offer.
Nehru announced to the Indian public, with more frequency and in
increasingly bellicose tones, that India’s patience was coming to an end.
With diplomats, however, he was indirect. Although shifting his ground
with them more than once, certain points did recur. <ese were:
(a) Goa was a threat to India’s security. <ere was ‘a tremendous military
build-up’ there; it had become ‘an armed camp’; ‘aggressive manoeuvres’
were going on which India could not ignore. (After, but, so far as I could
And out, not before, the Indian invasion, Nehru spoke darkly of ‘NATO
weapons’—which the Indian public took to mean nuclear weapons—in
Goa, and of a ‘tie-up with Pakistan which made the problem more urgent
than the border dispute with China’.)
(b) Inside Goa law and order had broken down because of a nationalist
uprising of the people against the Portuguese. <e ‘white Portuguese’—
another signiAcant phrase—after trying to crush the uprising with ‘a reign
of terror’, ‘mass imprisonment’, ‘torture atrocities’ and ‘massacres’, which
Nehru characterised as ‘gruesome’, were Ceeing the country to escape from
their overwrought subjects. At one stage the governor-general was
announced to have Ced; untruthfully. Further, at Belgaun, near the border,
there were said to be between 15,000 and 20,000 volunteers and ‘Goa
commandos’ waiting to rush in to relieve their martyred compatriots. <e
Indian Army could not hold back these volunteers much longer. When the
invasion was at last announced the Order of the Day to the Indian troops
said that they were going in to liberate the people in Goa and to restore law
and order, which ‘the colonialists can no longer maintain’. On the following
day, the 18th, heads of mission in Delhi were given a note on the invasion
in which it was stated, inter alia, that the Indian Army was taking over Goa
‘to end the holocaust and massacres’, as well as to end the threat to Indian
security.
(c) <e pressures on the Indian government to take over Goa were
‘irresistible’, ‘unbelievable’; all the parties in India, ambassadors and foreign
pressmen were told, wanted India to take over; if Nehru did not acquiesce
he would have to resign as prime minister.
(d) India had exhausted all her efforts for peaceful settlement and now
had no alternative than to use force. (Some months before that he had said
that India would never use force to solve the Goa problem.) India would
not negotiate except over matters to be settled after Portugal had handed
over Goa to India. But Portugal must quit, and at once.
Certain foreign newspapers of standing, like the New York Times, the
Baltimore Sun, the Daily Telegraph, and the Times, happened to have had
their correspondents, responsible and trained observers, in Goa at this time;
two of them there for a fortnight before the invasion as well as during it.
What struck them all were the lies—‘fantastic lies’ was the term used to me
by two of them—about the internal situation in Goa being poured out over
the Indian radio and in the Indian press prior to and during the invasion.
Some of the correspondents doubted if there were any volunteers at Belgaun
at all. One thought that there might have been a handful there, mostly
clerks and minor political types brought down from Bombay and dressed up
for the occasion, for photographic propaganda purposes. As for ‘the
tremendous military build-up’, a senior general concerned with the
operation told me months later, by which time volunteers and ‘the Goa
commandos’ had been forgotten (and were never heard of again), that it
would have been criminal on the part of the Portuguese authorities to have
resisted the Indian invasion as they had only about 2,500 troops; and they
were poorly trained and without proper equipment, and they had no armour
or artillery worth speaking of, no air support, and only one naval vessel, the
old-fashioned frigate already mentioned.
<e Times representative, some weeks after the invasion, and after
collecting and collating the facts, wrote a long objective article; but his
editor, in the interests of good Anglo-Indian relations, decided not to
publish it. <e plain facts were not agreeable.
For against the exiguous Portuguese forces the Indians sent in an
invading force estimated at between 30,000 and 50,000 troops, trained,
highly equipped, and with support weapons. Most of the Indian newspapers
did their best to glorify the invasion, including spreading misinformation
about the Portuguese, such as that they had carried out ‘a scorched earth
policy’. Indian journalists in fact were not allowed into Goa for nearly a
week after the invasion. <e truth became available only because some
foreign journalists happened to be there when the invasion took place.
Not that the Portuguese authorities were above criticism. <ere is little
or nothing to be charged against those on the spot but the government in
Portugual persisted right to the end in an unrealistic attitude, as well as in
the legalism about Goa being no colony but an integral part of Portugal,
years after warning had been given. Confronted with the claims of the
Indian government, and with the position in the UN, Portugal should have
offered to hold a plebiscite in Goa, under UN supervision if possible,
otherwise under any ad hoc international supervisory group, for or against
the status quo. It is doubtful if India would have won the plebiscite.
<e reaction in India to the Goa affair surprised most foreign diplomats.
Some it astounded, as did the whole affair. <ey had not expected, on the
one hand, such a conformist acceptance of what was so manifestly a put-up
job, or, on the other, such an outburst of nationalism of the crude tribal sort.
Very few Indians at any level protested against it. J.P. Narayan was one of
the leaders who did. Rajagopalachari, great and greatly courageous once
more, after so many great occasions, denounced it squarely for what it was.
<is was only a few weeks before the general elections; he knew that it
would cost votes to the party he was leading, but he did not hesitate.*
Various other people of importance, including at least two cabinet
ministers, deplored it, but only in private. Krishna Menon, not Gandhi, was
now the guide for policy. For whether, as was thought, Krishna Menon
conceived and launched this aggression or not it was surely in his spirit.
Prior to the invasion he, in his role of minister of defence, proclaimed to the
Indian forces that they were ‘going to help the people of Goa following on
the collapse of colonial administration due to the liberation movement of
the local people’.
After the aggression not a few speeches were made. Nehru spoke several
times. <en on December 28 he spoke for two hours. Evading the real
issues, he argued that the action was not against, but in conformity with,
UN principles; that it was virtually non-violent; and that Gandhi would
have justiAed it (a claim disputed by several of the few genuine Gandhians
left in Indian public life). <en came dark hints about the racial division of
the world; it was only the whites who had criticised India, and how terrible
this racial division could become (‘for the whites’—this was not added in
words but was clearly intended). On January 13 he made a speech at
Banares praising the army—he would have known nothing of the black
marketing or the assaults alleged on Goan women—for its ‘brilliant
manner’ in ‘restoring Goa to the Motherland’ and ‘ending Portuguese
colonialism’. Krishna Menon also spoke on several occasions but without
Nehur’s cat-like delicacy in leaping from one hot brick to another. Krishna
Menon just dropped the bricks. For instance, he ridiculed the idea that
there was anything in the affair contrary to the UN; India on the contrary
was carrying out the UN resolution on ending colonialism. Once Nehru,
commenting on a suggestion in the New York Times that India, in remorse
for her unilateral violence, should now return Goa to Portugal, said that if
any effort were made to get India out of Goa there would be thermonuclear
war (presumably launched by Russia, who was praised handsomely for
showing that she was a true friend to India because she had vetoed the
Portuguese complaint in the Security Council. <at Russia was also one of
the whites seems to have been overlooked).
<e Indian press throughout the Goa affair had disappointed most
foreign observers, especially those not long in India. Nehru’s part in it had
outraged them. More than one who hitherto had been admirers and lauders
of Nehru now turned on him and denounced him as a cynical imposter.
Nehru sensed his loss of status. When, three weeks or so after the invasion,
a head of government arrived at Delhi airport and the ambassadors were
there to take part in the usual welcoming ceremonies, Nehru, for the Arst
time in my experience, did not greet the assembled ambassadors and he
avoided looking at them. A member of his family at this time told me that
he was ‘crucifying himself over Goa’. Letters regretting what he had done
written to him by men whom he respected were said to have cut him to the
quick. When reproached by an old fellow-Gandhian of my acquaintance he
justiAed himself, with some sadness, and urged that his conscience was
‘absolutely clear’; but my Gandhian friend was convinced that his
conscience was not clear.
Why, how, and when, it was decided to take Goa are questions which
cannot yet be answered. On these questions the habitual secrecy of the
Indian ruling group remains unpierced. Few of those in the ruling group,
too, were in the know. <e secret was as restricted and as well kept as was
the secret of Eden’s Suez adventure Ave years earlier. At the time various
Indians in politics said that there had been no discussion in cabinet. <is
has since been denied, but it is likely enough that there was no real
discussion. <e part played by certain individuals, such as the police officer
Handoo,95 and General Kaul96 (who later retired from the army after an
unenviable performance during the Chinese attack a year later), would be of
interest. Probably the part played by Krishna Menon was crucial. Even the
factors leading to the aggression are not yet certain though among those
cited at one time or another the following probably counted:
1. <e elections. <ey were due to be held in the following month,
January. <e government had an interest in taking voters’ eyes off the Sino-
Indian border where incidents had been disturbing public opinion which
was inclined to be critical of Krishna Menon’s part in army and border
policy. Further, in Bombay itself, the only place where there was any
sustained interest in Goa, Krishna Menon was Aghting a key election
against Kripalani, a former president of the Congress Party and the only
man left in Parliament who could speak to Nehru with some semblance of
equality. Nehru regarded this election as of exceptional importance, as his
subsequent, and angry, campaigning there on behalf of Krishna Menon
showed.
2. Goa has the best deep-sea harbour in the Indian subcontinent.
3. Goa has great mineral wealth, especially iron ore.
4. If India was to strike she must strike now as efforts to provoke much
interest, let alone an uprising in Goa itself, had failed, while inside India
interest would not last long so that if there was to be action delay would
diminish its political value.
5. It would please the Afro-Asian bloc who would thus see that India is
no Uncle Tom.
No one could be surprised that Nehru or India had wanted to end
colonialism, or was sensitive about European rulers in Asia, or disliked
Salazar.97 But India had no legal right to Goa; and it is not easy to see
where, or how, she had any moral right to it. In any case she used force, she
used it unilaterally, and she used it after being given an opportunity for
negotiation and mediation. <is was aggression. And the aggression was
without provocation. Moreover, it was aggression on a virtually unarmed
neighbour. <is, too, was the India of Nehru where hundreds of thousands
of words had been uttered on peace and in condemning both force and
unilateral action, particularly when gone in for by the West.* Indeed not
long before the aggression Nehru had made an eloquent plea to the World
Council of Churches, then meeting in Delhi, against war. His plea made
such an impression that I recall a visiting clergyman saying to me after
Nehru’s address that Nehru was teaching them to be better Christians. At
the moment he made that speech the troop trains were already moving
relentlessly towards Goa. Finally, the aggression was preceded by a
campaign about Goa which was as impudent as anything Mussolini had
said about Albania, or Hitler about Sudetenland, before they gorged those
countries.
It was not for nothing that Nehru did not set foot in Goa until eighteen
months after the invasion. By then the prosperity of Portuguese times had
gone and the people of Goa, more particularly the Catholic and educated
half, were more resentful than ever. <e elections were not held until two
years after the invasion. Nehru’s party, Congress, then lost in every one of
the 28 seats they contested. <e United Goan Party, which wanted a
separate Goa state, won half the seats; illustrating the clear division between
the Catholic Portuguese-speaking Goans and the Hindus, illiterate low
castes predominating among the latter. Goa was still ruled directly from
Delhi.
Nehru’s biographers, if they care for the high moral reputation which he
had enjoyed for so long, and for its decline, will have to seek for the reasons
which led him to Goa, no less than for the reasons which led to his stand on
Kashmir. Until then Nehru remains charged with machiavellianism. We
who watched him for so long are sure that he was not as machiavellian as
this, and that he did not knowingly utter so much untruth. Nehru, in spite
of Goa, was no hypocrite and no imposter. We do not yet know what were
the compulsions he was under. But whatever the reasons, while he lost a
great deal for something as small as Kashmir he lost still more for
something still smaller, Goa. And whether, as is probable, he allowed
himself to be edged, bit by bit, and especially because he was ill at the time
as well as old and tired (he had to have teeth extracted because of a toxic
condition a few days after the aggression, and a few weeks later a serious
kidney disease was diagnosed), into a situation from which escape was very
difficult, he can be acquitted of hypocrisy. But he cannot be acquitted of a
failure.
<e Chinese Attack
<e second anticlimax of his prime ministership took place a year later, in
November 1962, when Chinese troops suddenly crossed the disputed border
and virtually destroyed the Indian troops opposing them—troops of that
Indian army which he had praised for their brilliant performance in Goa.
As a result Nehru was forced, within the space of a few weeks, to dismiss
Krishna Menon from the government; to witness an explosion of
nationalism inside India exceeding even that of 1959–60; and to undertake
to increase the armed forces to almost double and to give army leaders,
whom he had always distrusted, a standing which could make the army,
hitherto without political importance, a force no longer to be ignored in
Indian political life, and, Anally, to accept the principle of military aid from
the West, notably from the USA and Britain, which could jeopardise his
cherished policy of non-alignment. For a week or so towards the end of
1962 it looked as though he himself might be swept from office. <e
agitation against him was fomented to the utmost by those groups which
wanted to get rid of him because of his socialism and by those politicians
who had old personal scores to pay off, but most of it came from
disillusionment with Nehru’s foreign policy and from fear that China would
launch an invasion deep into India. Indians felt that they had been misled
by their leader, rather as the British felt about Baldwin in 1939–40.
Such was the mood that there were even attacks on his patriotism;
demands were made for giving up non-alignment; and some Indian jingoes,
including overweight MPs who were too unAt to waddle half a mile, cried
out for an Indian invasion of Tibet and for full-scale war with China.
For a while Nehru almost lost his sang froid. His own mood was even
more disillusioned and more bitter than that of the people; because he was
wounded by the Indian people as well as by the Chinese government. He
was completely taken aback by the Chinese proceeding to the lengths of
such a scale of attack, by the scale of the defeat of the Indian troops, and by
the scale of the reactions in Indian public opinion. He sent letters to
President Kennedy, Prime Minister Macmillan and to other leaders, written
under the impression that the Chinese might push right into India and not
merely into the semi no man’s land in NEFA; he appealed urgently for help.
<ere are claims, not wholly without evidence, that he asked the Americans
about, and apparently for, American air intervention or protection.
Two days after he sent his appeals the Chinese made their own ceaseAre
and offered to withdraw to the positions they had been occupying before
the attack. <is saved Nehru. He might well not have survived a
continuation of the Chinese thrust, or even the Chinese presence in the
territory they had won, given the panic and the resentments against him in
India at the time. It also saved him from the kind of military aid from the
West which could have ended non-alignment. Such was Nehru’s resilience,
and his adroitness, that he weathered the storm and within a few weeks was
regarded once more by the majority of Indians as indispensable. <e
malcontents had to be content with lesser scapegoats, such as General Kaul,
the nominee of Krishna Menon who was commanding the Indian Army in
NEFA, not gloriously, <apar, the army chief of staff, and, at length,
Krishna Menon himself, the defence minister. By then Nehru was probably
regretting his appeals to the United States and the United Kingdom and
was probably turning his mind to ways of getting such help as they would
give without allowing the West either bases or forces in India, just Alling in
some gaps in India’s armed strength, such as supersonic Aghters. He refused
to break off diplomatic relations with China.
One thing he could not cancel was the speech he made on not letting
Chinese have an inch of Indian territory. <is might have been politically
expedient but he went on repeating it to the extent that it made it difficult
for him later to come to a settlement with China.
<e Indian press and politicians at the time spoke much about ‘the
Chinese hordes’ near the Indian border; and some spoke of the invincibility
of the numbers involved, or of Chinese plans to get control over India’s oil
in Assam, or even over the port of Calcutta. <is is to be taken as a sign of
the fright which the Chinese attack made on Indians. <e truth is that there
were only two or three Chinese divisions involved, and that the Indian
Army suffered a limited defeat. As the official Indian report on the affair a
year later pointed out,* and as anyone familiar with the Indian Army at the
time could have guessed, the Chinese were tougher, better trained, better
equipped, and better led. <e Indian Army, which has troops with a
Aghting potential as good as any in the world, especially from what in
British days were called (and correctly called, though Indian nationalists
had repudiated the term) the martial races, had been giving too much time
to ceremonial parades. <e report referred to the inferior training in
mountain warfare, the inferior quality in officers, especially at the senior
level, where there was incompetence and negligence, and the inferior
information about the Chinese. <e orientation of the army had been
directed against Pakistan; war had been thought of as the kind of war which
would take place along and across the Punjab frontier; that is where the
bulk of the Indian striking force was kept. It should be added that no
politician of rank or standing in India, and perhaps a dozen at the most at
any level in political life, had had any experience of soldiering. It is doubtful
if there were half a dozen MPs at Delhi who had any personal knowledge
of, or who took any interest in, or had arry instinct for, army or defence
matters.
Nehru had had to bend to the storm. But he escaped surrender. He took
various steps to appease public opinion, such as setting up the Defence
Council and putting some of the critics of himself on it; but he gave it no
real power; it enabled him to hamstring the discontented retired generals.
He circumvented the pressures for giving up non-alignment and for
accepting the proffered Western umbrella. He circumvented the pressures
for giving up the plans or for turning the Indian economy into a war
economy; or for concentrating the armed services on the hypothesis of
China as the enemy; or for breaking off relations with China. At the same
time he managed to get more aid out of the West—the Pakistanis feared
that it would be enough to tip the balance against them still more—though
he failed to get the supersonic jet Aghters. What he got, as someone said at
the time, was military reliance without military alliance; which was not
little. He bowed to some pressures from the United States and England,
notably to hold talks with Pakistan; but, helped by Pakistan’s overplaying its
hand, he let the talks drag on for a few months until they petered out. He
got the United States, apparently with the help of an American ambassador
who was new to these matters and to diplomacy, to recognise the
McMahon Line. Hitherto the Department of State had refused to
recognise it, a fact not without signiAcance; the White House now
overruled the Department of State. And inside India itself he put the
Emergency to good use by getting more power for the central government.
It was a virtuoso’s performance; and the more remarkable as Nehru, not
long recovered from the Arst serious illness in his life, was old and tired. But
he could not recover what mattered most: his former standing as leader in
his party and in Parliament or with the educated classes.
And the picture of India which emerged then was not one to give
comfort to his drooping spirit. He could not have been happy about a good
deal in the nationalism which had come over India. Indians, until recently
soporiAc from the years of speeches about the India–China brotherhood,
felt black betrayal by China. Under the Arst shock Indian mobs fell on
harmless Chinese who had been living in India for many years—Japanese
diplomats, who looked like Chinese to the Indian mob, felt obliged to put
signs on their cars to the effect that they were not Chinese. <is reaction
against the Chinese, understandably heated at the beginning, settled in a
few quarters into a nationalism which was narrow-minded, self-centred,
legalistic, and moralising.* Just as India had insisted that there was nothing
to discuss with Portugal over Goa or with Pakistan over Kashmir she now
took the line that there was nothing to discuss with China. China must
accept the so-called Colombo power proposals in toto, though in fact those
powers had had their doubts about at least some of India’s case just as few if
any Afro-Asian countries were convinced that there was no case for
discussion. When in October 1963, a year after the attack, Chou En-lai
offered to visit Delhi to discuss a settlement this was dismissed as ‘a mere
propaganda trick’. Nehru, in short, was left with little if any leeway for
negotiating what was negotiable.
Evening Light
As 1963 opened Nehru looked on a prospect littered with ruins—the ruins
of his hopes, and the ruins of a prestige seemingly so impregnable for a
dozen years or more. Kashmir; Goa; the Chinese border; Indian standing in
Africa and South East Asia; in India itself the Naga uprising; Indian
nationalism getting out of hand; Hindu revivalism gaining ground;
communal violence worse than ever; more and more money on armaments;
the plans awry; hunger; more inefficiency in government at all levels;
corruption at all levels, including amongst his own ministers; gloom about
what would happen on a scene which he must soon leave. Indians were even
impugning his patriotism. Nehru probably took little comfort from the fact
that whatever the truth about his failures the biggest truth of all was the
immense scale of the problems the Arst prime minister of India had had to
wrestle with, and how successful he had been with some of the problems
and how near to succeeding with others. By 1962 and 1963 anyone
knowing him over the preceding ten years was struck with the marks of
sadness. His voice had lost some of its timbre; his silences had become
longer and more enigmatic.
<e Chinese invasion was the blow of havoc. <e existence of Pakistan,
like the connected massacring of Muslims by Hindus and of Hindus by
Muslims, outraged his sense of reason, his belief that the world is, or can be
made, a rational place. Goa had undermined his conAdence in himself. <e
Chinese invasion had undermined his conAdence in men, in Indian men as
well as in Chinese men; it had repeated the outrage on his sense of reason,
but it had done more: it had betrayed a trust; a trust given generously, and
for great ends. Trust is the foothold of life itself. Betrayal, the basest wrong,
shatters the very ground on which we walk and have our being; that oaths
are straw, that men’s faiths are wafer cakes … Nehru walked in a dazed way
after Goa. After the Chinese invasion he never walked Armly again.
Did this lover of poetry know Browning’s lines on Aeschylus
soliloquising in his last years?
I am an old and solitary man,
Mine eyes feel dimly out the s etting sun,
Which drops its great red fruit of bittern ess,
Today as other days as every day,
Within the patient waters.
* Cf. Sir Penderel Moon, Divide and Quit. <e author, quondam Fellow of All Souls and a member
of the ICS, spent 30 years in India, leaving in 1961. His Strangers in India, 1944, is acutely observant
and shows where the British raj was lacking. Also see Michael Edwardes, <e Last Years of British
India, dedicated ‘to the men, women and children murdered in the Aelds and streets of India who
though they did not Aght for their country’s freedom paid for it with their lives’.
* <e Mahalanobis committee report on distribution of income was symptomatic of the malaise in
the planning. <e committee, consisting of three senior civil servants and Ave economists under the
chairmanship of the Central Statistical Institute, was appointed in 1960 with the motive to produce
data showing an increase in wealth. It took three and a half years to produce a few uncoordinated
triCes, and some Agures which disproved any appreciable rise in income throughout the nation but
proved that the middle groups were worse off, as also the agricultural workers. Some of the worst
sycophants and talkers connected with the plans were on the committee.
* Cf. reactions to the poverty from Western literary visitors, e.g. John Wain in Encounter, 1961, or
V.S. Naipaul, the Trinidad novelist, in An Area of Darkness. He comes from a family which is UP
Brahmin by origin. Not long after I arrived in Delhi I once had occasion to go unexpectedly to the
chancery about midnight. I discovered that the gardener, who had no other dwelling, was sleeping in
the library and with him were two still poorer relations or friends one of whom, having no blanket,
was wrapped up in the big Australian Cag which we Cew in the daytime.
* When statistics are cited in this book they are meant to show trends not to state facts precisely.
Even in the most highly organised countries statistics on income, the national product, price
movements, foreign trade, etc., are subject to wide margins of error. Cf. Oskar Morgenstern, On the
Accuracy of Economic Observations, Princeton, 1964.
* Quoted by Rajagopalachari in Swarajya, August 1961.
* Like most ambassadors in Delhi, anxious to save Nehru from touring nationals who could have
no claim on his time, such as minor politicians and academics and even teenagers winning some
commercial travel raffle or other, I have declined their request to ask Nehru for an interview for them
only to discover later that they had gone to his office or house and had somehow got in to see him.
His senior officials, waiting for hours, or even days, to see him, complained bitterly of this practice of
his.
* Press, January 22, 1961.
** Cf. his statement of August 27, 1961, on ‘the overwhelming number of engagements’ he had to
fulAl, leaving him hardly any time for solid work. ‘My work, many people seem to think, should be
full of laying foundation stones, opening buildings, attending celebrations and so on. VIPs who come
here take a lot of time. I have to attend banquets and lunches and civic receptions. All this hardly
leaves any time for solid work.’ He added that he was becoming reluctant to accept any engagements.
<is reluctance did not triumph!
* Michael Brecher, Nehru: A Political Biography, 1959, p. 615.
* Again and again in Parliament and in the press in India it was complained that India’s case was
not sufficiently explained abroad and that more emphasis on ‘public relations’ should be given. <e
truth is that there has been far too much ‘public relations’ paper being sent out from Indian
embassies. Few recipients took it seriously. <e India News brought out by the Indian High
Commission in London, ten or so pages of loaded news, was an example. India, of course, was not
alone in this erroneous approach; it is common today.
* A selection is available in Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s Foreign Policy: Selected Speeches, September ’54–
April’61 and Nehru’s Speeches, 1949–53, Government, of India, Publications Division.
* According to one of the Indian doctors attending Jinnah in the latter part of his fatal illness
Jinnah said that the creation of Pakistan was a mistake and that rather than create it the better course
would have been to delay independence.
* Security Council Off Records, 5th February-2nd March, p. 30. Also see Shiva Rao’s articles on Sir B.
Rau.
* A brief statement of Krishna Menon’s thesis will be found in his article, ‘What is at Stake?’,
Seminar, June 1964. His statements in the UN require several days to read.
* February 15, 1964.
** Cf. the writings of the veteran correspondent and ex-MP, Shiva Rao, e.g. in <e Hindu, May 29,
1963, as well as various statements by Rajagopalachari and J.P. Narayan.
* One member, Dr Korbel, wrote a book on it. A fair-minded book on the origins of the Kashmir
question is Lord Birdwood’s.
* On the background cf. H.L. Richardson, Tibet and its History; the author, a former member of
the Indian Political Service, served in Tibet. A complication as regards Tibet, since 1956 at least,
which will not be discussed but should be noted, is that the Dalai Lama himself had come to regard
his regime, or much of it, as an anachronism. He no longer believed in his own theocracy. Cf. Lois
Lang-Sims, <e Presence of Tibet, 1963.I met the Dalai Lama on several occasions.
* Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged Between the Governments of India and China, vols. i, ii,
iii, iv.
** Report of Officials of the Governments of India and the People’s Republic of China on the Boundary
Question, February 1961. <e Chinese produced 245 items of evidence; the Indians 630; a mine of
information but not the last word. Cf. Alastair Lamb, <e China-India Border, 1964, as regards the
MacDonald Line of 1899 but also for some of the essential historical and geographical milieu to the
boundary question. See Times Literary Supplement, January 2, 1964, and subsequent numbers for
discussion, including letters of Dr Gopal (head of the historical section of the Indian external affairs
ministry). Also cf. G.J. Alder, British India’s Northern Frontier 1865–1895, London, 1964.
* It is not time for revealing the source of this information yet.
** Sir G. Bajpai was secretary general, external affairs ministry, until 1952.
* My Land and People, 1962.
* <e behaviour of the press, not only in India but especially in the United States, the United
Kingdom and other Western countries, during the various Sino-Indian conCicts and especially during
and just after the Dalai Lama’s Cight, was an eye-opener even to diplomats familiar with the
unreliability of much, and the unscrupulousness of some, newspaper reporting. <e reporting in
certain mass-circulation newspapers in the United Kingdom and the United States was worse than
inaccurate: it was often grossly fabricated. One newspaper chartered an aeroplane and poured out
money without let. Some of the correspondents concerned purported to have gone to places, and to
have had interviews, which were imaginary. <ey reported not the facts but what their editors or
proprietors wanted to foist on the public, or something to glamorise themselves. <e reporting by
some diplomatic missions in Delhi was not much better. Diplomats come to know of at least some of
the reports sent in by their colleagues. Too many of these reports copied the untruthful newspapers,
or sent back to their governments what they knew their governments would like to believe.
* My inaugural address to the Australian National University, <e Racial Factor in International
Relations, published in 1956, bears on this and connected points.
* According to Conor Cruise O’Brien, his representative in Katanga, Hammarskjold had in effect
falsiAed reports; To Katanga and Back, p. 67. Hammarskjold’s diaries are revealing of the man.
** Nehru did his best to conciliate the Nagas, and to see that the policies—sound British colonial
service policies—recommended by Verrier Elwin, to whom he showed great kindness, were carried
out. Elwin, son of a bishop of Sierra Leone, and himself once chaplain of Oriel College, Oxford,
came to India as a Christian missionary in the 1920s and after a period with Gandhi ended up as a
rationalist. He became an Indian citizen, and did valuable anthropological work on the tribal peoples.
* Encounter, August 1964, p. 5.
* Cf. Swarajya, December 15, 1961, January 6, 1962.
* Cf. some of the examples from speeches made by Nehru collected by the Daily Express at this
time, e.g.:
‘Peaceful coexistence has been the Indian way of life and is as old as India’s thought and culture.’—
Speech during Bulganin–Khrushchev visit, December 1955.
‘India has given a symbol to its people—the symbol of the Asoka Wheel, which represents peace,
morality, and the ancient culture and peaceful ways of this country.’—Speech in Delhi, July 1951.
‘To seek to impose a settlement by force is to disregard the rights of nations.’—On Suez,
September 1956.
‘It is the attitude of regarding one’s own conception as righteous and everything else wrong that
leads to conCicts.’—At Red Cross Conference, Delhi, October 1957.
‘A very small conCict has the shadow of a big conCict behind it, and a big conCict has the shadow
of a world war behind it.’—On Syrian crisis, September 1957.
‘<e only approach we can make is an approach of tolerance, of avoidance of violence and
hatred.’—About Cold War danger, Delhi, October 1957.
‘We do not show the clenched Ast to anyone. We extend our hand in friendship towards
everyone.’—On Kashmir, August 19, 1956.
‘War today solves no problems but leaves behind only brutalised humanity and a trail of bitterness
and hatred which forms the basis of another war.’—Speech on Gandhi’s teachings, January 1953.
* Henderson-Brook’s report; some of the contents were released to Parliament by the defence
minister in September 1963. No names were mentioned.
* Some Indians recognised this. Cf. Amlan Dutt, Seminar, No. 51.