Building and Destroying
How much does a leader lead? How much more can he do than to give
expression to the dominant mood of his time and place? Great leaders have
no doubt done more than this, such as by slanting, at certain strategic
points, the mood this way or that, and by seizing this opportunity or that.
But, in general, leaders are less free than we are apt to think. Nehru himself
once said in my hearing, when explaining to an Australian physicist why he
had not taken a certain measure, that a leader cannot get too far ahead of
his public opinion.
Bertrand Russell and Cow Worship
Nehru would have been made acutely aware at times of this limit on him as
a leader because his motivations were so different from those of the majority
of people in India. <e world of Bertrand Russell, Shaw, Wells, and the
Fabians, was largely the world of Nehru the political leader. <e world of
the majority of Indians is a millennium or so away from that world. How
far away is recalled to us by what comes out in the Indian police courts; or,
if this be thought too special, by what goes on in the villages. Four out of
every Ave Indians live in the villages; the village world is a world of status,
with caste as the hard core, of the gods and their sanctions, of the
horoscopes, and of the sacred fauna.
<at the gap between the world of the British scientiAc rationalists and
socialists on the one hand and the cow-worshippers on the other could be
bridged in a score or so of years has been the strange delusion of the
Western world as well as of Nehru. But in any case a bridge was required
between Nehru and the average Indian, and this would have to be in the
form of some man more Indian than himself. His conAdant Krishna Menon
could not form the bridge. Vinoba Bhave, the leader of the land gift
movement, one of the few authentic Gandhians left, understood, and was
understood by, rural and traditional India. Nehru respected Vinoba Bhave
personally but did not seem to take his movement seriously; which can
hardly be surprising.
Jayaprakash Narayan was a different matter. He had as much feeling for
the Indian spirit as Vinoba Bhave, but in addition he was internationalist
and he understood contemporary economics and sociology. After a
courageous period as a revolutionary nationalist he had become a disciple of
Gandhi; and in most things he remained a disciple. He had also spent years
in the United States and was therefore familiar with the world of machinery
and factories and elected rulers; and, as a former Marxist, he was equally
familiar with the conceptions of a planned economy. In the early 1950s
Nehru had thought of making him his dauphin. But Jayaprakash Narayan,
who had already renounced the material world, then renounced the political
world. He abdicated his leadership of the Indian socialists and took to an
ashram.
He did not renounce responsibilities as an Indian citizen, however, and,
though smitten with diabetes, he travelled, wrote and spoke a good deal,
always on the side of intelligence, goodwill and courage. He was never of
bigger stature than in the last year of Nehru’s life. When so much which
was spurious was raising its head he exempliAed the India which is mature
enough to endure self-criticism and to take the non-conformist line. After
the anti-Muslim massacres in Bihar and Orissa he, together with some of
his Sarvodaya111 colleagues, visited the scenes and systematically ran down
facts. On April 16 he addressed a letter on the subject to the presiding
officers of both Houses of Parliament and to political leaders. <is appears
to have impressed Nehru; but on the general public the effect was one of
hostility. Undeterred, Jayaprakash Narayan lost no occasion for pleading for
the injection of ‘a fresh dose of candour and courage’ in place of ‘a putrid
atmosphere of hatred, hypocrisy, and moral smugness’. <is led to bitter
attacks on him in India, illustrating, incidentally, how far Nehru’s values of
an anti-communal India were from a large number of Indians.* Early in
May his life was threatened. Still undeterred, he turned to India’s relations
with Pakistan, and notably over Kashmir. He pleaded for a confederal
arrangement.** Nothing comparable, intellectually or morally, came out of
Pakistan. He also turned to the other subject which was inCaming Indian
feelings—relations with China. He suggested amongst other things that
India should offer to lease Aksai Chin to China.***
Because Jayaprakash Narayan had renounced the political world, one
man remained who could have supplied the bridge which Nehru needed,
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari.
Rajagopalachari
Rajaji, as Rajagopalachari (sometimes written Rajagopalachariya) is usually
called in India, would have complemented Nehru. Nehru needed the
support of an equal. He needed, too, the criticism of an equal. After the
death Arst of Patel, in 1950, and then of Maulana Azad, in 1954, the only
man left who had a political experience, or a record in the independence
movement, comparable to his own, was Rajaji. Rajaji had joined the
independence movement as far back as 1907—he was eleven years older
than Nehru—and in 1919, at the age of forty, he threw up a highly
remunerative law practice to follow Gandhi and austerity. He served Ave
prison sentences. Besides, he was the intellectual and moral equal of Nehru.
He could have ended the situation prevailing in which no one could, or
would, stand up to the prime minister; the situation whereby he was
surrounded by men all of whom owed to him their jobs, whether as cabinet
ministers or as officials.
Endowed with an exceptionally strong and quick mind, Rajaji was in
spirit harmonious and without volatility or anything partaking of the
theatrical. Vanity was excluded from his nature. Although he had so much
affinity for traditional India, he knew the lore of the West, having a good
acquaintance with the Bible and Plato and the English classics as well as
with jurisprudence and economics; and he knew the case for economic
development. Although he was religious, and conservative, he was not
conformist. He had the true conservative’s trait of combining scepticism
about what man-made systems can do for human nature with the personal
kindliness to individuals which socialists, dealing with human beings as
statistical groups and abstractions, sometimes lack. And he had wit, that
life-renewing gift.
Rajaji had been one of the Arst Indians to be premier of a state, and it
would not be easy to show another who was better as premier. He had stood
out as an able administrator as well as a ruler who knew how to command.
Like Gandhi, he was though a Brahmin, as much a man of action as any
soldier. And he knew the game of politics as well as Nehru did. His
relations with the DMK112 during his late eighties showed that his
politician’s hand lost none of its cunning to the very end. He was thus a
practical man. He was a thinker, too. Gandhi leaned on him, for there was
no sharper mind in the independence movement, which did not lack sharp
minds. Gandhi loved Rajaji even when Rajaji refused to accept some of his
policies, such as the Quit India policy of 1942. Gandhi’s son married his
daughter. <e range and force of Rajaji’s mind was illustrated week after
week for the post-Gandhi generation in the weekly paper Swarajya. His
articles were mainly on Indian politics, not always impartial about Nehru,
but sometimes on physics, genetics, sociology, or morals. Being as much a
citizen of the world as Nehru he gave close attention to the nuclear arms
race. He was well aware what were the true priorities, and that the
invention of the bomb dwarfed other priorities. To this end, at the age of
eighty Ave, he left India for the Arst time in his life in order to persuade
Kennedy, Macmillan and de Gaulle to give up the tests. Kennedy was
delighted with his visitor and gave him his time generously.* He was in his
eighties when writing his Swarajya articles. He was a natural writer. A
master of English prose, he is also considered one of the best writers in
Tamil, his fables and stories already being classics. His translations from the
Sanskrit are also highly regarded.
Rajaji had succeeded Mountbatten as governor-general; being the Arst
Indian and the last person in that office. He should have been the Arst
President of India. Nehru tried to get him selected; but non-conformist
spirits, especially when they join great force of mind to great force of
character and to an unbending integrity, may be respected but usually they
are too uncomfortable for the majority and so are not liked. <e run-of-themill
Indian politician never felt at home with Rajaji; and for the sufficient
reason that Rajaji’s was not his home. <ey preferred Prasad, a respectable
man but a natural subordinate, as head of state.
As the years went by Rajaji became more and more critical of Nehru’s
policies and practices. In 1959, already over eighty years, he broke away
from Congress and founded a new party, Swatantra.113 It provided the
sharpest intellectual opposition to Nehru. He was particularly opposed to
all the moves towards turning India into the leviathan state; and he
particuarly feared the sort of hypnosis into which he believed Nehru’s
unique personal standing was lulling both the Indian people and perhaps
Nehru himself. He became increasingly sceptical about non-alignment; and
he had doubts about some of the developments in the Afro-Asian world.*
As for the bridge, Rajaji could have been the bridge between south India
and north India. South India has counted for too little in the Indian
republic. <is is a waste for India as well as an unfairness to south India,
because the south has a superiority in certain important things—in its
relative lack of violence, its lack of anti-Muslim intolerance, its lack of
indiscipline and delinquency in the universities; in its better educational
standards, its better government, and its cleanliness; in its far lesser practice
of corruption and its little taste for Hindu revivalism. If the English
language is saved to India as a living language it is the south which will save
it. But Rajaji could have been a bridge of still greater consequence—a
bridge between Nehru and the India of the average Indian; a bridge
between the physical and technological needs of contemporary India which
Ared Nehru and the traditional India of timeless values which Rajaji, like
Gandhi, valued.
Rajaji saw himself as standing for the religious view. He believed that, to
quote his own words, there is a greater Reality behind the sense reality and
that spirit is immortal. He feared that this was being lost sight of under
Nehru’s government. He feared, too, the loss of freedom. But Nehru, too,
respected the world of spirit; and, as well, he wanted freedom though he
thought freedom was meaningless if men were hungry. <e synthesis, not
unattainable, surely, was never produced between these two freedom-loving
and spiritual men. Here was great drama, two Agures of Shakespearean
scale in contest. And the drama was tragedy, for the contest was needless.
Both men were required by India in the two crucial decades following
independence; and both men shared the blame, though perhaps not in equal
measure, that there had been Assion, not fusion, between them.
Transitoriness of the Nehru Era
Nehru’s rule will leave some mark on India, but not as much as is expected.
<e future is likely to show that the roots did not all strike deep.
In the 1920s and the 1930s the British authorities both misunderstood
and underrated Nehru. After independence he was misunderstood once
more, but this time the world overrated his regime. What was ephemeral
about it was rarely perceived.
Given his long personal dominance, misunderstanding was hardly
surprising. His ministers counted for so little. Could half a dozen of the
several scores of them serving in his cabinets be remembered by the public a
couple of years after they left office? Yet the truth is that Nehru’s personal
dominance masked the continuing existence of the deeper forces in the
Hindu world hostile to his viewpoint, such as caste and regionalism.
Illusions born of the masking were heightened by the sycophancy and the
vested interests of the politicians and the officials who owed their careers to
him, and of the journalists who owed their careers to publicising the current
dominance.* <e phrase ‘our great leader’ became an incantatory ritual.
Foreign visitors encouraged the illusion, sincerely if ignorantly. Nehru
himself, however, sensed that his policies could be transitory. <at is why he
was in such a hurry to set India Armly on the road to industrialisation and
socialism, and why he had such a fear of Hindu revivalism.
Concealment of the truth might well go on for some time after the
disappearance of Nehru from the scene. Lip-service might well be paid to
him years after his policies have been given up, just as lip service was paid to
Gandhi years after most of the things Gandhi stood for had been given up.
Officially Gandhi remains the Father of the Nation. His policies, however,
are, like his famous ashram at Sevagram, now far gone in decay.
Not that all the work of Nehru will perish. Even some of the good work,
such as the new legal protection for women, might for once not be interred
with the bones of the doer. <e evil—or if a milder term be preferred, such
as the less good—will surely live on. For instance the rousing up of the
masses. It was Nehru who, with Gandhi, aroused the mob. In that way he
brought new forces into play in Indian life. But they are forces for lower
things than Nehru, or Gandhi, had in mind; and they could overwhelm the
things he cherished. <en there is the power of unionised labour. Only a
fraction of labour is unionised, and India has millions of unemployed, but
the blackmailing by certain unionised groups, such as hospital employees or
municipal garbage employees, due to the artiAcial labour scarcity their
unions have succeeded in creating in those areas of work, is not reassuring.
In addition to mob violence and to restrictive trade unionism there is also
the related phenomenon of the rise, in all the parties, of a cruder type of
leader. It is not merely that the expensively educated gentlemen, like Sir S.
Banerjea* or the Saprus, have almost disappeared; they belonged to a class
which is now disappearing in most countries. It is that the public man is,
like the whole world of public life in India, getting on to a different level—
less educated, less disinterested, less public spirited, and more concerned,
indeed almost exclusively concerned, with interests: local and caste and
personal, and in concrete material terms. <is earthiness, too, goes with a
proneness to narrow nationalism. Examples occur on all sides in India
today, and not only examples drawn from the two great vested interests of
the trade unions and business. A Bengali writer has shown some examples
recently in his study of what he calls the Plebeian Revolution and the
resulting change in the leadership of the Communist Party no less than in
that of Congress.* In south India the revolution takes the form of the
campaign against the Brahmins, who are now rapidly being pushed down to
the status of a depressed class.**
Nehru the man wanted passionately to destroy the caste system though
he remained indestructibly a product of the caste system—through and
through a Brahmin. When in his youth he came into contact with the
English he discovered several things which shook him, as they shook most
Indian students coming into contact with England and the English. He
discovered that he was an Indian and not merely a Brahmin and a Kashmiri
from UP; for that is how the mass of the English, inevitably ignorant of the
Indian social system, saw him—as an Indian, not as a member of this or
that caste from this or that region. He came to feel, too, a shame-like
disapproval for some Indian ways of life; and he discovered what he thought
was the means of getting rid of the unworthy things, especially the poverty.
<e means were the rationalist and socialist ideas which represented the
advanced thinking in England at the time.
He was thus in an ironical situation from the beginning. <e irony, the
inconsistencies, the dilemmas, remained with him throughout life. His long
prime ministership was stamped with the irony of inescapable
inconsistencies. All men exercising power are confronted with dilemmas; all
revolutionaries whose revolution has succeeded in unseating the previous
rulers, and who are thus called upon to rule, are confronted with special
dilemmas; but Nehru was confronted with dilemmas over and above these.
His lot was permanent dilemma, and his fate was to be always trying to
Aght his way out of it.
<us he needed power to give Indians what are now called human rights
as against the status society of Hindus, and to bring to them technological
changes for alleviating their hunger and suffering. But to get this power he
must have the Congress Party as the ruling party. <at meant conniving at
an ever-rising degree of politician boss-ism and corruption, and in some
places the reverse of democracy. It also meant keeping, indeed greatly
extending, the Preventive Detention—that is to say, imprisonment without
trial—which he had damned so passionately in the days of the British raj,
and which chimed ill with the parliamentary democracy he wanted. So, too,
the other inconsistencies, such as insisting on complete independence from
foreign commitments yet making the plans dependent upon foreign aid;
hankering after communist aims but insisting on liberal humanism; or
attacking European colonialism in Africa while acquiescing in Indian
colonialism in Nagaland. <e supreme irony was that most of Nehru’s values
were nearer to the British, whose raj he had been bent on destroying, than
to the Indians whose subjection to the raj he wept over. I have emphasised
the Hindu and the Brahmin in him. But no less emphasis is required on the
European, on the Englishman, in him.
Haunted with dilemmas in this way the strain on the spirit must have
been nearly insupportable at times. It says much for his inner strength that
he supported the strain. But he found no way out of his dilemmas.
India was Anding a way out for him; a way he could not care for. <e
Indian spirit, good and less good, quietly reasserted itself; those of Nehru’s
ideas which were too alien to take root in the ancient Indian soil will wither
away.
Construction and Reconstruction
Perhaps only another prime minister or ruler, knowing the realities of
government from the inside and from the top, could pronounce a complete
judgement on Nehru’s rule. Yet it is probable that when the dust has settled
Nehru’s achievements as ruler will be scaled down. Scaling down is a
common fate for statesmen no less than for writers. It happened with
Roosevelt; it will probably happen with Churchill and de Gaulle. <e
scaling down might be on India as much as on Nehru; or if there is not a
scaling down of India there will probably be some demystiAcation of it.
India without Nehru will lose some of the panache it affected under him. In
the words of Alberto Moravia, the Italian novelist (who visited India and
was much taken with Nehru), with Nehru’s death India enters a prose
epoch.
How much is India a better, or indeed a different, place because Nehru
lived? It is for the future historians, with more facts at their disposal and
with more knowledge of the real currents of the era, to decide. It will be
enough here to recapitulate his main achievements.
Indian unity he inherited. He cherished it and fostered it but he did not
create it. <e apparatus of government—the civil service and
administration, the defence services, the lawcourts, the communications
network of roads, railways, telegraph, and wireless—he also inherited. <e
constitution adopted in 1951 was itself an adaptation of the British
Government of India Act of 1935. Inside India Nehru’s most important
contribution was on atmosphere and attitudes, more particularly against
certain old prejudices and superstitions and for social justice and the
scientiAc approach. <ese took concrete form: Arstly in changing the legal
status of women and of the outcastes; secondly in the setting up and the
maintaining of the secular state; and thirdly in the planned moves towards
an industrialised and partly socialist economy. As regards foreign relations,
Nehru’s contribution was Arstly the policy of non-alignment and secondly
the acquiring for India a world presence. As regards peace, he made, though
many have contested the point, a contribution, especially in Dulles’ years.
He was not free of faults, as over Kashmir or Goa; but as regards India’s
neighbours, Burma, Ceylon, Nepal, all of them guilty of much provocation,
and at times of injustice, to India, Nehru was self-restrained and generous.
He contributed to peace, again, by counselling moderation and sanity to the
new Afro-Asian states.
<ese, though seeming to be not a great deal for nearly eighteen years of
power, were solid achievements of construction and reconstruction.