Nehru’s Personal Background
Jawaharlal Nehru was born in 1889. His father was Motilal Nehru, one of
the leading Indian barristers of the day, and his mother, who was Motilal’s
second wife, was Swarup Rani.
<e Nehrus are Kashmiri Brahmins in origin. <e title of Pandit
(Doctor) applied to Nehru—against his proclaimed wishes—comes from
this origin. It used to be applied to Kashmiri Brahmins, and to some others,
automatically, whether they were learned in Sanskrit or not. Nehru himself
did not know Sanskrit.
<e Kashmiri Brahmins were coming down to the plains of India from
their mountain valley in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, rather as the Scots were coming down to England in the same
years. <ey came for the same reason—poverty at home and better chances
in the south for men with brains and stamina. Kashmiri Brahmins were
thus found in many of the principalities in north and central India,
occupying positions of trust, as well as in the service of the Mughal
emperors. Like the Scots of those days, they acquired a reputation for being
ambitious self-seekers, and for favouring their own kith and kin unduly.
Early in the eighteenth century a Kashmiri Brahmin called Raj Kaul,
highly reputed as a Sanskrit and Persian scholar, gained the notice of the
emperor Farrukhsiyar38 and came to Delhi, the Mughal capital. ‘A jagir
with a house situated on the banks of the canal was granted to Raj Kaul,
and, from the fact of this residence, “Nehru”* (from Nahar, a canal), came to
be attached to his name. Kaul had been the family name; this changed to
Kaul-Nehru; and, in later years, Kaul dropped out and we became simply
Nehru.’ <e family experienced vicissitudes of fortune in times of trouble.
Our Nehru’s greatgrandfather, Lakshmi Narayan Nehru, became the Arst
Vakil of the sarkar Company at the shadow court of the emperor; and our
Nehru’s grandfather, Ganga Dhar Nehru, was Kotwal of Delhi until the
Mutiny in 1857. <e Mutiny put an end to the Nehru family’s connection
with Delhi for nearly a century—until Jawaharlal Nehru returned in 1946
as the Arst prime minister of India.
After the Mutiny the family had moved to Agra, 120 miles south of
Delhi.
Nehru’s father, Motilal, was born in Agra, in 1861, three months after
the death of his father. <e family seems to have been poor at this stage—
the highest caste in India is not necessarily, or indeed commonly, rich—and
the burden of the family fell on Motilal’s two older brothers—Bhansa Dhar
Nehru, who soon afterwards entered the judicial department of the British
government, and, because of being posted from place to place, was largely
cut off from the rest of the family; and Nandlal Nehru. It was the latter who
brought up Motilal. Nandlal entered the service of Khetri, a small Rajput
principality, or rather feudatory, in the hills of north Rajasthan. He served
there for ten years and, at a young age, rose to be Diwan (i.e. chief
minister). He then left to study and practise law at Agra, a new profession
resulting from the British bringing in their legal and judicial systems. When
the high court moved from Agra to Allahabad Nandlal moved with it,
taking Motilal with him. And so it was that Allahabad became the Nehru
home town. Nandlal rose to be one of the leaders of the Bar there.
Motilal, whose education included a good grounding in Persian, Arabic,
and Urdu, and later in English, studied law in Kanpur (Cawnpore) and then
worked with his guardian brother in Allahabad. Nandlal, however, died
suddenly, and, like the father, before his time. Motilal was thus left to make
his own way in the world.
He did this triumphantly. Sometime after the death of his Arst wife in
childbirth he married Swarup Rani. <eir Arst child died. Jawaharlal—the
name means ‘red jewel’—was the second child. An only son of a prosperous
father bereaved twice before, and for the Arst eleven years of his life the only
child, he was treasured highly. (Mrs Pandit was born in 1900, and the third
child, Mrs Raja Hutheesingh, in 1909.) Many, including Nehru himself, say
that he was spoilt. <is is probable; but if so the spoiling excluded any
softness.
<e family background in general meant in addition to the lavish
affection which is common in Indian homes, a big house with ample space
and garden and Cowers and fruits and horses, which is not common.
Contrary to what is often said, Nehru’s background was not aristocratic. He
himself always spoke of it as middle class; in English terms of that day it
would have been upper middle class. His personal standards were
aristocratic though he gave his life to destroying one set of conditions, and
to creating another set, which could result only in the end of aristocracy.
Anand Bhavan, Abode of Happiness, seems to have been not an inaccurate
name for the Nehru house. It was usually full, in the easygoing hospitable
Indian way, with relatives, other Kashmiri Brahmins of distinction,
including Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru,39 and a varied group of Hindus, Muslims
and Europeans. Allahabad, an old Mughal city with Hindu origins, still has
charm. In Nehru’s boyhood it was civilised and urbane as well as tranquil,
free of either mobs or factories. Motilal, its head, was by all accounts a man
of considerable intellectual force, strong character, handsome presence,
vitality and a winning personality, though not of so Ane a clay as his son. He
was a free thinker, modern and Western in outlook, contemptuous of
religion in general and of Hinduism in particular, worldly, and a free
spender who enjoyed all the fruits of his prosperity. Also, he was given to
bouts of temper, which frightened the son, much as the son’s bouts of
temper frightened people a generation or so later. Jawaharlal always admired
his father. <e mother was the traditional Hindu lady, with little or no
formal education but with the stamp of her Brahmin caste on her. Caste in
India meant breeding for quality. And no doubt she would have seen to it
that the tulsi, the plant sacred to the Hindus, was in the house, that pujas
were performed, and that Jawaharlal heard about Sangam, Gaya, Muttra,
Puri and the other sacred places.
Nehru speaks of a lonely childhood. Whether in this environment it was
or was not as lonely as he thought, it is certain that Nehru by nature was
lonely, and must always have been lonely. He would probably have been
lonely if he had had a brother a year older and another a year younger than
himself.
Motilal being the enthusiastic Westerniser which he was in those days,
pro-English enthusiasm being not uncommon in India then, the Nehrus
lived in the English, not the Indian, style, as regards food, speech and dress;
and the Nehru children were educated by English tutors or governesses.
Jawaharlal’s tutor, called Brooks, was an Anglo-Irishman with some French
blood, and seems to have inCuenced him considerably, notably by giving
him a taste for science, also a taste for theosophy, and perhaps a taste for
anti-imperialism. (Brooks for reasons which have never been established
committed suicide later.)* At the age of thirteen Nehru was initiated into
the <eosophical Society, Mrs Besant herself performing the rites. (A few
years later, and a thousand miles to the south, in Madras, another Indian
destined to become well known in the new republic of India, Krishna
Menon, was inducted into one of the orders of theosophy, ‘<e Star of the
East’, and put on the habit of the order. In the case of neither man did the
conversion endure.)
Another element in Nehru’s upbringing was the ‘Islamic Cavour’. Nehru
speaks of the effect of Munshi Mubarak Ali.40 But the Cavour derives from
more than one man. In his childhood and youth Nehru would have seen as
much of Urdu-speaking Muslims of education as of Hindus; perhaps more.
<e governing class in his province was predominantly Muslim. Urdu, not
Hindi, was the maternal language. Yet in temperament Nehru had always
been Hindu, not Muslim; while in conscious attitude he tried to be just
Indian and to regard being a Hindu or a Muslim Arst as irrelevant, and
then, under the pressure of facts, and so more realistically, as subordinate to
being Indian.
In 1905, Nehru, then Afteen, was taken to England by his father and put
in Harrow School. Much has been made by some commentators of the
Harrow background but the truth is that Nehru was an outsider there and
knew it. His age as well as his race was against him; boys have no peers for
conformism. For the Arst time in his life he felt that he was Indian.
Possibly, deep down, unbeknown even to himself, the seeds of his
nationalism were planted at Harrow. Two years later, in 1907, he went up to
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read for the Natural Science Tripos,
taking it in the second class. He seems to have enjoyed Cambridge, and was
sensible enough to do what was possible in those days, not to concentrate
on mere examinations. He coxed his college boat. After Cambridge he went
on to the Inner Temple where he spent two years, also happy, in preparing
for the Bar.
After he was called to the Bar, in 1912, he returned to India. He had
been away continuously for seven years, at a very impressionable time of life.
England had an inCuence on him, both positive and negative, both for
attraction and for repulsion, which never ceased.
Back in India he worked in his father’s chambers at Allahabad. When he
cared to apply himself he did well enough; but, to his father’s
disappointment, his heart was never in the law. <e legal background of
himself and of the class from which he came, however, has importance. <e
great majority of the fomenters and leaders of anti-English nationalism
were products of that new thing introduced by the British raj—the English
legal system, including the proAtable profession of lawyers. And they
showed a brilliant aptitude for using the English law in their cause and for
turning it against the English rulers. In 1916, at the age of twenty six,
which was an age well beyond the normal marrying age in those days, he
married Kamala Kaul. It was a typical caste marriage, she being of Kashmiri
Brahmin stock and belonging to Nehru’s clan. It was also an arranged
marriage. She was seventeen at the time. Indira was born in the following
year. A son was born in 1927 but died almost immediately. (It was not
known until later that Nehru belonged to the Rhesus negative blood group.)
In addition to the difference between them in age and in experience of
the world, Kamala had little formal education. <e importance of formal
education, especially in the case of people marrying within high castes,
where racial quality and social solidarity are primordial, has been
exaggerated in our days of the neo-literate. <e real difficulty in marrying a
man like Nehru would arise from the fact that he was already married, and
that his Arst marriage absorbed him entirely. He was married to a cause. <e
cause was overriding, and it left little or no place for family life or comfort.
‘I was,’ he wrote of himself, ‘a most unsatisfactory person to marry.’*
Sometimes Nehru and Kamala quarrelled; sometimes she was a little
frightened. It is characteristic of the frankness and self-criticism which
Nehru, for all his reserve and Anesse, was capable of, that he should say this.
We can add that so fastidious a man would not have failed in delicacy or
generosity, and that if his interests were not centred on Kamala they were
also not centred on any other woman, or on himself.
Six years after his return to India, and in his twenty ninth year, he
launched himself on his political career. In 1918 he became the secretary of
the Home Rule League in Allahabad. <is was the moderate movement
founded by Mrs Annie Besant which looked to India’s remaining a part of
the British empire. In 1919 he started, with money supplied by his father, a
newspaper, signiAcantly named 