Watching Nehru
I Arst saw Nehru in 1945. At the time I was serving in the British Army,
and the end of the war happened to And me in India for a while before
demobilisation. Nehru had not long been out of prison and was making a
triumphal tour in Bengal. Crowds gathered to see him at the railway station
in my area; huge and enthusiastic crowds. I noticed at the station where I
was waiting for him that his evident satisfaction with the crowd’s welcome
did not prevent him from impatiently pushing—some of my brother officers
said slapping—people who got too near him. Neither as a Britisher, nor as a
soldier concerned with law and order in Bengal at that moment, was I
predisposed towards Nehru, one of the arch agitators and troublemakers, as
we thought him. We were ignorant of his story, and ignorant of mistakes
made on the British side, but Lord Wavell,1 the viceroy, had recently
reproved him publicly for some of his speeches, and the reproof seemed to
us to be well merited. Nehru’s speeches had been inCammatory and had
again and again thrown doubt on the good faith of the British government
—Attlee’s government2—about its willingness to give India independence
though at that very time discussions were taking place for arranging
independence. <e nationalist agitation, moreover, in its mass parades, its
mass chanting of slogans, its badges and symbols, and its frenzy and raving,
reminded us uncomfortably of the Nazis to stop whom we civilians had
become soldiers.
I left India in August 1946 just after the great killings,3 as the Calcutta
massacres of Muslims by Hindus and Hindus by Muslims of that August,
came to be called. <e carnage, already horrifying, would have been
unspeakable had British Army units not taken over control. I was glad to
go, as this was the third mob uprising, and the most bestial, I had witnessed
in Calcutta, the others being in November 1945 and in February 1946. Of
India I had seen only Bengal, and only for about a year; but what I had seen
I did not like and I soon put India out of my mind. I neither expected nor
wanted to see it again.
But, by one of the accidents of life, less than six years later I found
myself back in India, in 1952, as head of Australia’s diplomatic mission. I
stayed in India for three years. I found these three years so interesting that I
gladly accepted the chance to return four years later in the same capacity.
On this second occasion I stayed for three and a half years.
During the six and a half years I was serving as high commissioner,
Nehru was the focus of my daily working life. Inevitably, I saw a good deal
of him.
He lived in the house4 formerly occupied by the British commander-inchief,
a big two-storeyed house set in a garden of several acres. Unlike many
Indians—there are conspicuous exceptions, such as M. Krishnan5—Nehru
had an interest in nature; he was fond of gardens and Cowers; his garden
was one of the best in Delhi. But for all his Cowers and his pandas and
other pet animals there was little of a private house about the prime
minister’s residence. <e greater part of the ground Coor was taken up with
offices where men worked in shifts throughout the day and night. <is was
part of the prime minister’s own secretariat; the other part was in the
external affairs ministry. (When Parliament was in session he spent much
time in his office in the Parliament building.) <e daily stream of visitors
began with the assemblage in his garden at 8.30 most mornings, when
anyone with a grievance, or a suggestion, or just a wish to look at him, could
come. Few were the weeks when special deputations of the people were not
coming to his house. Often they took up quarters on the footpaths
adjoining or opposite to it. Families running into scores, men, women and
children, would camp months on end opposite his gate, cooking, bathing,
and sleeping there. He showed irritation with them at times—they were a
health hazard at the least—but his pity and his sense of duty, no less than
his politician’s instinct to be seen with the people, were such that the police
were forbidden to drive them away or to harass them. <ey came for many
different reasons—to protest against some injustice, such as a poet carrying
out a hunger strike for eight days in front of Nehru’s gate to protest against
the closing down of the Hindustani <eatre,6 because of drought, Coods, or
hunger, and above all as refugees from Pakistan or from some troubled area
inside India itself.
I had many occasions to see Nehru in a different role, that of the formal
and ceremonious prime minister, such as at Delhi airport for the official
welcome, or farewell, to the Queen of England, President Eisenhower,7
Khrushchev,8 the Crown Prince and Princess of Japan,9 Chou En-lai,10
Nasser,11U Nu,12 a variety of Commonwealth prime ministers such as St
Laurent13 and Diefenbaker14 of Canada, Mohamed Ali and several other
prime ministers from Pakistan, Menzies15 of Australia, Nkrumah16 of
Ghana, and Kotelawala17 and Mrs Bandaranaike18 of Ceylon. No head of
government could be more distinguished, more at ease, yet more
welcoming, than he was on these occasions. His felicity, combined, as it
was, with energy and gravity, made him, without any effort on his part, the
cynosure. <is was true too of the various banquets and garden parties at
the President’s palace, and of the great national celebrations in New Delhi,
such as the Independence Day ceremony held each August in the Red Fort,
or at the Republic Day parade held each January when a procession two to
three hours’ long passed down Lutyens’ superb creation, the Central Vista,
or Rajpath as it is now called.
On these occasions Nehru never ceased to be in full possession of his
very quick wits. For instance, when the Queen of England was a guest at
the 1961 Republic Day parade, there was a good deal of parading done on
their own account by Indian politicians. Amongst these a group arrived a
little late and, no places being reserved or left for them on the seats, they
were asked by the attendants to sit on the ground, where in fact some
hundreds of their fellow citizens were already sitting. <is affronted their
dignity and they went protesting to Nehru, who was sitting near the Queen.
Nehru quietly got his daughter and the speaker to leave the Queen’s
entourage and to lead the MPs away and to sit on the ground with them… I
recall a reception eight years earlier at Constitution House when some MPs
fell like famished boys on the tea, cakes, and bananas, and, in that Indian
way born of centuries of having sweeper outcastes ready at hand to pick up
any mess one cares to make, threw banana peel on the Coor. Nehru, seeing
this, pointedly got up, came along with a plate, and, without saying a word,
shamed them by picking up the mess himself… At the reception given to
Sir John Hunt19 and his Mount Everest climbers in 1954, Nehru, with the
preparedness and drive habitual to him, arrived early to look over the
arrangements, including the placing of the chairs. Finding a horde of
photographers taking up positions which would have blocked the view of
the spectators he drove them off peremptorily, and as though he would
strike them; they scattered before his wrath… At the last Delhi Cower show
I attended in 1962, I saw him again in an unceremonious temper with
photographers when they were crowding around him in suffocating
numbers and blocking his view of the Cowers. <ey too scattered before his
wrath… It was always refreshing to see Nehru falling on this plague of
modern public life. His outbursts of temper could be calculated but mostly
they were spontaneous. <ey were not deterred by any public setting, as
those who once saw him dealing with a talkative ‘society’ woman at a music
recital in Delhi are not likely to forget. Another outburst which will not be
forgotten by those present occurred at the launching of the community
development campaign at Alipore in 1952. <e purpose was to stimulate
the villagers into modernisation and development through self-help and
village democracy, but, in the way so familiar in India, it was turned into a
social occasion, with much parading, exhibitionism, and other vanities. It
was uncomfortably hot, too. Nehru looked impatient when he arrived, the
lower lip protruding in a way which always bode trouble, and cast his eyes
threateningly around the gathering and the preparations. <e proceedings
then began with a speech from the President, broadcast from his palace in
Delhi. It went on and on, irreproachable platitude following irreproachable
platitude, and Nehru got more and more restive. As soon as the speech
stopped he jumped up angrily, denounced speech making, vetoed any more
speeches (several orators were waiting to say their pieces), and then led
them off to dig a drain… I once saw him stop a minister of agriculture in
full Cight, tell him to sit down, and then make a speech on the theme of the
inadequacy of the white-collar man in farming matters. <ese things made
him feared rather than loved… Each year this disciple of industrialisation
took his part in the ceremonial assemblage of dignitaries devoted to
spinning cotton in celebration of Gandhi’s birthday. His expression
betokened, I thought, mixed feelings.
An example of the quickness of his control of a situation was provided
when the Pakistani prime minister of the day, Mohamed Ali,20 came to
Delhi on an official visit. As Mohamed Ali walked from his plane the vast
crowd broke through the police cordon, surged forward, scattered the line of
formally dressed ambassadors (the unfortunate Japanese ambassador was
trampled underfoot and when at length rescued had to be carried off the
Aeld), and threatened to crush the two prime ministers. Nehru shouted at
and harangued the crowd, he reactivated the discouraged police, and, to give
an example, grabbed a policeman’s truncheon and laid about him. Order
was restored; the crowd retreated.
<en there were the occasions when Nehru was a mourner. While I was
at Delhi old and close political associates died, such as Pandit Pant, also
Nehru’s son-in-law, Feroze Gandhi (who had no connection with Mahatma
Gandhi: Feroze was a Parsee), and various others with whom Nehru had
close political or personal ties. He was not too proud to weep on occasion;
notably when Maulana Azad21 died. An agnostic, he had no consolations
from notions of a future life or of seeing the dead again. For him death was
the end. I once had to stand near him for a quarter of an hour or so at the
funeral of an ambassador of Nepal. Nehru’s solicitude for the family
concerned on these occasions was delicate and without any shirking.
Naturally, I heard him make many speeches; scores and scores of
speeches, both in and out of Parliament. <e range of his speeches, most of
which were unprepared, and most of them without a note, must be without
parallel—on political matters in a huge variety, and also on technology,
science, art, morals, history, welfare, and a host of good causes. I have
known Nehru to make three speeches on entirely different subjects in one
day. He had an astonishing facility for speaking for half an hour or so in
English and then, without a note, repeating it in Hindustani, the
translation, according to my Indian friends, being word perfect. For years he
was averaging, so I have been told by one of his secretaries, about twenty-
Ave speeches a month outside of Parliament. Speaking extempore,
conversationally (as was his way), so often, and on so many themes, he was
bound to repeat himself at times and bound to leave some ragged edges; and
occasionally what he said was indifferent stuff. But his speeches were a part
of his political action and are to be judged as such and not as exercises in
oratory, let alone in the profundities. He was seeking to get a view across to
a particular audience, or to evoke reactions, or even to spread adult
education among the illiterate masses, and even on such things as hygiene
or manners. At times he would provide a little unintentional comedy, as in
his speech at Amritsar in April 1961 while unveiling the memorial at
Jallianwala Bagh (the scene of General Dyer’s shootings in 1919), when,
seized with enthusiasm for the achievements of the Russian astronauts
announced at that time, he spoke at length about the wonders of space
Cight and weightlessness and the promise of man’s mastery over Nature. His
audience consisted mostly of illiterate peasants whose thoughts were mostly
on their bullock plough and the next meal. His speeches at times were
musing aloud. And in his old age, speaking too much and too long, his
speeches occasionally became a jumble of clichés, anti-climaxes and non
sequiturs; not unlike the speeches of Ramsay MacDonald22 at the end of his
career. But only an unusually well-furnished mind, and unusually
concentrated, could carry off Nehru’s quantity and quality of public
speaking throughout the half century prior to his decline.
I heard him on many dramatic occasions in Parliament. For instance the
debate in 1953 over extending the old British Preventive Detention23 Bill
when there was an exchange between him and S.P. Mookerjee,24 the latter
being a still more effective speaker than Nehru and, after Nehru, the most
forceful personality in Parliament. (Mookerjee died in Kashmir not long
afterwards, in controversial conditions.) Or Nehru’s announcement to a
crowded and silent House that Sheikh Abdullah,25 the prime minister of
Kashmir, had been arrested. With the Sheikh, Nehru had previously
worked closely and he used to extol him as a personal friend as well as a
loyal collaborator with India. Or in 1960, after the Dalai Lama’s Cight to
India and the subsequent revelations, especially in 1961, of the border
tensions with China, the country which for years had been lauded as the
ever-faithful Asian brother; when angry disillusioned debates Cared up on
India’s relations with her and with Tibet, including bitter passages with his
old Gandhian and Congress colleague, Kripalani.26 Or the affair of the
resignation of General <imayya,27 the Army Chief of Staff, following a
dispute with Krishna Menon;28 and on several other dramatic occasions
when Nehru spoke up passionately for Krishna Menon to a critical House.
Nehru’s mastery of the House, and of its psychology, were as outstanding as
his Rupert-like courage. After watching him during these years one could
have no doubt that Nehru was without a match, let alone a master, in the
Indian Parliament. He had perhaps only half a dozen equals in the other
parliaments I have had occasion to observe—the House of Commons, the
Australian House of Representatives, the Netherlands Parliament, and the
Canadian House of Commons. Further, Nehru, by persistent conscious
effort, had schooled the Indian Parliament into the best models of
businesslike procedures and dignity, including respect for the Chair.
<en there was Nehru in holiday mood—going up in a glider (aged
seventy-one the last time I saw him doing that), going on a trial Cight in
the Arst jet plane which came to Delhi, playing in a cricket match, enjoying
Indian classical music and classical dancing, and showing off his pets or his
Cowers. <ese occasions became less frequent in the last few years; but it is
an incomplete and misleading picture of Nehru which does not give some
place, though it can never be a major place, to his outbursts of gaiety, as also
to his wit.
For example, the smile, half-gentle, half-wry, with which he greeted me
after an incident which occurred at a time when there had been some
excitement in the Indian press over the White Australia policy,29 and
especially over a speech made by the Australian prime minister in South
Africa which Indian newspapers denounced as a seal of what they called the
Malan–Menzies axis30 (i.e. of anti-coloured policy). <is was the moment
chosen by an Australian sheep breeding expert, who had been appointed to
carry out an experimental project under technical aid to improve Indian
sheep by crossing them with Australian sheep, for getting a little publicity
for himself. He gave an interview to an Indian journalist. He had
discovered, he told the journalist, that a colour bar existed amongst sheep:
the Australian rams didn’t care for Indian ewes and wouldn’t mate with
them.
It was pleasant to see Nehru enjoying the ancient Hindu festivals,
especially Diwali, the lovely poetic festival of the lights, and Ramlila.
According to old friends—and I knew several who had known him
closely for over half a century—Nehru had always preferred his own
company, and for long had little taste for social life. Yet no man could be a
better host than Nehru, whether at formal dinner parties or, best of all, at
small dinners and lunches, especially en famille. <e same traits were
invariable: good breeding, elegance combined with simplicity, and
wholesomeness. Alcohol was not served but the food though plain and
unspiced—more English than Indian—was always of good quality, well
prepared, and with an abundance of the best fruit. Unlike most of the
Indian leaders he was not a vegetarian though for a time he had been. One
was spared too long a period at table or too much food: three courses and
fruit were the rule. Nehru himself was attentive to his guests without being
pressing or fussy. He delighted to recommend a choice fruit and then to
peel it or to cut it up for a guest. He was nearly always relaxed, or, more
likely, he took pains not to show any of the cares agitating him; for there
could scarcely have been a time when cares were not. He was always ready
for interesting conversation, his own contribution being lively, various,
quiet-voiced and unegotistical. He was interested in facts and ideas for their
own sake and not in himself. If he told a story involving himself—for
instance, about bureaucracy: the Arst time as prime minister he was brought
a sealed envelope marked ‘ConAdential’ he found on opening it, not, as he
expected, some secret of state, but the daily meteorological report—it was
tersely worded and was told to illustrate a point, not to glorify himself. (He
had no time for the bureaucrat’s spirit; he had knowledge of and contempt
for the Indian variety.) I have seen him on these occasions with scientists
like Lord Florey,31 the pathologist Sir Mark Oliphant,32 the physicist, and,
others whose investigations and talk he relished; with political Agures like
Lord Attlee and Bevan,33 who were obviously congenial, and with those,
better left unnamed (especially a fading conservative minister who before he
faded into an earldom moved unerringly from cliché to cliché), who were
probably not; but Nehru’s good manners never failed him. A prime minister
from a Commonwealth country who, as he himself remarked, was no
reading man, was once asked by Nehru in my time whether he would like to
be taken to Agra to see the Taj Mahal. ‘<e Taj Mahal? What’s that?’, the
visitor asked. Nehru explained patiently. On another occasion a prime
minister from another Commonwealth country missed the point of a story
told by Radhakrishnan, then vice-president of India, which the latter had
from Khrushchev himself. (Khrushchev when visiting a collective farm
looked in at the school and questioned some of the children to see what
they knew. At the end he called over a boy and said to him ‘Who wrote War
and Peace?’ ‘Not I, Sir, I didn’t write it,’ the frightened boy pleaded… Next
morning the principal of the school called and asked if he could see Mr
Khrushchev over something urgent. When admitted to Khrushchev’s
presence he blurted out that he wanted to report that the boy had come to
him with a confession: he did write War and Peace.) <e visiting prime
minister had not heard of War and Peace. Another memorable lunch was one
he gave for an American admiral of great power in the Dulles’ days, at the
suggestion of the American ambassador. <e admiral for some years, and
especially when on his PaciAc or South East Asian travels, used to make
public statements along the most menacing lines of brinkmanship and
massive retaliation and so was one of Nehru’s bêtes noires. <e American
ambassador felt that if he could get the two men together they might think
better of one another. Hence the lunch. <e admiral came and brought his
wife with him, a lady who turned out to be no student of India or of current
affairs. On being introduced to Nehru’s son-in-law, Feroze Gandhi, who
was not Gandhian in type, she thought she was meeting the Mahatma
himself, and gushed over him accordingly before the ambassador could head
her off. <e Mahatma had been assassinated some years before.
Nehru’s Arst visit to the United States had left an impression on him
which endured; especially the weekend at the Government Guest House,
presided over for the occasion by a cabinet minister, where the other state
guest was a female cosmetics magnate; or, again, the banquet of business
leaders in New York when Mr——, the famous banker, is said to have
opened his speech of welcome with: ‘Mr Neeroo, there are Afty billion
dollars sitting around this table…’ Nehru by then had learnt with surprise,
but apparently not with appreciation, that the ticker tape showered down on
him during his procession along Fifth Avenue was done as a regular routine
by a private commercial enterprise hired for the occasion; one or other
Welcomes, Inc.
President Johnson34 came to India—said to be his Arst visit overseas—
not long after becoming vice-president but his activities with bullock carts,
babies, and camel drivers represented a different sense of humour from
Nehru’s.
Nehru’s visit to President Kennedy in 1961 apparently modiAed some of
his earlier reactions.
Finally, there was Nehru with the Indian crowd. His relationship with it
was unique, not equalled even by Gandhi’s. His prestige with the Indian
people had something of the magical about it. Here was the source of his
power. Here was why over a dozen years or so he could have been a dictator
if he had so desired, without guns or propaganda. How this prestige came
about, how the Nehru myth had been created, is something for the
psychologists to explain. <e vast majority of Indians had never set eyes on
him; and those who had would in the vast majority of cases have done so for
an hour or two at the most. <e myth owed nothing to the projection of his
personality through the mass media, for few villagers had any acquaintance
with the radio or the cinema and none with TV, and four out of Ave were
illiterate. <at is to say, the myth owed nothing to the synthetic fabrication
of personality by the artiAces of ‘public relations’. It is unlikely that much
discrepancy between public reputation and the private truth will ever be
unearthed about Nehru, in the way, for example, it has recently been
unearthed about Lloyd George35—this darling of the Welsh chapels being
revealed as redoubtable in adultery, and in keeping injured victims at bay, as
in political wiles, though the secret remained intact throughout his life.
Nehru did his fair share of looking happy with the crowd, and of loving
little children, and at times he got near to demeaning himself by this Hitler
and Stalin type of histrionics. But in general what acting he did was little in
comparison with what the average politician in the United States or even in
England goes in for. Nor was the truth ever long in coming out that at
bottom Nehru was alone. <e notion of Nehru’s spending halcyon hours
relaxing with peasants is comically wide of the mark. It would be too much
to say that while he loved India he did not love Indians; but he undoubtedly
disliked certain Indian traits. Yet wherever he travelled in India he could
count on crowds running into half a million or more Cocking to him. Men
and women often spent a day or two to get to the place where he would be
speaking, or even merely passing by. Nor did his oratory account for this
magnetism. He was a good rather than a stirring speaker. His speech,
delivered in a clear and well-modulated but also in rather a light voice, was
rarely uninteresting and often it was persuasive, but in his last decade it was
more didactic than rousing. Moreover, he had to speak in Urdu (or
Hindustani) rather than in Hindi, or in English; many in his audience,
especially in south India, therefore could not understand a word of what he
was saying.
His incomparable prestige was based on other things. It was based in
part upon the fact that the people believed that he had been chosen by
Gandhi as his political heir; in part upon the charm and aliveness of his
mere presence; in part upon his devotion to the national interest as he saw
it, so self-evident and so marking him off from the run of Indian politicians;
the rich man who renounced his wealth and who for years lived something
of the hard life of the Indian people, even to travelling third class; in part
upon the fact that the Indian is traditionally a hero-worshipper (the classic
British writers on India have recounted from their experiences many
signiAcant examples, including the deiAcation of dead rajas and maharajas)
and not a few of the Indian villagers had been apt to see him as the great
new maharaja; and, Anally, in part, and not least of all, upon the fact that
Nehru survived. All his potential rivals and all his equals (except
Rajagopalachari) died off in his active lifetime. Had Bose or had Sardar
Patel lived as long as Nehru the story might have been different.
Towards the end, however, great as Nehru’s prestige remained, his
worshippers or admirers were the countrymen rather than the townsmen.
This was one of the ironies of Nehru’s position, for he was entirely the
townsman and disliked, if he did not loathe, the life of the Indian villager,
just as, being a declared agnostic, he disliked the villagers’ religion and
social rules. Further, even the villagers, though they might gather in their
hundreds of thousands to hear him or to salute him, more and more voted
against Nehru’s men or disregarded Nehru’s urgings.  Nehru myth, in
short, though mighty in India up until the end—so mighty that he could
not be unseated during the great disillusionment following the Chinese
attacks in the winter of 1962-63—was declining in his latter years, even
amongst the country people. Amongst the townsmen, especially amongst
the educated classes, it had declined sharply for some time. He had,
moreover, positive and active enemies. Owing to the security service, not to
his own wishes, Nehru never moved without a security guard, and his house
was carefully guarded day and night. On the occasions when he dined at my
house one of his security guards inspected the kitchen thoroughly and stood
by to watch the cooking of the dinner, so that there was no risk of his being
poisoned; an armed security man dressed like a servant waited upon him at
table; and a squad of men were hidden in the shrubbery surrounding the
house.
But the diminution of his prestige, and these risks of assassination—after
all Gandhi himself had been assassinated—do not affect the cardinal fact
that few if any leaders in any country have attained to such a prestige
amongst their own people; or have held on to it for so long. <e great bulk
of the people of India sensed, and they never lost the sense, that Nehru
wanted only to help them and wanted nothing for himself; and that he was
a ruler who had pity and kindness.
My last official business with Nehru was over a triCe. Not long before I
left India in 1962 he had received a request from a students’ group in the
University of Adelaide. He consulted me about it, questioning me about the
university and asking my opinion on the request. <ere were delays in
carrying out his intentions, due to various crises and to illness. As a result
the shield he donated as a trophy for inter-faculty debating competitions in
the University reached Australia a few weeks after he died; the last gift
made by him to anyone. <ere was no call whatever on Nehru to bother
with the Adelaide students; there are hundreds of universities in the world
as well as a score of crushing problems in India; but I could see that he
sensed the Adelaide students’ goodwill and that some gesture from him
would give them pleasure. I felt, too, as I had been made to feel more than
once, that he was concerned about certain fears widespread in Australia
regarding Asian neighbours and colour and he would lose no opportunity,
even the smallest, for reassuring Australians that Asians could be good
neighbours.