The Razor’s Edge

It’s a toss-up when you decide to leave the beaten track. Many are called, few are chosen.
– W. Somerset Maugham
British novelist

ntil 1992, Indian passport holders were prohibited from entering Israel.
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao brought into the open India’s relations with
Israel, which had been kept covertly active for a few years during his tenure as
foreign minister, and invited Israel to open an embassy in New Delhi. India and
Israel share some common ground, in that they are both isolated democracies
threatened by neighbours that train, finance and encourage terrorists. It was a
strategic imperative that both countries cooperate on defence matters. Dr Kalam
was tasked with establishing technological partnerships with many of the world’s
leading high-tech companies in Israel.
It would not be an easy task. There had been a good deal of negative
conditioning that needed to be overcome for a rapprochement. Although both
countries gained their independence from the United Kingdom within months of
each other, they found themselves headed in markedly different directions for
nearly four decades. India became a leader in the Non-Aligned Movement that
maintained close relations with the Arab world and the Soviet Union. Israel
linked its future to strong ties with the United States and western Europe.
On 6 March 1993, when Sharad Pawar became the chief minister of
Maharashtra, Prime Minister Rao took over the defence portfolio himself. Dr
Kalam now had direct access to Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, who shared
with him and other nuclear scientists his desire to develop a nuclear bomb. He
said that after the cold war had ended in 1991 and with that the 1971 treaty with

U

the Soviet Union, India no longer had any superpower ally. With a menacing
China and an openly hostile Pakistan, there was little choice but to become a
nuclear-capable nation.
At any rate, the threats to India’s security were not only of a tangible military
form. On Friday, 12 March 1993, a series of thirteen bomb explosions rocked
Bombay. The coordinated attacks were the most destructive bomb explosions in
Indian history. This was the first terrorist strike of its kind – planned, coordinated
serial bomb blasts – in the world. The attacks resulted in more than 350 fatalities
and 1,200 injuries. Dr Kalam told me that the threat that India faced from its
enemies was changing its form. He wondered: How does a civilized nation fight
hidden groups? How does a pluralistic society cope with the terrorists’ modus
operandi of continuing random violence?
Years later, Dr Kalam told me that the post-1991 years were perhaps the most
threatening for India. We were left with no superpower backer, surrounded by
inveterate enemies. Economically weak, we were in no position to build nuclear
weapons and bear the burden of nuclear sanctions. In spite of these adverse
conditions, Prime Minister Rao was determined to carry out a nuclear test. But
when, in 1995, the tests were imminent, the United States got wind of the
preparations and put tremendous pressure on Prime Minister Rao to abandon
them – and he did so.
In 1996, the navy expressed its urgent need for a quick-reaction air defence
system to protect its warships at sea from aircraft and anti-ship missiles. The
Pakistani navy had acquired Harpoon missiles from America and Exocet seaskimming missiles from France. Without any warning, these missiles could – by
day or by night and regardless of weather conditions – approach our ships at
near-sonic speed and inflict terrible damage. Not only must the warship fire its
missile at the earliest, the anti-missile has to ‘see’ the incoming missile through
the visual disturbance of the waves. The deployment of Trishul, the missile that
had been intended for this purpose, had been delayed.
Trishul had not yet finished its static trials from a fixed launcher, leave alone
the second and far more difficult stage of mounting it and firing it from a sailing
warship. The navy had no option but to commission two ships devoid of any
missile armaments. Dr Kalam acknowledged the navy’s predicament. He did not
retreat into denial and offered no excuses. He said, ‘The services must be

served.’The navy evaluated several systems and settled on the Israeli Barak
missile. Thus was born a great partnership. Not only were the Barak missiles
installed on Indian Navy ships, but this initial order also blossomed into a 350million-dollar joint project between the Israeli military technology sector and the
DRDO. This collaboration would develop the Barak Extended Range SAM,
which could be deployed against targets at distances of over 100 km from a
launch site, ten years later. It would be another decade before Dr Kalam would
visit Israel.
The theatre of war was changing. The idea to develop an Indian cruise missile
crystallized after the 1991 Gulf War, when the American Tomahawk cruise
missiles proved their usefulness, crippling Iraq’s command and communication
centres in short order and leaving its armed forces exposed to air attacks. That a
few hundred cruise missiles could isolate the 1.2-million-strong Iraqi military in
the space of a few hours seemed incredible. Dr Kalam felt that it was necessary
to equip India with a cruise missile system.
Dr Kalam enjoyed tremendous goodwill in the Russian scientific
establishment. He called on this goodwill to establish a joint venture, ratified by
an agreement signed on 12 February 1998, creating an equal partnership between
DRDO and Russia’s NPO Mashinostroyenia. Mashinostroyenia was the
legendary organization that had developed iconic cruise missiles such as
Malakhit and Granit, as well as ICBMs and spacecraft. The purpose of the joint
venture would be the design, development, manufacture and marketing of the
supersonic cruise missile BrahMos, named after the Rivers Brahmaputra and
Moscow.
India held a 50.5 per cent share in the joint venture company. The Russian
contingent had been keen for the joint venture to be realized as a private sector
company. Had the DRDO’s share been 51 per cent, it would have become a
public sector company, falling under India’s defence ministry. Dr Sivathanu
Pillai was appointed the CEO of the BrahMos Aerospace Company and Russia
invested 126.25 million dollars according to its commitment. Dr Kalam had once
again been the architect of a vital technological alliance, and it was due in no
small measure to the relationships he had forged over years, and the international
esteem he enjoyed:
The friendship between Kalam and Yefremov and their belief in their respective teams was a key

factor. Yefremov’s academic stature and his role as a renowned rocket designer helped remove
roadblocks and suspicions in the Russian bureaucracy. On the Indian side, when Kalam forwarded a
proposal to Prime Minister Rao, the file came back with his approval the same day.1

Not content with merely building a missile of the type of the IGMDP, Dr
Kalam wanted the BrahMos missile to be a futuristic weapon – it should be the
best and most advanced in its class. Dr Kalam laid down his crisp summation of
how this must be achieved. He said, ‘Increase the speed. Follow the basic rule of
war – when the speed of attack increases, it automatically reduces the response
time of the enemy. BrahMos must be faster than the Tomahawk.’ The Tomahawk
was a long-range subsonic cruise missile. The BrahMos was designed as a
supersonic missile. It would have two stages: the first, consisting of a solid-fuel
rocket, would take the missile to break the sound barrier (Mach 1). The second
stage, a liquid-fuelled ramjet, would propel it to Mach 2.8. The missile would
cruise as low as 10 metres above the wave tops, making it a ‘sea skimmer’. True
to Dr Kalam’s vision, the BrahMos is still the fastest cruise missile in operation.
With all his success in harnessing technology for missiles and aerospace
purposes, Dr Kalam could see the untapped potential for the Indian civilian
aeronautical industry. He regretted the fact that India, which was amongst the
first in South Asia to manufacture an aircraft, had not developed its own
competitive passenger aeroplane. The National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL)
had designed the Saras turboprop multi-role light transport plane using two
Canadian Pratt and Whitney turboprop engines. But the Saras would only take
between nine and fourteen passengers. Dr Kalam was passionate about the
development of a passenger plane with between seventy and 100 seats, that
would allow India to connect its regional centres to the major metropolitan
cities.
At times, Dr Kalam was loud and vocal about his frustration with the
stagnancy in the Indian aerospace industry. He said during tea, after a meeting of
the Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA),2 ‘When the Embraer company in
Brazil, starting with a turboprop passenger aircraft, can make regional airliners
with seventy to 110 seats and smaller business jets, why can’t we? If a sleepy,
state-owned manufacturer of planes for the Brazilian military could become one
of the four biggest makers of commercial passenger aircraft in the world, what is
stopping HAL?

His concern was, however, not merely for matters involving technology and
aeronautics. Dr Kalam’s vision for the country in this time would become global
in its scope, and comprehensive, such that it would manifest as a blueprint for
the nation’s progress in the first decades of the twenty-first century. In 1993, Dr
Kalam took over as chairman, Technology Information, Forecasting and
Assessment Council (TIFAC). Dr Kalam and Y.S. Rajan together oversaw an
extensive study by a team of 500 experts to develop a vision of India as a
developed nation by the year 2020. The plan was subsequently published in the
book form.
The book examined in depth India’s weaknesses and strengths and offered a
vision of how the country could emerge as one of the world’s first four economic
powers by 2020. Far from concerning themselves merely with dry economic data
and the technical aspects of the nation’s advancement, Dr Kalam and Y.S.
Rajan’s vision was particularly concerned with improvements in the lives of
ordinary Indians:
What makes a country developed? The obvious indicators are the wealth of the nation, the
prosperity of its people and its standing in the international forum. There are many indicators
regarding the wealth of a nation: the gross national product (GNP), the gross domestic product
(GDP), the balance of payments, foreign exchange reserves, rate of economic growth, per capita
income, etc. … Economic indicators are important, but they provide only a part of the picture …
The numbers, impressive though they may appear, can veil considerable human misery, especially
that of the common people.3

India 2020 identified five areas of progress: agriculture and food processing
aimed at doubling the present production; infrastructure with reliable electric
power providing urban amenities to rural areas and increasing solar power
operations; education and health care directed towards illiteracy, social security
and overall health for the population; information and communication
technology for increased e-governance to promote education in remote areas,
telecommunication and telemedicine; and critical technologies and strategic
industries, particularly the growth of nuclear technology, space technology and
defence technology.
India 2020 systematically outlined the issues facing the Indian nation and its
people. It is curiously prescriptive and flexible, in that it discusses the present
approaches to these issues, identifies their merits and demerits and then proffers

an array of solutions, in the view that the most feasible could be determined and
implemented. Prognostication, at least as far as matters involving technological
advancements, is like firing at a rapidly moving target from a moving platform.
India 2020 understood the need to remain open to new developments, as much
as it understood the nation’s rich heritage in traditional indigenous solutions,
such as natural herbal remedies and tribal systems of medicine. Furthermore, Dr
Kalam and Y.S. Rajan were equally comfortable with adopting the best healthcare methods from other civilizations, such as Chinese acupuncture for the
management of certain chronic pain conditions.
Unsurprisingly, given its proponent’s scientific background, Vision 2020 also
championed using the latest innovations for age-old problems. It suggested how
technology could be employed to eradicate malaria, by mapping out mosquitobreeding areas with remote sensing satellites. Additionally, it saw a fresh role for
the lasers developed by the DRDO to treat glaucoma and cataracts. Dr Kalam
and Y.S. Rajan were adamant, though, that India should not simply imitate the
ideas of other nations. India should exercise the inherent creativity of its people
in formulating the most appropriate solutions for its issues. Some of the
suggested ideas were novel but brilliant, such as the use of biodegradable
tapioca-lined paper packages as a substitute for the environmentally deleterious
plastic variety.
Whatever innovations would be adopted, though, must be ‘user-friendly’ and
enhance the average person’s quality of life. Technology should not be alienating
for any portion of society. As a man who had dedicated his life to technological
advancement yet advocated a simple lifestyle, Dr Kalam was well aware of
modernization’s drawbacks. He suggested that progress should not make the
common person apprehensive, as this could lead to inefficiency and lower levels
of customer gratification. One should be able to anticipate changes that are likely
to occur as a result of modernization and adapt accordingly.
At any rate, Dr Kalam expressed supreme confidence that by becoming selfreliant, our national self-esteem would rise immeasurably. Our technology would
forge ahead, thereby raising the standard of our products and above all, the
question of indebtedness to any other nation would be eliminated. Dr Kalam’s
assertion – that if the nineteenth century belonged to Europe, the twentieth
century to the United States, the twenty-first century will definitely belong to

India – awakened a long subdued patriotic fervour. Dr Kalam’s national profile
was elevated from that of the venerable Missile Man to the National Visionary.
Through India 2020: A Vision for the New Millennium, Dr Kalam shared a dream
with millions of Indians.
While Dr Kalam and Y.S. Rajan were applying the finishing touches to their
progressive vision of the country’s future, the nation’s leadership was mired in
uncertainty. General elections were held in India in 1996, resulting in the defeat
of the Indian National Congress government of Prime Minister Rao. A hung
parliament was declared. President Shankar Dayal Sharma invited Atal Bihari
Vajpayee, as leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), to form a government.
Prime Minister Vajpayee could not muster support from more than 200 of the
545 members of parliament and resigned, ending his thirteen-day government
with Pramod Mahajan as the defence minister. During his short tenure, however,
Prime Minster Vajpayee was briefed by the outgoing prime minister Rao about
the readiness of the nuclear bomb. Prime Minister Vajpayee gave a go-ahead just
before his government fell.
H.D. Deve Gowda took over from Vajpayee as the prime minister. Mulayam
Singh Yadav – the former chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, the largest state of
India, and a leader of the masses – became the defence minister. He developed a
strong personal bond with Dr Kalam and even gave him some Hindi-language
lessons. Mulayam Singh shared with Dr Kalam his vision at the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), established on 8 December
1985. He envisaged a Great Indian Union along the lines of the European Union,
with intrinsic economic connectivity and complete freedom of movement of
people across the Indian subcontinent. Mulayam Singh told Dr Kalam to be
ready with the nuclear bomb. Such was the respect Mulayam Singh gave to Dr
Kalam that he would walk into Dr Kalam’s office in the South Block whenever
he needed him, instead of calling him to his chamber.
But Prime Minister Deve Gowda did not share his predecessors’ enthusiasm
for India’s nuclear programme, and he refused to give permission to carry out
nuclear tests.
In November 1996, President Jiang Zemin of China came to India. It was the
first visit to India of the head of state of the People’s Republic of China. Dr
Kalam had read extensively about China and was most reverent towards the

Chinese civilization. He asked me while I was assisting him with his
autobiography, to brief him on the guiding socio-political theory credited to
Jiang Zemin. Known as ‘The Important Thought of Three Represents’, this
theory was ratified by the Communist Party of China at the sixteenth party
congress in 2002. Dr Kalam wanted to study this theory while he further refined
the India 2020 vision.
President Jiang Zemin, the paramount leader of China, articulated that a
nation is powered by three powerful forces. He asserted that the three must be
represented in the government, to prevent the implosion and dissipation of
creative and productive energy into internal squabbling and even conflict. He
defined the ‘three represents’ as: the advanced social productive forces carrying
out economic production, the progressive course of China’s advanced culture
taking care of the cultural development of its people, and the fundamental
interests of the majority leading to a political consensus.
Since the founding of the Communist Party of China in 1921, and communist
China in 1949, three major theoretical expressions have been formulated to
guide the nation building at different stages. Mao Zedong’s ‘Thought’ combined
Marxism with the practical situation of the Chinese revolution. The aim of Deng
Xiaoping’s ‘Theory’ was to build socialism with Chinese characteristics. And the
‘Three Represents’ theory marked another milestone for both party and nation
building.
What relevance did these have for India? Dr Kalam said, ‘The government
must always represent the development trend of India’s advanced productive
forces. It means that the government’s programme, principles, policies and all its
work must be in line with the laws governing the development of productive
forces; it must embody the requisites for constantly furthering the release and
development of productive forces, especially advanced productive forces; and it
must steadily raise the people’s standard of living by developing the productive
forces.’
Dr Kalam also propounded his now familiar mantra on the role of academic
and ideological principles in nation building: ‘Government’s programmes,
principles, policies and all its work must embody the requisites for guiding the
development of a national, scientific and popular socialist culture geared to the
needs of modernization, the world and the future. These must be implemented in

order to improve the ideological and ethical standards and scientific and cultural
levels of the whole nation and to provide motivation and intellectual support for
India’s economic development and social progress.’
Dr Kalam added, ‘Saying that the government represents the fundamental
interests of the overwhelming majority of the people means that in its
programme, principles, policies and all its work, it must persevere in taking the
fundamental interests of the people as its starting point and objective, give full
expression to the people’s enthusiasm, initiative and creativity; and enable the
people to constantly obtain tangible economic, political and cultural benefits on
the basis of social development and progress.’
The situation of the Indian government at that time starkly contrasted with the
‘Three Represents’ theory. The Gowda government collapsed in April 1997, and
the Congress withdrew its support for the coalition. The reason given was that,
although Gowda’s minority United Front government was dependent upon the
Congress, he did not consult the party regarding important matters. Inder Kumar
Gujral, widely regarded as a peacenik and minister for external affairs in
Gowda’s cabinet, was chosen as the new coalition leader. Prime Minister Gujral
reappointed every single minister from Gowda’s cabinet. He also publicly stated
that there would be no change in economic or foreign policies.
Prime Minister Gujral was of the view that 1997 was not the right time for
nuclear testing. He preferred to maintain the country’s existing nuclear deterrent,
and was concerned about the ramifications of India brandishing its nuclear
capability. He felt that the country could not afford the economic and diplomatic
fallout that would doubtless follow nuclear tests – sanctions and international
opprobrium – much less his government maintain its tenuous hold on power. In
any event, Prime Minister Gujral was a great admirer of Dr Kalam and his
contribution to India’s space and missile-building capability.
Both Prime Minister Gujral and Defence Minister Mulayam Singh believed
that Dr Kalam symbolized the scientific strength of India. To send a powerful
message about the importance the government gave to India’s security – not just
to the nation but also across the world – they decided that Dr Kalam should be
awarded the Bharat Ratna, the nation’s highest honour. This award was
announced in November 1997. He was the second scientist after Sir C.V. Raman
to receive the award.