Prophet of Self-reliance

There is a time in every man’s education when he arrives at the conviction that envy is
ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that he must take himself for better, for worse, as his
portion; that though the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing corn can come
to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of ground which is given to him to till.
–Ralph Waldo Emerson
American essayist and poet

t Gen. Dr V.J. Sundaram took over the reins of DRDL from Dr Kalam on 10
July 1992. He was heading the Prithvi missile project with Dr V.K. Saraswat
as his deputy. Before leaving for Delhi, Dr Kalam initiated the limited series
production of the Prithvi and Agni missiles. As a result of the armed services’
firm commitment to these two missile systems, the DRDO had been able to shift
its focus from technology demonstration, to modifying missile systems to meet
the field requirements of the user, in terms of deployment and operability.
Programmes were initiated to develop shorter- and longer-range versions of the
Agni missile, a supersonic cruise missile and a naval variant of the Prithvi.
The government of India constituted a committee under Dr Kalam, with
representation from the three services and defence production units, to create a
road map on how to indigenously develop critical key technology as a safeguard
against denials by developed countries. Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao had
dismantled the licence raj, the elaborate system of licences, regulations and
accompanying red tape that were required to set up and run businesses in India
between 1947 and 1990. He was convinced that technological power would raise
the nation to a position of greater strength – militarily and economically.
Having developed the SLV-3 and the five missile systems, Dr Kalam had a
good grasp of the strategic industrial system in India at this time. Specific to the

L

defence sector, there were thirty-nine ordnance factories geographically spread
across twenty-four different Indian locations, eight public sector defence
undertakings and consistently expanding large, medium, small and micro
undertakings from the private sector. The DRDO laboratories had developed a
symbiotic relationship with industry and were considered part of the defence
industrial base.
Two decades had elapsed since the departure of Dr Homi Bhabha and Dr
Sarabhai, the two great men who had envisioned the atomic energy and space
programmes. It was time that someone of that stature captured the big picture for
the defence sector. Dr Kalam was now deemed to be in the same league as his
former idols, and with his innate facility for visualizing many disparate parts as
an integrated, functioning whole, he was eminently suited for this job. How does
the nation regulate the phenomenal growth of its public sector factories and
ensure that they do not turn into behemoths? What would India need from the
industry in the next ten to fifteen years to convert the ongoing research and
development efforts into useful and viable products? This was the brief he
received from R. Venkataraman when he sanctioned the IGMDP in 1983.
Dr Kalam was fully aware that the manner in which he had overseen missile
development would not work at the time of limited series production. The Indian
defence industry was conditioned to undertake licensed production. The
drawings done by the development agency – which left some details to the
inference of the scientist/engineers building the unit – would not meet the
ordnance factory’s requirements. He was also aware that making a small number
of systems for experiential flight trial was a radically different process to making
them in a factory setting in large quantities. Standardization, process
optimization, quality assurance and reliability were tough disciplines that needed
to be evolved for the unprecedented systems and unfamiliar technology.
Dr Kalam had been associated with the Technology Information, Forecasting
and Assessment Council (TIFAC), an autonomous organization set up in 1988
under the Department of Science and Technology. It had a mandate to
prognosticate with technologies, assess the technologies’ trajectories, and
support technological innovation by network actions in select technological
areas of national importance. Dr Kalam was clear about the path ahead. His
close friend from ISRO, Y.S. Rajan – who worked as scientific secretary to Prof.

Satish Dhawan, at the ISRO headquarters – was appointed as the first executive
director of the new organization.
Dr Kalam studied the findings of the Subramanian Committee, which had
included the formidable J.R.D. Tata as a member, published in 1963. The
committee pointed out that the knowledge base in design was inadequate for the
requirements in the fast-changing aerospace sector. The committee had
accordingly suggested that joint design and development of aircraft engines
should be pursued with reputed engine manufacturers like G.E., Rolls Royce and
Snecma.
India’s Missile Man would not merely be confined to aerospace technology.
Ever versatile, and with a mind that inquired far beyond the bounds of his own
field, Dr Kalam would be instrumental in pioneering various technologies for the
less fortunate in society. During 1992, Dr Kalam became acquainted with two
doctors at the Hyderabad-based Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS):
cardiologist Dr B. Soma Raju and orthopaedic surgeon Dr B.N. Prasad. They
inspired him to develop civilian spin-offs of defence technologies in order to
assist poor patients with affordable solutions for their treatments. This led to the
development of a Floor Reaction Orthosis (FRO) to help polio-affected children
walk using advanced composite material developed by DRDL. It also gave rise
to a coronary stent made from developing delta-ferrite-free austenitic steel wires
with a surface free from wire-drawing-induced micro-channels.
Both Dr B. Soma Raju and Dr B.N. Prasad provided medical input to DRDO
scientists in an interdisciplinary biomedical collaboration that was
unprecedented in India. Dr Sivathanu Pillai later brought the FRO into
production, and with the help of orthopaedic surgeon Dr Narendra Nath, had
thousands of patients fitted with the device. The stent, developed by a team
under Dr A. Venugopal Reddy and Koneru Bose, was patented as the ‘KalamRaju Stent’. The introduction of the Kalam-Raju Stent caused a price crash in the
market for imported stents, and even today stents are available to Indian patients
at the lowest rates in the world. The Technology Institutions (TI) programme of
the newly founded ICICI Bank provided one million dollars’ funding to set up a
Cardiovascular Technology Institute at Hyderabad. This led to the creation of the
Care Hospital under Dr B. Soma Raju.1
When Dr Kalam was approaching the age of sixty-two years in October 1993,

a momentum was created at the DRDO headquarters for his exit. He also
received an offer to join Madras University as vice chancellor, perhaps
orchestrated as an easy exit route. The news was made public and the
newspapers carried stories of ‘decks cleared for Dr Kalam’s exit’. Dr Kalam’s
personal file was sent to Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao for approval of his
relieving order.
Prime Minister Rao did not sign the relieving order, but called Dr Kalam to
meet him with Dr V.S. Arunachalam, who was now working as his adviser in the
Prime Minister’s Office (PMO). The prime minister asked why Dr Kalam
wanted to go to Madras. Dr V.S. Arunachalam remained silent. When the prime
minister gave Dr Kalam a querying look, Dr Kalam said that he had reached
sixty-two years of age, and it was time for him to retire from government
service. The prime minister retorted that he was seventy-two, and should also
retire in that case. He wrote on Dr Kalam’s file ‘service tenure extended till
further orders’.
In 1994, The Indian Science Congress invited Dr Kalam to speak at its
eighty-first congress held in Jaipur. There, he gave a clarion call for developing
technology spin-offs so that health-care imports could be minimized. He stressed
that the pain of sickness was being compounded by high costs for treatment, and
this must be alleviated by indigenous technology and biomedical ventures. ‘Let
my brain remove your pain,’ he said. Dr Kalam announced the creation of a
Society for Biomedical Technology (SBMT) as an inter-ministerial working
group to bring doctors, engineers and public service administrators together for
this purpose. He assigned its management to his trusted friends Y.S. Rajan, Dr B.
Soma Raju and Sivathanu Pillai.
I was appointed as the programme manager to converge the medical, defence,
scientific and government social streams. He presented to each member a copy
of Man the Unknown written by the Nobel laureate and cardiothoracic surgeon
Dr Alexis Carrel in 1935. He read aloud to all members a paragraph from the
book in the first meeting of the SBMT governing board: ‘To progress again, man
must remake himself. And he cannot remake himself without suffering. For he is
both the marble and the sculptor. In order to uncover his true visage he must
shatter his own substance with heavy blows of his hammer.’2
When the stent was ready, the question of statutory approval came up. The

office of the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) said that they only
regulated pharmaceuticals, and stents did not come under their purview. Indeed,
even after the passage of two decades, little has changed.3 Dr Kalam called up Dr
P. Dasgupta, the DCGI, and requested him to provide a no-objection certificate
after examining the documents, even if the stent did not strictly fall under his
jurisdiction. Dr Dasgupta consented, facilitating the production of the stent. Dr
Dasgupta visited the stent manufacturing unit at the Care Foundation,
Hyderabad, and told Dr Soma Raju that he was deeply touched by the zeal
shown by Dr Kalam in his push for affordable indigenous products. He said that
only if those at the helm of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and
other such bodies showed care for the interests of poor patients and supported
innovation, would world-class drugs and treatments become affordable.
The SBMT developed Cytoscan, a PC-based interactive image analysis
system for objective assessment of cells for diagnosis/prognosis of carcinomas.
Software for classifying cancerous/normal cells on a cervical smear brought
together scientists at the Bangalore-based Defence Bioengineering and
Electromedical Laboratory (DEBEL) and oncologists and pathologists at the
NIMS, Hyderabad. The SBMT developed a social welfare project named Tulasi,
after the plant revered as an elixir of life in India, to screen women in rural areas
for the early detection of cervical cancer. Dr Kalam requested his friend Mata
Prasad, secretary Department of Welfare, to provide financial support for
conducting Tulasi’s field trials.
I received a call from Dr Kalam to immediately come to Delhi with a request
proposal from the SBMT for the funding. There was no Internet for information
searches in those days, and word processing had just arrived. All that I could
manage at such short notice was a five-page write-up, cobbling together
whatever information I could muster on the medical, technical and social aspects
of the project. When Dr Kalam saw my meagre effort, he did not like it and
scolded me, saying, ‘Funny guy, I am seeking fifty-lakh funding for you, and
you can’t even write a fifty-page proposal! In Delhi, unless you write big, no one
gets impressed, no one gives you money. People judge your quality by how
much you can write and how well you can speak.’
Fortunately for me, Mata Prasad, the officer with whom the proposal rested,
was kind with my write-up. He graciously sanctioned the project and noted that

screening poor women in time for fatal cervix cancer is the best form of welfare
he had come across and asked me convey his respect for the compassion Dr
Kalam had demonstrated for the underprivileged. It is important that people
occupying high positions critically examine their capabilities, which are indeed
enormous, and use them for the good of faceless poor citizens and solve their
problems. He however asked me to modify the title a bit to fit to a scheme and
‘spare me from any post-retirement headache for doing this good task given to
me by the noble soul Kalam’.
SBMT also attempted to make a cardiac pacemaker, and an external
pacemaker was successfully developed. But there was no semiconductor foundry
in India – and even at the time of writing, India does not have this vital
technological infrastructure – to take this work forward. In another project, the
development of a Nd-YAG laser for ophthalmic applications was attempted
between L.V. Prasad Eye Institute and the Defence Science Centre, New Delhi.
But it did not progress far. DMRL and MIDHANI developed titanium dental
implants under the guidance of Brig. T. Ranindranath at the Institute of Nuclear
Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS), New Delhi. However, the work
undertaken to develop a bileaflet heart valve with pyrolytic carbon between
DRDL and the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and
Technology (SCTIMST), Trivandrum, also came to nothing.
India clearly had a long way to go to meet its technology needs. Doubtlessly,
there would need to be some compromise between the ambition for the
indigenous production of all the nation’s military and civilian technology needs
and what was feasible. For this, the Self-Reliance Committee made a distinction
between the concepts of ‘self-sufficiency’ and ‘self-reliance’, though both terms
had been alternately used in the Indian context. It was settled that selfsufficiency meant indigenously producing everything that the armed forces
needed, whereas self-reliance meant equipping the armed forces with a whole
range of equipment that might derive from an assortment of foreign and
domestic sources. Dr Kalam recognized that an inflexible adherence to ‘selfsufficiency’ was not an ideal path for a country like India, because India’s
industrial and research and development bases were not yet sufficiently
developed. Thus, self-reliance would be the order of the day, at least for some
time to come.

Furthermore, Dr Kalam did not sugar-coat the fact that India’s defence
production sector and research and development laboratories also suffered from
a capability differential with their international counterparts. He felt that joint
ventures with countries like Russia and France for co-production and
development of defence equipment could be one way of addressing this. Dr
Kalam famously said, ‘It is not the quantum of investment but the quality of
synergy that we build with academia, the private sector and the DRDO that
would be the key to improving our design capability in key technologies.’ This,
along with improved production organization and collaboration with globally
respected original equipment manufacturers and design houses, was indeed
essential.
The key to self-reliance and eventual self-sufficiency was India’s nine
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs). Unlike the ordnance factories,
which were departmentally run organizations, the DPSUs were corporate entities
with relatively more financial and operational freedom. DPSUs were also larger
and operated in the high-end technology spectrums such as aerospace,
electronics and warships. The Hindustan Aeronautics Limited was the largest
and accounted for over half of all DPSU production and sales. Bharat
Electronics Ltd was the premier defence electronics company, with nine
production units and thirty-one manufacturing divisions spread across seven
states. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) catered to the core needs of
defence services such as trucks, diesel engines, earthmovers and railways.
Bharat Dynamics Ltd (BDL) built strategic and tactical missiles, and underwater
and aerial weapons. MIDHANI produced special steels, super alloys and
titanium alloys that were the core requirements not only of defence production
but also of the space and atomic energy programmes. Mazagon Dock Limited
(MDL), Bombay; Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers (GRSE), Calcutta;
Goa Shipyard Ltd (GSL), Goa; and Hindustan Shipyard Ltd (HSL),
Visakhapatnam, were engaged in shipbuilding and other naval engineering
services.
Dr Kalam realized that by and large, the practice of licensed production had
had its day. HAL was by this time an industry giant, assembling aircraft; this
organization, and others of its type, should now be striving to become
international technological leaders in their respective fields. Starting at

Bangalore, HAL now had several facilities throughout India including Nasik,
Korba, Kanpur, Koraput, Lucknow, Bangalore and Hyderabad. Dr Kalam spent a
good deal of effort understanding the growth of HAL. HAL had initially been
started for the overhauling of aircraft operating in the region under the British
and their companies. HAL’s first big order came in 1946, for the repair and
overhaul of 100 Tiger Moth Aircraft. These were a 1930s biplane designed by
Geoffrey de Havilland and operated by the Royal Air Force (RAF) and others as
a primary trainer.
When India gained Independence, HAL was recognized as the authorized
service centre for the American aerospace manufacturer, the Douglas Aircraft
Company in India. HAL manufactured Percival Prentice Trainer Aircraft. In
1950, HAL was admitted as a member of the Society of British Aircraft
Constructors, and was contracted to manufacture Vampire aircraft under licence
from the British company De Havilland Aviation Ltd.
After becoming a public sector company under the Ministry of Defence in
1951, HAL had successfully built and flown, within the following ten years, the
Marut HF-24 at Bangalore and HS-748 aircraft at Kanpur. The manufacture of
Gnat aircraft under licence from the British firm Folland Ltd was commenced in
1956. In 1962, HAL ventured into building helicopters under licence from the
French aircraft manufacturer Sud Aviation. Russian cooperation was sought for
the manufacture of MiG-21 FL aircraft, including its engines and avionics. In
1964, the first Orpheus 703 aircraft engine manufactured from raw materials by
HAL was test-accepted. The engines powered the intermediate jet trainer Kiran
aircraft.
By 1973, HAL had delivered MiG-21 M aircraft of the CTS series, produced
under licence in 1973, and ‘Fly Away’ Cheetah helicopters. And by 1977, the
helicopters were being produced from the raw material stage. In 1979, HAL
entered into a licence agreement with British Aerospace for the manufacture of
Jaguar aircraft. The first Jaguar Aircraft built indigenously from the raw material
stage was handed over to the Indian Air Force in 1988. Around this time, the
Indian Air Force purchased and installed the facilities for the overhaul of
Mirage-2000 aircraft of the French aircraft manufacturer Dassault Aviation.
Dr Kalam was deeply involved with the aerospace division of HAL right from
the SLV-3 days, and saw through its expansion for the fabrication of missile

structures under IGMDP. The Prithvi missile wing bays, aerofoil wings,
propellant tanks and aluminium warhead casings were made at HAL’s aerospace
division. I was involved with C.S. Maheshwari in getting Trishul airframe
sections fabricated there. We worked together in the development of the
magnesium casting of the Akash missile section at the Foundry and Forge
Division with P.K. Sengupta.
Starting with the manufacture of communications equipment in 1956, Bharat
Electronics Ltd (BEL) set up a radar manufacturing facility for the army and an
in-house research and development installation in 1966 at Bangalore. In the
1970s, BEL established manufacturing facilities for television transmitters for
Doordarshan and began manufacturing frigate radars for the navy. A second unit
of BEL was set up at Ghaziabad in 1974 to manufacture radars and troposcatter
communication equipment for the Indian Air Force. The Space Electronic
Division was instituted at Bangalore to support the nation’s satellite programmes
in 1982. Dr Kalam brought BEL on board as the principal integrator of the
Akash missile system and facilitated the creation of the BEL unit at Hyderabad
to manufacture electronic warfare equipment.
The Self-Reliance Committee had underscored the need to improve our selfreliance quotient from 30 per cent in 1992 to 70 per cent by 2005. The
committee also identified the critical technologies required – gallium arsenide
devices, fibre optics, smart weapon subsystems, heavy particle beams, focal
plane array and hypersonic propulsion. It recommended the creation of a
Defence Technology Fund of Rs 100 crore to focus on ‘core’ and ‘mother’
technology that are necessary for building state-of-the-art defence systems.4
These would include multimode radars, aero engines, carbon fibres and the
stealth capability for Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), for example.
The committee’s report underscored the need to create a Self-reliance
Implementation Council (SRIC) as the ‘mastermind’ of the self-reliance
endeavour. The SRIC would bring together the heads of DRDO, the army, navy,
air force and the Department of Defence Production to ensure that the goals of
self-reliance are monitored regularly and effectively. Dr Kalam opted for the
tested model of design, development and production of Sukhoi fighter planes in
Russia. There, the Sukhoi Design Bureau effectively steered the aeronautical
programmes in sync with the production houses.

Dr Kalam felt that in a turbulent world where the status quo and technology
are fiercely guarded by established powers, India must make concerted and
judiciously formulated plans for its technological progress. It must improve its
knowledge base with the active participation of academic institutions in the
national programmes. Moreover, all stakeholders must pool their efforts in the
programme: they must not be allowed by the political leadership to develop
fiefdoms and fight turf wars. Accepting failure is indeed the springboard of
success. This is how Dr Kalam envisioned India’s tomorrow. With sagacious
understanding, Dr Kalam said, ‘The whole universe conspires to give the best to
those who dream and work. We need to seize them with both hands.’