Chariot of Fire

The most powerful weapon on earth is the human soul on fire.
– Ferdinand Foch
Supreme commander of the Allied forces in World War I

he first flight trial of the Agni missile was scheduled for 20 April 1989, at
Chandipur. It would be an unprecedented exercise. A missile launch
involves a wide array of safety hazards, far greater than those of space launch
vehicles. This calls for the location of a launch site over a remote area of land or
water. The Bay of Bengal provides an ideal stretch of sea over which missiles
can be safely fired; it is, in a sense, a protected sea. On the western side, it can be
monitored from peninsular India and in the east, there is the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands chain. This means that telemetry stations can easily be set up to
cover most of the bay area.
All preparatory activities for the launch went as scheduled. The people living
in nearby villages were moved away at the time of the launch, which attracted
media attention and led to much controversy. When the launch day arrived,
though, the whole nation was watching the DRDO. Foreign pressure had been
exerted through diplomatic channels not to go ahead with the flight trial. But the
Government of India took a firm stand for its national defence prerogatives.
Defence Minister K.C. Pant stationed himself at Balasore for the duration of the
launch.
At T-14 seconds, the computer signalled ‘hold’, indicating that one of the
instruments was functioning erratically. It was promptly rectified. Now, the
down-range station asked for a ‘hold’. The Car Nicobar tracking station, which
was networked with other tracking stations and naval ships via satellite to chart

T

Agni’s flight path, reported a problem. In another few seconds, multiple ‘holds’
were necessitated. This resulted in an unintended internal power consumption,
and the launch had to be aborted. The missile had to be opened up to replace onboard batteries. The anticlimax caused widespread disappointment. Defence
Minister Pant left for Delhi with a promise to return soon. Dr Kalam had to lift
his team out of their despondency, and he did so with characteristic realism: ‘I
lost my launch vehicle in the sea and had to rebuild the whole thing. Your
missile is in front of you. In fact, you have lost nothing but a few weeks of
rework.1
The media predictably went up in arms, circulating various interpretations of
the postponement of the flight to suit the fancy of a wide spectrum of readership.
At any rate, the missile was made ready for the launch on 1 May 1989. The
defence minister arrived as per his promise. But again at T-10 seconds a ‘hold’
appeared, and one control component was found malfunctioning. A control valve
had burst, and nitrogen gas had leaked in one of the motors. The launch was
aborted once again. Such things are very common in rocketry – and happen quite
often elsewhere. But the expectant nation was in no mood to appreciate the
difficulties of test missile deployment.
Dr Kalam did not like a cartoon published in The Hindu, his favourite
newspaper, which showed a villager counting some currency notes and
commenting to another, ‘Yes, it’s the compensation for moving away from my
hut near the test site – a few more postponements and I can build a house of my
own.’ ‘People just do not understand the complexities involved in our work,’ Dr
Kalam explained. Nonetheless, the humour of Amul’s cartoon recommending
their butter as a propellant and the missile being called IDBM for Intermittently
Delayed Ballistic Missile, was well received.
In an exemplary show of wholesome leadership, an undistracted and resolute
Dr Kalam remained with his team, monitoring all its activity. Though a change
in weather conditions at Chandipur was predicted, Dr Kalam prepared for a third
attempt to launch before the onset of the monsoon season. The launch was slated
for 22 May 1989. Defence Minister K.C. Pant arrived on the day prior to the
launch. It was a full moon night. He invited Dr Kalam and General K.N. Singh
for a walk after their dinner. The waves of the Bay of Bengal were crashing and
roaring at high tide. Mr Pant asked Dr Kalam, ‘What would you like me to do to

celebrate the success tomorrow? What gift would you like for yourself?’ Dr
Kalam recalled his reaction to the defence minister’s offer:‘What did I want?
What was it that I did not have? What could make me happier? And then I found
an answer. We need 100,000 saplings to plant at RCI.’2
The defence minister’s face lit up with a friendly glow. ‘You have brought the
blessings of mother earth, Kalam. We will succeed tomorrow,’ he said. Finally,
on 22 May 1989 at exactly 7.17 a.m., the Agni missile blossomed into a chariot
of fire that propelled India into an exclusive club dominated by the world’s
technological and military giants. The 300-odd scientists at the control centre
watching the pencil-thin missile arc across the sky on television monitors
thumped each other on the back. Dr Kalam was bodily lifted on the shoulders of
the jubilant scientists.
Meanwhile, Agni was igniting nervous reactions in many of the world’s
capitals, stretching from Washington to Beijing. Only five countries – the US,
the Soviet Union, France, China and Israel – had developed IRBM (missiles with
a range of 500 kilometres to 5,500 kilometres) technology. For India, Agni
represented a quantum leap in strategic capability. At 7.20 a.m., three minutes
after Agni blasted off, Defence Minister K.C. Pant picked up the hotline that had
been specially set up between the Chandipur Control Centre and the prime
minister’s office on Race Course Road and said just one word to the prime
minister: ‘Congratulations.’ Rajiv Gandhi immediately understood what Pant
meant. On the previous two occasions that Pant had called on the hotline, he was
the bearer of bad news. This time, the prime minister was delighted. He stayed
on the line, asking a number of technical questions, which showed how keenly
he had followed the project. He had a very deep understanding of the technology.
The prime minister’s subsequent speech in parliament later that day was
cautious, in that it did not trumpet Agni’s strategic importance. But Rajiv added
a line: ‘We must remember that technological backwardness also leads to
subjugation.’ While he stressed that Agni was only a ‘technology demonstration’
and ‘not a weapon system’, no one could be in any doubt that Agni had
broadened India’s strategic defence options more than at any time since the 1974
Pokharan nuclear test. Dr Kalam declared, ‘The launch is a boost to the
confidence of Indian scientists and is a symbol of their cooperation, wherever
they are.’ Pant aptly pointed out, ‘The fact that twice the mission was aborted

seconds before the launch only proved that our testing and tracking systems were
perfect. The two aborted launches were, in that sense, a tribute to our
technology.’
Despite the triumph of the Agni launch, the defence establishment was well
aware of rival nations’ progress in missile capability. While the Agni missile had
been under development, Pakistan too had made advances. It had tested two
surface-to-surface missiles, Hatf-1 and Hatf-2, built with the help of China.
Pakistan claimed that Hatf-1 had a range of 80 km and its successor, a range of
300 km. This immediately spurred India into the full-scale development of Agni
and its four smaller sisters. Once the services decided on their precise role and
deployment – and the government gave the go-ahead – the missiles would be put
into production and be ready for operational use within five years.
In terms of cost-effectiveness, it made perfect sense for New Delhi to give the
green light for production. Agni could deliver – without any chance of being
countered – a payload equivalent to four deep-penetration Jaguars with
considerable accuracy, but with no danger to pilots or aircraft. Agni was
developed at a meagre budget of three million dollars; and it had established
India in the league of ballistic missiles nations.
After the rigmarole and unpleasantness of having to relocate people every
time a launch was planned – and to avoid the media attention it attracted – Dr
Kalam proposed to move the launch site to Wheeler Island, a land mass of about
2 sq. km in area, approximately 20 km off Chandipur coast. But for that, the
Government of Orissa would first have to hand the island over to the DRDO.
Recollecting how Dr Vikram Sarabhai secured the church grounds at Thumba to
set up TERLS, Dr Kalam sought an appointment with the chief minister of
Orissa, Biju Patnaik.
Biju Patnaik was a tall man with a regal personality. Dr Kalam had heard
accounts of his daredevil piloting acts. On 24 July 1947, he had flown a Dakota
aircraft into Java, defying the Dutch siege and flying Indonesian Prime Minister
Sultan Sjahrir to Singapore. This act had enabled newly independent Indonesia’s
participation in the first Inter-Asia Conference in New Delhi. In another heroic
act, he had piloted the first plane that left Palam Airport at Delhi at dawn on 27
October 1947. He landed at Srinagar Airport, taking soldiers of 1 Sikh Regiment
to save Kashmir.

Biju Patnaik gave Dr Kalam a warm hug. He said, ‘Kalam, you are a good
person. I have been following your work since Sarabhai’s days. Whatever you
ask, I will give. Your mission – the missile programme – is very important to the
country. Anything needed from Orissa will be yours … give me a promise (that
you will make an ICBM). The day India makes its own ICBM, I shall be
stronger as an Indian.’3
Wheeler Island later became the missile test facility for most Indian missiles,
but Biju Patnaik’s promise could not be fulfilled before his death on 17 April
1997.
The successful Agni missile test raised international hackles. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, India’s pronouncement that the Agni was a ‘technology
demonstrator project’ to establish re-entry vehicle technologies did little to
assuage its controversy. India had used a SLV-3 booster motor, a component of
its civilian space research programme, for what were transparently military
purposes. As with the Prithvi, the United States had opposed the programme as
another potential proliferation affront to the MTCR. What seemed to have
eluded Western critics, though, was the laudable self-reliance India had achieved
in missile technology. The SLV-3 booster motor was a bona fide Indian effort.
No external support was ever solicited or received for its development. Dr
Kalam said, ‘The point is not who will allow India hereafter from asserting our
role in the world, the point is who will stop India?’
On Republic Day 1990, the Indian nation celebrated the success of its missile
programme. The Padma Vibhushan, the second highest civil award of the
Republic of India, was conferred on Dr Kalam and Dr Arunachalam. Two other
missile scientists, R.N. Agarwal and J.C. Bhattacharya, were decorated with
Padma Shri awards. It was the first time in the history of India that so many
scientists working with one organization were selected for the national awards in
a single year.
Dr Kalam was invited by the Madurai Kamaraj University to deliver their
convocation address. Upon reaching Madurai, Dr Kalam looked for his teacher
Iyadurai Solomon, who was by now a Reverend Father and eighty years old. He
hired a taxi and looked for his house for more than an hour. He brought him to
the convocation and made him sit in the front row. Dr P.C. Alexander, the
governor of Tamil Nadu, and chancellor of the University, then invited Reverend

Father Iyadurai Solomon to the dais. Dr Kalam said in his lecture, ‘Every
convocation day of every university is like opening the floodgates of energy
which – once harnessed by institutions, organizations and industry – aids in
nation building.’ He later recounted his former teacher’s touching words: ‘After
my lecture, I bowed down to my teacher. “You have not only reached my goals,
Kalam! You have eclipsed them,” he told me in a voice choked with emotion.’4
A fortnight later, on 7 February 1990, N.R. Iyer and his team celebrated the
awards for the missile programme with the maiden flight of the Nag missile.
They repeated the feat again the next day. The missile featured a high-strength
composite airframe with foldable wings and fins, an Imaging Infra-Red (IIR)
seeker with high immunity to countermeasures, an on-board real-time processor,
a compact sensor package, an electric actuation system and a digital autopilot.
Once launched, the Nag would not need to be guided, allowing the launcher to
seek cover. The missile could use its autonomous on-board guidance to hit even
a fast-moving tank.
Prahlada and his team launched Akash missile on 14 August 1990, proving
the Ram-rocket technology, which had been developed for the first time in India.
The medium-range surface-to-air missile (MR-SAM) with a range of 25 km and
an altitude of 18 km, Akash would be completely guided by radar. It was fitted
with a digital proximity fuse, to detonate its warhead after coming close to a
moving target; a direct hit was not necessary. This marked the successful
completion of the first phase of the IGMDP.
Towards the end of 1990, Jadavpur University conferred on Dr Kalam an
honorary degree of Doctor of Science (DSc) at a special convocation, along with
an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) to Prof. Amartya Sen. In the same
convocation, an honorary degree was conferred on Nelson Mandela in absentia.
Dr Kalam became emotional upon hearing his name clubbed with this great
nation builder and academician. The meeting between Dr Kalam and Dr
Amartya Sen at the convocation laid a foundation for the future, when they
would work together to revive the ancient Nalanda University. Dr Amartya Sen
recalled his interaction with Dr Kalam later in his book Argumentative Indian:
Dr Kalam, who comes from a Muslim family and is a researcher of great achievement, has a very
strong commitment to Indian nationalism. He is also an extremely amiable person (as I had
discovered when I had the privilege of his company at an honorary degree ceremony at Jadavpur

University in Calcutta in 1990). Kalam’s philanthropic concerns are very strong, and he has a record
of helping in welfare-related causes.5

The year 1991 began on an ominous note. The Iraqi army had invaded Kuwait.
On 15 January 1991, a powerful coalition led by the United States launched
Operation Desert Storm, one of the most rapid and decisive military actions of
all time. In just over four days of one-sided combat, the coalition would liberate
Kuwait, demolish the Iraqi army and take hordes of Iraqi prisoners – all at a
minimal cost in casualties. A narrative soon coalesced that focused on the role of
new military technologies in the victory, particularly those that exploited the
microchip and the digital revolution. Kalam was now regularly questioned about
the indigenous military technology’s capabilities:
The nation was quick to draw parallels between the missiles operational in the Gulf War and our
own warhead carriers. A common query I encountered was whether Prithvi was superior to a Scud,
whether Akash could perform like a Patriot, and so on. Hearing a ‘Yes’ or a ‘Why not!’ from me,
people’s faces would light up with pride and satisfaction.6

After the Gulf War concluded on 28 February 1991, in the month of March, over
500 scientists of DRDL and RCI assembled to discuss issues that had emerged in
this missile warfare. Dr Kalam posed a question: Was technology or weapon
symmetry with other nations feasible, and if so, should it be attempted? A young
scientist asked why India is apologetic about calling Agni a missile. Dr Kalam
said, ‘It is a missile. A rose is a rose is a rose is a rose,’ eliciting thunderous
applause. The meeting ended after a lively discussion spread over three hours
described Desert Storm a testimony of ‘revolution in military affairs’ by the
rapid advances in electronics, information and communication technology.
In the same year, Dr Kalam received an honorary degree of Doctor of Science
from IIT, Bombay. The citation described him as ‘an inspiration behind the
creation of a solid technological base from which India’s future aerospace
programmes can be launched to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century’.
The identity of Dr Kalam as India’s Missile Man had been well established by
this time.
In July 1992, Dr Kalam took over as the scientific adviser to the defence
minister and director general of DRDO. He succeeded Dr V.S. Arunachalam. He
would report to Sharad Pawar, the defence minister, in the cabinet of Prime

Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao.