CREATION

Life is a series of natural and spontaneous changes. Don’t resist them – that only creates
sorrow. Let reality be reality. Let things flow naturally forward in whatever way they like.
– Lao-tzu
Philosopher and poet of ancient China

2.1

Indra’s Net

We live in a cosmos of infinite realms upon realms, mutually containing one another.
Different people have different journeys for different reasons. You can’t judge, but you can
celebrate that there are connections everywhere.
– The Avatamsaka Sutra
Chinese Buddhism

alam was handpicked by Dr Sarabhai as the project director for the Satellite
Launch Vehicle (SLV). This would be the first indigenous rocket
development endeavour to put a satellite in a low-earth orbit, which means at an
altitude of between 100 miles (160 kilometres) and 1,200 miles (2,000
kilometres), with an orbital period of between approximately eighty-eight
minutes and 127 minutes. Objects below 100 miles of altitude will experience
very rapid orbital decay and altitude loss under the gravitational pull of earth. A
target of putting a 40 kg satellite load into a 400 km orbit was set.
SLV was conceived as a four-stage rocket with all solid-propellant motors
along the lines of the American Scout launch vehicle first used in the 1960s. The
Scout (an acronym for Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test system) was
designed in 1957 at the NACA Langley Center. It was the first – and for a long
time, the only – orbital launch vehicle to be entirely composed of solid fuel
stages. The standard Scout launch vehicle was approximately 75 ft (23 m) in
length, with a launch weight of 47,398 pounds (21,500 kg).
The Scout design persisted, as it was the most proven and reliable of the
satellite launchers of the times. Indian scientists had no prior experience of
designing a launch vehicle, and a four-stage, all solid-propulsion design was
easier than the complex liquid equivalent and seemed to be the most likely route
for success. By 1971, the design phase of the launcher was completed, and of the

K

six designs Dr Sarabhai chose the third – hence the name SLV-3. It was a vehicle
measuring 22 m in length and weighing 17,000 kg, and it could place a 30 kg
satellite into near-earth orbit. Though SLV-3 resembled Scout in its morphology,
the sub-assembly and fuel assemble were designed afresh by Indian scientists
and engineers.
Besides Kalam, the core SLV-3 project team consisted of Dr S. Srinivasan,
Ved Prakash Sandlas, D. Narayana Moorthi, G. Madhavan Nair, M.S.R. Dev,
M.K. Abdul Majeed, D. Sasikumar, P.S. Veeraraghavan and A. Sivathanu Pillai.
Dr V.R. Gowariker, M.R. Kurup and A.E. Muthunayagam were tasked with
developing the first, second and third stages. Kalam was given the additional
responsibility of developing the fourth stage, which would be a composite motor.
The world of technology is deeply interconnected and marked by fierce
competition. In 1960, President Charles de Gaulle proclaimed the French
aspiration to reach space. The Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), was
formed on 1 March 1962, with the task of planning and executing the French
space programme. Diamant (French for Diamond) was the first French space
launcher. Diamant was the first satellite launcher and the only one at that point
of time not built by either the USA or USSR.
In early 1969, Kalam received a call from Dr Sarabhai stating that he would
be visiting Trivandrum along with Prof Curien, president of the French space
organization, CNES. Kalam was asked to give a presentation about the fourth
stage to the CNES team. After the presentation was made, Kalam was told that
SLV-3 fourth stage was also being considered as the upper stage for the French
four-stage launch vehicle Diamant BC. A decision was taken in the same
meeting that the SLV-3 fourth stage should be reconfigured to match and suit
both French and Indian satellite launch vehicles. Kalam recalled his enthusiasm:
We were just in the design stage, and here was a visionary whose dream was that Indian scientists
could build an upper-stage rocket system compatible with both Indian and French satellite launch
vehicle systems … this resulted in an interesting partnership when the European Space Agency’s
Ariane launched the Indian APPLE satellite, that would use the SLV-3 fourth stage as an apogee
boost motor later in the future.1

This experience gave Kalam two important messages. First, whatever your
position in the organizational hierarchy, a leader with an open mind locates the

right person and encourages him to succeed. The second was that a great leader
imbues his team members with confidence and makes them feel that ‘we can do
it’.
As a matter of fact, the Diamant and SLV airframes were incompatible.
Kalam had to modify the SLV-3 fourth-stage design to suit the Diamant airframe.
The 400 mm diameter was changed to 650 mm and the propellant mass went up
from 250 kg to 600 kg. It took the team two years to develop the new design that
would be the Diamant rocket’s third and upper stage. Then France abruptly
abandoned its national launcher programme in favour of the European Ariane
launcher in 1975. Kalam was very upset, but Dr Sarabhai enlightened him about
the complexities of international collaborations in aerospace. There is give and
take in so many forms and spread over long periods of time, sometimes across
generations of people. International technology exchange is like Indrajaal. No
good work done ever goes waste; it gets reflected somewhere else and utilized.
The satellite launching station at Sriharikota Island on the east coast of the
Indian peninsula in Andhra Pradesh, chosen in 1969 for launching bigger
rockets, became operational in 1971. It was named Sriharikota Range (SHAR).
On 9 October 1971, the Rohini RH-1 satellite, a two-stage rocket using a solid
propellant, was launched from SHAR. It carried a 7 kg payload to an altitude of
19 km.
In 1970, Kalam attended the Bombay National Electronics Conference, where
Vikram Sarabhai announced plans for an Indian National Satellite (INSAT).The
INSAT was primarily a direct-broadcast satellite, to be placed into orbit with the
intention of educating Indian villagers through television. Attending the
conference was an eminent array of academics, industrialists, politicians,
bureaucrats, researchers, scientists and engineers, as well as a substantial crew of
Indian journalists. It was a perfect place to build consensus for a national
satellite. Sarabhai’s presentation of the INSAT plans thrilled the crowd.
‘Dissenters’ with prepared questions were planted in the audience by the wellconnected ‘Sarabhai boys’, to help allay any genuine doubts about the project.
Kalam had started seeing the greater context wherein his work was placed. He
realized that SLVs and missiles were indeed two fruits of the same tree of
rocketry. Almost parallel to his work on SLV, the DRDO was gearing itself for
developing an indigenous surface-to-air missile. Narayanan, who worked with

Kalam on RATO – and was now promoted to the rank of air commodore – was
given the reins of DRDL, Hyderabad. With his hallmark impatience, he chose
the quicker route of one-to-one substitution by reverse engineering, rather than
following ISRO’s policy of new design and indigenous technology development.
Indigenous replication of the Russian missile SA-2 was taken up at DRDL
with the code name Devil. SA-2 was a simple two-stage missile design with
three sets of four cruciform fins. Guidance control and initial roll stabilization
was provided by electronics in two of the rear fins. Once launched, its main
booster burned for four to five seconds before the primary sustainer motor
ignited and burned for another twenty-two seconds. The warhead of the missile
was filled with 130 kg of high explosives. Its nose section was equipped to hold
a variety of fuses – proximity, impact and command.
The SA-2 was indeed a potent air-defence weapon in its time. It was perhaps
best known for downing a United States U-2 spy plane over Cuba on 27 October
1962, but it was successfully deployed elsewhere. The North Vietnamese shot
down a United States F-4C fighter aircraft in 1965, and in the same year a
United States RB-47 was shot down over the Black Sea – both using SA-2s. As
the pace of the Devil project picked up, the frequency of the Missile Panel
meetings increased.
It was Kalam’s practice to brief Dr Sarabhai over the telephone immediately
after every Missile Panel meeting. After attending one such meeting on 30
December 1971, Kalam spoke to Dr Sarabhai by phone from Delhi airport,
before boarding his flight for Trivandrum. Dr Sarabhai was in Trivandrum and
was to return to Bombay in the night. He instructed Kalam to meet him at
Trivandrum in the airport immediately after alighting from the aeroplane.
When Kalam reached Trivandrum, a pall of gloom hung in the air. The
aircraft ladder operator Kutty told him with tears running down his cheeks that
Dr Sarabhai was no more. He had passed away an hour earlier following a
cardiac arrest. Kalam was flabbergasted. He had just spoken to Dr Sarabhai and
expected to see him. He stayed back at the airport till Dr Sarabhai’s mortal
remains were airlifted to Ahmedabad for the last rites. Kalam told me once, ‘Let
no man in the world live in delusion. Without a guru none can cross over to the
other shore.’ When I asked him ‘How does one find the guru?’, he replied, ‘Let
each man take the path according to his capacity, understanding and

temperament. His true guru will meet him along that path. I was doing my work
to the best of my ability and respecting my situation, and Dr Sarabhai came into
my life.’
Prof. M.G.K. Menon was given interim charge of the Indian space
programme. He convened a large national seminar of scientists, engineers,
technocrats and administrators to discuss and define the ten-year profile prepared
by Dr Sarabhai, who was declared the father of the Indian space programme.
The Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station was renamed in his honour.
Recognizing the growing demands and importance of space activities, the
government in June 1972 constituted an independent Space Commission and a
Department of Space. It invited Prof. Satish Dhawan, the director of Indian
Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore since 1962, to head both organizations.
Prof. Dhawan also took over as chairman of the ISRO, which functions under
the Department of Space.
In May 1972, Dr Brahm Prakash joined as the first director of the Vikram
Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC). Dr Prakash was the creator of the Nuclear Fuel
Complex (NFC) in Hyderabad, the former chief of the Department of Metallurgy
at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) and one of the scientific secretaries for
the first United Nations conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy that
was held in Geneva in 1955.
The RATO system was tested on 8 October 1972 at Bareilly Air Force Station
in Uttar Pradesh, where a high-performance Sukhoi-16 Jet aircraft became
airborne after a short run of 1,200 metres, as against the usual length of 2
kilometres. The sixty-sixth RATO motor was used for the test. The test was
adjudged an unqualified success, and the effort was said to have saved some five
million dollars. Kalam and Narayanan’s partnership, under the stewardship of
the visionary Dr Vikram Sarabhai, had now paid its dividends, and the benefits
of swadeshi aerospace were abundantly clear: ‘Including trial expenses, we spent
less than Rs twenty-five lakhs on the entire project. The Indian RATO could be
purchased at Rs. 17,000 per piece, and it replaced the imported RATO, which
cost 4000 dollars.’2
After assuming the leadership of the SLV-3 project, Kalam faced conflicting
demands on his time. He had to attend to committee work and correspondence,
make material procurement decisions, preside over reviews and briefings; and he

needed to stay abreast of a wide range of developments. But his change in status
did not alter the way he lived in any respect. Kalam came to Trivandrum in 1968
and stayed at Indira Bhavan Lodge in a humble corner room on the ground floor.
In all his time in Trivandrum, he stayed in this same room. The room did not
have an attached bathroom then, but only a common one on the same floor. With
a single bed, a table and a chair, the small room was meant only for basic single
accommodation – it was intended for use by bachelors on a meagre salary, who
could afford nothing better. His landlady later recalled Kalam’s spartan lifestyle:
‘Kalam did not have visitors at the lodge. Once he was back from the office, he
would sit for reading. At the lodge, he communicated with only a watchman
(security guard) upon whom he depended for getting provisions and food from
nearby hotels.’3
Kalam started his day with a stroll of about 2 km around the lodge. He would
prepare a mental schedule for the day during his walk and decide two or three
things that he would like to accomplish that day. At least one of these important
tasks must further a long-term goal. ‘Without a long-term definite chief aim, a
life is like a rudderless ship – it goes nowhere,’ he would remind me.
Once in the office, Kalam would first clean his desk. Within ten minutes he
would segregate the papers there into three categories: matters that required
immediate action, matters of low priority which could be kept pending and
general reading material. He would then put the high-priority papers in front of
him on the desk, walk to his secretary’s desk and place the rest of the papers
there, out of his sight.
On New Year’s Day 1975, Kalam accompanied Dr Brahm Prakash to DRDL
for a review of the Devil missile project. The review noted excellent progress,
but Kalam observed that a one-on-one philosophy had taken precedence over the
generation of design data. Consequently, the design engineers had not been able
to pay adequate attention to the necessary analysis, which was the practice at
ISRO. Kalam learned that a successful reverse engineering process in itself was
not merely concerned with creating a copy or changing a prototype in some way.
It was more an analysis in order to deduce design features from the prototype,
with little or no knowledge about the procedures involved in its original
production.
Narayanan told Kalam that reverse engineering was an accepted and well-

developed practice in the development of military systems. The Western Allies
at the end of the war captured technical documents for the V-2 Rockets and
related technologies from the German military. The Americans then focused
their reverse engineering efforts via Operation Paperclip, which led to the
development of the PGM-11 Redstone rocket. The Soviets captured German
engineers to reproduce technical documents and plans, and worked from
captured hardware, in order to make their clone of the V-2: the SA-11/R-1
rocket.
In contrast to the galloping progress at DRDL, the SLV-3 was taking shape
slowly. Instead of following a straightforward process of replicating a prototype,
the SLV-3 was trekking along many developmental paths. The project had been
formulated in such a way that the major technological work centres could handle
propellant production, rocket motor testing and launch of any large diameter
rocket. Prof. Dhawan introduced a sponsorship programme for research in space
science and technology (RESPOND) in universities and national laboratories, to
assist in the project’s development.
At any rate, the assiduous technological development of the SLV-3 would
eventually bear its fruit. For a year, from 1 August 1975 to 31 July 1976,
hundreds and sometimes thousands of villagers gathered daily in front of each of
5,000 television sets – installed outside like a processional deity of a temple – to
watch educational television. Indian engineers had placed the television sets in
remote and especially backward villages spread in six clusters across the
subcontinent. It was an experiment in social engineering and rural upliftment as
much as it was in technology. The television programmes had been carefully
formulated to educate the villagers on how to lead better lives and grow more
food. Most villages were beyond the electricity grid and required solar electrical
installations to power the sets.
The triumph of SITE ensured the organization’s ongoing support and prestige,
both within India and internationally. For Kalam, the success of the project was
an especially personal accomplishment. Rameswaram Panchayat School, where
he had been first inspired by a class on flight nearly four decades earlier, now
had a satellite television. Kalam’s father was beaming with pride. He died in
1976 at the ripe old age of 102 years, immensely proud of his son’s
achievements.

It was during the tumultuous period of the mid-1970s, with the Emergency of
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and the resulting suspension of democratic rights,
that Kalam began to deeply ponder the country’s social and political landscape.
He could see a widening gulf between the interests of the political class and the
aspirations of India’s poor millions. A nascent idea, ‘Strength respects strength’,
would crystallize over time in Kalam’s vision for the country’s future. He could
see the potential for the country and its people to become empowered, just as he
had been – by education, hard work and the nurturing of technology.
In his immediate duties, he could see that his hard work and pioneering
efforts in indigenous aerospace – fostered by his late boss and mentor Dr Vikram
Sarabhai – had now raised the country’s international status in the field. ISRO’s
enhanced status facilitated an increase in recruitment for the first time after
Sarabhai’s death. Thousands of young professionals from elite engineering
institutions now clamoured to join its ranks. SITE opened critical paths in the
rapidly emerging European space programmes. ISRO was accepted as an equal
partner in several critical cooperative programmes managed by the European,
French and German space programmes. India may not have joined the ‘space
race’, but it was a force to be reckoned with in aerospace.
Moreover, there were evermore practical applications for the aerospace
industry, and pressing concerns for the nation’s people that the new technologies
of ISRO needed to address. One of the worst cyclonic storms to hit the Indian
shores struck Andhra Pradesh on 19 November 1977. The most affected areas
were in the delta region of the River Krishna, where a storm surge of up to 6 m
in height from the Bay of Bengal wreaked havoc on its coastal populations.
Landslides severed the railway lines on the Waltair-Kirandal route. Fields of
paddy and cash crops were submerged by the waves. Thirteen sailing vessels
went missing in the storm, and at least 50,000 people were killed. Hundreds of
bodies were later found floating in the waters, and those bloated beyond
recognition were consigned to mass funeral pyres.
The horrific scale of the casualties highlighted a need for early warning
systems for tropical cyclones. Beginning with the launching of TIROS-I in April
1960, satellites were used to detect tropical cyclones. Techniques were
developed to determine in real time a tropical cyclone’s strength from
characteristics seen on satellite imagery. Wind speed could be ascertained from

the data, and differences in temperature between the surrounding storm clouds
and the eye of the cyclone could determine the strength of the weather pattern:
the larger the temperature difference, the stronger the tropical cyclone. ISRO’s
satellites could now be deployed to help save lives, giving early warning to
millions living in low-lying coastal areas in the cyclone-prone regions of the
subcontinent.
The SLV-3 Apogee rocket, developed as a common upper stage with
Diamant, was scheduled to be flight-tested in France. Some problems surfaced
during the system integration, and Kalam was needed in France to attend to
them. Two days before Kalam’s scheduled departure to France, his mother
passed away. He took the first available bus to Nagercoil, and boarded the night
train to Rameswaram. He performed her last rites and returned to the railway
station from the burial ground. Years later, he remembered that there was little
time for grief: ‘The next morning I was back at Thumba, physically exhausted,
emotionally shattered, but determined to fulfil our ambition of flying an Indian
rocket motor on foreign soil.’4
With his parents gone, Kalam threw his entire being into the SLV project. He
withdrew from every other activity. He stopped playing badminton in the
evenings and stayed back at work, even on weekends and holidays. A stoic calm
enveloped him. Kalam immersed himself in his duties and quiet contemplation,
exercising much self-control, as some men are apt to do, in overcoming his grief.