
Smiling Buddha

It is better to rise from life as from a banquet – neither thirsty nor drunken.
– Aristotle
Greek philosopher and scientist

r Kalam was fully aware of the burden he was taking on his shoulders. He
was being interpolated into an organization with a radically different culture
to that of ISRO; and it was, at that time, functioning poorly. He had worked at
ADE earlier but those were the formative years of the DRDO, when it was
created more or less in mimicry of the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA) in the United States. Its purpose had always been to expand the frontiers
of technology and science for military applications, with the aim of reaching
beyond the forces’ immediate requirements. In this, it was now lagging behind.
Kalam’s quest would be to help the organization shed its stultifying low morale
and reliance on foreign technology, and inspire a new culture of selfempowerment to lead it towards the twenty-first century.
Dr Kalam had studied the evolution of DRDO from close quarters since its
inception. Its beginnings were more emotional than strategic. Veneration for
science was obvious in the choice of Dr Kothari as the first Chief of DRDO. Dr
Kothari had worked under the legendary Meghnad Saha during his master’s at
Allahabad University, and had done his PhD under the father of nuclear physics
Ernest Rutherford at the University of Cambridge. Special Weapon Development
Team (SWDT) did the initial work. This team was later expanded into DRDL, a
full-fledged laboratory at the campus of Defence Science Centre, Delhi, in June
1961. The laboratory was moved to Hyderabad in February 1962 on land in the
Chandrayanagutta area provided by the state government that had once housed

D

the barracks of the erstwhile Nizam’s army. The debacle in the 1962 Sino-Indian
war had provoked serious discussion of missile technology development in
India, raising the profile of the DRDO in the halls of power.
The top brass of the organization decided first to develop a wire-guided antitank missile. The anti-tank missile was a totally indigenous product – its
propulsion, control, guidance, power supply and materials were all Indian. There
were no computers, and electronic circuits were used to make calculations. The
missile was test-fired near Imarat, a village on the outskirts of Hyderabad. Dr
Kalam had visited this place earlier during his time as a member of the Missile
Advisory Committee. The tests proved the anti-tank missile reliable.
This project had laid the foundation of India’s missile programme and helped
to train many technologists, including A.V. Ranga Rao, S. Krishnan, K. Rama
Rao, Z.P. Marshal, H.S. Rama Rao and J.C. Bhattacharya. Dr Kalam had met
each one of these learned gentlemen during the course of the SLV-3’s
development, and some of them even came to Trivandrum to participate in
technical reviews. Many from the group of more than fifty scientists who were
involved in the development of India’s anti-tank missile, went on to set up
Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), Hyderabad. BDL became the production
agency of missiles. And in the late 1960s, the Government of India embarked on
the licensed production of French-developed SS-11B anti-tank missiles at BDL.
India conducted its first successful nuclear bomb test on 18 May 1974 at the
army base, Pokhran Test Range (PTR), in Rajasthan. It was the first confirmed
nuclear weapons test by a nation outside the five permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council – the victors of World War II – namely, the
USSR, the United Kingdom, France, China and the United States. The country’s
entry to the ‘nuclear club’ put an immediate focus on the missile technology for
delivering nuclear warheads. The nation’s politicians, of all political hues, would
henceforth look towards the DRDO for long-range missiles that could take the
country’s nuclear capability beyond static tests in the desert.
The rocketry demands in the forces were both immediate and long-term. In
the years leading up to the Pokhran nuclear test of 1974, the Indian Air Force
was suffering from lack of spare parts for the Soviet Union’s SAM-2 missiles for
their high-altitude air defence needs. The Government of India decided in 1972
to solve this problem by re-engineering the parts. In parallel, a programme called

Valiant was launched under Squadron Leader R. Gopalaswamy to build a rocket
engine powered by liquid propellants. Gopalaswamy started a project to pioneer
the development of a semi-cryogenic liquid rocket engine. He set up a test
facility at the Jamnagar Air Force Station and joined DRDL in 1964. The engine
was tested on 10 June 1974 in the presence of Dr Kalam.
DRDO simultaneously turned its attention to building a guidance package,
because the inertial navigation system formed an essential part of a long-range
missile. A team headed by D. Burman and comprising P. Banerjee and Avinash
Chander built a platform-based inertial navigation system (INS). It was tested on
board an Avro aircraft during 1974–75. By now, DRDL had built substantial
infrastructure in the fields of propulsion, navigation and manufacture of
materials. As it did not have its own range, the Indian Space Research
Organization’s Sriharikota base and the Indian Air Force’s Suryalanka Base,
Andhra Pradesh, were used for flight testing the SAM-2. Dr Kalam was present
for two of these flight trials.
Dr Kalam had a series of discussions with Dr Arunachalam, the chief of
DRDO and his boss. Dr Arunachalam had considerable experience in technology
development. He had received his PhD degree in materials science and
engineering from the University of Wales in 1965. He had then worked at the
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for more than a decade and the National
Aeronautical Laboratory at Bangalore, before joining the Defence Metallurgical
Research Laboratory, Hyderabad, as its director in 1975. Dr Kalam and Dr
Arunachalam could clearly envisage the demands for missile technology
multiplying in the following decades. Equally, both were convinced that only a
dynamic, cohesive organization had any chance of meeting the nation’s
requirements.
They moreover concurred that there was a need for a cultural renaissance in
the system. Dr Arunachalam was aware that almost all senior scientists at DRDL
were living with the pain of frustration and repressed anger. The sudden shelving
of the Devil missile programme without consultation had hurt them. There was
also a perception that senior officials in the Ministry of Defence had cheated
scientists of this laboratory. It was clear to Kalam that the burial of the Devil was
essential for a revival of hope and vision. Dr Arunachalam gave Dr Kalam a free
hand and promised his complete backing for the change. He was good to his

word.
Dr Kalam immediately did two things. He created a Directorate of
Management Services and invited Colonel R. Swaminathan, the head of Missile
Control Laboratory and a DRDO veteran, to head the new group. In doing so, he
aimed to address the career issues of the scientists and facilitate the smooth
functioning of the organization. He also recruited his former lieutenant at ISRO,
Sivathanu Pillai, to DRDO and helped him to organize the programme
management. These two able officers and trusted friends of Dr Kalam indeed
acted as his two hands in managing the DRDL, drawing the threads of its
damaged morale together to form a strong fabric of cooperation.
The new team was to adopt a more informal, consultative management style,
which was unfamiliar to the bureaucratically orthodox DRDO. Dr Kalam evoked
the concept of management by participation and made earnest efforts to involve
middle-level scientists and engineers in the management of the laboratory.
Kalam saw it was imperative that decisions on vital scientific and technological
problems were taken quickly and collectively:
Throughout my career I had zealously pursued openness in scientific matters. I had seen from very
close quarters the decay and disintegration that go with management through closed-door
consultations and secret manipulations. I always despised and resisted such efforts.1

At any rate, one of the challenges of these years, and it ran counter to his
dynamic and flexible nature, was organizational rigidity. Dr Kalam took some
time to change the underlying organizational culture of DRDL. The prevalent
mindset of reverse engineering had served the institution in previous decades,
when there was an exigency for armaments. Rocketry for the forces had to be
cobbled together to meet immediate defence needs in the wake of the SinoIndian war of 1962. The new culture of innovation and technological
development was the only way to serve the country’s future as a military and
technological power.
With this objective in mind, Dr Kalam undertook some measured
organizational changes. He first inducted 280 young engineers in 1984, which
was perhaps the biggest-ever induction in an Indian scientific organization. Dr
Kalam evolved a matrix organization in which, by retaining the traditional
hierarchical structure of the laboratory, he introduced a task-driven work system.

The scientists working in technology divisions were made system managers and
given exclusive responsibility for one project. An external fabrication wing was
created under P.K. Biswas, who had formidable experience of working with
public sector undertakings (PSUs) like HAL, and private sector industry such as
L&T, Godrej and Tata. Just as he had done early in his career in developing the
RH-75 rocket, Dr Kalam would rely on the best technical and scientific minds he
could muster – in and outside the government service.
Dr Kalam also formed a high-level decision-making body called the Missile
Technology Committee to map the way forward. According to Dr Kalam’s and
the committee’s reckoning, the existing Prithvi missile could not be converted
into a long-range missile, so he created a pitch for a ballistic missile involving
re-entry technology. On Dr Kalam’s insistence, a development project on reentry technology was included. Days of debate and weeks of thinking finally
culminated in a long-term Guided Missile Development Programme.
Dr Kalam invited Z.P. Marshall, the chairman and managing director of BDL,
N.R. Iyer, A.K. Kapoor and K.S. Venkataraman to synthesize all debates and
decisions into a clear and well-defined scheme for missile development for the
following ten years. The scheme was outlined in a paper that was sent for
approval by the Cabinet Committee for Political Affairs (CCPA). The paper was
given its final shape after consulting the representatives of the three defence
services. The final document estimated a budget of fifty million dollars over a
period of twelve years.
Dr Kalam, accompanied by Dr Arunachalam, made a presentation to Defence
Minister R. Venkataraman. The three service chiefs and the nation’s top-level
bureaucrats were present. The discussion went on for more than an hour. India
needed missiles; but was it possible? Did the track record of DRDO support its
claim? Fifty million dollars were a significant sum of money, and who would
take a twelve-year-long shot? What would be the political fallout? Would the
services wait for the outcome? Were there other options? The meeting ended
without a decision or even any indication of the department’s intentions. The
defence minister, however, asked Dr Kalam and Dr Arunachalam to meet him
later in the evening.
Both the scientists were unsure of what exactly was in store for them. Dr
Arunachalam was anxious and verbalized his doubts: What if only ten million

are sanctioned? Or, if they get only twenty million, which missile would they
take in that case, and which others should they discard? Dr Kalam had by now,
though, developed a strong sense of intuition, bordering on the prescient. He had
no such thoughts. He had a vision of a SLV-sized rocket soaring into the sky and
re-entering thousands of miles away with its payload. His vision gave him a
calm assurance.
When evening arrived, a relaxed defence minister communicated to them the
government’s decision to approve an integrated guided missile programme, and
not just fund one or two projects that were being asked. The DRDO, however,
would have to shoulder the responsibility for the programme till user trials were
completed and production was launched, and not just confine itself to research
and development. The defence minister asked Dr Arunachalam and Dr Kalam to
rework their figures, incorporating the additional scope of work, and to meet him
the following morning. Dr Arunachalam knew full well that Dr Kalam was
taking the night flight to Madras on his way to Rameswaram to attend the
wedding of his niece Zameela (his brother’s daughter) the following evening.
But Dr Kalam did not say a word about it. He handed over his ticket for
cancellation to Dr Arunachalam’s secretary.
Dr Kalam and Dr Arunachalam huddled together in the latter’s office and
worked till midnight. They decided to extrapolate the dots from the minister’s
words by themselves and give a clear, rational plan to him. Dr Arunachalam
arranged dinner from his house, and even as they ate they were busy working.
While much detail was uncertain, both the scientists were convinced of one
thing: never before in India was such a plan attempted, but now that it had been
decided, it must succeed. The Integrated Guided Missile Development
Programme (IGMDP) was conceptually born in the wee hours of 14 May 1983.
It included Dr Kalam’s dream of a SLV-3-sized rocket taking off and the payload
returning through the atmosphere. They named the idea REX or re-entry
experiment launch vehicle and asked for it the modest budget of ten million
dollars. Defence Minister Venkataraman was visibly pleased with the plans
shown to him the next morning, and said that it would now be his task to get the
plan sanctioned by the cabinet. Kalam later happily recalled the minister’s
supportive approach: ‘Turning to me, he (R. Venkataraman) said, “Since I
brought you here (to DRDO), I was expecting you to come with something like

this. I am happy to see your work.”’2
Dr Kalam had thankfully bowed before the minister and turned towards the
door, when he heard Dr Arunachalam telling the defence minister how ‘Dr
Kalam had to sacrifice going to Rameswaram today for his niece’s wedding and
competed this work even without saying as much as a word about his
predicament’. It amazed Dr Kalam that a person of Dr Arunachalam’s stature
was concerned about a wedding taking place on a far-flung island, in a small
house of ordinary people. And what the defence minister of India did next
amazed him even more.
The office of the defence minister put Dr Kalam on an Indian Airline flight
leaving for Madras an hour later, and tied up with an Indian Air Force (IAF)
helicopter that was running a shuttle to Madurai in the late afternoon. The
helicopter was ready for take-off when the flight landed at Madras airport, and
Dr Kalam was airborne again in less than ten minutes. At Madurai, the air force
commandant even gave Dr Kalam a lift to the railway station and a ticket to
Rameswaram. Dr Kalam boarded the train when it was about to leave the
platform. Dr Kalam reached his ancestral home in time for the wedding. There
were no mobile phones then, and Dr Kalam was expected to attend the wedding.
Unmindful that the machinery of government had moved virtual heaven and
earth for Dr Kalam to be there in time, they were simply delighted with his
arrival, and went about the business of the marriage. Dr Kalam was
overwhelmed, though, by the noble, kind efforts of the minister and the defence
personnel.
The defence minister was likewise accommodating to the missile programme:
he stood by his word and got the IGMDP plan approved by the cabinet. An
unprecedented budget of Rs 388 crore (fifty million dollars in those days) was
sanctioned. The five indigenous missiles of the programme were given
appropriately and unmistakably Indian names, in keeping with the spirit of the
nation’s tryst with indigenous missile technology. The surface-to-surface missile
was called Prithvi (the earth), the tactical core vehicle for short-range air defence
was named Trishul (the trident of Lord Shiva), the medium-range surface-to-air
defence missile was given the title Akash (the sky) and the anti-tank missile
project was called Nag (the serpent). Dr Kalam dubbed the missile of his vision
Agni, as the payload would re-enter the atmosphere as a ball of fire.

Following the vision of Defence Minister Venkataraman in right earnest,
these projects were aimed towards the realization of indigenous state-of-the-art
technology. Dr Kalam’s team was not merely confining itself to re-engineering
missiles available elsewhere in the world. The development of Nag would entail
innovative thermal-seeker technology. The inertial navigation system of Prithvi,
the phased array radars and capability to handle multiple targets through Trishul,
the ram-rocket propulsion motor in Akash and the re-entry technology through
Agni, were indeed aimed to achieve a genuine self-reliance in missile
technology.
Kalam took his own good time to identify the right leaders to handle the five
missile projects. There was no dearth of talent and experience in the good mix of
services officers with operational experience, hard-core technology experts and
young blood with grit and determination. Kalam was looking for men who could
clearly visualize the goal of developing a missile system, seeing it through field
trials and taking it right up to the stage of production. Dr Kalam was conscious
that a wrong choice of leader would undo the whole achievement of getting the
programme sanctioned. He was looking for not only five project directors but a
leadership brigade that would sustain missile development through the next
twenty-five years. He felt that he should be circumspect in this new situation:
Many of my senior colleagues – naming them would be unfair, because it could be only my
imagination – tried to befriend me during this period. I respected their concern for a lonely man, but
avoided any close contact. Through loyalty to a friend, one can be easily led into doing something
that is not in the best interests of the organization.3

Dr Kalam by now had developed astute insights into the working styles of
people, but he wanted to follow a scientific approach. He asked Col R.
Swaminathan to study the managerial grid model, a style of leadership model
developed by Robert R. Blake and Jane Mouton doing the rounds in those days.
Col Swaminathan came up with a report defining the basic aspect of a person’s
working style as to how he plans and organizes tasks. At one extreme was the
cautious planner, who would carefully spell out each step before making any
move. With a sharp eye for what could possibly go wrong, he would try to cover
all contingencies. At the end of the spectrum was a fast-tracker, who would
weave and dodge without a plan. Inspired by ideas, he would always be ready

for action.
Another aspect of a person’s style Swaminathan brought out in his report was
control – the energy and attention devoted to ensuring that things happened in
certain ways. At one extreme was the tight controller, a strict administrator with
frequent checkpoints. Rules and policies were to be followed with religious
fervour. At the opposite end were those who move with freedom and flexibility.
They had little patience for bureaucracy. They delegated easily and gave their
subordinates wide latitude for movement.
Dr Kalam wanted his leaders to be men who had the capability to grow with
possibilities, with the patience to explore all possible options and with the
wisdom to apply old principles to new situations; people with the skill to
negotiate their way forward. He wanted his men to be accommodating – to be
willing to share their power with others and work in teams, delegating good jobs,
assimilating fresh opinions, respecting intelligent people and listening to wise
counsel. They would have to be able to resolve conflict amicably and take
responsibility for slip-ups. Above all, his men must be able to take failure in
their stride and share both their successes and failures. Kalam told Swaminathan
that he wanted leaders who would tread the middle path: those who could
control without stifling dissent or being rigid and those who could make swift
progress without breaking rules. ‘Find me people who neither indulge in excess
nor suffer with deficiency,’ he told Col Swaminathan.