Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam

The sole meaning of life is to serve humanity.
– Leo Tolstoy
Russian novelist

reoccupied with his work with the SLV-3 project, Kalam felt comfortable,
and enjoyed a great sense of purpose. He would never tire of meeting with
people, discussing, arguing, explaining and understanding – at least so far as it
applied to his work. On a personal level, he started to feel a strange aversion for
the usual social interactions, and had no patience for idle gossip and small talk.
When he was not working, he would mostly seek solitude, reading some good
book or listening to Carnatic music. He was convinced that living according to
reason and virtue is to be in harmony with the universe’s divine order. He
hypothesized that this order was coded in one’s talents and the situations of one’s
life at any point of time. These talents must be identified, nurtured and refined,
and the situations in one’s life must be understood and attended to. For this, he
needed to be at peace within.
Nevertheless, Kalam found that interacting with people and coordinating their
efforts was his special talent. The development of the SLV-3 was his latest
medium to manifest this talent. These were indeed the transformative years for
Kalam. He was realizing the importance of living a purposeful life; and he had
freed himself from the prison of sensory pleasures and miseries hidden behind
merrymaking. He was past his forties, and the diversions of youth no longer held
any allure for him. While he had settled into a confirmed bachelorhood, his
lifestyle was more that of a monk or a sadhu; he was now happily engrossed
simply in work and contemplative pursuits.

P

This is not to say that Kalam was aloof or cold; he continued to enjoy,
throughout his life, lasting, meaningful friendships. And at this time, he
developed a particularly strong emotional bond with Dr Brahm Prakash. Dr
Prakash was an outstanding scientist, an inspiring leader and a self-effacing man
who had been the first Indian to head the Indian Institute of Science’s
Department of Metallurgy. Under his leadership, the Atomic Energy
Establishment’s Metallurgy Group developed techniques for the extraction and
fabrication of a variety of nuclear-grade metals. The ‘closed nuclear fuel cycle’,
which was the goal of the Indian nuclear programme, was essentially about
materials of high purity, and Dr Brahm Prakash was at the centre of this effort.
Kalam found in him his mentor teacher. Dr Sarabhai was like an angel to Kalam
– inspiring and guiding – but almost not from this world. Brahm Prakash,
however, was like Naranarayan, the embodiment of divine grace right in front of
him. Kalam saw in Brahm Prakash his departed father.
Dr Brahm Prakash recognized in Kalam his own self, from his youthful days
in Lahore. Dr Brahm Prakash was one of millions who lived through the trauma
of Partition. He lamented to Kalam one day that there were many books written
on the Nazi holocaust, but no one had really ever written of the callousness of
the British colonial rulers with their Partition of India. They had arbitrarily
drawn a line on the map, deciding the nationality of millions of people, with a
total disregard of the consequences. He told Kalam once, ‘Hitler has been
established as a monster of human history, and rightly so. But the devils in the
garb of suave politicians on the Indian subcontinent who created the colossal
human tragedy of Indian Partition got away with their sins, after Mahatma
Gandhi settled their account with his sacrifice.’
Dr Brahm Prakash and Kalam would often take long strolls. Dr Brahm
Prakash was a heavy smoker but when walking with Kalam, he would not light a
single cigarette. They both shared a sense of concern for the suffering of others
and an aspiration to see that suffering relieved. Dr Brahm Prakash treated Kalam
as his son, and Kalam garnered from him the education of the finer aspects of
life that he had missed with his father.
Dr Brahm Prakash taught Kalam the essence of the virtue of respect. Respect
is about the worth you put in people around you and in your own self. One must
have regard for the worth of others. Likewise, one must have regard for the

worth of oneself. But the most important lesson Kalam learned from Dr Brahm
Prakash was that of humility, which he explained to Kalam as the respect for
one’s own limitations. Dr Brahm Prakash told Kalam, ‘Humility is not the act or
posture of lowering oneself in relation to others. Humility is about having a clear
perspective and respect for one’s place in context.’ In a religious setting, this can
mean recognition of the self in relation to God, acceptance of one’s defects, and
submission to the divine grace as a member of any great religion of the world.
Kalam also learned from Dr Brahm Prakash his first lesson in the
transformation from ‘I’ to ‘We.’ He explained to Kalam:
This is the most important process leaders go through in becoming authentic. How else can they
unleash the power of their organizations unless they motivate people to reach their full potential? If
our supporters are merely following our lead, their efforts are limited to our vision and our
directions … Only when leaders stop focusing on their personal ego needs are they able to develop
other leaders.

In May 1973, Dr Brahma Prakash informed Kalam of the visit of Werner
(Freiherr) von Braun, the legendary inventor of the V-2 and the Saturn-V
rockets. He chose Kalam to receive von Braun at Madras and escort him to
Trivandrum. Kalam took this assignment as a great gift. Werner von Braun was
almost universally revered in the field of rocketry as one of the greatest rocket
scientists and champions of space exploration of his era. His V-2 rocket was the
world’s first long-range guided ballistic missile. It was also the first man-made
object to cross the boundary of space.
Kalam and von Braun boarded an Avro aircraft in Madras for the ninetyminute flight to Trivandrum. Kalam was pleased to sit beside his hero of
rocketry, and was even more gratified by this great man’s down-to-earth
politeness. Kalam broke the ice by mentioning to von Braun his visit to NASA’s
Wallops Island. In turn, von Braun asked about Kalam’s work and intently
listened to his brief dissertation, as if he were just another practitioner of
rocketry. Kalam later wrote: ‘I never expected the father of modern rocketry to
be so humble, receptive, and encouraging. He made me feel comfortable right
through the flight. It was hard to imagine that I was talking to a giant of missile
systems, as he was so self-effacing.’1
Those unforgettable ninety minutes also allowed Kalam to hear von Braun’s

great story of human courage, of how he had prevailed in the most adverse
situations. He understood from von Braun, in this short time, how the anchor of
the intellect could save a person from the most trying of life’s challenges. In
March 1945, when Allied forces defeated Germany, von Braun used his research
and access to technical documents to broker a new life in the United States. He
knew that regardless of the Nazi atrocities, no major world power would refuse
the Nazi regime’s technological advances. The post-World War II geopolitical
jockeying between the major world powers would manifest in a race for
technological superiority, which would be inextricably linked to rocketry and
aerospace technology.
Von Braun told Kalam that he and his entire rocketry team were brought to
the United States and immediately given employment with the military, as the
Americans had no technological capacity of the sort he had developed with his
team in Germany. American rocket scientists would take another five years to
reach the level of V-2 technology. Befitting his scientific stature, the US
government appointed von Braun as technical director of the US Army
Ordnance Guided Missile Project in Alabama. During the 1950s, von Braun also
became one of the most prominent advocates of space exploration in the United
States. Americans accepted him as their own hero. Strength respects only
strength.
In 1960, von Braun’s rocket development centre was transferred from the
army to the newly established NASA and received a mandate to build the giant
Saturn rockets. Accordingly, von Braun became director of NASA’s Marshall
Space Flight Center and the chief architect of the Saturn V launch vehicle, the
superbooster that would propel Americans to the moon. Von Braun impressed
upon scientists and engineers the importance of recording their work accurately
and diligently on paper and seeking collective review before publishing it. He
said, ‘Had I not created dossiers of my work, I would have been killed and
buried in an unmarked grave. The records of my work not only saved my life, it
saved years of hard work and scientific data of immense value for future
research.’
While Kalam was in France at CERN for the SLV-3 Apogee rocket project, he
witnessed the genesis of a fascinating and successful Franco-German aerospace
collaboration. French work with geosynchronous orbit telecommunications

began in 1967. France joined hands with Germany to develop two experimental
Symphonie satellites. The small (230 kg) spacecraft, with three-axis stabilization
and two 6/4 GHz transponders, were launched by the US in 1974 and 1975. The
Symphonie system was highly successful in providing telecommunications links
throughout Europe and to other continents. Both spacecraft far exceeded their
design life of five years.
Kalam wondered: What if India and China, instead of fighting over concocted
issues, joined hands like France and Germany? Why are Asians caught in a
perpetual cycle of self-degradation and petty conflicts? When France and
Germany – who were adversaries in the bitterest wars of the last century – can
join hands, what stops India and China, who had enjoyed 2,000 years of peace!
On 19 April 1975, India entered the space age by launching its first-ever
satellite, the Aryabhata, from Kapustin Yar, Astrakhan Oblast, in Russia. A
Kosmos-3M launch vehicle was used to put the satellite into a near-circular orbit
at an altitude of 600 km. The satellite was constructed as a twenty-six-sided
polyhedron with a diameter of 1.4 m. All of its faces, except the top and bottom,
were covered with solar cells. Named after the fifth-century astronomer and
mathematician Aryabhata, the 360-kg spin-stabilized satellite enabled ISRO
scientists and engineers to learn the basics of satellite technology in designing,
building and operating the satellite. Kalam admired the diligence of his Russian
counterparts:
Our first satellite was launched by a Soviet Rocket, Cosmos-3M, on 19 April 1975 from Kapustin
Yar Test Range. Although language is a huge barrier while working with Russians, they are very
thorough in their schematic and mathematical expression. I witnessed the development of IndoRussian collaboration from the traditional importer model to a more symbiotic relationship through
joint defence research and development and manufacturing.2

The year 1975 also saw the creation of The European Space Agency (ESA), an
intergovernmental organization comprising twenty-two member states’
representatives. It was headquartered in Paris. The science missions were based
at European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC) in Noordwijk, the
Netherlands, the earth observation missions at ESRIN in Frascati, Italy, ESA
Mission Control (ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany, and the European Space
Astronomy Centre (ESAC) located in Villanueva de la Canada, Madrid, Spain.

The European Astronaut Centre (EAC), that would train astronauts for future
missions, was set up in Cologne, Germany. After World War II, many European
scientists left western Europe in order to work in the United States. They
realized that by returning to their countries and working solely on national
projects, they would not be able to compete with the two main superpowers; and
this had brought them all together.
The Aryabhata was followed by Bhaskara-1, launched on 7 June 1979 from
Kapustin Yar aboard the Intercosmos C-1 launch vehicle. The 444-kg satellite
made by ISRO was fitted with two television cameras operating with invisible
(600 nanometre) and near-infrared (800 nanometre) frequencies that collected
data related to hydrology, forestry and geology. It also boasted a satellite
microwave radiometer (SAMIR) operating at 19 and 22 GHz for study of the
ocean and such phenomena as water vapour, liquid water content in the
atmosphere, etc. ISRO used the Franco-German Symphonie satellite for the
Satellite Telecommunication Experiments Project (STEP)to establish satellitebased post and telegraph services during 1977–79.
Not all of the memorable happenings of these years were positive. One tragic
aeronautical event, which unfolded right in front of Kalam, led him to deeply
contemplate the profound issue of mortality. He was sitting in Bombay’s Sahar
Airport passenger lounge, waiting to take the evening flight to Trivandrum on
New Year’s Day in 1978, when the deadliest aviation accident India had seen
occurred nearby. Air India passenger flight AI 855, bound for Dubai from Sahar
Airport, crashed just off the coast of Bandra, almost immediately after taking off
from the airport. All 213 passengers and crew on board were killed. The aircraft
involved was a Boeing 747 named Emperor Ashok. A sad Kalam reflected, while
flying back to Trivandrum later in the night, that no one wants to die. Even
people who want to go to heaven don’t want to die to get there. And yet death is
the destination we all share. No one has ever escaped it. And that is as it should
be, because death is very likely the single best invention of life. It is life’s
change agent. It clears out the old to make way for the new.
At least in rocketry of the kind that Kalam was now engaged in, mechanical
failure or human error rarely had any opportunity to cause the loss of life. It
could, however, cause great distress. The first experimental flight trial for the
SLV-3 was scheduled for 10 August 1979. The primary goals of the mission

were to realize a fully integrated satellite launch vehicle to evaluate on-board
systems like stage motors, guidance and control systems and electronic
subsystems – and to evaluate ground systems, like checkout, tracking, telemetry
and real-time data facilities in launch operations built at SHAR. The rocket took
off at 7.58 a.m. Stage I performed perfectly; but the second stage went out of
control. The flight was terminated after 317 seconds, and the rocket’s shattered
wreck splashed into the sea, 540 kilometres off the Sriharikota coast. Kalam was
mortified by this dramatic failure, as he would later recount:
I felt a strange mix of anger and frustration. Suddenly, I felt my legs become so stiff that they ached.
The problem was not with my body; something was happening in my mind … The premature death
of my hovercraft Nandi, the abandoning of the RATO, the shelving of the Diamant; all came alive
in a flash, like a long-buried Phoenix resurrecting.3

‘What do you suppose could have gone wrong?’ somebody asked Kalam. He
walked away without answering. He was too tired to think. The launch had been
preceded by a night-long countdown. Moreover, Kalam had had hardly any sleep
in the week prior to the launch. Completely drained, mentally as well as
physically, he went straight to his room and collapsed in his bed. It was
inevitable that those who want to reap the benefits of this great nation must bear
the fatigue of supporting it.
Dr Brahm Prakash came to Kalam’s room but left without disturbing his
sleep. He returned after about an hour, but Kalam was still sleeping. Dr Brahm
Prakash quietly sat outside his room. When Kalam finally woke up late in the
afternoon, Dr Brahm Prakash took him to the canteen for lunch. He made light
conversation during the meal, carefully avoiding any mention of the SLV-3. Dr
Brahm Prakash was a godsend with his kindness and helped Kalam through this
ordeal.
In the evening there was a press conference. A large contingent of Indian and
international press – and of course the entire ISRO top brass – were present.
Kalam was ready to be skinned alive. Prof. Satish Dhawan took charge of the
situation. First, he surprised everybody with his opening statement,
congratulating the SLV-3 team for achieving a flawless launch and their
successful development of the first-stage booster motor. He mentioned Kalam by
name, saying that he had shown exemplary leadership; that he had put in a

mammoth effort involving thousands of people over seven years – and had never
allowed personal likes and dislikes to come in the way of his duties.
One correspondent asked, ‘Twenty crores of taxpayers’ money has been
drowned in the Bay of Bengal.’ Prof. Dhawan kept his cool and answered,
What is being attempted in the space programme in India has far-reaching consequences. You will
not be able to count the amount of money that would go out of the country in the future if India
does not have its own communication and remote-sensing satellites. Please understand the billions
of dollars’ worth of work done by low-paid and frugally living employees of our government
organizations.

There was a pin-drop silence. He then added that he was confident that in
exactly a year’s time, SLV-3 would successfully place a satellite in orbit. Prof.
Brahm Prakash retired in November 1979, and Dr Vasant Gowariker assumed
his former position.
The SLV-3 was launched on 18 July 1980, successfully placing the Rohini
satellite RS-1 into orbit, thereby making India the sixth member of an exclusive
club of spacefaring nations. The successful culmination of the SLV-3 project
showed the way to advanced launch vehicle projects such as the Augmented
Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and the
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). Prof. Dhawan asked Kalam
to take up the Space Launch Vehicle Directorate at ISRO headquarters. His
mission would be to preside over the space programme for remote sensing and
communication satellites, linking the corresponding launch vehicle systems,
including the launch complex. Sivathanu Pillai took over as Kalam’s lieutenant.
This was a time for change. Kalam’s old comrade Narayanan, who had
reached the rank of air vice marshal, had by now retired. In his absence, the
entire programme of military rocketry was languishing under a persistent apathy.
There was a leadership vacuum at the DRDO and Dr Raja Ramanna, the
scientific adviser to the defence minister of India, invited Kalam to give his input
to the missile programme:
The DRDO needed somebody to take command of their missile programmes, which had been stuck
at the drawing board and static test bed stages for quite a while. Prof. Ramanna asked me if I would
like to join DRDO and shoulder the responsibility of shaping the Indian Guided Missile
Development Programme.4

On 26 January 1981, Republic Day of India, Kalam was awarded the Padma
Bhushan, the third-highest civilian honour of the country. On the same day, Prof.
Satish Dhawan received the Padma Vibhushan, the second-highest civilian
honour in India. Dr Brahm Prakash called Kalam and said that he felt as if his
son had received the Padma Bhushan. The Anna University, Madras, conferred
on Kalam the honorary degree of Doctor of Science. He received the degree in
the convocation from Dr Raja Ramanna. Dr Kalam joined DRDO as director on
1 June 1982.