Crystal Cathedral

Never cut a tree down in the wintertime. Never make a negative decision in the low time.
Never make your most important decisions when you are in your worst moods. Wait. Be
patient. The storm will pass. The spring will come.
– Robert H. Schuller
Christian evangelist and author

he DRDO had acquired approximately 2,100 acres of land in the 1970s for
the purpose of developing a range for anti-tank missile testing. The land was
in the Pahadi Shareef area near Hyderabad, famous for the dargah of Hazrat
Syedna Baba Sharfuddin of the Chisti lineage of saints. But for a dilapidated
building in that area called Imarat, the entire landscape is dominated by ancient
rock formations, which are around 2,500 million years old and considered
amongst the oldest and hardest rocks in the world. Kalam later recalled his
impressions of the place:

T

The terrain was barren – there were hardly any tress – and dotted with large boulders typical of the
Deccan plateau. I felt as if there was some tremendous energy trapped in these stones. I decided to
establish a model high-technology research centre here … this became my mission.1

Dr Kalam was mindful that his primary challenge in the IGMDP was the
development of requisite basic technologies. Missile development without an
adequate technological foundation would be doomed to failure. It was indeed
imperative that front-line research was conducted in areas such as special
materials, embedded electronics and software. These would comprise the
bedrock upon which an ambitious missile programme could be successfully
constructed. Moreover, facilities for testing and evaluating missile systems
would be required. Dr Kalam invited Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi to lay the

foundation stone for the new facility in August 1985. It was named Research
Centre Imarat (RCI).
The RCI would test and evaluate missile components, modules, subassemblies, major sub-assemblies and completely integrated missiles in order to
weed out design, fabrication and integration deficiencies. For these purposes, the
centre would have an inertial instrumentation laboratory, full-scale
environmental and electronic warfare test facilities, a composites production
centre, a high enthalpy facility and a state-of-the-art missile integration and
checkout centre. This was going to be a Herculean task. Dr Kalam invited M.V.
Suryakantha Rao to lead this effort, with a younger Krishna Mohan to assist him.
In accordance with the established procedure, Dr Kalam approached the
Military Engineering Services (MES) to perform the construction work for the
RCI. The MES informed him that they would require five years to complete the
necessary building infrastructure. Dr Kalam immediately took the matter to the
highest levels in the defence ministry, knowing that years of delay would hamper
the RCI’s progress beyond redemption. He secured a landmark decision to give
the contract for the works to MECON Limited, a public sector company under
the Ministry of Steel, Government of India. MECON, based at Ranchi, was
India’s front-line engineering, consultancy and contracting organization. Dr
Kalam sought their full range of services, from concept to commissioning,
including turnkey execution.
As the next logical step, Dr Kalam looked for a suitable site for missile flight
trials. The search concluded near Balasore, a town in northern Orissa. Here,
Proof and Experimental Establishment (PXE), Chandipur, had been set up in
1895, and it was decided to create the new test range around its campus. The
PXE range had unique characteristics. The water receded at low tide to a
distance of about 3 km from the shore, which provided a temporary stretch of
hard seabed suitable for various firing operations. The seawater and the
underlying seabed would provide a soft cushion for the fired projectiles and
make the launch vehicle’s recovery easy, both of which were required to
examine the missiles’ strength of design. At low tide, the seabed would become
sufficiently hard to allow movement of loaded vehicles, and even tanks, during
range operations. Dr Kalam felt that the site fitted the requirements of a proof
range admirably.

Dr Kalam visited the site for a personal inspection. He stood at the seashore.
The tide had receded. He saw many children, barefoot and running on the hard,
warm sand, searching for brass parts of the shells that had been fired by PXE the
previous day. His childhood years flooded his mind, when he would go door to
door collecting tamarind seeds and delivering newspapers. He reflected that
almost half of the world’s population lives in rural regions – and mostly in a
state of poverty. Inequalities in human development have been one of the
primary reasons for unrest and, in some parts of the world, even violence. But
then poverty is not only being hungry, naked and homeless. The poverty of being
unwanted, unloved and uncared for is the greatest poverty – and is even crueller.
He resolved in his heart that someday he would work for making children cared
for.
It was not easy to travel to Balasore. Dr Kalam would reach Calcutta by air
and from there travel by car to the town. The parlous condition of the road would
make the 250-km journey an odyssey of eight bone-jarring hours, or even more
at times. Once, there was complete road block near Kharagpur, and Dr Kalam
had to take a diversion into the forest area at night. He was dozing with his eyes
half closed, somewhere between Bhagabanpur and Patashpur, when the driver
braked suddenly. Dr Kalam immediately awoke, startled. A barasingha (swamp
deer) was standing in the middle of the road, unmoving, its fiery red-orange eyes
staring at the car through the darkness. Its unbroken gaze, which seemed to aim
right through to him in the car, haunted Dr Kalam for the rest of his visit.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi visited DRDL on 19 July 1984. Dr Kalam had
met the prime minster on several prior occasions, but this time he would be
receiving her on behalf of his laboratory. Dr Kalam noticed the friendship
between Dr Sarabhai and Prime Minister Nehru, and how it helped Dr Sarabhai
progress with his vision for aerospace in India. The prime minister asked pointed
questions. She appeared determined to see more practical results from the state’s
investment; she obviously viewed science as much more than a lofty pastime of
academics and schoolchildren. But she was also quite prepared to redesign
institutions to achieve more synergy between science and technology, and took a
direct interest in key scientific appointments.
What Dr Kalam realized was that although she retained her father’s respect
for science and scientists, she had also learned much after his death and now

linked ‘science’ more strongly to ‘technology’. She congratulated Dr Kalam for
taking a decision to not import high-tech facilities and taking the hard but
ultimately more rewarding route of achieving his goals with Indian industry and
people. Dr Kalam told her, ‘Madam, even we want to purchase materials from
overseas; but no one will sell them to us. The Western countries are jealously
guarding their technology.’ Prime Minister Indira Gandhi told Kalam, ‘Put them
in their place.’
Dr Kalam’s flair for bringing people from different walks of life together and
inspiring them for a common purpose, would again come into play. Dr V.S.
Arunachalam organized a conference on IGMDP on 27 September 1984. Dr
Kalam invited around 100 academicians and industry captains and solicited their
partnership in the missile development programme. Dr Kalam said,
Technology development, its further adaptation and application has never been a very
straightforward process. A successful technological innovation requires a strong interactive
mechanism, complete with the feedback loop for various stakeholders, for example – industry,
extraneous knowledge sources, inspection and certification agencies and most importantly, the users
or the market. However, the problems become acute in a rapidly changing technological and
economic environment. The Space and Atomic Energy programme has elevated India to a stage
where the country has demonstrated some remarkable strengths in modern technologies for
achieving development goals. There exists a chain of national laboratories, specialized research and
development agencies, Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), universities and other academic
institutions of higher learning, which are capable of providing world-class expertise, technically
trained manpower and technological support to the industry. Let us join our hands in developing
world class missiles together.

Until this time, there had been a great chasm between government laboratories
and academicians. On one side was the status consciousness of the government
scientists turned officials, and as a counterforce there was the intellectual
arrogance of the academicians. On that day, Dr Kalam indeed bridged that
divide, and in the process won many hearts.
By the summer of 1985, all the groundwork had been completed for building
RCI. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi laid the foundation stone of the RCI on 3
August 1985. The prime minister told the DRDL family that he understood the
hardships faced by Indian scientists and expressed his gratitude towards those
who persevered, staying in their own country to work. He said that nobody could

concentrate on the demands of scientific work, unless he is free from the
trivialities of daily life. Further, he promised his wholehearted support to make
RCI a truly world-class centre in terms of working environment and amenities.
Kalam noted some differences between the new prime minister and his mother:
There was a childlike curiosity in him (Rajiv Gandhi) … The grit and determination displayed by
his mother was also present in him, although with a small difference. Madam Gandhi was a
taskmaster, whereas Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi used his charisma.2

MECON acquitted themselves well in their construction of the magnificent RCI
campus, finishing the work without any time delay or financial overruns.
President R. Venkataraman inaugurated the laboratory on 27 August 1988. It was
indeed the vision to develop technologies and systems rather than particular
missiles that had made the organization’s accomplishments possible. President
Venkataraman held Dr Kalam’s hand for a long time and told him that he was
indeed proud of his achievements. He advised Dr Kalam to focus on small and
medium enterprises and encourage them to carry out innovations at the
developmental level.
Invited by the US Air Force, Dr Kalam visited the United States in September
1988 with Dr Arunachalam, Dr Roddam Narasimha of National Laboratory and
K.K. Ganapathy of HAL. The Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) was
established to manage the LCA (Light Combat Aircraft) programme, and it was
seeking the supply of the General Electric F-404 engines for the future Light
Combat Aircraft project of India. The four veteran scientist engineers used the
long-haul flight to the USA to reflect on the self-reliance of Indian strategic
sectors. While the better part of the forces’ low-technology military equipment
was provided by the ordnance factories, India was still critically dependent on
Western sources to meet its growing requirement for high-technology
armaments. Only concerted efforts – partnerships between government, industry
and educational sectors – could hope to address this glaring strategic
vulnerability.
After finishing work at the Pentagon in Washington DC, the team flew to San
Francisco on their way to Los Angeles for a meeting with Northrop Corporation,
the United States’ leading aircraft manufacturer. Dr Kalam utilized this
opportunity to visit Crystal Cathedral, built by his favourite author, Robert

Schuller. Crystal Cathedral is a stunning modern church of titanic proportions,
constructed in 1980 in Orange County, Los Angeles. Dr Kalam saw the Research
Centre Imarat as his own Crystal Cathedral, and he prayed to God in gratitude
for its completion.
Dr Kalam held the religious places of all faiths in the highest esteem. He
realized early in his life that visiting places of spiritual importance brings people
in contact with others following a spiritual path, and this creates a sort of
resonance. Dr Kalam told me once that saints and sages can indeed help us by
giving their association and sharing their spiritual knowledge and realizations.
Thus, it is of prime importance to align our lives with their revelations, so that
we can also make spiritual progress.
By this time, Dr Kalam had started spending most of his time at RCI. A villa
was constructed for him in the guest house complex. Dr Kalam had a childlike
fascination with the full moon. He used to tell me that the full moon was a time
when mysterious things happen and wishes come true. There was a large tree in
the compound, and Dr Kalam loved to sit under the tree alone late on full moon
nights. On one such moonlit night, perhaps Dr Kalam visualized RCI as a worldclass avionics centre.
Dr Kalam ensured that, like the Crystal Cathedral, everything about the RCI
was outsized: its campus, its deer population, the density of its trees, the
buildings that house its laboratories and its arched main entrance. He was
convinced that the proportions of the campus would inspire expansive dreams
for its scientists, to lead the country forward into the new millennium.
And he knew that a scientist, of all people, must have a dream or vision. Dr
Kalam was not sure when he conceived his idea of the re-entry test vehicle REX,
exactly how it would be achieved. But like any good scientist, he was well
versed in the physics of re-entry and knew the principles that would allow a
missile re-entering the atmosphere to endure its searing trajectory.
Dr Kalam learned, at the Goddard Centre in 1963, the concept of the ablative
heat shield described first in 1920 by Robert Goddard, based on his study of
meteors. Goddard understood that although meteors entering the atmosphere at
the ‘Karman Line’ (around 100 km above sea level) usually meet a fiery end and
disintegrate, this is not due only to the heat factor. While a meteor would enter
the atmosphere at a typical speed as high as 30 miles per second, and massive

heat of friction is thus generated, the interior of the meteor would remain cold.
The erosion and destruction of the meteor is due largely to chipping and cracking
of the suddenly heated surface. The ramifications of Goddard’s discovery were
enormous for aerospace development.
The Agni missile payload would be delivered at hypersonic speed, but
considerably slower than a falling meteor. This nevertheless called for the design
and development of a re-entry vehicle structure that could cope with the
scorching heat of the atmospheric drag and aerodynamic heating of atmospheric
re-entry. In this way, the missile would not meet the fate of the regular meteor as
it falls towards earth. Ablative thermal protection systems were thus required for
the re-entry vehicles, wherein thermal energy would be expended by way of
sacrificing the material. It would protect the payload by keeping the inside
temperature below a limit of 40° Celsius, when the temperature of the outside
skin would be greater than 2,500°C. An inertial navigation system with the onboard computer could then guide the payload to the target location.
Dr Kalam needed a team to develop the carbon-carbon composite material for
the nose and carbon-phenolic material for the after body. Dr Kalam also needed
an especially skilled team for the development of finite-element-based software
to model the surface recession (ablation) with time. Two models were required to
study the chemical and mechanical aspects of ablation. First, for the material
removal by oxidation of carbon at high temperatures (chemical ablation) using
analytical expressions and second, erosion of carbon-phenolic layered material
by aerodynamic surface shear (mechanical ablation). With all the relevant
testing, a consortium of four DRDO and the CSIR laboratories accomplished the
task of building the Agni missile re-entry structure, in the short span of eighteen
months.
Another challenge involved in the Agni payload design related to the
tremendous speed with which it would re-enter the atmosphere. This was
estimated at twelve times the speed of sound. At this speed, there was no
knowing how to keep the vehicle under control. And to carry out a test to
ascertain its behaviour, there was no wind tunnel capable of generating speeds of
that order. Dr Kalam again found himself having to circumvent the limitations of
indigenous technology and scientific infrastructure:
If we sought American help, we would have been seen as aspiring to something they considered

their exclusive privilege. Even if they consented to cooperate, they would be certain to quote a price
for their wind tunnel test greater than our entire project cost.3

He found the solution with Prof. S.M. Deshpande at the IISc. With four young
scientists working in the field of computational fluid dynamics, Prof. S.M.
Deshpande developed a unique software that simulated hypersonic conditions,
not available anywhere in the world. This creative approach to negotiating the
countless barriers imposed by the Western bloc was the hallmark of the Agni
missile project’s success, and the ingenious efforts of Dr Kalam and his team
effectively nullified the embargo of the Missile Technology Control Regime.
While the Western world was guarding every facet of its technology, Dr Kalam
was creating his own technology to achieve India’s national defence imperatives.
Dr Kalam never allowed problems to defeat him. He faced problems head-on
and defeated them with his innovative methods – and by seeking appropriate
help from appropriate people. As a manager, Dr Kalam explored the potential of
the non-cognitive factors – attributes, dispositions, social skills, attitudes, and
intrapersonal resources – of the people around him. He was particularly
interested in employing those factors that high-achieving individuals draw upon
to accomplish success. Within his discipline, Dr Kalam presented a role model to
hundreds of scientists of his time in grit, tenacity and perseverance.