Strength Respects Strength

If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, do more and become more, you are
a leader.
– John Quincy Adams
The sixth president of the United States

r Kalam had now assumed the role of Missile Man of India. The political
and bureaucratic establishment was easily convinced that missiles could
perform certain military and strategic roles better than other types of weapons.
This was due in no small part to Dr Kalam, who successfully conveyed their
virtues: Ballistic missiles can be launched in poor weather or at night. They
travel at supersonic speeds and can thus reach strategic targets – enemy
installations that are far from the missile’s point of deployment – in a very short
time. They can also be directed at enemy ground forces, aircraft or naval targets.
And they are more difficult to detect and intercept than aircraft, not to mention
their being more economical. Moreover, they can act as a serious deterrent to
belligerent states by virtue of their ability to carry warheads.
Dr Kalam selected Col V.J. Sundaram to lead the Prithvi surface-to-surface
missile project. Col Sundaram had belonged to the Indian Army Corps of
Electronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME) and held a master’s in
aeronautical engineering. DRDL had produced several components for the Devil
missile, including a solid rocket booster with high-strength steel casings and a
specific impulse of 200 seconds, and a second-stage three-tonne liquidpropellant engine, fuelled by a combination of xylidiene and tri-ethylamine,
oxidized by inhibited red-fuming nitric acid and di-nitrogen tetroxide. Could it
be used for powering a ballistic missile that could reach its target 150 to 250
kilometres away within five to ten minutes, fitted with a warhead weighing

D

somewhere in the order of 500 to 1000 kilograms?
The work on the Devil missile was revived to test a strap down inertial
navigation system (SDINS), supported by a computer that would implement
control, guidance and navigation. Its computer was built in the Special Purpose
Computer Division (SPCD) and was powered by an off-the-shelf LSI-V03 (PDP,
programmed data processor, equivalent) processor module. Other interfaces for
gyros, accelerometers, telemetry, launch control, etc., were developed in various
in-house PCB (Printed Circuit Board) facilities. Dr Kalam was determined to
make use of whatever components that were available; yet the team would have
to go beyond the evolutionary ancestry of surface-to-surface V-2 and Scud
missiles. These missiles could never deliver a warhead within a CEP (circular
error probable) measured even in kilometres – the CEP being the radius of a
circle, whose boundary is expected to encompass the landing points of 50 per
cent of the missiles fired. Kalam was talking about a CEP of less than 100
metres.
The Trishul was conceived as a quick-reaction surface-to-air missile that
could also be used as an anti-sea skimmer from a ship against low-flying
attacking missiles. To lead Trishul’s development, Dr Kalam was seeking a man
who not only had a sound knowledge of electronics and missile warfare, but who
could also communicate technical complexities to his team in order to promote
understanding and earn his team’s support. He found Commodore S.R. Mohan –
an electronics engineer, who came to DRDL from the Indian Navy – the most
suitable candidate to lead the project.
Commodore Mohan would oversee the development of the missile’s intended
scheme of dual command guidance: the missile would initially rely on ka-band
gathering and then transfer to the tracking radar for its guidance. The missile
would have electronic counter-countermeasures against all known aircraft
jammers. As the missile would employ a dual-thrust propulsion stage using highenergy solid propellant, propulsion expert A.K. Kapoor was made Commodore
Mohan’s deputy. Trishul had to be capable of a rapid reaction time, highfrequency operation, high manoeuvrability, high lethal capability and multiple
roles for the three services.
For Agni, Dr Kalam wanted an old-timer who would share deep insights into
developing strategic systems. His two juniors at Madras Institute of Technology,

K. Rama Rao and R.N. Agarwal, were available, and he decided to give Agarwal
the command. Agarwal had been head of the aeronautical test facility and would
therefore best understand the design needs of the re-entry payload. Dr Kalam
appointed Rama Rao as chief of composites. Rama Rao’s team would focus on
the design of the re-entry stage module, wherein the fiercely guarded carboncarbon composite technology would be utilized.
Dr Kalam took some time to ponder the management needs of Akash, which
involved ramjet propulsion technology, and Nag, the guidance of which was
based on an imaging infrared (IIR) passive-seeker technology to ensure high-hit
accuracy in both top- and front-attack modes. These were futuristic
undertakings, and he selected the relatively youthful pair Prahalada and N.R.
Iyer to head the Akash and Nag projects respectively.
Dr Kalam emphasized to all the men he selected that to be effective project
leaders, they must be empathetic to a diverse array of needs. He always said that
there are two facets of leadership in an organization in which a leader must be
especially adept. One is in comprehending the broad needs of the overall mission
requirements, and the other is being aware of the needs of each department to
effectively leverage their work. A project director must understand the mission
requirements and the needs of each department and effectively prioritize and
deliver material requirements, mostly in the form of funds.
In those days, there was no forum in DRDL where issues of general
importance could be openly discussed and debated. Dr Kalam knew from his
first-hand experience at SLV-3 that scientist engineers were indeed very
vulnerable people. They performed their own specialized tasks for high-stakes
projects – which are inevitably subject to their numerous colleagues’ input and
the vagaries of a myriad of factors – over which they have little control. They
thus work under great anxiety and insecurity. Once they stumble – they lose
confidence and focus – it becomes difficult for them to regain their footing. Dr
Kalam was more than aware of the challenges they faced, and knew that their
morale must be sustained within the workplace itself: ‘I did not want any of my
scientists to face disappointments alone. I also wanted to ensure that none of
them set their goals when they were at low ebb.’1
Dr Kalam thus created a forum and named it the ‘Science Council’. All
scientists in the laboratory – juniors and seniors, veterans and freshers – would

sit together once every three months and let off steam. In the very first meeting
of the Science Council, a senior scientist, M.N. Rao, stood and asked Dr Kalam,
‘On what basis did you select these five Pandavas?’ He meant the five project
directors whom Dr Kalam had personally selected.
Dr Kalam gave a very patient answer. He said that as the project director of
SLV-3, he had acquired certain experiences. Based on these experiences, he
recognized that the directors of the missile projects must control the three key
parameters of scope, schedule and budget, and understand the nuances of team
dynamics. Dr Kalam explained that he spoke to at least fifty people in the course
of his deliberations. Some said that they were fanatical about driving
productivity and meeting schedule commitments. Others said they had the ability
to spot red flags; they were zealous communicators, and were well respected by
their peers and bosses. Dr Kalam said that the five project directors he had
selected had an ability to balance what needs to be done, as driven from the plan,
with what should be done to meet the mission’s requirements – even if this is
counter-intuitive and not exactly in accordance with the project’s road map.
These project managers would not only manage – they would lead.
A young scientist wanted to know how Dr Kalam would stop these projects
going the way of the Devil missile project. Dr Kalam explained to him, and
through him to all the doubting Thomases, ‘The participation of the production
centres and user agencies right from the design stage has been ensured, the
budget is in place, and there is no question of going back till the missile systems
are successfully deployed in the battlefield.’ His answer received a thunderous
ovation from the audience. He had won his team’s confidence. In September
1983, Defence Minister R. Venkataraman visited DRDL. There was no doubt in
anyone’s mind about the credibility of the IGMDP.
Dr Brahm Prakash passed away on 3 January 1984 at the age of seventy-two,
in Bombay. Dr Kalam keenly felt his loss. In the memorial service organized for
Dr Brahm Prakash, Dr Kalam spoke at length about his mentor teacher. Dr
Kalam shared with the congregation that when Brahm Prakash returned to India
in 1948, he was given a position in the then nascent Atomic Energy Commission
in Bombay. Towards the end of 1950, when the Indian Institute of Science was
seeking a suitable person to head the Department of Metallurgy – and the setting
up of the Atomic Energy Commission’s metallurgy laboratory was in its early

stages – he was deemed the logical choice for the job. Dr Homi Bhabha, who
was also a member of the court of the IISc, proposed that Dr Brahm Prakash
would assume leadership of the Department of Metallurgy in Bangalore, on the
firm understanding that he would return to Bombay as soon as the programme of
work gained momentum there.
Side by side with his academic responsibilities in Bangalore, Brahm Prakash
maintained a continuous link with the atomic energy programme, attending
discussion meetings in Bombay and also undertaking tours abroad during the
summer vacations. To maintain one of these positions was a serious endeavour
for any scientist. To maintain both without sacrificing attention to the duties of
either, is a herculean task; and Dr Brahm Prakash did it with aplomb. By early
1957, Dr Bhabha decided that it was time to allow Dr Brahm Prakash to return to
Bombay. Dr Brahm Prakash was the first project director for the Nuclear Fuel
Complex (NFC) that was set up in Hyderabad in 1971. Dr Kalam said, ‘By the
detailed portrait of a sthitaprajna given in the Bhagavadgita – an individual of
steadfast mind with clarity in action, who remains unperturbed under any
circumstance – Brahm Prakash was the real-life model.’
Around this time, Dr Kalam was playing a key role in developing Pinaka
rockets for the artillery at the Armament Research and Development
Establishment (ARDE) in Pune. These would replace the Russian BM-21 ‘Grad’
Launchers the Indian Army was operating. The Pinaka rockets would generally
be deployed in a battery of seventy-two rockets. Aptly named after the divine
bow of Lord Shiva, all the seventy-two rockets could be fired within forty-four
seconds, laying waste an area of around 1 sq. km. Like his guru Brahm Prakash,
Dr Kalam managed to juggle multiple workloads and work across boundaries of
organizations, with relative ease. This was a skill that would serve him
throughout the following decades.
Another of Dr Kalam’s myriad skills that was increasingly exercised in these
years was his adroit diplomacy, which he had learned from his mentor Dr
Vikram Sarabhai. Nevertheless, international politics could at times stymie even
Dr Kalam’s best efforts. In 1985, he visited the United States as part of a team to
buy a supercomputer from Cray Inc., in Seattle, US, that was ostensibly required
for weather forecasting. Dr Kalam needed it for computational fluid dynamics
analysis of the Agni re-entry payload. India did not have a hypersonic wind

tunnel, and the only way to simulate its re-entry stage was to model it and test it
using computation. Only the United States and Japan had the supercomputing
technology. The Americans snubbed Dr Kalam’s delegation, bluntly conveying
their decision not to sell the machine to India.
Indian scientists were again compelled to follow a swadeshi approach to
technological development; but it would be for the greater good. Indian
computer experts rose to the challenge of creating an indigenous supercomputer
of the Cray computer’s capability, then in the gigaflops range. The Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) was created in Pune in 1988, as
India’s national initiative in supercomputing, under the leadership of Dr Vijay
Bhatkar. The Wall Street Journal took notice of the development with a frontpage headline: ‘Angry India Does IT’ when the C-DAC delivered the
supercomputer PARAM, three years later.2 Like many properly focused
indigenous endeavours, this swadeshi computing effort was the seed of a new
field of opportunity for the nation, which would continue to be harvested well
into the new century.
While Dr Kalam valued the friendship of many people from other countries,
and would remain throughout his life relaxed with people of any race or creed,
he was uncomfortable with the geopolitical approach of the Western world. He
saw the West as the geopolitical aggressor. In Dr Kalam’s view, which he shared
with me in various discussions on the topic, the age of blocs came to an end in
1991 with the collapse of the USSR. From this time, the group of seven or eight
industrialized Western nations became the hub of the world, transforming all of
Africa, Asia and Latin America into markets. How the entire humanity can be
made to follow only one path, one opinion and one ideal, he wondered.
India needed to remain cognizant not merely of geopolitical developments in
the West, but also significant events close to its own borders. China conducted
its first nuclear test on 16 October 1964, almost a decade ahead of India, and its
missile programme was centred on how to carry the bomb. China’s first missile
was Dongfeng (DF, ‘East Wind’ in Chinese). The DF1 was developed with
active participation by the Russians. The liquid-propelled, 590-km-range R-2
missile was the starting point. As this missile would not even reach American
military bases in Japan from the Chinese mainland, China upgraded it to DF2
with a range of 1,200 km. The DF-2 missile was deployed along the Sino–North

Korean border, in striking range of the whole Japanese archipelago. Over
several years, China developed the DF-3 to be capable of reaching American
bases in the Philippines, the DF-4 to reach the US territory of Guam Island in the
western Pacific and the DF-5 for its capability of striking continental United
States in 1981 – all using liquid propellant.
Large liquid-propellant missiles were intrinsically long and had thin skins.
They could not be filled with propellants in a horizontal position without causing
serious body damage. An unfuelled missile would first be erected on the
launching pad and receive preliminary targeting alignment and on-board
equipment checks. It would then be filled with oxidizer and fuel – operations
which must be performed separately, because combined, oxidizer and fuel would
spontaneously ignite. The missile, somewhat deformed by the loaded
propellants, would then undergo final alignment and checks, and data
corresponding to the assigned range would be fed into the missile’s instruments.
All these preparations would consume, on average, no less than four hours.
This made them vulnerable to detection by reconnaissance satellites (orbiting the
earth every ninety minutes) and subsequent preventive strikes. The Chinese thus
developed silos and rail-race systems until they succeeded in their first solidpropellant, 1,700-km-range rocket JL-1 in 1982. Thereafter, China regularly sold
missile technology to Pakistan, Iran, Syria, Iraq, Libya, Saudi Arabia and North
Korea.
In April 1987, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Great Britain and the
United States jointed hands and created the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR), in order to curb the spread of unmanned delivery systems for nuclear
weapons. The MTCR specifically targeted delivery systems that could carry a
minimum payload of 500 kg a minimum of 300 km. The MTCR was not a treaty,
but a voluntary understanding among member countries sharing a common
interest in controlling missile proliferation. The partner countries committed to
applying an export embargo pertaining to a common list of controlled items.
This list included virtually all key equipment and technology needed for missile
development, production and operation.
In June 1987, the visionary behind the IGMDP, R. Venkataraman, was elected
the eighth president of India. By this time, work on Prithvi was nearing
completion. The MTCR embargo could have given rise to insurmountable

obstacles, had it not been for Dr Kalam’s astuteness and championing of
indigenous technological production. He guided the development of clustered
liquid-propellant rocket engines with programmable total impulse, with the
foresight of attaining different payload-range combinations. With the help of the
ordnance factory at Khadaki (near Pune), Dr Kalam had also completely
eliminated the import of the propellant for Prithvi engines.
Dr Kalam took a keen interest in modernizing and expanding the ordnance
factories organization and secured massive funding for development of
propellants and high-energy materials for the warheads. The ordnance factories
had been the largest and oldest departmentally run defence production enterprise
in India. The history of the organization dated back to British rule in India when
the first factory, the Gun Carriage Agency, was established in 1801 at Cossipore
in Calcutta. Over the years, the number of factories had grown, with a rapid
expansion taking place post-1962. The war with China, and the subsequent
desire for self-reliance in defence production, led to the establishment of sixteen
new factories, which saw a surge of expansion compared to the five that were set
up between 1949 and 1962.
The Prithvi was successfully flight-tested on 25 February 1988 at SHAR. It
was a watershed event in India’s military development, as this test established
India’s capability to develop the basic modules for future guided missiles. The
Prithvi had the provision for modification from a long-range surface missile to
an air missile; it could also be deployed from a ship. A CEP of less than 100
metres was achieved. The successful launch sent political shock waves across
the region, particularly in unfriendly neighbouring countries.
The response of the Western bloc was initially one of surprise – and then of
indignation. The MTCR, with the United States at its head, imposed a
coordinated technological boycott on India. The supply to India of computer
processor chips, radio-frequency devices, electro-hydraulic components,
maraging steel, magnesium alloy, gyroscopes, accelerometers, carbon fibre, glass
fibre – almost any product or material that could have an application in India’s
missile programme – was banned. President Venkataraman – the former defence
minister – spoke to Dr Kalam over the telephone and expressed his satisfaction
for having handed him the reins of the missile programme. He told him not to be
deterred by the technology sanctions, reminding him of the aphorism, ‘When the

going gets tough, the toughs get going.’
Inspired by the words of the president, Dr Kalam collaborated with public and
private sector industries and academic institutions, in a bid to assert the complete
independence and self-reliance of India’s missile technology. The nation’s
missile programme must continue, despite the best efforts of foreign powers to
scuttle it. Led by Dr Kalam, the truly swadeshi partnerships developed maraging
steel for rocket motors, carbon-carbon composites and resins for the re-entry
vehicle of the Agni missiles, magnesium alloy, phase shifters for passive
electronically scanned array radar, winding machines and so forth. The Mishra
Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI), the Defence Metallurgical Research
Laboratory (DMRL), and private industries together developed a crucial
magnesium alloy, which was denied to India by Germany. The international
campaign to thwart India’s missile programme had merely slowed its progress.
On New Year’s Day 1989, Dr Kalam declared at the Science Council
meeting, ‘As a country located in one of the world’s most unstable regions, India
can hardly afford to be dependent on imported weaponry if it wants to be taken
seriously in the emerging world order.’