The Organizer
He had this really refreshing dream and I was like, “Barack, no, no, no. Not
going to happen.”
—THE REVEREND JEREMIAH A. WRIGHT

Barack Obama arrived in Chicago in June 1985 at a tender twenty-three years of
age, still wildly idealistic about the intrinsic goodness of mankind. But Obama’s
first Chicago experience would open his youthful eyes to how cynical,
complicated and unjust the world can be—especially when politics, race and
power are as inextricably intertwined as they are in the largest middle-American
city. But these Chicago years also educated Obama about more than the
shortcomings of human beings. For a mixed-race young man, it was his first
deep immersion into the African-American community that he had longed to
both understand and belong to. The means by which he was immersed in this
society—through community organizing—also made a lasting imprint on
Obama, an impression that would greatly affect how he later conducted himself
as a politician.
After he rolled into the City of Big Shoulders in a beat-up old Honda, Obama
still kept a daily journal of his observations and emotions, still read philosophy
and literature extensively and still led a rather isolated personal life. His daily
existence so resembled the solitary life of a writer that some of his fellow
community organizers wondered whether he had undertaken organizing simply
to find grist for his version of the great American novel. They would not be too
far off, for a few years later Obama would vividly recount his time in Chicago
when writing Dreams, although the prose would be a loose form of nonfiction.
According to Jerry Kellman, “One of the things Barack thought he might want to
be is a writer. When he came to Chicago, he was still contemplating that. He
wrote short stories. That’s a very different side from where he eventually went.

He talked about how his father had made some wrong moves and wound up
destitute, and he didn’t want that for himself.”
Obama was drawn to community organizing because it forced him directly
into neighborhoods of poverty and despair. In New York, a former activist whose
nonprofit had grown into a powerful entity reviewed Obama’s résumé and
offered him a job that seemed to fit his well-educated skill set—organizing
conferences and lobbying politicians on behalf of poor black communities. But
Obama wanted to be closer to the real lives of the dispossessed and dispirited,
and he turned down the offer. Community organizing in Chicago placed Obama
in the midst of a unique American culture. Chicago’s South Side is filled with
neighborhood upon neighborhood of African Americans, the largest single
grouping of blacks anywhere in the nation. In the mid-1980s, the South Side
ranged from communities of the stable middle class to neighborhoods of dire
poverty. In the poor neighborhoods, violence, drugs and crime infected nearly
every aspect of daily life. But even in some of the predominantly middle-class
sections, a significant class dichotomy between middle and low income was
present, creating tension between neighbors, between the haves and have-nots.
Kellman assigned Obama to the Roseland and West Pullman neighborhoods
on the city’s Far South Side. Kellman was Obama’s tutor and sounding board
through his many frustrations of organizing people who were financially poor,
confused about authority and, in some cases, illiterate. Kellman cautioned
Obama that his task would not be easy and that he should be prepared for utter
failure, but that if he concentrated on a few specific problems, he could make a
difference. “All I had to do was to teach him not to be idealistic and he did the
rest,” Kellman said. “You can’t go out there and do any kind of significant
political work or organizing and be idealistic. And he was idealistic, almost
ridiculously so. You know, it is in his nature. He was a dreamer. But at the same
time, you can’t perceive people through rose-colored glasses—right away, you
have to get a sense of them.”
Roseland, once a Dutch farming community named for the bushes that thrived
in its soil, reflected a schism in prosperity. The neighborhood is nearly all black
and is adorned with street after street of well-manicured lawns and wellmaintained houses. But it is also home to the occasional block of blight, poverty,
unemployment and crime. That makes the lives of all its residents vastly more
precarious than those of, say, the city’s whites on the Northwest Side. “For the
middle class, it’s hard to maintain the high lofty goals you have for yourself

when this abject poverty is all around you,” said Pat DeBonnett, executive
director of a nonprofit group devoted to bringing business to several Far South
Side neighborhoods. During the migration of southern blacks to Chicago from
1914 through the 1950s, Roseland suffered extreme disinvestment as nearly all
its white inhabitants departed. White flight, in turn, translated into depressed
property values, which translated into mortgage defaults, business failures,
housing foreclosures, crime and unemployment. Then, in the 1980s, the decline
of the South Side industrial base stung Roseland. By the mid-1980s, about one in
six Roseland residents lived below the poverty line. The ubiquitous presence of
the poor created an emotional paradox for middle-class blacks. Residents of
moderate wealth were mindful that their neighbors lived in deprivation, a
situation that instills a sense of compassion for those less fortunate. But middleclass blacks also harbored some resentment toward their poor neighbors because
they dragged down the community’s overall standard of living. “It creates a real
division in a community—and I’d even say a sense of division within the race,”
DeBonnett said.
Into this uncomfortable, complicated stew dropped Obama. Kellman had hired
him to launch the Developing Communities Project, an ecumenically funded
group whose mission still today is to empower the poor and disenfranchised
through grassroots organization. The group is based in the community
organizing tradition of Saul Alinsky. Alinsky’s activism in the first half of the
twentieth century ran parallel with the labor movement, although he expanded
the theory of organizing people to include grievances other than employment.
Born in 1909, Alinsky grew up in Chicago’s gritty Back of the Yards
neighborhood during the Great Depression. He made his first political efforts in
his home community of blue-collar European immigrants, organizing
meatpackers to agitate for better working conditions. He believed in public
confrontation in the form of sit-ins and boycotts, but his success stemmed
mainly from instilling people with the belief that they had the power to redefine
their own lives, through both activism and personal behavior. In his manifesto
Rules for Radicals, Alinsky wrote, “When we talk about a person’s lifting
himself by his own bootstraps, we are talking about power. Power must be
understood for what it is, for the part it plays in every area of our life, if we are
to understand it and thereby grasp the essentials of relationships and functions
between groups and organizations, particularly in a pluralistic society. To know
power and not fear it is essential to its constructive use and control.” Alinsky
taught organizers to work behind the scenes, listening to residents for hours upon
hours to decipher what their community needed and what it could realistically

achieve.
Alinsky’s life mission and his methodologies are both central to Obama’s
modern political message. As noted before, a recurring passage in many of
Obama’s speeches is his mission of “giving voice to the voiceless and power to
the powerless.” But Obama also speaks frequently about self-reliance as the
most effective means of ultimately pulling oneself out of financial and social
distress. Alinsky himself was politically active, traveling the country and
attempting to politicize the masses. In the process, he established an institute that
trained, among others, Cesar Chavez, founder of the United Farm Workers
union. Alinsky’s work also influenced the civil rights movement and anti–
Vietnam War protestors. Obama wrote that he was drawn to Alinsky’s form of
direct action. “Once I found an issue people cared about, I could take them into
action. With enough actions, I could start to build power. Issues, actions, power,
self-interest. I liked these concepts. They bespoke a certain hardheadedness, a
worldly lack of sentiment; politics, not religion.”
One of Obama’s initial discoveries about Chicago’s broad swath of South Side
African-American communities was the power and influence of the church in
these neighborhoods. Whether it was the Catholic Church, African Methodist,
Baptist or something else, the larger churches and their pastors exercised great
influence over the local politics. And this was the first hard lesson that Obama
learned about these institutions: Most of these ministers operated independently
of the others, to the degree that they competed for congregants—and competed
for power. Obama had idealistic notions of uniting these various conflicting
personas and personal agendas into a coherent whole, to work on behalf of the
entire area. But it did not take long for him to learn just how discouraging that
mission would be in reality. “It wasn’t until I came to Chicago and started
organizing that all this stuff that was in my head sort of was tested against the
reality,” Obama said. “And in some cases, it didn’t always work out. That’s why
I say that the best education I ever received was as an organizer because it
reminded me that you can look at a map, but that’s not the actual territory.”
ONE OF THE MOST INFLUENTIAL OF THESE SOUTH SIDE PASTORS was Jeremiah A.
Wright of the Trinity United Church of Christ. Wright tried to explain to Obama
that the terrain on the map was treacherous. In fact, Wright counseled the young
Obama that his dream of unifying the Chicago pastors was impossible:

The first day we met, I said, “Do you remember the story about Joseph in
the Old Testament, where he had these dreams and he shared them with his
brothers? Then one day, Joseph was coming across the field toward his
brothers and they said, ‘Behold, the Dreamer.’” I told him, “That’s what I
feel like when I listen to you, Barack. You are a dreamer.” He came up with
this dream of organizing the churches of Chicago like you would organize
the churches in New York or on the East Coast. His vision and view was to
implement significant change and meaningful change that benefited people,
real people. Not politics, not self-aggrandizement, not worrying about
which politicians would look good. But how can we bring about change in
our communities that the people want and need? I said to him, “Oh, that
sounds good, Barack, real good. But you don’t know Chicago, do you?”
[Wright then broke into a hearty laugh.] Barack said to me, “You are a
minister. Why are you sounding so skeptical?”…And I said, “Man, these
preachers in Chicago. You are not going to organize us. That’s not going to
happen.” He had this really refreshing dream and I was like, “Barack, no,
no, no. Not going to happen.”
Wright’s pessimism was born in a cold reality, a lesson Obama would soon
take to heart. In Dreams, he recounted a community police meeting that he
organized in which one minister derided him for being a naive pawn in the hands
of Chicago’s whites—lakefront Jewish liberals and the Roman Catholic Church.
Indeed, individuals from both of those groups were benefactors of Kellman’s
Developing Communities Project. The meeting “was a disaster,” Obama said. At
this juncture in his life, Obama’s religious beliefs were similar to his mother’s—
a secular humanist who was largely agnostic. In Dreams, Obama described how
religion was being used in Chicago’s churches, and he questioned the true power
of religious faith and religious institutions to make positive change: “For there
were many churches, many faiths. There were times, perhaps when those faiths
seem to converge—the crowd in front of the Lincoln Memorial, the Freedom
Riders at the lunch counter. But such moments were partial, fragmentary. With
our eyes closed, we uttered the same words, but in our hearts we prayed to our
own masters; we each remained locked in our own memories; we all clung to our
own foolish magic.”
A main tenet of the Alinsky organizing philosophy was attention to listening
—to pull together the masses for a common cause, the organizer must hear and
understand the limitations, the fears and the experiences of the people being
assembled. Working out of a small office in a church, Obama was assigned to

conduct twenty to thirty interviews each week. Residents initially were wary of
this overly serious young man from out of town, but Obama slowly gained their
trust. “I’m here to do serious work,” he told them. Over time, residents began
calling him “Baby Face” for his youthful looks. Obama was known for his
detailed and calculated planning, a trait he would carry into politics. He did not
like to be surprised in a meeting and he especially loathed being unprepared.
Kellman’s first major project for Obama was assisting the people of a housing
project called Altgeld Gardens. Altgeld’s sprawling apartment complex was
inhabited by two thousand residents, nearly all of them black. Situated just
outside Roseland, it was built in the 1940s to house manufacturing laborers for
surrounding factories. The complex sits in relative physical isolation amid a
huge garbage dump, a noxious-smelling sewage plant, a paint factory and the
heavily polluted Calumet River. Altgeld is in a constant state of disrepair, and
circumstances have improved only slightly a generation later. Obama’s group
was one of two working in Altgeld to organize parents and others, with the
mission of pushing the Chicago Housing Authority to repair toilets, windows
and the heating system. To some extent, Obama’s efforts were successful. He
organized residents to successfully lobby city hall to open a job bank, learning
along the way that blacks still viewed the labor movement with suspicion.
Chicago’s trade unions historically had excluded blacks from their ranks,
especially as manufacturing jobs dried up.
Of Obama’s pursuits in Altgeld, a campaign to remove asbestos drew the most
public attention, even if Obama himself garnered practically no publicity. He
helped organize two meetings in downtown Chicago. One resulted in the
housing authority testing Altgeld for asbestos and persuading an alderman,
Bobby Rush, to hold city council hearings on the matter. A second meeting saw a
group of several hundred travel downtown for a raucous visit with city officials.
That confrontation prompted the housing authority to hire workers to seal off the
asbestos. “He was our motivator,” resident Callie Smith said of Obama. Kellman
suggests that Obama downplayed his own significance because, as an organizer,
he wanted to remain behind the scenes and allow the residents to be the public
faces of discontent. For instance, Kellman said it was actually Obama who
noticed a newspaper ad for asbestos removal services in the main administration
building at Altgeld, even though in his book Obama credits an activist he called
“Sadie.” The ad prompted residents to question whether asbestos was in other
parts of the complex too.
When writing his first memoir, Obama made Kellman one of his main

Chicago characters, bestowing on him the pseudonym “Marty Kaufman.” “Jerry
Kellman is whip smart,” Obama told me. “One of the smartest men I’ve ever
met.” In Dreams, Obama described Kellman (or Kaufman) as a bespectacled,
ordinary-looking white man in his middle thirties who typically needed a shave
and seemed a bit too sure of himself. When I met Kellman in March 2006, he
seemed much the same man, only now in his mid-fifties, a bit more put together
but still quite certain of his own words. A New York Jew who converted to
Catholicism, Kellman described himself as a “recovering organizer,” giving me
the impression that he did not view his organizing years with joy. He still worked
in a modest-paying job that assisted the poor and disaffected, serving as director
of a Roman Catholic social services project in an inner-ring suburb just north of
Chicago.
Physically, it was difficult to recall specifics of his face only hours after our
interview. But the substance of the interview was etched in my mind for days.
Kellman’s voice would occasionally drop into such a low pitch that I was drawn
to it, not only because I had to strain to hear it, but because it seemed as if he
was earnestly imparting a piece of wisdom that he deeply believed—and deeply
wanted his listener to believe. His insight into Obama was extraordinarily
intimate and accurate, not surprisingly since the two had been daily confidants
for almost three years. They talked about everything from community organizing
to Obama’s vision for his future. Kellman’s main mission seemed to be to keep
Obama from burning out. He urged him to pursue a more active social life to
take a break from the depressing moments of organizing. Obama, who initially
was spending most of his weekends reading books, eventually heeded this
advice. He started dating and had a live-in girlfriend for a while. But when that
relationship ended, it was painful for Obama, who conceded that his own lack of
maturity partly contributed to its demise.
Like Obama’s grandmother, Kellman described Obama as a man on a mission
to serve society. Obama told Kellman that he had been extremely fortunate in his
own life, and so he felt a passion to contribute to the betterment of others’ lives,
especially by pushing for economic and social progress in the black community.
“Barack wanted to serve; he wanted to lead,” Kellman said. “And he was
ambitious, but never just for ambition’s sake. It was always mixed in with a
sense of service. He is motivated by [a desire for] significant structural change
for people he cares about. And he found himself in the African-American
community, historically, intellectually and, finally, geographically.”

The two men fell out of touch after Obama left Chicago for Harvard Law
School, and thereafter Obama’s life grew busier and Kellman’s grew somewhat
erratic. Kellman had not had an extended conversation with Obama since his rise
to celebrity status, but in following his public career, he said, it seemed clear to
him that the core of Obama’s character had remained essentially intact. He felt
so devoted to Obama’s political cause, in fact, that he contributed fifteen
hundred dollars to his Senate campaign. (“That’s not much, but it is a great
amount for me, someone paid from the Catholic Church,” he said sheepishly.
Not long after our interview, Kellman called Obama and the two men had an
extended conversation.)
Before sending Obama off to Chicago’s projects, Kellman urged him to read
Parting the Waters, the first of author Taylor Branch’s rich and thorough trilogy
on the civil rights movement of the 1950s and ’60s. After finishing the book,
Obama confessed to Kellman, “This is my story.” It would be yet another
indication to Kellman of the seriousness with which Obama took both himself
and his public work. But mostly it would be a sign that this man who had
suffered such profound racial confusion was finally finding comfort as an
American black man. Obama’s physical features, after all, give him this
appearance. He has joked that cab drivers who passed him by on the streets of
New York failed to see his maternal white relatives. Nor have most blacks
looked at him and questioned his identity. “I think there are a lot of black and
white intellectuals who like to use me as a Rorschach test for their own
confusion about race,” Obama said. “And the truth of the matter is, you know,
when I’m walking down the South Side of Chicago and visiting my barber shop
and playing basketball in some of these neighborhoods, those aren’t questions I
get asked.”
Kellman met with Obama on nearly a daily basis and observed as Obama
grew more comfortable weaving in and out of the black community in those
organizing years. After seeing how Obama’s political career unfolded, Kellman
made a bold proclamation: Despite chatter in some quarters of the black
community that Obama hadn’t lived the typical African-American experience,
Kellman predicted that he would be the most likely heir to Martin Luther King’s
legacy as both the chief advocate and the moral voice of black Americans. He
said Obama saw this role for himself years ago, even if he is reluctant to admit it
publicly today for fear of sounding immodest and perhaps distancing himself
from his non-black constituents. Kellman also predicted that Obama would
assume this mantle with thoughtfulness and a full understanding of its gravity.

“If you look at the King analogy and you look at Barack,” Kellman said,
“Barack has become the expectation of his people, and in that sense he is similar
to King. As I know Barack, he will carry that as a weight, but he will carry that
burden with great seriousness. And obviously, that can cause someone to kind of
lose perspective. You can get overly inflated. But it is also cause for some
sobering loss of your own importance at the same time. I think he knows that if
he wants to go where he wants to go in politics, he has to speak for more than
the black community. But I think the rest of his life, he will take on that burden
of being that person who changes the situation for African Americans.”
A SECOND MAN PLAYED A VITAL ROLE IN OBAMA’S CHICAGO experience—Reverend
Wright. Obama noted the influential role that the church played in the lives of
the African Americans he was organizing. “So I figured I better attend some
services myself and see what it was all about,” he said. It was Wright’s church
and his charismatic preaching that most closely spoke to Obama’s budding
spiritual nature. In seeking a permanent American identity, Obama discovered
that, in a religious land, his agnosticism relegated him to a place of isolation. “I
came to realize that without a particular commitment to a particular community
of faith,” he wrote in his book The Audacity of Hope, “I would be consigned at
some level to always remain apart, free in the way that my mother was free, but
also alone in the same ways that she was ultimately alone.”
Wright was among the most liberal of African-American preachers—he could
be all fire and no brimstone. When Obama knocked on Trinity’s door, Wright
was in his mid-forties and in the midst of growing his Trinity congregation to its
present membership of nearly eight thousand. Burly and light-skinned, Wright is
the son of a Baptist minister in Philadelphia. His intellectual sermons sometimes
more resemble left-wing political rants than religious preaching. Startling for a
preacher, he can be both profane and provocative. Despite advancing a
multicultural agenda, like Obama, Wright’s church is rooted in Afrocentrism.
Wright himself often dons colorful African dashikis and is not shy about laying
historical and modern-day blame on whites for much of the social and economic
woes in the African-American community. His sermons frequently denounce
Republican politics, and he has called people who voted for George W. Bush
“stupid.” Trinity United is considered among some Chicago blacks to be the
church of elites, attracting celebrities like the rapper Common and TV talk
mogul Oprah Winfrey to its congregation.

In some ways, Obama and Wright seem a mismatch because of their
distinctively different styles. But in other ways, they seem like a perfect fit—an
attraction of opposites. In contrast to Obama’s cautious style, Wright is
bombastic, rebellious and, in his own estimation, unafraid to speak truth to
power. Wright earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in sacred music from
Howard University and initially pursued a Ph.D. at the University of Chicago
Divinity School before interrupting his studies to minister full-time. His
intellectualism and black militancy put him at odds with some Baptist ministers
around Chicago, with whom he often sparred publicly, and he finally accepted a
position at Trinity. The church’s motto was “Unashamedly black and
unapologetically Christian.” Wright unquestionably took that motto to heart.
Wright remains a maverick among Chicago’s vast assortment of black
preachers. He will question Scripture when he feels it forsakes common sense;
he is an ardent foe of mandatory school prayer; and he is a staunch advocate for
homosexual rights, which is almost unheard-of among African-American
ministers. Gay and lesbian couples, with hands clasped, can be spotted in
Trinity’s pews each Sunday. Even if some blacks consider Wright’s church
serving only the bourgeois set, his ministry attracts a broad cross section of
Chicago’s black community. Obama first noticed the church because Wright had
placed a “Free Africa” sign out front to protest continuing apartheid. The liberal,
Columbia-educated Obama was attracted to Wright’s cerebral and inclusive
nature, as opposed to the more socially conservative and less educated ministers
around Chicago. Wright developed into a counselor and mentor to Obama as
Obama sought to understand the power of Christianity in the lives of black
Americans, and as he grappled with the complex vagaries of Chicago’s black
political scene. “Trying to hold a conversation with a guy like Barack, and him
trying to hold a conversation with some ministers, it’s like you are dating
someone and she wants to talk to you about Rosie and what she saw on Oprah,
and that’s it,” Wright explained. “But here I was, able to stay with him lockstep
as we moved from topic to topic…. He felt comfortable asking me questions that
were postmodern, post-Enlightenment and that college-educated and graduate
school–trained people wrestle with when it comes to the faith. We talked about
race and politics. I was not threatened by those questions.”
Wright also played an assisting role in another part of Obama’s evolution—
from a questioner of religion to a practicing Christian. Along his Senate
campaign trail, Obama would never fail to carry his Christian Bible. He would
place it right beside him, in the small compartment in the passenger side door of

the SUV, so he could refer to it often. When I first questioned Obama about his
religious faith and ever-present Bible in October 2004, he seemed just a bit
hesitant to answer. He was also uncharacteristically short in his responses.
Obama, without fail, would mention his church and his Christian faith when he
was campaigning in black churches and more socially conservative downstate
Illinois communities. But in speaking to a reporter, it seemed that he had
something to say about religion and politics, although he had yet to turn that
inclination into a coherent message. He told me that he referred to his Bible a
“couple times a week.” “It’s a great book and contains a lot of wisdom,” he said
simply. When I pried further, he said he was drawn to Christianity because its
main tenet of altruism and selflessness coincided with his own philosophies.
“Working with churches and with people of faith, I think, made me recognize
that many of the impulses that I had carried with me and were propelling me
forward were the same impulses that express themselves through the church,” he
said.
But more than that, Trinity’s less doctrinal approach to the Bible intrigued and
attracted Obama. “Faith to him is how he sees the human condition,” Wright
said. “Faith to him is not…litmus test, mouth-spouting, quoting Scripture. It’s
what you do with your life, how you live your life. That’s far more important
than beating someone over the head with Scripture that says women shouldn’t
wear pants or if you drink, you’re going to hell. That’s just not who Barack is.”
Overall, Obama’s first Chicago experience proved powerful in his later
development as a politician. His Christianity would be well received among
blacks and some rural whites. Community organizing taught him that idealism
must be coupled with pragmatism and hard realism. This would help him most
prominently in his legislative work, when he realized that compromise was often
necessary to move a bill forward. Organizing also turned this once self-absorbed
teenager and college student into an attentive listener to other people’s concerns,
a trait that enabled him to perceive the world through other people’s eyes and
then communicate those concerns to voters.
Obama never got very far in his effort to organize Chicago’s pastors, but a
magazine essay he wrote upon returning to Chicago a couple of years later
showed that he had not lost hope for that dream. In the 1990 article, Obama
called the African-American church “a slumbering giant in the political and
economic landscape of cities like Chicago.” He continued: “Over the past few
years, however, more and more young and forward-thinking pastors have begun

to look at community organizations…as a powerful tool for living the social
gospel, one which can educate and empower entire congregations and not just
serve as a platform for a few prophetic leaders. Should a mere 50 prominent
black churches, out of the thousands that exist in cities like Chicago, decide to
collaborate with a trained organizing staff, enormous positive changes could be
wrought in the education, housing, employment and spirit of inner-city black
communities, changes that would send powerful ripples throughout the city.”
After some losses, some victories and new spirituality, Obama summed up his
experience working for the Developing Communities Project by strongly
endorsing community organizing as an effective means of advancing American
society toward the ideal of equity and justice for all:
“In helping a group of housewives sit across the negotiating table with the
mayor of America’s third largest city and hold their own, or a retired
steelworker stand before a TV camera and give voice to the dreams he has
for his grandchild’s future, one discovers the most significant and satisfying
contribution organizing can make.
In return, organizing teaches as nothing else does the beauty and strength
of everyday people. Through the songs of the church and the talk on the
stoops, through the hundreds of individual stories of coming up from the
South and finding any job that would pay, of raising families on threadbare
budgets, of losing some children to drugs and watching others earn degrees
and land jobs their parents could never aspire to—it is through these stories
and songs of dashed hopes and powers of endurance, of ugliness and strife,
subtlety and laughter, that organizers can shape a sense of community not
only for others, but for themselves.