The Race Factor
Barack is a black man!
—MICHELLE OBAMA

The Democratic takeover of the Illinois senate in January 2003 could not have
come at a more opportune time for Barack Obama and his candidacy for the U.S.
Senate. With the close relationship between Obama and the senate’s president,
Emil Jones Jr., Obama was suddenly positioned perfectly to move from backbench obscurity into a prominent lawmaking role. Obama cleverly approached
Jones about supporting his Senate candidacy from the tack of increasing Jones’s
own political might. “You know, you have a lot of power,” Obama told Jones.
“You can make the next U.S. senator.” Jones responded, “Wow, that sounds
good! Got anybody in mind?” To which, Obama said, “Yes—me.” Indeed,
throughout 2003 and 2004, Jones offered Obama an array of high-profile bills to
shepherd through the senate. This powerful kinship also allowed Obama to
remain neutral, or fade to the background, on thorny issues that came before the
legislative body. But perhaps more than anything, it provided Obama with
crucial logistical assistance in running an effective statewide campaign. With
Jones setting the senate timetable, Obama was no longer at the mercy of
Republican leadership, which meant he was no longer in the dark about the
senate voting and session schedule. If Obama needed to hit the campaign trail,
attend a debate or throw a fund-raiser, he now could ask Jones not to schedule an
important vote during that time period.
As a consequence of Jones’s patronage, over the next two years in the
legislature, Obama sponsored nearly eight hundred bills, with the new
Democratic governor, Rod Blagojevich, signing more than two hundred and
eighty into law. Many of those bills allowed Obama to curry favor with key
Democratic constituencies—such as organized labor—that Obama would call

upon in his campaign for the Senate. Obama, for example, sponsored legislation
that blocked overtime restrictions mandated by the Bush administration, and he
sponsored a law that extended the reach of the Earned Income Tax Credit for the
working poor. Besides advancing Obama’s political career, the bulk of this
legislation reflected his commitment to the liberal doctrine of expanding
government powers to help the most vulnerable in society: children, the elderly,
the poor. “Being in the majority was critical. Accomplishing the things that I had
wanted to accomplish, that pent-up demand of ideas that I had, was important,”
Obama said. “It gave me a lot of confidence. This is the kind of politics that I
want to practice. This is why I am in this thing. It really bolstered my sense of
why politics is important because I had seen what I could get done in a
legislative context.”
By early 2003, the field for the Democratic Party’s race for the U.S. Senate
seat from Illinois was nearly set, and surprisingly, it included no real powerhouse
candidates. This was one of the reasons Obama felt he had a chance to win.
Besides Obama, over the coming months, the contest to be decided in March
2004 would attract seven contenders, five of them seemingly having a shot at the
nomination for the junior seat. Democrat Dick Durbin held the senior Senate
seat.
The presumptive front-runner was Dan Hynes, the state’s comptroller. Hynes
was the only candidate to have competed in—and won—a statewide race,
meaning that voters in every corner of Illinois had at least seen his name on the
ballot, if not voted for him. He had been the youngest comptroller in the state’s
history when he was first elected in 1999, and most insiders perceived him as
older and more experienced politically than he was. Though just in his late
thirties, Hynes had graying temples and a serious face that gave him a mature
look. He had seemingly the deepest political résumé in the field. His father,
Thomas Hynes, had been president of the Illinois senate and still ran a powerful
ward organization on the city’s Southwest Side.
Daley was the foremost Irish political name in Chicago; Illinois house speaker
Michael Madigan placed second in that category; and Hynes arguably came in
third. The other top contenders for the Senate would be Blair Hull, the securities
trader who had promised to dump as much as thirty million dollars into his
campaign; Gery Chico, Mayor Daley’s former chief of staff who had been
Chicago school board president; and Maria Pappas, the Cook County treasurer.
Also joining the contest were two others deemed more spoilers than anything:

Joyce Washington, a health care consultant; and Nancy Skinner, a liberal bombthrowing radio host.
Obama’s campaign operation in early 2003 was being run by Dan Shomon
from a small two-room office in Chicago’s Loop business district. Shomon,
however, did not want to spend the next year running a Senate campaign.
Feeling burned out, he told Obama that he would help him launch an office, but
he needed to find a long-term campaign manager by spring. Shomon explained it
wasn’t that he didn’t believe Obama could win, but he didn’t want to be involved
in the grind of another campaign. This news infuriated Obama, who could not
understand how Shomon could abandon him at this crucial juncture in his career.
“This Senate thing,” Shomon tried to explain to Obama, “that’s your thing,
Barack—it’s not mine. My life is going a different way.” Obama, however, still
felt betrayed. While the two men spoke frequently over the next months and
years, their tight-knit relationship was never fully repaired. Obama, who had
been deemed a special person since his childhood, clearly was not accustomed to
being left at the altar.
