11
The Candidate
The older I get, the more I realize it is not always what you say, but the way
you say it. And that is particularly true in politics.
—HOTEL MAGNATE PENNY PRITZKER

Barack Obama’s first thoughts about running for the U.S. Senate came as early
as mid-2001, less than a year after his stinging defeat by Bobby Rush. After that
race, Obama had been approached about running for Illinois attorney general,
but discarded the notion for the same reasons Dan Shomon warned him away
from the Senate run. Said Obama, “I put Michelle and the family through such
heck with the congressional race and it put such significant strains on our
marriage that I could not just turn around and start running all over again, so I
passed that by.”
Coincidentally, the thought of Obama running for the Senate had also
occurred to Eric Adelstein, a Chicago-based media consultant for Democrats.
Adelstein had scheduled a meeting with Obama for September 2001 to discuss
their mutual idea. But little could either man have known what would transpire
on September 11 of that year. “So 9/11 happens and immediately you have all
these reports about the guy who did this thing is Osama Bin Laden,” Obama
said. “Suddenly Adelstein’s interest in the meeting had diminished! We talked
about it and he said that the name thing was really going to be a problem for me
now. In fairness to Eric, I think at that point the notion that somebody named
Barack Obama could win anything—it just seemed pretty dim.”
So Obama went back to concentrating on his two jobs as constitutional law
instructor and state lawmaker. But by mid-2002, he again was growing restless
in his political career. He began toying again with the idea of the Senate contest
and he opened serious conversations with his Illinois senate colleagues about the

notion. Several seemed receptive—Denny Jacobs, Terry Link, Larry Walsh and
members of the black caucus, including senate president Emil Jones Jr. They
promised to support him, even to lead an exploratory committee.
But there was one person whose affirmation was vital—Michelle. Convincing
Michelle to support him through another campaign was the most significant
hurdle Obama had to clear. Michelle knew that her husband’s political career
was of immense importance to him, but upon hearing his Senate idea, she began
to wonder if this optimistic dreamer was going off the deep edge. The couple had
two kids, a mortgage and credit card debt. After Obama’s crushing loss to Bobby
Rush, she worried that her husband was about to undertake another lost cause,
although, realistically, she worried primarily about finances. Another political
race could keep the family in debt, or perhaps plunge it deeper into debt. And
even if he won the Senate seat, she thought, their financial condition was not
likely to improve.
“The big issue around the Senate for me was, how on earth can we afford it?”
Michelle told me. “I don’t like to talk about it, because people forget that his
credit card was maxed out. How are we going to get by? Okay, now we’re going
to have two households to fund, one here and one in Washington. We have law
school debt, tuition to pay for the children. And we’re trying to save for college
for the girls…. My thing is, is this just another gamble? It’s just killing us. My
thing was, this is ridiculous, even if you do win, how are you going to afford this
wonderful next step in your life? And he said, ‘Well, then, I’m going to write a
book, a good book.’ And I’m thinking, ‘Snake eyes there, buddy. Just write a
book, yeah, that’s right. Yep, yep, yep. And you’ll climb the beanstalk and come
back down with the golden egg, Jack.’”
But Obama was confident that he was destined for more than just a day job
running a foundation or practicing law or languishing in the minority party in the
Illinois senate. And for that golden destiny to come to fruition, he knew he had
to do his most convincing sales job yet.
Explained Obama, “What I told Michelle is that politics has been a huge strain
on you, but I really think there is a strong possibility that I can win this race.
Obviously I have devoted a lot of my life to public service and I think that I can
make a huge difference here if I won the U.S. Senate race. I said to her that if
you are willing to go with me on this ride and if it doesn’t work out, then I will
step out of politics…. I think that Michelle felt as if I was sincere. I think she

had come to realize that I would leave politics if she asked me to.”
Added Michelle, “Ultimately I capitulated and said, ‘Whatever. We’ll figure it
out. We’re not hurting. Go ahead.’” Then she laughed and told him hopefully,
“And maybe you’ll lose.”
Obama went back to Shomon and told him he was in. “So I told Dan that I had
this conversation with Michelle and she had given me the green light and that
what I want to do is roll the dice and put everything we have into this thing.”
Still tapped out from his congressional race, Obama knew he needed start-up
cash. So he held a small fund-raiser that netted thirty-three thousand dollars.
That allowed him to begin paying Shomon as a full-time campaign manager, as
well as hiring an office administrator and a full-time fund-raiser.
BEFORE THAT FUND-RAISER, HOWEVER, OBAMA HAD BEEN MAKING other vital moves.
He had a crucial meeting with another important crowd—the key financial
supporters of his unsuccessful congressional race in 2000. Obama knew that his
fund-raising for a Senate campaign had to far exceed what he had raised in his
race against Bobby Rush. So he invited a group of African-American
professionals to the house of Marty Nesbitt, who had served as finance chairman
of his congressional campaign. Nesbitt is the president of a Chicago parking
management company and vice president of the Pritzker Realty Group, part of
the Pritzker family empire. A tall, slender African American, he had been friends
with Obama for years. Their wives were also close, and Nesbitt’s wife, Anita
Blanchard, an obstetrician, delivered both of Obama’s children. The two men
played basketball together and mixed with the same Hyde Park neighborhood
crowd of young, successful black professionals. Nesbitt was soft-spoken, polite
and amiable. He was also extremely active in civic affairs, serving on the boards
of Chicago’s Museum of Contemporary Art, Big Brothers/Big Sisters and the
United Negro College Fund, among many others.
Not long after Obama’s loss to Rush, Nesbitt had suggested that Obama might
want to run statewide in his next contest. It seemed pointless to try to unseat
Rush again after failing so miserably. So when Obama addressed the group of
black professionals and mentioned his plans for a statewide race, Nesbitt quite
naturally assumed Obama was considering a state office, such as attorney
general or treasurer. Then Obama dropped the bomb.

“Barack says he wants to run for the U.S. Senate,” Nesbitt recalled. “Blahhh!!
I mean, I literally fell off the couch. And we all started laughing—and he said,
‘No, really, I am gonna run for the U.S. Senate.’” Then Obama proceeded to
make a rational argument that he could win such a race. He said that Senator
Fitzgerald’s approval ratings were so low that he was destined to lose to a
Democrat in 2004. Obama said he believed he could bring together blacks and
liberals into a coalition and come out on top in what was looking to be a
crowded primary field. “He convinced us in the room that day that he could pull
it off,” Nesbitt said. “But he mostly convinced us because we were his friends
and we wanted to support him.”
Obama, who had learned the significance of money in politics during his Rush
contest, also told them the hard fiscal truth that he was going to need not
hundreds of thousands but millions of dollars to pull off a victory. He even broke
it down into specifics, telling the group that with three million dollars, he had a
40 percent chance of winning; with five million dollars, he had a 50 percent
chance; with seven million, 80 percent. And with ten million, Obama
proclaimed, “I guarantee you that I will win.”
Nesbitt said that Obama’s supreme confidence, clear vision and attention to
detail convinced them that it was doable. It certainly wasn’t a sure win, but it
was doable.
“So we all said, ‘We’ve gotta make a grassroots, ground-level push and get
this going,’” Nesbitt said. “But you know, at this point, I was very naive. Barack
is not afraid to ask for money. But I didn’t have any idea how far we had to take
it, to the next level.”
The next level meant that Nesbitt and Obama had to reach beyond his
previous contributor base. In his congressional race, Obama successfully picked
up cash from black business leaders and a smattering of lakefront liberals, but he
needed to reach even deeper into those pockets and find more. So Nesbitt
arranged a weekend getaway to help Obama reach inside the deepest pockets he
knew—those of the Pritzker family.
THE PRITZKERS RULE A FAMILY EMPIRE THAT EMBODIES HIGH society and extreme
wealth in Chicago. One of the richest families in the country, with a fortune
estimated at twenty billion dollars, the Pritzkers began their American story in

1902 when Nicholas Pritzker, a Ukrainian immigrant, opened a law firm in
Chicago’s downtown Loop commercial district. Over four generations the family
amassed its fortune through Hyatt hotels, financial services and numerous other
enterprises. The clan is intensely private, even if they have also been extremely
philanthropic. Nesbitt knew that if Obama could sell himself to Penny Pritzker,
her support would not only reap huge immediate financial dividends but also be
a crucial step in the foundation of a fund-raising network.
So in late summer 2002, Obama, Michelle and their two daughters drove to
Penny Pritzker’s weekend cottage along the lakefront in Michigan, about fortyfive minutes from Chicago, to sell his candidacy.
Like many people at this point, Pritzker was impressed by Obama’s
intellectual heft but was unsure whether he could pull off what he had in mind. It
would be up to Obama to sell his vision to a veteran businesswoman who was no
easy sale. Pritzker, who has mostly supported Democrats but deems herself a
“centrist,” recalled the weekend as a “seminal moment.” She and her husband,
Bryan Traubert, were in training for the Chicago Marathon, and under a beautiful
sunny sky the couple slipped away for a long run along Michigan’s winding
country roads near the lakeshore, all the while discussing whether Obama
merited their backing. She described the discussion:
We had known Barack and Michelle previously, but we hadn’t made up our
minds about supporting him for the Senate. And we had to make a decision.
So we spent some time talking with him about his philosophy of life and his
vision for the country. He is a very thoughtful human being in the way he
articulates ideas and the way he thinks about the world. And the older I get,
the more I realize it is not always what you say, but the way you say it. And
that is particularly true in politics…. So Bryan and I had a long discussion
about Barack and his values and the way he carries and expresses himself,
his family and the kind of human beings he and Michelle are—what kind of
people they are, as much as about lofty political ideas. Really, at that point
the question was, these other people are running and what obligations do
you have to the other people? It became clear to us that if Barack could win,
he had the intellect, the opportunity, to be an extraordinary leader, not just
because he would be an African-American senator, but a male AfricanAmerican senator. Here is a guy with an amazing intellectual capacity to
learn and an interest in learning…. But how much did he know about
medicine, about business, about foreign affairs and the economy? He was

dealing with all these things in fragments and we asked ourselves what was
his capacity to deal with these things as a whole?…He was someone who
views himself as a healer, not a divisive character, but someone who can
bring disparate constituencies together…. It became clear to us that…he is
not perfect, but he is bright and thoughtful and confident. He possesses a lot
of confidence. That was the seminal moment when we simply decided after
that weekend that we would support them.
With Penny Pritzker on board, other influential Chicago-based Democrats and
philanthropists soon followed suit: Newton Minnow, a Chicago lawyer who
advised Senator Adlai Stevenson and Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon
Johnson; James Crown and members of the wealthy Crown family; John Bryan,
then the chief executive of the Sara Lee Corporation.
Obama had not yet announced his candidacy, but he realized he needed more
political talent behind him. By now, Adelstein had signed on with another
potential candidate, Gery Chico, the former president of the Chicago Board of
Education. So Obama turned to the other major political consultant he knew,
David Axelrod. A couple of years earlier, Axelrod and his wife, Susan, had
thrown a quick fund-raiser for Obama at their downtown Chicago high-rise
condominium when Obama’s senate district lines were redrawn to include much
of downtown, including their home. Obama was largely anonymous outside
Hyde Park at that first gathering, which drew all of twenty people. “We were
pulling in people from the pool, urging them, ‘Hey, come meet your new state
senator,’” Axelrod said.
After this tepid fund-raiser and Obama’s collapse against Bobby Rush, the
political consultant was less than enthused about a potential Senate candidacy
for Obama. Axelrod told the hopeful Obama that he thought Obama was a
“terrific talent” and “I consider you my friend,” but running for statewide office
was “probably unrealistic.” Axelrod was blunt with Obama: “If I were you, I
would wait until Daley retires and then look at a mayor’s race because then the
demographics would be working in your favor.”
That disappointed Obama, but it did not dissuade him—he still thought the
Senate was a good possibility for him. Even so, he soon encountered an even
bigger stumbling block than Axelrod’s caution. Carol Moseley Braun, who
represented Illinois in the Senate from 1993 to 1999, announced that she might
run to reclaim the seat she had lost to Republican Fitzgerald. Moseley Braun had

made history as the first African-American woman to serve in the Senate but
was defeated by Fitzgerald in 1998 after a tumultuous first term. Allegations
arose that her then boyfriend, Kgosie Matthews, who ultimately took over her
campaign, sexually harassed female campaign workers, although Moseley Braun
said an investigation found no evidence. The couple was accused of spending
campaign money on clothes and jewelry, and they were criticized for taking a
month-long trip to Africa right after the election. But her major downfall was
meeting with the former dictator of Nigeria, General Sani Abacha, without
giving advance warning to the Department of State. Abacha had been accused of
a host of human rights violations.
Fitzgerald looked extremely vulnerable, having feuded with the GOP power
structures in Washington and Illinois. This was the major factor that led Obama
to think that unseating him was possible. But if Moseley Braun were in the race,
Obama said he would have to defer to her and decline to run. The reality was, he
would have no choice: she would gobble up both of his potential bases of
support—African Americans and liberals. “There was no way to win,” he said.
So Obama asked to meet with her in his senate office in Springfield. “We…
asked her how serious she was, and her basic attitude was that she had not made
up her mind but obviously it is [her] prerogative to potentially run,” Obama
recalled. “I understood her position. She had been a trailblazer. It was frustrating
for me to think that maybe this was one chance to go after something I really
cared about and potentially [I] could not do it. But that is the nature of politics.”
Moseley Braun presented not only a problem for Obama, but a major
headache for the Democratic Party powers in both Illinois and Washington.
Because she had been a national figure as the first black woman in the Senate,
her alleged improprieties in office had been a major embarrassment to the party.
And even though Fitzgerald appeared extremely vulnerable, Democrats feared
that these past embarrassments would doom her in a general election. Eric Zorn,
a liberal columnist for the Chicago Tribune, went so far as to predict that she
would be “walloped” by almost any Republican. With a Senate seat seemingly
up for grabs, Democrats could ill afford to run a candidate tainted with past
scandals.
To keep Moseley Braun out of the race, various Democratic powers close to
Obama set out to find her a job elsewhere. “But the problem was, they could not
find her employment,” said an Obama confidante. “Nobody could find her any
work.” While the job search persisted, Moseley Braun’s indecisiveness about a

Senate run began to wear thin on the potential candidates and on Democratic
activists looking to support someone in the race. It especially wore thin on
Obama, whose political career was hanging in the balance. But that apparently
did not matter to Moseley Braun (who declined to be interviewed on the
subject). “She felt that [Obama] was a young whippersnapper, a pretender, a
cheat,” David Axelrod said. “I think she took it personally. He was essentially
messing in her territory. She made it pretty clear that she was not happy about
Barack’s entrance.”
As Moseley Braun considered her options, Obama decided to travel to
Washington in September 2002, to spend a weekend at the annual Congressional
Black Caucus conference in hopes of garnering support for himself. He figured
he would meet some influential black lawmakers and ask for their help and
guidance. But the excursion was a major disappointment for the earnest Obama.
He returned to Chicago significantly disillusioned about the ways of
Washington.
A couple of weeks after returning home, he sought the counsel of his pastor
and friend, the Reverend Jeremiah Wright. Visibly dejected, Obama slumped
onto the sofa in the pastor’s second-floor office at Trinity United Church of
Christ. He told Wright that the Senate idea was thoroughly frustrating him
because Moseley Braun would not make up her mind whether she was in or out.
And not only that, but other names had begun to surface for the race—Illinois
comptroller Dan Hynes, whose father was a powerful Chicago ward alderman;
Blair Hull, a multimillionaire securities trader; and Gery Chico, formerly a top
aide to Chicago mayor Richard Daley and school board president. None was a
certain nominee or impinged on his bases, but each had strengths, and each was
pulling ahead of him in organizing a campaign operation. Hynes had run
statewide before and would have his father’s political machine behind him. Hull
would have tens of millions in personal wealth to lavish on a campaign. Chico
was already raising significant money and was far along in assembling a
campaign structure. Another name floating around was Representative Jan
Schakowsky, a liberal from the North Shore suburbs who would have cut
directly into Obama’s lakefront support.
“My name should be out there,” Obama told his pastor. “But Carol Moseley
Braun won’t say what she’s going to do, and I’m not gonna run against a black
woman. If she’s gonna run, then I’m out. Until she says yes or no, I can’t say
anything.”

But what truly struck Wright from that meeting was Obama’s astonishment
over the black caucus event in Washington. It opened Wright’s eyes once again
to just how innocent and idealistic Obama could be about the world of politics.
The conference was nothing like what Obama had envisioned, but it was exactly
the way Wright, a former adviser to Chicago’s only black mayor, Harold
Washington, recalled it.
“He had gone down there to get support and find out who would support him
and found out it was just a meat market,” the pastor said in an interview,
breaking into a laugh. “He had people say, ‘If you want to count on me, come on
to my room. I don’t care if you’re married. I am not asking you to leave your
wife—just come on.’ All the women hitting on him. He was, like, in shock. He’s
there on a serious agenda, talking about running for the United States Senate.
They’re talking about giving [him] some pussy. And I was like, ‘Barack, c’mon,
man. Come on! Name me one significant thing that has come out of black
congressional caucus weekend. It’s homecoming. It’s just a nonstop party, all the
booze you want, all the booty you want. That’s all it is.’ And here he is with this
altruistic agenda, trying to get some support. He comes back shattered. I thought
to myself, ‘Does he have a rude awakening coming his way.’”
A few months later, Moseley Braun was still dithering as Obama took his
annual Christmas season sojourn to his native Hawaii. Deeply dispirited over the
prospect of Moseley Braun’s candidacy, Obama rested on Sandy Beach, a
fifteen-minute drive along the rugged southeast shoreline from downtown
Honolulu. This was the beach of Obama’s youth, the childhood paradise where
he spent mindless high school days bodysurfing, drinking beer and seeking to
convince college women that he was worthy of their attention. With the treecovered hills of Oahu again cascading behind him, with the tall waves of the
Pacific Ocean again crashing before him, the forty-one-year-old Illinois state
senator contemplated his future. At this moment, Obama’s ambitious nature was
eating at him. He was terrified that all his hard work was coming to naught. The
frustrating years trying to organize programs that would assist the impoverished
on Chicago’s Far South Side, the decision to forgo a lucrative law career for a
meagerly paid civil rights practice, the years foraging in the wilderness of a
minority party in the Illinois General Assembly, the days and nights away from
his devoted wife and two precious daughters to travel the campaign trail—what
had this sacrifice done for him and for the world? That Christmas, Obama’s once
bright future seemed as if it was crashing in the surf. Suddenly his grand idea of
winning an open seat on the world’s most powerful lawmaking body looked less

like a serious notion than a quixotic dream.
For the first time in his professional life, the supremely confident Obama was
deeply frightened. He was terrified that the final story of Barack Obama’s
political career would be this: Another talented black man with grandiose
dreams somehow flamed out and disappeared from public life. Most frightening
of all: This story resembled all too much the tale of his father’s unfulfilled
dreams.
But then Obama peered out at his two young girls splashing in the ocean with
Michelle. They looked playful and happy. Obama reconsidered his dreams and
thought, well, perhaps he was not meant to be a senator or a mayor. “I didn’t
grow up thinking that I wanted to be a politician,” Obama recalled. “This was
something that happened as a sideline, as a consequence of or an outgrowth of
my community organizing, and if this doesn’t work out I am fine with it. Kids
keep you grounded, and I had to remind myself that it was not all about me and
my personal ambitions, that there is a set of broader issues.”
But just as Obama was coming to terms with the notion that his grand political
career might never happen, he received a phone call that would again put his
personal ambitions front and center. He was still in Hawaii when the news came
via cell phone: Moseley Braun had decided against running for the Senate and
instead would seek the presidency. Obama knew exactly what he needed to do—
and fast. He clicked the cell phone back open and dialed David Axelrod.
