The Ryan Files
I don’t think I am going to have a hard time convincing anyone that Barack
is the mainstream candidate in this race.
—ROBERT GIBBS, AFTER OBAMA’S OPPONENT WAS CAUGHT UP IN A SEX SCANDAL

Barack Obama’s campaign caught a huge break in the primary with the sordid
divorce files of Blair Hull taking center stage. But the real break was the
improbable entrance of Hull into the race in the first place. Hull had a brilliant
mathematical mind that helped him build a mountain of wealth on Wall Street;
but if he’d had a keener mind for human nature, he would probably never have
entered politics and suffered such public disgrace. David Axelrod had warned
him privately about the potentially devastating effect of his divorce files, but
Hull went ahead anyway. Without Hull, it is impossible to know how events
would have played out. Would Axelrod have signed with Obama? Would Dan
Hynes have run a better campaign and raised more money without having to
constantly worry about Hull? Would Obama have raised and spent a couple of
million dollars for a big TV splash without the Millionaire’s Amendment that
Hull triggered?
Hull’s influence did not stop at the end of the primary. And for Obama, Hull
was the political gift that just kept on giving. Even though Hull had now
disappeared from the race—and largely from Chicago politics—his divorce mess
created aftershocks on the Republican side that would tilt the general election
heavily in Obama’s favor.
Jack Ryan, Obama’s GOP opponent, had had portions of his divorce files
sealed, just as Hull had. And when the Chicago Tribune and WLS-TV decided it
was in the public interest to sue for the opening of Hull’s file, they looked
around at all the other candidates in the Senate race and discovered that Ryan

had sealed a portion of the public records in his split from his ex-wife,
Hollywood actress Jeri Ryan. So in the interest of fairness, the news outlets sued
to open the entirety of Ryan’s file as well. Ryan’s lawyers had managed to keep
the records private through the primary, but they had no compelling legal case to
keep them closed forever. Ryan maintained that the files contained delicate
information involving his nine-year-old son and held nothing embarrassing to
him personally. He simply wanted to keep the files closed to protect his son, he
said. Republican and political insiders were leery about this defense. Ryan had
been married to an attractive TV actress, and Ryan himself looked as if he had
been ordered from central casting. He was tall, lean, square-jawed, Ivy League–
educated and well-spoken. After becoming rich in investment banking, he spent
a few years teaching in a private high school in Chicago’s inner city and
articulated a Jack Kemp–esque, pro-business brand of compassionate
conservatism. In some ways, he looked more mainstream than the liberal Obama
from the South Side, and his campaign strategy was to paint Obama as an
extreme leftist. A Republican in the Illinois legislature who had cosponsored
bills with Obama dubbed Obama “to the left of Mao Tse-tung.” In an interview
with me, Kirk Dillard, another Republican in the Illinois senate who was close to
Obama, awkwardly walked a tightrope between his loyalties to the GOP and his
friendship with Obama. Dillard complained that Obama was “soft on crime and
borderline socialistic,” but ended the interview by emphatically saying that
Obama was “truly a wonderful human being.” As for Ryan, the rumor mills in
Hollywood and Illinois political circles swirled about what caused the divorce
between him and Jeri Ryan. Those rumors intensified in Illinois after Ryan
confided to some Republicans that his sexual predilections could be a bit outside
the norm. Illinois GOP chairwoman Judy Baar Topinka questioned Ryan sternly
about the divorce records, and he assured her that they contained nothing that
could derail his candidacy.
Besides being haunted by the closed divorce files, Ryan’s general election
campaign got off to an inauspicious start in another way. Ryan had sent a field
tracker with a video camera to follow Obama in the hope of catching him in
some sort of public gaffe. With the advent of the video-posting website
YouTube.com, this strategy has become commonplace in campaigns today. A
candidate can utter something unfortunate in the morning, and the video is up on
the Internet that afternoon. But there is a certain physical space that a tracker
generally affords his subject, and Ryan’s young staffer stepped over that line.
Instead of simply taking video of Obama speaking publicly, the man decided to
follow Obama everywhere he went, down hallways to the bathroom and along

sidewalks to his vehicle—all with a video camera trained on the subject. Obama
was less than thrilled with a reporter from the mainstream media covering him
every day, so one can imagine how this overly aggressive young Republican
went over with him. The issue came to a head in Springfield during a senate
session when Obama’s patience ran out. With the tracker in tow, Obama walked
into the press room in the state capitol and announced to a roomful of astonished
journalists, “Meet my stalker.” The man never stopped recording, and the next
day’s papers were filled with stories of this “stalker” from the Ryan campaign
who wouldn’t give Obama any room. Whether it was calculated or visceral,
Obama’s move proved ingenious. Public opinion fell heavily against Ryan.
Hounded by questions, a Ryan spokesman finally succumbed and issued an
apology to Obama. The tracker was withdrawn, but the story had a certain
unique and easy-to-understand quality that drew the public’s attention for several
days. So the first major news story of the general election campaign was a blow
to Ryan.
Assuming that he had urban Chicago well in hand, Obama turned his attention
to wooing voters in moderate and Republican territories. In mid-June, he headed
downstate for a campaign swing. While Obama was on this tour, Ryan’s lawyers
finally ran out of appeals and a California judge ordered the divorce records
released. Ryan and his staff spent the day trying to figure out the best method of
releasing them, a decision they ultimately bungled as badly as they did the
tracker. Ryan called reporters to a news conference at six o’clock in the evening
to see the files. But someone must have realized that this would allow television
stations to go live on the evening news with the records release. So the media
was kept waiting until after eight o’clock. This only set up an even bigger
feeding frenzy, with news outlets now having hungered for a couple of hours to
see details of the records.
The media had good reason to salivate. The files were even more voyeuristic
than the Hull records. They showed that Jeri Ryan, who had gained fame
primarily through her role in TV’s Star Trek: Voyager, had accused her husband
of taking her against her will to public sex clubs in New York and Paris, where
he tried to coerce her into having sex in front of strangers. At the club in Paris,
the file said, his wife alleged that “people were having sex everywhere. I cried. I
was physically ill. Respondent became very upset with me and said it was not a
‘turn-on’ for me to cry. I could not get over the incident and my loss of any
attraction to him as a result. Respondent knew this was a serious problem. I told
him I did not know if we could work it out.” Jeri Ryan described one of the New

York spots as “a bizarre club with cages, whips and other apparatus hanging
from the ceiling…. Respondent wanted me to have sex with him there with
another couple watching. I refused. Respondent asked me to perform a sexual
activity upon him and he specifically asked other people to watch. I was very
upset.”
As these embarrassing details appeared in full view, Obama made sure to be
as far away from Chicago as possible. The strategy was to just let the Ryan saga
play out all on its own. In the midst of a hectic two-day downstate campaign
swing, Obama was giving a speech that evening at a fifty-dollar-a-plate fundraiser at Southern Illinois University in far southern Carbondale. The first
Associated Press story about the Ryan files flashed across Robert Gibbs’s
Blackberry mobile device about nine o’clock. Reading the story, one of Obama’s
young aides couldn’t help but laugh at his own candidate’s good fortune.
“Awesome,” he said, breaking into a big grin. When Obama finished speaking,
he was swallowed up by autograph seekers and well-wishers. Gibbs waded in
and pulled Obama to the side to relay the breaking news. Obama listened
attentively and made sure that his body language gave away nothing. A few
minutes later, I asked Obama for a response. His consultation with Gibbs had
elicited this: “I’ve tried to make it clear throughout the campaign that my focus
is on what I can do to help the families of Illinois and I’m not considering this
something appropriate for me to comment on.”
Outside, walking up to the campaign caravan, Obama flipped on his cell
phone to find it filled with messages from reporters across the state seeking his
comment. At campaign appearances all day long, he had declined to discuss
Ryan’s potential problems, saying that whatever was in Ryan’s divorce files was
not his concern. Gibbs advised Obama not to return any of the media calls, since
the AP had already picked up these no-comments from throughout the day. “I
wanna call back [Dave] McKinney with the Sun-Times,” Obama said earnestly.
“He’s a nice guy and treated me well when I was a nobody.” Gibbs gave him the
go-ahead but reiterated that he was not to comment on the substance of the Ryan
problems. As we stood around in the parking lot readying to leave, Obama shook
his head at this bizarre turn of events. “This sounds worse than the Hull stuff, at
least more embarrassing,” he said. “I mean, what was Ryan thinking to get in
this race?”
For his part, Jack Ryan denied the allegations, which came as the couple
battled for custody over their son in 2000. But the political fallout was intense.

The Tribune blared the story across its front page the next morning with the
headline “Ryan File a Bombshell: Ex-wife Alleges GOP Candidate Took Her to
Sex Clubs.” Chicago television stations fed on the story for days. A Republican
congressman from Illinois, Ray LaHood, asked Ryan to withdraw from the race.
Gibbs privately joked, “I don’t think I am going to have a hard time convincing
anyone that Barack is the mainstream candidate in this race.” Even late-night
comedians got in their shots. Jay Leno cracked, “Jack Ryan, I’ve heard of going
after the ‘swing vote,’ but this is ridiculous!”
As for Obama, his campaign caravan roared through Illinois again the next
day, which he spent carefully keeping himself out of the Ryan story. Incredibly,
the Illinois race had again turned into the dissection of a man’s sordid marriage.
Reporters tossed question after question at Obama about the unfolding Ryan
saga, and time and again Obama did not take the bait, dutifully projecting a
sense of morality in the process. In Peoria, he told a gaggle of reporters: “I don’t
take any pleasure from watching this kind of circus atmosphere. I want the
outcome to be this: that the voters of Illinois have sent me to Washington to
improve their job prospects, to improve the prospects of their kids going to
college, to make sure that health care is affordable.” As Obama endeavored to
remain above the muck, some reporters waded right in. After Obama broke from
the Peoria media gaggle in which he declined over and over to discuss the Ryan
matter, a radio reporter ran after him through the parking lot and followed him to
his awaiting SUV, yelling at full throat to Obama: “Do you think a sexual fetish
defines a person’s character?! Senator, do you think a sexual fetish defines a
person’s character?! Well, Senator, Senator?!” Despite the fact that the woman
was thrusting her microphone over his shoulder and into his face, Obama
miraculously kept his composure and kept walking.
The long two-day campaign trip through Illinois ended that evening with a
fund-raiser at the Children’s Museum on Chicago’s Navy Pier, an event attended
by a score of Obama’s longtime Chicago supporters. With the Chicago media
waiting to ask Obama about the Ryan matter, David Axelrod stopped by to make
sure his candidate did not fumble the ball during this tumult in his opponent’s
campaign.
But at Navy Pier, a fatigued Obama came closest to his breaking point. The
night before, the campaign caravan had not arrived at the hotel until nearly two
o’clock in the morning, and the first event was just seven hours later at nine
o’clock. It had been a tiring couple of days, and when Obama addressed the

Chicago press, he strayed from his no-comment theme a couple of times, once
going so far as to say that “all of us have to take responsibility for ourselves and
how we conduct ourselves in our campaigns.” This unwise statement sent
Axelrod into his mode of worried pacing. Obama then plunged back into his
response, that voters ultimately would decide this election on the issues that
mattered to them. But asked if he worried that a tougher opponent like former
Illinois governor Jim Edgar might emerge if Ryan were to drop from the race,
Obama was surprisingly candid about his upcoming campaign strategy. “When I
started twenty months ago, everybody looked like a formidable opponent,” he
said. “And when people suggested to me that we shouldn’t bother, because
people with more money or higher name recognition, a higher profile or more
organization were in the race, then we would have folded up our tent back in
February. I think what we have shown in this campaign and what we will
continue to show is, if we stay on message and talk about the issues that matter
to voters in Illinois, that we are going to do just fine.”
Axelrod paced faster and faster. Did his candidate really just say “stay on
message”? Indeed, when Obama reiterated several more times this plan to stay
“on message,” Axelrod halted midstride, winced and shot a glance downward, as
if somebody had punched him hard in the gut. His star client was juggling the
ball all over the place. After all, candidates are supposed to stay on message, but
they aren’t supposed to announce to the world that they are staying on message.
Finally, after getting lost in another answer, a weary Obama realized he had
drifted into no-man’s-land and abruptly ended the press conference himself.
Gibbs saw my surprised reaction and sauntered over. “He’s tired,” Gibbs
explained. “It’s been a long couple of days.” It certainly had been an exhausting
campaign trip, and Obama had to be close to brain-dead after two straight days
of talking, posing and politicking. But mental and physical stamina are vital
components of a successful federal candidate, and fatigue would be a consistent
part of Obama’s life as his career sped forward. In his presidential run in May
2007, a sleep-deprived Obama would accidentally say that ten thousand people
died in a tornado in Kansas when the actual number of fatalities was just twelve.
That launched a series of news stories questioning his discipline and stamina.
Few humans are as disciplined as Obama, but his stamina can be questionable.
In any event, the poor performance at Navy Pier revealed not only that he was
susceptible to fatigue, but that he was still learning the game. There would be
many more long, tedious campaign swings in his future, and Obama would have
to carry himself at a level higher than this if he were to realize his own ambitious
dreams.

EVEN WITH THE PUBLIC JOKES AND PUBLIC EMBARRASSMENT, JACK Ryan’s team
insisted that he would remain in the race. But that was close to delusional. Ryan
had lost the confidence of not only many Republican voters, but the GOP
establishment in Illinois. Most important, Topinka, the state Republican Party
chairwoman, felt betrayed because Ryan had assured her that the files contained
nothing unflattering. Within weeks, as pressure built from top Republicans in
Illinois, Ryan ended his candidacy, leaving the reeling GOP lost about what to do
next.
Several months later, in an interview with the college newspaper at
Dartmouth, his alma mater, Ryan explained that he believed the divorce files
would never become public and he cast himself as a victim of an overzealous
media. He made a vigorous defense that the records should have been kept
sealed. He noted that Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry had sealed
divorce files that no media venture had sued to open. “There’s no other example
of someone having to turn over their sealed divorce records. So this is obviously
a higher standard than anyone else in the history of the United States has been
held to,” Ryan told the paper. “But I don’t know whether it’s because of my
background they held me to a higher standard or not; I just don’t know. I really
don’t know what motivated the Chicago Tribune to do that. They said it was a
matter of principle. But if it were, it wouldn’t have only applied to me.”
As Illinois Republicans waded into the wilderness without a candidate,
Obama was headed the other direction—straight into orbit. His campaign fundraising was now moving at a furious pace and the buzz around him as a rising
star was increasing by the hour. And there was more at work: Axelrod, Cauley,
Gibbs and Obama’s fast-growing network of influential fans were lobbying high
party officials to win their candidate a key speaking slot at the Democratic
National Convention in Boston the next month. The party was looking for a
fresh new minority voice—and Obama fit the role perfectly. The main thrust of
the Obama team’s effort was to get him “in the window.” That meant solidifying
a speaking slot in the evening when the national TV networks would be carrying
the convention live. This kind of widespread exposure could raise Obama’s
profile nationally and shift his fund-raising into fifth gear.
Kerry, now the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, had met Obama
twice at political events in Chicago, and Obama had impressed him each time. In

particular, a joint appearance on Chicago’s Near West Side at a small industrial
plant gave Kerry a dose of the smooth grace of Obama’s public style.
Surrounded by employees of the company, the two men sat on stools next to
each other and answered questions from the workers about health care, free trade
and other matters. Obama wore a tie and a light blue dress shirt similar to the
one he’d worn that day I met him in his constitutional law classroom, and he
began answering his first question while rolling up his sleeves in the same cool,
methodical, look-at-me manner. He loosely held a cordless microphone and
walked about the room answering questions with complete ease. Kerry, by
contrast, appeared stiff, uneasy and his answers sounded prescripted compared
with Obama’s engaging, conversational tone. The presidential candidate, in a
reversal of protocol, looked to be picking up cues from the Senate candidate.
“Barack just killed at that event,” observed Nate Tamarin, Obama’s deputy
campaign manager. “You could see Kerry was looking at him with some awe.”
Ultimately, Kerry and Democratic National Committee officials offered
Obama the Tuesday-night keynote address to the convention. At first glance, this
appeared to be a big deal. Obama, after all, was still a state senator from Illinois.
His election as the third black U.S. Senator since Reconstruction looked very
promising, considering he was without an opponent and Illinois Republicans
seemed lost. Yet past keynote speeches had been delivered by the likes of
Barbara Jordan, Mario Cuomo, Jesse Jackson and Bill Clinton. Cuomo was a
speaker whom Obama had long admired. While Obama’s advisers were honored
to follow in this history, they were not pleased overall, because the major
networks were not carrying that night’s events live. “We wanted Monday night
between nine and eleven and we were not thrilled with our time slot in the least,”
Cauley said. “We felt that if they really wanted to show us off, they would have
put us in the window. At the end of the day, I think Barack fit the flower-power
picture they wanted to paint. And as it has all turned out, we all look like
geniuses. But back then, we were totally pissed.”
Being denied the window, however, provided Obama with leverage to
negotiate control over the content of his speech. Former congressman Harold
Ford of Tennessee had delivered the 2000 keynote speech, and most reviewers
called it flat. Like Obama, Ford was a young, charismatic, up-and-coming mixed
race (and self-identified) African American. Obama had heard that the writing of
Ford’s speech had largely been co-opted by the DNC, and Obama feared that
same result—he wanted to give a speech from his own heart. Obama was also
surprisingly ineffective at delivering a speech written by another author. He

simply didn’t read well from a prepared script, sometimes sounding wooden and
bored with his material. He spoke with much more authenticity and clarity when
the words flowed directly from his own pen or straight from his thoughts at the
moment. For this reason, Obama’s advisers left it up to him to write the first
draft of the speech. Gibbs forwarded along past keynote addresses from Ann
Richards, Cuomo, Jordan and others.
But the speech itself came rather quickly to Obama. He wrote it longhand in
hotel rooms along the campaign trail and in his hotel room in Springfield while
the General Assembly was in session. Then he transferred it to computer at home
in Hyde Park. Just as when he penned Dreams from My Father, most of his
writing was done between nine o’clock in the evening and one o’clock in the
morning. Obama is a night owl, and this has long been his prized time alone, to
catch some sports highlights on TV, to return e-mails from friends, to write, to
think. Having grown up largely as an only child, Obama has an introverted side
that makes him savor this time to himself. And on the busy campaign trail, these
moments were fewer and fewer. In their Hyde Park town house, his wife called
his writing and thinking spot “The Hole,” because her husband would disappear
into a small room off the kitchen after they put their children to bed at night. The
Hole was about the size of two typical workplace cubicles, down a long corridor
away from the bedrooms and family room. A dark wooden desk sat in the left
corner, with a dingy white chair and ottoman beside it. When Obama showed the
room to me, it was rather tidy. Having heard of his sloppy personal habits at
home, I asked, “Where’s the clutter?” He replied, “Well, just imagine it with
piles of papers and books everywhere.”
The words of the speech came fast. “This was not laborious, writing this
speech,” Obama said. “It came out fairly easy. I had been thinking about these
things for two years at that point. I had the opportunity to reflect on what had
moved me the most during the course of the campaign and to distill those things.
It was more a distillation process than it was a composition process.” Obama emailed early drafts of the speech to Gibbs, Axelrod, Giangreco and others during
the wee hours, with one draft arriving about four in the morning. By nine o’clock
that morning, he would call and ask what they thought. Several hadn’t even seen
the new draft yet.
This was the moment Obama had been waiting for—his opportunity to convey
his message of hope and unity to the greater society.
