Nairobi
This is where he belongs. He just goes there to work [in America], but he
should and will come back home to be one of our own.
—A KENYAN WOMAN

Obama’s arrival at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi the next
day bespoke the utter madness that was to mark Obama’s six-day Kenyan
adventure.
The difference between the cultures of South Africa and Kenya was
immediately evident. Nairobi is a city of more than three million people, but the
first thing one notices after arriving at the airport from South Africa is the lack
of white people. And the whites who were there, like me, were immediately
approached aggressively by any number of smiling Kenyans and offered
assistance, by carrying a bag or giving directions or supplying a taxi. This
assistance was for a fee, of course.
Another noticeable difference in Nairobi was the ubiquitous presence of
uniformed police officers, many of them toting assault-style rifles. The
atmosphere was far less Western-oriented, more fragile and clearly more
dangerous than in Cape Town. Nairobi might be Kenya’s capital and the center
of culture, business and politics in all of East Africa, but it had been pushed into
becoming a modern urban mecca far too fast. In the early 1960s, the city’s
infrastructure had exploded into place after Kenyans won independence from
colonialist Britain. This had resulted in some neighborhoods appearing
completely modern, and even middle-class or better, by Western standards. But
not far away were sprawling slums without potable water, indoor plumbing or
electricity. Roads curved for no apparent reason, and traffic lights seemed to
barely contain the autos speeding along the streets. Paved sidewalks were

nonexistent, with pedestrians walking along uneven red-dirt paths in close
proximity to moving traffic.
Kenya was a functioning democracy, but it still operated heavily on a tribal
caste system. Political parties were divided along the various ethnic tribal lines.
Bitter rivalries existed among these tribes, and the resultant political warfare had
severely hindered economic and civic growth. Obama’s father hailed from the
Luo tribe, which made up about 13 percent of the country’s population and had a
strong farming background, mostly in the western region.
Only a few minutes after my arrival at the airport, I noticed that certain crimes
were either overlooked or, perhaps, encouraged. Once I claimed my luggage, I
went to confirm my flight reservations to ensure that arrangements for my
departure six days later were in order. As I waited in line, two white European
men in their fifties talked with a tall, lithe Kenyan woman who appeared to be in
her early twenties. The men squeezed the attractive young woman’s behind, ran
their hands up and down her thighs and then offered her a small wad of money,
which she stuffed into a pocket in her tight white jeans. The men looked as if
they were measuring cattle, but she didn’t seem the least bit offended and,
ultimately, walked away arm in arm with each of them. To be sure, such a
transaction might occur in airports in any number of cities around the globe. But
what was most revealing: This one went down just several feet from a cluster of
uniformed police officers in berets, dark uniforms and with assault weapons in
their hands.
The senator had traveled from South Africa on a U.S. government jet, and by
good fortune or bad luck, some of us in the media were at the airport when he
landed. Obama’s staff had hoped to keep his entrance a secret, but of course
Kenyan politicians had tipped favored reporters to his evening arrival time. Most
of the American reporting gaggle would have missed it too if it had not been for
an unsettling occurrence. Axelrod’s camera crew was held up at the baggage
entrance trying to get its video equipment through security. Kenya’s reputation
for rampant corruption was well known, and back in the States, the leader of the
documentary crew, Bob Hercules, had sent money ahead to a Kenyan “fixer” to
ensure that their equipment would make it through the customs agents.
Nevertheless, Hercules soon found that the payment—a bribe, if you will—had
not secured safe passage. (Another media crew from Chicago also paid a bribe to
get its equipment through. Together, the bribes equaled about eighteen hundred
dollars in U.S. currency.) As Hercules and his crew haggled with airport officials

to get their equipment released, the environment outside the terminal suddenly
changed. An eerie silence washed over the evening dusk and about a hundred
people started gathering in small groups along the roadway and in the medians.
They were strangely quiet, expressed little emotion and were all looking toward
a building in the front of the airport where a couple of dozen security personnel
had gathered. In a hushed voice, a man explained, “Obama is here.” Ah yes, the
young prince was returning to his father’s homeland.
A moment later, Gibbs popped out of the building, quickly surveyed the scene
and disappeared back inside. So I headed toward the building, where a clutch of
media and police had amassed, and soon grew aware that being white might
actually be a plus—it might get me through the thicket of bodies that had been
cordoned off by police. What else could a white man with a notepad and camera
be other than a Western-based news reporter? Sure enough, police allowed me
and a magazine reporter past the first media barricade.
With Gibbs’s help, we wended our way through the mob of people inside the
building before Gibbs put a hand on my upper back and pushed me into a small
back room where Obama was enduring a quick photo “spray” with select
Kenyan media. The media hit had been thrown together on the spot, and it
showed. There was no focus to it. Obama had only agreed to sit down for the
shot when the foreign minister told him that he wanted to “take care of my guys
in the press,” Gibbs later explained. “Barack didn’t want to say no, so we sat
down and did it. It wasn’t our idea.”
The photo spray lasted all of two or three minutes. Some people carried
cameras and some did not. It was difficult to distinguish the journalists from the
onlookers, the plainclothes authorities from the civilians. People without the
proper clout were physically escorted out of the room. Those with journalistic
clout, including myself and a couple of other American journalists in the Obama
entourage, were permitted to stay. Dressed in one of his navy blue suits and a
light blue shirt, Obama was sitting on a chair with the Kenyan deputy foreign
minister. Cameras whirled all around. Obama smiled and tried to look relaxed,
but I could see by his rigid jaw that his Hawaiian calm was eluding him. When
Gibbs abruptly announced that the spray was ending, Obama tried to ease the
tense and chaotic atmosphere by telling the assorted gathering, “You’ll be tired
of me by the end of the week.”
Outside, another hundred or so people had gathered along the streets leading

up to the various terminal buildings. They stood under palm trees and along
curbs and one man hoisted a little girl onto his shoulders. I stepped across the
small street from the building and watched as Obama made his first public
appearance as a U.S. senator in his father’s homeland. To my surprise, when he
came through the doors, the crowd reacted with near silence. They simply stood
and watched in quiet reverence. Obama, with a government official at his side,
stepped quickly toward an awaiting white Ford Explorer parked at the curb just a
few steps from the building. Gibbs had instructed him not to stop and take
questions, or even acknowledge the cameras and gathering crowd. But Obama
walked up to the vehicle and could not help but look out to the people.
Discarding Gibbs’s advice, he seemed to realize that it might appear impolite to
altogether ignore the crowd around him. Besides, as a skillful politician, it is
deeply ingrained in Obama’s psyche to acknowledge an audience amassed for
his benefit. Finally, one photographer yelled at him, “Wave!”
So Obama raised a crooked arm and waved stiffly, like a wiper across a car’s
windshield, or like the infamous Richard Nixon’s bon voyage wave as he
stepped onto the plane after resigning the presidency. Obama then flashed a
forced smile and ducked into the SUV. The vehicle burned rubber as it sped
away, with a twelve-car convoy piloted by embassy officials and police in tow.
The scene more befitted a visiting head of state than a junior member of a
foreign country’s legislature. I breathed a heavy sigh and felt the adrenaline rush
begin to subside. This was clearly not going to be the same laid-back atmosphere
as in South Africa, where our subject could roam the streets in relative
anonymity and events seemed more orchestrated than organic.
Obama moved swiftly to the hotel in the speeding caravan, but the rest of
rush-hour traffic was stymied, thanks to Kenya’s widely acclaimed guest. The
bus carrying my grouping of the media gaggle took an hour to reach the Nairobi
Serena Hotel, even though it was just a few miles away. Roads were closed all
through downtown to allow Obama’s motorcade easy access, and this severely
jammed up traffic. At the hotel that evening, the first order of business for
Obama: interviews for the Chicago TV media. Each of Chicago’s major
network-affiliated stations had sent a reporting and camera crew to cover the
Kenya visit. International press, including writers for Time and Newsweek
magazines, had also arrived. David Axelrod’s old media chum Mike Flannery
from Chicago’s Channel 2, a CBS affiliate, headed Obama’s interview list. The
relationship between Flannery and Obama extended back to at least the Senate
campaign, when Flannery’s coverage of Blair Hull’s marriage files and drug use

contributed to the burial of Hull’s candidacy. “How’s it going so far, Robert?”
Flannery asked Gibbs upon spotting him in the hotel lobby. “Oh,” replied a
harried Gibbs, “I’m like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest.”
Gibbs, endeavoring to bring a sense of order to the chaos, held a 9:15 p.m.
briefing for reporters in a casual meeting room on the hotel’s ground floor. The
vibrant aroma of after-dinner coffee, one of Kenya’s primary crops, emanated
from the restaurant area of the hotel. Reporters filled a long table, some couches
and a handful of chairs. Gibbs finally had preprinted daily schedules for us.
There were a number of new faces in the press corps, including international
wire services and, most notably, the Chicago crews. Gibbs warned that a frenetic
atmosphere would be the norm. “I’m not sure if you folks were at the airport,”
he said. “But we’re going to find that even when things are not advertised, some
Kenyans will gather.” Some Kenyans—that would prove the understatement of
the week. “What we learned today—expect the unexpected,” Gibbs said in
concluding the briefing. “Now the fun begins.”
OBAMA’S FIRST OFFICIAL KENYAN FUNCTION OPENED THE NEXT morning, and it
highlighted the deified nature of his presence to many Kenyans. Michelle and
their two daughters had arrived the evening before, and the family appeared at
the Nairobi State House for a morning ceremony welcoming the senator. The
event was held outside the State House under a tent. Dozens of embassy
employees, both black and white, wore orange-and-yellow T-shirts with obama
in the house emblazoned on the front. Songs had been composed for Obama’s
visit, and a group of clapping and finger-snapping Kenyans harmonized over
these lyrics: “When you see Obama has come to Kenya, this day is blessed.” As
Obama opened his speech, he was interrupted by a friendly, but misplaced voice.
Eight-year-old Malia shouted to her father, “Daddy, Daddy, look at me!”
No one could have been more pleased to see Obama, yet felt less blessed, than
Christopher Wills, an Associated Press reporter based in Illinois. Wills had
covered Obama when he was still in the state legislature and the burgeoning
Obama phenomenon was still relatively confined to progressives and blacks in
the United States. Thus, the AP honchos in New York and London made no
objection to Wills being the lead reporter on the trip to Africa. Wills promised
his editors in Illinois that he would write a couple of newsy feature stories from
Kenya. By the time Wills arrived in Nairobi, however, the dynamics had shifted
greatly within the AP. The wire service’s London bureau had finally recognized

the significant media buzz that Obama’s journey was drawing worldwide. As a
consequence, the AP’s Nairobi bureau chief was nagging Wills by cell phone to
supply half-hour updates on Obama’s every move, giving Wills a severe case of
the jitters. This unexpected turn of events came after Wills had undergone an
agonizing experience with the Kenyan embassy in the United States to attain the
proper travel credentials. Obama is always mindful to cultivate friendly
relationships with the reporters who cover him, and he is happy when there are a
good number of them around. He is happiest, though, when they are kept at a
safe distance. So when Obama spotted Wills amid the media gaggle, he made
sure to acknowledge him. Or perhaps, less cynically speaking, Obama simply
spotted a familiar face and it comforted him. With Obama, as with many of the
best politicians, it is never perfectly clear whether he is being politic or merely
human. In either case, in contrast to the regal nature of the proceedings around
him, Obama yelled out from his crowd of Kenyan government dignitaries,
“Chris Wills! You made it! You got your visa!” A slightly bewildered Wills
didn’t seem to know how to react to the unexpected shout-out. He responded:
“Uh, yes, Senator. Thank you.”
Obama met that morning at the State House with senior government officials,
including Kenyan president Mwai Kibaki. After triumphing in the December
2002 elections, Kibaki’s National Rainbow Coalition (nicknamed Narc) took
control of the government in 2003, ending nearly four decades of rule by Kanu,
the Kenyan African National Union. Kanu was widely viewed as corrupt and
had been accused of land-grabbing and raiding public coffers for private
enrichment. Kibaki won the office on a pledge to rid the country’s institutions of
corruption and revitalize its economy. But more than three years later, corruption
persisted, the economy was largely stagnant, and Kenyans who had been
optimistic at Narc’s electoral success were again pessimistic about the direction
of their country and its institutional leadership. “People have just kind of given
up on the government,” a veteran Kenyan journalist, Dennis Onyango, told me.
“They feel we’ll never get what we want.” Obama, in his meeting with Kibaki,
discussed with the president the importance of clean government. The American
senator maintained that investment from overseas would never arrive if Kenya’s
government and business communities remain soaked in graft. He cited the
airport bribes paid by Chicago media crews as evidence that corruption remained
pervasive, that it was a corrosive element in everyday society and that it
negatively impacted Kenya’s international image. Kibaki replied that he was
working to stamp out corruption and promised to look into the airport bribes.

Obama’s next stop was a meeting with government officials and business
leaders at a restaurant secured in a plaza behind huge wrought-iron gates.
Judging by the secluded design of the restaurant, which made it easy to protect
with a couple of guards at the closed gates, I assumed that it was the site of many
high-level lunches among top Kenyan politicians.
It was here that we would first witness the intensity of emotion that Kenyans
felt toward Obama, the emotion we had read about beforehand in various media
accounts. Those news stories had not been overblown. Outside the restaurant,
workers of many pursuits, all hungry for a glimpse of their American hero, had
left their jobs to crowd atop balconies, huddle in doorways and press against the
iron fences. Obama met privately for lunch with local officials and, as we
waited, reporters fanned out to interview the Kenyans amassing outside the
gates. The interviews bore out the state of idolatry surrounding Obama among
the Kenyans.
To some, he was a native son who had risen to great power in the world’s most
influential nation, and because of this he gave them hope that they or their
children could persevere and succeed in their own daily lives. To others, he was
an all-powerful political figure who could put Kenya on the worldwide radar. To
still others, he was nearly a deity, an ethereal figure who would bring riches and
all good things to Kenya from the promised land of America. This last group
believed that Obama truly belonged in Kenya, not America.
A forty-year-old woman named Catherine Oganda maintained that Obama
ultimately would choose to leave America and live in Kenya: “This is where he
belongs. He just goes there to work [in America], but he should and will come
back home to be one of our own.” I asked why she believed that, and she
continued: “Because the father is a Kenyan. You know, your father is your
bloodline; it’s not your mother—it is your father. So you belong where your
father comes from, in your fatherland. Kenya is in his blood.” A fifty-year-old
man named John Nyambalo had a slightly different take, but one that was no less
divorced from reality. He saw Obama as a living representation that the United
States had overcome racial intolerance. “If the Americans can select a senator
like Obama,” he said, “that means that Americans embrace the whole world and
they are true democrats. There is no racism there.”
After lunch, our caravan headed to the memorial that had been erected at the
former site of the U.S. Embassy, which had been car-bombed in 1998, killing

nearly two hundred and fifty souls. The deadly bombing, later linked to the
Islamic fundamentalist terror movement that struck the United States on
September 11, 2001, had helped to create a bond between the United States and
Kenya. Both countries suffered from the attack. Dozens of people stood at the
entrance of the memorial site waiting for Obama, with Michelle and their two
young daughters among them. Obama shook the hands of a long row of current
embassy staff on his way up toward the site, with Michelle nearly last in line.
The last few introduced themselves to Obama, and then Michelle smiled and
held out her hand and offered the same, as if she were just another member of
the greeting party. “I’m your wife, welcome,” she said with a warm smile.
“Hello, Wife,” Obama said with a playful grin.
Gleaming in a brilliant sun, the memorial itself stood at the far end of a plaza
just beyond a small fountain. It was rather unassuming, giving the appearance of
an elongated headstone on a burial plot—a concrete block in the shape of a halfmoon rising from the plaza’s bricked surface. Its facade was a sheet of brown
marble with the names of the deceased etched in it, as well as the following
epitaph: “May the innocent victims of this tragic event rest in the knowledge that
it has strengthened our resolve to work for a world in which man is able to live
alongside his brother in peace.” A couple dozen photographers and TV reporters
were assembled at the far end of the plaza, readied for the shot of Obama at the
memorial. Through the trees that guarded the memorial site, located in the heart
of Nairobi, I could see a large crowd assembling in the streets—more Kenyans
with hopes of catching just a passing glimpse of Obama. Also witnessing the
scene were workers in a seven-story office building that overlooked the park.
They leaned out of big steel-framed windows and peered down on the
proceedings with rapt attention. With his right arm wrapped around Malia’s
waist and Sasha standing at his left elbow, Obama sat down at a white-clothed
table and signed an official guest book before heading over to the memorial with
his family in tow. He carried a wreath and laid it gently at the foot of the
tombstone. Then he turned to a small group of officials huddled to his right as
photo and video crews knelt and stood not far to his left, their cameras clicking
away.
Scanning the epitaph, Obama bowed his head and offered his own words of
consolation and remembrance: “The tragedy that happened here is a reminder
that, ultimately, all of us suffer from conflict and, ultimately, all of us suffer from
terrorism. But we have to redouble our resolve, as the memorial says, to find
ways to live in peace and to find ways to resolve our conflicts in a way that does

not result in the kind of tragedy that occurred here. We will not forget what’s
happened here. We want to make sure that all of us are vigilant in terms of
preventing it from ever happening again.”
After the brief ceremony, Obama was taken inside a nearby building to chat
with embassy and other government officials. Malia and Sasha, dressed in bright
pink tops and white skirts, were set loose to play in the memorial area that
doubled as a small corner park. I hadn’t bothered a tired-looking Michelle when
she first arrived at the hotel the day before, so this seemed like a good
opportunity to reconnect. She was strolling around, shaking hands and eyeing
her daughters as they ran about happily. But our chat was cut short. Immediately
after we exchanged greetings, a roar erupted from beyond the trees. Its sheer
volume startled Michelle. She leaned her upper torso far backward and a stunned
look crossed her face. “Oh my goodness! What was that?!” she exclaimed.
“That,” I said, “is for your husband. He must have come out.” The wondrous
look slightly receding from her face, she replied innocently, “Oh, my! For
Barack?” Clearly, Michelle was in no way prepared for this overheated response
to her celebrity husband.
We both headed for the narrow exit to the memorial and Michelle was gobbled
up into a pack of security personnel. The crowd in the streets, consisting mostly
of men, had reached a state of euphoria. They were cheering in full throat,
standing atop cars, dancing, whistling and screaming and waving their arms
wildly. Police had established a perimeter at the edge of the street. Yet even
though the crowd seemed wild and uncontrollable, no one had stepped a single
foot past the Kenyan officers, as if an invisible wall held them in check. The
people were chanting in unison: “Obama, come to us! Obama, come to us!” I
looked for the senator and spotted him to the right along the perimeter with
several security officers packed around him for protection. He was feverishly
shaking hands with members of the fawning crowd in a surreal press-the-flesh
moment. With each step he took toward the street, closer to the frenzied mass of
people, the chanting rose a notch in volume. “Obama, come to us! Obama, come
to us!”
I watched the senator from a safe zone inside the perimeter about ten paces
behind him. Incredibly, the scene was growing ever more chaotic as Obama
worked his way closer to the belly of the throng. A horse carrying a police
officer, spooked by the noise and instability of the crowd, bucked his front legs
into the air and nearly kicked me in the head before the officer reined him in.

“Be careful! Don’t get yourself trampled!” warned a perpetually tense Jennifer
Barnes, the embassy’s media liaison. As I wandered closer to the edge of the
perimeter, within a few feet of the first row of people, a woman from the crowd
suddenly lunged toward me and grabbed my left bicep. Before I could pull away,
an officer swung his black billy club and cracked the woman square on her
forearm. Her arm fell limply to her side and the officer pushed her back into the
sea of people with his club, swiping his club casually, like a chef pushing a pile
of crushed onions across a cutting board. I decided that I better keep a safer
distance from the crowd. The scene was so full of heightened emotion that even
the most innocent acts became hyperreality. Bill Lambrecht, a reporter for the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, handed a woman a piece of paper from the embassy that
contained background information on Obama’s visit. Lambrecht figured she
could have it as a souvenir. Five men immediately jumped the woman and
successfully ripped the paper from her hands. Lambrecht shook his head in
discouragement upon seeing what his nice gesture had wrought.
Just then, as I turned backward and took a few steps, I saw Obama heading in
my direction. It became apparent that I was about to be sandwiched between two
surging walls of humanity—the crowd before me and the crowd behind Obama.
Unfortunately, I had no security detail guarding me from harm. To escape the
fate of trampling, I galloped sideways to an opening. Standing in this safe spot
was Bob Hercules, the documentary director sent by Axelrod. “This is intense,”
Hercules said. “It’s like the messiah has returned.”
I spied Gibbs, who was surveying the proceedings from an opening a few feet
behind Obama. His arms were folded and he wore a satisfied half smile on his
face. Gibbs should have been smiling, I thought. This is exactly the kind of
messianic outpouring of idol worship, exactly the kind of crazy mob scene that
he had envisioned a year and a half earlier when he first mentioned the Africa
trip to me over eggs Benedict in downtown Chicago. The legend of Obama was
growing by leaps and bounds. Indeed, The Plan was going exactly according to
script.
AFTER A COUPLE OF MINUTES OF THIS CHAOS, GIBBS GRABBED Obama’s sleeve and
advised him to head back to an awaiting SUV. This move delighted security
personnel guarding Obama, who were struggling to shield him from the crowd
and had reservations about the press-the-flesh session from the outset. As they
escorted Obama back toward the parked caravan of vehicles, Gibbs noticed a

young man holding aloft a black-framed, eye-catching portrait of Obama. It was
painted in brown, black, gold and white and it featured a profile of Obama with
an ethereal glow engulfing him. Beneath him were the words Waruaki Dal, or
“Welcome Home.” Obama had already made his way back into the safety of his
SUV. But seeing this young man, Gibbs realized there was more to milk from the
madness of this media event. Gibbs grabbed the arm of the young man and tried
to lead him back to Obama’s SUV. Instead, Gibbs ran into a team of security
personnel reluctant to let the man pass. An intense discussion between Obama’s
media maestro and the security officers ensued. Security eventually relented to
Gibbs’s persistent demands—but only after patting down the young man
aggressively. Gibbs extracted Obama from the SUV and introduced him to
Gregory Ochieng, a man in his twenties who hailed from a rural village near the
farm of Obama’s paternal relatives. About a half-dozen TV cameras rolled as
Obama graciously accepted Ochieng’s painting and thanked him profusely for
the gesture. The meeting resembled a young fan meeting an athlete or a musician
whom he idolizes. Within hours, that encounter, along with the surreal scene that
preceded it, was beamed across the globe and appeared in newscasts worldwide.
Ochieng, a member of the Luo tribe, told several of us in the media that he felt
a deep connection to Obama because Obama’s father had been a Luo. “He is my
tribesman,” Ochieng explained. “I feel happy that a Kenyan is representing us in
the U.S. as a senator. So when I heard he was coming here, I thought of doing
something that was unique.” Asked by reporters if the encounter lived up to his
expectations, he said with a broad smile, “It is better.” Gibbs’s instincts were
note perfect. Again he had struck PR gold.
If the overwhelming outpouring from thousands of Kenyans was not enough
to signify that Obama’s trip was something wholly unique, the next event would
solidify it. Media members literally filled a ballroom at the downtown Nairobi
Grand Regency Hotel for Obama’s news conference. Every journalist in Africa
seemed to be in attendance. Wearing a gold-lined lapel pin with the flags of
Kenya and the United States molded together at the center and then spread like
wings on a bird, Obama stood behind a brown wooden lectern with more than
one hundred representatives of the media before him. He emanated a slightly
regal air that, in this setting, felt far more presidential than senatorial.
Obama opened the news conference by recognizing that this visit was
remarkably different from his previous trips to Kenya as a private citizen. This
time, he sought to be a “bridge between the two nations.” “Part of my role,” he

said, “is to communicate how much the American people appreciate the Kenyan
people and how much they value the partnership that the United States has with
Kenya. Part of it, I think, is also to listen and find out what is on the minds of the
Kenyan people…. Part of my goal is also to maybe highlight some of the values
and ideals of the United States that I think might be helpful to the Kenyan people
as they pursue their development.”
Toward that last point, Obama delivered a message of morality, as he is wont
to do. He suggested that the very cultures of some African nations needed to
change. He said he perceived a movement backward, toward a political system
riven by tribalism and a reluctance to acknowledge internal problems to the
outside world:
I think that there’s a tendency—which is understandable, given the history
of colonialism—to not want to speak out against fellow Africans and to be
protective of even some of the mismanagement, the corruption that takes
place. And I think we’ve moved beyond that; I think the time is now, where
we have to understand that nobody in Africa wants to be bullied, nobody in
Africa wants to see the products of their labor expropriated by a
government that is not representing them properly. Nobody wants to be
tortured to death because of speaking their mind. Nobody wants to have to
pay a bribe in order to get a business or get a job or just go about their daily
business. And it’s incumbent upon us, when we see those things happening,
to speak up…. I think ultimately, that kind of honesty will improve
governments everywhere.
Arriving back at the Serena Hotel, Gibbs hastily called a news conference in a
small courtyard area for the traveling press, mainly so that TV reporters would
have informal interview footage of Obama discussing the day’s events. As Gibbs
scoured the hotel to make sure everyone was aware of the Q&A, Obama made
small talk with the reporters, who were anxiously waiting to query him about the
wild scenes of the day. After a bit of talk about baseball and music, Obama
began to grow impatient, as Gibbs still had not appeared. “Where is Gibbs?”
Obama said to no one in particular. “Where is the animal trainer? Where is the
whip and chair?” This remark did not go over well with several reporters, who
frowned at the suggestion that they were, at the very least, uncouth and, at worst,
so hopelessly uncivilized that they needed to be tamed. A magazine writer
sensed this elitism in Obama and included it in her piece about the Africa trip in
Elle magazine a few months later. The writer, Laurie Abraham, conceded that

she had been charmed by Obama’s writings and media appearances. But mostly,
she had been drawn to the brash, idealistic, soul-searching Obama whom she
encountered in his Dreams memoir. After following him closely for several days
in Africa, she had shelved this sense of Obama in favor of a more pragmatic
vision of an elected official entering middle age and making compromises for
political benefit. She found a more calculating man—a politician, surprise!—and
an occasionally aloof one at that. “When he is not working a crowd, he can seem
so sublimely cool and confident that his manner veers toward haughtiness,”
Abraham wrote.
Others in the traveling entourage experienced this less appealing element of
Obama’s persona as well. One videographer told me that he grew weary of being
treated like something of a nuisance on the excursion: “I feel demeaned when
Obama says stuff like that. We’re over here working our asses off. We’re not
leeches. We were invited here, even pitched on this trip. I think we’ve been very
respectful of his space.” Indeed, the American press had been far less aggressive
in physically pursuing Obama than Kenyan reporters, who had no qualms about
throwing an elbow to push another photographer out of the way or pushing up to
the front of the line. Obama’s privately haughty manner and wary posture toward
reporters seems rooted in two things: an internal conceit that formed in his
character after being treated as a special human being as far back as childhood,
and an understandable antagonism toward those individuals who, since he
gained celebrity status, have impinged on what little privacy still exists for him.
Throughout the interview with the American press, Obama tried to downplay
the effect he would have on Kenyan society. “Kenya is not my country. It’s the
country of my father,” Obama said. “I feel a connection, but ultimately, it’s not
going to be me, it’s going to be them who are climbing a path to improving their
new lives.”