The Legislator
For Barack, it’s not a constant flow of glorious defeats. He has good
attention to ideals and core principles, but a recognition that it is good to
get things done from year to year.
—JOHN BOUMAN, ANTIPOVERTY ADVOCATE

For the first six of Barack Obama’s almost eight years in the Illinois General
Assembly, he suffered from an aggressive legislator’s most debilitating affliction
—membership in the minority party. In national politics today, Illinois is a pure
blue state, considered an immediate loser for a Republican presidential
candidate. But Illinois voters have a long history of electing moderate
Republican governors, as well as turning over state legislative chambers to the
Grand Old Party. Rural areas of Illinois are known for sending Republicans to
the state legislature, as are the suburban counties that encapsulate Chicago. The
Illinois House of Representatives has been dominated by Democrats for some
time, but Republicans captured control of the Illinois Senate in 1992 and held on
to it for a decade.
No red carpet unfurled for Obama when he arrived in the state capital of
Springfield in January 1997. If anything, his fellow senators cast a cold eye.
Many of his colleagues viewed him in the same visceral way that his aide, Dan
Shomon, first reacted to him: Here comes an aloof Ivy League good-government
type who too often mentions his years of sacrifice as a community organizer and
his Harvard Law pedigree. “The fact that he had a Harvard Law degree and was
a constitutional law professor—that made some eyes roll,” said Kirk Dillard, a
Republican senator from suburban Chicago.
Despite his time organizing the poor on the city’s Far South Side, Obama’s
ability to connect on a broad scale with urban blacks outside his collegial Hyde

Park neighborhood was highly questionable. And even though he had spent
several years as an organizer in the city’s economically depressed communities,
he exhibited far more comfort in university-type settings where he could woo the
white lakefront liberal set—environments that highlighted and celebrated his
cerebral, mission-oriented, policy-wonk nature. His public speeches tended to be
policy-heavy and overly intellectual—fine for Harvard Law students, but fairly
dry for everyday people. Indeed, some of his senate colleagues, especially in the
Legislative Black Caucus, saw in him an Ivy League elitist unwilling to sully
himself with the unseemly universe of Chicago ward politics or the muck of the
legislative process. “It wasn’t like Barack took Springfield by storm,” Shomon
said. “The first few years he was thought of as intelligent, thoughtful, bright. But
he certainly wasn’t considered to be a major player.” Rich Miller, the publisher
of Capitol Fax, a statehouse newsletter, was less diplomatic. “Barack is a very
intelligent man,” Miller said in 2000. “He hasn’t had a lot of success here, and it
could be because he places himself above everybody. He likes people to know he
went to Harvard.”
Miller’s characterization might be unduly harsh, but in charitable terms,
Obama initially toiled in relative obscurity in the statehouse. His intellectualism
initially did not translate well to Springfield, where most grunt legislative
success is accomplished over spirits in a local tavern or between iron shots on
the fifth fairway. In addition, Obama’s palpable disdain for some of the petty
antics of his fellow legislators did not endear him to those colleagues. At the
same time, Springfield had its share of self-absorbed, monosyllabic hacks with
little use for an urbane sophisticate like Obama.
Nevertheless, with Shomon as his main tutor, Obama eventually adapted to
this environment. He picked up golf. He established close working and personal
friendships with a number of fellow legislators, and these associations would
greatly assist him as his political career unfolded. By the time his tenure in
Springfield ended, it could be argued that he had evolved into a very successful
state lawmaker. Viewed warily by some of his fellow blacks, Obama primarily
formed alliances with downstate Democrats and a handful of Republicans. These
friendships would show that while some people, especially some blacks,
regarded Obama as elitist, he could mix with other everyday legislators quite
comfortably.
Perhaps most significantly, Obama joined a weekly poker game that included
fellow senators Terry Link and Denny Jacobs, white Democrats who represented

districts outside Obama’s home base of Chicago. The son of a man who studied
economics at Harvard, Obama was not surprisingly a skilled poker player. As
when playing board games at home, the highly competitive Obama took the
game seriously. He played carefully and was adept at not revealing his hand.
Senator Link joked that Obama took his money at the card table and Link won it
back on the golf course, where Obama was still learning the game.
The loose poker atmosphere, however, did not always fit with Obama’s
exceedingly strict sense of propriety and morality, traits instilled primarily by his
mother. During one poker game, Obama was irked when a married lobbyist
arrived with an inebriated woman companion who did not acquit herself in a
particularly wholesome fashion. Without offending his buddies, Obama
registered his displeasure with the situation. “He didn’t think much of that,” an
Obama associate said. “He didn’t see the purpose of bringing her.”
Legislatively, Obama managed to pass a decent number of laws for a firstterm lawmaker in the minority party. His first major legislative accomplishment
was shepherding a piece of campaign finance reform in May 1998. The measure
prohibited lawmakers from soliciting campaign funds while on state property
and from accepting gifts from state contractors, lobbyists or other interests. The
senate’s Democratic leader, Emil Jones Jr., a veteran African-American legislator
from the South Side, offered Obama the opportunity to push through the bill
because it seemed like a good fit for the do-good persona projected by Obama.
Obama was also recommended to Jones by two esteemed Chicago liberals who
had taken a liking to him: former U.S. senator Paul Simon and former
congressman and federal judge Abner Mikva. Working the bill was an eyeopening experience for the freshman senator. It was a tough assignment for a
new lawmaker, since he was essentially sponsoring legislation that would strip
away long-held privileges and perks from his colleagues. In one private session,
a close colleague angrily denounced the bill, saying that it impinged on
lawmakers’ inherent rights. But Obama worked the issue deliberately and
delicately, and the measure passed the senate by an overwhelming 52–4 vote.
“This sets the standard for us, and communicates to a public that is increasingly
cynical about Springfield and the General Assembly that we in fact are willing to
do the right thing,” Obama told reporters immediately after the bill’s passage.
The bill was not a watershed event anywhere but Illinois. It essentially lifted
Illinois, a state with a deep history of illicit, pay-to-play politics, into the modern
world when it came to ethics restrictions. The bill gave Obama a legislative
success, but his public criticism of Springfield’s old-school politics did not sit

well with some of his colleagues, who already considered the Ivy League lawyer
overly pious.
Furthermore, this highly publicized success stood rather alone. Obama was
learning that, like the court system, the legislative branch of government could
move at a snail’s pace. Indeed, as his time wore on in the minority party, he
became increasingly frustrated by the workings of the Illinois legislature. He was
especially irritated that too many grandstanding, feel-good measures seemed to
go forward easily, while bills that offered structural change were bottled up in
committee or never got off the ground. For instance, lawmakers easily passed a
bill that strictly outlawed graffiti painting, but were reluctant to take on deeper
juvenile justice issues. The graffiti bill garnered its sponsors a political gold
mine of media attention.
IN SPRINGFIELD, OBAMA RAN INTO SOME OF THE SAME ISSUES WITH blacks that he
experienced at Harvard. He was not shy about criticizing black leaders and their
legislative strategy; also, he did not necessarily follow his caucus’s talking
points. Moreover, he worked closely with white Democrats and even
conservatives to pass his own bills. Obama, to be sure, had allies in the black
caucus, but he had his share of critics as well. His chief antagonists were Rickey
Hendon, who represented a district on the city’s West Side, and Donne Trotter,
who would run against Obama for Congress.
Hendon and other African-American lawmakers from the West Side often
found themselves at odds with their South Side brethren, but the rift between
Hendon and Obama was particularly acute. Hendon and Trotter would “just give
Barack hell,” said Senator Kimberly Lightford, an Obama ally in the black
caucus. Hendon, nicknamed “Hollywood” because he once aspired to produce
films, was a flamboyant personality in Springfield, known for his smart-aleck
humor and occasionally inappropriate public manner. In one legislative session,
the two nemeses nearly came to physical blows when Obama, apparently
inadvertently, voted against a bill that included funding for a project that assisted
Hendon’s district. Years later, details of the incident remain in the eye of the
beholder. Obama supporters say that Obama had stepped away from his seat and
asked someone else to vote for him, not an uncommon practice considering the
thousands of votes cast each session. His proxy, however, accidentally voted
against his wishes. When Obama asked that the record reflect that he voted the
wrong way, Hendon publicly accused Obama of duplicity. Hendon has never

been shy about holding back his feelings, and he had a special way of
penetrating Obama’s usually smooth exterior. Soon, the two men were shouting
at each other on the senate floor. They took their disagreement into a nearby
room, and a witness said that Obama had to be physically restrained. Neither
man cares to discuss the incident today, but Hendon remains unconvinced of
Obama’s explanation that his vote was accidental. Individuals close to the
situation say Hendon still believes that Obama voted against his project in order
to pacify North Side fiscal conservatives who were leery of some West Side
projects. For his part, the rarely reticent Hendon won’t discuss the altercation,
except to confirm that it occurred. “I have been advised to leave Barack alone
and that is what I am going to do,” Hendon said. “I am going to let things stay in
the past. It happened. That’s all I can say. It happened.”
Though Obama alienated some colleagues like Hendon and gained scant
public attention, he nevertheless accrued a rather impressive record as a firstterm legislator for the out-of-power Democrats. Much of it was like his
community-organizing success—low-key and behind the scenes. In his first two
years, Obama introduced or was chief cosponsor of fifty-six bills, with fourteen
of them becoming law—not bad rookie and sophomore seasons. Besides the
campaign finance and ethics bill, other Obamaled legislation that became law
included measures that compensated crime victims for certain property losses,
prevented early probation for gun-running felons, streamlined administrative
processes when municipalities adjudicated ordinances and increased penalties
for offenders who used date-rape drugs on victims.
In his third year, 1999, Obama was even more successful. He cosponsored
almost sixty bills and eleven became law. They included measures that
established a state-funded screening program for prostate cancer (a disease that
disproportionately afflicts blacks), provided a training program in the use of
heart defibrillators, strengthened hospital testing and reporting of sexual assaults,
increased funds for after-school programming, increased investigation of nursing
home abuses and hiked funding for lead abatement programs (another large issue
in the black community).
Most of Obama’s legislative efforts were rooted in his discussions with special
interest groups, and he was particularly attentive to activists who sought his help
for a cause he supported, such as fighting poverty or protecting civil liberties.
Yet he declined to take up issues simply for the sake of garnering attention. He
was highly results-oriented. “Obama is interested in sponsoring bills that will

pass and is [uninterested] in symbolic legislation,” Don Wiener, an opposition
researcher hired by two later campaign opponents, wrote in a report assessing
Obama’s early senate career. “He does not seem to sponsor legislation just
because he is encouraged to do so.” Obama concentrated his efforts on pursuing
legislation that reflected his basic sense of social justice. “He is idealistic but
practical,” said John Bouman, a director of the Chicago-based National Center
for Poverty Law. “For Barack, it’s not a constant flow of glorious defeats. He has
good attention to ideals and core principles, but a recognition that it is good to
get things done from year to year. He is willing to hammer out a good
compromise, but he doesn’t compromise for the sake of it.”
A major reason for his high rate of bill passage was his deftness in reaching
across the aisle to Republicans. After working in peace with conservatives on the
Harvard Law Review, Obama was not the least bit uncomfortable taking the
concerns of Illinois conservatives into account and placating their fears. His
relentlessly polite, inoffensive manner was key to his success in this regard. “I
always found him to be a true gentleman in all the negotiations and dealings that
I had with him,” said Joe Birkett, a hard-nosed Republican prosecutor in
conservative DuPage County who was Obama’s ideological opposite.
In the course of his legislative career, Obama persuaded Republicans to go
along with an array of initiatives, winning bipartisan support on potentially
polarizing legislation like reforming welfare and battling racial profiling by
police. “The most important thing that you do in Springfield is you bring all
sides of an issue to the table and you make them feel they are being listened to,”
said Obama, hearkening back to lessons learned as a community organizer. This
reasonable tone and genuine attentiveness to Republican concerns made Obama
a key swing legislator for both Republicans and Democrats, even if his voting
record was decidedly liberal. “Members of both parties listened closely to him,”
said Dillard, the Republican senator from suburban Chicago who frequently
cosponsored legislation with Obama.
AS OBAMA’S FIRST TERM WOUND DOWN, HE MADE HIS FIRST MAJOR political
miscalculation. The cause of this misjudgment: unbridled ambition.
Obama had returned to Chicago from Harvard Law with an eye on the
mayor’s office after witnessing Harold Washington’s historic tenure at city hall.
But while Obama was away, Richard M. Daley, the son of iron-fisted longtime

mayor Richard J. Daley, had brokered a peace with the black community and
won the city hall job. By 2000, Daley had built a massive political army and held
such a firm grip on the city council that unseating him looked akin to dethroning
a king.
So Obama looked at Congress instead, deciding to challenge Representative
Bobby Rush in the 2000 Democratic Primary. To Obama, Rush looked
vulnerable in his South Side district. Rush, in fact, had tried to oust Daley in
1998—but he was stomped by the mayor. For this reason, Obama saw Rush as
an aging politician ready to be replaced by a younger man with a fresh vision
and new enthusiasm for tackling the ills of the black community. Obama figured
that if he could spread his message of community empowerment and social
justice, he could upend Rush. This was a circle-of-life philosophy, since Rush
had won his seat in Congress in 1992 in exactly that fashion. Rush had alienated
some Democrats by unseating a well-regarded black congressman, Charles
Hayes, who needed just one more term to earn a comfortable pension. Despite
this political history, Rush was not the least bit understanding of Obama’s
challenge.
Through the 1990s, Rush had been neither a stellar success nor a failure in
Congress—he had just sort of existed comfortably inside the Beltway. This was a
bit surprising considering his somewhat radical past, which had gained him star
status with black voters. Rush was a 1960s civil rights veteran, having been a
member of the Student NonViolent Coordinating Committee and an acolyte of
the outspoken Black Power advocate Stokely Carmichael. After coming under
the influence of Carmichael, Rush left SNCC and served as head of the Illinois
Black Panther Party, whose mantra was “Power to the People.” The Panthers’
philosophy was in direct contradiction to the nonviolent tenets of SNCC, and
they derived power from fiery eye-for-an-eye rhetoric and from arming
themselves to defend against white-led urban police forces, most notably in
Chicago and Los Angeles. After the Panthers faded from the public scene, Rush
became a Chicago alderman in the Harold Washington era, and he served as one
of Washington’s lieutenants on the city council.
With this history, Bobby Rush had the consummate résumé for a black
politician representing a black congressional district. Indeed, the most enduring
image of Rush remains a photograph of him as a Black Panther, clad in a black
leather jacket and clutching a rifle.

So when thirty-eight-year-old Obama made a run at fifty-three-year-old Rush,
the black political world did not embrace him. For the most part, blacks
wondered what Obama was doing trying to unseat this black elder statesman;
and some African Americans privately began to question not only Obama’s
motives but his black credentials.
This questioning of Obama’s blackness gained some resonance for several
reasons. Primarily, this came about because Obama had not been brought up in a
traditional African-American setting. He had been active in Chicago’s poor
black neighborhoods for a few years, sure, and that had gained him some street
credibility. But that was nothing compared to being a former Black Panther and
one of Harold Washington’s trusted foot soldiers. Obama was a beneficiary of
the work by Rush and others to advance the black cause. And his running against
Rush raised questions that perhaps this young upstart was an ungrateful
beneficiary of that labor.
Much of this sentiment percolated beneath the surface or among Chicago’s
black nationalist crowd. That group largely consisted of an aging generation that
vividly recalled the civil rights struggle, but it was still an influential voice in
Chicago’s black community. The charge that Obama lacked black authenticity
appeared in its sharpest form in a March 2000 story in Chicago’s alternative
weekly tabloid, the Chicago Reader. Another candidate in the Rush contest,
State Senator Trotter, viciously accused Obama of being secretly controlled by
powerful white interests. Before long, that doubt was reverberating through
segments of Chicago’s South Side black community. Feeding into this
perception were Obama’s personal résumé, which included ties to two
institutions of white power (Harvard and the University of Chicago), his lack of
connection to the broader black community while growing up in Hawaii and his
campaign’s substantial financial support from wealthy white liberals—people
like Abner Mikva, a former federal judge, and Bettylu Saltzman, a former aide to
Illinois senator Paul Simon.
In addition, Obama’s state senate district on Chicago’s South Side was
undergoing a demographic and socioeconomic shift during this period, a trend
that has continued into the 2000s. Once blighted areas just south of downtown
were experiencing the first waves of gentrification. Obama had formed a
political alliance with the local alderman, Toni Preckwinkle, and both politicians
were the beneficiaries of substantial campaign donations from developers eyeing
these suddenly attractive South Side areas. These financial donations were both a

boon and a detriment to Obama. The campaign cash from developers helped him
remain independent of the Daley political machine, but they also caused him
problems with the older African-American nationalists. (One developer who
actively courted Obama, Antoin “Tony” Rezko, would cause Obama significant
problems in later years when Rezko was indicted amid a federal investigation of
pay-to-play politics.) There was considerable tension among these new
developers, some of whom were white, and longtime black activists in the area.
And there was virtually no way to reconcile their interests. Trotter not too subtly
raised these concerns when he told the Chicago Reader, “Barack is viewed in
part to be the white man in blackface in our community. You just have to look at
his supporters. Who pushed him to get where he is so fast? It’s these individuals
in Hyde Park, who don’t always have the best interests of the community in
mind.”
THE ACCUSATIONS OF BEING LESS THAN BLACK TOOK HOLD IN CIRCLES that were open
to such talk. With this political history working against Obama in the black
community, some of his advocates began wondering in earnest about his political
strength among Chicago’s blacks. Said the Reader during Obama’s 2000
challenge of Rush: “There are whispers that Obama is being funded by a ‘Hyde
Park mafia,’ a cabal of University of Chicago types, and that there’s an ‘Obama
Project’ masterminded by whites who want to push him up the political ladder.”
Contributing to this perception was his loving treatment by the Chicago
Tribune, the region’s most influential newspaper. The Tribune has historic ties to
the Republican Party, and its readership is still disproportionately white
compared with the diverse population it serves in the Chicago region. The
Tribune, gushing that Obama was “a rising star in the Democratic Party,”
endorsed Obama over Rush and Trotter in the 2000 primary race. Any black
leader with the imprimatur of the editorially conservative Tribune had to be
viewed with wary eyes on the South Side, where home-delivered Tribunes can
go untouched for days while copies of the rival Sun-Times must be picked up
from doorsteps early in the morning, lest they be swiped. “What was
interesting,” observed Jerry Kellman, the Chicago community activist who
brought Obama to Chicago, “Barack is in the black community and he is being
attacked for not being black enough, not because he is half-white, but because he
went to Harvard, and because he talks like he could be white and he moves like
he does. There are thousands of black people who move and talk like he does,
but they are not running for Congress from the South Side of Chicago.”

For his part, Obama maintains that the charge of not being black enough was
little more than a canard drummed up by his political foes. “What’s fascinating is
it’s never been an issue among regular folks on the street,” he said. “You know,
it’s never an issue with the bus drivers or the teachers or the guys on the street
corner who I’m talking to. This is always an issue that’s been brought up in the
context of a political situation by professional politicians. And it’s a handy
shorthand to try to create some separation between me and what’s a strong part
of my base. But it really is not something that has ended up being a problem for
me with respect to the voters.” Privately, however, Obama told me that he has
encountered blacks who question his commitment to the black cause and his
self-identified status as an African American. “What I’ve found,” he said, “is
they are usually going through identity issues themselves and they project those
issues onto me.”
The issue of Obama’s black authenticity would follow him from this time
forward—rearing its head again in his race for the U.S. Senate and then again in
his presidential bid. But it was in this congressional contest that it was first
broached.
OBAMA’S CAMPAIGN
beginning.

FOR

CONGRESS

WAS STAR-CROSSED ALMOST

from the very

On October 18, 1999, five months before the primary, Rush’s twenty-nineyear-old son, Huey Rich, was gunned down on a South Side street. For days, the
Chicago media overflowed with the story of Rush’s son fighting for his life,
spurred in no small part by public appearances of a solemn-looking Rush in
which he talked about the incident. By the time Rich died four days later, the
congressman had been transformed in the public eye from the 1998 mayoral
candidate who had been thrashed by Mayor Daley into a grieving parent who
had suffered the tragic loss of his son.
The death all but silenced Obama’s campaign. As he was trailing Rush badly
in the polls (one survey found that Obama had only 9 percent name recognition
in the district compared with the incumbent’s 90 percent), Obama’s only hope
was to go negative on Rush. This was a strategy Obama had been considering
before the shooting. Opposition researchers for Obama’s campaign had found
that Rush’s relations with his grown son had been strained. Rush had fathered
Huey in the late 1960s with Saundra Rich, another member of the Black

Panthers. Rush, in fact, had named his son after Panther founder Huey Newton.
But Obama’s research showed that Rush had touch-and-go involvement in his
son’s upbringing, with Huey being raised primarily by an aunt. One of the men
convicted of the shooting told police investigators that he sought out Huey
because he believed the congressman’s son was carrying cash for a drug dealer.
If Obama were to unseat Rush, he would have to use something along these
lines to portray Rush in a negative light. Now that Huey Rich had died tragically,
that morsel of potentially negative information was off the table. Attacking Rush
for being an absent parent now was completely out of the question. In fact,
attacking Rush with any ferocity would now look in bad taste.
“I’ll never forget getting a phone call from Reverend [Jesse] Jackson,” Obama
said. “He said to me, ‘You realize, Barack, the dynamics of this race have
changed.’” Added Shomon, who was managing Obama’s campaign: “There was
just no way to beat Bobby after his son was shot.”
But that was not the only misfortune to beset Obama’s congressional
campaign.
Throughout Obama’s tenure as a state lawmaker, Shomon would stress
nothing more vigorously to Obama than the importance of not missing votes in
the General Assembly. This continual preaching from Shomon could irritate—
and sometimes infuriate—Obama. On many of his three-hour commutes from
Chicago to Springfield, an impatient Obama would phone Shomon and complain
that he was making another pointless trip to the state capitol when it was clear
that little would be accomplished in that particular session. Shomon would
explain that it didn’t matter whether Obama’s presence made any difference to
the capitol debate or to pending legislation, it was crucial to Obama’s future
political career to have a high-percentage voting record so that a political
opponent down the road could not accuse him of shirking his public duties. “You
gotta show up for work,” Shomon told him. Obama, who loathed having his time
wasted, balked and rebelled verbally—but he heeded Shomon’s advice and
missed few votes during his time in Springfield.
There was, however, one instance in which Obama did not follow this plan—
and it cost him dearly. As he did every holiday season, in December 1999
Obama gathered up Michelle and Malia, now eighteen months old, to visit his
grandmother in Honolulu. These annual trips to his childhood home have served

as a respite for the hardworking Obama, who looks forward all year to spending
a couple of weeks decompressing in the serene tropical environment of his
youth. But the 1999 trip was not stress-free, by any means. That holiday season,
a showdown was brewing in the state capitol in Illinois. Governor George Ryan
was pushing for reenactment of a gun control law known as the Safe
Neighborhoods Act, and the General Assembly was locked in a heated debate
over the bill. The legislation, among other things, would have raised the penalty
for illegally transporting a firearm from a misdemeanor to a felony. Obama, a
staunch gun control advocate who represented a district containing
neighborhoods ravaged by gun violence, wholeheartedly supported the
legislation. Opposition mostly came from rural conservatives, who argued that
hunters and other law-abiding gun owners could be hit with felony counts for
accidentally carrying a rifle or other firearm from place to place.
As Obama vacationed in the Pacific, the bill moved closer to a vote in a
special session of the senate called the week between Christmas and New Year’s.
Shomon jumped on the phone with Obama during that week, advising his boss
that he ought to seriously consider returning to Illinois for a possible vote.
Obama, however, had been spending a good deal of time away from Michelle
and their young daughter in recent months, as he had two jobs—state senator and
college law lecturer—in addition to campaigning. In fact, he had already
truncated his usual two-week Hawaii trip to just five days because of his hectic
campaign schedule. So at this point, leaving the family vacation early for the
sake of work, especially during the holidays, would put him in a bad spot with
Michelle. She was already displeased with her husband’s prolonged absences for
the sake of his political career and, according to Obama, was barely on speaking
terms with him. Moreover, Obama said, his daughter had come down with a bad
cold, which worried Michelle. Obama was torn between his duty as a public
official and his duty as a father and husband. In the end, he chose to remain in
Hawaii.
Back in Illinois, Shomon was left to defuse a potential public relations bomb.
The governor’s office and reporters were calling asking the whereabouts of
Obama and if he could be counted on to vote should the bill come before the
senate. Ryan, desperate for every vote, even offered to fly Obama from Chicago
to Springfield. Shomon was in a no-win situation—and he stonewalled. For a
day or two, he quit returning calls, hoping the issue would go away. How could
he tell the governor and the media that his boss was on vacation in Hawaii as this
important matter was debated? Shomon crossed his fingers that the bill would

not come up for a vote. Unfortunately, that strategy failed, as no compromise
was brokered in the waning hours. On December 29, the bill came to the floor
and fell just three votes short of the thirty-six needed for passage. Obama was
among three lawmakers Governor Ryan had relied on but who had missed the
vote. “I’m angered, frankly, that the senate didn’t do a better job,” Ryan told
reporters tersely.
As Obama’s plane touched down in Chicago the following week, he took
another phone call from Shomon, who was not shy about letting him know of the
political disaster awaiting him upon his return to Illinois. He warned Obama that
this political ad was in his future: an image of Obama sipping a tropical drink on
the Waikiki Beach while legislators fell just a few votes short of passing a tough
anticrime bill, all of this transpiring as Chicago was suffering the highest murder
rate in its history. Besides Governor Ryan, criticism came from various segments
of the media. The Tribune, which, despite its conservative leanings, was a
staunch advocate of strict gun laws, took Obama to task on its editorial page:
“Sen. Barack Obama (D-Chicago), who has—had?—aspirations to be a member
of Congress, chose a trip to Hawaii over public safety in Illinois.” Bobby Rush
also piled on, telling the Tribune, “This vote was probably the most pivotal vote,
one of the most important votes in memory before the General Assembly, and I
just can’t see any excuse that Mr. Obama could use for missing this vote.”
It was during this episode that I first encountered Obama. About two weeks
after the holidays, I was assigned a weekend reporting shift at the Tribune. And
that Sunday afternoon, Obama assembled a group of senior citizens in his Hyde
Park neighborhood to tout a proposal instituting price controls on prescription
drugs. But with Obama’s missed vote still fresh in the public consciousness,
reporters covering the event had little interest in the health care proposal and
instead focused on seeking an explanation directly from Obama for the missed
vote. Instead of fielding questions about health care, Obama found himself
explaining how his daughter had become ill and how he felt duty-bound to stay
with the family in Hawaii. He handled the questioning with a confident
demeanor, but it was obvious that he felt chastened by the experience. Before a
spread of news photographers and television cameras, he shifted from one leg to
the other and maintained that he had put his family’s interests above his own
political career. He cited his high-percentage voting record and said this
occurrence was not the norm, but there were extenuating circumstances. “I
cannot sacrifice the health or well-being of my daughter for politics,” Obama
told reporters. “I had to make a decision based on what I felt was appropriate for

my daughter and for my wife…. If the press takes my absence as the reason for
the failure of the Safe Neighborhoods bill, then that’s how the press is going to
report it…. I have the track record of someone in Springfield who takes his
legislative duties seriously.”
Most of the roughly fifty seniors who listened to Obama seemed to buy his
explanation of a sick child. When Obama maintained that the real culprit for the
botched legislation was a feud between the governor and the senate president,
many seniors nodded in support. I, however, was more cynical. Using the excuse
of a sick toddler while vacationing in Hawaii seemed a bit hard to swallow.
Thus, I began my story the next day in the Tribune this way: “Proving the
political principle that one memorable public decision can define a politician for
some time, state Sen. Barack Obama called reporters to a senior citizens’ home
Sunday to unveil a health care proposal but soon found himself explaining his
controversial Christmastime vacation.”
Rather than a rising star, Obama looked like a withering candidate. His
performance reminded me of a comedian dying onstage.
The incident was indicative of Obama’s almost uncanny run of bad luck in the
Rush contest. The missed vote, the questioning of his racial authenticity, the
death of the incumbent’s son—Obama’s first major campaign in the public eye
had become an utter disaster. Obama would later say that this period was one of
the low points of his life. “Less than halfway into the campaign, I knew in my
bones that I was going to lose,” Obama wrote in his book The Audacity of Hope.
“Each morning I awoke with a vague sense of dread, realizing that I would have
to spend the day smiling and shaking hands and pretending that everything was
going according to plan.”
Over the next couple of months, Obama fared only slightly better. He
managed to pick up the Tribune’s endorsement, after all. And he won a few high
marks for his performance in public debates, although the major news media
largely ignored them. The candidates’ only televised appearance, perhaps
fittingly, went poorly for Obama. He resembled a fighter struggling on the ropes,
desperately trying to prove he belonged in the ring in the first place. The rather
informal panel discussion was hosted by Chicago’s public television station and
featured a single moderator, Phil Ponce, asking questions of the candidates. By
now, the three men had been rivals for some time, and the discourse tended to be
combative. Obama and Rush’s other main challenger, Donne Trotter, accused

Rush of failing to lead in Washington, and both argued that the district needed
fresh, aggressive leadership. Rush, meanwhile, portrayed Obama as an overly
ambitious young state lawmaker with modest accomplishments who had the gall
to ask voters to send him to Washington. When Obama impatiently tried to
interrupt Rush and plead his case, moderator Ponce cut him off and asked him to
give Rush his time to speak—an unpleasant exchange that only furthered
Obama’s growing image as a self-centered young upstart. To make matters
worse, Rush batted away the interruption by averting his eyes from Obama and
attacking Obama’s newcomer status: “Just what’s he done? I mean, what’s he
done?” Obama responded by citing his history of organizing voters and poor
residents, but Rush’s line cut through Obama’s message like a steak knife
through butter. Obama’s candidacy was in tatters, and he lost the election by 30
percentage points.