The Mainland
Do you mind if I call you “Barack”?
—A FEMALE COLLEGE FRIEND

Hawaii was a wonderful place to grow up for Barack Obama. With his
grandparents looking after him, his home environment was secure and loving
enough to provide him with some stability as he negotiated his racially
conflicted adolescence. “I’ll admit that I did give him a few kicks in the pants,”
his grandmother said. “Not many, but a few.” When the realities of adulthood hit
him in his twenties, Obama looked in the rearview mirror of his life and called
his youth in Hawaii “a childhood dream.”
Yet Hawaii, with all its tropical splendor and melting pot of ethnicity, could
also be stifling. His half sister Maya Soetoro-Ng said that island inhabitants were
keenly aware of their serene seclusion, dropped on a spot of land in the middle
of an ocean. Civilizations that drove world commerce, the arts and popular
culture were on continents far, far away. That peaceful solitude was both a
blessing and a curse. “It could seem very insular here. And one can feel trapped
here, believe it or not,” Maya said. “It seemed back then that news traveled here
so slowly. There was no Internet, and you couldn’t find the New York Times.”
Even Obama’s grandmother, who seemed satisfied working a nine-to-five bank
job and providing a secure home life for her grandchildren, complained that
people felt detached from their native country. For example, with the six-hour
time differential between the United States’ East Coast and Hawaii, presidential
elections had largely been decided by the time many Hawaiians even bothered to
leave for the polls. “We’re disenfranchised,” Madelyn Dunham complained.
Consequently, both Barack and Maya felt the same yearning desire to
experience life beyond their island. Attracted by their mother’s wandering spirit

of adventure and her liberal sensitivities, neither sibling considered going into
business or seeking financial wealth once they reached the mainland United
States. But they did want to consume the globally powerful American culture—
at its epicenter. In time, both would land in the Western world’s most important
city, New York.
On my visit to Honolulu, Maya was in her mid-thirties. She had lived in
Manhattan from 1995 to 2000, and while there, she helped to launch an
alternative school. But by 2000, she had reached the moment in her educational
career and her personal life when she was prepared for a family. In addition, her
grandmother’s health was declining—and so back to Hawaii she came. After
returning, she found an extremely affable and responsible husband in a
Canadian, Konrad G. Ng, a film manager at the Honolulu Academy of Arts.
“Just an all-around great guy,” Obama said of his brother-in-law. Four months
before my 2004 visit, Maya had given birth to her first child (Suhaila Kala KaiLa Ng).
Much like her older half brother, Maya emanated a refined, confident
presence. A pretty woman with a roundish face and a wide smile (like her
brother’s), she was a mixture of European and Indonesian heritages, with the
bushy dark eyebrows of her mother and Obama, and the olive skin of her father,
Lolo. She wore her thick brown hair flowing over her shoulders, which softened
her features and accentuated her large brown eyes. “Maya’s just beautiful!” Nora
Moreno Cargie gushed. At the university, Maya taught evening classes in
multicultural education, education philosophy and education history. This was
appropriate, I thought, given her own family’s various cultures—an AfricanAmerican brother, a white American mother, an Indonesian father and white
midwestern grandparents. (“Our family get-togethers look like a meeting of the
United Nations,” Obama is fond of saying.) Maya spoke the King’s English in a
hybrid of East Coast accents, enunciating words in a precise way that gave her
an air of sophistication and prompted me to wonder how she picked up such an
elite manner of speaking. A lifetime of private schooling, I imagined. She
practiced Buddhism, taught global dance as an avocation and was a connoisseur
of the arts. Considering how successful her brother had become in his career, as
well as her own sophistication, it was somewhat surprising to see her driving a
well-worn white Ford Contour that lacked hubcaps and had been purchased at
Budget Car Sales. But she and her husband subsisted on the modest salaries of
an educator and an arts school manager. And true to their mother’s cerebral and
benevolent nature, the pursuit of expensive material possessions was not high on

the list of priorities for either Maya or Barack.
On Maya’s tour of the island, we kept pace behind the compact Ford by
maintaining sight of the bright blue-and-white, Illinois-imported sticker
emblazoned on its back bumper: “OBAMA: Democrat for Senate.” The most
amusing aspect of meeting Maya was hearing her pet name for her brother:
“Obama.” This tickled Moreno Cargie to no end: “I just love that—she calls her
brother Obama!” Using her brother’s last name singularly connoted several
things to me. It highlighted that she and her brother had different fathers; it
emphasized the mystique surrounding her brother’s African surname; and it gave
Obama a certain importance, like the music stars Prince or Bono. When Maya
did refer to her half brother by his given first name, it was usually in formal
conversation. And in doing so, she would break “Ba-rack” into two distinct
syllables and roll the r.
Maya’s tour of all-things-Barack included guiding us up a winding road
through Pu’u Ualakaa State Park, a gorgeous deep-green rain forest where
Obama’s family often picnicked. The park, whose Hawaiian name means
“rolling sweet potato hill,” was set in a thousand-foot-high mountainous area
that, at its peak, provided a clear and breathtaking panoramic view of Waikiki,
Diamond Head and Honolulu, a sweeping canvas of almost the full length of the
island of Oahu. We also visited the nearby military gravesite at the National
Memorial Cemetery of Obama’s grandfather, Stanley Dunham, who died from
prostate cancer in 1992 at the age of seventy-five. And we drove by the massive
seaside rocks near Sandy Beach, from which a despondent Obama and his sister
spread the ashes of their mother when she passed away from ovarian and uterine
cancer in 1995.
My interview with Maya came over dinner at her brother’s favorite restaurant,
the Hau Tree Lanai. It was just a couple of miles from the bustling Waikiki
Beach strip, nestled amid the wooded Kapiolani Park section of lower-rise hotels
and apartments along the oceanfront—a place that tourists could easily find if
they wanted to take a short drive, and certainly a favorite among Oahu residents.
We dined in an elegant beachfront courtyard. Several hau trees with thick trunks
and long, angular branches spotted the area. The setting provided the ideal
outdoor dinner atmosphere, with light ocean waves topped with white foam
softly lapping against the beach, a gentle evening breeze wafting through the
night air and a black cloudless sky wrapping us in comfort. The brightly lighted
Waikiki strip shone in the distance to our right, looking almost lonely amid the

mass of darkness in all other directions. With its menu of fresh seafood and
tender steaks at slightly high prices, I could see why Obama religiously
patronized this restaurant on his Hawaii visits. And overall, after a couple of
days in such idyllic settings, I completely understood why almost everyone
seems to return from Hawaii to the continental United States with their blood
pressure a few points lower and speaking of their excursion in glowing terms.
This wonderful perception of Hawaii was somewhat ironic given the point to
which Maya consistently returned in our dinner interview about Obama: her
brother’s burning desire to leave Hawaii to seek something—knowledge,
adventure, racial identity—away from the confines of Honolulu. “Hawaii has
ideas and cultures and what have you,” Maya said. “But basically you felt cut off
from the world, much more so than you do now. I think moving to the mainland
he found himself for the first time in the midst of arguments and, you know,
defense. Here, I think he loved it here, and he was happy, and he was welladjusted—he was all of those things. But there were just so many big questions,
you know, that couldn’t be answered here that lingered. He sort of had no one to
help him understand or to urge him to pursue those questions, for instance, when
he felt someone was being racist or when he was struggling with issues of
identity.”
In his memoir, Obama makes composite characters of the few blacks who
dispensed advice on racial issues, such as the strident Ray, who seemed almost
as lost as Obama in that respect. Obama wrote that his grandparents were illequipped to speak about race, and Maya said their mother’s lack of experience
with the African-American community was particularly evident. There were few
family disagreements, Maya said, but Obama and his mother debated
emotionally over one topic: Obama’s connection to Malcolm X. His mother tried
but failed to understand the anger brewing within the 1960s black nationalist
leader, who perhaps was best known for urging his followers to seek black
freedom, justice and equality “by any means necessary.” “She just didn’t
understand—and she wanted to,” Maya said. “She was a little naive and she was
very sweet and she was very liberal and she just didn’t understand how anybody
who had been subject to discrimination could then be exclusionary in their
tactics. She didn’t understand the anger…. And I think, although she tried, she
was not equipped to help Barack deal with what it is like to be a black man in
this country. I don’t think she knew at all how to help him. I think she just
wanted to make him feel better. She was such a loving mother. She just wanted
to make him feel like everything was okay.”

But to Obama in these years, everything was not okay and black militancy
was an alluring notion. Consider this passage from Dreams about his feelings of
black anger: “At best, these things were a refuge; at worst, a trap. Following this
maddening logic, the only thing you could choose as your own was withdrawal
into a smaller and smaller coil of rage, until being black meant only the
knowledge of your own powerlessness, of your own defeat. And the final irony:
Should you refuse this defeat and lash out at your captors, they would have a
name for that, too, a name that could cage you just as good. Paranoid. Militant.
Violent. Nigger.”
Maya said her brother realized that he must experience African-American
culture up close if he were to cleanse himself of this internal racial confusion and
bubbling anger. Even so, after being accepted by several colleges, Obama chose
to attend a small liberal arts school in suburban Los Angeles that had relatively
few blacks on campus. Still not clearly focused on adult goals, he decided on
Occidental College for the same reason that many young men make decisions—
not necessarily based on a rational, long-term plan, but because he was fond of a
girl. The Occidental coed who caught his eye was from tony Brentwood,
California, and she had vacationed on Oahu with her parents. While still in high
school, Obama was inclined to use his charm and good looks to try to connect
with college women visiting Hawaii on vacation. His intelligence and broad
smile made him quite appealing to women older than himself, and his
introspective manner made slightly more mature college women more appealing
to him. Also, by his senior year, he was shedding the thicker body frame that
helped him on the football field as a high school freshman. He wasn’t quite as
thin as he would become in his twenties, but he was now on his way toward the
ultraslender physique of his adult years.
OBAMA WON A FULL SCHOLARSHIP TO THE WELL-MANICURED liberal arts college of
fewer than two thousand students. At Occidental, Obama gravitated toward the
school’s small contingent of black students and instantly discovered that blacks
in the United States were not at all the monolithic tough urban chic guys he saw
on his television screen in Hawaii. They were as diverse among themselves as
whites—with a range of viewpoints and divergent behavior patterns. At
Occidental, many blacks were from middle-to upper-middle-class backgrounds,
and Obama decided they were a lot like him—suburban kids “whose parents had
already paid the price of escape.” “They weren’t defined by the color of their
skin, they would tell you. They were individuals,” he wrote. “In their

mannerisms, their speech, their mixed-up hearts, I kept recognizing pieces of
myself.” Those characteristics of Obama were also evident to blacks in other
parts of the country. Chicago native Don Terry, a writer for the Tribune whose
mother was white and father was black, told me that Obama reminded him of
“California blacks,” projecting a more laid-back, less urban personality.
Obama wrote that he consciously chose politically active black students as his
friends because he feared being labeled a “sellout.” In trying to convey an image
of being a true black, he would sometimes overreach to gain acceptance among
his black peers. When Obama described an African-American student who
lacked overt black mannerisms as a “Tom,” another student chastised him for the
comment, saying, “Seems to me we should be worrying about whether our own
stuff ’s together instead of passing judgment on how other folks are supposed to
act.” When I first read this passage in his memoir, it struck me that in my
experience with him, Obama still had a tendency to overreach in order to fit in
with some urban blacks, even if in general he seems at ease in black settings.
Occasionally during his Senate campaign, he would slap a black man on the
back and exclaim something like “What’s up, brother?” Obama’s feigned
enthusiasm and overly eager manner could sometimes be a tad off-putting. I
recall one surprised black man responding, “Huh?” and another not responding
at all. “Obama is a great candidate, just a great candidate. But that ‘hey, brother’
thing can be just a little too much sometimes,” Scott Fornek, a political reporter
for the Chicago Sun-Times, remarked during a campaign stop at an AfricanAmerican church.
Besides blacks at Occidental, Obama found a diverse set of friends in “foreign
students, Chicanos, Marxist professors, structural feminists, punk-rock
performance poets.” He would encounter intellectual discourse focused on
political rebellion and engage in deep-into-the-night intense discussions in his
dorms about such heavy topics as neocolonialism, Eurocentrism, decolonization
and the Caribbean black activist Frantz Fanon. “When we ground out our
cigarettes in the hallway carpet or set our stereos so loud that the walls began to
shake, we were resisting bourgeois society’s stifling constraints,” Obama wrote.
Obama became involved in a popular campus movement of the day—urging
divestment of university money from South Africa because of its policy of
apartheid. It was through this activism that Obama first learned the power of
words—and his own power with the spoken word. “I noticed that people had
begun to listen to my opinions,” he wrote. “It was a discovery that made me

hungry for words. Not words to hide behind but words that could carry a
message, support an idea.” His first public-speaking moment occurred when he
opened a staged rally in which he was to begin talking to an afternoon crowd
only to be yanked from the stage in a physical metaphor for the voiceless black
South Africans. But when his cohorts began pulling him from the stage, Obama
sensed a connection with the audience and physically resisted. “I really wanted
to stay up there, to hear my voice bouncing off the crowd and returning back to
me in applause,” he wrote in Dreams.
Occidental was a powerful intellectual growth experience for Obama, even if
he still did not perform heroically in his studies. But it was here that he began to
slowly drift away from concentrating on basketball and partying. He practiced
with Occidental’s Division II team for several weeks but said the team consumed
too much time and he didn’t see basketball leading anywhere. So he quit the
team and instead played pickup games with students and faculty. In the
classroom, Obama found deep-thinking peers and professors who challenged
him to reconsider his own self-absorption and to view the world in global terms.
The somewhat idle yet capacious mind of a teenage basketball player and
bodysurfer was being fed intellectual nutrients that it had never ingested before.
Rather than hanging out at the beach, Obama was now spending time in
intellectual discourse in coffeehouses. Some of that was again driven by male
hormones, Obama conceded. “The schools I went to weren’t driven by
athletics,” he said. “To get girls, you had to be the smartest guy in the coffee
shop, not the best shooter on the court.” Nevertheless, being forced to rely on his
intellect and charm served to change him and focus him. “He seemed to have
gotten some purpose in life during those two years at Occidental,” his
grandmother told me. Maya noticed her brother growing as well: “Moving to the
mainland, he felt for the first time in the midst of vigorous discussion. He was
always smart, but he found himself a meaningful participant in all of that. It was
the first time he was really confronted with black culture. He really had to find
his place in the world. And that requires a great deal of reflection and a great
deal of study.”
Obama assumed a new persona at Occidental. During one coffeehouse
conversation, a young woman, whom Obama was obviously attracted to,
inquired about his given first name: Barack. He explained that it meant “blessed”
in Arabic, and that his paternal grandfather was a Muslim. “Do you mind if I call
you ‘Barack’?” she asked. Obama smiled, and some readers of his memoir can
see the lightbulb pop on over the young man’s head with the likely caption

“Hmmm. Women might just be into the name Barack over Barry.” And so Barry
Obama was forever discarded.
After his sophomore year, in 1981, Obama transferred from Occidental to
Columbia University in New York City under a program assembled by the two
schools. He said he wanted to experience New York and find a “community” of
blacks where he could “put down stakes and test my commitments.” “Occidental
was so small,” he said, “that I felt that I had gotten what I needed out of it and
the idea of being in New York was very appealing.”
Ironically, when he arrived in New York, it was not the hustle and bustle and
the millions of cosmopolitan people that primarily consumed him, but the
solitude and isolation of being a newcomer in a big city. He chose to live a
monastic existence, spending time alone in his spare Manhattan apartment and
digesting the works of Friedrich Nietzsche, Herman Melville and Toni Morrison,
as well as the Christian Bible. He began an exercise routine, running several
miles each day, and this routine would attach itself to his psyche and remains
there to the present day. His sour moods can often be attributed to a missed
workout or two. “I had two plates, two towels,” Obama recalled. “My mother
and sister, when they came to visit me, just made fun of me because I was so
monklike. I had tons of books. I read everything. I think that was the period
when I grew as much as I have ever grown intellectually. But it was a very
internal growth.” Obama’s intellectually elitist nature also began to sprout during
this period, and he perhaps began taking himself a bit too seriously. Maya, who
was in her mid-teens at the time, recalled that her brother chastised her for
reading a copy of People magazine and watching television instead of delving
into the novels that he had given her. Maya said she questioned whether her
brother was going off the deep end, but her mother convinced her it was simply
another phase in Obama’s life. To Julian Green, Obama’s former Illinois press
secretary, these years were the most instrumental in developing Obama’s present
level of intellectualism. “Barack put himself through something that most of us
never do—you know, that whole period of just reading and growing your mind.
That’s the difference between him and a lot of people who haven’t succeeded, I
think.”
Obama
professors
instructor
evolution.

focused on himself and did not give much credit to his college
in his book, but a friend of Obama’s said that one Occidental
in particular played an enormous role in Obama’s intellectual
Roger Boesche taught two classes taken by Obama: American

Political Thought and Modern Political Thought. The latter had a lasting effect.
Boesche’s personal hero is Thomas Jefferson, as well as others who advocated
for participatory democracy. Yet Boesche said he did not push his own political
predilections on his students. “My philosophy of teaching is for them to think for
themselves. I’ve always thought that in a good political theory class, students
come to their own conclusions,” Boesche said. “I don’t really care how they end
up. I don’t believe in converting students to my way of thinking. Whether they
come out and become radicals or liberals or conservatives, I want them to
rethink their assumptions and come out on the other end. I can be Plato one week
or Aristotle for a week.”
Boesche actually had only a vague recollection of Obama, which was
interesting, considering that Obama told his friend how much Boesche had
influenced his thinking and life choices. When Obama was his student, Boesche
had been a college teacher for only a few years. In his early thirties at the time,
Boesche was young enough that he would occasionally mingle with Obama and
his peers in a campus burger-and-fries joint called The Cooler. And though his
memories of Obama were scant, he vividly recalled one lunchtime chat in which
he urged Obama to apply himself more vigorously to his studies. He said Obama
showed great promise, but that promise went unfulfilled at Occidental. “You can
often see the potential in a student’s papers and in questions in class,” Boesche
said. “I would put Barry into that category. It was my feeling that his
performance hadn’t matched his immense talent. I was pushing him, I guess, to
develop that talent.”
When I told Boesche that just a couple of years later, Obama had devoured the
writings of Nietzsche and other political thinkers during his solitary spell in New
York City, Boesche said that Obama certainly must have gone through a
philosophical growth experience. “Nietzsche calls everything into question. You
have to call everything into question. He says God is dead,” Boesche said. “So if
he kept reading Nietzsche, he went through a whole reasoning process in which
he reevaluated all the core beliefs that he had—and then came out on the other
side.”
Obama affirmed Boesche’s observation. He considered Boesche’s class on
modern political theory his favorite course. He went so far as to say that
Boesche’s influence and this course, more than anything, spurred his following
period of deep self-reflection and study. Boesche had a way of drawing out

Obama’s intellect, which had not yet been fully engaged. He did this by, of all
things, giving Obama a B on an exam that Obama was certain deserved an A.
Obama said that he was still “partying pretty hard” but found Boesche’s classes
special. “I knew that, even though I hadn’t studied, that I knew this stuff much
better than my classmates,” Obama said. “I went to him and said, ‘Why did I get
a B on this?’ And he said, ‘You didn’t apply yourself.’ He was very much
grading me on a different curve. And I was pissed.”
Obama said that Boesche was among a number of people who helped him
mature, who guided him out of his self-absorbed, angst-ridden teenage years into
a serious adulthood. “There were people who recognized my potential and who
were willing to challenge me on some of my less productive behavior, and I
think that helped increase a sense of seriousness,” Obama said. “Most
importantly, it got me to recognize that the world wasn’t just about me. There
was a bigger world out there and I was luckier than most and I had an obligation
to take not only my own talents more seriously but also see what I could
contribute to others.”
Indeed, Boesche’s toughness tactic worked, and Obama worked even harder at
stimulating and challenging himself intellectually. That evolved into his growth
phase in New York City.
“THOSE TWO YEARS WERE EXTREMELY IMPORTANT FOR ME,” HE said. “I just stripped
everything down and sort of built things back up. For about two years there, I
was just painfully alone and really not focused on anything, except maybe
thinking a lot.”
Obama graduated from Columbia in 1983 with a bachelor of arts degree in
political science. He stayed in Manhattan and took a position with the Business
International Corporation, a firm that published newsletters on global business
and offered consulting to American companies operating overseas. Obama was
an editor and research assistant in the firm’s international financial information
division. For a year, he “researched, wrote and edited articles, reports, and howto manuals on international business and finance for multinational corporations,”
according to his résumé. Obama told me along the Senate campaign trail that this
job did little to excite him, but it gave him a quick education in modern business,
international finance and the “coldness of capitalism.” In Dreams, Obama wrote
about feelings of ambivalence toward this job and the progression of his life. His

Manhattan apartment was on the trendy Upper West Side. He recalled that he
barely recognized himself in suit and tie and briefcase, although he also had
some visions of grandeur, of being a powerful businessman cutting major
international deals. These observations of his own personal privilege ate at
Obama. “I would imagine myself as a captain of industry, barking out orders,
closing the deal, before I remembered who it was that I had told myself that I
wanted to be and felt pangs of guilt for my lack of resolve.”
Indeed, Obama had told his grandmother Toot that he wanted “to leave the
world a better place.” Becoming a wealthy and powerful captain of industry
would not fulfill that mission. He had begun toying with the idea of becoming a
neighborhood activist who would help empower the poor, although he did not
know exactly how to go about doing that. He grew more unfulfilled in his day
job and ultimately quit. Obama said he wanted to work close to the “streets,” and
took a couple of part-time organizing jobs in Harlem and Brooklyn that barely
paid the rent. He sent out résumés and searched for a regular community
organizing post, but none appeared. He had begun considering a return to the
business world when he received a call from a man named Jerry Kellman, a
community organizer in Chicago. Kellman had placed an ad in a trade
publication seeking new hires for an organizing drive he was launching in a poor
black neighborhood on Chicago’s Far South Side. Being white and Jewish,
Kellman and his partner had difficulty gaining the confidence of black residents.
When Obama answered the ad, Kellman thought about Obama’s name and
wondered about its racial ancestry. “Could this be Asian?” he asked his wife,
who was Japanese American. She said it might be. The two met in a coffee shop
in Manhattan; Kellman was immediately impressed. First, Obama was black. It
was especially hard to find a young, college-educated black man willing to work
in community organizing for just thirteen thousand dollars a year, which was all
Kellman could pay. Second, Obama was intelligent and hungered to serve
society in a positive way. For Obama, whose soul was ever restless, Kellman
offered an opportunity to experience a new city and a new culture. He also
offered Obama something more: an opportunity to chase that unselfish life
mission that he had confided to his grandmother.