8
Politics
I am surprised at how many elected officials—even the good ones—spend
so much time talking about the mechanics of politics and not matters of
substance. They have this poker chip mentality, this overriding interest in
retaining their seats or in moving their careers forward….
—BARACK OBAMA

Barack Obama’s first foray into electoral politics revealed both the burning
intensity of his personal ambition and his deeply held desire to press for social
change, particularly in poor African-American communities. To Obama, it
displayed once again the thorny thicket of intramural politics that besets
Chicago’s black community. The city’s African-American political universe is
lighted by a select group of insiders who have amassed power and prestige, and
they are loath to relinquish it. It is also a society of unyielding internal rancor,
which often impedes overall black progress. For these reasons, as Obama
entered the public political sphere, the eternal optimist began to express
pessimism about the state of black Chicago.
“Upon my return to Chicago,” he wrote in Dreams from My Father, which
was published around this period, in 1995, “I would find the signs of decay
accelerated throughout the South Side—the neighborhoods shabbier, the children
edgier and less restrained, more middle-class families heading out to the
suburbs, the jails bursting with glowering youth, my brothers without prospects.
All too rarely do I hear people asking just what it is that we’ve done to make so
many children’s hearts so hard, or what collectively we might do to right their
moral compass—what values we must live by. Instead I see us doing what we’ve
always done—pretending that these children are somehow not our own.”
Running Project Vote and working for Judson Miner provided Obama with

entree to the diverse constellation of black politicos on Chicago’s South Side. So
when an opportunity to run for public office presented itself in 1995, Obama
seized it. A respected state senator in her first full term, Alice Palmer, had
decided to run for Congress, which led to Obama cutting his first deal to advance
his career in politics. Palmer was a progressive African American in the vein of
Obama, and she threw her support behind Obama as her replacement.
But that is only where the story begins.
In Obama’s version of events, Palmer agreed that even if she was not
successful in the three-person race for Congress, she would retire from politics
and he would run for her seat. But when Palmer began to falter badly in the
congressional contest, she changed course dramatically. Her supporters met with
Obama and asked him if he would step aside if Palmer was to lose. This would
allow her to run again for the Illinois Senate seat she was holding, but it would
leave Obama out in the cold. After pulling together a campaign, Obama had no
interest in ditching the effort. And he did not equivocate in expressing that
sentiment to Palmer’s representatives. At thirty-four, Obama was eager for this
next step in his evolution. This was, after all, a man who had mused to his
brother-in-law a couple of years earlier that, hey, you never know, he might be
the president of the country one day. Palmer, in Obama’s view, was reneging on
an agreement that they had negotiated in good faith. So he told Palmer’s people
that she had promised to relinquish her seat and support him, and that he would
not withdraw from the race.
Predictably, this did not sit well with Palmer. She, indeed, lost the
congressional primary contest in November 2005 to Jesse Jackson Jr., and then
quickly filed to run for her old seat in the March 2006 Democratic primary
against Obama—even though she had publicly supported him for the seat.
“Since she endorsed me, I can always use, ‘Even my opponent wants me’ as a
campaign slogan,” Obama quipped to the Chicago Tribune.
But humor aside, this established a problematic election for the upstart
Obama. Suddenly, instead of running at the head of the pack with the
incumbent’s blessing, he was running against the incumbent herself. He had
worked the hustings and accumulated a great deal of support for his candidacy,
but he would have been hard pressed to match Palmer’s power of incumbency: a
ready-made army of supporters to distribute literature and get people to the polls
on election day, as well as the endorsement of an array of established black

politicians. Indeed, Palmer called a press conference and accepted a petition
from more than one hundred supporters urging her to seek reelection. Also in her
corner was the new congressman, Jesse Jackson Jr. In fact, fresh from the
congressional victory, Jackson’s field organizer attended Palmer’s press
conference and pledged full assistance. Palmer also possessed an incumbent’s
most potent weapon—name recognition from her previous election—while
Obama’s name was not a plus to his campaign. When it came to his name, the
debate generally revolved around which was odder—his first name or his last.
But Obama had one card up his sleeve. He could not envision how Palmer’s
supporters, even as solidified as they seemed to be, had gathered the necessary
number of voter signatures on her nominating petitions in such a short time.
Palmer herself confessed at her press conference that the nearly sixteen hundred
petitions she had filed with the state elections board had been accumulated in
just ten days. So a volunteer for Obama challenged the legality of her petitions,
as well as the legality of petitions from several other candidates in the race. As
an elections board hearing on the petitions neared, Palmer realized that Obama
had called her hand, and she acknowledged that she had not properly acquired
the necessary number of signatures. Many of the voters had printed their names,
rather than signing them as the law required. Palmer said she was desperately
trying to get affidavits from those who had printed their names, but time was
running out. She had no choice but to withdraw from the race. The other
opponents were also knocked off the ballot, leaving Obama running unopposed
in the primary.
Publicly, Palmer claimed she held no grudges; privately, she was extremely
bitter. This turn of events was embarrassing to her, especially after her poor
showing in the congressional contest. But more important than embarrassment, it
effectively ended her once promising political career. So she refused to support
Obama in the primary or the fall election, telling a Chicago journalist, “I’ve
since discovered that he’s not as progressive as I first thought.” Nevertheless,
since the Republican Party is almost nonexistent in African-American districts
on the South and West Sides of the city, Obama cruised to victory in the fall
election.
For Obama, the saga pointed up several things. Rather than winning a position
in the Illinois General Assembly by ousting an incumbent or taking an open seat,
he appeared to have slipped in the back door on a technicality. And by
challenging Palmer, who was highly regarded in black political circles as a

fighting progressive, he had left a bad taste in the mouths of many black political
leaders, influential people whom he would have to work with in the state capitol
and in his district. Palmer, for her part, seemed more than happy to see this
bitterness and resentment toward Obama spread to as many people as possible.
But most significantly, the whole episode showed that Obama was an
extraordinarily ambitious young man willing to do whatever it took to advance
not only his agenda of community empowerment but his own political career.
OBAMA’S STATE SENATE DISTRICT ON CHICAGO’S SOUTH SIDE WAS one of the most
economically diverse in the state. It included some of the poorest AfricanAmerican neighborhoods and public housing projects in the country, but it was
also home to middle-and upper-middle-class residents, most living in Hyde Park.
In addition, his district ran up into the South Loop area, just south of the main
downtown commercial district of the city. As development spread outward from
the city’s high-rises from the 1980s through today, the South Loop and
neighborhoods to its near south experienced intense development pressures. The
South Loop was undergoing gentrification, with new condominium buildings
and town-house communities drawing downtown professionals and others back
to city living. Attendant stores, businesses and restaurants sprouted alongside
these developments.
Obama’s fratricidal state senate race provided some inside-page grist for the
Chicago media, but it was still a relatively obscure contest in a city filled with
higher-stakes political intrigue. Yet the emergence of Obama onto the city’s
political scene did not go completely unnoticed. Obama’s Harvard pedigree, the
release of his first memoir and his own personal eloquence combined to draw
some interest from the press and from influential people outside the South Side
environment.
He was named one of the city’s top movers and shakers by N’DIGO
magazine, a publication tailored to black professionals in Chicago. But the most
substantial interest came in the form of a long front-page profile in the city’s
leading weekly alternative newspaper, the Chicago Reader. The four-thousandword article was highly laudatory of Obama, and the last third of the piece was
largely an account in Obama’s own words of his views on the complicated
intersection of race and politics. The article served as a manifesto of sorts for
Obama. This was the first time he was able to voice his political philosophy to

the broader Chicago community, especially the all-important liberal set. His
vision for a “new kind of politics” was still in its nascent stage, and he was
speaking primarily to the more narrow concerns of his future black South Side
constituents. But the overall principle was essentially identical to what he
preaches politically today: If America is to progress as a free society, people
must learn to work together to build healthy communities rather than fight with
each other over parochial, self-serving interests. As Obama put it:
The political debate is now so skewed, so limited, so distorted. People are
hungry for community; they miss it. They are hungry for change. What if a
politician were to see his job as that of an organizer, as part teacher and part
advocate, one who does not sell voters short but who educates them about
the real choices before them? As an elected public official, for instance, I
could bring church and community leaders together easier than I could as a
community organizer or lawyer. We would come together to form concrete
economic development strategies, take advantage of existing laws and
structures, and create bridges and bonds within all sectors of the
community. We must form grassroot structures that would hold me and
other elected officials more accountable for their actions. The right wing,
the Christian right, has done a good job of building these organizations of
accountability, much better than the left or progressive forces have. But it’s
always easier to organize around intolerance, narrow-mindedness, and false
nostalgia. And they also have hijacked the higher moral ground with this
language of family values and moral responsibility. Now we have to take
this same language—these same values that are encouraged within our
families—of looking out for one another, of sharing, of sacrificing for each
other—and apply them to a larger society. Let’s talk about creating a
society, not just individual families, based on these values. Right now we
have a society that talks about the irresponsibility of teens getting pregnant,
not the irresponsibility of a society that fails to educate them to aspire for
more…. I am surprised at how many elected officials—even the good ones
—spend so much time talking about the mechanics of politics and not
matters of substance. They have this poker chip mentality, this overriding
interest in retaining their seats or in moving their careers forward, and the
business and game of politics, the political horse race, is all they talk about.
Even those who are on the same page as me on the issues never seem to
want to talk about them. Politics is regarded as little more than a career.
One of Obama’s central themes was the powerful potential of multiculturalism

in American society. Rather than continually fighting white interests and
castigating whites for an oppressive history of mistreating blacks, Obama
suggested, blacks would do better if they infiltrated the mainstream power
structure and worked from there to effect social change.
“Any solution to our unemployment catastrophe must arise from us working
creatively within a multicultural, interdependent, and international economy,”
Obama said. “Any African Americans who are only talking about racism as a
barrier to our success are seriously misled if they don’t also come to grips with
the larger economic forces that are creating economic insecurity for all workers
—whites, Latinos, and Asians.”
At Harvard, Obama’s practice of patiently listening to all sides of a debate
made him popular and defused conflict with members of the school’s
conservative ranks. But his steadfast beliefs about multiculturalism and race
made him less than a unifying force in Chicago’s black community. The idea of
building bridges to people of all races was anathema to many old-school black
leaders and so-called black nationalists who still sounded a voice in Chicago’s
African-American community. These individuals practiced a form of identity
politics. They were not only pessimistic about the capacity of whites to share
economic wealth with minority groups, but they were especially wary of blacks
like Obama who were educated in elite white institutions, had assimilated into
mainstream white society and now espoused these kinds of multicultural notions.
It did not help Obama’s cause in these circles that, in addition to his law practice,
he was lecturing in constitutional law at the University of Chicago School of
Law. The university was situated in Hyde Park, and to some South Side blacks
the campus represented the encroachment of the white establishment into what
had historically been claimed as African-American turf. The school was
considered a physically forbidding and intellectually impenetrable institution of
white elitism sitting in the middle of struggling black communities—and there
was Harvard Law–trained Obama, teaching classes at this establishment.
Most of this grumbling occurred behind the scenes, although some was aired
in public. An African-American political science professor at Northwestern
University criticized Obama for his “vacuous-to-repressive neo-liberal politics.”
The head of a task force on black empowerment was more direct and more
cynical, charging that Obama was little more than a tool of forces beyond the
black community. These kinds of concerns from blacks were nothing new to
Obama, of course. He had rankled some African Americans at Harvard for trying

to promote harmony among partisans by appointing conservatives to editorial
posts at the expense of pushing specific blacks up the ladder.
SOME OF THESE ISSUES IN THE BLACK COMMUNITY FOLLOWED Obama into the
Illinois General Assembly, where he received a cool reception from some
members of the Illinois Legislative Black Caucus. This group of black
lawmakers was not immune from internal squabbling. Chicago has two
significant communities of African Americans—West Siders and South Siders—
and legislators representing districts from each part of town were often at odds,
in part because they were competing in Springfield for the same state resources.
And Obama did not necessarily ingratiate himself with the legislators by making
some privately disparaging comments about the disorganized, free-for-all
atmosphere in Springfield. While some lawmakers acknowledged that Obama’s
criticisms were on the mark, others wondered, Just who is this hotshot new guy
from Harvard Law who shows up in Springfield and immediately takes potshots
at us? “At the swearing-in, there was already some heat from certain people,” a
Springfield politico recalled.
In fact, the man who soon became Obama’s chief political adviser
acknowledged that he did not care for Obama upon their first meeting. Dan
Shomon was a hardworking, gregarious, bespectacled wire service reporter who
had left journalism to become an aide to Democrats in the state capital. By 1997,
Shomon had worked in Democratic Party politics in Springfield for eight years
and he knew the terrain. Obama was displeased about the amount of time that his
assigned aide was devoting to his staff work and noticed that Shomon was a
dogged worker for the senator in the office next door. So Obama pressed the
Black Caucus leader, Emil Jones Jr., to have Shomon assigned to him, as well.
Shomon was initially reluctant because he had heard some of the scuttlebutt
about Obama. He had also met Obama a couple of times the year before when
Obama helped campaign door-to-door for other Democratic legislative
candidates. On one of his volunteer walking efforts, Obama ran into another
volunteer apparently assigned to walk the same precinct and grew miffed
because he felt his time had been wasted. This gave Shomon the impression that
Obama could be rather testy and elitist. So when Shomon was approached about
working for Obama, his first reaction was: “I am thinking that I am really busy.
He wants to change the world and that is great, but I don’t really like the guy that
much.” Still, Shomon agreed to meet with Obama, and when Obama took

Shomon out for dinner, the two wound up hitting it off. So Shomon went to work
for Obama, mostly in the capacity of helping the freshman lawmaker with
legislative strategy. Shomon offered to help with media affairs, since that was his
specialty as a former reporter. But Obama told Shomon that he did not need a
press aide because he dealt with reporters on his own. Obama wanted full control
over his own public message, and he didn’t want a spokesperson interpreting his
language and ideas.
(Thus began Obama’s cordial, but not chummy, relationship with the news
media. He was known for an occasional thoughtful quote, but capitol reporters
were not so charmed by him that they consistently sought him out. Obama joked
in later years that only one reporter, Dave McKinney of the Chicago Sun-Times,
paid him any attention at all. “And McKinney only talked to me to be nice,”
Obama said.)
One of Shomon’s first tactical moves would later prove pivotal in pushing
forward Obama’s budding political career—and it would convince Obama that
he could win a statewide political contest. Shomon told Obama that, because he
would be voting on issues that affected Illinoisians outside the Chicago region,
he should consider traveling to the southern reaches of the state to gain an
understanding of Illinois’s vastly divergent cultures. Obama thought the trip
would be instructive for that reason and for another: Springfield was not his final
political destination. He harbored notions of running for statewide office one
day. This was 1997, before Obama’s first child was born, and there were fewer
encumbrances on his time. So, according to Shomon, Obama responded without
hesitation: “Let’s do it.” (In Obama’s second book, The Audacity of Hope:
Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream, he takes credit for the idea of this
first far downstate trip.)
Behind Shomon’s thinking was this: Illinois suffers from a constant
geographic tussle between the Chicago region and the rest of the state. About
two-thirds of the state’s population lives in the Chicago area, which, at roughly
eight million people, is the third-largest metropolitan region in the United States,
behind New York City and Los Angeles. The remaining third live in rural and
small urban communities across Illinois, and these communities consistently
complain that they are overwhelmed by Chicago and its collar counties,
especially when resources are divvied up by lawmakers in Springfield. Because
of this dynamic, most politicians from Chicago are viewed with some suspicion
by voters in Chicago’s immediately surrounding suburbs and with even greater

suspicion outside the metro region altogether.
But in central and southern Illinois, another factor might play a role in how
Obama would be considered: race. Obama was not only a Chicago politician but
an African-American one. This was potentially a second strike against him in
this part of the world. Southern Illinois, in particular, more resembled the Deep
South than the Midwest. It had endured a long history of racial intolerance. At
Illinois’s southern tip, where the Ohio and the Mississippi rivers meet, the small
town of Cairo has a particularly unsettling past that includes the public lynching
of black men in the early 1900s and a race riot in 1967. The riot was so ugly that
it helped to spur the departure of thousands of residents. On several trips into
this potentially hostile environment, Obama would not only measure his overall
reception but also seek to make political and fund-raising contacts. The key
question: Had the racial equation changed enough that he would be viewed as a
friend or, at the very least, a nonthreatening outsider? “I said that we will go for
a week and play golf and we will see the state,” Shomon recalled.
On this first trip, Obama’s eyes were opened to this largely white part of the
world—the so-called red state world. The two men disagreed over some
logistical and political aspects of the trip, but overall it was a resounding
success, signaling to both of them that Obama probably could compete in that
rural, small-town environment. Obama may have written four hundred serious
pages in Dreams about the painful odyssey of finding comfort with his mixed
racial ancestry, but he seemed comfortable with his identity by this time.
“We are driving through Perry Township and we pass the Pinckneyville Coon
Club,” Shomon recalled, spelling out the word “C-O-O-N” for special emphasis.
(Coon in this case was a truncated colloquialism for raccoon, but historically in
the United States it has been used as an epithet for a black person.) “And, you
know, this guy has never really been in the South. So Barack looks at the sign,
and looks at me, and he says, ‘I don’t think they’re going to let me join the
Pinckneyville Coon Club.’ He then starts laughing and he is laughing so hard he
almost fell off his chair.”
While traveling in another small town on a later trip, Obama and Shomon
were pulled over by a police officer in DuQuoin County when they inadvertently
turned the wrong direction down a one-way street. When the officer questioned
the state license plate on Obama’s green Jeep Cherokee and Shomon told him
that Obama was a state senator, the officer “looked flabbergasted,” Shomon said.

“He’s not a state senator from these parts!” the officer told Shomon.
Still, in setting after setting on these downstate trips, Obama discovered that
everyday people reacted warmly to him. In some cases he was treated like a
dignitary because people were not accustomed to a state senator visiting them.
“It was just a great trip because it really did open Barack’s eyes,” Shomon said.
“He thinks these people are really cool, and they could relate to him—although,
you know, they couldn’t pronounce his name.”
The trips were also helpful in yet another regard, allowing Shomon to school
Obama in another lesson of politics: Try to adapt as best you can to the culture
you are stepping into. Obama did not always take well to Shomon’s unsolicited
advice. While Obama’s family never had a great deal of money, his private
schooling and Harvard degree meant that he had been immersed in an elite
culture, especially during his adult years. One morning, Shomon met Obama
coming out of their hotel and noticed that Obama was wearing khaki pants and a
silky black shirt with a flat collar and buttons all down the front, a shirt more
typically worn to a picnic than to a round of golf. Most significantly, it was not
the universal golf uniform of a two-or three-button polo shirt. (Obama shows his
minimalistic tendencies by consistently wearing khaki pants and black shirts in
casual settings. “Buy him a black shirt for Christmas and he is a happy man.
He’s not flashy. That’s all he wears,” his wife once told me.) “So I asked him
what was going on with the shirt? And he asked what I meant,” Shomon said. “I
told him that we have the golf outing today. He didn’t think anything was wrong
with the shirt. I told him that he needed to wear a golf shirt like everyone else.
And he asked me why, because he only had one golf shirt and he had worn it
playing golf the day before. I said, ‘Well then, wear it again.’ So he put it back
on. I reminded him that this was southern Illinois and you don’t want to look too
‘uptown.’ He got mad and kind of frustrated about that. He didn’t have a
problem with changing after I explained it to him, but he really had not been
exposed to that stuff. He is fairly sophisticated.”
Obama recounted a slightly different version of this anecdote in his second
book. He wrote that Shomon told him to wear polo shirts and khakis throughout
the trip, in order to fit in. Obama also recalled the story of Shomon advising him
in a downstate restaurant to eat regular yellow mustard rather than the more
pretentious Dijon mustard. Obama portrays Shomon’s advice as rather petty.
These disagreements might appear insignificant on the surface, but they reveal
something about each man. Both could be stubborn and opinionated, but each

also had legitimate points. And the discussion itself crystallizes a dilemma that
political aides have consistently had with Obama: his occasional air of elitism
coupled with his skin color. Rightly or wrongly, Shomon was concerned that
Obama’s urbane sophistication, coming as it did from a black man, would
alienate working-class white voters—and Shomon sought to temper that image.
Obama, however, was wise enough to know that if he tried to morph into
something that he was not, he would be perceived as inauthentic.
In any case, Shomon and Obama would take more of these trips downstate,
and the excursions satisfied Obama that he could win votes among this
electorate. These mostly white, middle-class, down-to-earth midwestern people
reminded him of his grandparents and he felt completely comfortable in their
midst. And that comfort obviously was reciprocated. “I understand these folks,”
Obama told me on a downstate campaign trip during his U.S. Senate race. “My
grandmother was Republican. I grew up with these people.”