The Senator
There are probably folks on the left who want me to be Paul Wellstone. And
I love Paul Wellstone, but I’m not Paul Wellstone. I don’t agree with
everything Paul said. And one of the things you come into office and
everybody’s projecting—particularly the way I came in—everybody’s
projecting their own views onto you.
—BARACK OBAMA

Barack Obama’s inauguration week in January 2005 appeared to be a time of joy
for him and his family, although the pressures of his celebrity were not to abate.
During his first news conference in Washington, a reporter asked earnestly,
“What is your place in history?” But most of the week was about enjoying the
spectacle of the moment.
After taking the oath of office, Obama, Michelle and the two girls strolled
across the Capitol grounds to the Library of Congress, where he would greet a
party of well-wishers from both Illinois and Washington. Taking the first steps
out of the Capitol, Obama and Michelle clasped hands. “Congratulations, Mr.
Senator,” Michelle said with a soft kiss. “Congratulations, Madame Senator,”
Obama responded with a warm smile. With a handful of journalists trailing along
to capture the scene, six-year-old Malia looked up at her father and asked,
“Daddy, are you going to be president?” It was such an innocent question, but
Obama scanned the reporters in his midst and cautiously withheld an answer.
Picking up on the cue was Jeff Zeleny, then a Washington bureau reporter for the
Chicago Tribune. Zeleny arched an eyebrow. “Well, Senator, aren’t you going to
answer?” Zeleny asked. Obama again ignored the question. Back in Obama’s
transitional Senate office, Robert Gibbs received word of Malia’s query and
made sure to disseminate it to all reporters who might not have heard the
potentially clairvoyant anecdote: Obama’s little daughter had asked if he was

going to be president!
As Obama reached the Library of Congress, his party guests were waiting in
line to gain entrance. People had come from across Illinois and around
Washington to fete Obama. His sister Maya and her husband had traveled from
Hawaii. Marty Nesbitt and Valerie Jarrett had come from Chicago, along with an
assortment of others. Obama ran up to the Reverend Jesse Jackson, who
enveloped Obama’s thin frame in a bear hug. Obama had lost nearly ten pounds
on the campaign trail that year. “I’m not a toy senator. I’m not a play senator!”
Obama said. “I’m a real senator now!” Requests for photographs of the real
senator came from all around, and he obliged as many as he could. Jackson,
always deft when finding a camera to point his way, hoisted a smiling threeyear-old Sasha onto a concrete pillar about four feet tall and posed for
photographs with his arm around the bright-eyed girl. After the photo was
snapped, Jackson stepped away, leaving Sasha standing atop the concrete pillar
by herself. Obama saw his three-year-old daughter stranded on the pillar and
rushed over to rescue her. He shot a disapproving glance at Jackson, who was
oblivious to Obama’s glare and his own lapse in judgment about the little girl’s
safety.
Inside, amid the party of several hundred fund-raisers and Obama stalwarts,
the senator assured his audience that his mission to create a fairer, more just
America had only begun. “We are bound at the hip,” he said. “We are going to
be working hard to make sure that every child gets a decent shot at life and to
make sure that every senior citizen is cared for, that the diversity of this country
is appreciated and to make sure that we create the kind of nation that these
children and your children and your grandchildren deserve. I promise you that
this is not the end of the road.” The question was, where did that road now lead?
AS A STAR ATTRACTION IN WASHINGTON, OBAMA DREW APPLICATIONS for staff
positions from some of the best talent pools available. Gibbs and Axelrod also
had a wealth of connections for finding bright people to run his policy office,
legislative affairs, speech writing and other jobs. Fortuitously, one of the most
well-regarded chiefs of staff inside the Beltway had just become available
because longtime senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota had lost his race.
Obama hired Daschle’s top aide, Pete Rouse, a Washington veteran for decades,
to run his Senate office.

The first order of business for Obama’s team was charting a course for his first
two years in the Senate. The game plan was to send Obama into the 2007–2008
election cycle in the strongest form possible. No politician had gained the sort of
attention that he had won so quickly, and his advisers knew that he had a shot at
being a vice-presidential selection or perhaps an outside chance at running for
president as early as 2008. Obama, pressed by the Chicago media the day after
his election, flatly denied that he would run for the Oval Office in 2008. But
history was full of politicians who had reversed those kinds of denials about
career advancement.
“The Plan,” as his team called it, was formalized on a computer file and was
consistently updated as events occurred. It was primarily molded by Axelrod,
Gibbs, Rouse and Obama. The Plan was broken into four quarters per year, with
his first quarter being dedicated to hiring Senate staff, learning the names and
faces of Washington, writing his book, launching his own political action
committee to raise money and turning down the volume on his publicity machine
(“letting the air out of the balloon,” in Obama’s words). Lowering his profile
was the hardest of these to accomplish. Obama was a highly sought commodity,
receiving hundreds of speaking requests each week. Moreover, the year began
with the first issue of Newsweek magazine splashing Obama’s smiling face on its
cover with the title “The Color Purple,” a reference to Obama’s desire to blend
America’s red-blue politics into a bipartisan hue. Other media also wanted a
piece of Obama, and Gibbs spent most of his time turning down interview
requests rather than seeking them out. Another problem in tamping down
expectations and his media presence was a Tribune effort by Zeleny to chronicle
Obama’s first year in office. The Plan called for Obama’s transition to occur with
as little media probing as possible, and Gibbs did all he could to thwart Zeleny’s
access to the senator. “If Mike Tackett wants to know what it’s like to be a U.S.
senator, he should have run himself,” Gibbs said, referring to Zeleny’s boss, the
Tribune’s Washington bureau chief. Yet the competitive, indefatigable Zeleny
spent the year chasing Obama from event to event and managed to produce a
compelling series of stories.
The Plan called for Obama to spend most of the year tending to the home fires
of Illinois to make sure his constituents did not feel forsaken. He conducted
nearly forty town hall meetings in Illinois in 2005. Most were packed with
attendees and gained him positive media coverage in the local community.
Obama also took foreign trips in this first year. He had been selected for the
Foreign Relations Committee, an excellent spot for a politician with national

ambitions to build a foreign policy résumé. He would visit Russia, Eastern
Europe and the Middle East, including Israel and Iraq. Then, in 2006, Obama
would lift his head from the sand to hit the campaign trail in an effort to raise
money and the profiles of Democrats across the country in the party’s effort to
retake control of Congress. The second half of that year would be capped by a
visit to his father’s homeland of East Africa and the release of his second book.
Despite this detailed sketch by some of the sharpest political minds around,
Obama’s first year proved as hard as some of his aides had predicted. The first
few months were especially difficult. Understandably, Obama wanted to bring
Michelle and the girls to live with him in Washington. He had missed them
dearly on the long campaign trail and he wanted to get his “house in order.”
There was just one problem with this thinking. Nearly everyone counseled him
to keep his family in Chicago. Michelle’s life—and Obama’s refuge from the
outside world—remained in Hyde Park. Her mother and her closest friends still
lived on the South Side. She still worked at the University of Chicago Hospitals,
although she had cut back on her hours during the campaign season. Moving the
family to Washington would strip Michelle of this village of support, making her
totally dependent on Obama and focusing her life solely around him. Besides,
Obama would be traveling back to Illinois every week for town hall meetings,
which would have meant leaving Michelle and the girls to fend for themselves in
Washington. Axelrod saw this problematic future and turned to his friend
Congressman Rahm Emanuel for assistance in heading it off. Axelrod scheduled
a dinner between the Emanuels and the Obamas, where using their own
experience as an example, Emanuel and his wife, Amy, made the convincing
case that it was better to keep the family back in the district rather than bring
them to Washington. After some time, Obama realized this was the best course
of action and he rented an apartment in Washington and spent Tuesday through
Thursday nights there while the Senate was in session. He usually had a full
schedule back in Illinois on Saturdays, but Sundays would now be devoted to his
family.
There was another ink blotch on this sketch. Writing a book is a full-time job
in itself. And writing one while stepping into a new job is a recipe for burnout.
Obama had a history of taking on an inordinate number of tasks at once. While
he was writing his first book, for example, he was running Project Vote in
Chicago. Realizing his full schedule and the time pressures on him, I gave him
several months of breathing room before I asked for an interview. When I did see
him, on a sunny Saturday afternoon in April, I found the less-than-relaxed, short-

tempered version of Obama. We met at a Mexican restaurant in Hyde Park.
Obama had a full day of events scheduled, beginning with an early-morning
radio program, and was an hour late to our lunch. When he stepped through the
door, the face of a middle-aged woman sitting at the first table lit up, and she
tried to chat him up about Chicago politics. Obama uncharacteristically showed
extraordinarily little patience with the woman, curtly telling her that he was
running behind. Later, he told me, “I’m writing a book and I just don’t have any
time in my life.” Throughout the year, Obama was as visibly fatigued as during
his long stretches on the campaign trail. Waiting to deliver the commencement
address at a Chicago college-preparatory academy on the South Side, Obama
nodded off during speeches by the school administrators, and he nearly did the
same during his own. Standing at the edge of the stage, holding a microphone,
his eyes fell shut momentarily and his knee buckled while he was talking to the
crowd.
Obama had finally succumbed to abiding by a tight schedule that was defined
largely by others. His friends noticed a different Obama through this difficult
period. “Does he look happy to you?” Emanuel asked me that spring. “I think the
job looked better on paper to him.” Dan Shomon, his former Springfield aide,
said his old employer was adapting to the less glamorous aspects of being a
celebrity politician—overwork, a dearth of leisure time and a stable of aides
making decisions about his life. “Barack is his own man, but he is tightly
controlled and in some ways he likes that,” Shomon told me in April 2006. “I
mean, he has no time for himself and no life. So by being controlled, that does
keep people like you away, people who eat up his time. He can’t go play poker
or get a beer or get enough time with his family—and that’s the downside, a big
downside. His life is over, and I keep thinking, you know, he really didn’t ask for
this.” Another aide made a similar observation about the pitfalls of political
fame: “The Barack you knew in the campaign, the one you could just bullshit
with in the car, he’s gone now. He no longer exists. He has to watch himself
wherever he goes. If he goes somewhere, there is a volunteer there waiting for
him and he has to watch what he does and says. He doesn’t have time to be
himself except when he is with Michelle. He always has to be on.”
Another aspect of The Plan frustrated some of his friends, his legislative
colleagues and particularly his devoutly liberal followers. In order to keep
himself as unscathed politically as possible, he became even more cautious in his
political approach, avoiding controversy at all costs. In Springfield, Obama had
been an unabashed liberal, even when toiling in the minority party. But if he had

larger ambitions, his team believed he could not be fitted too uncomfortably with
a liberal straitjacket. This plan closely resembled the largely successful model
that Hillary Clinton had followed when she won a Senate seat from New York.
Keep your head down, remain noncontroversial and make sure to tend to your
constituents back home. One close colleague in Congress became irritated when
Obama declined to cosponsor a piece of legislation saying it was “too
controversial.” “When you find that bill that eighty percent of the people love,
you call me,” the legislator told Obama. “They’re doing the Hillary thing,
obviously,” the lawmaker said. “And that’s just so Washington. Oh sure, yeah,
let’s just follow the Hillary model.”
This aspect of The Plan did present a double-edged sword. In becoming a
more conventional Democratic politician, Obama ran the risk of alienating his
core supporters on the left. Indeed, he engendered great antipathy in today’s
most visible forum of political debate—the Internet blogosphere. Early in 2006,
angry liberals flogged him online for not objecting to the certification of
presidential ballots in Ohio and for confirming Condoleezza Rice as President
Bush’s secretary of state. Here was this leading critic of the Iraq War arriving in
Washington and voting to install in a major cabinet post one of Bush’s top
advisers through the launch of the war. Obama voted against the nomination of
John Roberts to the Supreme Court. But when he voted for cloture for Roberts’s
nomination and then defended other Democratic senators who voted in favor of
Roberts, he was vilified on the liberal blog the Daily Kos. Obama replied in a
long post to the blog that pacified some on the left simply by his recognition of
their online criticism. But he also reiterated that he is no flame-thrower from the
left—it is just not in his temperament or in his civil approach to politics. Obama
told me in an interview at the end of his freshman year:
There are probably folks on the left who want me to be Paul Wellstone. And
I love Paul Wellstone, but I’m not Paul Wellstone. I don’t agree with
everything Paul said. And one of the things you come into office and
everybody’s projecting—particularly the way I came in—everybody’s
projecting their own views onto you. And so, I think when people are
disappointed that I would not certify the objection in Ohio, well, I actually
think George Bush won the election. That wasn’t a safe move—it was
actually my genuine belief that George Bush won the election. When
people were disappointed about me voting to confirm Condoleezza Rice—I
genuinely felt on the merits that the president, on most executive
appointments, deserves some deference in order to put together his team,

and that we weren’t gonna do better than Condoleezza Rice in this
administration when it came to foreign policy. And I actually think that it’s
proven to be correct, that she is, you know—the bar is low, but she’s been a
moderating influence on this administration when it comes to foreign
policy. So I think that what you’ve seen are times where I’ve actually done
what I think is best, but you know, there may be some folks who disagree
and automatically assume that I’ve done it for political purposes. And the
one thing that is frustrating about my position, and I think our political
culture generally—frustrating but not surprising, and I don’t blame people
for having the assumption—is that [they assume] whatever I do is political,
that I’ve got my antennae out and I’m making these calculations. And I
think we’ve just gotten so immersed in this cynicism about politics, and as I
said, oftentimes for good reasons, that people think whatever you do must
be motivated by politics.
Despite this, Obama voted with his party 95 percent of the time in 2005,
according to Congressional Quarterly; just eight senators voted more
consistently Democratic than he did. Of his hundreds of votes during his first
year, Obama agonized over a dozen or so. On those difficult matters, he called
his top staff into his office and led freewheeling debates about how to proceed.
“We have enough strong personalities here that we definitely get two people on
opposite sides of the issue,” said his legislative director, Chris Lu. “And he just
loves to have us argue it out in front of him.” Lu was one of the moderate voices
in this atmosphere of smart young staffers. Robert Gibbs, the pragmatic
southerner who considers political calculations foremost, was the other strong
voice pulling to the center in these debates. Lu maintained that Obama was his
own man when it came to making tough votes. The staff might leave the room
thinking he would vote one way, but he could just as easily go the other.
Overriding the arguments of Lu and Gibbs, for instance, Obama was one of
thirty-four senators opposing the Military Commissions Act, which gave the
military special interrogation capabilities when questioning “high-value
detainees.” This was consistent with Obama’s history in Springfield of
protecting civil liberties, a belief that is rooted in his in-depth study of the
Constitution. “If you want to position yourself in the middle, you’d vote for that
bill,” Lu said. “But he fundamentally believed that bill was troubling, that it
would basically cut out habeas corpus rights for detainees. As a law professor
and somebody who understands the role of due process, who understands sort of
the historical origins of habeas corpus, it offended him…. And so no matter what
Robert and I said about the scary world we lived in or how this vote would play

out, you know, in some future thirty-second attack ad, he didn’t care.”
THE ENGLISH PLAYWRIGHT SIR TOM STOPPARD ONCE DESCRIBED HIS dance with the
press to the New York Times Magazine in this way: “My reticence is a form of
conceit, not of modesty. It has to do with not making myself available.” Indeed,
Obama’s plan to not make himself available through much of 2005 had the
opposite effect, as one might expect. By turning down interview requests from
television networks and other major media, as well as ducking the Tribune’s
Zeleny, Obama only magnified the media’s pent-up desire. While derided by
some of his closest political friends, the decision to maintain a cautious path in
his first year turned out to be masterful in keeping his stock high. Obama made
sure that his public schedules reflected every speaking appearance in Illinois, but
privately, he was also busy raising money for the party and his newly formed
Hopefund political action committee, which had nearly two million dollars by
the end of 2005. A Tribune poll late in the year found him with an amazing 72
percent favorable rating among his Illinois constituents.
Legislatively, Obama had few major accomplishments in 2005, although he
did advance some measures that would gain him a measure of publicity back in
Illinois. His lack of seniority in the Senate—he reminded all audiences that he
was ranked ninety-ninth out of one hundred—shielded him from huge
expectations on this front. After a series in the Chicago Sun-Times described the
slow process of government pay for Illinois veterans, Obama jumped on the
issue and pushed the administration to equalize funding. On his town hall tours
through Illinois, he noted his work to hike the production of ethanol by
increasing the number of gas stations that sell the E85 ethanol blend. He also
became a leading early voice on the threat of the avian flu pandemic.
Obama’s greatest legislative success was teaming with Republican senator
Richard Lugar of Indiana on a bill that expanded U.S. cooperation to reduce
stockpiles of conventional weapons and expanded the State Department’s ability
to interdict weapons and materials of mass destruction. In the spring of 2005,
Obama had traveled to Russia with Lugar to inspect nuclear weapons stockpiles.
Robert Gibbs said that his failure to more vigorously publicize Obama’s work on
the bill, which was signed into law by President Bush in January 2007, was his
greatest public relations failure during Obama’s early Senate tenure. “It was an
important law and it was my fault that Barack didn’t get more credit for it,”
Gibbs said.

Early on, Obama alienated some colleagues with his desire not to speak out
more forcefully against Republican policies, but he wanted to stay true to his
mantra: He was a healer, not a divider. In this vein, besides Lugar, Obama
reached out to other Republicans by proposing immigration reform with Senator
Mel Martinez of Florida and a more rigorous review of government contracts
related to Hurricane Katrina with Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma. Again
Obama alienated some colleagues by declining to make phone solicitations
during the so-called Power Hour of fund-raising for the Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Committee, but he made amends by campaigning arduously for
Democrats across the country in the 2006 election cycle.
Obama’s two major moments in 2005 came when he did lift his head from the
sand.
The first of these was his June 2005 commencement speech at Knox College,
a small liberal arts school in western Illinois. A thunderstorm threatened, but the
dark sky only sprinkled on the gathering as an admittedly nervous Obama
delivered the first major address of his Senate tenure, a speech that would
reaffirm his liberal tendencies and encapsulate the heart of his governing
philosophy. Citing various moments of American history, with an emphasis on
the emancipation of slaves and the civil rights movement, Obama offered his
theory as to why America has endured and prospered for more than two
centuries. It is not simply the workings of the free market, or the tireless work
ethic of the country’s laborers, or immense individual ambition—America’s
success is built on “our sense of mutual regard for each other,” Obama
proclaimed, and “collective salvation” is the surest way to ensure the country’s
continued prosperity. And, Obama added, the best means for looking out for
each other is through government—strengthening public schools, providing
health care to all citizens, devoting time to community service rather than
“focusing your life solely on making a buck.” The global economy is threatening
the country’s economic health, Obama said, and the only way for America to
continue to compete is to invest in itself:
…there are those who believe that there isn’t much we can do about this as
a nation. That the best idea is to give everyone one big refund on their
government—divvy it up into individual portions, hand it out, and
encourage everyone to use their share to go buy their own health care, their
own retirement plan, their own child care, education, and so forth.

In Washington, they call this the Ownership Society. But in our past there
has been another term for it—Social Darwinism—every man or woman for
him or herself. It’s a tempting idea, because it doesn’t require much thought
or ingenuity. It allows us to say that those whose health care or tuition may
rise faster than they can afford—tough luck. It allows us to say to the
Maytag workers who have lost their job—life isn’t fair. It lets us say to the
child who was born into poverty—pull yourself up by your bootstraps….
But there is a problem. It won’t work. It ignores our history. It ignores the
fact that it’s been government research and investment that made the
railways possible and the internet possible. It has been the creation of a
massive middle class, through decent wages and benefits and public schools
—that has allowed all of us to prosper. Our economic dominance has
depended on individual initiative and belief in the free market; but it has
also depended on our sense of mutual regard for each other, the idea that
everybody has a stake in the country, that we’re all in it together and
everybody’s got a shot at opportunity—that has produced our unrivaled
political stability.
Obama had studied this theory of social Darwinism several times in his life.
His influential Occidental professor, Roger Boesche, would see echoes of his
political theory class in the speech. The reference to social Darwinism is also
found in Mario Cuomo’s keynote address in 1984, when Cuomo attacked Ronald
Reagan’s trickledown principles as cruel to the working class. Obama’s Knox
speech was written in conjunction with his staff speechwriter, a young man
named Jon Favreau whom Gibbs had recruited on the basis of their time together
on the Kerry campaign. In crafting a speech, Favreau grabs his laptop and sits
with Obama for about twenty minutes, listening to his boss throw out chunks of
ideas. Favreau then assembles these thoughts into political prose. Favreau
describes Obama as a master storyteller and a student of history, so Favreau is
constantly looking through history books to draw parallels between the past, the
present and a vision for the future. Even after a major speech is composed,
however, Obama writes comments in the margins and tweaks passages right up
until the time of delivery. The night before, he often stays up until the wee hours
working on the final draft. As a professional long-form writer and a
perfectionist, he can wrestle for hours whittling his elaborate thoughts into
fifteen-and twenty-minute speeches. “It’s hard for him to give up words,”
Favreau said.

Obama’s Knox address drew almost no immediate press attention, largely
because it was delivered at a small school in Illinois on a weekend. Only local
press attended the event. But thanks to the power of the Internet, the speech sped
through cyberspace, drawing cheers from liberals, who were beginning to worry
that their newest prophet was not the one they had originally envisioned.
Conservatives, however, looked at this speech and realized that even though
Obama patiently gave heed to their arguments, and even though he was an
eloquent and inoffensive Democratic voice, he was not one of them.
OBAMA’S SECOND MOST SIGNIFICANT PUBLIC MOMENT OF 2005 occurred in his selfimposed role of racial bridge-builder, a role that can cause deep worry among his
cautious aides. Building bridges to Republicans, after all, can win moderate
votes; talking too directly about race can alienate both blacks and whites. Yet as
an African American, Obama realized that he could not escape the issue;
overnight, he had become the country’s highest-ranking black politician.
In September, against the wishes of some of his advisers, most of whom are
white, Obama agreed to appear on ABC’s Sunday-morning political affairs
show, This Week with George Stephanopoulos, to speak on the tragedy of
Hurricane Katrina. It was one of only two interviews he granted to major
networks in his freshman year. The storm had killed more than a thousand
people and left tens of thousands homeless amid the floodwaters of New Orleans
and the coast. Traveling with Lugar in Europe at the time, Obama was personally
affected by the enduring television images of thousands of mostly black, mostly
poor people who had lost their homes and their livelihoods in the storm. As
President Bush and local officials dithered and panicked, and as some Democrats
and black leaders cried racism, Obama stood out as a voice of subtlety and
reason.
Stephanopoulos prefaced his first question with the famous remark from hiphop artist Kanye West that “George Bush doesn’t care about black people” and
asked Obama if racism was at the root of the federal government’s seemingly
lackadaisical response to the disaster. Obama responded in a typically measured
fashion that alienated neither blacks nor whites and yet struck at the heart of the
matter. He acknowledged that race was a component in the aftermath of the
hurricane, but he did this without using the shrill and angry language that gives
whites such great discomfort:

I think that Kanye West expressed a great deal of anger, anguish that exists
in the African-American community. I think that the entire country felt
shame about what had happened. Now, my general attitude has been that
the incompetence by…the Department of Homeland Security and by this
administration was color-blind, but what I do think is that whoever was in
charge of planning was so detached from the realities of inner city life in a
place like New Orleans that they couldn’t conceive of the notion that
somebody couldn’t load up their SUV, put one hundred dollars’ worth of
gas in there, put [in] some sparkling water and drive off to a hotel and
check in with a credit card. There seemed to be a sense that this other
America somehow was not on people’s radar screen, and that, I think, does
have to do with a historic indifference on the part of government towards
the plight of those who are disproportionately African-American.
…I think that in the African-American community there’s a sense that
the passive indifference that’s shown towards the folks in the Ninth Ward of
New Orleans or on the West Side of Chicago or in Harlem, that that passive
indifference is as bad as active malice, and I think that the broader
American community and white America in particular would make those
distinctions and those fine lines. I think that the important thing for us now
is to recognize that we have situations in America in which race continues
to play a part, that class continues to play a part, that people are not availing
themselves of the same opportunities, of the same schools, of the same jobs,
and because they’re not, when disaster strikes, it tears the curtain away
from the festering problems that we have beneath them, and black and
white, all of us should be concerned to make sure that that’s not the kind of
America that’s reflected on our television screens.
Obama’s careful language was in stark contrast to the anger and frustration
vented by black leaders of older generations. The Superdome became a
temporary home to tens of thousands of storm evacuees who were stranded
without supplies for days. Princeton University scholar Cornel West (ironically a
hero of Obama’s) said caustically, “From slave ships to the Superdome was not
that big a journey.” The Reverend Jesse Jackson likened the Superdome in New
Orleans to the “hull of a slave ship.” Jackson was a close friend and supporter of
Obama’s, so I asked him what he thought about their different approaches
toward race. The question clearly irritated him. He said he worried that the
careful language of younger black leaders would cede ground that had been
acquired in the long struggle to equalize the playing field for blacks and whites.

(In short, he meant that many of his own crusades for racial justice might be
undone.) “Every speaker has the right to use his own style and try to assess his
own angle,” Jackson said. “But I was on I-90 in New Orleans when we saw
people by the thousands and they were dying in people’s arms. They were
putting people in buses by blocks, women here and children there. And I said it
looked like the hull of a slave ship. And it did.”
Jackson was particularly perturbed by an editorial in the editorially
conservative Chicago Tribune that compared the words of Obama and Jackson.
The newspaper harshly criticized Jackson for viewing the tragedy in racial terms
while Obama saw the issue not as entirely racial but as a matter of social justice
among all economic classes. Jackson’s “racism charge is simplistic and
ridiculous,” the newspaper said. “But it also could prove dangerous if it fosters
the impression that government emergency plans aren’t what’s really in need of
fixing…. What played out in New Orleans was more about economic class than
race. The Senate’s only African-American understands the distinction—and the
need for the nation to address it with more than inflammatory rhetoric.”
Thinking back on the editorial agitated Jackson, who shuffled his feet and
wriggled in his chair. Obama “said he didn’t see race, he saw class. I saw race
because I was there. It was impossible not to see race if you were there,” Jackson
said, his tone growing almost defensive. “The Tribune editorial board took the
position that an enlightened young guy saw class, but an old guy saw race. But
the whole world saw what it was. It was poor class and black race in the hull of a
Louisiana ship.”
Jackson then worried that young blacks who had not gone through a
tumultuous racial past might be more immune from seeing racism when it was
before them. He also said that the conservative bent of the country since the
Reagan era gave black politicians less ability to talk boldly about racial injustice.
“I was jailed [for] trying to use the public library. I remember blacks being
drafted for World War II and you couldn’t vote,” Jackson said. “I think Barack
chooses to walk a very delicate balance, but sometimes it is not your walking
that is the issue, it is what is beneath your feet. The right wing radically shifted
the earth. It is…contract compliance and affirmative action that has made
[Obama] possible. When the laws of the last fifty-one, fifty-two years that made
his advance possible…they are taken away, you have to fight.”
Jackson’s racial anger and Obama’s conciliatory tone represented the debate

within the black community about how to approach modern race relations. As
Jerry Kellman pointed out, there is no cause that Obama felt more deeply about
in his heart than advancing the situation of African Americans. So far, Obama’s
political acumen has placed him in the perfect niche of white and black appeal
that has eluded almost every black politician before him. Historically, black
officials hewing too closely to so-called black issues, such as safeguarding
government programs for the poor and challenging the Republican Party
commitment to a fairer society, often found themselves losing support among
whites. Conversely, black politicians reticent about venting racial anger and who
challenge African Americans to study and correct their own deficiencies often
lose support in their own community. Obama has followed both of these paths
and thrived nonetheless. Thus, in political terms, Obama has struck gold when it
comes to race. Instead of being torn asunder trying to please each racial camp, he
has strung a tightrope between the two and walked it with precision. Obama
shrugged his shoulders when I offered this theory to him at the end of 2005:
I think there is a generational shift taking place in how core values that are
important to the African-American community are expressed in a way that
builds bridges with other communities. I think there’s a majority in the
African-American community who recognize that we have a multiplicity of
voices, and not everybody’s going to serve the same role—that Reverend
Jackson or Reverend [Al] Sharpton is going to have a different role to play
than someone like myself, who’s representing all sorts of people. I just
think that I am the most prominent of a new generation of AfricanAmerican voices…[and] I actually have felt very comfortable speaking on
issues that are of particular importance to the African-American
community, without losing focus on my primary task, which is to represent
all the people of Illinois. And I haven’t felt contradictions in that process. I
think that on every issue, whether it’s a racially tinged issue or a foreign
policy issue or a social issue, if I’m speaking honestly, if I’m speaking what
I think, then usually things turn out all right.