6
Harvard
We had the sense…that he genuinely cared what the conservatives had to
say and what they thought and that he would listen to their ideas with an
open mind. And so there was just a much greater comfort level with the
notion of Barack…than some of the others.
—BRAD BERENSON, A HARVARD LAW SCHOOL CLASSMATE

Community organizing is high-burnout work. Battling a harsh world that often
ignores the poor and dispossessed gave rise to perhaps the first extended period
of disillusionment in the life of the young idealist from Hawaii. Before that
point, Barack Obama had had little contact with failure. At a minimum, he had
found modest success at whatever he tried, from pickup basketball to college
studies to attracting young women.
Initially, one of his biggest organizing projects—the asbestos campaign in
Altgeld Gardens and its nice run of media coverage in Chicago—seemed to be a
small victory for Obama and other Altgeld activists. Ultimately, though, the
victory proved ephemeral. Budget priorities in Washington soon sapped much of
the activists’ sense of lasting accomplishment. Federal officials told the publichousing residents that they had a choice between repairing Altgeld’s antiquated
plumbing and leaky roofing or cleaning up the poisonous asbestos—there was
not enough funding for both. This left many residents wondering what all their
hard work and activism had wrought. “Ain’t nothing gonna change, Mr.
Obama,” one dispirited resident complained. Moreover, squabbling between
members of Obama’s Developing Communities Project and another group did
not help instill optimism about the long-term success of organizing efforts in
Altgeld. Thus, a couple of residents told Obama they were so busy trying to
make ends meet in their households that they no longer had time for public
activism, especially since it appeared to be leading to scant advancement.

As these frustrations mounted for Obama, an abrupt external event radically
altered the political and racial landscape in Chicago. In November 1987, the
city’s first black mayor, Harold Washington, suffered a massive heart attack at
his desk in city hall and died. Washington’s election in 1983, the year before
Obama arrived, was a seminal moment for Chicago’s African-American
community, even if it cracked wide open the city’s deep and lingering racial
divide. It was also an object lesson for Obama in the real power that American
democracy bestows on its duly elected political leaders.
Organizers had registered more than one hundred thousand new black voters,
and Washington squeaked through a three-way Democratic primary in which the
vote was largely divided along racial lines. The two white candidates, incumbent
Jane Byrne and Richard M. Daley, son of the longtime mayor Richard J. Daley,
had split the white vote. Washington, meanwhile, won nearly all the black vote
and captured just enough support from liberal, reform-minded whites. Typically
in Chicago, where the Cook County Democratic Party reigns supreme, the
Democratic primary winner is a lock in the fall general election. But Washington
was a different story. He barely eked out a November victory against Republican
Bernie Epton, who suddenly found support among white Democrats and
powerful ward organizations in white neighborhoods. Even after Washington
took office, he encountered stubborn white resistance on the city council and
could not win enough votes to enact his programs and appoint his chosen
nominees. The city council descended into a bitter, racially polarized battle
dubbed the “Council Wars,” after the then-popular science fiction film Star
Wars. In 1986, two years after Washington took office, special elections were
called and enough Washington-endorsed candidates were victorious to allow his
agenda to go forward.
Obama wrote poignantly in Dreams of the significance of Washington’s
ascendance in the lives of Chicago’s more than one million blacks. When
Washington died, it was a devastating blow to that community. Thousands
attended his two-day wake in the lobby of city hall. “Everywhere black people
appeared dazed, stricken, uncertain of direction, frightened of the future,”
Obama wrote.
With Washington’s abrupt death, and considering his own modest organizing
successes, Obama grew dispirited. This Chicago adventure—to follow his sense
of mission in assisting poor African Americans—was worthwhile in many ways.
It opened his eyes to both the complexities and the shortcomings of a unique

racial culture, as well as to the cruel reality of American priorities. But after
three years of working close to the “streets” he had so longed for, Obama felt
shackled by the limited power of a small nonprofit group to create expansive
change.
Bobby Titcomb, his friend from the Punahou Academy, visited Obama around
this time and found his teenage chum far less optimistic and readily enthusiastic
than during their Hawaiian childhoods. One night, an extremely frustrated
Obama arrived at his apartment near the University of Chicago from a meeting
of unhappy residents at a church. “I just can’t get things done here without a law
degree,” Obama told Titcomb. “I’ve got to get a law degree to do anything
against these guys because they’ve got their little loopholes and this and that. A
law degree—that’s the only way to work against these guys.” It had not gone
unnoticed by Obama that Mayor Washington had a been a graduate of the
Northwestern University School of Law, and he had parlayed that lofty degree
and his own personal charisma into a highly successful political career. Indeed,
Obama watched closely as Washington unabashedly wielded his power to pour
resources into the city’s ailing minority communities. The mayor led the fight to
redistrict council wards to give more representation to Latinos and blacks; he
issued an executive order to increase city contracts with minority-owned
businesses; he upgraded city services in poor black and Latino neighborhoods.
Washington could do more for Chicago’s poor blacks with the wave of his veto
pen than Obama could in countless days and nights of community meetings in
Roseland and Altgeld.
Titcomb was not prone to Obama’s activism and was grappling with a set of
family problems at the time, so he had only a partial understanding of Obama’s
personal disheartenment. But he could see the resolve in his friend’s eyes.
Obama would soon be accepted at the most prestigious law school in the
country, lifting him even higher into a world of intellectual elites and setting him
on a course to the kind of political power that even Harold Washington could
only dream of possessing.
OBAMA ARRIVED AT HARVARD LAW SCHOOL WITH A UNIQUE pedigree. At twentyseven, he was several years older than his typical classmate, who most likely had
come straight from a highly regarded undergraduate school. Like many of the
students, however, Obama had been privileged to receive an elite primary and
secondary education. Punahou Academy, Occidental College and Columbia

University—all were excellent private schools. Yet Obama’s life was already
much different from that of the typical Harvard Law student. He was a black
man from Hawaii who had been a community organizer in Chicago for three
years; by now, he had also taken his first trip to Kenya to explore his father’s
roots. After his several years of a minimalist life in New York, and several years
of diligent work in Chicago’s neighborhoods, Obama had attained a maturity
level and an extraordinary degree of self-discipline that would greatly abet his
success at Harvard. He was now committed to his studies as never before, and
his grades reflected this—he would graduate magna cum laude. A classmate,
Michael Froman, who would later work in Bill Clinton’s Treasury Department,
said it was readily evident that Obama was operating on a different plane from
everyone else. “He was mature beyond his years in being able to approach issues
in the way that he did. I saw people who were much older and more seasoned
who have similar attributes as Barack. And he was doing this in his twenties.
This is a temperament and a style that he clearly developed ahead of his peers.”
(In 2004, Froman would reconnect with Obama and serve as a key adviser in
organizing his Senate office.)
As in New York and, to some degree, Chicago, Obama spent a vast amount of
time by himself while in Cambridge. In his initial year, his daily routine included
carving out a spot for himself in one of the sections for first-year students at the
library and burrowing in for several hours of intense study.
Obama again made friendships with the small number of black students on
campus. But after largely coming to terms with his mixed racial ancestry, he also
reached out and secured several close white friendships. He researched and
wrote articles for the Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review. He was
active in the antiapartheid movement on campus, gave a speech at the annual
dinner hosted by the Black Law Students Association and served on the
association’s board of directors.
Harvard was the forum in which Obama’s long-term public message of unity
and altruism would take its first oratorical shape. At the Black Law Students’
dinner, Obama asked his audience to remember that their privileged education
meant that they now had the means, opportunity and, yes, the responsibility to
use their prestigious law degrees to return something to the less privileged.
Friends and professors recalled that Obama invoked similar rhetoric in his often
fiery and inspirational speeches concerning the importance of cultures and ideas
mixing on campus—his hope being that if students with differing philosophies

interacted more often, they would be less wary of opinions the opposite of their
own. This bridge-building approach to racial and partisan politics was the first
indication of the tightrope he would walk throughout his career. He would give
voice to minorities who felt slighted but in a conciliatory tone that did not
threaten whites; in addition, he would give conservatives the impression that he
was willing to listen to their arguments. In his political career, Obama would
deliver numerous speeches along these lines—about the value of helping those
less privileged and the ideal of multiculturalism. And, of course, Obama would
center his presidential campaign on the message of uniting a bitterly divided
country.
His message of racial and intellectual unity may not necessarily have been
controversial, but it certainly flew in the face of events on the Harvard campus in
the early 1990s. Black students, in particular, were agitating for more minority
representation among the faculty ranks. Toward that end, a group of blacks sued
the school for discrimination; and a black professor, Derrick Bell, resigned over
the matter. Obama largely steered clear of the fray, but he did give a speech
calling for greater faculty diversity and heaping praise on Bell for his defiant
stand.
Besides these racial tensions, Harvard Law was in the midst of a bitter
ideological war. Liberals and conservatives waged fierce intellectual battles in
classrooms, lunchrooms, at parties and, of course, in the offices of the
prestigious Law Review. Despite these differences, Harvard Law is considered
by most to be a bastion of liberal thought. This left-leaning history is rooted in
the Vietnam War era when progressive activists at Harvard Law railed against
school policies and, most vociferously, the war. In recent years, liberal professors
like Laurence Tribe and Alan Dershowitz have gained national reputations,
pushing the school’s image even farther in that direction. The Economist
magazine went so far as to dub the school “the command centre of American
liberalism.”
Obama immediately made a mark at Harvard among his peers and professors.
He went to work for Tribe as a research aide and so thoroughly impressed the
renowned legal scholar that Tribe would later call Obama his “most amazing
research assistant.” In a 2006 Harvard admissions blog written by an
administrator, Tribe added this incredible statement: “He’s a guy I hope will be
President someday.”

Obama made enduring friendships at Harvard, one of the most significant
being with a black woman named Cassandra Butts, who would later become a
senior adviser to Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri. The two met in
the financial aid office the first week of classes. Obama’s personal charm,
interesting background and unique perspective intrigued her. “But you know,
once you get past the charm, what keeps you, what engages you—or at least,
what engaged me—was his decency and the intellectual curiosity. And you
know, that combination, and the experience that he had from his work as an
organizer, the international experience that he had—he just saw the world in a
different way than anyone I had met, to that point, and definitely anyone who
was in law school with us. And so that, you know, that just made him interesting.
[He] was a wonderful filter through which to see what we were learning and how
you apply what we were learning to the outside world. He came to discussions
with much more life experience than most of the students. I mean, we all had big
ideas, but Barack had the experience.” This experience often gave his opinions a
greater weight, although she said Obama did not offer them as such.
THE MOST GLARING EXAMPLE OF OBAMA’S DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE came during a
large organized discussion among black students of Harvard’s law, medical and
business schools. The meeting was convened to discuss a hot topic of the day
among educated blacks: Should they refer to themselves as “blacks” or “African
Americans”? This debate would not end in the 1980s. In an essay in the Chicago
Tribune Magazine nearly a decade later, columnist Clarence Page explored the
source of the issue. He asserted that the label debate was a way for black
Americans to define their own identities rather than having the white majority
define it for them. But he conceded that this led to great confusion among people
of all races. “Diversity is enriching,” Page wrote, “but race intrudes rudely on
the individual’s attempts to define his or her own identity. I used to be ‘colored.’
Then I was ‘Negro.’ Then I became ‘black.’ Then I became ‘African American.’
Today I am a ‘person of color.’ In three decades I have been transformed from a
‘colored person’ to a ‘person of color.’…Changes in what we black people call
ourselves are quite annoying to some white people, which is its own reward to
some black people. But if white people are confused, so are quite a few black
people.”
At Harvard, that identity confusion came forth passionately in the organized
conversation among the black students, with participants arguing heatedly for
each side. But when Obama stood up to speak, he didn’t take sides. Instead, he

looked at the discussion from the pragmatic viewpoint of a former community
organizer. He said the whole issue was immaterial to the real world. As Butts
recalled it, Obama told the crowd: “You know, whether we’re called black or
African Americans doesn’t make a whole heck of a lot of difference to the lives
of people who are working hard, you know, living day to day, in Chicago, in
New York. That’s not what’s going to make a difference in their lives. It’s how
we use our education in these next three years to make their lives better. You
know, that’s what’s going to have an impact on making the U.S. a more just
place to live, and that’s what’s going to have an impact on their lives.”
OBAMA’S MOST IMPORTANT EXPERIENCE AND DEFINING ROLE AT Harvard would be
his tenure as a writer, editor and, finally, president of the Harvard Law Review,
the most influential legal publication in the country. It was hard for him to see
the significance of this role at the time, but the Review presidency would provide
him with his first lessons in managing both bitter electoral politics and the
personal agendas of individual people.
The Review is edited by students, allowing them a high-profile public forum
in which to display their research and writing skills. But it also permits scholars
and others to voice their arguments in the most highly read publication in the
legal community. A Law Review post, especially the presidency, is an immediate
attention-grabber on any résumé. Even so, the top job held little appeal for
Obama. As his first year of law school wound down, he garnered a position on
the Review through high grades, a writing competition and endorsements from
other students and professors. Almost immediately, friends urged him to run for
the presidency, but Obama expressed no interest. He told them that overseeing
the legal journal would do nothing to enhance his future as a lawyer. After all, he
did not envision clerking for a federal judge or seeking a position at a prestigious
law firm. Obama wanted to return to Chicago and use his degree to help the
city’s disadvantaged, or perhaps follow Harold Washington’s model and take a
stab at politics. Therefore, the credential of Law Review president seemed of
little value.
In 1990 the Review’s staff of about seventy-five students was riven by intense
partisan feuding. Large factions of liberals and small bands of conservatives
were engaged in titanic ideological struggles, with each side trying to push the
Review’s leading viewpoint in its own direction. Since the liberals outnumbered
the conservatives, they mostly dominated the discussion. But a growing

movement of conservatives on campus had gained a foothold and was pushing
for a larger voice. The Federalist Society, a national group of attorneys and law
students that describes itself as “conservatives and libertarians dedicated to
reforming the current legal order,” was gaining more adherents among students
of Harvard Law. (Over the next two decades, the Federalist Society would grow
exponentially and become a force of conservatism at the school. And the group
would gain national prominence for exerting great influence in the Republican
administration of George W. Bush, with society members appointed to cabinet
posts and throughout the Department of Justice.) Brad Berenson, a classmate of
Obama who later served in Bush’s Justice Department, said he had never seen
more vicious political infighting and backbiting than during his Harvard Law
days. He said the law school campus “was populated by a bunch of would-be
Daniel Websters harnessed to extreme political ideologies.” He added that
“political rivalries and personal divisions inside the Review were just
ridiculously bitter, given how little was at stake.”
This heated battle of ideology and personalities played out fiercely as the
Review conducted elections for its 1990–91 president. The electoral process
itself is like no other. Inside the Review’s cluttered, cramped offices in a threestory Greek Revival building that was formerly a single-family home, candidates
spend election day preparing food for their roughly seventy-five colleagues as
ballots for the presidency are cast. Over hours of spicy chili and less spicy
spaghetti, candidates are eliminated and the field is winnowed down. At the last
moment and at the urging of his friends, Obama cast his hat in the ring. He was
one of nineteen editors who ran for the presidency—about one in four of the
staff. As such, the balloting session was egregiously long that year, lasting from
a Sunday morning into the wee hours of the following Monday morning.
Candidates eliminated from the next round of balloting typically sit down for a
meal and start casting ballots themselves.
Finally, after the last conservative was voted out of the competition, that
faction threw its support behind Obama, tilting the election in his favor and
bestowing on him the honor of being the first African American to hold the
presidency in the more than a century of the Review’s existence. As the final
outcome was announced, another black student with tears in his eyes, Kenneth
Mack, threw his arms around Obama. The decision would provide Obama with
his first bit of national media exposure, profiles quickly appearing in the New
York Times and several other publications. That publicity, in turn, opened up the
opportunity for Obama to publish Dreams.

Berenson, a member of the conservative group, said that Obama won over his
peers for various reasons, but race was not among them: “He was picked
completely on the merits.” Obama was a devoted liberal, but conservatives
believed he would give their opinions a fair hearing. Obama seemed less
ideologically rigid and more evenhanded than the other progressive candidates,
Berenson recalled. “Barack always floated a little bit above those controversies
and divisions. Barack made no bones about the fact that he was a liberal, but you
didn’t get the sense that he was a partisan—that he allied himself with some
ideological faction on the Review and had it in for the other ideological factions
on the Review. He was a more mature and more reasonable and more openminded person. We had the sense, and I think it was borne out by the experience
of his presidency, that he genuinely cared what the conservatives had to say and
what they thought and that he would listen to their ideas with an open mind. And
so there was just a much greater comfort level with the notion of Barack as
president than some of the others.”
The conservatives were indeed correct in their assessment. Obama was an
avowed social and economic liberal, but his reasonable tone and attentive
listening skills gave him a nonthreatening appeal to partisans on the right.
Obama, in fact, used some of his appointment power to place conservatives in
key editorial positions on the Review. He asserted that each viewpoint deserved a
fair hearing—a magnanimous sentiment that would produce some criticism from
people in his own progressive crowd, as well as from minorities who wanted him
to put their advancement at the top of his Law Review agenda. But Obama was
more interested in making his publication run smoothly and convey diverse
opinions than in pleasing everyone in the liberal and black contingents. His
tenure as Review president, in fact, would foreshadow his future political style: a
belief in giving attention to people with views other than his own; a desire to
reach across the aisle to form consensus; a tendency to disappoint people in his
own crowd—blacks and progressives—by not being more strident in his
demeanor or behavior.
Despite this grumbling, however, the Review ran rather peacefully under
Obama, especially considering how bitter the partisan feuding had been. “He did
show great political deftness as president of the Review in maintaining good
relations with most, if not all, of the editors of the Review,” said Berenson, the
devout conservative. “He made people feel generally included and valued and he
got everybody in harness, working toward a common goal, notwithstanding a lot
of the other problems and fissures that existed. I remember marveling at the

amazing set of interpersonal and political skills that he had. It was a fractious,
headstrong bunch. And he led the group with considerable skill and finesse.”
One group disenchanted with Obama’s Law Review performance was some
campus blacks who criticized him for not filling more management posts with
African Americans. This is a criticism that Obama concedes has dogged him,
and would continue to beset him throughout his public career. Obama has
consistently advocated racial diversity and affirmative action, but he has also
advocated promotion based on merit. So when he appointed some conservatives
to the Review’s upper editing ranks and bypassed some minorities and women,
the criticism rang forth. Butts defended Obama’s choices, even though she
wasn’t as close to the Review’s internal workings as he was. She said he was
fixed on making the best personnel choices based on talent, dedication and
temperament.
Obama, for his part, would not talk in specifics about his personnel choices.
But in the weeks leading up to his inauguration as a U.S. senator, he told me that
the Law Review experience was a precursor to what he expected to confront in
Washington—that he would anger some minorities and liberals by concentrating
on serving a constituency of all races, ethnicities and political affiliations. “On
the Law Review, that was the first time I had to deal with something that I
suspect I’ll have to deal with in the future, which is balancing a broader
constituency with the specific expectations of being an African American in a
position of influence,” he said. “I had to manage a Law Review with seventy
students who all want their own positions and who all want their advancement.
And I had to make decisions about promoting diversity but also ensuring that
people feel that I am being fair. So as for the criticism, I’m not sure there was
anything all that surprising about that.”
As his Harvard schooling wound down, Obama began setting his sights on the
mission that he had been training for—politics back in Chicago. All through his
time in Cambridge, he had never mentioned running for any office but mayor of
Chicago. Harold Washington’s tenure in that position had so impressed Obama
that, in his mind, overseeing Chicago City Hall was the top political job in the
country. “He wanted to be mayor of Chicago, and that was all he talked about as
far as holding office,” Butts said. “He never talked about the U.S. Senate; he
never talked about being governor. He only talked about being mayor, because
he felt that is really where you have an impact. That’s where you could really
make a difference in the lives of those people he had spent those years

organizing. He could have gone on to great acclaim, but those people still were
his mission.”