
25
Siaya: A Father’s Home
It’s not just God we praise, but Obama too.
—ELDERLY KENYAN WOMEN CHANTING TO OBAMA

This was Obama’s third trip to the small rural compound of his father’s family.
He visited just after college in 1983 and then again after Harvard Law in 1991 in
order to research his Dreams memoir. The family farm was located near a town
called Kolego in the Siaya District of Nyanza Province. This western province
sat on the edge of Lake Victoria, the world’s second-largest freshwater lake,
which is about the size of Ireland. Siaya was home to various modest farming
and trading villages and its residents were largely poor, with more than half
living on less than a dollar a day. The district’s largest city was Kisumu, which,
at roughly a quarter of a million residents, was Kenya’s third most populous
town. The region was inhabited almost exclusively by Luo, the tribe that Obama
was astonished to learn as a child lived in mud huts and subsisted by farming
their own land. Kisumu was about a hundred and seventy-five miles east of
Nairobi, which could be a drive of seven or eight hours through the wickedly
difficult terrain separating the remote villages and towns in western Kenya. The
traveling press and Obama took separate flights on commercial airlines to
Kisumu. We then joined a caravan of vehicles that somehow would navigate the
crater-marred, red-dirt roads that extend into the far rural reaches of Siaya.
The atmosphere surrounding Obama’s previous visit to the family compound
had been vastly different from that of this CODEL. Back then, Obama had
boarded a train in Nairobi and ridden it through the night and the morning across
the mountainous Rift Valley. When he arrived in Kisumu, he had walked half a
mile to a bus station by himself. With his older half sister, Auma, as his primary
guide, he had been greeted by a handful of relatives at the station. “Obviously
there’s been a big shift in terms of my travel accommodations,” Obama told

reporters in Kenya. “The last time I arrived in my grandmother’s village, there
was a goat in my lap and some chickens.” He dropped into Kisumu this time by
way of a forty-minute morning plane ride aboard an East African Airways jet.
The Kenya Airways flight carrying the press gaggle landed at the Kisumu
airport before Obama’s plane. The airport was actually a one-runway airstrip,
with flights landing and departing hourly. Separated from the runway by only a
group of thin trees and a sidewalk, a squat, dirty yellow building held the
cramped, cluttered offices of three commercial airlines. I was surprised to find
only a few interested onlookers, given that Kisumu was one of Kenya’s largest
urban areas and given the crowds we had seen in Nairobi. But when Obama’s
flight landed, a mass of people seemed to materialize from thin air. Obama was
dressed as he would have been for any number of campaign swings through
Illinois—dark blue blazer, white shirt, beige pleated plants, casual leather shoes.
As he and Michelle stepped down from the plane, the media descended on them,
with half a dozen boom microphones magically appearing over their heads. The
enthusiastic crowd of a couple of hundred turned out to consist mostly of Peace
Corps workers from the United States. Obama strode up to the airport building
as media members pushed against one another to gain the best possible footing.
“How’s everybody doin’?” Obama asked in his elegantly cool manner. But when
the media kept pace with him as he entered a holding room labeled Government
and VIP Lounge, Gibbs was forced to intervene and give Obama some breathing
room to chat with local officials. First Gibbs shouted for everyone to leave the
room. Then he began yanking them out one by one. “This is a prelude to a big
mess,” said one of the documentary filmmakers. “Lord, help me,” Gibbs
mumbled under his breath as he escorted one camera crew after another out of
the room.
Obama’s public day was not yet ten minutes old, and Gibbs was already
fighting it.
Obama was loaded into an SUV and the traveling press was herded into two
small rickety buses, affectionately named Samson and Delilah by their owner, a
local man, and his son, who eked out a living by ferrying tourists around Kisumu
and Lake Victoria. With these buses, appearances did not lie. A few minutes into
the trip through Kisumu, our bus sputtered and lost power. As it glided into a gas
station, its passengers groaned, mostly out of fear of losing the caravan and
missing out on Obama’s main event at the family farm. Had we traveled all this
way only to miss the final act? Jennifer Barnes, the U.S. Embassy official riding

with us, was livid. “Why would you show up for a daylong trip with no petrol!”
she shouted at the driver. (This, in fact, was the second time a vehicle carrying
the press contingent had run out of gas. A taxi in Pretoria met the same fate after
dinner one night, albeit that was in a much better neighborhood than this.) The
driver seemed to take forever filling up the tank, prompting an exasperated
Gibbs to exclaim, “Fill this fucking thing up!” Once it moved again and we
caught up to the motorcade, Gibbs commanded, “Jesus, now don’t lose him!”
We wended through town after town toward the New Nyanza Provincial
General Hospital, where Obama and Michelle were to take their AIDS tests. It
was Saturday, and along the sides of these roads were makeshift markets selling
everything from fruit to American T-shirts to Air Jordan basketball shoes. Every
Kisumu street was lined with waving, hollering and overjoyed people, hoping to
catch a glimpse of the Obama motorcade. Again—there were thousands of them.
I noticed that some of these Kenyans, desperate for any item of American
culture, were wearing our hand-me-downs. One boy walking near a railroad
track wore a T-shirt that displayed the 2006 Super Bowl champion Seattle
Seahawks. But Seattle lost that game to the Pittsburgh Steelers. The shirt
obviously had little value in the United States and was shipped to Africa.
Arriving at the hospital, we encountered managed bedlam. Thousands upon
thousands had turned out to see Obama. And to our dismay, the senator’s car had
disappeared into the sea of people ahead of us. He was to be dropped off close to
the hospital while our decrepit Samson and Delilah parked a couple of football
fields away. Reporters scurried out and began marching toward the hospital in
high gear, again worried about missing a key moment of the day.
The closer we got to the hospital and its surrounding park area, the thicker the
crowd became. Soon, people seemed to occupy every square inch of land. They
stood on rooftops of the hospital buildings, sat along balconies and incredibly
had climbed into trees and dangled from the limbs. Most reporters were
separated trying to make their way through the dense throngs. A couple of
journalists were pick-pocketed of recording devices and other gear. The Kenyans
were simply rapturous, chanting rhythmic verses and screaming for their hero,
Obama. Some wore T-shirts bearing Obama’s name or image. Others held aloft
pictures of him or waved flags adorned with his name or face. Nearly everyone
in this remote part of Kenya spoke or sang in Luo, and we American reporters
had to ask Kenyan media members to translate for us. One chant was taken from
a 2002 election when former Kenyan president Daniel arap Moi lost power in

the reform movement. The verse went: “Everything is possible without Moi.”
But on this occasion, it had been altered to “Everything is possible with Obama.”
A row of four older women, their eyes rolling back into their heads, looked
almost possessed as they writhed and shimmied to an indigenous African
rhythm.
As on the day before in the streets of Nairobi, an invisible barrier had been
formed by authorities carrying billy clubs and assault rifles. This opened a wide
safe zone in the park area for an AIDS trailer and the dozens of media members.
Obama and Michelle made their entrance in a cluster of people and headed for a
mobile clinic operated by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to
take their AIDS tests. Though on a far smaller scale than in South Africa, this
part of Kenya nevertheless had the highest incidence of AIDS in the country,
with about one in seven people infected. Gibbs and Obama said they were told
that his public AIDS test could spur hundreds of thousands of Kenyans to take a
test themselves. Obama and Michelle disappeared inside the mobile unit to
thunderous applause. After the husband and wife were pricked in their fingertips
and blood samples drawn, Obama stepped outside and stood atop the trailer steps
to address the enthused audience.
He took a microphone in his left hand and held aloft his right arm to speak and
subdue the crowd. Instead, the frenzied masses drowned him out and began to
push ahead. Police, apparently worried that people would be trampled or
smothered, allowed the surge to move forward a bit. Obama urged calm. “Stop
pushing, no pushing,” he implored through the microphone and loudspeaker. His
words went unheeded and Obama pulled the microphone away from his mouth.
“This is intensity,” he said calmly to himself. “I am going to take a seat.” Obama
sat down on the top step and his eyes caught mine. I smiled and said, “Wow.
This is way beyond LeBron, baby.” Obama returned a slight smile. “This is…,”
he said, pausing to find just the right word—an innocuous word, a cautious
word. He finally settled on “interesting.” “This is interesting,” he said again.
AFTER THE BLOODLETTING FOR THE SAKE OF THE AIDS CRISIS, THE Obama caravan
rumbled off to another of Obama’s causes—a multimillion-dollar CARE Kenya
project in Central Ugenya that benefits orphans. Obama partially financed the
project, which was geared toward empowering older women who care for
orphans. The project provided them with financing to buy such things as sewing
machines. To reach the event, the convoy navigated the uneven and unpaved

roads into what seemed like one of the most remote parts of the world. We
chugged by collection after collection of tiny green farms marked by thatch huts
with mud or tin roofs. Dust floated everywhere, partially swept up by the long
brigade of vehicles and partially lifted up naturally from the occasional barren
field in the verdant and hilly terrain. Driving through this obstacle course of farflung red-clay roadways took a special talent. It was also not for the faint of
heart. The roads were barely wide enough for two oncoming vehicles to pass
each other. The final half-dozen feet on either side of the road fell into a steep
grade that would make Samson and Delilah lean so far to one side that we
seemed to be almost parallel to the ground. Drivers hurtled their machinery
toward oncoming traffic at unbelievably fast speeds considering the treacherous
road conditions. It was a classic game of chicken as to which vehicle would give
ground, and it was assured that this maneuver would take place at the last instant
before a possible collision. Seemingly in defiance of the laws of gravity, our
buses managed not to tip over on the journey. After dozens of miles of this
rough, white-knuckle travel, it was easy to see how Obama’s father, a poor driver
who was a heavy drinker, died in an auto accident while navigating this
dangerous terrain.
When our buses finally arrived at the CARE Kenya project, it was clear that
we were in the far reaches of Africa, a place largely bereft of clean running
water and electricity. The event was set amid a deep green thicket of trees and
dust. About a hundred and fifty rural Kenyans, many in traditional African garb,
gathered to partake in what can best be described as a spiritual ceremony in
Obama’s honor. Nearly all of those in attendance were women and children, just
as most of the people back in downtown Kisumu were men. The women
generally remain in the rural regions, tending to family farms and child rearing,
while the men travel to town for urban jobs and send money back home. The
ceremony resembled a religious experience. A handful of the older women
danced and pranced in song, at one point showering Obama with these words in
Luo: “It’s not just God we praise, but Obama too.” Obama danced with the
native women and addressed those assembled through a jerry-rigged loudspeaker
system powered by a car battery hidden behind a thick tree. In a short speech, he
called this “a wonderful homecoming.” He looked as relaxed in this atmosphere
as he does anywhere.
As Obama played politician, I couldn’t help but notice Michelle, who was
sitting behind him with a bored-looking Malia and a fidgety Sasha leaning up
against either side of her. Michelle’s facial expression registered somewhere

between a scowl and a frown. She was unmistakably trying to process how
exactly she had found herself and her family being feted as some kind of deity in
the middle of remote Kenya. When the spotlight landed on her, however, she
brightened and, as usual, played the good wife of a senator. She even stood up
and danced in a circle with the native Luo women. But Michelle was still trying
to adjust to this new world of Obama glorification. When the event concluded,
the Tribune’s Zeleny and I asked her how she was coping with this strange new
environment. “I haven’t digested it all yet. It’s all a bit overwhelming,” she
confessed. “It’s hard to interpret what all of this means and what it means to us
as a family.” When a few more reporters gathered around, Michelle realized she
was beginning to sound impolitic, and she changed gears. “This doesn’t really
make me think of Barack Obama and his fame and fortune,” she said, seemingly
searching for some larger meaning behind this odd trip. “It makes you think of
what you can do to help here…. The spectacle is interesting, but in the end, this
has to be all about more than Barack Obama.”
BACK IN THE CARAVAN, WE WERE OFF TO THE MAIN EVENT OF THE day—and perhaps
the entire trip: Obama’s visit to his father’s farming compound, the specific
physical roots of his paternal African heritage. Unbeknownst to Obama’s trip
planners or staff, presidential candidate Raila Odinga had assembled thousands
of Luo for a political festival in Obama’s honor. For Odinga, Obama’s visit was a
political gift. For the entire trip, Odinga endeavored to gain as much publicity
for himself as he could by cozying up to this beloved figure from the United
States who happened to have a Luo heritage. Odinga even had T-shirts printed
with the image of him and Obama and the humble declaration africa’s greatest
sons.
In an effort to remain above Kenyan tribal politics, Obama’s staff had been
coy about revealing the senator’s schedule to Odinga. Still, the time of his visit
to the family compound was widely known to locals. Kisumu, in fact, had been
in a carnival atmosphere for several days, with nightclubs celebrating Obama’s
trip in raucous fashion. So there was no way to get around the orchestrated
political assembly, which had all the trappings of the same kind of event in the
United States. Local officials and their minions, who most likely had some
connection to political patronage of the Luo, gathered at Odinga’s request to see
Obama. A group of uniformed schoolchildren had also amassed outside the
schoolhouse named in Obama’s honor. They stood in a long row, swaying their
hips and waving their arms rhythmically to a song composed specifically to

honor their American visitor. The lead voice was a boy about twelve years old
who crooned in a beautifully melodious manner as the other children
harmonized behind him. To the melody of the American song “This Land Is
Your Land,” the children had supplanted American geographic points of interest
with Kenyan spots: “This land is your land, this land is my land, from Lake
Victoria to the Coastal Province, from Nairobi to the Rift Valley, this land is my
land alone.” They stood amid buildings of the primitive-looking Senator Obama
Kogelo Secondary School. From the financial donations of Obama, the school
had purchased chalkboards and wooden desks and various types of science
equipment. The problem is, the science experiments would undoubtedly require
running water, and the schoolhouse appeared to have none. The school featured
just three small buildings, with one classroom each, on the edge of a big hill
overlooking a small green-brown valley. The classrooms were less than inviting,
just concrete floors and worn wooden tables and chairs. Most unfurnished
basements in the United States look more modern and better equipped for
schooling. “Hopefully, I can provide some assistance in the future to this school
and all that it can be,” Obama said at a quick dedication ceremony, careful to
lend support but not to overpromise.
The magnitude of the upcoming political ceremony caught Obama and his
small staff off guard. The large turnout would have outdone most such
gatherings on the South Side of Chicago in the heat of election season. The vibe,
however, was strangely similar. America might be an ocean away from Africa,
but in a democracy, politics is still politics. A reporter asked Gibbs facetiously,
“Does this meet or does it wildly exceed your expectations?” Gibbs only
chuckled in response. Wearing brightly colored robes over their Western-style
suits and ties, the Luo Council of Elders sat in white lawn chairs underneath a
long row of canvas tents set up to shield them from the hot sun and ubiquitous
dust. Aside from their colorful garb, they looked like any group of American
politicians waiting their turn to speak. Standing with his slender brown arms
folded was Michael Adara, a thirty-five-year-old information technology worker
in Nairobi. He said he had made the excursion from the big city to this rural
outpost to see the senator in the flesh. “The thing that attracts me and other
people to Obama is that he traced his roots to right here,” Adara told me. “It lets
us feel that we can all trace our roots and find our real home.” Adara wore a
black T-shirt with an image of Obama’s face and the words the senator, the
diplomat, the politician, the luo.
Speaking in Luo, Odinga, the presidential candidate, opened the festivity with

a wordy talk about the meaning of Obama’s visit and what one surmises was a
stump speech. As a member of the challenging Luo tribe, he called for an end to
government corruption, a sentiment that drew sustained applause. It was then
Obama’s turn. He stepped onto a wooden table, grabbed the microphone and,
sensing the political rally atmosphere, dropped into an extemporaneous variation
of his own campaign speeches from back in his Senate race. The theme, once
again, was the interconnectedness of all people and the unifying nature of the
human condition. But in adjusting to the crowd here in Kogelo, Kenya, instead
of talking about his own life, he substituted his father’s life story. Speaking
plainly in his midwestern drawl, Obama said:
As I was driving up here, I thought about my father. Some of you may be
aware, I didn’t know him that well. He actually did come back here to
Kenya. I was the one who stayed back, stayed back home, stayed back in
the United States. We corresponded. We spoke. But I did not grow up with
him. It wasn’t until as an adult that I came to visit this area. I remember the
first time that I came, I thought to myself that even though I grew up on the
other side of the world and even though I had not had a day-to-day
connection, when I came here I felt the spirit among the people that told me
I belonged. Everybody was so warm and so gracious and so friendly and
hospitable. One of the things that you realize about this area is that even
though a lot of times people don’t have a lot, they are willing to give you
what they have.
There is a generosity of spirit in this community, which is extraordinary.
As I traveled through here, one of the things I realized is how remarkable it
was the journey my father had traveled. He grew up around here. He was
taking care of goats for my grandfather. And maybe sometimes he would go
to a school not so different from Senator Barack Obama’s school, except
maybe it was smaller and they had even less in terms of equipment and
books. And teachers were paid even less and sometimes there wasn’t
enough money to go to school full time. Yet despite all that, because of the
health of the community, the community lifted him up and gave him the
opportunity to go to secondary school and then go to a university in
America and then get a Ph.D. from Harvard and then come back here and
work with many of the individuals who are here today. It’s a story of what’s
possible when a community comes together and supports its children.
After Obama concluded, the moment of the day was at hand. He was off to

visit his father’s compound and his grandmother just a few hundred yards from
the school site. The only problem: how exactly to get there. Obama tried to
shake some hands at the political function, but as usual, the staff hustled him into
an SUV. Reporters, meanwhile, broke into two camps. One group headed for
Samson and Delilah. As for me, I kept my eye on Gibbs, who advised that we
should just walk rather than board a bus that would fight crowds to travel less
than a mile. Gibbs made a small attempt at organizing the reporting crew. But
suffering from the same fatigue that we all felt as the day wore on, he quickly
gave up. “It’s like herding cats,” he said in frustration. “They’ll find their way, I
hope.”
After about a fifteen-minute walk, we arrived at the small farming compound.
There were several small clay buildings with tin roofs amid a spread of grass,
weeds and dirt. Chickens and goats wandered here and there, as if they were the
tenants of the community taking a stroll around the grounds. Small farming
fields of rice were on either side of the compound. Most people living in this part
of the world subsisted daily on the food they produced at home—rice, eggs,
cabbage. A clutch of Kenyan reporters and other international press were already
assembled awaiting Obama’s arrival. A few dozen relatives of the Obama clan
were there as well. One thin elderly man who was dressed all in white—cotton
shirt, pants and matching hat—displayed a blue-and-white “Obama, Democrat
for Senate” button on his chest. He leaned on a wooden cane and looked around
in bemusement at the bizarre scene: media crews carrying modern boom
microphones and digital cameras to a place where televisions and computers did
not exist. Most of Obama’s relatives had donned their best dresses and suits.
They were, after all, gathered for a weekend family function, although one
covered by scores of reporting crews, many from another continent. The
“spectacle” that Obama had mentioned was in full display.
Obama’s caravan arrived at the compound, but Samson and Delilah and most
of the American reporting gaggle had not. When Obama exited the vehicle to
greet his grandmother, media and relatives swarmed around the two. (His
grandmother is not actually a blood relative. She is the woman who raised his
father. The circumstances surrounding his blood grandmother’s disappearance
from the family are murky.) Obama embraced “Granny,” as she is known, while
reporters and photographers and security and other official staff pushed and
shoved each other, either to protect Obama or to document the moment,
depending on the job they held. Kenyan photographers were particularly
aggressive. They threw elbows to open a clear shot at Obama and his

grandmother.
Amid the frenzy, Obama and his grandmother strode slowly up a slight grade
toward the main house, which had a new tin roof and fresh coats of blue and
white paint, thanks to Obama’s recent financial help from afar. About halfway up
the small hill, Obama stopped in midstride and recognized that he was missing
his own companions. “Where are my wife and children?” he asked plaintively.
They had fallen behind the mass of marchers surrounding him. Sasha then
appeared before him and he scooped her into his arms. With chaos all around,
she looked frightened and grabbed her father tightly around the shoulders and
neck. “I have you, Sasha,” her father said soothingly. Obama started walking
again and I noticed that Pete Souza, the Chicago Tribune photographer, had
finally made it to the compound. Souza had missed Obama’s arrival because the
media buses were fighting the crowds, just as Gibbs predicted, and he was
exasperated. “This is out of control! Just absolutely out of control!” he observed.
“I mean, I barely got one shot.” As for myself, I was busily taking notes and
endeavoring, once again, not to get trampled by the pack.
Reaching the main house, Obama and his grandmother disappeared inside for
their first visit in nearly fourteen years. The family reunion was initially
scheduled to last nearly two and a half hours, after which Obama was to get
some time alone at his father’s and grandfather’s gravesite, located on the
compound. But because of the unforeseen events and chaotic atmosphere, after
about forty minutes Obama emerged from the house and stood, arm in arm,
between his eighty-three-year-old grandmother, Sarah Hussein Obama, and
Auma. They all fielded questions from the press. He said the family had eaten
porridge and chicken. Asked if his grandmother had given him any words of
wisdom, Obama answered without hesitation: “Don’t trust reporters.” When the
questions were over, an American television correspondent based in Africa
asked Obama to autograph his copy of Dreams. This drew disapproving stares
from print journalists, who considered such a request to reveal a severe lack of
objectivity.
Obama was then supposed to visit his father’s grave, the site of his emotional
climax in his Dreams memoir. But such a private moment was unattainable in
this atmosphere. Instead, aides pulled him away from the press and guided him
into the SUV for the trip back to the Kisumu airport and then Nairobi. A U.S.
military liaison, who was part of Obama’s traveling entourage, surveyed the
madness and shook his head. “It’s a fucking circus,” he said. “I feel bad for

Obama.”
CHAOS WOULD FOLLOW OBAMA INTO THE NEXT DAY, WHEN THE CODEL would take
us to one of the bleakest places on the planet.
Kibera (pronounced Kee-bear-a) is recognized as the largest single slum in all
of Africa, and thus in all the world. Between seven hundred thousand and a
million impoverished souls are packed into a tract of urban land that is just twoand-a-half square kilometers. Situated in the southwest quadrant of Nairobi,
Kibera was first settled extensively in the 1920s when British colonizers allowed
a group of soldiers from what is now Sudan to establish homes on a wooded
hillside on the outer reaches of Nairobi. The ethnic group, called Nubians, had
fought for the Allies in World War I as part of the King’s African Rifles. Even
though the British allowed the Nubians to live on the land, the English never
gave the group official title to the territory. The Nubians established a
community that they called Kibra, meaning “jungle” or “bushes.” Nevertheless,
with no legal claim to the territory, they were essentially squatters.
This lack of recognition of Kibera followed through the entire twentieth
century. Even after independence from Britain in the 1960s, the Kenyan
government never officially recognized the community. No title deeds were
issued. No sewage or water lines were constructed. No real power was bestowed
upon the poor, who despite their privation swelled the population of Kibera.
Most residents moved there from rural villages to seek better schooling in
Nairobi or find jobs in the large city. Even as the population surged, however, the
community remained in the shadows of Nairobi. Much like poor neighborhoods
in the United States, Kibera was rarely visited by Kenyan politicians save for
election time when they are seeking votes from all constituencies. Interestingly
enough, Illinois’s senior U.S. senator, Dick Durbin, had toured Kibera several
months before. Durbin’s visit, however, attracted none of the fanfare that Obama
would, even though Durbin at the time held much greater power in the Senate as
assistant minority leader. When I mentioned to a Kenyan journalist that Durbin
had recently visited Kibera, he said that Durbin’s visit had garnered virtually no
media attention.
Kibera was every bit as distressed as it had been billed. Many residents lacked
basic services, such as clean running water and plumbing. Sewage and garbage
were dumped into the open; dwellings were made of canvas and tin with

corrugated roofing; and some children appeared less than fully nourished. The
inhabitants, however, were positively gleeful at Obama’s visit. And like
elsewhere, they turned out in droves. The motorcade could only move at a snail’s
pace through the densely populated community because people had filled the
streets and swarmed around the vehicles. A colorful mural painted on a wall on
the village outskirts paid homage to Obama. It featured a man sitting on a
barstool at an “Obama joint.”
Accompanied by Michelle, Obama attended two organized events in the slum:
one that discussed a program involving microfinancing of small businesses in
Kibera and a second that outlined a program to educate young people about
HIV/AIDS prevention. But it was outside the events where Obama made the
biggest media impact. Crowds had flooded around the small tin-roofed building
housing the first event, and authorities had to push open a walking path for
Obama and his wife to reach their motorcade afterward. As he stepped outside
onto a dirt path leading to his SUV, Obama grabbed a bullhorn and raised it to
his mouth, but the overzealous crowd drowned him out. He looked down, smiled
and began again. “Hello!” he screamed in Luo. “Everybody in Kibera needs the
same opportunities to go to school, to start businesses, to have enough to eat, to
have decent clothes,” he told the residents, who madly cheered his words. “I love
all of you, my brothers, all of you, my sisters. I want to make sure everybody in
America knows Kibera…. Everyone here is my brother! Everyone here is my
sister! I love Kibera!”
Obama’s next morning opened with a tree-planting ceremony for the sake of
the environment. Shovels in hand, Obama, his wife and his daughters dropped an
African olive tree and surrounding dirt into the middle of Freedom Park, a wideopen downtown Nairobi green space. Throughout the short event, a handful of
photographers edged in front of their peers, jockeying for position, drawing the
ire of Obama’s two-man security crew from the U.S. government because the
photographers initially resisted moving back. As the disagreement subsided, one
security man complained to the other, “Fuckin’ asshole journalists, man.” His
partner nodded in agreement. The park had been cordoned off to outsiders, and
another crowd of about five hundred Kenyans had amassed outside the fencing
to see Obama. He grabbed another bullhorn and gave them a quick hello before
ducking back into his dark SUV and being whisked back to the Serena Hotel for
lunch. A fatigued-looking Gibbs shrugged. He turned to a few reporters and said,
“Let’s walk back to the hotel. You know, you never see the real streets of a
country when you go on these kinds of things. I’d like to feel the real streets of

Kenya for ten seconds.” The moral here: Even ruthless political operatives have
a softer side and want to experience the real world on occasion.
That afternoon, after all the spectacle of the trip—the staged events, the pressthe-flesh moments, the trite banter with reporters—Obama stepped into perhaps
his most comfortable environment, a situation that almost always inspires him.
He gave a speech at a college. Obama’s address before a crowd of about a
thousand students and academics at the University of Nairobi was carried live on
the country’s largest television network and rebroadcast twice. The setting was a
large, rather prosaically designed campus auditorium that Souza, the Tribune’s
photographer, immediately saw as having limited artistic potential. Instead,
Souza left the room and captured images of students who had stopped whatever
they were doing to listen in rapt attention to Obama. Loudspeakers carried
Obama’s words into courtyards and cafeterias and study rooms, where students
appeared transfixed by the American senator. As for Obama, his timing was
perfect, his voice was as rich as ever and thus his performance was at peak level.
It was hard not to witness this kind of speech by Obama and not envision a
presidential run. His presence, confidence and moral clarity filled the room.
His address was a call for Kenyans—in particular, young Kenyans—to work
toward ending the country’s culture of corruption and ethnic politics. He asserted
that positive change is almost always brought about by idealistic youths rather
than older adults who have internally reconciled society’s injustices. In calling
for an end to corruption, Obama spoke in generalities about who was responsible
for this ill, and he sidestepped assigning specific blame to a political party or
leader. “Here in Kenya, it is a crisis, a crisis that is robbing an honest people of
the opportunities they have fought for, the opportunity they deserve,” he said.
“Corruption has a way of magnifying the very worst twists of fate. It makes it
impossible to respond effectively to crisis, whether it’s the HIV/AIDS pandemic
or malaria or crippling drought.”
The senator received warm and occasionally enthusiastic applause during the
speech. But this audience of Nairobi’s most well-educated youth was clearly
more discerning about Obama than the roaring crowds in the streets. Some
students with whom I spoke after the address said they could sense a definite
charisma about Obama, but they were disappointed by his lack of specific
remedies for Kenya’s endemic problems. They wanted him to take a harder line
on the current political leadership. “There are people here with so much hatred
toward the government that they wanted a direct attack,” said Dennis Onyango, a

senior writer for the East African Standard. “They wanted him to name names.”
But Obama was diplomatic about the source of the country’s corruption
problems, which was on message in his mission for the trip. He strove to voice a
strong anticorruption stance, and yet he did not want to point fingers and be
dragged into local tribal politics. This is ground he has trod before in the United
States—providing an overarching voice of moral authority without stepping into
the fray and choosing sides. “He sounded very much like a politician,” one
student told me. “He was eloquent, but it was a politician’s talk.”
This, effectively, was the end of my African excursion with Obama. For the
next two days, Obama and his family went on safari in the Masai Mara region of
Kenya, again with the American media entourage in tow. Obama’s staff had
initially tried to keep the safari a private family outing, either to protect the
image of Obama as continually working on the trip, or to give him some
downtime with family. But as Obama was discovering more each day, the press
was not going to let go of him anytime soon, so he relented and, despite
occasional discomfort with the prying media, he even showed a bit of mercy for
the weary American journalists. “Barack figured the reporters had traveled all
this way and they were entitled to some relaxation and fun, too,” Auma said.
After the safari, Obama was off to Chad to speak with refugees of the horrific
civil war in bordering Sudan. He had tried to visit Sudan itself, but he has always
been outspoken about the atrocities occurring there, and the Sudanese
government would not grant him a visa. At that point, more than two hundred
thousand people had been killed in the Darfur region and two million more had
been dislocated in the fighting between rebels and the government.
Beyond the sheer human misery before him, Obama would find the visit to the
refugee camp wholly disheartening. One traveling journalist said Obama was
“furious” with his aides because he had been allotted only ninety minutes to
speak to the refugees. The refugees’ stories were translated from Arabic to
French to English, consuming a great deal of time and making it difficult for
reporters to hear. Obama, who had studied the Darfur situation intensely, learned
only so much from the interviews. While the event most likely produced good
television and newspaper copy, it did little to advance Obama’s knowledge about
the conflict—and this was what apparently infuriated him. In his days as a
community organizer, he was accustomed to listening to poor South Side
residents pour out their troubles for hours on end. But here, he didn’t even
receive the Cliffs Notes version. In a post-Africa interview, Obama told me that

he found the entire African journey both “wonderful” and, in characteristically
diplomatic terms, “a little bit frustrating”:
It was a little bit frustrating that, you know, now that rather than taking
trips, I have to take CODELs, which means a lot of official business, a lot
of pomp and circumstance, a lot of press. Which, you know, means that I
can’t sort of wander off and explore these countries in the way that
sometimes are the best ways to learn. But, you know, obviously, the Kenya
portion of the trip, in particular, evoked a response that I hadn’t expected, to
that magnitude. But on the other hand, it spoke maybe to, you know, the
influence that I can exercise. That’s gratifying, in the sense that, like, when
Michelle and I took that AIDS test, you know, the CDC said maybe half a
million people might now take an AIDS test as a consequence of you taking
it. When I gave the speech on corruption, you know, it was broadcast
nationally, I think two or three times. I think I changed the debate inside
Kenya for weeks after my visit. And so, you know, it was, I think,
gratifying to feel as if I had used my bully pulpit effectively while I was
there.
In the end, Obama’s trip to Africa was a learning experience for him—and for
his family. It was yet another example of just how pervasive and intrusive the
media will be in the life of a politician who maintains a profile of this stature. It
was also yet another lesson in the enormous expectations of devoted followers
not only in the United States but in Kenya. It brought to light that America
remained the focal point of the world for many nations like Kenya. But even
though Obama had risen to great heights in American politics as a senator, his
power to “leave the world a better place” was still limited.
Upon her return to Chicago, Michelle admitted that she was “overwhelmed”
by the “magnitude of everything.” She and Obama tried to leaven the enormous
outpouring on their behalf with humor. “Barack and I joked the whole way that
we have an armed escort now, and when we went in before, we just walked
around from shop to shop. To have it elevated like this was kind of surreal….
There is part of you that is embarrassed by the scene of it. Part of you just wants
to say, ‘Can we tame this down a little bit? Does it have to be all this? This is out
of hand.’ That is my instinct and I know that is his instinct too—do we really
need all this?”
For Auma, now a social services worker outside London, the madness of the

trip and the intense idol worship from the Kenyans raised great concern. She still
fears that her brother might be headed down a path littered with all the same land
mines that contributed to her father’s premature death. To her, the restless life
journeys of father and son have eerie parallels. After receiving an elite American
education, her father returned to Kenya with incredible expectations thrust on
him by his family and the Luo tribe. Ultimately, Barack Sr. could not satisfy all
these intense desires and was overwhelmed by them. Obama certainly has
studied his father’s life in depth and he appears to have learned from that story,
Auma told me. But she is still concerned. “My father tried to live up to all of
those expectations and I think Barack needs to learn from my father’s mistakes,”
Auma said. “I think he is learning, but he just needs to set realistic goals for
himself and set out to achieve them. Barack is like my father in that he is driven
to perfection with regards to his work and he just needs to give himself a little
slack. I am proud of Barack and I love him. But I worry about him.”