Lebron Revisited
People have always had a tendency to give Obama a pass. It’s like no other
politician I’ve seen. They feel like he is on this important mission. And
maybe he is.
—FORMER AIDE DAN SHOMON

Within weeks of his return from Africa, Barack Obama began thinking seriously
about running for president in 2008. The reception he had received and the
publicity he had generated back home was exhilarating, if not intoxicating.
“How bad can you feel when everybody is telling you that you should be
president?” observed Nate Tamarin, a former aide. A White House bid this early
was not the timetable that Obama would have chosen—he still had two young
daughters at home whom he adored and missed—but there was such a strong
political wind at his back that he and his ambitious advisers simply had to give a
presidential run serious consideration. “We definitely looked at it as something
that was now plausible,” Robert Gibbs said. “It would not be a whimsical thing.”
Obama had been in the public eye through most of 2006, receiving almost
universally glowing treatment in the national media. Earlier, in March, he had
appeared at the annual Gridiron dinner, where Washington journalists and
politicians gather to make light of each other. In typical fashion, he impressed
reporters with wit, intelligence and poise. Even President Bush took note of the
Washington love affair with Obama. “Senator Obama, I want to do a joke on
you,” the president told the Gridiron audience. “But doing a joke on you is like
doing a joke on the pope. Give me something to work with. Mispronounce
something.” After seeing him at the Gridiron, New York Times columnist
Maureen Dowd, one of the country’s touchstone liberal columnists, suggested
that Obama should think about the White House. She opined that the Democrats
should not cast him aside because of lack of national experience. “The

Democrats should not dismiss a politically less experienced but personally more
charismatic prospect as ‘an empty vessel,’” she wrote. “Maybe an empty vessel
can fill the room.” The idolatry and flattery from the mainstream media in 2006
was constant, unlike anything that politicians generally experience for a day,
much less months or years on end. Men’s Vogue put Obama on the cover, and, to
the magazine writer, the senator let slip his thoughts of the Oval Office and his
overabundance of confidence. “My attitude is that you don’t want to just be the
president,” Obama said. “You want to change the country. You want to be a great
president.” Profiles of him appeared everywhere, from New York magazine to the
national newsweeklies to a spread of him and Michelle in Ebony. The media
could not get enough of him, and neither could his growing legions of followers.
A Washington political consultant called Obama the “Black Jesus.” Even his
drug use as a teenager became a laugh line and won him praise for candor.
Asked about smoking pot by the Tonight Show’s Jay Leno, Obama said casually,
“I inhaled; that was the point.” His supporters seemed to forgive him for this and
much more—for his unbridled ambition, for raising millions in campaign dollars
from established interests, for tacking to the center, for speaking mostly in the
same broad, general themes. “People have always had a tendency to give Obama
a pass,” former aide Dan Shomon said. “It’s like no other politician I’ve seen.
They feel like he is on this important mission. And maybe he is.”
Up to now, The Plan had been working to near perfection.
So after Africa, Obama began talking to people earnestly and deliberately
about an Oval Office bid. His first round of discussions came with his immediate
inner circle of Michelle, David Axelrod and Gibbs. Then he branched out to
others, such as Jeremiah Wright and Jesse Jackson, Newton Minow and Abner
Mikva, Penny Pritzker and Valerie Jarrett, Cassandra Butts and Marty Nesbitt. In
all these discussions, Obama heard little to discourage him from pushing
forward. “There are an awful lot of people urging him to go,” Axelrod told me
over breakfast. “There aren’t too many people waving yellow caution flags.” In
September, when Obama was the main speaker at Senator Tom Harkin’s annual
steak fry fund-raiser in Iowa, the first presidential caucus state, the future
became clear to Minow. By happenstance, the former counselor to Adlai
Stevenson and John F. Kennedy had watched Obama’s speech to more than three
thousand Iowans on the C-Span public affairs network. He soon called Obama.
“I saw John Kennedy and now I have seen you—and I haven’t seen anything
quite like it in between,” Minow told Obama. “You ought to go for it now.”

This was perhaps all the more interesting because, in truth, Obama had not
performed well in Iowa. When he arrived at the Indianola fairgrounds, it was
typical Obama-mania, as adoring fans engulfed him everywhere. Gibbs made
sure to alert reporters that a “Draft Obama for President in 2008” petition was
circulating in the crowd. But when Obama spoke, he left some of these veteran
Democratic activists a bit bored. After years of red-meat speeches from hardcharging Democrats such as John Edwards and Howard Dean and home-state
hero Harkin, Obama’s lecturing manner and professorial prose more evoked the
cerebral Adlai Stevenson. Obama also made the same mistake as he had on his
election night—failing to prepare a speech ahead of time and instead letting it all
come to him on the stage. When his crescendo lines failed to draw the
appropriate responses, he reached back for another crescendo line. This made his
speech wander from anecdote to anecdote without tying all the themes into a
coherent whole. It also made the speech, at nearly forty minutes, far too long.
“When it comes to leaders of the Democratic Party, I think he is up there,” said
sixty-two-year-old Irene Wesley of Ames. “But he just needs to be maturing a
little bit, learn to relate to a crowd a little bit more and come up with some
positive accomplishments in the Senate. He just needs a little maturity and he
will be there.” Others, however, gushed over Obama. The influential Des Moines
Register columnist David Yepsen opened his column the next day, “Oh Oh Oh
Obama.” Yepsen later wrote, “This guy looks like a winner.” And overall, most
of the Iowans seemed to adore him. So if Obama could get this kind of positive
reaction in Iowa after a sub-par performance, his advisers mused, what would
happen if he brought his A-game?
In October came the much-anticipated release of Obama’s second book, The
Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream. A major
publicity campaign was undertaken, with Obama launching a national two-week
book tour and appearing on seemingly every major network talk show, capped
by an appearance with Michelle on Oprah. Book sales boomed, and Audacity
eventually dislodged John Grisham’s latest work from the top of the New York
Times bestseller list. This satisfied Obama’s stridently competitive nature. He
had asked his advisers, “What can we do to make it number one? I want to be
number one.”
The book’s content was not nearly as raw as that of Dreams from My Father.
After all, Audacity was a work from a man in his mid-for-ties who, by this time
in life, had made concessions and reconciliations to an imperfect world, both for
his own survival and his own advancement. In fact, much of the book wrestles

with how a politician can hold on to his ideals amid a scrutinizing press, a media
culture that feeds on conflict and a political system that makes it necessary to
raise big money from special interests and wealthy donors. In this way, for a
book from a politician with presidential aspirations, Audacity was rather candid,
and it again put Obama’s uniquely personal writing voice on vivid display.
Obama acknowledged internal struggles, including an insecurity about his role in
his own family; he even took the blame for most domestic problems. He fretted
about losing his own voice because a politician can fall victim to “a committee
of scribes and editors and censors” who “take residence in your head.” He said
that he sometimes worried that his idealism was overcome by personal vanity.
And he conceded that, as a consequence of modern political necessity, he now
spent far more time in a rarefied world of moneyed and intellectual elites and
much less time with ordinary people.
This was very different from the wandering, occasionally angry young man in
Dreams. “There was more of an edge to me back then, I suppose,” Obama said
of the angst-ridden prose found in Dreams. “You grow a little older, you know,
and become more forgiving of yourself and others.” In Audacity, Obama
provided a somewhat sentimental vision for the future of America, a vision that,
of course, called for more civility and unity in our culture. Much like his
political rhetoric, however, the book lacked detailed, real-world specifics about
how to accomplish that. Overall, it received positive reviews, something that his
staff had worried about before its release. They did not want him to come across
to the East Coast media elites judging his political future as an unserious, selfserving politician.
But it was the monster sales of the book that provided the linchpin for
Obama’s next move. As Obama’s book hit the top spot in sales, books written by
the major Democrats considering the presidency, Hillary Clinton and John
Edwards, languished far down on the bestseller lists. Also, Obama’s book tour
was pure madness. Thousands gobbled up tickets for the events in all corners of
the country. At a book signing in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, after Obama
delivered a centrist-oriented speech, fifty-two-year-old Penny Reynolds wasn’t
sure if Obama was ready to lead the nation, but she said his message of unity and
bipartisanship made her an instant fan. “He’s not really saying anything different
than anybody else except that we should all try to work together, enough of this
partisan stuff,” she said. “And it’s sad to say, but that’s really refreshing right
now.” Obama’s advisers took this kind of talk as confirmation that, beyond his
physical and emotional appeal, Obama’s message of political consensus was

striking a lasting chord with people. With a widely unpopular Republican
president in the White House who had governed in a rigidly ideological manner,
Obama the good-natured consensus-builder seemed to be the antidote for these
faithful Democrats. “The combination of the book, the reaction he got
campaigning and the election results—it all sort of validated his message,”
Gibbs said. “It made [running for president] something that we could no longer
avoid thinking about.”
THE DAY AFTER THE NOVEMBER ELECTION, IN WHICH DEMOCRATS took control of
Congress, Obama and his advisers began meeting in Axelrod’s office in
Chicago’s West Loop to discuss seeking the Democratic nomination for the
presidency. Vital to these discussions was Michelle. In a Chicago Tribune
interview at the end of 2005, Michelle had complained that because of her
husband’s onerous work schedule, she often felt like a single mother and she
worried about an erosion of Obama’s paternal connection to his daughters.
Axelrod and Gibbs knew that these kinds of press quotes would be highly
damaging to a presidential candidate. They also knew that Obama would need
full support from home if he were to run. So Michelle was brought into the
discussions as a full partner. Her voice carried as much resonance as that of
anyone in the room. By December, the Michelle hurdle had been cleared. She
asked only that, as a prerequisite for her approval, Obama quit smoking, which
he agreed to do. “If Barack really wants this, Michelle will support him and do
what’s necessary,” said Cassandra Butts, Obama’s friend from Harvard. “That’s
always been their relationship.”
In an interview in December 2006, Michelle sounded very much as if she had
weighed the pros and cons of the decision, as well as the consequences of that
decision on her family. She had risen out of the fog of the overwhelming African
adventure, yet still marveled at the American public’s yearning for more of her
husband. “You keep waiting for people to be like, okay, you are tired of him
now, right? You’ve had enough.” When I said the public seemed to want even
more, she said only, “I know.”
By now, an image of Michelle was evolving in the media, and it was not
entirely positive. Obama had consistently portrayed her as both a solidifying
force (“my rock at home,” he would say) and the scolding wife who kept his ego
in check. She also gained a spate of publicity and raised some eyebrows for
being promoted to a lucrative vice presidential position at the University of

Chicago Hospitals, where she was now earning more than a quarter of a million
dollars a year. In addition, she sat on the board of a food supplier to Wal-Mart
Stores Inc., a position that earned her another fifty thousand dollars a year,
although her husband had been a critic of the labor practices of the megaretailer,
giving the appearance of hypocrisy. So if she were to be considered as First Lady
material, a more three-dimensional, positive image of Michelle would be
necessary. And she would also need to hit the campaign trail with and without
her husband. “I know that my caricature out there is sort of the bad-ass wife who
is sort of keeping it real, which is fine,” Michelle said, adding that her husband’s
career pressures on the family remained an issue. “There is still the part of me
that, if we do something this big, our kids are still really little, and what I am not
ready to sacrifice is their livelihood. But…I am going to be the person who is
providing them with the stability. So that means my role with the kids becomes
even more important. What I am not willing to do is hand my kids over to my
mom and say, ‘We’ll see you in two years.’ That’s not going to happen…. There
has to be a balance and there will be a balance. You just have to make your mind
open to it, in some way, shape and form.” (As the campaign kicked off, Michelle
would quit the food supplier’s board and cut back on her hours at the university.)
Michelle indicated that she had thought deeply about the prospect of losing
her husband, presumably to an assassin. I mentioned to her that a newspaper
editor in Nairobi had asked me, “Don’t you worry that as a black man in
America the skinheads will kill him?” She confided that he was now in a fragile
spot as a major black politician. “I don’t worry about it every day, but it’s there.
And it’s a nonstarter,” she said. “So if we take this next step, there would have to
be a comprehensive security plan in place…. It only takes one person and it only
takes one incident. I mean, I know history too. So it’s still an issue.” She said
that her own career ascension has been tied to this possibility. Michelle worried,
for example, that if something happened to her husband she would lose her
prime means of financial and emotional support. “I do think about the fact that
my husband is in a high-risk sort of position right now. And I need to be able to
take care of myself and my kids. I have to be in a position that if anything
unexpected or unfortunate happens, where are all those people who are being
critical of my credentials or my ability to serve on boards, where are they going
to be if I have to take care of my kids? There would be great sympathy and
outpouring if something were to happen, but I have to maintain some level of
professional credibility not only because I enjoy it, but I don’t want to be in a
position one day where I am vulnerable with my children. I need to be in a
position for my kids where, if they lose their father, they don’t lose everything.”

A COUPLE OF WEEKS BEFORE INTERVIEWING MICHELLE, WHEN Obama was still being
coy about his final presidential decision, I asked Obama how he viewed the 2008
election cycle. In his typical understated way, he said that the trend of the
country—its severe antipathy toward the Bush administration—had given the
Democrats a “great opportunity” to win the White House. “I think the
Democratic nomination in ’08 is worth something. Yeah, I do. But I think that
over the next two years, the Democrats have to show the country that they are
listening and that they are interested in crafting a set of commonsense practical
solutions.”
Obama gave little indication that he was anywhere but on the path toward
running for president. If there were any doubt left, his visit to the early-primary
state of New Hampshire in December erased it. He was the main speaker at a
fund-raiser that drew more than fifteen hundred guests. That visit effectively
pushed at least one other potential candidate out of the race, Senator Evan Bayh
of Indiana, who had drawn just a couple of dozen people to an event the
preceding weekend. This was similar to what followed the Harkin steak-fry in
Iowa, where former Virginia governor Mark Warner witnessed firsthand the
Obama phenomenon. As Warner spoke from the stage, a good number of the
attendees had their heads turned backward to watch Obama wend his way
through the fawning crowd. Soon thereafter, Warner announced that he would
not run.
But as the wheels were in motion to launch a campaign, Obama—
coincidentally or not—was hit with the most damaging news story of his career.
With his newfound wealth, in 2005, he and Michelle had purchased a mansion in
Hyde Park for more than one million six hundred thousand dollars. Michelle, in
particular, had wanted a good-sized home because, she said, the couple wanted a
roomy refuge from the public trappings of fame. But purchasing a piece of
property right next door, on the very same day, had been the wife of Antoin
“Tony” Rezko, an old friend and financial contributor of Obama’s who had been
indicted just months before on federal fraud charges. Reporters for the Tribune,
where the story broke, also found that Obama and Rezko’s wife engaged in a
series of financial transactions to redivide the properties and improve their
parcels. The relationship between Rezko and Obama went back twenty years.
Obama had met him when Obama was in law school and Rezko’s development
partners had tried to hire him. At his north suburban home, Rezko had hosted a

fund-raiser for Obama in 2003 that helped fund early parts of his Senate
candidacy. Since then, Rezko had been a regular contributor to Obama’s
campaigns. The two had also been social friends, with the Rezkos dining out a
few times a year with the Obamas.
As soon as the story was aired, Obama expressed contrition and openly
conceded bad judgment, calling the transaction “boneheaded.” His radar with
Rezko had broken down, he said, and if he had to make the deal again, he would
not have. “Look, I came up through politics in Chicago and Cook County and
Illinois,” Obama said. “And this is the first time that I’ve ever, in ten years,
having risen from knowing nobody to being a U.S. senator, where people
suggested anything that I’d done was inappropriate. And so, I’d have to say that,
you know, that would indicate that I must have a pretty good radar, because
that’s a pretty good track record.”
Back at the Tribune, reporters saw the hand of Obama’s shrewd political
advisers in the deal’s sudden uncovering. The paper had gotten hold of the story
through an anonymous tip. As the Blair Hull experience showed, it’s always
better to get any negative press for your candidate out of the way as early as
possible so it does not break at the height of the election season. Obama had
been bloodied for a few days in the Chicago media, and surely future political
opponents would point to the Rezko deal as untoward, but the story was out
there for all to see—and Obama seemed little the worse for it.
WITH MICHELLE ON BOARD, WITH AXELROD AND GIBBS ASSEMBLING a national
political operation, with Democrats across the country in thrall over Obama, the
decision was made. In January, Obama announced on his Internet website that he
was forming a presidential exploratory committee and would announce his final
plans in early February. This methodology gave the candidate two media hits
surrounding his announcement, two for the price of one.
Top aides were not without concerns about Obama’s preparedness. The speed
of his ascendancy has been unprecedented and it was uncertain how that would
affect him in the long run. He neared burnout in his first months in the Senate.
And his life had not slowed from warp speed since he first decided to run for the
Senate in 2003. Could this breakneck pace be sustained through a bruising
presidential contest? “He is in fantastic shape, but I wonder about his physical
stamina,” said one of his consultants, Pete Giangreco. “It takes just an incredible

amount of physical stamina out there.”
Indeed, running for president is like no other experience a human can endure.
It is so bizarre and so surreal that journalists Mark Halperin and John F. Harris
have dubbed modern presidential politics “the Freak Show.” In their book The
Way to Win, the two posited a theory that advanced modern technology and the
breakdown of old media like newspapers and network television have made
presidential contests into a ruthless blood sport in which referees no longer exist.
This, in turn, exacerbates partisan fighting and is largely responsible for the
polarization of the voting public. “The supreme challenge for any presidential
candidate is keeping control of his or her public image in the face of the Freak
Show’s destructive power,” the authors wrote.
I asked Axelrod in December whether he thought Obama was ready for this
Freak Show. His message, after all, was conciliation. What happens if things
devolve into a muddy free-for-all? Axelrod’s candor was surprising. “I don’t
know,” he said. “What do you mean?” I responded. “Do you think he can handle
it?” “I don’t know,” Axelrod said again. “One thing about running for president
is that—and he knows this—it’s like putting an X-ray machine on yourself
twenty-four hours a day, because…at the end of the day, the American people
know who you are. But with Barack, he’s kind of a normal guy in a lot of ways.
He likes to watch football on Sundays. He treasures his time with his kids and
Michelle. I think he has an inner toughness, and that is reflected in the road he
traveled to get where he is, because you know, he didn’t exactly start off in an
optimal place. And he has, I think, struggled through a lot of challenges to make
himself what he is. I think there’s this impression that here’s this Harvardeducated, stemwinding intellectual, but he is a guy who was raised by a single
mother who wasn’t there to help all the time because she couldn’t be. And you
know, he fought his way through a lot.”
I wasn’t sure whether Axelrod was trying to sell me or himself with this
speech. And I am not sure it even mattered. There was no turning back.
Axelrod’s young political talent had cast himself in the Freak Show.
LESS THAN TWO MONTHS LATER, ON A FRIGID FEBRUARY DAY OUTSIDE the Old State
Capitol in Springfield, Illinois, I stood on a grandstand riser filled with
newspaper, wire service and television photographers waiting for Barack Obama
to tell the world he was running for president of the United States.

Two more risers were equally jammed with media. And big-name national
journalists were scattered throughout the crowd of fifteen thousand true believers
assembled down below. As I put pencil to paper, my thoughts rambled back over
the past three years that I had spent following this likable, idealistic yet utterly
mercurial politician, and I couldn’t help but recall the small moment when
Obama showed me off to a stranger who honked at him as we walked down
Martin Luther King Drive in Chicago. Just three short years ago, Obama seemed
proud to have a single reporter interested in him. Now, on this day in Springfield,
he had thousands of journalists worldwide ready to listen, and examine, his
every word. And he had thousands more enthused spectators overjoyed at
viewing this small slice of American history.
Perhaps the only moment that came close was that keynote address in Boston,
when I had been sitting in a vast arena wondering how Obama would perform.
On this day, I had to admit, I had no wonder. Having watched him deliver
impassioned speeches to blacks on Chicago’s South Side, to Latinos on its Near
West Side, to rural whites in downstate Illinois, to people in cities across the
United States and to poor villagers in remote Africa, I knew exactly what to
expect. A call for mutual citizenship, a call for a new generation to lead, a call
for an end to the Iraq War. Obama had stayed up into the wee hours the night
before, crafting and rehearsing these words. It was twelve degrees outside, but
this was the Hawaii native’s true element—preaching to the masses the gospel of
Barack Obama; the gospel of a common humanity, the gospel that, if everyone
would just join together behind him, he could be the one to make the world a
better place.
As his friend Marty Nesbitt told me that day in Boston, Obama is like that
basketball player on his high school team back in Ohio, always able to elevate
his game when the situation demanded it. With Michelle on his arm, a supremely
confident-looking Obama strode onto a long black catwalk that led to a wooden
podium, situated front and center. The handsome couple, each in black winter
overcoats, held hands as they walked forward, waving to the cheering crowd and
stoking the electrified atmosphere. Nearing the podium, Obama let go of
Michelle, who stepped down to allow her husband to take the stage by himself.
The crowd heaved into a chant, “O-ba-ma! O-ba-ma!” The senator walked up to
the podium, his most natural setting, and I couldn’t help but say to myself, “Here
comes LeBron, indeed.”