13

Photographic Insert

“Barry” Obama in his 1979 senior class portrait at the Punahou Academy in Honolulu. (Courtesy of
Punahou Academy)

Obama, fourth from the right in the front row, with his ninth-grade graduation class at Punahou Academy.
In Honolulu, the private school was known as the school for the “haole,” or the school for whites. (Courtesy
of Punahou Academy)

Obama with the Ka Wai Ola Club at Punahou Academy in 1976. (Courtesy of Punahou Academy)

Obama is making a layup here, but he was largely relegated to warming the bench at Punahou after arguing
with his coach about the lack of playing time. The experience taught Obama the pitfalls of challenging
authority. (Courtesy of Punahou Academy)

David Axelrod, the premier Democratic political consultant in Chicago, is Obama’s chief media strategist
and was the lead architect of Obama’s Senate campaign. A Republican strategist once put Axelrod at the top
of a list of “Guys I Never Want to See Lobbing Grenades at Me Again.” (Courtesy of Paul D’Amato)

Obama files petitions with the Illinois Board of Elections in Springfield, Illinois, to be placed on the
Democratic primary ballot for the U.S. Senate on December 8, 2003. At the right is his first long-term
political adviser, Dan Shomon. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Seth Perlman)

Obama confers with Illinois Senate president Emil Jones Jr. on the floor of the state senate on July 24, 2004.
Jones was Obama’s political patron in Springfield, helping Obama mold his legislative record in a fashion
that would help Obama win his U.S. Senate race that year. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Randy Squires)

Obama delivers his now-famous keynote address to the Democratic National Convention in Boston on July
27, 2004. The speech propelled him onto the national stage. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Ron Edmonds)

Jack Ryan was Obama’s first Republican opponent in the 2004 U.S. Senate race until the former investment
banker was felled by allegations from his ex-wife, a Hollywood actress, that he pressured her to have sex in
public. Courtesy of Associated Press/ Nam Y. Huh)

Alan Keyes was Obama’s second Republican foe in the 2004 Senate race. The bombastic Keyes got under
Obama’s skin when he continually challenged Obama’s Christianity, even charging that “Jesus would not
vote for Barack Obama.” (Courtesy of Associated Press/Nam Y. Huh)

Obama leaves a Chicago polling station with Michelle and his daughters, Sasha, front left, and Malia, after
voting in November 2004. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Nam Y. Huh)

Obama and his oldest daughter, Malia, then 6, along with his wife, Michelle, and their second daughter,
Sasha, then 3, celebrate Obama’s Senate victory in November 2004. Obama became the third African
American since Reconstruction to hold a U.S. Senate seat. (Courtesy of Associated Press/M. Spencer
Green)

Obama talks with his staff in his office in the Hart Senate Office Building on Capitol Hill in February 2006.
(Courtesy of Associated Press/Manuel Balce Ceneta)

Craig Robinson, Obama’s brother-in-law, initially worried that his sister Michelle would “jettison” Obama
if he failed to meet her expectations. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Stew Milne)

As media chaos engulfs them, Obama greets his paternal grandmother, Sarah Hussein Obama, at his father’s
farming compound in the village of Kolego in western Kenya in August 2006. (Courtesy of Associated
Press/ Sayyid Azim)

Obama and his traveling entourage are swarmed by Kenyans as he visits the Nairobi slum of Kibera in
August 2006. “I love all of you, my brothers, all of you, my sisters!” Obama told the crowd. (Courtesy of
Associated Press/Gary Knight VII)

Obama comforts Antoinette Sitole as they view the historic photo of her and her slain brother in the Hector
Pieterson Museum in Soweto, South Africa, in August 2006. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Themba
Hadebe)

In Nairobi, Kenya, Gregory Ochieng held aloft a portrait of Barack Obama that he had painted and then
delivered to the visiting U.S. senator in August 2006. “He is my tribesman,” Ochieng said of Obama.
(Courtesy of David Mendell)

Obama’s traveling media entourage snuggles up close in August 2006 as the U.S. senator tours the Robben
Island prison in South Africa, where Nelson Mandela and other antiapartheid activists were imprisoned.
(Courtesy of David Mendell)

Obama strikes a pose as he peers through the bars of the jail cell where Nelson Mandela was imprisoned on
Robben Island just off the coast of Cape Town, South Africa. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Obed Zilwa)

Joined by his half sister, Auma Obama, and his paternal grandmother, Sarah Hussein Obama, Barack
Obama answers media questions on his father’s farming compound in western Kenya in August 2006.
Auma said she worries that her brother is driven by the same perfectionism and ambition that overtook their
father’s life. (Courtesy of David Mendell)

Obama chats with top aide Robert Gibbs, one of the key architects of his ascension, while they await
Obama’s appearance on CBS’s Face the Nation in January 2007. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Aynsley
Floyd)

Anthony Direnzo of Norfolk, Massachusetts, and Lauren McGill of Blacksburg, Virginia, appear to be
enraptured as Obama speaks at a rally at George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia, in February 2007.
Obama’s support is especially strong on college campuses. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Susan Walsh)

Ten-year-old Donavan Dodds seems thrilled to shake hands with Obama after a campaign rally at Georgia
Tech University in Atlanta in April 2007. (Courtesy of Associated Press/Gregory Smith)

Now a full-fledged presidential candidate, Obama speaks at a campaign stop in Sioux City, Iowa, on April
1, 2007. (Courtesy of Associated Press/ Nati Harnik)

Maya Soetoro-Ng, Obama’s half sister, said her ambitious, wandering brother was compelled to leave
Hawaii, in part because of the isolated atmosphere of the Pacific islands. (Courtesy of Associated
Press/Lucy Pemoni)

Michelle Obama, whom her husband describes as “my coconspirator,” has become a partner on the
campaign trail as he seeks the presidency. She speaks here in Windham, New Hampshire, in May 2007.
(Courtesy of Associated Press/ Jim Cole)

While Obama’s campaign operation was stagnating under a lame-duck
campaign manager, Bettylu Saltzman was working hard. She was pulling
together fund-raisers and lobbying Axelrod hard on her belief that he indeed had
a budding star on his hands in Obama. “I’m sure she used the word magical,”
Axelrod said with a smile. So as Axelrod moved fully on board, he reached out
to Pete Giangreco to run the direct mail operation. Giangreco is a senior partner
in the Strategy Group, based in suburban Evanston, and he is one of the leading
political mail experts in the country. In that campaign season, he was handling
targeted mail for John Edwards’s presidential campaign. He was also fully
versed in working a statewide campaign in Illinois, having been an integral
adviser to Rod Blagojevich’s successful governor’s race in 2002. So with
Axelrod and Giangreco behind him, Obama had the top media and direct mail
operatives in Illinois. Once they pulled in top-notch Washington-based pollster
Paul Harsted, Obama suddenly began looking like quite a formidable candidate.
All he needed now was staff.
The first full-time hire was Nate Tamarin, the thirtyish son of a Chicago union
organizer who hailed from Giangreco’s Strategy Group. Tamarin joined the
campaign as a deputy campaign manager in March, just a couple of days before
Chicago’s annual Saint Patrick’s Day Parade. Politicians never miss the
downtown Chicago parade. It’s a ready-made opportunity to preen before a
good-sized crowd and before the television cameras. The most telling aspect of a
campaign’s strength is often the placement of a candidate’s float or car in the
parade—the nearer to the front of the pack, the more powerful the candidate or
officeholder. Tamarin might have wondered what kind of campaign he had just
joined: “We were dead last,” he said. Hynes, meanwhile, was among the first
half dozen.
As the spring wound down, Obama’s team still lacked a full-time manager,
and Axelrod began beating the bushes. He wanted someone experienced in
electing a black candidate in a predominantly white area. He had followed a race
in which a new black mayor was elected in Jersey City, New Jersey, a
community of diverse races and cultures. The campaign manager for that
candidate was Jim Cauley, who surprisingly came from one of the least diverse
places in the country—the Appalachian territory of Kentucky. Axelrod had
worked with Cauley on the successful Baltimore mayoral campaign of Martin
O’Malley, and it seemed to him that Cauley had a knack for urban political
warfare. Cauley was in his mid-thirties at the time but was an experienced

political hand. He had run O’Malley’s campaign and a couple of congressional
campaigns and had worked for the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee. At the time, Cauley held a steady job at the DCCC, but he was
chafing at the day-to-day office work, which lacked the adrenaline highs of a
political campaign. So Axelrod called Cauley, and like most people at that time,
Cauley reacted skeptically to the name “Barack Obama.” But he did a bit of
research and was impressed that Obama had raised more than half a million
dollars in his first congressional effort. Besides, Cauley thought, Axelrod was a
“big-time player,” and if he was vouching for Obama, he must be worth looking
at. “Just come to Chicago and meet Barack and see if you see what I see,”
Axelrod said. “If you don’t see it, no sweat.” So Cauley flew to Chicago and
lunched with Obama near Chicago’s famed Michigan Avenue. Cauley was
impressed with Chicago in June, but he did not necessarily see what Axelrod
saw in Obama. “They were working out of two small rooms, and frankly,”
Cauley said, “it looked like a campaign for the state senate, not the U.S. Senate.”
But, Cauley said, “a lot of influential people were asking me to do it and I
respected them—so I said okay.” Still, Cauley climbed aboard with some
apprehension. Even Cauley’s father, who was a certified public accountant and
had been involved in Kentucky Democratic politics for decades, wondered if
Cauley knew what he was doing by handling a candidate named Barack Obama.
“Have you really thought this one through, Jim?” his father asked.
Cauley was something of the antithesis of whom one might expect to find as
Obama’s campaign manager. Slightly balding and barrel-chested, he exuded
every bit of his Kentucky upbringing. His accent was thick and his phrasing
southern, down-home and straightforward. His plainspoken nature, his lack of
interest in policy matters and his attention to minor details all ran counter to
Obama’s larger, philosophical vision. Cauley did not claim to be a Rhodes
Scholar, and he knew what his role was: to help Obama raise money, hire and
organize staff and volunteers and then turn out Obama’s voters on election day.
“Somebody’s got to keep the trains running on time and make sure the money is
coming in—and that’s me,” Cauley said.
AS HE OFFICIALLY SET OUT ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL, OBAMA charted a course to
shore up his two core constituencies, African Americans and liberals. Among
key liberals, he won the support of Representative Jan Schakowsky, who
represented a lakefront district on Chicago’s North Side. She had considered a
run for the Senate but decided against it and instead ardently threw her support

behind Obama. Also officially coming on board was the Reverend Jesse Jackson
Sr., the best-known black leader in the country. Jackson, whose Rainbow/PUSH
organization was headquartered in Hyde Park, had been an informal adviser to
Obama for several years. This was an example of Michelle helping to ingratiate
her husband with Chicago’s African-American network; she had been friends
with Jackson’s daughter, Jacqueline, while they grew up on Chicago’s South
Side. As a teenager, Michelle had even babysat young Jesse Jr.
Beyond the endorsements, Obama put his most vigorous on-the-stump efforts
into winning votes in the black community. Blacks are a key voting bloc for any
Democrat, with about 75 percent of black voters being Democrats compared
with 45 percent of white voters. In Illinois, roughly one in five Democratic
primary voters is black, and Obama would need a large percentage of the
African-American vote on election day to be successful. And judging by his
uneven relationship with some members of the legislative black caucus and the
ill feelings from the Bobby Rush race, his black support was by no means
guaranteed. Indeed, Rush’s grudge against Obama was as intense as ever, and the
congressman did everything he could to poison Obama’s image among blacks.
Rush even signed on to be cochairman of Blair Hull’s campaign. Moreover,
Obama’s foes in the Senate contest were more than willing to point out the race
issues that percolated beneath the surface from the Rush race. This left various
observers to ask: Was Obama black enough to win widespread AfricanAmerican votes?
“As a politician, the Obama character has a tragic flaw,” worried commentator
Laura Washington in the Chicago Sun-Times. “He may be too smart, too
reserved, and perceived as too elitist for regular black folk. It’s the Uncle Leland
problem. My uncle says that low-income and working-class blacks don’t think
Obama is ‘down’ enough. It’s a cultural phenomenon, and it’s rooted in an
unfortunate strain of anti-intellectualism and distrust of those with close
associations with the white power structure…. Some of the black nationalists are
whispering that ‘Barack is not black enough.’ He’s of mixed race, he hangs out
in Hyde Park, and is a darling of white progressives; he’s not to be trusted. And
there are the black Machine Democrats. They’re all crabs in the barrel, trying to
get to the top. And they don’t want Obama to get there first.”
In these early days of his U.S. Senate campaign, aggressively trying to
establish a kinship with ordinary blacks, Obama still seemed a tad uncomfortable
trying to win acceptance, or at least win votes. Sometimes he could work just a

little too hard. When addressing African Americans, he would drop into a
southern drawl, pepper his prose with a neatly placed “y’all” and call up various
black colloquialisms. The cadence of his sentences would change dramatically,
moving faster and then slower and then faster. He would hit crescendos and then
fall back into a slower rhythm again until the next crescendo, taking a page from
the many African-American preachers he had first encountered in his days as a
community organizer on Chicago’s Far South Side. Sometimes this worked;
other times it seemed forced.
Obama explained to me the change in his speech pattern this way: “There is
going to be a certain rhythm you feel from the audience, any audience. An allblack audience is going to respond in a different way. They are not going to just
sit there. I am not a minister and I can’t pretend to be Dr. King, nor would I want
to. He spoke poetry and I am prose. But it takes a different speaking pattern to
connect with your audience.” Aides would occasionally worry that his change of
tone and diction from precise English could be viewed as talking down to his
audience. “It’s been mentioned, but most times, you know Barack, he just can’t
help himself,” said David Katz, his campaign photographer. Sometimes Obama
clearly would go overboard in all-black settings, yet no one could dispute that he
did anything but campaign tirelessly in the black community. From early 2003,
he filled nearly every Sunday morning with speaking appearances in Chicago’s
black churches. And when stepping before the congregation, always careful to
be respectful and stand astride the preacher’s pulpit, always certain to mention
his own pastor, Jeremiah A. Wright, Obama would use inspiring oratory and his
credentials as a state legislator to educate the audience about himself and his
candidacy. By the end, he had clearly won over most of the crowd.
Obama’s message to black audiences was similar to his proclamations to other
Democratic crowds—a theme of hope in the goodness of the human spirit—
although he wrapped that message in a language tailored to African Americans.
He consistently mentioned his Christian faith and his home church on the city’s
South Side, Trinity United Church of Christ, and suggested that the teachings of
the African-American church should be a primary guide for lawmakers and other
decision makers. But in these speeches to blacks, Obama went one step further.
He linked his own political ascendance to the forward momentum of the black
cause in general. He spoke in terms of his own success being a step in the larger
success of blacks nationwide. To a nearly all-black audience at Mars Hill Baptist
Church in Chicago’s Austin neighborhood in November 2003, Obama declared:
“I am not running a race-based campaign. I am rooted in the African-American

community, but not limited by it. I am campaigning everywhere. The way we are
moving so far, if we can sustain it, and if our community can rise up and we
recognize this opportunity, I am confident we are gonna win. This is a campaign
based on truth and based on honesty and based on the values that I learned in the
church.”
Not enough emphasis can be placed on Obama’s claim of not being “limited”
to only winning black votes. This sentiment strikes at the heart of black
America: a desire for full emancipation into the white world, not to be “limited”
by skin color alone, to be given an equal shot. In making himself part of that
cause, Obama was conveying that a vote for him was a vote for freedom of all
blacks, a vote for blacks not to be held down.
In January 2004, at the opening of his south suburban campaign office, he
implored an audience of largely black supporters to look beyond immediate
disappointments, not to let painful thoughts of the black struggle cloud a vision
of future possibilities—with the greatest possibility, of course, being his election
as a U.S. senator:
We just assume that young people in our communities won’t aspire to
higher education and we are not surprised when they drop out. We
automatically assume that they are going to be two or three grades behind
in national reading scores. That is just something that we have come to
expect. We are not shocked that there are more African-American men in
prison than there are in college. We are not shocked that fifty percent of
African-American men between twenty-one and twenty-four are not in
school and are out of work. And when it comes to Washington, we just
assume that the game is fixed for the powerful, for the special interests….
The essence of this campaign is for us to no longer accept the unacceptable,
to raise the bar, to set a new set of standards, to start thinking differently
about what is possible in our communities and in our politics.
This hopeful oratory aside, his most convincing argument to blacks was not
his eloquent language but the basics of his political résumé. Obama had
accumulated a list of concrete accomplishments during his tenure in the Illinois
senate, many of which assisted blacks. In Obama’s oft-repeated words, “I have
not just talked the talk, I have walked the walk.” Before black crowds, Obama
ticked off all the laws aiding the black community that he had personally written
and ushered through the legislature: a law that forced police to record the race of

people pulled over in order to stem racial profiling; a law that forced authorities
to videotape confessions in the wake of Chicago Tribune investigative reports
that more than a dozen innocent men, all of them black, had been placed on
Illinois’s death row; a law that greatly expanded the number of poor children
covered under the state’s medical insurance. When blacks in churches like Mars
Hill heard this, they would nod their heads approvingly, and any thoughts that
they might have been harboring that Obama was a tool of whites soon
evaporated.
Another factor that greatly inoculated him from these charges of lacking black
authenticity was his wife, Michelle. Obama had married a black woman from the
city’s South Side. Cynthia Miller, his office manager in his congressional
campaign, said when questions about Obama’s blackness would arise among her
African-American friends and acquaintances, she would consistently be asked if
he married a black or a white woman. “It was the first question I would get—and
I would get it a lot,” Miller said. When she answered that he had married a black
woman, the wariness would subside: His choice of a black wife seemed to give
him legitimacy in the community.
Michelle, for her part, defended her husband vigorously against suggestions
that he lacked black credentials. In a Chicago public television profile of her
husband during the Senate race, she practically jumped out of her seat when the
interviewer noted that Obama had been cast by a previous political opponent as a
mercenary for white elites. “Barack is a black man!” she said emphatically, her
eyes widening. In an interview with me, she expanded on that sentiment and
explained why her response was so emotional. She said that blacks who achieve
academic success and do not adhere to popular stereotypes within black culture
can often be ostracized—and she encountered similar issues when growing up.
So when her husband was accused of not being fully black, it struck a raw nerve.
Said Michelle:
The anger and frustration that comes with that whole issue has just as much
to do with…the frustration of the challenge within the community, and I
faced it too. Here I am, you know, South Side, doing just what I thought I
was supposed to do. But Princeton and Harvard do certain things and, you
know, it’s like that growing up, you know. You talk a certain type of
English and then you have to cover that up on your way to school so you
don’t get your butt kicked. You know, we grew up with that. My brother
faced it, we all faced it where…there’s frustration of feeling like you have

to camouflage your intellect in order to survive in your own community.
And fortunately I came from a family on both sides that didn’t believe in
that, that didn’t foster it, that fostered any courage, intellectual discourse
and, you know, all of that. So that just brings up all of [what] I experienced.
So I didn’t view that as something that was particular to Barack…. The
point is…that he’s a black man…. So that’s not even the issue. You can’t
even focus on that. But what it points to that is frustrating is there’s still an
ability of people to use intellect and race as a way to drive a wedge between
certain people in their own community. And that’s the frustration, I think,
that I felt with that issue because it reminded me of just the kind of things
that I had to deal with growing up.

CHAPTER

14
The Real Deal
I have been chasing this same goal my entire adult career, and that is
creating an America that is fairer, more compassionate and has greater
understanding between its various peoples.
—BARACK OBAMA

My first encounter with Barack Obama in his U.S. Senate race came on a cold
fall morning in November 2003. I had been assigned to cover the Democrats
vying for the nomination and I began reporting profiles of the top-tier
candidates: Obama, Dan Hynes, Gery Chico and Blair Hull. By now, Obama had
contracted with a communications director named Pam Smith. Good-natured and
usually smiling, Smith was a Chicago-based public relations consultant in her
forties who was rather inexperienced in politics at this level, and she could be a
bit overwhelmed with the daunting task of serving as the lead spokeswoman for
a high-profile Senate candidate. She was aware of the importance of the
campaign—and Obama understood the significance of hiring a black woman as
his public face to Chicago area voters—but she acted more as a conduit to
reporters than as a mouthpiece for Obama. Just as Obama had told Shomon years
before, Obama handled his own press for the most part. He wanted control over
his message, especially when it came to his image in such a powerful local
media outlet as the Chicago Tribune. I told Smith that I wanted to attend one of
Obama’s constitutional law classes at the University of Chicago and we arranged
for me to sit through a lecture later that week.
But when I arrived at 8:50 a.m. at the room number Smith had given me, I
found no students and no Obama, even though the class was to begin in ten
minutes. After a series of cell phone calls—to Smith, who called Obama, who
called me—we straightened out the matter. His class was down the hall. Political
campaigns, especially in the early stages, are rarely well-oiled machines. They

are like a start-up company tossed together, usually populated by young people
barely removed from college. So this disorganization was irritating, especially at
9 a.m., but not surprising. What surprised me was Obama’s handling of the foulup. He apologized and told me that he had given Smith the wrong room number.
He emphasized that it was his fault. “Don’t blame Pam,” he said. “It was my
mistake.” I found this odd—and rather refreshing. Obama could easily have
made his aide the culprit but chose to accept the blame himself. Politicians are
not known for admitting to mistakes. Settling into a chair in his classroom, I
thought, He is either honest, naive or endeavoring to change my first impression
of him from several years ago—as one who would blame an ill child for his
missing a key Illinois senate vote while he vacationed in Hawaii.
Dressed in blue shirt and tie, Obama strode into the classroom about five
minutes late and did not acknowledge my presence, another act I found
somewhat strange. How many times does a Tribune reporter sit through your
class? He pulled off his winter coat and his navy suit coat, and I noted that his
frame was even thinner than I had remembered from that press conference a
couple of years earlier. He opened the discussion and, as he paced the room, he
loosened his tie and reached down to roll up the sleeves of his shirt. He turned
over each layer of light blue cotton so slowly and with such precision that it was
impossible not to fix your eyes on his movements. Obama certainly knew how to
call attention to himself, and in the most subtle manner. It was understated, but
he definitely had a confident presence, if not overly confident.
To Obama’s far right, I spotted two young African-American female students
gazing at him from above their laptop computer screens. One of the young
women looked positively enraptured, while the other appeared just slightly
entranced. Even if they did not have crushes on the instructor, they seemed more
focused on his physical being than the subject of his lecture. Obama went
through the material of the day, cases involving civil rights and voting rights, in
a clear and methodical manner. He challenged some students but in no way
seemed bent on embarrassing them. The University of Chicago is an elite
institution, and the students were bright and alert. It was evident that they had
read the assignments and were at least minimally prepared. As the class ended,
the two young African-American women approached Obama. The woman with
the intense gaze was fidgety and nervous in his presence, even as she asked a
common question about an assignment. He folded his arms with a detached
coolness that did little to put her at ease. I smiled. If Obama runs any kind of
television ad campaign that gets him noticed by large numbers of voters, I

thought, it’s crystal clear where the vote of college-educated black women is
going.
As students departed, Obama walked up and shook hands with me. His
handshake was not as tight and firm as I had come to expect from politicians. He
joked that he was going to call on me a couple of times in the class, but “wasn’t
sure you had read the assignment.” I laughed mildly. I then explained that I
would be covering the campaigns of the Democratic candidates for the Tribune
over the next five months, and I suggested that we grab a cup of coffee and talk
about the race. “Great idea,” he said. So we walked out and headed down the
hallway. A student with a blue-white “Obama, Democrat for Senate” button
fastened to his backpack walked by. Obama broke into a wide grin and pointed,
“Hey, look at that.” The button didn’t exactly impress me. Surely Obama had a
good number of university students in his corner, considering that he was
teaching there and lived just a few blocks away in Hyde Park. As we stepped
down a corridor and neared some outside doors, Obama turned and said, “Well,
have a good day.” Perplexed, I froze in my tracks. “I thought we were getting
coffee?” I asked. “Oh, we will,” he said. And he stepped away. This baffled me,
but over time I would learn that Obama was a man accustomed to setting his
own pace and his own schedule—and that day, a cup of coffee with the Tribune
reporter was not in his plans. He had only learned the night before that I would
be there, and he was a man who insisted on being fully prepared for these kinds
of encounters.
I found Obama again when he was one of several speakers to a crowd of
South Side black veterans. The event was outdoors and Obama was late arriving.
He surprised me by driving up to the gathering by himself, with no staff
accompaniment. Most politicians, and especially candidates for high office, are
chauffeured from place to place with at least one aide at their side. Afterward, as
I walked with Obama back to his Jeep Cherokee, he seemed to have only faint
interest in setting up that cup of coffee with me. Yet when a black man slowed
his car and waved encouragement to him in his Senate race, Obama was quick to
point me out: “Hey, I’m doing good,” he told the man. “Look, I’ve got the
Chicago Tribune here with me right now.” I guess I came in handy for showand-tell, I thought.
OBAMA’S CANDIDACY INTRIGUED ME, BUT NOT NEARLY AS MUCH AS the newest face
on the political scene: multimillionaire Blair Hull. His résumé of making

hundreds of millions as a securities trader was interesting enough, but as the
story went, he had moved into trading after parlaying twenty-five thousand
dollars in blackjack winnings from Las Vegas into a successful trading company.
Besides that, rumors swirled about those personal issues—alcohol abuse and exwife problems—that had scared David Axelrod away from working for his
campaign. Hull had long ago put together a campaign apparatus, and it was so
well assembled that it resembled a minicorporation. Professional-sounding
secretaries answered the phone and there were up-to-date magazines in the
waiting area. The campaign was housed in a historic-looking building in the
bustling Near North neighborhood of downtown Chicago, within walking
distance of the “Magnificent Mile” of North Michigan Avenue. I counted more
than two dozen signs or buttons or stickers with the name “HULL” emblazoned
on them in the waiting area. Hull entered the race with zero name recognition,
and the first order of business was building his name into a brand. He had
already been running television commercials across the state. The poll-driven
theme was that, as an outsider to Washington not beholden to any special
interests, Hull would cut through the muck of the Beltway cesspool to solve the
nation’s health care crisis. His health care plan, in fact, would ensure that all
Americans had medical coverage. The ads were slick and highly professional—
and Hull had an unlimited bank account to flood the airwaves with them.
I had called the Hull campaign to establish contact and meet with his press
secretary, a good-humored, buttoned-down spokesman named Jim O’Connor. I
wanted to meet Hull, and O’Connor said that would be “fantastic.” But after
weeks of chatting, the meeting still had not come together. O’Connor seemed to
find one excuse after another for why we could not sit down. I would learn later
that Hull’s aides had been working for months to prepare the political neophyte
for talking with reporters. Finally, in late November, O’Connor, Hull and I had
lunch, and Hull seemed amiable enough. I told him that his ads were sharply
produced and appeared to be having some effect on an electorate that, at the
moment, was barely aware that a Senate contest was under way. But I also took
notice of something that a colleague had pointed out: “Those Blair Hull ads are
good, but you know, I can never remember what he looks like afterward, even
though I have seen that commercial a dozen times.” Indeed, Hull had such an
undistinctive face—none of his characteristics were particularly defining—that
his physical presence could go largely unnoticed and be soon forgotten.
Bespectacled, with gray hair, Hull smiled throughout the lunch and appeared to
be reciting lines that had been written for him, but I expected this from a firsttime candidate for office.

What I did not expect was the call from his office that came about 6 p.m.
several days later—on Monday, December 8. Someone named Jason Erkes said
there would be an important announcement from the Hull campaign at any
moment. When Erkes called back, he explained that he was a second campaign
spokesman and he had information to release: A young woman had been found
dead in the garage of Hull’s home in Chicago’s tony Gold Coast neighborhood
on Saturday evening. Hull had not been living in the home and he did not know
the woman—she apparently was the close friend of a former young girlfriend of
Hull’s. The two women had been sharing the home and Hull had moved
elsewhere. The police were investigating but did not believe foul play was
involved.
Later, the authorities ruled the woman had died from carbon monoxide that
had emanated from a malfunctioning swimming pool heater located inside the
garage. The pool was atop the garage. The young woman had stepped into the
garage and was felled by the poisonous fumes before she reached her car.
The story was buried in the newspapers and only lasted a day. But four
months before the primary, Blair Hull’s bizarre, scrambled personal life was
already taking center stage in the Senate race.
THE WEEKEND BEFORE THE HULL STORY BROKE, I WROTE A curtain-raising story
about the Senate race for the Tribune. The piece called Dan Hynes the frontrunner and mentioned Blair Hull, Gery Chico and another candidate who had
now entered the race, Cook County treasurer Maria Pappas. She was perhaps the
hardest candidate to explain. Pappas was an eccentric who had high name
recognition, but she had jumped into the campaign so late that observers
wondered if she was really serious or was a stalking horse for another candidate.
I had spoken with her on the telephone and the conversation left me more
puzzled than anything. She was known for her quirky nature, and in the chat
with me, she stressed that she might even hop on a bicycle and go through
neighborhoods on two wheels. Then she invited me to bike with her. “Um, it’s
December and this whole campaign is running through the winter,” I said. “I
think I’ll take a pass on the Sunday bike rides.” First there was Blair Hull and
the death of a young woman in his home. Now here came this odd woman
insisting that I bicycle with her in December in Chicago—this race had more
characters to it than I had ever anticipated.

In the Tribune story, I mentioned that Obama was trying to pull together the
key Chicago Democratic voting blocs of North Shore liberals and African
Americans. In doing so, I wrote, Obama had campaigned “almost exclusively” in
the black community, at least so far. I wrote this because I had limited
information about Obama’s campaigning, since he had not yet sat down to speak
with me. Smith had told me that he was spending every Sunday morning in
black churches—and I had spent one Sunday observing him in several of them.
But once the story appeared, Smith called to say that he had been campaigning
in far more settings than the African-American community, and Obama wanted
to talk to me in person about my misrepresentation of his campaign. And could I
do it that afternoon? she asked.
Obama’s campaign office was located high inside a beautiful white terra-cotta
building along South Michigan Avenue across from downtown Chicago’s Grant
Park. When I stepped into his private corner office, my eyes were drawn to two
things: the room’s clutter and a huge framed poster of heavyweight boxer
Muhammad Ali. The striking photograph caught the fighter with a clenched right
arm and a bloodthirsty, celebratory gaze in his eyes just moments after blasting
opponent Sonny Liston to the canvas. The famous Ali image hovered above
Obama’s head at his desk. The candidate explained that he recently grabbed it on
the spot from a street vendor. Was this a metaphor for his underdog campaign
pulverizing the opposition with glee? I asked with a grin. He returned a smile.
I sat in front of Obama’s desk, with Smith taking her place in the chair beside
me, and was prepared for Obama to launch into a diatribe about what he
believed I had written inaccurately about his campaigning. Instead, Obama said,
“Well, go ahead, fire away. Ask whatever you want.” I realized that this was our
profile interview, not a dressing-down session. Obama was now obviously ready
to speak to the Tribune and had summoned me for that purpose, and somehow
the communication wires were crossed again. I hadn’t fully prepared for such an
extensive discussion, but the candidate was right here in front of me, so away we
went. After about a half hour, I had managed to ask only three questions. Once
he was fully prepared, Obama could talk endlessly about a subject dear to him:
himself. He spoke quietly and slowly, measuring each of his statements. Indeed,
his low-key, conversational delivery in a one-on-one interview can be the
complete opposite of his stage persona. His rich baritone is very clear in personal
settings, but sometimes it is almost hushed. As Obama would do with so many
reporters as the months wore on, he impressed me that evening with his mixture
of intelligence, eloquence and a committed idealism. He framed his entrance into

politics as part of an ongoing quest for social change. He was truly an activist at
heart, not a politician, he claimed. I would see each of his life experiences shape
the course of his discussion—the happy-go-lucky prep school teen from Hawaii,
the adventurous community organizer with trained listening skills, the Harvard
Law School graduate who presided over combative intellectuals on the Law
Review, the state lawmaker who had endeavored to remain out of Chicago’s
nasty ward politics, the devoted husband and father:
I think politics was really an extension or progression from a broader set of
goals and concerns. When I was in college, I decided I wanted to be part of
bringing about social change in this country, and some of that is based on
the values my family gave me. Some of it is based on, I think, my status as
an African American in this country. And some of it is informed by my
having lived abroad and having family in underdeveloped countries where
the contrast between rich and poor is so sharp that it is hard to ignore
injustice. But I didn’t know in college how that would take shape. And I
was actually pretty cynical in college about electoral politics. That’s when I
decided to get involved in community organizing as opposed to signing up
with someone’s campaign. I took a lot of inspiration from the civil rights
movement and the way the movement brought ordinary people into
extraordinary positions of leadership. It struck me that lasting change came
from the bottom up and not from the top down. I have been chasing this
same goal my entire adult career, and that is creating an America that is
fairer, more compassionate and has greater understanding between its
various peoples.
I asked Obama something of a reporter’s question—designed in an impossible
fashion to elicit a certain response. At the time, the city was building a grandiose
park area, now called Millennium Park, just outside Obama’s window on the
other side of South Michigan Avenue. The project was well beyond its target
date for completion and far over budget—into the hundreds of millions of
dollars. I asked him about his relationship with Mayor Daley, and he responded
that it was “cordial, not close.” So I queried Obama about what he thought of the
park, if it wouldn’t have been wiser to spend those hundreds of millions on the
beleaguered city school system or to spur economic development in the poor
neighborhoods of his district. Spending those kinds of public resources on a park
largely for tourists and the elites—how was that advancing social change? And
why hadn’t he spoken out on this issue? Obama winced at the question, and I
readied myself for a politic answer, perhaps something about how the center city

needed to be developed, how Chicago was a tourist metropolis and needed that
kind of urban investment. Instead, Obama leaned forward and said, “How do
you really expect me to answer that? If I told you how I really felt, I’d be
committing political suicide right here in front of you.” I found his candor
refreshing. But it also told me something: Even if he was driven by an activist
heart, he was no radical. Rather, he was a polished professional politician who
knew that, despite being a community organizer and staunch do-gooder, as a
U.S. Senate candidate, he was now working from within the established political
order. And when I pressed further for a real answer, he indeed found that
politically correct response, saying that the park would advance the city’s
national reputation and he understood its importance to overall economic
development, but he would also like to see more resources devoted to the
problems in the city’s economically depressed neighborhoods.
In the interview, Obama said the three men he most admired were Mahatma
Gandhi, Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr.—“men who were able to
bring about extraordinary changes and place themselves in a difficult historical
moment and be a moral center.” (It’s worth noting that Obama might fall into
that category if he were to win the presidency in a difficult period fraught with a
foreign war. As a presidential candidate, he has portrayed himself as a moral
leader who wants to change not only policy but the combative nature of politics.)
As we spoke, Obama also emphasized various themes that I would hear over the
coming months and years in his stump speeches as a Senate candidate, in his
town hall meetings as a senator and in his trips across the country in his White
House quest. Even though he spent his teen years ridden with feelings of
parental abandonment—again, he had often deemed himself “an orphan”—he
said that he had been blessed with so much good fortune in his life that it was
incumbent upon him to give something back to society. His devoted mother and
grandparents, as well as college professors and adult friends, were aligned to
steer him from a path of self-destruction, he said. And too many black teenagers
are not that fortunate:
When I see young African-American men out there and the struggles that
they go through, then I connect with that. I know what that means. I know
that, in my book, I mention that I dabbled in drugs or that I was acting
tough. I put that in there explicitly because what I wanted to communicate
was the degree to which many young men, particularly young AfricanAmerican men, engage in self-destructive behavior because they don’t have
a clear sense of direction. But I also wanted to point out that there is way to

pull out of that and refocus, and in my case, it was tying myself to
something much larger than myself. In my case, that was trying to promote
a fair and just society. That is the reason I work on ex-offender legislation. I
say to myself that if I had been growing up in low-income neighborhoods in
Chicago, there is no reason to think that I wouldn’t be in jail today, that I
could have easily taken that same wrong turn. That is something that I am
very mindful of and it is something that motivates me. Thinking about how
you provide hope and opportunity to every kid is my biggest motivator.
When I see my five-year-old and my two-year-old, it makes me weep
because I see children who are just as smart and just as beautiful as they
are, who just don’t get a shot. It’s unacceptable in a country as wealthy as
ours that children every bit as special as my own children are not getting a
decent shot at life.
Obama’s notion of attaching oneself to a larger ideal is a persistent theme in
his public rhetoric. Through the first months of his presidential campaign, he
would challenge audiences of all political stripes, educations and financial levels
to work on behalf of a greater good and not to spend their lives strictly in pursuit
of material possessions. This fell right in line with his mother’s post–World War
II brand of liberalism and humanism. His message could be preachy, especially
coming from a Harvard Law graduate who eventually would become a
millionaire presidential candidate, but even conservatives would be hard-pressed
to argue against the premise of helping those less fortunate. Throughout our first
encounter, Obama also exuded a certain authenticity and great ease with himself,
the polar opposite of, say, Blair Hull, who could seem uncomfortable just saying
“Hello.”
IN SUMMER AND FALL 2003, DAVID AXELROD HAD BEGUN TO PULL together facets of
Obama’s résumé to sell to his Washington media contacts and Illinois-based
reporters. He managed to get some pieces in Washington-based political journals
that touted Obama as a potential star in the making. These were helpful not only
to build up his candidate in the media but to present to potential fund-raising
contacts to show Obama’s viability as a strong contender in the race. This helped
Obama raise three million dollars overall and still have two million on hand
heading into the final months of the campaign. This was nothing compared with
Hull’s tens of millions, but it would be enough to run a two-to three-week
television campaign and present Obama as a serious candidate to influential
political insiders.

Also in the fall of 2003, as most professional campaigns would do, Obama’s
advisers hosted a series of focus groups to determine their candidate’s strengths
and weaknesses. Focus groups are a far cry from scientific experiments, but they
can open eyes to what voters might be thinking. In these groups, a cross section
of people were assembled to review television footage of the candidates.
Obama’s consultants watched from the next room, munching on junk food and
swilling canned diet soda. The sessions revealed that Obama’s self-confidence as
a political candidate and as the purveyor of a desirous message was not
misplaced. There was even an epiphany or two among Obama’s campaign team.
The aides learned that various parts of Obama’s unique résumé appealed to
different demographic groups. In explaining Obama’s experience to a white
voter, all they had to do was mention “first black president of the Harvard Law
Review” and the voter suddenly had an image drawn—a positive portrait of a
black man. “It worked on two levels,” Axelrod said. “There were those who
thought that breaking barriers is very important. And for others, the Harvard
Law Review was a major credential in itself.” With black voters, however, it was
not Harvard Law that evoked positive responses but Obama’s communityorganizing experience and the legislation he had successfully sponsored, such as
the racial profiling law and the expansion of health care coverage to poor
children.
But Obama’s campaign tacticians also learned that he would probably play
fabulously on television. Indeed, their candidate had an amazing telegenic
quality. Jim Cauley, the campaign manager, had not necessarily swallowed
Axelrod’s predictions of Obama’s potential star power. Perhaps it was because
Axelrod had to be sold on it himself by Bettylu Saltzman. But as these two and
others would learn, Obama could be viewed very differently by women than by
men. And when it came to suburban white women, he could be viewed in
“magical” terms, to quote Saltzman. Obama not only had good looks, but his
charm with women apparently emanated through the television screen. His face
had a certain honesty and handsome warmth that was not offending, much like
his personality. In addition, many strong women had shaped Obama’s character,
from his mother and his grandmother as a child, to his sister and his wife as an
adult.
“My moment was a focus group,” Cauley recalled in his Kentucky twang.
“The moderator was talking to [liberal, North Shore] women voters, thirty-five
to fifty-five and fifty-five plus. He asked the older group, ‘Who do each of these

guys remind you of?’ For Dan Hynes, a woman said, ‘Dan Quayle.’ For Hull,
she said, ‘Embalmed.’ And she looked at Barack, and the lady said, ‘Sidney
Poitier.’ At that moment, I was like, ‘Shit, this is real!’”