The Ascent
I’m LeBron, baby.
—BARACK OBAMA

For those who know Barack Obama well, this might sound close to impossible,
but the swagger in his step appeared even cockier than usual on the afternoon of
July 27, 2004.
As summertime bathed downtown Boston in warm sunshine, Obama led a
gaggle of reporters, aides and a couple of friends—a group occasionally two
dozen deep—around a maze of chain-link security fences guarding the largescale FleetCenter indoor arena. A former high school basketball player who, at
forty-two, still relished a pickup game, the rail-thin Obama was carrying his
upper body as if he were heading to the free throw line for the game-winning
shot, a shot he believed was destined to sink. His shoulders were pitched
backward. His head was held erect. His blue-suited torso swayed in a side-byside motion with every pace forward. His enormous confidence appeared at an
all-time peak. And for good reason: hours later, the Illinois state lawmaker and
law school lecturer would take his first steps onto the national stage to deliver
his now famous 2004 keynote address to the Democratic National Convention.
Indeed, Obama’s time in the bright sunshine had arrived. And though this
moment had come upon him rather quickly, unexpectedly and somewhat
weirdly, with only weeks of notice, his opportunity to prove to the world that he
could play in this most elite league was at hand. Finally.
Having covered Obama for the Chicago Tribune since the early days of his
U.S. Senate candidacy more than nine months before, I had already established a
rapport with the state senator, and I was mostly trying to stay out of the way and
watch the day unfold, watch the story of Barack Obama unfurl. Still, as a

skeptical newspaper reporter, I was not completely convinced that, by day’s end,
all would come out well. I was still trying to gauge if this strut was something of
an act, whether his winning free throw would clang on the rim and bounce away
or whether he was on the verge of hitting nothing but net and making a national
name for himself.
After Obama and I slipped through a security checkpoint and he momentarily
broke free from the entourage, I sidled up to him and told him that he seemed to
be impressing many people of influence in this rarefied atmosphere.
Obama, his gaze fixed directly ahead, never broke his stride.
“I’m LeBron, baby,” he replied, referring to LeBron James, the phenomenally
talented teenager who at the time was shooting the lights out in the National
Basketball Association. “I can play on this level. I got some game.”
I wasn’t so sure. I fell back amid the marching gaggle of the Obama entourage
and chatted with one of his closest friends, Marty Nesbitt, who had flown in
from Chicago to accompany Obama during the convention week. I asked Nesbitt
how he thought his friend would perform that night, given all the media attention
and political pressure. “He sat down with Ted Koppel earlier this week and he hit
the cover off the ball, didn’t he?” Nesbitt asked. “Barack reminds me of a player
on my high school basketball team back in Ohio. He could elevate his game to
almost any situation. And when we needed a shot, he always hit it. Always.”
That evening, Obama introduced himself to America. He delivered a keynote
address of historic proportions, so inspiring that even some conservative
commentators would concede they were moved by it. His rich baritone voice
resolute and clear, he hearkened back to his beloved mother’s philosophy of a
common humanity, a philosophy that had been ingrained in him throughout his
childhood. He declared that America is a land of good-hearted people, a nation
of citizens who have more unifying traits than dividing traits, a country of
individuals bound by the common purpose of freedom and opportunity for all.
“There’s not a liberal America and a conservative America—there’s the United
States of America. There’s not a black America and white America and Latino
America and Asian America—there’s the United States of America…. We are
one people….”
Across the arena, many Democrats from various states, various walks of life,

various races, had tears in their eyes. And as the woman seated next to me in an
upper level of the FleetCenter joyously shrieked—“Oh my god! Oh my god!
This is history! This is history!”—I looked around at the energized and
emotional crowd and heard myself speak aloud to no one in particular.
“Yes, indeed. Tonight, Barack, you are LeBron, baby.”
THROUGHOUT 2004, THE POLITICAL AND CULTURAL MOOD IN Obama’s home state of
Illinois—and much of the country—was sharply polarized. A bevy of
Democratic presidential aspirants had vied to challenge President George W.
Bush, who had led the country into war in Afghanistan, and then Iraq, in the
wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York City and
Washington. Chagrined from being in the minority in both chambers of the
Congress, Democrats desperately craved a strong candidate who could defeat
Bush in the November election. Among those Democrats, Senator John Kerry of
Massachusetts had won the party’s nomination, but despairing Democrats were
having difficulty warming up to him. They hungered for something more than
Kerry could offer—a political savior, an inspirational figure who could lead
them out of one of the darkest periods in their party’s history. Kerry surely
seemed electable, but his reserved nature and plodding public style made him far
from a savior who could stir the souls of the masses.
At this point the nation was evenly divided on the Iraq war, but the Democrats
were not. In the eyes of many moderate Democrats who had initially supported
the war, the nationalistic fever that had washed over America in the wake of the
9/11 terrorist strike was beginning to wear off. For most left-leaning party
members, the war had been nothing short of a colossal mistake from the very
beginning. Thousands gathered for anti-war rallies in Chicago, San Francisco
and other urban centers. In some cities, pro-war demonstrations attracted
partisans on the other end of the spectrum. In Chicago, several anti-war events
were largely well-behaved. They were arranged and attended not solely by
young radicals but also by established members of the city’s lakefront liberal
crowd. A rally in the city’s Federal Plaza seventeen months earlier, in October
2002, was assembled by an aide to former U.S. senator Paul Simon and a
mainstream liberal public relations expert. The rally featured a pointed anti-war
speech from Obama, then a fairly anonymous state lawmaker, who deemed the
impending Iraq engagement “a dumb war.” The event drew old and young alike,
as 1960s protest veterans mixed with suburbanites and college students and

journalists. Another war protest was more demonstrative, spilling out of the
city’s downtown Loop area one evening and choking off the main transportation
artery of Lake Shore Drive. Protestors marched aimlessly to a destination
unknown, before being cornered on the drive and arrested en masse by Chicago
police attired in riot gear.
In spring 2003, the Washington Post, the daily bulletin board of the D.C. elite,
published a story illuminating the nation’s growing political and cultural divide.
The article explored a burgeoning theory that political scientists informally
labeled as the red state–blue state phenomenon. The theory was gaining
prominence in both political and intellectual circles. Red states were core
Republican Party strongholds, populated primarily by culturally conservative
Christian whites. The entire South and most of the Midwest fell into the red
category. Blue states were Democratic Party territories, home to larger
percentages of gays, minorities and college-educated intellectuals than the nation
as a whole. West Coast and Northeastern states generally voted blue. The redblue notion resonated with so many Americans that it soon took hold as
something of a truism.
This tug-of-war was reflected in the nation’s capital by a bitterly partisan
battle between minority Democrats and majority Republicans. After the fall
elections of 2003, the Pew Research Center released a study summarizing eighty
thousand interviews over the previous three years that found an evenly split and
polarized nation, with sharp differences along political, cultural and religious
lines. The country’s most religious states were in the South, and their residents
tended to be the most socially traditional and the most hawkish on national
security issues. People living in New England and on the Pacific Coast,
meanwhile, were less religious, more dovish and less socially traditional.
On the night of that Democratic National Convention in Boston, a handsome,
caramel-skinned man who seemed to embody all of these disparate parts
appeared on television screens throughout the country and called for unity.
Barack Obama’s mother was a white, middle-class Kansan with a naive,
wandering spirit that she would pass along to her son. His father was a poor,
black Kenyan whose pioneering trek to the United States for Western schooling
represented the immigrant experience. Obama had been raised mostly among
whites but also among Polynesians and Asians. He was a devout Christian who
had married into a black family from Chicago’s South Side. He had been a
community organizer in the poorest African-American neighborhoods of

Chicago. He had gone to the country’s finest law school and excelled. He was
then serving in the state legislature in Middle America. And he seemed to be
offering himself as the very vision of what America should be—a place where
race, class and cultural differences mix together to make a republic whole, not to
divide it.
Later that year, his maternal grandmother, Madelyn Dunham, would tell me,
“When he was a young man, I asked him what he wanted to do with his life. He
said, ‘I want to leave the world a better place than when I came in.’ And I
believe that has been his guiding light.”
Obama, without argument, is imbued with an abiding sense of social and
economic justice. He is an earnest, thoughtful, occasionally naive man who has a
strong sense of moral purpose, a trait driven into him by his ardently progressive
mother. But Obama is far more complex than just a crusading dreamer aiming to
“give voice to the voiceless and power to the powerless,” in his own oft-spoken
words. He is an exceptionally gifted politician who, throughout his life, has been
able to make people of wildly divergent vantage points see in him exactly what
they want to see. “He definitely has this yin and yang quality to him,” said
Robert Gibbs, one of Obama’s top political aides. He is not of the same specific
ancestry as most blacks in the United States, nor has he lived the typical black
experience in America. Yet he is accepted by most as a brother, in large part
because his physical appearance is decidedly African and his wife and children
are African American. He was raised by a white family and educated in elite
white institutions, giving him nonthreatening appeal and instant credibility with
the white cognoscenti. His parents and grandparents were of modest means, and
for most of his life he has not had excessive material wealth, making him aware
of the daily concerns of the middle class mostly because they have been his
concerns.
But it is his easygoing public temperament and ingenious lack of specificity
that perhaps have most abetted his career in politics. Whatever setting Obama
steps into—a black church, the Senate floor, a rural farmhouse—he blends
comfortably into the atmosphere, as if he has spent a lifetime there. With his
relentlessly reasonable tone and a studied thoughtfulness, he can turn even the
most jaded journalist into a mild fan. He emanates supreme confidence at almost
every moment. But he also has a self-deprecating sense of humor and can
express humility to an almost unnecessary degree, at least in public. While
talking or writing about a deeply controversial subject, he considers all points of

view before cautiously giving his often risk-averse assessment, an opinion that
often appears so universal that people of various viewpoints would consider it
their own. In settings with everyday voters, he dons his college lecturer hat and
explains arcane policy matters in easy-to-understand terms that invite unanimity,
not argument.
What the public has yet to see clearly is his hidden side: his imperious,
mercurial, self-righteous and sometimes prickly nature, each quality exacerbated
by the enormous career pressures that he has inflicted upon himself. He can be
cold and short with reporters who he believes have given him unfair coverage.
He is an extraordinarily ambitious, competitive man with persuasive charm and a
career reach that seems to have no bounds. He is, in fact, a man of raw ambition
so powerful that even he is still coming to terms with its full force. This drive is
rooted in an effort to atone for his absent father’s tragic failures, both as a
Kenyan politician and as a family man. “He’s always wanted to be president,”
Valerie Jarrett, a close friend of Obama’s, would confide shortly after his Boston
speech. “And I’m not sure that he’s even still fully admitted it to himself that he
does, but I know he does. I know he does.”
The journey toward that admission, finally arriving while he vacationed in his
native Hawaii in December 2006, would be unlike any other journey by an
American politician. Indeed, for all of Obama’s intellectual heft, for all of his
genuine sense of mission, for all of his aching desire for personal success, no
man could be fully prepared for what lay ahead of him after that heady star turn
in Boston. And no man could be left unaffected by it. In just a couple of years,
he would rise from obscure state lawmaker to national celebrity pursued by
paparazzi on his family vacation. He would struggle through a self-described
“painful year” of just three or four hours of sleep per night in order to write a
bestselling book that would assure his family’s financial security for his lifetime
and nurture his burgeoning political career. He would spend many weekends and
even more weeknights away from his devoted wife and two young daughters in
helping the national Democratic Party raise millions of dollars to retake control
of Congress. He would be discussed endlessly in the mainstream and alternative
media as potentially the first African American to hold the Oval Office.
From Chicago’s South Side, an entirely new and unique politician had
emerged on the American scene. Obama and his mother’s hopeful message of
inclusion and brotherly compassion would land squarely in the middle of a
massive political void. In a nation that perpetually seeks to anoint the next New

Thing, Obama would bask for months in a remarkably intense media spotlight.
Over those two years, this new brand of politician would do the unthinkable:
he would transcend race as he embodied it; he would throw an outstretched hand
to conservatives as he enchanted progressives; he would beguile hard-bitten
national political reporters (at least some of them, at least for a while) with his
newness, intellect and affability; he would become a prideful and iconic symbol
for millions of black Americans; and he would secure his role as a major
national voice for Democrats. Obama would take the optimistic vision instilled
in him by his mother—that, at our essence, all humans are connected by
compassion and generosity of spirit—and mold it into a compelling political
theme. He would offer this theme of reconciliation to a politically and culturally
splintered republic as a form of national salvation.
Galloping onto the national stage, Obama would become a source of hope and
optimism for disillusioned Democrats from California to New Hampshire.
Obama’s come-from-nowhere ascent would make it starkly evident just how
passionately many Americans yearned for an inspirational leader who could
mend the various divisions within the country—racial, political, cultural,
spiritual. “Hours before he gave the speech, Democrats were excited,” Chicago
Tribune columnist Clarence Page said. “You know why? Because they finally
got a black face for the party who’s not Jesse Jackson or Al Sharpton. Let’s be
frank. That’s how this thing got launched. It went beyond party, because the
whole country right now is looking for that kind of a come-together kind of
feeling.” Movements to draft him to run for the presidency in 2008 would take
hold on the Internet, among Hollywood celebrities and on college campuses
across the country. As a faraway war claimed thousands of American lives and
descended into bloody chaos, as an inordinate number of power and finance
scandals engulfed Congress, as Americans grew more disenchanted with the
policies and leadership of Republican president George W. Bush, America
seemed ready for a shepherd to lead the country in an entirely new direction.
Not since the days of Jack and Bobby Kennedy, and their luminous political
Camelot, had a politician captured so quickly the imagination of such a broad
array of Americans, especially the significant voting bloc of black Americans.
And even the Kennedy comparison would not characterize Obama’s fame
properly. Not since Ronald Reagan had a politician been so adept at sharing his
own unwavering optimism with a disheartened electorate. Cunningly using the
broad power of the modern media as his launching pad, Obama and his small

team of skilled advisers would plot a course that catapulted him from littleknown state lawmaker to bestselling author to U.S. senator to national celebrity.
A mixture of idealist and pragmatist, Obama would move almost overnight from
a critic of the established political system inside the Beltway to a player within
that system. He would represent both outsider and insider.
Wherever he went, Obama would draw impassioned crowds in the thousands.
Throughout 2006, Obama would grace the covers of national magazines and the
front pages of national newspapers. Like Obama’s mother, who reinforced his
self-esteem constantly, nearly all these journalists saw something special in him.
“It’s like nothing I’ve ever seen before,” said Julian Green, a former aide. “We
actually have fans among the media. I’ve never run across that for any other
politician.” “Dreaming of Obama” and “Great Expectations” and “Why Barack
Obama Could Be the Next President”—these headlines would feed his growing
legend. Among politicians, Obama would be in the highest demand for
television’s endless talk circuit, exchanging serious discourse with Charlie Rose,
cracking wise with Jay Leno and opening his heart (relatively) to Oprah Winfrey.
He received both an NAACP Image Award and a Grammy, the latter for a voice
recording of his first memoir. In a society that worships celebrity, no political
figure in the country could come close to projecting such megastar wattage. “We
originally scheduled the Rolling Stones for this party,” the New Hampshire
governor, John Lynch, told fifteen hundred Democrats who had shelled out
twenty-five dollars apiece to see Obama in December 2006. “But we canceled
them when we realized Senator Obama would sell more tickets.”
Internally and certainly politically, Obama would embrace this adulation. But
he would also struggle mightily with its deleterious effects. As his fame spread
worldwide and his public life roared ahead at a ferocious pace, his familiar world
collapsed on him and he became more confined to a low-oxygen celebrity
bubble. “I can’t, for example, walk down the street by myself and watch people
go by anymore, and that’s a very difficult thing to accept,” he lamented. He
became more cautious of his public comments and his public image. He
carefully restricted access to reporters. A highly active legislator in Illinois who
sponsored and passed an assortment of bills, he now steered clear of any single
controversial issue. He grew ever more reliant on key aides, family and others
close to him—and these people would grow more protective of him. “For us, his
family, he hasn’t changed,” his Kenyan-born half sister, Auma Obama, said.
“But the people around him have changed. I feel the vulnerability in him and I
see him being more guarded than he ever used to be.” His small cadre of

dedicated advisers, who had attached their own careers to Obama’s soaring
rocket ship, would feel this intense pressure as well. Said David Axelrod, his
chief media strategist: “It’s like you are carrying this priceless porcelain vase
through a crowd of people and you don’t want to be the guy who drops it and
breaks it.”
Intimate aides like Axelrod would question privately whether Obama’s warpspeed ascension had gone too fast, whether the earnest, occasionally thinskinned Obama was prepared for the unyielding rigors of a presidential contest,
even as that contest already seemed to begin with urgency inside the media and
among activists. “David always worries about a meltdown,” a confidante of
Axelrod’s told me. And yet every time that private worry had been raised
previously, Obama would confidently step onto the court and hit that key shot.
He did that again in early February 2007, when his final conclusion about
running for the presidency was rendered with rich political pageantry and yet
another speech that electrified supporters and earned praise from analysts.
After months of agonizing indecision, on a bone-chilling winter’s morning in
Springfield, Illinois, Obama spoke directly to America’s yearning for new
leadership and offered himself for that role. Before a crowd of nearly seventeen
thousand shivering people gathered in the shadow of Illinois’s Old State Capitol,
Obama announced his candidacy for president. He drew on the powerful historic
symbolism of where he stood—outside the building where Abraham Lincoln
served as an Illinois lawmaker, the place where Lincoln delivered his famous
“House Divided” antislavery speech in 1858. He reasserted that America was
ready for a new generation of leadership, ready to withdraw from the war in Iraq,
ready to be united. He merged the themes of Lincoln’s long-ago call for a unified
citizenry and his own mother’s most endearing characteristic—seeing the best in
people, rather than the worst. “Let us transform this nation,” he said through a
confident voice and a clenched jaw. “It was here we learned to disagree without
being disagreeable—that it’s possible to compromise so long as you know those
principles that can never be compromised; and that so long as we’re willing to
listen to each other, we can assume the best in people instead of the worst…. The
life of a tall, gangly, self-made Springfield lawyer tells us that a different future
is possible. He tells us that there is power in words. He tells us that there is
power in conviction, that beneath all the differences of race and region, faith and
station, we are one people. He tells us that there is power in hope.”
For Obama’s growing legion of followers, this was the moment they had been

waiting to experience. For them, it didn’t seem to matter that since the
aggressively liberal state lawmaker had gone to Washington he had taken a
dramatic turn toward calculation and caution, or that he had yet to propose
anything philosophically new, or that Obama was, in his own words, “a blank
screen on which people of vastly different political stripes project their own
views,” or that the higher he soared, the more this politician spoke in well-worn
platitudes and the more he offered warm, feel-good sentiments lacking a precise
framework. It also didn’t seem to matter that in his two years in the minority
party in the U.S. Senate, he had the clout to pass only one substantial piece of
legislation or that he avoided conflict at all costs, spending none of his heavily
amassed political capital on even a single controversial issue he believed in.
Indeed, through his first year in the Senate, he had to argue with his cautious
political advisers to speak out, however carefully, on a topic dear to him—the
impact of Hurricane Katrina and its racial and economic ramifications.
And yet his irreducible confidence, his undeniable intellect and, not least, his
compelling biracial life story had transformed Obama into America’s most
alluring new political face. To voters of various political persuasions, perhaps,
just perhaps, here was the antidote to what ailed their fractured national
leadership. Here was a pragmatic politician who also possessed a capacity to
dream, who spoke convincingly of a better tomorrow at a time when Americans
were profoundly worried about that tomorrow. Here, at last, seemed to be the
magnetic leader who conveyed the perfect blend of confidence, character and, in
his own words, hope. “People don’t come to Obama for what he’s done,” said
Bruce Reed, president of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group devoted to
centrist policies. “They come because of what they hope he can be.”
Whether by design or destiny, ambition or purpose, Barack Obama had
climbed aboard the ride of his life. And he seemed determined to take America
with him.
BUT AS OBAMA STRUCK OUT FOR THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY’S 2008 nomination for
the U.S. presidency, large questions lingered in the public domain: Exactly how
had Obama moved this far, this fast—and was it too fast? Was he a man of
substance or of media hyperbole? Did he have the experience and toughness to
inhabit the White House? Was his mixed racial ancestry a political hindrance, a
political asset, or, in a country still confused about race, was it both? Our media
can invest people with power in the blink of an eye, but was this particular

investment wise? Could this young senator with an idealistic message of
inclusiveness survive the boiling cauldron of presidential politics, or would
Obama fall victim to his own burning ambition? Would the mercurial media turn
on the mercurial Obama?
And most of all, even though a solid section of the voting public was
enthralled with Obama, would the rest of America embrace his message and
entrust this newcomer with the world’s most important leadership role?