15
Hull on Wheels
Don’t you think it would be cool to be a senator?
—BLAIR HULL, DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATE FOR THE SENATE

The Senate contest of 2004 taught Dan Hynes how difficult it can be to be
anointed front-runner in a high-profile political race. When something does not
go your way, your spot at the top and the strength of your candidacy are instantly
questioned. And few things went Hynes’s way in this campaign.
With his powerful father’s longtime ties to organized labor, a key Democratic
Party constituency, Hynes was expected to lock up labor support far and wide. In
fact, he had won the endorsement of nearly every trade union in the state, groups
representing seven hundred thousand workers overall. But Hynes was the state
comptroller, whose only real responsibility was cutting payments for the state’s
bills. Throughout 2003, Barack Obama had been working in the legislature on
behalf of various labor groups. And thanks to his tight friendship with senate
president Emil Jones Jr., he was successful at pushing pieces of legislation that
benefited labor interests. Jones had also given Obama the chairmanship of the
senate’s Health Committee, which gave him a close working relationship with
the Service Employees International Union. The SEIU had more than one
hundred thousand members in Illinois, representing tens of thousands of nursing
and other medical workers. So when Obama plucked the SEIU’s endorsement
away from Hynes, it was a major coup. The SEIU was a younger, more racially
diverse union than the mostly white trade unions. In the 1990s, the SEIU began
building an effective grassroots political mechanism, running phone banks and
amassing armies of volunteers to work on behalf of endorsed political
candidates. On a cold, dreary Saturday morning in December 2003, Obama
addressed the annual state convention of enthusiastic SEIU members at
Chicago’s McCormick Place convention center. He donned a purple SEIU jacket

and spoke passionately about the union movement in America. Impressively,
thousands had turned out early that morning to hear Obama preach about how he
could win the Senate race. But, of course, he needed their help, he told them. “I
can’t do this alone,” he said.
“Barack has taken the lead on issues of significant importance to our
members,” said Tom Balanoff, the SEIU president, in explaining the Obama
endorsement. “He’s also been out there for us when we have been in trouble,
during strikes and things like that.” In Springfield, Obama indeed had carried
SEIU’s water. He was instrumental in expanding child-care benefits for workers
and had been an ardent proponent of universal health care coverage. He was also
a leader on the so-called hospital report card act, which, among other things,
required hospitals to post staffing levels and mortality rates on the Internet. After
the SEIU’s blessing, endorsements followed from the Chicago teachers’ union
and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. This
shifted some momentum toward Obama and away from Hynes.
Hynes struck back with the hard-fought endorsement of the labor umbrella
group, the AFL-CIO, as well as with John Stroger, the African-American
president of the Cook County Board of Commissioners. But in the end, the
Stroger endorsement was an empty gesture. Stroger even conceded that he was
endorsing Hynes strictly as a favor to Hynes’s father, Thomas, Stroger’s
longtime political friend. Hynes’s aides contended that this showed Obama’s
weakness among black voters. But when I scanned the room during the Hynes
event, it was clear from the lack of enthusiasm in their physical reactions that the
two dozen blacks in attendance had come more because they were part of
Stroger’s large political operation than because of any good feelings toward
Hynes. I surmised that at least half of these blacks would ultimately vote for
Obama if he were in contention on election day. Indeed, history shows that if
there is a viable black candidate on the ballot, African Americans will
overwhelmingly support that person in the privacy of the voting booth, no matter
how many verbal endorsements the white candidates in the race have sewn up in
the black community.
Hynes had other problems too. For one, like the various Democratic
presidential candidates, Hynes supported giving President Bush the authority to
invade Iraq. In the first debate in the race, Obama sought to exploit what he
believed was an Achilles’ heel for a Democrat in a primary contest. He pressured
Hynes about his support of the impending war in Iraq and tweaked him for

having no legislative experience when Hynes seemed to waver on that support.
“The legislature is full of tough calls,” Obama said in a lecturing tone. “It’s not
like an administrative job; it requires tough calls.” Hynes was also dogged by
questions from the panel about a story I had written in the Tribune about Hynes’s
questionable bundling of campaign contributions from a donor who did business
with his office. The donor had his employees give thousands of dollars to
Hynes’s campaign fund and then reimbursed the workers from the company pot,
something that federal elections officials ultimately found was illegal.
With all this controversy swirling around Hynes, I looked around for him
when the radio debate was concluded, but he had ducked out of the postdebate
Q&A with reporters. It’s never a good sign when a candidate for public office
feels compelled to run from the press.
By December 2003, opinion polling showed that a great number of Illinois
Democrats had no idea whom they would vote for in the contest, with
“undecided” being the overwhelming favorite. Among voters with a preference,
Hynes was leading, with about 20 percent of respondents saying they would cast
a ballot for him. Blair Hull was coming up on Hynes’s heels on the strength of
his massive television campaign. Gery Chico had raised a lot of cash and had
spent almost as much as he had collected, but he was languishing in the single
digits and looking more like an also-ran. Maria Pappas, who had been in politics
for years and possessed high name recognition in Chicago, polled in the double
digits, but had no discernible campaign operation. The still obscure Obama was
around 10 percent, but he had two bases that he was working diligently, and
Axelrod was singing his praises to people of influence.
So the burgeoning story was Hull. His steady movement in the polls from
nowhere to just behind Hynes greatly concerned Hynes, as well as the other
candidates. Most campaign strategists were aiming to get their candidate to 30
percent. With so many contenders, this thinking went, the first candidate to reach
30 would be hard to stop. It was increasingly looking as if only three candidates
had a shot at getting to this point: Hynes, Hull and Obama.
But Hull’s rapid ascent had put Hynes and his staff into a mild panic. The
problem for Hynes: Hull was grabbing voters downstate and in other rural
corners of Illinois, where life was slower and his television advertising was
seeping into the public consciousness. In Chicago, his ads were more likely to
get lost amid the urban frenzy. But Hull’s name and message were gaining notice

in these small towns even though he had never set foot in them. These were
voters that Hynes was counting on. Obama would draw blacks in and around
Chicago, lakefront liberals and perhaps college students. But if Hynes was to
win, he needed rural voters on his side. Believing he had to blunt Hull’s early
movement, Hynes dropped several hundred thousand dollars in television
commercials in downstate markets in late 2003, months before the March
primary election. Unfortunately, with voters still not engaged in the race, the
brief ad campaign by Hynes had little penetration; in fact, it served only to take a
chunk of money from his campaign fund that he would need down the stretch.
I turned my attention to Hull. I had heard from Tribune political writer Rick
Pearson, among others, that Hull’s sketchy past deserved looking into at some
depth. Hull had the oddest of political résumés, although it was becoming more
commonplace for the excessively wealthy to enter electoral politics using their
personal fortunes to bankroll a campaign. A federal campaign law, called the
“Millionaires’ Amendment,” had been enacted to try to even the playing field for
less well-heeled candidates in races with candidates of extreme personal wealth.
The amendment allowed other candidates to surpass federal donation limits
when raising money for such races. In the Illinois contest, this was quite
advantageous to Obama, who relied heavily on wealthy lakefront donors like the
Pritzkers. It seemed that every member of the Pritzker clan had given the new
maximum of twelve thousand dollars to Obama. Hynes, meanwhile, was funded
by labor unions and political action committees, which could not spread out their
maximum contributions among friends and relatives.
Hull, who possessed a scarily keen mathematical mind, had been a
professional blackjack gambler who turned his winnings into Wall Street
success. At the urging of his partners, he had sold his securities firm for more
than half a billion dollars and then, looking for a new professional interest,
turned to Illinois politics. But what intrigued me was not his past but his current
campaign. When I tracked him on the campaign trail for a few days, I was
stunned by the extreme artificiality of both the candidate and his message. I had
lunched with a longtime political source in the city who told me that, like
Axelrod, he had interviewed with Hull but declined a job offer. Just as one line
from Hull had frightened off Axelrod, this source offered a similar story. When
he had asked Hull why he was seeking office, Hull responded: “Don’t you think
it would be cool to be a senator?” The source was stunned: “How do you work
for a guy whose sole purpose for running seems to be that it would be a cool
job?” Moreover, in briefings with his many aides, Hull even expressed

skepticism about the effectiveness of a representative democracy. “For goodness
sake, don’t say that in public,” he was warned. “You are running for the U.S.
Senate, after all.”
I didn’t find much more depth on the campaign trail. Hull had tapped his vast
finances to construct one of the most sophisticated political operations anywhere
in the country that campaign season. His staff and payroll were larger than those
of any Democratic presidential contenders, and he had hired some of the most
savvy consultants in the business at top-dollar wages. But this was also part of
his undoing. His aides joked that they were working on the “Noah’s Ark” of
campaigns because there were two of each of them: two pollsters, two
communications directors, two campaign chairmen. This could often mean far
too many conflicting voices around the strategy table. His campaign manager
earned twenty thousand dollars a month and his policy director fifteen thousand
a month. He had as many as twenty-eight consultants on the payroll in the last
three months of 2003. He tooled around Chicago in a huge recreational vehicle
that had cost the campaign forty thousand dollars. At a joint appearance of the
candidates in suburban DuPage County, I was following Obama for the day
when he spotted the RV with its huge red-white-and-blue lettering on the side:
hull for senate. “Gee, what’s that?” Obama asked with a sense of wonderment.
“That’s Hull on Wheels,” I explained, using the Hull campaign’s moniker for the
vehicle. “How do I compete with that?” he asked rhetorically.
It’s true that all political campaigns have something of an illusory quality, with
candidates hiring consultants to craft and sell a certain image of the client. Hull’s
skilled image makers had been paid handsomely to conjure a message and a
vision of Hull as an independent fighter in Washington for common Illinoisans.
But the media blitz was so dizzying that it was more reminiscent of a company
building a brand, or of Hollywood marketing a blockbuster film. Hull’s
campaign had shelled out hundreds of thousands of dollars a week to run
television commercials that touted his thick and detailed economic and health
care plans. Hull billboards appeared in virtually every corner of the state. Even
Internet surfers could not escape Hull’s bespectacled mug, with ads gracing
websites as varied as the Washington Post and Yahoo e-mail pages. The media
barrage was so relentless that even Hull wondered about the value of running a
campaign this way. “Don’t you think people kind of, you know, get sick of you
after a while?” he asked me. Because he had no prior grassroots operation in
place and no political base, he paid supporters fifty dollars a day to act as
volunteers and a cheering section for his public appearances. (In a weird irony,

one of Michelle Obama’s distant relatives took a job in this capacity.) As Hull
would step into an event, they would line up and yell, “Give ’em Hull!” But Hull
was perhaps one of the most uncomfortable stump speakers in the history of U.S.
Senate races. He would trip over his lines and rarely seemed to convey an
extemporaneous thought. His supporters, however, would cheer him madly, even
after a verbal flub. To me, all these staged theatrics gave the campaign a feeling
of utter artificiality—and as a voter, I was aghast that his type of campaign
seemed to be resonating in a democracy. As I wrote in the Tribune, it was “sort
of like The Truman Show meets The Candidate.”
Nevertheless, Hull’s ads were working. And when Hynes’s quick hit of
television had no effect, the Hynes brain trust began worrying even more about
Hull. Hynes’s campaign spokesperson, Chris Mather, stepped up her phone calls
to me and other reporters in hopes of slowing the Hull momentum. However, the
intense lobbying effort actually had the opposite effect with me. Hynes’s obvious
fear gave Hull even more credibility. At about this time, I met with a Hynes
operative for lunch. When I had gone to meet Mather earlier in the campaign
season, we convened near Hynes’s office. But this operative wanted to come to
me, so we gathered at a North Michigan Avenue restaurant just a couple of doors
from the Tribune Tower. Before I had taken a bite of my grilled chicken
sandwich, I was handed a folder of opposition research on Hull. Among the
papers was a copy of the outside sheet of the filing of one of Hull’s two divorces
in Illinois. Hull, in fact, had been divorced three times. He was married to his
first wife for nearly thirty years, raising three children with her. After moving to
Chicago, he then twice married and divorced the same woman. The rest of the
divorce file had been sealed, and this vague court order was the only document
publicly available. The order contained only one salient fact: Hull’s second wife,
Brenda Sexton, had once been granted an order of protection against him.
As this was occurring behind the scenes, Hull continued ascending in the
polls, cruising past Hynes and the rest of the field. Hull was nearing the 30
percent mark when I interviewed him for my Sunday profile of him and his
candidacy. Like many encounters with Hull, it was an uncomfortable experience
for both subject and interviewer. In his campaign office, several aides and Hull
sat at one end of a long table and I sat at the other. When I brought up the
divorces, Hull squirmed in his chair, nervously shifting from leaning on an
elbow to folding his arms to various other poses. He steadfastly refused to
discuss the circumstances of his marriages, divorces or the court order, saying
they were private matters. Because he had been reluctant to explain these issues,

particularly the court order, I felt compelled to include this in my profile. I
placed this nugget fairly deep inside the story, but it served the purpose of the
other candidates—the behind-the-scenes gossip had now slipped into the largest
circulation newspaper in the state. Other political reporters and pundits jumped
at the tasty morsel. Tribune columnist Eric Zorn was the first on board, penning
a column asking what Hull was hiding and maintaining that he owed it to the
voters to release the divorce files. Mike Flannery, a political reporter at CBSaffiliated Channel 2 in Chicago, pressed Hull incessantly about the divorce files
as Hull opened a campaign office on the city’s West Side. Flannery and Zorn
were among Chicago’s more skilled political reporters, and yet I could not help
but notice that both were also guests of Axelrod at his annual holiday party. For
his part, Hull continued to stonewall, citing privacy concerns.
It was not long before the Hulls’ divorce story assumed a life of its own,
dominating headlines, leading newscasts and consuming public debates. At a
televised candidates’ forum on public television, Hull was peppered with
questions about the sealed divorce files—and he stammered no-comments when
prompted to talk about the issue. This was not pretty to watch, but Hull faced a
legitimate question of a candidate for such an important public office: Had
Sexton accused him of something untoward, and didn’t voters have a right to
know if she had? His staunch resistance to answering questions seemed to
indicate so. Yet Hull was a magnificently wealthy man, and his aides were
suggesting off the record that she had made accusations against him to wrest
more money from him in the divorce settlement. Nevertheless, I had to admit:
witnessing this spectacle was not something that I enjoyed, even though my
story had instigated the feeding frenzy.
At the TV debate, various reporters and campaign advisers watched from a
nearby room. Axelrod and Giangreco, who had been on the road with the John
Edwards campaign, had returned to Chicago to prepare and guide Obama
through the forum. A grimacing Axelrod paced the floor as a bemused
Giangreco watched more patiently from a chair. Axelrod had a habit of pacing
whenever Obama began speaking in a public place. If he disliked what Obama
was saying, his pacing would quicken. Even though he had been dealing with the
issue for days, Hull looked like a man dying from a thousand cuts. Axelrod
stopped in midpace and pulled up beside me. “You know, you’re responsible for
this,” Axelrod told me, apparently trying to stroke my journalist’s ego. The
comment did nothing of the sort. Seeing a man’s reputation unravel in slow
motion in the glare of the public eye gave me little sense of accomplishment.

“David,” I told Axelrod, “if it wasn’t through me, you folks would have figured
out another way to get this mess out there. I just fired the first bullet loaded in
the chamber.”
IN A DESPERATE ATTEMPT TO CALM THE STORY, JASON ERKES, HULL’S campaign
spokesman, offered to let me review the divorce records on an off-the-record,
nonprintable basis. I declined the offer, saying that the information had become
too vital to the Senate campaign to be kept from the public if a reporter had seen
it. Soon, the Tribune and WLS-TV sued for the unsealing of the divorce records.
When it became likely that a judge would have ruled in their favor before
election day, Hull and Sexton jointly asked the judge to release the records.
After I spent thirty seconds with the documents, it was apparent that Hull’s
chances of winning the race were over. The files showed that Sexton had
accused Hull of becoming violent, profane and verbally abusive in the waning
days of their second marriage. She accused him of calling her a “cunt.” During
one incident, Sexton alleged that he “hung on the canopy bar of my bed, leered
at me and stated, ‘Do you want to die? I am going to kill you….’” Only once,
however, did she accuse him of striking her, which led to Hull’s brief arrest. But
authorities declined to press charges against Hull because they determined that
“mutual combat” had occurred. Hull said he struck Sexton’s shin in retaliation
for Sexton allegedly kicking him.
If this weren’t enough, in the postdebate press conference at a later TV forum,
each candidate addressing the press was asked by Channel 2’s Flannery if he or
she had ever used drugs or sought counseling for drug or alcohol abuse. Once
again, Hull became the focus of the story when he answered that he had used
cocaine and sought counseling in the 1980s for alcohol use. Hynes and Chico
admitted to the minor infractions of having smoked marijuana in college, and
Obama had already conceded in his memoir his drug activity as a youth. So
Hull’s drug use as a Wall Street trader was the news of the night. Hull only made
matters worse for himself when he sensed the news conference turning sour on
him and abruptly stopped taking questions. Television cameras chased him from
the TV studio like a defendant fleeing the courthouse. Reporters shouted
questions at him. His adult daughter, who had come to Chicago to blunt criticism
of her father as a violent man, scurried alongside her father and exclaimed,
“Don’t answer that question! Don’t answer that question!” The bizarre scene was
chaotic and every bit as surreal as Hull’s campaign. When I called the Tribune

city desk to report what had transpired after the debate was over, my editors
were incredulous. “Forget what you saw on TV during the debate,” I said. “Blair
Hull just admitted that he used cocaine.” At the Tribune, my colleagues and I
began referring to Hull as the “Velcro” candidate—everything stuck to him.
“Each day we come in here determined not to write another Blair Hull story, and
each night, here we are, writing a Blair Hull story!” said an exasperated Tribune
colleague, John Chase, as he furiously recast the debate story into a drug story
under deadline pressure.
As Hull fell into ignominy, voters were left looking for a candidate to support
in the contest. Obama’s campaign had been following the simple strategy long
advanced by Axelrod and Giangreco: Hold on to your money and TV advertising
until the final weeks when voters finally are paying attention—and then blast the
airwaves with as much force as you can. This was not as easy as it seemed. As
Hull was rising and Hynes was still hovering around 20 percent in the polls,
Obama was making only minor advancements. Just a month from the election,
Obama was still an unknown commodity to most blacks and most Democrats in
general. This made some supporters extremely anxious, and they began advising
him to jettison Axelrod’s earlier strategy and start running TV ads immediately.
“Barack was concerned that we needed to be out there,” Axelrod said. Obama
talked to his advisers about these concerns but ultimately chose to follow their
plan and “hold our powder,” he said.
Axelrod was privy to Hull’s messy divorce from their earlier interview, after
all, and knew that his candidacy most likely would end at any moment—as soon
as the divorce details went public. There was one concern, however. As Hull was
falling fast, he seriously considered dropping out of the race altogether. One
morning on my way in to the office, I received a frantic cell phone call from a
panicked Giangreco concerned about just that. Had I heard if Hull was
dropping? This could throw a monkey wrench into the racial dynamics of the
contest. Obama needed for Hull to siphon white votes and downstate votes away
from Hynes. “I sure hope we haven’t overshot the runway!” Giangreco worried.
MANAGING OBAMA’S HEALTHY EGO HAS BEEN ONE OF THE MORE trying tasks for his
staff and paid consultants. As Obama himself will acknowledge, his mother went
to great lengths to shore up her son’s confidence. She worried that because his
father was absent and he was biracial he might fall prey to a lack of self-worth.
“As a consequence, there was no shortage of self-esteem,” Obama told me with

a wry smile.
In a politician, a show of grandiose ego can be off-putting and cost support
from all quarters—media, colleagues and, in particular, constituents—and there
were moments in the Senate campaign when I found myself in the midst of the
effort to rein in Obama’s ego. In January 2004, for instance, the Chicago SunTimes ran a story about prominent Chicago-area politicians who had what the
newspaper referred to as the “IT Factor.” Said the newspaper: “Some politicians
acquire it. Some hire it. Others earn it. But for this coiffed crew…no spin doctor
is required. Call it ‘charisma,’ if you prefer. Or ‘packaging,’ if you’re going to be
cynical about it. But there’s one thing we look for in our political candidates,
whether we admit it or not: Sex appeal.”
Bill Clinton headed the list of politicians who stirred the libido, according to
the newspaper. But in Chicago, Obama was listed among the dozen or so
politicos who had “IT.” Beneath a flattering photo of a smiling, confidentlooking Obama, the Sun-Times breathed heavily: “The first African-American
president of the Harvard Law Review has a movie-star smile and more than a
little mystique. Also, we just like to say his name. We are considering taking it
as a mantra.”
One can only imagine the reaction to this designation from Michelle, who
considered it her personal mission to keep her husband’s ego from inflating
beyond all proportion. Obama’s take on the story certainly drew rolled eyes from
some staff members. Obama walked through the campaign office with a copy of
the tabloid newspaper folded under his arm and open to the story. He proclaimed
with glee, “See, told you I’ve got ‘IT’!”
When I brought up the story to an aide that day, the aide told me, “For god’s
sakes, don’t mention that story to him. He’s walking around here with a huge
grin on his face and saying ‘I’ve got IT, I’ve got IT.’ He sure doesn’t need any
reinforcement in the IT department.”