17
A Victory Lap
Truthfully, it feels like a movement. I think for people of our generation, we
haven’t been a part of something like this before.
—A THIRTY-SOMETHING OBAMA VOTER

David Axelrod’s television advertising defined Barack Obama in the public
consciousness in those final three weeks of the primary campaign. Axelrod’s
long-held strategy of keeping a lock on the money and spending it on TV at the
end proved to be positively genius, especially in light of the ugly demise of Blair
Hull. Axelrod, of course, had full knowledge of Hull’s unseemly personal
baggage and he was confident that, in such a high-profile contest, it would not
remain under wraps forever. Dan Hynes, meanwhile, ran a series of
commercials, but they had a cutesy quality and got lost in the seasonal blitz of
political ads. In one commercial intended to court suburban women, Hynes stood
at a kitchen counter attired in an apron and cradling an egg—“a nest egg,” he
called it—and then cracked the egg over a skillet. This was a reference to
Republican indifference to safeguarding a retirement nest egg for everyday
people. (Note to campaign commercial scriptwriters: Never put your candidate
in an apron.) Another ad featured Hynes and his wife, but again, it seemed
lightweight for a U.S. Senate contest.
With Obama’s ads resonating, momentum had swung his way and it seemed
unstoppable. He was soaring in the polls. This was the very beginning of the
Obama phenomenon that would sweep through Illinois and then spread
nationwide, carrying him into the U.S. Senate and ultimately into the 2008
presidential contest.
Obama’s Democratic primary opponents huddled with their staffs to
brainstorm about how to stop Obama in those final weeks, but they came up with

nothing. Hynes had been concentrating almost solely on derailing Hull and
seemed clueless about how to respond to Obama’s surge. The Hull campaign had
assembled opposition research on Obama, but nothing was of much substance.
Obama had been inoculated from harsh criticism of his teenage and college
cocaine snorting because he had divulged the matter himself in a book published
ten years earlier. Hoping to turn Democratic women away from Obama,
operatives for one opponent feverishly lobbied me behind the scenes to write a
story about Obama’s many “present” votes in the legislature on abortion bills.
But when I interviewed abortion rights activists in Springfield about Obama’s
posture on abortion, they stood firmly behind him as a staunch pro-choice
advocate. “There was nowhere to go, nothing to make an issue of,” said Mark
Blumenthal, one of Hull’s pollsters. “Obama had the best of all worlds. He said,
‘I embody change, but I have experience.’ The Obama persona born the last
week of the campaign—we couldn’t look at that with any depth. He was just on
the right side of Democratic primary voters that season. And nobody was able to
create a news story to take him down.”
As a black man, Obama, in some ways, wore a suit of armor. No candidate
wanted to alienate the significant black voting bloc by sharply attacking him as
he was fast becoming a symbol of pride in the African-American community.
When Obama stepped into public spaces, he was recognized as never before.
“Hey, that’s Barack Obama,” a black man whispered to a friend with a beaming
smile on his face as Obama marched through Chicago’s McCormick Place
Convention Center to an event. “Let’s face it—he’s black. And we don’t want to
look racist,” explained Jason Erkes, the Hull communications director. There
was also more to Hull’s reluctance—Hull’s campaign cochairman, Bobby Rush,
had assured the Hull team early in the race that Obama could not draw votes
from the black community. So he had never developed a strategy for attacking
Obama. Indeed, the bad blood was with Hynes. Said Erkes, “If we don’t win,
and it looks like we can’t, we are going to do everything we can to make sure
Hynes doesn’t win.”
The only other event that could have damaged Obama’s pristine image came
in the final televised debate. Obama, now the clear front-runner, was visibly
nervous from the outset and did not deliver his opening statement with his usual
cocksure attitude. To offer support and prepare Obama for the debate, Axelrod
and Pete Giangreco had traveled back to Chicago from their duties with the John
Edwards presidential campaign and other clients. They assumed that the other
candidates would come out swinging at Obama, and that was true. And one

could sense that Obama was thinking about what might soon be coming his way.
Hynes, for one, assailed Obama for doing little to curb state spending under the
previous Republican gubernatorial administration and thus asserted that Obama
was partially responsible for creating the state’s fiscal mess. “He stayed silent,”
Hynes said of Obama. “He did nothing.” But, Giangreco noted, while Obama’s
even temperament can make him poorly equipped to take the first swing at an
opponent, “Barack is a great counterpuncher when he’s attacked.” Sure enough,
Obama swatted back effectively by saying that Hynes was the state comptroller
at the time and “he signed off on every one of these budgets.”
Obama came out of the forum largely unscathed, with only days to the
election. For all intents and purposes, the nomination was his.
THE TYPICALLY GRAY WINTER SKY OF CHICAGO HUNG BEFORE ME on March 10,
2004, framing the impressive city skyline in dreariness. I was juggling my
morning coffee, a manual-shift Saturn and speeding traffic along the Eisenhower
Expressway en route to the Tribune Tower in downtown Chicago when my cell
phone showed that Obama was calling. It is a rare occurrence when a candidate
calls a reporter himself, but to this point, Obama had pretty much run his
campaign on his own terms, and pretty cheaply as well. Instantly I sensed why
he was dialing me. For the first time, Obama had led the Tribune’s daily wrap-up
story on the Senate race. The Tribune had run weekly stories on the policy issues
in the race, but the coverage that had absorbed most of the media’s attention
concerned Hull’s marital troubles. And in this case, not only was Obama the lead
of the story, but the article featured a negative finding about him. Talk about
rare.
A rival campaign had passed along to me an Obama flyer dubbed a
“Legislative Update” that looked suspiciously like campaign advertising,
although its cost was borne by state taxpayers. The flyer had been mailed in
early February to every household in his state senate district on Chicago’s South
Side under even more suspicious circumstances. It arrived in mailboxes just days
before an ethics law prohibited elected officials running for office from
dispersing such taxpayer-funded literature. And there was irony to the story.
Obama had written the ethics law himself, touting it as an example of both his
probity and his legislative accomplishments. Thus, it seemed he was caught in an
impropriety: By mailing the state-funded positive piece about himself just before
the deadline, he was clearly doing an end run around the very law that he had

sponsored with pride.
The Tribune story, which I cowrote with colleague John Chase, began like
this: “State Sen. Barack Obama claims the mantle of a reformer, but early last
month the Democratic U.S. Senate candidate spent $17,191 in state taxpayer
money on a mailer that had the look and feel of a campaign flier. The mailing
went out just days before a new ban on the pre-election dissemination of such
state-paid constituent newsletters went into effect, part of a package of ethics
reforms that Obama takes credit for getting passed.”
Considering that his main opponents in the Senate race had been caught up in
improperly bundling campaign contributions (Hynes) and allegations of spousal
abuse (Hull), this story hardly merited a misdemeanor. But it did put a slight
chink in Obama’s armor, which at that point hadn’t endured so much as a minor
surface scratch.
Like most reporters who receive such phone calls, I quickly realized I was
going to have to defend my story. In this case, that didn’t seem like a difficult
chore. It was hardly the crime of the century, but the story was solid and
legitimate, far from a cheap journalistic shot. “Hey, this story today,” Obama
began, before pausing a moment. “Uh, I guess with me at the top, I guess this
means I’m the front-runner, huh?” His hesitation and his less-than-assured tone
told me he didn’t seem comfortable making the call, but felt he must defend
himself. “You know, Dave,” he continued, “this story today, we didn’t do
anything illegal here. The implication is, we did something illegal.” I explained
that the story never implied illegality, but said that he appeared to have breached
“the spirit of the law.” I then waited for his defense of that argument.
But, to my shock, Obama did something that politicians rarely do—he backed
down and concurred with me, showing a rare glimpse of both humility and
candor. “Okay, I’ll give you that,” he said. “And between you and me, I chewed
out my staff for mailing that out when they did. It should have gone out a long
time ago.”
And with that, the matter seemed to be laid to rest. That is, until I chatted with
Obama’s lead campaign consultant later in the day. Axelrod called to inform me
that my story was bogus—his candidate had done nothing wrong. When I used
the same response as with Obama—I never implied illegality, only that he had
violated the spirit of his own ethics law—Axelrod disagreed entirely. He argued

vigorously that the mailing in no way resembled campaign literature and it was
strictly distributed by Obama’s senate office to inform his constituents about his
work in Springfield. No laws were broken—just an unfair shot from the
newspaper at his man, Axelrod insisted.
When I told Axelrod that his candidate had conceded to me earlier in the day
that he had mistakenly sent out the flyer when he did, that it should have gone
out earlier, and that Obama had further admitted to breaking the spirit of the law,
Axelrod responded with utter amazement.
“He did?” Axelrod said. “He said that?”
“Yes,” I said. “How about that? It would appear that you have an honest man
on your hands here.”
“Yeah, I know. And you know what?” Axelrod said. “That can be a real
problem.”
AS THE PRIMARY CAMPAIGN WOUND DOWN AND OBAMA’S VICTORY seemed in the
bag, he naturally started thinking about the general election and how to
strengthen his campaign organization. He would now be the Democratic Party
nominee, and resources from the national party would be forthcoming. The
question was, how much did he need to avail himself of these resources. As
someone who endeavored to keep his career as unencumbered as possible by the
organized political structure, he wanted to maintain autonomy over his message,
his media and his policy. In the primary, Obama had hired savvy professional
consultants and staff with ties to the mainstream political establishment in
Axelrod, Jim Cauley and Pete Giangreco. But for the most part, Obama’s
message and his core beliefs were the main thrust. He also had a flock of
volunteers who believed in him. Many of them were students at the University of
Chicago and other Chicago-area colleges who had heard of Obama by word of
mouth or had seen him speak. “We have all these save-the-world types showing
up at the door,” campaign manager Cauley mused one day. “Sometimes, I don’t
know what to do with them all.” I almost laughed aloud at this comment. Wasn’t
Obama a save-the-world type himself?
In any case, Obama could still look at his primary campaign and say that
victory pretty much came organically—not just because the powers-that-be

wished it so. Obama, to be sure, had worked within the established order,
currying favor with insiders, raising millions in campaign money and hiring
aides with powerful connections. He had secured Illinois senate president Emil
Jones’s backing. He had tapped many of the same financial donors who also
backed Mayor Richard Daley. Unions, trial lawyers and other so-called special
interests had backed him financially and with grassroots help. And Michelle, of
course, had worked in city hall and helped to introduce her husband to a network
of important African-American business leaders. But Obama operated mostly on
the fringes of Chicago’s legendary machine politics. He was not considered a
vital cog in the wheel of any political operation but his own.
So Obama wanted to keep his freedom and his independence intact through
the fall election. “I don’t want this campaign to be taken over by Washington,”
he said, while riding in the campaign SUV between appearances at AfricanAmerican churches. That will be easier said than done, I thought to myself.
Perhaps Obama didn’t realize the power of his candidacy. Illinois was trending
heavily Democratic, and he had an excellent chance to be only the third black
elected to the Senate since Reconstruction and most likely the only sitting black
in the upper chamber. This in itself would catapult his profile above all the black
representatives who had been in Washington for years.
THE BUZZ AROUND OBAMA IN THOSE FINAL WEEKS BECAME INtense. African
Americans, especially, jumped aboard his candidacy with fervor. Private polling
showed that Obama shot from less than 15 percent of the black vote to nearly 50
percent just a week after his television ads hit the airwaves. “It was a straight
arrow up,” said Blumenthal, the Hull pollster. “And it just kept going up and
up.” This electricity among blacks was palpable in nearly every AfricanAmerican setting Obama walked into. Rather than sitting anonymously in a
church pew on Sunday morning and then having to introduce himself from the
pulpit, he now turned heads wherever he went. A fund-raiser thrown by a young
black professional at a trendy downtown bar was packed to capacity. It took
Obama half an hour to push himself through the crowd to the back of the huge
nightclub, where he was to speak. When the host introduced him to a cheering
crowd as “the best and the brightest we have to offer the world,” even the
ambitious, self-assured Obama raised an eyebrow at this obsequious treatment.
He needed a burly escort to help him back through the crowd and into the
waiting SUV. Finally hopping back into the vehicle, he seemed stunned himself
at the outpouring of affection.

Wherever Obama went in public as primary election day neared, he put on his
game face. “I am fired up!” he would exclaim in joyous rallies filled with
exuberant union members and teachers and progressives and blacks. Privately,
however, Obama’s driving ambition, and now the seeming fait accompli of
becoming a U.S. senator, was having a different effect—it was eating him up.
What is worse: Getting a job that you desperately want but that will
dramatically alter your relatively happy life, whisking you away from your
beloved wife and children and curtailing your time with close friends, or not
getting the job and living out your life quite comfortably? Obama dearly loved
his wife and his two young girls, and it was dawning on him that being a U.S.
senator—especially one with star power—was going to pull him away from
them more than he might have foreseen. Obama’s abiding belief in his own
personal destiny created this paradoxical effect—he would strive for something
passionately and then rebel against its deleterious effects on his life. “Ambition
has always been both Barack’s downfall and his greatest attribute,” his former
aide Dan Shomon said.
This internal conflict came to the attention of his close friend Valerie Jarrett at
a picnic she threw for the campaign’s volunteers and staff. Throughout the event,
Obama’s face was tight and he was on edge—almost the antithesis of his
easygoing public persona. Jarrett noticed this and asked him about it when the
two had a private lunch not long after. “Well, you are on your way now,” she told
him. “It looks like you are going to be a U.S. senator and who knows what’s
next? So what’s the matter, Barack?” Obama’s eyes had been downcast since he
greeted her, and he now hung his head low as Jarrett spoke. When he lifted his
head to answer, a tear rolled down his cheek. “I’m really going to miss those
little girls,” he said.
ELECTION NIGHT WAS A RAPTUROUS EXPERIENCE FOR MOST OF Obama’s supporters,
except Obama. Highly disciplined and focused, he displayed few signs that he
was about to be the Democratic nominee to the U.S. Senate. The victory party
was held at the Chicago Hyatt Regency, owned by the Pritzker family. As a
roomful of two hundred guests watched election results pour in across the
television screen, Obama paced about endlessly, checking notes for the speech
he had cobbled together and greeting the many smiling well-wishers who
hugged him and shook his hand. Obama had stepped into his Hawaii calm, cool

exterior. “He’s really pretty excited,” Michelle told a quizzical-looking Eric
Zorn, the Tribune columnist. “He’s basically a calm guy. It takes a lot to push his
buttons. He has incredibly low blood pressure.”
Axelrod was stationed at the Cook County Board of Elections, monitoring the
results of the race. On election night, Axelrod’s crusader instincts took over from
those of the Machiavellian consultant bent on winning a race at all costs. As he
looked over the numbers, he began thinking about the historic nature of what
was occurring. A black man was running away with a statewide race for the U.S.
Senate, and he was not squeaking through. He was winning predominantly white
wards all over the city and precincts in the suburbs that most blacks would have
considered far out of reach. The breadth of Obama’s support shocked even his
chief strategists. “The most surprising and gratifying thing was when those
numbers rolled in on primary night,” Axelrod said. “And you saw numbers from
the Northwest Side of Chicago, and you saw the numbers from the collar
counties, and you realized that, you know, I mean, I was covering Chicago
politics when the issue of race was at a jagged edge here. And I was around
when Harold Washington went to Saint Pasquale’s church on the Northwest Side
and was roundly booed and the hatred was, you know, palpable. And that night,
that primary night, I was moved, if you could be moved by watching numbers
come across a computer screen. What those numbers meant was that we had
passed a Rubicon in the politics of this state, where a guy could come along who
was an African-American candidate, but who had universal appeal and people
were willing to look beyond race.”
I had run back to the Tribune from Obama’s fete in order to assemble the story
on his victory for the next day’s paper. And I was surprised by the numbers as
well, even if my roots in Chicago and its racial schisms were more recent. The
final tally: Obama had a whopping 53 percent of the vote; Hynes had 24 percent;
and Hull finished with about 10 percent. These numbers were beyond anything
that Cauley, Giangreco or Axelrod had fathomed was possible. Giangreco
initially figured that if Obama pulled in 80 percent of blacks and half of collegeeducated liberals—which was the initial goal—he could win 35 percent of
Democratic voters and prevail in such a crowded field. Giangreco’s analysis of
voting patterns had Obama’s high-end threshold in the upper 30s or, maybe, if all
went perfectly, in the low 40s. Cracking 50 percent was beyond hope. But in the
end, Obama raked in more than 95 percent of the black vote and even won some
city wards with a heavy percentage of non-college-educated whites.

As I sat at my desk to write the “Obama Wins” story, I looked through the
various feeds arriving from reporters in the field who were interviewing voters at
polling stations. There was one theme throughout: Barack Obama was a “breath
of fresh air,” in the words of one voter in a white Northwest Side ward that
would have seemed safely in Hynes’s pocket. But Obama displayed a unique
quality that she could not quite put her finger on. In the end, she summed it up
by saying: “He knows his stuff. I’m tired of the machine.”
This was the kind of Obama voter that shocked pollsters and strategists.
Obama destroyed the stereotypical appeal of a black candidate. Illinois surely
had a history of electing blacks to statewide offices, but usually this was done
purely on the strength of liberals, college-age voters and African Americans
themselves. A postprimary analysis by Blumenthal showed that even when he
subtracted college-educated whites from his sample, Obama still garnered nearly
30 percent of the rest of the white vote, which was extremely unusual for a black
candidate. He decisively won all the heavily white Chicago collar counties and
even captured nearly one in four Democratic votes outside the Chicago region,
though he barely campaigned there.
Those who were inclined toward Obama in the first place were swept away in
the heady moment. They talked about Obama representing a new generation of
politician whose language was not shrill and who eloquently conveyed a feeling
of hope and honesty. “Truthfully, it feels like a movement,” said Leslie Corbett,
who had met Obama the year before at a meeting of the National Poverty Law
Center and instantly became a supporter. “I think for people of our generation,
we haven’t been a part of something like this before.” Twenty-six-year-old
Deborah Landis of Chicago said she first saw Obama a year before and was
overwhelmed by his aura. “When I first met him, I registered to vote that
evening just so I could vote for him,” Landis said.
Back at his victory party, Obama ambled onstage surrounded by his family—
Michelle, Sasha and Malia; his brother-in-law, Craig Robinson; and his half
sister Maya Soetoro-Ng, from Hawaii. A proud-looking Reverend Jesse Jackson,
who had endorsed Obama, proclaimed: “Tonight, surely Dr. King and the
martyrs smiled upon us.” Obama himself told the crowd that they, not he, were
responsible for this victory. He reiterated the Democratic ideals that he had cited
throughout the campaign, saying that he was on a mission to enact broad social
change to better the condition of society’s most vulnerable citizens. “At its best,
the idea of this party has been that we are going to expand opportunity and

include people that have not been included, that we are going to give voice to the
voiceless, and power to the powerless, and embrace people from the outside and
bring them inside, and give them a piece of the American dream,” Obama said.
Throughout his speech, a chant rose from the jubilant and attentive crowd, and
Obama used the chant to launch a call-and-response. The words of this chant
could be found on the huge white-and-blue banners hanging throughout the hotel
ballroom: “Yes, we can! Yes, we can!”