The Consultant
David was in his glory. He was the belle of the ball. Everyone wanted him
and he was feeding on all the attention.
—AN ILLINOIS POLITICAL LOBBYIST ABOUT CONSULTANT DAVID AXELROD

Perhaps the most significant event in Barack Obama’s campaign for the U.S.
Senate occurred more than two full years before Illinois voters went to the polls
and many months before Obama even made a final decision to run for the seat.
This occurrence was a businesslike yet utterly strange final meeting between the
highly regarded political consultant David Axelrod and a complete political
neophyte with his eyes on the Senate seat, multimillionaire Blair Hull.
The discussions between Axelrod and Hull ultimately pushed Axelrod into the
campaign of Obama, rearranging the dynamics of the race and instantly turning
the relatively little-known state senator into a serious contender. Without
Axelrod as his marketing specialist, it’s unclear if Obama would have won the
Democratic Party primary. And if Obama had still managed to pull off victory,
there’s absolutely no question that he would never have done it in such an
astonishing fashion—in a way that propelled him to national stardom even
before he hit Washington. Obama possessed the innate talent for success, to be
sure. But Axelrod was the coach who harnessed that talent and massaged it into
its present form, and then he was the publicity agent who sold Obama to Illinois
voters. Obama would lean on Axelrod increasingly throughout the 2003–2004
campaign season—and thereafter. If Obama was on his cell phone, which
seemed to be at every spare moment, there was a high probability that he was
consulting with “Ax,” the apt nickname for this cutthroat political operative.
Obama would call Axelrod three or four times a day, at all hours of the day and
night, seeking his counsel and his wisdom.

Axelrod is a former reporter for the Chicago Tribune who had slogged
through several years of political campaigns as a private consultant before
establishing himself as the preeminent message and media adviser for Democrats
seeking office in Illinois. His talent for producing television commercials that
highlight the best sale points of a candidate is unsurpassed. A native of New
York City, Axelrod is a tall man who was then approaching fifty. He has a thick
salt-and-pepper mustache, thinning hair, a perpetual slouch and dark droopy eyes
that make him appear continually sad. He has a keen, somewhat scalding sense
of humor. But even when tossing off an acidly funny line, he rarely smiles at his
own wit.
Whenever I was assigned to cover a political campaign for the Tribune, I
would never fail to schedule a breakfast or two with Axelrod near the downtown
Chicago high-rise condominium he shares with his wife, Susan, whom he met
playing coed basketball in college. It was a mutually beneficial source-reporter
relationship. I would endeavor to pick his brain about the race at hand, while he
would use the encounters to convey his candidate’s message and try to spin a
reporter from the influential Tribune. Without fail, a disheveled Axelrod would
arrive for these meetings at least twenty minutes late. He was typically outfitted
in a baseball cap and wrinkled sports attire, which he might or might not change
in the course of his business day. Over one breakfast, he rubbed his eyes hard
with the palms of his hands and confessed that he suffers from sleep apnea, a
condition in which someone sleeps but fitfully and unrestfully. This made me
think that Axelrod’s scarily shrewd political mind is always at work, even during
sleep. His sloppy eating habits are a well-worn inside joke among those who
know him well—Obama foremost among these wags. During Obama’s 2004
Senate primary contest, I recall a breakfast in which Axelrod fervently pitched
his client’s potential star power for minutes on end. But as he extolled the virtues
of Obama, I was more in wonder at the seemingly endless length of time that a
gooey string of yellow cheese from his omelet could extend from his mustache
to his plate without snapping or being noticed by him.
Axelrod has handled media strategy for major Democrats across the nation,
including Chicago mayor Richard M. Daley, Representative Rahm Emanuel of
Illinois, Senator Christopher Dodd of Connecticut and a host of others. He
initially oversaw media for Senator John Edwards’s 2004 presidential campaign
but mysteriously left that role amid squabbling among Edwards’s advisers.
Axelrod won’t talk about that campaign in depth, except to say that “For
whatever reason, John Edwards couldn’t close the deal. The candidate has to

close the deal with voters.”
Rising from the streets of Chicago’s bare-knuckles, fratricidal machine
politics, Axelrod developed a specialty in urban races. He is especially masterful
at helping to elect black candidates in broad geographic areas where some white
support is essential, most notably Michael White for Cleveland mayor and Deval
Patrick for Massachusetts governor. He has a special talent for tapping into the
most compelling personal life stories of a candidate and composing a campaign
script that enhances those qualities for public consumption. Despite this artistic
side, Axelrod also has no fear of negative, go-for-the-jugular campaigning. Of
all the operatives that Republican strategist Ed Rollins has gone up against,
Rollins placed Axelrod at the top of his list of “Guys I Never Want to See
Lobbing Grenades at Me Again.”
Axelrod did his first political work at nine years of age, when the precocious
youngster handed out leaflets for Robert Kennedy’s Senate campaign in New
York. “I just wanted to go out and do it and so I went over and volunteered—I
was a weird kid,” Axelrod said with a smirk. His mother was a newspaper
reporter before running focus groups for a New York advertising agency. His
father, a Russian immigrant, was a psychologist and, perhaps most significant to
the sports-maniac Axelrod, an excellent baseball player who was an amateur
teammate of the great hitter Hank Greenberg, known for making the National
Baseball Hall of Fame after overcoming virulent anti-Semitism. Axelrod’s father
went to Long Island University on a baseball scholarship and studied art and
philosophy before turning to psychology. Axelrod’s parents, who would divorce
during his childhood, were passionate about politics and “classic New York
leftists,” he said. This philosophy remains with Axelrod today. He is a potent
blend of irascible left-wing idealist and smooth-talking, high-priced operative for
the establishment. He talks with such deep conviction about using politics to
promote the greater good that it is impossible to think he does not believe this at
some level. On the other hand, one of Axelrod’s most enduring clients is Mayor
Daley, who lords over Chicago with a powerful political machine unmatched
anywhere in the country. When Daley’s political apparatus became the focus of a
federal corruption investigation into widespread illegal patronage hiring at city
hall, Axelrod rushed to defend the mayor with TV appearances and op-ed pieces.
He explains this moral contradiction by saying that Daley’s overall record is one
of bringing harmony and development to a city that the mayor clearly loves.
Axelrod has been dealt two family tragedies that perhaps explain why I have

always sensed a certain melancholy about him. His father committed suicide
while Axelrod was in college, and his only daughter among three children
became developmentally disabled after suffering epileptic seizures.
For years, Axelrod was loath to acknowledge his father’s suicide. Whenever I
tried to broach the subject, he would deftly skirt around it, and I would retreat.
But in 2006, Axelrod finally came to terms with the loss. He wrote a poignant
column in the Tribune about his father’s chronic depression: “Dad never shared
his anxieties or sadness with me or, so far as I could tell, anyone else. At his
funeral, several of his patients told me that he had saved their lives. Yet he
couldn’t reach out for help to save his own…. We still have a long way to go
before depression and other psychiatric conditions are fully accepted as illnesses,
not defects of character or failures of self-discipline. I know, because it’s taken
me more than thirty years to say out loud that the man I most loved and admired
took his own life.”
Axelrod came to Chicago to study political science at the University of
Chicago and, just days after graduation, found himself following his mother’s
profession, covering nighttime “mayhem”—cops, courts, killings—for the
Tribune. He worked his way up to political reporter and was largely responsible
for a great deal of good press coverage of the 1979 campaign of an outsider for
Chicago mayor, Jane Byrne. In fact, Axelrod’s reporting was instrumental in
Byrne’s upset victory to become the first woman to head city hall. After her
election, Axelrod then dutifully chronicled every election promise that she
broke, and essentially reversed her image from reformer to another go-along
politician. Thus, Axelrod is intimately familiar with how the media often
operates, having been a purveyor of its duplicitous nature. The press can carry a
candidate into office on one day and knock that politician out of office the next.
Set ’em up, then knock ’em down.
Axelrod’s stay with the Tribune ended in 1984 after, in his version, he grew
concerned about the newspaper’s direction away from a “sense of mission” and
toward “corporatization.” He talks nostalgically of his reporting days at the
Tribune. “It was just all about the journalism and the mission,” he said. “You
would have loved working then.” Axelrod had a front-row seat for Harold
Washington’s historic mayoral run and the racial animosity it stoked in the city.
But missions aside, Axelrod also departed the Tribune because his career hit a
roadblock. He had sharp differences with more senior reporters and editors who
stood in his path. Upon leaving the newspaper, Axelrod was immediately hired

as communications director for the successful Senate campaign of then
Representative Paul Simon, whose devotion and integrity “inspired” Axelrod.
After a shakeup in Simon’s staff, Axelrod quickly found himself comanaging the
campaign of the bespectacled, bow-tied, populist Democrat. Still in his twenties,
Axelrod went from newspaper reporting to overseeing a major Senate campaign
almost overnight. It was in Simon’s campaign that Axelrod formed a lasting
friendship with another young Chicago operative—the brash, youthful, harddriving Rahm Emanuel, who went on to become a top White House aide to Bill
Clinton and then a leading Democrat in Congress. The merciless Emanuel was
chief architect for the Democrats’ takeover of the House of Representatives in
2005.
When Axelrod left the newspaper for political consulting, he carried with him
a Rolodex of media contacts and intimate knowledge of how deeply politics and
newspapers are intertwined in Chicago’s culture and how the inside players of
that world operated. It would take time, but this knowledge would help him
build a lucrative media consulting business that is thriving more than two
decades later—with his top client, of course, now being Obama.
THE MEETINGS BETWEEN AXELROD AND BLAIR HULL, WHICH occurred throughout
2002, provided Axelrod with a vivid glimpse into the private life of Hull, a
former professional Las Vegas gambler who had amassed extraordinary personal
wealth trading securities on Wall Street.
Hull was willing to spend tens of millions to win a Senate seat—and he
wanted Axelrod on board his campaign. Axelrod was especially accomplished at
spotting and assessing the modest or far-reaching talent possessed by a
candidate, as well as at crafting a message and articulating that message through
appealing television advertising. But just as important, as a former Tribune
reporter, he offered those invaluable inside connections to Chicago’s media elite.
He could call nearly any political reporter or newspaper editor in the Chicago
region, including those in the often impenetrable Tribune ivory tower, and
immediately get an audience. Axelrod had cultivated reporters throughout
Chicago and the rest of the state. (Full disclosure: I was among those reporters
under cultivation.) From his earlier stint at the Tribune, Axelrod was also on a
friendly, first-name basis with the editor of the Tribune, Ann Marie Lipinski, as
well as with its editorial board editor, Bruce Dold. He throws an annual
December holiday party in which the guests are split almost evenly between

media members and political insiders. Thus, each serious candidate in the 2004
Senate contest ranked Axelrod the overwhelming first choice among media
advisers to hire. “David was in his glory. He was the belle of the ball,” one
influential Illinois political lobbyist recalled. “Everyone wanted him and he was
feeding on all the attention.”
In being the sought-after adviser, Axelrod was dealing from a position of
extreme power when selecting an employer. No one grasped the demographic
and political dynamics of the entire state and urban Chicago as astutely as
Axelrod. He knew the terrain and the people who populated that landscape. The
candidate who won his services would have the sharpest, most ruthless political
mind in the state at his disposal, immediately providing that person with a huge
advantage amid a competitive field.
For those like Axelrod who ply their trade in the meat-grinder of campaign
politics, Hull was the employer of choice. Hull not only brought immediate
national attention to the race because of his excessive wealth—several hundred
million dollars—but most important to itinerant political workers, he offered an
unlimited bank account from which to fund a campaign. Hull had pledged to
spend tens of millions of dollars—whatever it took to win the seat. And best of
all, he was such a newcomer to politics that he was at the mercy of his paid staff
about nearly everything, from what to say to reporters to how much to drop on
television ads. His campaign manager, for example, struck a one-hundred-andfifty-thousand-dollar-a-year deal—an over-the-top sum to run a Senate
campaign. Hull was a cash cow all too willing to be milked prodigiously. “He
was a meal ticket for everybody,” in the words of Axelrod.
Axelrod also had a history of signing with a deep-pocketed first-time
candidate like Hull. In 1992 he was chief adviser to free-spending
multimillionaire lawyer Al Hofeld when Hofeld unsuccessfully sought the
Democratic nomination against Senator Alan Dixon of Illinois. So when the
2004 Senate race rolled around, Axelrod looked first to Hull. By Axelrod’s
account, he met with Hull at least twice in the first half of 2002. Hull told
Axelrod that he had already hired a highly recommended Washington-based
media consultant, Anita Dunn. Yet, according to Axelrod, Hull promised him
double Dunn’s fee if he would come on board too. “I would have made far more
money working for Hull in the primary than what I made from Barack in both
the primary and the general [elections] combined,” Axelrod said.

Still, none of the meetings between Axelrod and Hull went particularly well
for the awkward Hull. And most important, the encounters provided Axelrod
with extraordinary insight into Hull’s character and his astounding lack of
political talent. In their first chat, Hull misinterpreted Axelrod’s concern about
Hull’s dismal history of voting in elections as a veiled threat to be used against
him later. In subsequent discussions, Axelrod learned intimate and sordid details
about Hull’s private life that would later be of significant value to Axelrod’s
ultimate employer, Barack Obama.
Rumors had swirled in Democratic circles that Hull’s divorce had been
particularly messy, and that his ex-wife had made allegations against him,
although the specifics of those allegations were unclear. Talk that Hull had a past
alcohol abuse problem also floated through the political air. Learning of this
through the grapevine, Axelrod could see a complicated future for a Hull
candidacy. If these things were true, Hull could go up in flames, especially if the
public relations surrounding these matters was not handled with expert
perfection.
So Axelrod questioned Hull sternly and specifically about the rumors. He
wanted to know exactly what kind of storm he might have to weather if he
signed with Hull. And he wanted to know how Hull would handle himself
should those rumors be proved factual and then leak into the public domain.
Realizing the importance of enlisting Axelrod on his team, Hull decided to come
clean with him—sort of. Hull acknowledged that he indeed had used cocaine in
the past and had sought treatment for alcohol abuse and that, yes, his ex-wife had
alleged physical and mental abuse.
But to Axelrod’s astonishment, when he pried further about the ex-wife’s
allegations of abuse, Hull gave him an answer that ultimately would end their
relationship. Axelrod explained to Hull: “You know, I hear these things. I don’t
know if they’re true. But you know, like I need to know if they’re true.” The
multimillionaire gave Axelrod a look that Axelrod would later describe as
“glacial.” Then Hull simply said: “There’s no paper on that.”
Recalled Axelrod: “So I’m thinking, Wow, that’s really not the answer you
really wanted to hear…. And I am thinking, He’s a cold guy. I finally came to
that conclusion. I also came to the conclusion that he could not get through the
primary with that stuff…. I told him that he needed to think real long and hard
about this because these kinds of things come out. It was a really awkward thing,

though, because I knew stuff from a conversation that I felt was, in certain ways,
privileged. I knew all this shit but I could not, and would not, use it against him.”
Nevertheless, if Axelrod wanted some business from the 2004 Senate contest,
after those talks, it became clear that he must find another Democrat to pay his
bills.
LESS THAN TWO MONTHS BEFORE OBAMA’S SEASONAL HAWAII vacation in 2002, he
delivered what he considers today to be his best speech—an address to a group
of hundreds of war protestors in which he flatly stated his opposition to a U.S.
invasion of Iraq. The American military action was still months away, but
foment had been building against it, especially among the Democratic Party’s
left wing. Still, just a year after the 9/11 terrorist strike, President Bush’s
favorable rating among voters was very high. Polls showed that most Americans
supported him if he ultimately deemed the invasion to be in the best interests of
the country’s foreign policy.
As a still unannounced Senate candidate, Obama for months had been quietly
courting what he considered his two strongest bases of support—Chicago’s socalled lakefront liberals and African Americans. The lead organizer of the
downtown Chicago anti-war rally was Bettylu Saltzman, a liberal stalwart
among the city’s elite lakefront crowd whose admiration for Obama dated back
more than a decade. Saltzman, a petite woman in her early seventies at this time,
was the daughter of a late Chicago-area builder, Philip Klutznick, who left a
fortune to Saltzman and her five brothers. Klutznick had held top posts in the
administrations of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy and Jimmy
Carter. Of Klutznick’s children, Saltzman was the one drawn to political
activism. She had been “enraptured” by the speeches of Adlai Stevenson, the
senator from Illinois who lost the 1962 Democratic presidential nomination to
Kennedy. At the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968, she
worked on behalf of Eugene McCarthy, the anti–Vietnam War candidate for
president. But her biggest political role came when, for four years, she ran the
Chicago-based office of Senator Paul Simon. While working for Simon,
Saltzman formed a close bond with one of Simon’s chief political minds—
Axelrod, who had comanaged Simon’s first Senate campaign. The two would
talk on the phone almost daily, each sharing a passion for political gossip and
Chicago Bulls basketball. By 2002, Saltzman was a major Chicago fund-raiser
who could not only tap into her own wealth but had big-money connections that

could help raise substantial cash for any political candidate.
Saltzman first met Obama in 1992 after he graduated from Harvard Law and
moved back to Chicago to practice civil rights law. Saltzman was volunteering
for Bill Clinton’s campaign and was assembling constituency groups when
Obama stopped into Clinton’s Chicago campaign office. Saltzman was
immediately struck by Obama’s understated presence. “He came in and not only
did he speak well, but it was just the way he presented himself,” Saltzman said.
“He had never run for office, but he had all those qualities of a skilled
politician.” Saltzman and Obama formed a lasting political friendship and she
was helpful to Obama when he ran for the Illinois senate. When I interviewed
Saltzman about Obama, it was readily evident that his appeal to her went beyond
the normal politician’s. Having mentioned that she was “enraptured” by Adlai
Stevenson, Saltzman said she felt the same way about Obama, only more so. She
seemed almost spellbound by him, in fact. “When he speaks, it’s like—it’s like
magic.”
So when Saltzman was assembling speakers for the anti-war rally in late
October 2002, Obama came to her mind. Saltzman knew from conversations
with the lawmaker that he did not support an Iraq invasion, and she called him
and asked him to participate in the rally. Obama, still an unannounced candidate
for the Senate, did not immediately agree, but he told Saltzman that he would
think it over. This was one of the biggest decisions of his potential Senate bid.
Should he take a public stand on the likelihood of an Iraq war? He consulted
with Shomon, still his main political adviser at the time, and Shomon told him
that it was a no-brainer—if Saltzman was urging him to speak, he could not
refuse. Moreover, Obama was trying to draw Axelrod onto his Senate campaign
team. It would not be wise to disappoint Saltzman if he wanted her to continue
lobbying Axelrod on his behalf. So Obama agreed to speak. But Shomon also
warned Obama to be careful with his words because “there will be political
ramifications to whatever you say.” Shomon was indeed correct, and the
importance of this decision to Obama’s political future cannot be
underestimated. It is particularly important when considering this: Obama made
the decision to protest the impending war in part as a political calculation that he
hoped would benefit him among Democrats. Around the same period, in the U.S.
Senate, lawmakers were mulling over a similar political calculation—whether to
give President Bush the authority to launch an Iraq invasion. Several of these
senators with presidential ambitions—Hillary Clinton, John Kerry and John
Edwards—would choose the opposite course from Obama’s. As the next few

years would unfold, Obama’s calculation to oppose the war would fuel his rise in
the Democratic Party beyond his imagination. Meanwhile, the decision of these
three senators to give Bush invasion authority would prove to be horrendous for
their careers.
Obama called Saltzman just a couple of days before the event and told her that
he would participate. He then went home and wrote the speech longhand in a
single evening. Up to this point in Obama’s career, he had rarely used written
text, relying on his talent for speaking extemporaneously. But this time he took
Shomon’s advice to heart about the importance of the precise language of his
speech. “I knew that this was going to be an important statement on an important
issue and I didn’t want it subject to misinterpretation,” Obama said. “I wanted to
strike exactly what I truly felt on this thing. The nice thing is, because I thought
the politics of [the invasion] were bad, it was liberating—because I said exactly
what I truly believed.” When Obama told me this in an interview, I found it
fascinating. If one parses this statement, Obama is implying that he has given
speeches with sentiments that he does not truly believe for the sake of politics.
This is something that most politicians are loath to admit, at least on the record.
Obama came close to conceding that point, but as usual, lacked real specificity.
Though the speech was delivered to a group that most likely included a good
number of pacifists, Obama opened by announcing that he was “someone who is
not opposed to war in all circumstances.” This was something that I would see
Obama do on many occasions during his Senate campaign—begin his talk with
an opinion that did not necessarily coincide completely with the views of his
audience. For an observer, these moments were affecting because they made it
appear that he was not pandering to the crowd but authentically telling them
what he believed.
Throughout the speech, Obama inserted the refrain “I don’t oppose all wars”
between his unusually blunt rationales for opposing the launch of military forces
to Iraq:
What I am opposed to is a dumb war. What I am opposed to is a rash war.
What I am opposed to is the cynical attempt by Richard Perle, Paul
Wolfowitz and other armchair, weekend warriors in this administration to
shove their own ideological agendas down our throats, irrespective of the
costs in lives lost and in hardships borne. What I am opposed to is the
attempt by political hacks like Karl Rove to distract us from a rise in the

uninsured, a rise in the poverty rate, a drop in the median income—to
distract us from corporate scandals and a stock market that has just gone
through the worst month since the Great Depression.
That’s what I’m opposed to. A dumb war. A rash war. A war based not on
reason but on passion, not on principle but on politics.
By 2007, the speech looked positively prescient. Obama warned that a U.S.
occupation would be of “undetermined length, at undetermined cost, with
undetermined consequences.” He said that he was certain that an invasion
without strong international support would only “fan the flames of the Middle
East and encourage the worst, rather than the best, impulses of the Arab world,
and strengthen the recruitment arm of Al Qaeda.”
Another aspect of this scenario that seemed prescient later: Shomon’s
prediction that there would be “political ramifications” to whatever Obama
asserted. For Obama, those ramifications would be nothing but positive. Over
time, Obama could tout the speech as his predictions evolved into reality, as the
Iraq war devolved into a chaotic mess, killing several thousand Americans and
tens of thousands of Iraqis. Indeed, the speech had placed Obama firmly and
publicly against the Iraq venture before it happened. This was a position that
most Americans would gradually move toward as the war dragged on and
consequently sapped the political fortunes of the many Democrats and
Republicans in Congress who voted to give the president the authority to invade.
The speech would also make Obama the only candidate in the 2004 Senate race
and the only top-tier Democrat in the 2008 presidential contest to flatly oppose
the war before it was launched. In mid-2006, well after he delivered his keynote
address in Boston and myriad other high-profile speeches as a senator, Obama
told me that this had been his best-written and most courageous speech and was
thus his favorite:
That’s the speech I’m most proud of. It was a hard speech to give, you
know, because I was about to announce for the United States Senate and the
politics were hard to read then. Bush is at sixty-five percent [approval]. You
didn’t know whether this thing was gonna play out like the first Gulf War,
and you know, suddenly everybody’s coming back to cheering. What I
knew at the time, even as I gave the speech, was the military aspects of it
would be extraordinarily successful and very quick. I didn’t have any doubt
that the U.S. military would blow through there pretty quickly. And it was

just, well, a well-constructed speech. I like it. I like the opening because it
sets the tone. I mean, in some ways, it was not a typical anti-war speech.
Obama later in 2003 would correctly predict the sectarian violence between
the Shiites and Sunnis that overtook Iraq in the aftermath of the U.S.-led
invasion and subsequent occupation. He would also tell audiences that if he had
been a senator at the time, he would have voted against the resolution giving
President Bush the authority to invade Iraq because he feared the United States
would stoke sectarian violence and be bogged down in the Middle East for the
foreseeable future. After these pronouncements, when he finally entered the
2004 Senate contest, he could legitimately hold himself up as the candidate that
spoke out the earliest and the loudest on the war. And by the time he entered the
2008 presidential contest, these on-the-mark forecasts would be one of his main
selling points to an electorate that had long wearied of American bloodshed in
Iraq.
Standing firmly against the Iraq war helped to define Obama, just as voting
for the resolution defined the Democratic senators who ultimately would pay a
steep political price for their choice. Perhaps there is a lesson in this story for
politicians: Sometimes saying what you “truly believe,” in Obama’s words, can
pay long-term dividends.
WITH MOSELEY BRAUN OUT OF THE SENATE RACE, OBAMA WAS free and clear to
announce his candidacy. He did so on January 21, 2003, at a downtown Chicago
hotel, becoming the second announced candidate, along with Gery Chico. His
event was not overwhelming, but it looked serious. He assembled a group of
about a dozen established Democrats, including his Illinois Senate poker crew,
Illinois senate president Emil Jones Jr., Congressmen Danny Davis, Jesse
Jackson Jr. and various others. He focused his rhetoric on assailing the
Republican incumbent, saying that Peter Fitzgerald had “bought himself a
Senate seat and he’s betrayed the people of Illinois ever since.”
By now, Axelrod had all but formally committed to Obama. It appeared that
the race was shaping up as something of a free-for-all—potentially a three-or
even four-man contest by the end, with Obama, Hynes, Hull and Chico being the
top contenders. Chico, by this time, had hired Adelstein. Axelrod was still
weighing his options. Hull had the divorce issue and alcohol abuse problems in
his past that Axelrod thought would ultimately fell his candidacy. Axelrod had

reached out to Hynes, but Axelrod had never been particularly close to the
Hynes’s family-based political operation on the city’s Southwest Side, while his
and Obama’s friendship went back years. And besides, the state comptroller
wanted to keep his organization in the family. He hired his brother Matt as his
campaign manager.
That essentially left Axelrod with Obama, whom, ironically, he had once
counseled to pass on the Senate race and wait to run for Chicago mayor one day.
But with coaxing from Obama fan Bettylu Saltzman, Axelrod had been warming
to Obama’s pitch on how to win the primary—marry the African-American and
liberal vote as a base and then expand from there. Axelrod also knew that
Obama and his credentials—community organizer, Harvard Law Review
president, state lawmaker—might play well with an important constituency:
newspaper editorial boards, which hand out endorsements. In Obama, he saw
raw talent, tremendous drive and a decent opportunity at winning, especially
with all of Hull’s personal issues.
“My involvement was a leap of faith,” Axelrod said. “Barack showed flashes
of brilliance as a candidate during the early stages of the campaign, but there
were times of absolute pure drudgery…. His speeches were very theoretical and
intellectual and very long. But I thought that if I could help Barack Obama get to
Washington, then I would have accomplished something great in my life.”
To counter Obama’s shortcomings as a candidate, Axelrod did two things: He
urged Obama to think more in terms of people and their stories rather than pure
policy, and he stressed the importance of this advice to Obama’s other close
adviser—Michelle Obama.
Axelrod told Obama to visualize the people he had met and would be meeting
on the campaign trail, to try to bring their stories to life, to “invoke more
humanity in his speeches.” “In a classic way he grew under the tutelage of the
people he was meeting out on the stump and realized that he was internalizing
their everyday concerns and problems and realizing what the whole was about,”
Axelrod said. “It clicked in his head and he became a much better candidate over
time. His learning curve is great. Once he realized that he was not taking orals at
Harvard he became a better candidate.”
This maturation process is not dissimilar to that of many great politicians.
Again, John F. Kennedy was a poor speechmaker and even worse glad-hander at

the beginning of his political career. But after coaching from aides and his own
observations on the campaign trail, Kennedy developed into one of the great
presidential orators and a politician who could work a room with the best of his
kind. As for Michelle’s influence, Obama listens to her advice as he does to that
of no other individual, not even Axelrod. “She’s my coconspirator,” he said.
