TUMULTUOUS TIMES

While I was starting to play some of the best cricket of my career, at home my life had undergone a
fundamental transformation. That is because on 12 October 1997 I had received my greatest ever gift,
with Anjali giving birth to our first child. I had shared the news that I was expecting a child with my
team-mates when we were touring Zimbabwe in February 1997 and organized an impromptu party in
celebration. I was thrilled at the thought of becoming a father.
The night before the moment finally arrived I was with my friend Sunil Harshe on the terrace of
Anjali’s family’s house in Breach Candy. The house was just two minutes away from the hospital and
I had been told by Anjali’s paediatrician friend, Dr Ajit Gajendragadkar, that he would call me the
moment they brought her out of the delivery room. My prolonged presence in the hospital would have
caused difficulties for the authorities and it was best that I waited for the call. Restless and anxious, I
was lying on the terrace, staring up at the sky, and I remember saying to Sunil that within hours I
would be a father and turn a new page in my life. All I was praying for was that Anjali and the child
would both be safe and healthy.
When Dr Gajendragadkar finally called me with the good news the following day, I arrived at the
hospital within minutes with a video camera in my hand. Seconds after reaching the maternity ward, I
saw the doctor carrying my child in his arms and that’s when I was told that God had blessed us with a
baby girl. I recorded the whole thing and cherish the recording of the doctor bringing my daughter out
to me. It’s impossible to describe the overwhelming sensation of seeing my child for the first time. I
went up to Anjali and said to her that we would call our daughter Sara. In fact, it was a name that Ajit
had suggested and both Anjali and I loved it. When the doctor asked me to hold Sara, I was much too
nervous to do so at first, though I was longing to take her in my arms. I had never held a newborn in
my life.
On the day of Sara’s birth, I asked permission from the hospital authorities to stay with Anjali in
her room. I simply did not want to leave my wife and daughter alone. While I knew that they were in
good hands, I wanted to be with them the whole time. They were only too kind and suggested that,
while there wasn’t an extra bed for me, I could stay in the same room as Anjali and they were happy to
provide a mattress, which was placed on the floor. That was fine with me and I will always appreciate
their help.
Sara, according to everyone who saw her, was a carbon copy of me and I loved the act of putting her
to sleep in my arms. I would just rock her for a couple of minutes and she would go off to sleep. I had
a beard then and once she was a few months old I would place her on my lap and brush her hair with it.
It was a favourite father–daughter pastime and something both of us loved to do every day.
With a packed cricket calendar, which entailed me being away from home for long periods, it could
not have been easy for Anjali to bring up young Sara alone, but not once did she appear to resent this
or ask me to spend more time at home. For my part, I know I found it difficult to leave my newborn

daughter. Every time I came back after a tour I could spot the changes in her and I was aware that I
was missing out on something truly special.
The first international destination that young Sara travelled to was New Zealand in December 1998.
We arrived in Napier to start with and the team were given comfortable serviced apartments to stay in.
I was given a two-bedroom apartment and it was decided that Anjali and Sara would sleep in one
bedroom while I used the other. Sara, who had just turned one, had serious trouble adjusting to the
time difference. She would be awake all night and would expect Anjali to play with her the whole
time. I would put her to sleep all right, but then she would wake up an hour later and start wandering
all over the apartment. Because I had to train or play a match the next day, there was no way I could
stay up with her. As a result the responsibility fell on Anjali.
At one stage we were both finding it extremely tough to adjust and Anjali suggested that she would
much rather return to India. It was difficult managing a toddler alone, having to cook, clean and wash
her clothes, and when it was time to sleep she would be wide awake and ready to play. But then we
took her to the park to feed the ducks in the pond, which she loved, and that gave us so much joy that
the thought of going back was buried.
There is another story about Sara in New Zealand that I will never forget. The door to my bedroom
was always kept open so that Sara could come and go whenever she wanted. One morning Bhajji said
to me that I ought to check if she had something in her mouth. I was surprised, because we had not
given her anything. I had to persuade Sara to open her mouth for me and when she did I was shocked
to see that she had four or five cherry stones in her mouth. She must have had them in there for at least
a few minutes, and had it not been for Bhajji there could have been a serious problem.
The team spent Christmas and New Year in New Zealand in 1998–99 and we will always remain
grateful to two expat Indians for bailing us out on Christmas Day. None of us had an idea that
everything in Wellington, including restaurants, would remain shut between the night of 24 and the
morning of 26 December. In India all restaurants and hotels are open on Christmas Day, with people
eating out to celebrate the occasion. In Wellington, even the team hotel would not serve food and the
team was left to fend for themselves. That’s when Mori Patel, Ilesh Patel and Nanu bhai came to our
rescue.
Mori bhai, Ilesh bhai and Nanu bhai are residents of Wellington, and on Christmas Day they came
over to our hotel with all sorts of amazing food. We all enjoyed feasting on the fantastic Indian food
that had been specially prepared for us. Apart from not starving on Christmas Day, it meant we could
also get a taste of fantastic home-cooked Indian food. Over the years, the Patels came to watch a lot of
our games in New Zealand and sometimes even travelled to Australia to see us play. Each time they
would bring food and tea for us. Ilesh bhai’s desi chai (Indian tea) was a hit among the players and
each time I saw him I would ask, ‘Ilesh bhai chai nahi pilayenge kya?’ (Ilesh bhai, would you not get
us to drink tea today?)
It was in New Zealand that Sara started to speak. She said her first nursery rhyme in the course of
this tour and each word she said made me feel immensely fulfilled and delighted.

A painful series
While I was gradually adjusting to the responsibilities of fatherhood, I suffered my first serious
injury, a back problem from which I took more than eight months to fully recover. The problem
surfaced in Chennai at the end of January 1999 during the first Test against Pakistan.
Pakistan had come to India after a gap of thirteen years and the entire country was focused on the

two-Test series and the Asian Test Championship involving India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka that was to
follow. Pakistan had a versatile bowling attack, with Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis and the offspinner Saqlain Mushtaq, leg-spinner Shahid Afridi and slow left-arm orthodox spinner Nadeem Khan
all in good form, and there was no doubt it would be a keenly contested series.
The Chennai match lived up to the hype and after three days of gripping Test cricket, India were left
with a target of 271 in the fourth innings. It was a difficult run chase, as Wasim and Waqar started out
very well for Pakistan, reducing us to 6–2 on the third evening. I walked out with just under an hour
left on the third day, with Wasim and Waqar still charging in and full of energy. Rahul was already
out there and we knew we needed to see out the rest of the day and resume battle the following
morning. These little sessions are always tricky because the bowling side know they can come back
refreshed the next morning and so they throw everything at the batsmen, in the hope of getting a bonus
wicket. For the batting team there’s little to be gained and the priority is not to lose another wicket.
Waqar welcomed me to the crease with a couple of bouncers and even walked up to me on one
occasion to say, ‘Ball nazar aayi?’ (Did you see the ball?) I didn’t say a thing, but my eye contact was
enough to give him the message. I hardly moved and he was soon walking back to his bowling mark. I
remember muttering to myself, ‘You are not bowling that quick, my friend.’ This exchange only
helped to strengthen my resolve and I was unbeaten on 20 at the end of play, determined to win the
Test match on the fourth day.
Rahul was not out at the other end and there are not many other players you would rather bat with in
a situation like that. He has always been rock solid. The next morning, however, the usual script was
torn up when Rahul was bowled by a beauty from Wasim. Azhar soon followed and when Sourav got
out we were down to 82–5 and badly needed a partnership.
When Nayan Mongia came out to join me in the middle I asked him to be patient and just play
himself in. With the cream of our batting back in the dressing room, I realized it was time for me to
take charge. I was fully focused on the job at hand and had gone into a zone where I was praying
before each ball was bowled. Even when Nayan was on strike I was rehearsing in my mind how I’d
have played the balls bowled to him. In effect, I was trying to bat at both ends. As I concentrated
really hard, everything else around me seemed a blur and all I knew was that I had to bat through to
the end of the game.
And then the pain struck. It was forty-five minutes before tea when I felt a scorching pain in my
back. By now Nayan and I had put together a good partnership and the game was starting to tilt ever so
slightly towards India. But Pakistan had yet to take the new ball and I knew we still had a fair amount
of work to do. Wasim and Waqar would give their best in one final burst. The hot and humid
conditions in Chennai were harsh and I was starting to suffer from cramp. Playing each ball was
turning out to be an ordeal and the pain in my back was becoming unbearable. The tea break came as a
blessed relief. I remember lying flat on a towel in the dressing room with cold towels spread all over
me to bring down my body temperature. My whole body was cramping up and I knew it was going to
be really difficult to bat for two more hours.
After tea I had no choice but to attack the bowling, because I knew my back was about to give up. I
informed Nayan of the change in strategy and hit a few boundaries in the next few overs. Soon the
target was down to manageable proportions and we just needed to play out the second new ball. We
had put on 136 runs for the sixth wicket and Pakistan were gradually losing their grip on the match. In
fact, we were cruising along when Nayan got out to a bad shot. He tried a slog to a Wasim delivery
and top-edged the ball in the process. There was no need to play that shot and it had once again given
Pakistan a ray of hope. It was a sad end to a very good innings from Nayan.

Sunil Joshi, who came in next, settled well and even hit a six off Saqlain during his forty-minute
stay at the wicket. We made 36 in the six overs after Nayan got out and the target was now just 17 runs
away. In the meantime my back had all but given up on me and I was finding it difficult to stand up
straight. Every movement was hurting and every shot increased the pain. I soon realized that all-out
attack was my only option. Unable to bear the pain any longer, I tried to hit a Saqlain doosra – the offspinner’s delivery that goes the other way from normal after pitching, a ball that Saqlain was the first
to master – over mid off for another boundary. The ball bounced more than expected and I ended up
top-edging the ball. I could see Wasim getting under the ball at mid off and was praying for him to
drop the catch. But I was out for 136 and was devastated.
It was a painful walk back to the pavilion. Even the standing ovation from the crowd did little to
alleviate the pain at not having finished the match. However, I must say that I really did not expect us
to lose the match from there, with just 17 runs to get and three wickets, including Srinath and Kumble,
still left. In fact, I couldn’t believe what was happening when we were bowled out for 258 and lost by
12 runs. My world seemed to collapse around me and I just couldn’t hold back the tears in the dressing
room. My back was in horrible shape and mentally I was at a serious low.
It was the only time in my life when I didn’t go out to receive the Man of the Match award. Raj
Singh Dungarpur tried to persuade me but I said to him that I was in no state, physically or mentally,
to leave the dressing room. He understood and left me to myself. Even when we were leaving for
Delhi the next morning, I couldn’t even carry my hand luggage. It was as if someone was sticking
needles into my back all the time and I couldn’t sit in one position for more than two or three minutes.
In hindsight, I should not have played the Delhi and Kolkata Test matches that followed, but my
urge to play against Pakistan drove me on. I had told the BCCI all about my physical condition and
they had left it up to me whether to play or not and at the time I felt I would be able push myself.
The second Test, starting in Delhi on 4 February 1999, was very much Anil Kumble’s match and it
was his world-record spell of 10–74 in the second innings that helped us level the series. Anil has won
many Test matches for India and he was unplayable at the Kotla in Delhi, as he became only the
second bowler in the history of Test cricket, after Jim Laker in 1956, to pick up all ten wickets in an
innings. In Pakistan’s second innings I handed Anil’s sweater and cap to umpire Arani Jayaprakash
before every over he bowled. It worked well for us and there was no reason to change the pattern. It
seems incredible to think that Anil singlehandedly won us a Test match against Pakistan, but he
certainly did.
The two-Test series was followed by the Asian Test Championship and India played Pakistan in the
inaugural match of this new competition at Eden Gardens in Kolkata, which started on 16 February.
Many looked upon it as the third and deciding leg of the bilateral series. I remember the match for the
way I was run out in the second innings. Chasing 279 for victory, we were well placed at 134–2 when I
walked out to bat. I was in the process of playing myself in when I clipped a Wasim delivery past wide
mid on. The ball was finally pulled up yards from the rope by the substitute fielder Nadeem Khan. I
was jogging to the crease for an easy third run when the throw came in on the full to hit the stumps.
Despite the direct hit, I would have been well in if I hadn’t collided with Shoaib Akhtar. Shoaib, who
was fielding at mid off, had come forward to back up the throw and was standing a few yards behind
the stumps, right in my line of running. I could not comprehend why he was standing there rather than
right behind the stumps. With my eyes on the ball, I collided with him moments after I had run my bat
in. As a result of the collision, my bat was in the air when the ball hit the stumps.
While not imputing any motive to Shoaib, I must say I was shocked to see the Pakistanis appeal for
the run-out. The crowd, sensing the injustice, turned violent and started throwing things onto the

ground. After walking off, finding it difficult to come to terms with the incident, I went straight to the
third umpire’s room to check the replay and was dismayed to see what had really happened.
Because of the crowd disturbance, the match had to be stopped for a good twenty minutes, and
finally Jagmohan Dalmiya, then president of the ICC and one of India’s most distinguished
administrators, came to our dressing room to ask if I would go out and pacify the crowd. I didn’t
really feel like it, because I felt wronged, but I changed my mind to ensure there was no further
violence at Eden Gardens. It was only after Jagmohan Dalmiya and I appealed to the crowd that the
match was finally allowed to resume.
The sense of outrage, however, was still there and the crowd turned violent again the following
morning, resulting in unreal scenes towards the end of the match. In an unprecedented move, 65,000
people were forced to vacate the stadium and the match was completed without a single spectator
inside the ground. Perhaps it could all have been avoided if Shoaib had not stood in my way or if
Wasim had withdrawn the appeal.
India lost the Test match by 46 runs and the way the match ended left us all feeling rather bitter.

Losing my father
Continuing to play on with my back injury had unfortunately aggravated the problem. As a result, I
played the World Cup in England in May and June 1999 in considerable physical discomfort. But the
World Cup was not a tournament I could miss and I did all I could to get ready. Every time I trained,
my back would get stiff and I would need a cooling-off period for it to settle down. The fickle English
weather did not help matters and I was advised to sleep on the floor of the hotel room with a pillow
below my knee, to make sure that my back was flat on the ground. In time, I learnt to sleep in the tiny
gap between the bed and the cupboard in most hotel rooms, which ensured there wasn’t much space
for me to toss and turn.
Ajit, Anjali and Sara were all in England before the World Cup and that was a great comfort. We
would go out for meals together and it was during one of these dinners at a Chinese restaurant that I
ordered crispy aromatic duck. I just love to eat this dish served with thin pancakes and sliced
cucumber and can finish a portion on my own. However, just as I placed my order, Ajit asked me to
cancel it. He declared that he would not allow me to eat duck before the World Cup. While I found it
amusing at first, I soon realized he was serious and felt obliged to do what he wanted. When I asked
him his reasons, he said he had read an article which said that three English players had once gone out
for a meal before a very important match and they had all had duck for dinner. Subsequently each one
got out without scoring. Of course, in cricket a ‘duck’ is associated with a batsman scoring zero and
on the Australian television coverage a duck is even shown accompanying a batsman back to the
pavilion if he gets out without scoring. Ajit said to me I could have as much duck as I wanted once the
World Cup was over!
Just before the tournament started Anjali decided to go back to London, leaving me to focus solely
on my cricket. In the second trimester of her pregnancy and with one-and-a-half-year-old Sara with
her, it must have been immensely difficult for her to negotiate things on her own. While I missed her
badly and desperately wanted to be with her to help out, there was little I could do but appreciate what
she was doing for me and the family.
It was in the middle of all this that I received the news of my father’s passing. Ajit, who had gone
back to India by then, called Anjali to tell her what had happened and asked her to break the news to
me personally. Anjali in turn called two of my team-mates, Robin Singh and Ajay Jadeja, and asked

them to be outside my room as she drove back to the team hotel in Leicester very late at night on 18
May – the day before our second match of the tournament, against Zimbabwe. She also called the
hotel manager and asked him not to transfer any calls to my room.
When I opened the door at well past midnight and saw her standing with Ajay and Robin I
immediately sensed something serious had happened. Atul Ranade, one of my closest friends, was
with me in my room and I asked Atul to go out as Anjali came in. I could not believe what she was
saying. It was a cruel blow and not something I had expected at all. It left me numb for a few minutes.
I could not say a thing. Father had always been there for me. My mind had stopped working and all I
could do was hold Anjali and cry. I felt helpless and was unable to come to terms with the shock for a
while.
My first thought was to go back to India at the earliest opportunity to be with my mother and see
my father one final time. Mark Mascarenhas, as always, had already made all the arrangements for the
following morning and drove the two of us to Heathrow just before dawn. All through the journey I
kept thinking about my father, who had been in reasonable health when I had left India for the World
Cup. In fact, I couldn’t believe he was not alive and felt that if I went back to India he would open his
eyes again. He had undergone angioplasty a few months earlier and had stayed with us, so that Anjali
could take care of him. By the time I left for the World Cup, he seemed back to his normal self and
had even started to climb three floors. The doctors had asked him to have a drink every evening and I
made a point of coming home most evenings to share a drink with him. In my wildest dreams I had
never imagined that I would be sharing a drink with my father, but medical advice had forced me to do
so. The thought that I would never see him again was just too much to digest.
My brothers and friends had come to pick me up at Mumbai airport but this was a very different
homecoming from normal. When I got home I could see that my mother had aged considerably in the
past few days and was sitting facing the wall. She hardly said a word to anyone and was in a state of
shock. I felt devastated to see my mother like that and what was more worrying was that she did not
move from her position for close to two days. It became unbearable when I came face to face with my
grandmother, who had lost her son. She said to me that she wanted to spend a few quiet minutes with
him and I immediately asked all who were present to leave us alone for a while. I accompanied my
grandmother to the room where my father’s body was lying, then left her to mourn with her son in
peace. I remember standing a good few yards away, giving her the space she needed.
I couldn’t sleep for many nights having lost my biggest inspiration. And it was a deeply emotional
moment for all of us when the watchmen, postmen and all the other people he had helped during his
life came over for his funeral. I put a gold coin with my face on it in his pocket before the cremation,
so that I could always be there with him.
Without my father, my life would never be the same again.

A very difficult tournament
After spending four days in India, I returned to England to rejoin the team on the eve of the match
against Kenya. That, it seemed to me, was what my father would have wanted me to do, and that’s
what prompted the decision to return to London to play the remaining World Cup matches. Mentally,
however, I was not at my best throughout the tournament. I had to wear dark glasses during the
practice sessions, because at times I could not hold back my tears. Though I managed to score a
hundred in the match against Kenya – which remains one of my most cherished centuries, one I
dedicated to my father – my mind was not always on the game.

The back injury, which had not shown any signs of improvement, also continued to bother me
throughout the rest of the World Cup, helping to make it one of the toughest tournaments I have
played in. It wasn’t India’s best World Cup either and we were knocked out in the Super Six stage
after winning a couple of memorable matches against Sri Lanka and England at the group stage.
Against Sri Lanka at Taunton on 26 May 1999, Sourav and Rahul played two of the finest innings I
have seen in a World Cup. Sourav was at his elegant best on his way to a majestic 183 and Rahul
played beautifully for his 145. In our next match against England on 29 May, Sourav yet again made a
significant all-round contribution, to give us a much-needed win, and Rahul was consistent right
through the tournament.
At the Super Six stage our only consolation was another win against Pakistan. The match had
assumed great significance against the backdrop of strained political relations between the two
countries – the war in Kargil in Kashmir was on at the time. India won the highly charged encounter
by 47 runs, with Venkatesh Prasad picking up a five-wicket haul.

An unexpected appointment
The back pain continued to bother me after the World Cup and in fact turned worse in the twin
tournaments in Sri Lanka and Singapore in August–September 1999, at the end of which I decided to
go to Australia to get my back examined. I had already resorted to acupuncture and acupressure – and
even had my tongue pricked by an expert in Singapore trying to identify the pressure points that might
help in the recovery. They were the acts of an increasingly desperate man.
Dr Anant Joshi, one of India’s leading doctors and one who has always been there for me right
through my career, travelled with me to Adelaide in September 1999 to meet a number of specialists.
A series of checks were conducted and I eventually received four injections for the injury. I was glad I
could not see the injections at the time because afterwards I realized I had never seen bigger needles
in my life. I actually carried one back to show my friends and family and nobody could believe the
size of them. But they did the job, and soon after my return to India the back injury that had bothered
me for eight months was finally sorted. It was certainly a relief to be pain-free.
My determination was even greater because in August 1999 I had been appointed captain of India
again, despite having deep reservations about taking on the job for a second time. What happened was
that Ajit Wadekar had come to my house to ask me if I was prepared to captain India again and I told
him that I was reluctant to do so. The next I heard was that I had been appointed captain ahead of a triseries in Sri Lanka in August. It appears that Wadekar Sir had come over to speak to me on behalf of
the BCCI and it was after consultation with him that the selectors had decided to give me the
responsibility, despite my unwillingness. Once the appointment was made public it was difficult for
me to turn it down. I have never ducked a challenge and I went on to accept the job, determined to
give it my best. We were due to tour Australia at the end of the year and I knew it was the toughest
assignment in cricket at the time.

A new arrival
All of this coincided with the birth of our second child, when Anjali and I were blessed with a baby
boy on 24 September 1999. I decided to name him Arjun and remember announcing my intention to
Anjali soon after I had seen my son for the first time. She later mentioned to me that she had thought
of a few other names herself but, seeing my enthusiasm for Arjun, went ahead with my choice. Once

again I filmed the day and I cherish the recording of Arjun being brought out to me for the first time.
Watching the children grow up is a fantastic feeling and I must say I missed them every time I was
away from them. With Arjun it was particularly hard. He would resent my going away and would
refuse to speak to me on the phone. For the first six years of his life Arjun never talked to me when I
was on tour. In my desperation to hear his voice I often requested Anjali to ask him to say hello, but
he would always refuse. Then, on my return, he would cling to me for the first three days, trying to
make up for lost time.
While Sara did not seem to resent my going in the same way as Arjun, she did find it difficult on
occasions to bond with me on my return. Sara was just a few months old when I had to travel to Sri
Lanka for a tour. It was extremely hot in Colombo and I returned home with quite a tan at the end of
the assignment. I had turned really dark and she didn’t recognize me. She thought someone else had
walked in and she refused to go near me for the first few minutes!
When I had my kids at the turn of the century, technology was not as advanced as now and there
was no option to use Skype or FaceTime. Had the technology been available, I’m sure I would have
asked Anjali to bring Sara and Arjun in front of the webcam so that I could at least see my kids when I
was off in some other part of the world. It would have meant not missing out on so many of the
changes they went through.

New Zealand in India, October–November 1999
After a couple of weeks at home following Arjun’s birth, I was back on the field at Mohali on 10
October captaining India against New Zealand in the first of three Tests. Just like the first time, the
start to my captaincy was not too bad, as we beat New Zealand in the series, though we made it hard
for ourselves in the very first innings at Mohali when we were bowled out for 83, with Dion Nash
taking six wickets. It was just one of those days when nothing worked and we collapsed for one of our
lowest ever scores on home soil. It seemed as if the ghost of Barbados was back to haunt me. This
time, however, our bowlers did a good job restricting the Kiwis to 215 and we batted with a lot more
discipline in the second innings. We scored 505, losing just three wickets, with both Rahul and me
scoring hundreds, and the game ended in a draw.
The second innings, however, was not without incident. Chris Cairns, the New Zealand all-rounder,
bowled a spell of excellent reverse swing. Part of the problem for Rahul and me was that he concealed
the shiny side of the ball so well that there was no way for the batsman to work out which way the ball
would swing. That’s when I came up with a plan. I suggested to Rahul that while it was impossible for
the striker, it was not so difficult for the non-striker to work it out as he was far closer to Cairns. It
was decided that while standing at the non-striker’s end, I would spot the shiny side and if it was on
the outside of the ball, I would hold my bat in my left hand to indicate to Rahul that the ball would
swing away from him. If the shiny side was on the inside, I would hold my bat in my right hand to
indicate that the ball would be coming in to him. And if I was not able to figure out which way the ball
would swing, I would hold my bat in the middle.
The plan worked surprisingly well and soon we were able to attack Cairns, who ended up going for
76 runs in his twenty-four overs without picking up a wicket. It took a while for Cairns to work out
what we were doing. To catch us unawares, he decided to bowl a cross-seam delivery, so I held my bat
in the middle to indicate to Rahul that I didn’t know which way the ball would swing. Soon after
delivering the ball, Cairns turned towards me to see what I was doing. He was angry and frustrated and
wanted to know how I had reacted to him bowling a cross-seam delivery. Winning this battle against

Chris Cairns definitely helped us save the match.
In the second Test match, at Kanpur, we beat New Zealand comprehensively, with Kumble picking
up ten wickets in the game, and in the final Test at Ahmedabad I scored a double hundred in a drawn
encounter. At Ahmedabad we scored a mammoth 583 runs in the first innings and, despite bowling the
opposition out for 308, did not enforce the follow-on. This was a unanimous decision taken in
consultation with the fast bowlers, who were tired after an exhausting first-innings effort and needed
some rest before they bowled again. We won the series 1–0 and then went on to win the ODI series 3–
2. It may not have been ideal preparation for the tour to Australia that started at the end of the month,
but a series win never does any harm.

India in Australia, November 1999–January 2000
During my second stint as captain we had Kapil Dev as our coach. He is one of the finest cricketers to
have played for India and one of the best all-rounders of all time, and I had great expectations of him
in Australia. I have always maintained that the coach’s job is an important one, for he is in a position
to play a key role in formulating team strategy. Who better than Kapil to come up with options for me
during a tough tour of Australia? However, his method of involvement and his thought process was
limited to leaving the running of the team to the captain, and hence he did not involve himself in
strategic discussions that would help us on the field.
Things did not start badly for us in Australia. Unlike in South Africa in 1996–97, we reached
Australia a good two weeks before the series started and played three practice games before the first
Test. All in all, we weren’t underprepared when we walked onto the field at the Adelaide Oval on 10
December 1999, and if the first morning was anything to go by, we were in with a good chance against
the best team in the world.
Javagal Srinath and Venkatesh Prasad bowled extremely well to reduce Australia to 52–4 before
lunch and we needed just one more wicket to get into the Australian lower middle order. We almost
had that wicket in the form of the always dangerous Ricky Ponting, but he was given not out to a very
close lbw shout early in his innings. He escaped again when he clearly under-edged a ball from Ajit
Agarkar to the wicketkeeper MSK Prasad when on 62 but was again not adjudged out. Australia were
still not out of the woods at that stage and that could well have been the opening we were looking for.
However, luck was with Ponting on the day and he and Steve Waugh both went on to make big
hundreds.
When it was our turn to bat, I faced a probing spell from Glenn McGrath towards the end of the
day’s play, playing out five or six maiden overs in the process. Some people may have wondered why
I allowed McGrath to bowl those maidens and why I was not playing my natural game, but Test
cricket is all about getting into the mind of the opposition. After that passage of play, the Australians
changed their tactics, and later Shane Warne told me that I had forced them to make the change. The
Australian plan, I was told, was to make me leave 70 per cent of the deliveries in each innings. But
with me playing out the maiden overs, they realized that attempts to frustrate me wouldn’t work. The
next morning, I changed my strategy and hit McGrath for two boundaries in the first over.
In this Test match we were at the receiving end of what seemed to us to be a howler from umpire
Daryl Harper. Sourav and I had embarked on a good fightback and I had scored 61. The team score
was at 215–4 and another hundred runs could have helped set up the match, but just as we were
looking to consolidate, Daryl Harper gave me out bat-pad to Shane Warne, caught by Justin Langer at
forward short leg. I was sure I hadn’t hit the ball. Warne had pitched the delivery on my legs and the

ball simply hit the pad before being caught by Langer. In the second innings I felt I was unlucky again.
Glenn McGrath tried to bounce one at me but the ball actually stayed low. I instinctively ducked and it
hit me on my shoulder. To everyone’s surprise, umpire Harper declared me out lbw. It was a strange
decision, because there was surely no way it would have gone on to hit the stumps.
While I’m not trying to excuse our under-par performance, there’s no doubt that those decisions
played a huge role in such a hard-fought Test match. To Australia’s credit, they capitalized on the
opportunities and went 1–0 up as a result. In the second and third Tests of the series, however, we
were comprehensively outplayed. Even when VVS Laxman produced a magical 167 in Sydney in the
third Test, something that prompted me to ask the selectors to keep him back for the ODI series that
followed, the result was never in doubt. McGrath and Brett Lee, who made his debut in the series,
were exceptional and had great back-up in Damien Fleming and Shane Warne. We were never allowed
to take charge and there’s no harm in conceding that Steve Waugh’s Australian team in 1999 was one
of the best teams I ever played against.
Personally I had a pretty good series and batted well for a hundred at the MCG in the Boxing Day
Test. However, it counted for nothing because I was not able to change the fortunes of the team. A
hundred in a losing cause is something of a bitter pill. Even in the second innings I scored 52 and
while it was a personal milestone, it was not enough to save the game.
After the 3–0 defeat in the Test series we lost the ODI tri-series with Pakistan and Australia, failing
even to make the final. The tour had gone from bad to worse and I was deeply frustrated. On my way
back to India I was going through serious mental turmoil. I was finding it difficult to unwind. In the
past I had been able to leave the disappointments of cricket behind and switch off. Not this time. Even
when I was with my kids, my mind was still on the series. I was unable to figure out what I was doing
wrong. I was failing to get the team to play to their potential and it was all starting to get to me.
As a batsman, I was accountable for my own mistakes and could do what was required to sort out
my flaws and get back to form. As a captain it was not. As skipper, I was responsible for the actions of
my team-mates, but I couldn’t control everything they did. For example, sometimes I carefully put a
plan in place but it was simply not implemented, which I found hard to cope with.
The ODI against Pakistan in Brisbane on 10 January 2000 is a case in point. It was a low-scoring
game and we had made 195 batting first in our fifty overs. Pakistan, docked an over for a slow over
rate, were reduced to 71–6 at one point in their innings. Clearly, we should have closed out the match
from that position. Eventually, however, Pakistan won the match off the last ball, with Saqlain
Mushtaq and Waqar Younis taking the team over the line with an unbeaten 43-run stand for the ninth
wicket.
The defeat particularly hurt me because I had predicted what the Pakistani batsmen were planning
in the final stages of the innings. While fielding at mid off, I had repeatedly spoken to my fast bowlers
and had specifically asked them not to bowl a slower ball without informing me. Despite my repeated
warnings, one of them bowled a slower ball without the proper field in place and the Pakistan batsman
promptly dispatched it to the boundary. Such incidents caused me immense frustration and I was
finding it increasingly difficult to get them out of my mind.

Over to Sourav
Even before the start of the Australia series, I had spoken to the selectors about appointing Sourav
Ganguly as my deputy. I had always felt he had the ability to lead the team in my absence. If I got
injured in Australia or had to leave the field temporarily, I wanted Sourav to be in charge of the side.

Within weeks of coming back from Australia I had communicated to BCCI president AC Muthiah
and the selection committee that I did not want to continue as captain. It was in the best interests of
the team to pass the baton to Sourav and focus on my batting. At the same time, we did not want to
spring the Indian captaincy on him and leave him unsettled. He needed a little time to come to terms
with the pressures and it was my responsibility to ensure that the transition was smooth. So I informed
the selectors that I was happy to lead the side in the two home Tests against South Africa in February
2000. It was agreed that Sourav would take over after the Test series and before the start of the fivematch ODI series.
I had discussed my decision with my family in Lonavla, where we had gone for a break. They were
all in agreement that the frustration of not achieving what I wanted with the team was affecting me
badly and that I was pushing myself too hard. Anjali knew how I was feeling and I also spoke to Ajit
at length about what I was going through.

Never again
After giving up the captaincy at the start of 2000, I never captained India again. That is not to say I
wasn’t given the choice of captaining the team later in my career. I was actually offered the job quite a
few times but was never tempted. One occasion was soon after Rahul Dravid stepped down after the
tour of England in September 2007.
The final time I was offered the job was at the end of Anil’s captaincy in late 2008. We were in the
middle of a home series against Australia and Anil’s retirement had left a huge void. This time I
recommended MS Dhoni. Earlier I had recommended him as captain for the Twenty20 World Cup,
and Test captaincy was a natural progression.
Dhoni had already captained the team with distinction in the Twenty20 format and had also done
well in the fifty-over format. He was one of the few players who played all formats of the game and
read the game well at critical times. Having discussed things with him when fielding in the slip
cordon, I knew he was a good choice for the job and had little hesitation in putting his name forward.
He had age on his side and would be able to guide Indian cricket into the future.
All of the people I recommended or played under after giving up the captaincy – Sourav Ganguly,
Rahul Dravid, Anil Kumble or MS Dhoni – I had a good relationship with, and when I felt it necessary
I would give them my opinion and then leave it to them to take the final call. As a senior player in the
side, I felt it was my job to give the captain options, as he had way too much on his plate and it was
sometimes easy to miss things. I loved being involved and they all seemed to welcome my
contributions. The final decision was always the captain’s, but I felt it was important for me to let
them know what I thought was best for the team.
Every captain I played under had his respective strengths. Sourav was an excellent strategist and
had a very good understanding of the game. He was an aggressive captain and wasn’t afraid to
experiment in difficult situations. It was under Sourav that we started winning overseas Test matches
consistently.
Anil Kumble was an excellent communicator and clearly explained to the players what he wanted
from each of them. He was aggressive and trusted his instincts. Sourav and Anil were both great
players and equally capable leaders.
Rahul, on the other hand, was more conventional. He was more methodical and his mental
toughness was an added strength. He was committed to the job but stayed away from experimenting
too much. Dhoni, in contrast, was impulsive and loved to back his instincts. He has a really good grasp

of the game and is not afraid to try something different. He is never flustered and handles pressure
well. Under these men India won some big series and tournaments and I enjoyed playing with them
all.
Among the captains I played against, I consider Nasser Hussain the best. He was an excellent
strategist and even if some of his tactics occasionally bordered on the negative – using the left-arm
spinner Ashley Giles to bowl to me outside my leg stump from over the wicket, for example – he was
a very good thinker about the game and was proactive. Nasser would not place a fielder in a particular
position after a shot was played. Rather, he had the ability to anticipate the shot and would place a
fielder well in advance, making a real difference to his team.
Among the Australians, I rate Michael Clarke as the best captain I played against. While I was too
young to judge Allan Border in 1992, the other Australian captains in Mark Taylor, Steve Waugh and
Ricky Ponting benefited from having some of the greatest players of our generation in their teams.
With so many match-winners, the role of the captain is automatically reduced. Clarke’s case, however,
was different. He had to rebuild the Australian team from scratch and to do so in such a short time
speaks volumes for his ability as leader.
Graeme Smith of South Africa is yet another player I have great regard for as skipper. Taking over
the reins of the side at the age of twenty-two in the most tumultuous of conditions, Smith did
brilliantly to propel South Africa to the top of the world Test rankings.
Looking back at my own captaincy career, I feel I could have achieved better results during my first
stint as captain had there been more cooperation. I never felt totally comfortable with the relationship
with the selectors. This was reflected in the teams I was given, which were not always the ones I
would have chosen. In my first stint as captain of India, it seemed that each series was a personal test
and losing one series badly meant my position was immediately in question. Such pressure did not
always send out the best signal and it was as if I was constantly being evaluated. Every captain sets
out to win but it’s not always possible to do so in international sport. The opposition were also playing
to win and at times they simply played better cricket than we did. That was the case in Australia in
December 1999.
There is no point lamenting what could have been. It was time to look beyond the captaincy and
contribute to the team in the best way possible. I am glad I was able to do so for a good thirteen years
after giving up the captaincy in February 2000.

The difficulty of being a Tendulkar
There is a common misconception that cricketers’ families have an easy time of it. On the contrary, in
my absence Anjali had to do most of the parenting, and bringing up two young kids almost on her own
was anything but easy. For the children too it was hard at times. They were not always able to do the
things normal kids enjoy and, with their father away for long periods, they missed out on fatherly
affection and care.
When Arjun was just nine months old, for example, I was going to Germany to visit the Adidas
factory and asked Anjali if she would like to come along. I was going for only five days and Anjali
hadn’t left home for nine months – after Arjun’s birth. We left Sara and Arjun with her parents in
India. It was on the third night away that calamity struck. We had finished work in the Adidas factory
and had retreated to a small village for the evening when Anjali got a call from Dr Ajit
Gajendragadkar, who asked us to come back as soon as possible. We were informed that Anjali’s
mother had suffered a brain haemorrhage (from which she later recovered) and was in the hospital

unconscious, while Arjun was seriously sick at home.
It was night-time in Germany and the earliest we could leave for India was the following morning.
All through the journey the next day we kept worrying about who was taking care of nine-month-old
Arjun. When we finally got home, the first sight of Arjun reduced us both to tears. He had lost weight
and had a pained expression in his eyes. While there was a glint of happiness in seeing us both back at
home, his expression was predominantly one of hurt, as if to ask why we had to leave him and go
away. Since then, Anjali has never left the kids alone at home to travel abroad with me.
Another example occurred soon after we had been knocked out of the World Cup in the Caribbean
in March 2007. We had played poorly in the tournament and it was a low for the country. My family
were aware that the repercussions of the first-round exit might reach the kids. As a precautionary
measure, Anjali tried to explain to Arjun, who was seven years old at the time, that if someone made a
snide comment about his dad at school, he should ignore it; he should just say that it was
disappointing and we would surely do better the next time. When a friend of his accosted him at
school and said that India had lost because his dad had got out for zero, our advice went out of his
head and Arjun punched the boy and told him not to say anything bad about his father again.
While Sara is interested in studying science, Arjun, who started with football, now wants to play
cricket. I am perfectly happy with them doing whatever they want to do. In the last few years Sara has
changed perceptibly and has started taking far more responsibility. Anjali has allowed her the freedom
to shape her timetable and she is showing signs of maturity. She went to Oxford in the summer of
2012 for her summer school and is happy pursuing her dream of becoming a doctor. I’d be delighted
to see her do so and have always felt that the best thing for parents is to allow kids to chase their own
dreams. That’s what I did and it’s what I want my daughter to do as well.
Arjun, on the other hand, is deeply passionate about cricket. Mind you, he and I hardly ever spoke
about the game till he turned seven. I would chat with him about everything else but never talk cricket
at home. This was an attempt to keep my professional world separate; I found it often helped to keep
the two spheres distinct from each other. So much so that my wife and children have hardly ever come
to the stadium to watch me play. Anjali has been to the stadium just a handful of times in her life. The
first time she saw me bat was at Edgbaston in 1996 when I scored a hundred. She was with her father
at the time. The second time was in Melbourne in 2004, when I was out for a first-ball duck.
Thereafter, she didn’t come to the stadium again till my 199th Test match at Eden Gardens in
November 2013. Instead, she had a special seat at home for watching matches on TV and refused to
speak to anyone or take phone calls when I was batting. That was her way of being with me the whole
time.
Arjun has come to my games frequently, however, and has travelled with me to England, Australia
and South Africa. Arjun got seriously attracted to cricket after watching India win the inaugural world
Twenty20 in September 2007. We watched the matches together at home and he was hugely inspired
to see the Indian triumph in South Africa.
Many have asked me if I feel added pressure at Arjun trying to become a cricketer. I really don’t. I
am happy that he is trying to do something he enjoys, for that in itself will make him really happy.
Also there is nothing negative about playing a sport. While it is never possible to guarantee
performance, one can guarantee the effort put in and there’s no doubt that he is putting his best foot
forward. I am not concerned with how far he goes with his game, but am happy that he is doing his
best to excel in what he loves. I firmly believe that you take to playing cricket only if you are madly in
love with it. And that’s what has happened with Arjun over the last few years. There’s no doubt there
will be pressure on him every time he plays. But he has chosen what he wants to do and will have to

deal with that pressure as best he can.
India in New Zealand 1998–99
1st Test. Dunedin. 18–22 December 1998
Match abandoned without a ball bowled
2nd Test. Wellington. 26–30 December 1998
India 208 (M Azharuddin 103, SR Tendulkar 47 ; SB Doull 7–65) and 356 (SR Tendulkar 113 , SC
Ganguly 48, M Azharuddin 48; DJ Nash 3–20, SB Doull 2–49)
New Zealand 352 (DJ Nash 89*, DL Vettori 57, NJ Astle 56; A Kumble 4–83 SR Tendulkar 2–7 ) and
215–6 (CD McMillan 74*, CL Cairns 61; J Srinath 3–82, A Kumble 2–70)
New Zealand won by 4 wickets
3rd Test. Hamilton. 2–6 January 1999
New Zealand 366 (CD McMillan 92, RG Twose 87, MJ Horne 63; J Srinath 5–95) and 464–8 dec (CL
Cairns 126, CD McMillan 84, DJ Nash 63, AC Parore 50; SR Tendulkar 2–30)
India 416 (R Dravid 190, J Srinath 76, SR Tendulkar 67; CL Cairns 4–107, SB Doull 3–64) and 249–2
(R Dravid 103*, SC Ganguly 101*; CL Cairns 2–30)
Match drawn
New Zealand won the series 1–0
Pakistan in India 1999
1st Test. Chennai. 28–31 January 1999
Pakistan 238 (M Khan 60, Y Youhana 53; A Kumble 6–70, J Srinath 3–63, SR Tendulkar 1–10 ) and
286 (S Afridi 141, Inzamam-ul-Haq 51; BKV Prasad 6–33, SR Tendulkar 2–35)
India 254 (SC Ganguly 54, R Dravid 53, SR Tendulkar 0 ; S Mushtaq 5–94, S Afridi 3–31) and 258
(SR Tendulkar 136, NR Mongia 52; S Mushtaq 5–93, W Akram 3–80)
Pakistan won by 12 runs
2nd Test. Delhi. 4–7 February 1999
India 252 (M Azharuddin 67, S Ramesh 60, SR Tendulkar 6; S Mushtaq 5–94) and 339 (S Ramesh 96,
SC Ganguly 62*, SR Tendulkar 29; S Mushtaq 5–122, W Akram 3–43)
Pakistan 172 (S Afridi 32, S Malik 31; A Kumble 4–75, H Singh 3–30) and 207 (S Anwar 69, S Afridi
41; A Kumble 10–74)
India won by 212 runs
Series drawn 1–1
Asian Test Championship 1999
1st Match. India v Pakistan. Kolkata. 16–20 February 1999
Pakistan 185 (M Khan 70; J Srinath 5–46, BKV Prasad 2–27, SR Tendulkar 1–8 ) and 316 (S Anwar
188, Y Youhana 56; J Srinath 8–86)
India 223 (S Ramesh 79, SR Tendulkar 0; S Akhtar 4–71, W Akram 3–65) and 232 (VVS Laxman 67,
S Ramesh 40, SR Tendulkar 9; S Akhtar 4–47, S Mushtaq 3–69)

Pakistan won by 46 runs
2nd Match. Sri Lanka v India. Colombo (SSC). 24–28 February 1999
India 518–7 dec (S Ramesh 143, R Dravid 107, M Azharuddin 87, SC Ganguly 56, SR Tendulkar 53 )
and 306–5 (SR Tendulkar 124*, SC Ganguly 78; KEA Upashantha 2–41, PA de Silva 2–59)
Sri Lanka 485 (DPMD Jayawardene 242, A Ranatunga 66; A Kumble 4–134, H Singh 3–127)
Match drawn
Pakistan beat Sri Lanka in the final
India in the 1999 World Cup
2nd match. India v South Africa at Hove. 15 May 1999
India 253–5 (50/50 ov); South Africa 254–6 (47.2/50 ov)
South Africa won by 4 wickets (with 16 balls remaining)
8th match. India v Zimbabwe at Leicester. 19 May 1999
Zimbabwe 252–9 (50/50 ov); India 249 (45/46 ov)
Zimbabwe won by 3 runs
15th match. India v Kenya at Bristol. 23 May 1999
India 329–2 (50/50 ov); Kenya 235–7 (50/50 ov)
India won by 94 runs
21st match. India v Sri Lanka at Taunton. 26 May 1999
India 373–6 (50/50 ov); Sri Lanka 216 (42.3/50 ov)
India won by 157 runs
25th match. England v India at Birmingham. 29–30 May 1999
India 232–8 (50/50 ov); England 169 (45.2/50 ov)
India won by 63 runs
1st super. Australia v India at The Oval. 4 June 1999
Australia 282–6 (50/50 ov); India 205 (48.2/50 ov)
Australia won by 77 runs
4th super. India v Pakistan at Manchester. 8 June 1999
India 227–6 (50/50 ov); Pakistan 180 (45.3/50 ov)
India won by 47 runs
8th super. India v New Zealand at Nottingham. 12 June 1999
India 251–6 (50/50 ov); New Zealand 253–5 (48.2/50 ov)
New Zealand won by 5 wickets (with 10 balls remaining)
Final. Australia v Pakistan at Lord’s. 20 June 1999
Pakistan 132 (39/50 ov); Australia 133–2 (20.1/50 ov)
Australia won by 8 wickets (with 179 balls remaining)

New Zealand in India 1999
1st Test. Mohali. 10–14 October 1999
India 83 (J Srinath 20, SR Tendulkar 18 , MSK Prasad 16*; DJ Nash 6–27, CL Cairns 2–23, SB
O’Connor 2–20) and 505–3 dec (R Dravid 144, SR Tendulkar 126* , DJ Gandhi 75, S Ramesh 73,
SC Ganguly 64*)
New Zealand 215 (CM Spearman 51, NJ Astle 45, SP Fleming 43; J Srinath 6–45) and 251–7 (SP
Fleming 73; A Kumble 3–42, SB Joshi 2–38)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Kanpur. 22–25 October 1999
New Zealand 256 (CL Cairns 53, DJ Nash 41*; A Kumble 4–67, J Srinath 3–62) and 155 (AC Parore
48; A Kumble 6–67, H Singh 3–33)
India 330 (DJ Gandhi 88, S Ramesh 83, R Dravid 48, SR Tendulkar 15 ; DL Vettori 6–127) and 83–2
(SR Tendulkar 44*, DJ Gandhi 31)
India won by 8 wickets
3rd Test. Ahmedabad. 29 October–2 November 1999
India 583–7 dec (SR Tendulkar 217 , SC Ganguly 125, S Ramesh 110; DL Vettori 4–200) and 148–5
dec (SC Ganguly 53, SR Tendulkar 15)
New Zealand 308 (NJ Astle 74, CL Cairns 72, SP Fleming 48; A Kumble 5–82) and 252–2 (GR Stead
78, SP Fleming 64*, CM Spearman 54*)
Match drawn
India won the series 1–0
India in Australia 1999–2000 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Adelaide. 10–14 December 1999
Australia 441 (SR Waugh 150, RT Ponting 125, SK Warne 86; BKV Prasad 3–83) and 239–8 dec (GS
Blewett 88, AC Gilchrist 43; AB Agarkar 3–43, J Srinath 3–64)
India 285 (SR Tendulkar 61 , SC Ganguly 60, VVS Laxman 41; SK Warne 4–92, DW Fleming 3–70)
and 110 (SC Ganguly 43, SR Tendulkar 0; DW Fleming 5–30, GD McGrath 3–35)
Australia won by 285 runs
2nd Test. Melbourne. 26–30 December 1999
Australia 405 (MJ Slater 91, AC Gilchrist 78, RT Ponting 67; J Srinath 4–130, AB Agarkar 3–76) and
208–5 dec (AC Gilchrist 55, ME Waugh 51*; AB Agarkar 3–51, A Kumble 2–72)
India 238 (SR Tendulkar 116 , SC Ganguly 31; B Lee 5–47, GD McGrath 3–39) and 195 (SR
Tendulkar 52, HH Kanitkar 45; ME Waugh 2–12, B Lee 2–31, DW Fleming 2–46)
Australia won by 180 runs
3rd Test. Sydney. 2–4 January 2000
India 150 (SR Tendulkar 45 , R Dravid 29; GD McGrath 5–48, B Lee 4–39) and 261 (VVS Laxman
167, SR Tendulkar 4; GD McGrath 5–55, B Lee 2–67)
Australia 552–5 dec (J Langer 223, RT Ponting 141*, SR Waugh 57; J Srinath 2–105, SR Tendulkar
1–34)
Australia won by an innings and 141 runs

Australia won the series 3–0
South Africa in India 2000
1st Test. Mumbai. 24–26 February 2000
India 225 (SR Tendulkar 97 , AB Agarkar 41*; JH Kallis 3–30, AA Donald 2–23, SM Pollock 2–43)
and 113 (R Dravid 37, SR Tendulkar 8; SM Pollock 4–24, WJ Cronje 3–23)
South Africa 176 (G Kirsten 50, HH Gibbs 47; SR Tendulkar 3–10 , J Srinath 3–45) and 164–6 (HH
Gibbs 46, JH Kallis 36*; A Kumble 4–56)
South Africa won by 4 wickets
2nd Test. Bangalore. 2–6 March 2000
India 158 (A Kumble 36*, SR Tendulkar 21 ; N Boje 2–10, SM Pollock 2–26, M Hayward 2–40) and
250 (M Azharuddin 102, A Kumble 28, SR Tendulkar 20; N Boje 5–83, AA Donald 2–56)
South Africa 479 (L Klusener 97, JH Kallis 95, N Boje 85, G Kirsten 79, DJ Cullinan 53; A Kumble 6–
143, M Kartik 3–123)
South Africa won by an innings and 71 runs
South Africa won the series 2–0
