YEARS OF CONSOLIDATION

In March 1992, after returning from the gruelling Australian tour and the World Cup, I badly needed a
few weeks of relaxation. Our next international assignment was a tour of South Africa towards the end
of the year and we had several months off in the interim. Fortunately for me, I managed to spend the
first few days at home. I played tennis-ball cricket with friends and it was terrific to be able to unwind
in familiar surroundings.
I was playing downstairs with my friends one day when Ajit called down from our apartment
balcony to say that there was a phone call from Yorkshire County Cricket Club and that they wanted
me to play for them! I came up to take the call and was very excited at the offer. I did not bother
asking about the contract and other details and was determined to make the most of this opportunity to
play in the County Championship in England. That I would have to cook, do my laundry, drive and
perform all the other household chores never occurred to me at the time. A few days after the
conversation, the CEO of Yorkshire CCC, Chris Hassell, came over to India to complete the
formalities. We met at Thane, a suburb of Mumbai, where I was playing a match. I signed the contract
at the ground, proud to become Yorkshire’s first overseas-born player in 128 years.

A Yorkshire lad
I left for England towards the end of April 1992, right after my nineteenth birthday, and stayed there
for three and a half months. It was my first long stint away from home on my own and it wasn’t easy
coming from such a different cultural background, but the generosity and openness of my employers
made the stay immensely enriching and it was a great learning experience, to put it mildly.
One of the first problems was that I had little idea of the roads and had to follow my team-mate
Richard Blakey as he drove to the ground. I was not really used to driving in England and often opted
for the fastest lane while driving to the ground. There were occasions when I missed an exit and also
lost Richard in the process. It was difficult to turn back and I cursed myself for not staying in the
slowest lane, where it would have been easier to see the exit. There were no mobile phones then and
getting lost meant I would be late for practice, which I hated.
I had actually driven a little in England in 1991 when I was there to play a few games of league
cricket. Back then I stayed with the former India fast bowler Atul Wassan and he was generous enough
to give me his car to drive around. He asked me if I had driven before and I assured him that I had
passed all the tests and had an international licence and was confident of my driving skills. He said the
key to driving in the UK was not to use the brake much and just to follow the lanes. However, the very
first day ended in disaster. I was in the fast lane when all of a sudden the car came to a halt. There was
no power and the car would not restart, and I panicked when I saw a string of cars behind me. I told
Atul, ‘Gadi start nahi ho raha hai yaar!’ (The car is not starting, my friend!) Atul initially thought I

was joking and asked me to accelerate. Anxious, I said to him that I was trying to, but there was no
power and nothing was working. Only then did we realize that we had run out of fuel. Atul
immediately asked me to put on the hazard lights and in my state of nervousness it took me ages to
find the switch in the unfamiliar car. Finally, Atul put on the hazard lights for me. Somehow we got
the car onto the hard shoulder, then we called the AA and after a while a breakdown vehicle arrived.
Another problem was my complete lack of knowledge of English geography, which caused a
number of blunders during my stay in Yorkshire. Some of these I now remember with fondness. One
such was to commit myself to playing at opposite ends of the country on consecutive days. I had
agreed to play in an India–Pakistan festival match in London but had also committed to playing for a
Rest of the World XI versus England at Newcastle the following day. To add to my woes, the India–
Pakistan match started at 6 p.m. and finished close to midnight. I had driven from Yorkshire to
London for the early-evening start and by the time the match was over I was exhausted.
Afterwards the other players were heading back to the hotel in London to relax and they asked me to
join them. When I said I had to leave for Newcastle because I was playing there the next day I could
see the shock and bewilderment on their faces. I had wrongly believed that it was easy to get from any
part of England to another in two or three hours. It was only when they told me that it would take a
minimum of six or seven hours to drive there that I realized the seriousness of the situation. I was
advised to leave for Newcastle straight away. I was stumped. I had left Yorkshire at one o’clock that
afternoon to get down to London, and here I was at midnight getting ready to drive all the way to
Newcastle.
Jatin Paranjpe was with me at the time and we set off on the long drive together. Unfortunately, we
had little knowledge of the roads and were completely dependent on the signs. To add to our misery,
we missed a turn and ended up going south for close to thirty-five minutes when we should have been
driving north. It was just one of those nights.
After driving for a couple of hours, my eyes started to give way. I asked Jatin to drive while I
napped to regain a bit of energy. Jatin did so and after a few minutes I took my turn in the driver’s seat
again. A coffee break helped and eventually we reached the hotel at 8.15 a.m., only to see the team bus
about to leave for the ground. We were both pretty much out of it by then and desperately needed to
close our eyes. I walked up to the team manager and explained to him my plight and asked if he could
possibly let me have twenty-five minutes of sleep. I promised to join the team at the ground in an
hour. He was most kind and I set the alarm at exactly twenty-five minutes.
When I woke up I didn’t know where I was and felt like a complete zombie. I stumbled out of the
hotel and made my way to the ground. I was sleepy and tired and was in no physical state to play a
day’s cricket. I still find it hard to believe, but somehow I managed to go out and make a hundred.
After lunch, however, I could hardly stay awake and for the first time in my life I was taking tensecond naps between overs. I was actually sleeping while fielding and don’t really know how I
managed to get through the rest of the game.
As soon as the match was over Jatin and I rushed to the hotel. Our plan was to sleep for a couple of
hours before joining the rest of the team for dinner. The next thing I remember is waking up in the
early hours of the morning. My first thought was that I had missed dinner. We tried calling room
service but no one picked up the call. We called Reception and were told that at that hour they
couldn’t serve us any food. With no hope of food, we drank three glasses of water each and went back
to bed, setting the alarm for 7 a.m., in plenty of time for breakfast. We did manage to get up in time
for breakfast and after eating a hearty meal of eggs and toast went to the ground to resume duty for the
Rest of the World XI. For all the exhaustion, I still managed to score some runs and must say that,

amidst all the chaos, the only thing that was going right was my batting.
After the match Jatin and I decided to drive back to Yorkshire in the evening, so that I could rejoin
my county the following morning. This journey too was rather eventful. There were roadworks
everywhere as we got out of Newcastle and the speed limit had been brought down to 55 mph from the
normal 70 mph. Given that it was fairly late, we decided to follow a police car that was in front of us,
reckoning that as long as we followed a police car while maintaining a safe distance we would also be
safe.
After a while I saw the police car making some sort of gesture to me. The driver had his hand out of
the window and had all five fingers stretched out. He then closed his fist before spreading his fingers
again. I thought he was asking me to put my lights on full beam and duly followed his instructions. A
few minutes later the police car put on its hazard lights and signalled us to stop.
I was confused but did exactly as I was told. The policeman asked me if I had seen his earlier
signal. I said yes and told him that I had followed his instruction and turned on my lights. He said that
wasn’t what he had meant and explained that the signal was for me to slow down because I was
speeding. The police car was doing 65 mph while the speed limit had been set at 55 mph. As I’d been
maintaining the same distance for the last hour and a half, I must have been speeding. He went on to
say that the reason he stretched his five fingers twice was to indicate to me that the speed limit was 55
mph and I should slow down.
I was taken aback and immediately confessed to my mistake, saying it wasn’t intentional and that I
was blindly following the police car, believing it to be the safest option. In the interim the policeman
had seen the white rose and Yorkshire CCC printed on my car and asked what it meant. I informed
him that I played cricket for Yorkshire and it was a car given to me by the county. At this he asked my
name and queried if I was indeed the first overseas professional to play for Yorkshire. I think it was
my identity that earned me a reprieve and I was let off with a warning that I should always keep the
speed limit in mind while driving.

Life lessons
At Yorkshire we often played back-to-back matches and it helped me improve my batting a great deal.
The conditions were very different from those back home and I definitely matured as a batsman
during my time in county cricket. The ball would swing a greal deal more than in India and it allowed
me to improve my technique and ability to adjust to different conditions. Over the years, the lessons
learnt from my stint at Yorkshire continued to help me whenever I toured England as part of the
Indian team.
Socially too it was a good learning experience. The authorities, including the president Sir
Lawrence Byford, were extremely sociable. The team had a great time and I particularly remember
some extremely interesting Sunday club bonding sessions. In one it was decided that everybody had to
wear towels and a tie without a shirt and meet in the hotel’s convention centre. At first I thought my
team-mates were pulling my leg and I wasn’t prepared to dress up without seeing a few of the other
players do so. I kept a close eye on the lobby and only when I saw a number of my team-mates
sporting a towel and tie did I do the same. It turned out to be an eccentric but hilarious evening in the
end.
Everyone at Yorkshire knew I was only nineteen and they were always eager to help. This was just
as well, because things were not at all what I was used to in Mumbai. I had toured England in 1990, of
course, but back then I had been with the Indian team and everything was arranged for us. This time I

had to do everything on my own – from organizing my own food to doing the laundry.
Coping by myself sometimes caused me great embarrassment. One incident involved my first
attempt to use a washing machine. I had no idea how much detergent was needed and must have
emptied about half a packet into the machine before starting the washing cycle, then I went out. On
my way back I could see something oozing beneath my front door. I was shocked at first until I
remembered that I had left the washing machine on. All the detergent had made it overflow and there
was foam everywhere.
That was the first and last time I did the laundry on my own. Every other time Solly bhai’s family
kindly came to my rescue. Solly Adams, who I fondly referred to as Solly bhai, was a resident of
Dewsbury in West Yorkshire. I had first met Solly and his wife Mariam in 1990 in the company of
Dilip Vengsarkar. Every Mumbai cricketer who had played league cricket in England had spoken to
me about Solly bhai’s hospitality and it was natural that I should get in touch with him. His house had
become a refuge for all Indian cricketers in the area and we all looked forward to the delectable food
we were served at Solly bhai’s house, particularly the biryani, tandoori chicken, raita and mango lassi.
It soon became a ritual for me to visit him three times a week when I was in Yorkshire.
Solly bhai’s brother Younus and his wife Ruksana were also great hosts and it was from them that I
learnt the art of filling the salad bowl. When a few of my friends – Jatin Paranjpe, Mufi and Vinod
Kambli – came to stay with me in Yorkshire, we mostly survived on cheap fast food. As the only
member of the quartet who was earning, I would pay the bills and, with limited resources, fast food
was the most affordable option. We would eat out at KFC, Burger King and the like, but the all-youcan-eat buffet at Pizza Hut was our favourite. While we could eat as many pizzas as we wanted for a
fixed price, we could only fill up our salad bowl once. And it was here that the training from Younus
and Ruksana came in handy. They taught me to use lettuce leaves to construct a wall, so that the size
of the bowl, which was ordinarily just two or three inches tall, increased to five or six inches. We
could then fill it with as much salad as we wanted.
I finally left Yorkshire for India around mid-August, to get back in time for the Duleep Trophy,
India’s second most important domestic competition. It’s named after Ranjitsinhji’s nephew
Duleepsinhji, who played for England in the early 1930s, and features teams representing the
country’s five zones: West, North, South, East and Central, It was suggested that I should play in it
before we left for what would be a challenging tour of South Africa in October. The Yorkshire
management was most considerate and allowed me to come back early, thus ending a really fruitful
and productive time in county cricket.

India in South Africa, November 1992–January 1993
It was a historic tour because it was the first time the South Africans had played a Test series at home
since returning to the international fold in 1991. They had toured India in November 1991 to end their
international isolation after twenty-one years and in the three one-day internationals showed they were
a very good side. In Allan Donald they had one of the best fast bowlers in the world and he was ably
supported by Richard Snell, Brian McMillan, Craig Matthews, Meyrick Pringle, Brett Schultz and a
host of other really good bowlers. In South African conditions the fast bowlers would pose a serious
challenge.
The United Cricket Board of South Africa had made every effort to make the tour memorable. We
landed in Durban and were immediately met by the hosts, who put us in open-top cars. There were two
cricketers in each car and hordes of people lined the road as we made our way to the hotel. I was in a

car with Pravin Amre, a middle-order bat and another of Ramakant Achrekar’s students, and
remember listening to Kishore Kumar songs all the way to the hotel. It was a fabulous experience.
We played our first tour game against Nicky Oppenheimer’s XI at his private ground in
Randjesfontein. It had rained heavily before the start of the game and it looked highly unlikely that we
would get any cricket on the day. But I had underestimated our hosts and was totally taken aback to
see what they were pouring onto the pitch to dry it out. They actually burnt petrol on the pitch to
expedite the drying process, something I had never imagined could happen. That wasn’t all. To our
surprise, a couple of helicopters hovered over the ground to dry the pitch for a good forty-five
minutes. As a result of all this effort, the pitch was finally playable and we managed to get a game. I
made a hundred and we won the match easily, making a very good start to the tour. Afterwards, the
talk in the dressing room was that we would beat the South Africans easily. We carried this sense of
complacency into the next match, where we scored over 500 runs against a Combined Bowl XI after
bowling them out for 230. The tour was turning out to be a walk in the park.
Things changed dramatically when we played the South African Board President’s XI at Centurion
on 6 November 1992. We bowled first and, standing at slip, I could see that the ball was not carrying
through to the keeper. Manoj Prabhakar and Subroto Banerjee, a promising medium-fast swing bowler
with a terrific sense of humour, opened the bowling for us and neither generated much pace off the
wicket. Apart from Srinath, who could bowl fast, none of our bowlers could get the ball to carry to the
keeper on that slowish track and we felt reasonably happy to get the opposition out for 268.
As our innings started we felt confident of batting the opposition out of the game again, but things
didn’t quite go according to plan. The second over was bowled by Brett Schultz and he generated
serious pace in his very first over; in fact, it was one of the quickest first overs I had seen. This wasn’t
what we had expected and within minutes the atmosphere in the dressing room had become very
subdued. The wicket had started to look lively and the batsmen were having all sorts of problems. It
wasn’t difficult to see that the Test series might not be so easy after all.
During the match it rained a little and the drizzle had made the outfield slippery. As a nineteenyear-old full of energy, I decided it would be a good idea to use the rain to practise sliding, at the
opposite end of the ground from the pavilion. Chamundeshwarnath, a former South Zone first-class
player who was playing club cricket there, helped the Indian team in fielding practice and also gave
me throw-downs in the nets. He was with me and was helping me with my drills. If under normal
circumstances I was able to slide for about three or four yards, the rain stupidly encouraged me to
slide a few extra yards each time I chased a ball. In doing so I twisted my ankle and had to be carried
off the ground. When I went to the hospital to get the injury checked, I was told it would take at least
four to five weeks to recover.
With the first Test still a week away, I was desperate to play a part in the series and pushed myself
to get fit as quickly as possible. After a few days, I started to walk but I was still finding it difficult to
run. The team management was keen for me to play because I was batting well, but the only way I
could do so was by standing in the slips, where I did not have to do much running about. It eventually
turned out to be quite embarrassing because there I was, a youngster, standing in the slips while Kapil
Dev, the senior member of the side, was running about in the deep.
In the first Test match at Durban, starting on 13 November 1992, we batted well and remained
competitive throughout the game, which ended in a draw. Pravin Amre scored a fantastic hundred on
debut and it was an innings full of character. I, unfortunately, wrote myself into the history books by
becoming the first batsman to be given out by the third umpire – the use of TV replays had just been
introduced. I had played the ball to point, where Jonty Rhodes was fielding. He was on it in a flash and

returned it to the keeper in quick time. Still hampered by the ankle injury, I took a little extra time to
turn back and, thanks to Jonty’s brilliance, fell short by two or three inches. Just to be sure, umpire
Cyril Mitchley went to the third umpire, Karl Liebenberg, who declared me run out.
It was my first taste of Jonty Rhodes’s fielding prowess, something that caused us problems for the
whole tour. Jonty was particularly effective in the ODI series and was undoubtedly the best fielder I
played against. His anticipation and reactions were the quickest I have encountered and he managed to
dry up all the singles around point, cover point and towards third man. On difficult pitches they can be
crucial runs and all of a sudden they had been cut off, with Jonty manning the entire area on the off
side with amazing speed. He ran a number of us out and saved a lot of runs every game, making a
significant difference to the outcome of the series.
The other thing about Jonty was his running between the wickets. In the third match of the ODI
series, which we won, Jonty had played a slog sweep off Ravi Shastri to deep square leg, where Kapil
spilled the catch. In the interim Jonty had completed the first run really fast and had almost made it
back to the striker’s end, only to realize that his batting partner Andrew Hudson had not made any
attempt to run a second. To our amazement, Jonty turned back and almost made it to the other end
before the bails were dislodged to run him out. He had all but completed three runs in the time the
non-striker had managed just one.
Coming back to the Test series, we followed the Durban draw with another good performance in the
second Test at Johannesburg, which started on 26 November. I got a hundred in this game, my fourth
in Test cricket. It is an innings I remember with great satisfaction. I was not out on 75 at the end of the
second day and had to fight really hard on the third morning. Allan Donald was bowling a brilliant
spell and patience was the key to survival. I kept leaving balls outside the off stump and knew I had to
see Donald off before I was able to get on with scoring. I played just one cover drive before lunch,
otherwise it was a battle of attrition and patience. That memorable contest against Allan Donald
typefies what Test cricket is all about for me, making it the pinnacle of all formats of the sport. Here
was a fast bowler propelling the ball at close to 150 kph. For a batsman there’s nothing more
challenging than really hostile fast bowling in bowler-friendly conditions. You don’t get to play spells
like that in domestic cricket and surviving is a true test of a batsman’s calibre.
At Johannesburg, I finally got to my hundred after lunch, facing 270 balls in the innings, which
lasted for six and a half hours. With Kumble taking six wickets in South Africa’s second innings, we
managed to draw the match and went into the third Test at Port Elizabeth with all to play for. The
other bowler who bowled very well for South Africa was Craig Matthews. He was the most accurate of
the lot and bowled a crafty line outside off stump, from where the ball would generally swing away.
Occasionally he would get one to nip back and it was difficult to play this incoming ball. So much so
that almost the whole team ended up with very similar black bruises on our thighs after being hit by
Matthews. We even joked about it in the dressing room, saying, ‘ Aare isko bhi medal mila hai dekh!’
(He too has got a medal. Check!)
Unfortunately, we lost the third Test at Port Elizabeth to the pace and guile of Allan Donald, who
picked up twelve wickets in the match. We were still in the game at the end of the first innings of both
teams, but it was Donald’s opening burst in the second innings that made all the difference. We lost
our first six wickets for 31 and, despite a brilliant hundred from Kapil Dev, we never really had a
chance. I got a bad umpiring call and was declared out to Brett Schultz, caught behind, when the ball
had actually hit the inside of my thigh. The umpire met me at the end of the game and apologized for
getting it wrong. It was understandable, for umpiring is one of the most difficult jobs in cricket and it
is only human to get things wrong sometimes.

We were determined to level the series in the fourth and final Test match at Cape Town, which
started on 2 January 1993. While we failed to achieve that, we didn’t play badly. Javagal Srinath
bowled particularly impressively, picking up six wickets. This time Allan Donald bowled a lot of
overs to me from round the wicket, pitching it short of a length to make the most of the spongy bounce
Cape Town is known for. I decided to try a new approach. He was bowling short and was getting the
balls to come into my body. I realized that the best way to counter him would be to frustrate him. My
thinking was simple: if taller guys can use their height to stand up on their toes and get on top of the
bounce, why shouldn’t the shorter guys use their height to go under the ball. So I decided to change
my stance in this match. Normally I used to leave a gap of ten inches to a foot between my feet while
batting, but in Cape Town I increased the gap to two and a half feet. This meant I was effectively even
shorter than normal and could easily get under Donald’s deliveries, forcing him to change the length
he was bowling. It proved successful and I managed to bat for more than four and a half hours, facing
208 balls for my 73, which helped us draw the game.
In the ODI series, which for some reason was played between the second and third Tests and which
for the first time was played with two new balls, one from each end, we gave a good account of
ourselves, despite losing the seven-game contest 2–5. Most of the matches were low-scoring and 200
or thereabouts was considered a competitive score, which seems extraordinary these days.
We had lost to South Africa in both formats but I must say I had relished the challenge of playing
against some of the best fast bowlers in the world. Every side faces difficulties away from home and
at the end of the tough South Africa series we were looking forward to dishing out a few challenges to
Graham Gooch’s England when they toured India in February–March 1993. Remarkably, it would be
my first ever Test series on home soil.

England in India, January–March 1993
There’s nothing quite like playing in front of home crowds and in home conditions. When the first
Test at Eden Gardens in Kolkata started on 29 January 1993, the enthusiasm among the spectators
acted as huge motivation. Mohammad Azharuddin, our skipper, who always relished playing at Eden
Gardens, set the tone with a brilliant 182, while I managed a half-century. By the fifth day we needed
just 34 to win and to my complete amazement 70,000 people had come to the stadium to see us knock
off the winning runs and take a 1–0 lead in the three-Test series. I remember hitting a short ball from
Paul Jarvis, the England fast bowler, over square leg to the boundary to win the game.
Back in the dressing room there was no holding back. We really needed that win after the
disappointment in South Africa and it felt particularly great to see the spinners come into play in
conditions that suited their art. The English batsmen I had seen hitting through the line in England in
1990 were now struggling against the turning ball. The boot was on the other foot and we were
enjoying every moment of it. Playing spin in the subcontinent is quite a challenge and England were
finding it very difficult. We had a three-pronged spin attack in Anil Kumble, Rajesh Chauhan and
Venkatapathy Raju – a lethal threesome. With the fast bowlers Kapil Dev and Manoj Prabhakar both
very able with the bat, we had the flexibility to go in with five bowlers, making our attack look that
much more potent.
The second match of the series started in Chennai on 11 February and it was in this match that I got
my first home Test hundred. The surface, a very good track to bat on, was hard with a little bit of
bounce. I scored 165 and could easily have gone on to score a double ton if I hadn’t played a
disappointingly loose shot to Ian Salisbury, the leg-spinner. I had set out to hit the ball over midwicket

and ended up top-edging it back to the bowler.
Navjot Sidhu also made a century and we posted a sizable total of 560. Despite some resistance
from Neil Fairbrother in their first innings, England were forced to follow on. Chris Lewis put up a
good fight in the second innings, making his maiden century, but Kumble took six wickets and we
ended up winning the match comfortably. We headed to Mumbai for the third Test four days later,
having already taken an unassailable 2–0 lead in the series.
This was to be my first Test match at the Wankhede Stadium, where I had grown up playing a lot of
my cricket, and hence it was a homecoming of sorts. It was the same for Vinod Kambli, who got a
spectacular double hundred in this match. England must have been reasonably pleased to post their
biggest total of the series in their first innings, 347, with Graeme Hick making his highest Test score
of 178. Yet we posted an impressive 591 in reply, of which I contributed 78, and then Manoj
Prabhakar took three quick wickets and the spinners did the rest, handing the English another innings
defeat. It’s fair to say that we had successfully put the disappointment of South Africa behind us.
Anil Kumble, who had bowled beautifully in all three Test matches, was declared Player of the
Series. Anil was becoming the match-winner we had been looking for and discipline and rigour were
the hallmarks of his craft. He did not turn the ball much but made up for it with great accuracy and
tenacity. I never saw Anil let up in intensity and have nothing but the highest regard for him, one of
the greatest players to have represented India.
The ODI series was more closely contested and we went into the last match at Gwalior on 5 March
1993 needing to win to level the series. Up till then, I had had a mediocre run batting at number five or
six. However, at Gwalior I managed to score a quick 34 off thirty balls at a crucial time in the game
and was involved in a key partnership with Azhar, who scored a brilliant 95 not out as he took us to
victory.
The England series marked the beginning of a very successful phase in Indian cricket. We followed
up by beating Zimbabwe in a one-off Test at home and were gradually getting into a healthy winning
habit in home conditions. In ODIs we had started winning close contests and we went into the next
major one-day tournament – the Hero Cup, also featuring South Africa, Sri Lanka, the West Indies and
Zimbabwe – as one of the favourites.

Turning my arm over
Not long before the Hero Cup I played a festival match in Bangalore. When Kiran More, normally a
wicketkeeper, bowled me a juicy full toss I tried to hit it for six but ended up twisting my wrist. It was
a freakish injury and while I was able to continue batting, I was in serious pain. After a few days the
injury had still not eased and it was decided that I needed to have an injection. This was my first
cortisone injection and Dr Anant Joshi flew in from Mumbai to Delhi to administer the shot. I was to
be injected on my wrist very close to the palm, and with the Hero Cup just days away, I was
apprehensive about the recovery. The injection, which was pretty painful, was the first of a hundred or
more cortisone injections over the course of my career.
The one match of the Hero Cup I will never forget is the semi-final against South Africa on 24
November 1993. We batted first, scoring a very modest 195 in our fifty overs. We knew we needed to
bowl and field exceedingly well if we were to stop South Africa from making the final. Our bowlers,
led by Anil, did a very good job and at the end of the forty-ninth over South Africa needed six runs to
win. Having made a match of it despite scoring too few runs, we now had to decide who should be
entrusted with the task of bowling the all-important final over.

I volunteered to take the responsibility. I had not bowled on the day and so I thought my bowling
would have a surprise element to it. Also, the track had assisted the slower bowlers and Kapil’s pace
might have been easier for the South African batsmen to deal with. Then I realized that after fielding
for forty-nine overs and in the slightly nippy evening, my body was stiff and my hands were frozen. I
knew I had to warm up again quickly because there was no second chance. One wide could mean the
match was over.
The first ball was a good-length delivery to Brian McMillan, one of the best all-rounders in the
world at the time, who managed a single. But in the process South Africa lost Fanie de Villiers, who,
in trying to get McMillan back on strike, was run out by a throw from Salil Ankola. Importantly, it
meant that McMillan was at the non-striker’s end and the new man was facing me. This was my
opportunity. Allan Donald, the new batsman, wasn’t great with the bat and if I managed to pin him
down we definitely had a chance of winning the contest. The key was to keep the big-hitting Brian
McMillan away from the strike.
As Donald walked to the wicket, I knew he was feeling the tension. I just had to hold my nerve and
not try anything fancy. I deliberately bowled slower to him and even tossed one up, giving it a bit of
spin. Donald was unable to cope with the lack of pace and ended up putting himself and his team
under pressure by playing out three dot-balls. He didn’t manage a single till the fifth ball of the over.
South Africa now needed a boundary off the last ball to win. For our part, we just needed to stop the
boundary and we were in the final.
The key to handling pressure situations like these is to keep yourself steady, follow your instincts
and think clearly. I was aware that there had been occasions in the past when a batsman had got an
inside edge attempting a huge heave and the ball had beaten the keeper standing up and sped to the
boundary. In such circumstances there’s little the bowling team can do. Remembering this, I asked
Vijay Yadav, our keeper, to stand back, as if to a fast bowler.
It’s difficult to believe, looking back, but McMillan did try a slog and he did get an inside edge.
Yadav easily picked up the ball twenty yards back and South Africa could only sneak a single. In the
most dramatic of finishes we had managed to win and were in the final. I had conceded only three runs
in the over and we had won by two runs. The packed Eden Gardens crowd, which numbered close to
100,000, turned hysterical. Paper torches were lit all round the stands, creating an unbelievable
atmosphere. I felt a sense of exhilaration and was soon engulfed by my team-mates. It was one of the
best one-day internationals I had played in.
The other, rather unexpected, contributor to the Indian victory was a mongoose, which kept coming
onto the ground during the second half of this day-night encounter at the Eden Gardens. It seemed that
every time the mongoose came on the field the momentum shifted and the South Africans lost a
wicket. While it was just a coincidence, of course, it turned out to be a lucky coincidence for India!
After such a nerve-racking semi-final, the final was a relatively easy affair, with Anil running
through the West Indies line-up to give us the title. He bowled brilliantly and finished off with careerbest figures of 6–12 as we won the Hero Cup in front of a packed Eden Gardens. To make the victory
even sweeter, I managed to get the wicket of Brian Lara. Getting Brian Lara out was interesting
because Ajit, who had travelled to Kolkata with me to watch the semi-final and the final, had
mentioned to me in the hotel that I should look to get Brian Lara out if I got a chance to bowl to him,
and also suggested that I should bowl stump to stump to him. As it happened, I did get a chance to
bowl to Brian, who had opened the batting for the West Indies. After he had hit me for a few runs, I
bowled him a delivery slightly outside the off stump, which nipped back in a shade and bowled him.
Delighted with the wicket, I immediately thought of the discussion I had had with Ajit.

My first year of cricket on home soil had gone really well. However, there were still things I
desperately wanted to do. One was getting my first ODI hundred and another was opening the batting
for India in one-dayers.

India in New Zealand, March–April 1994
It was the morning of 27 March 1994 and later that day we were playing New Zealand in the second
game of a four-match ODI series in Auckland. Navjot Sidhu, our first-choice opener, woke up with a
stiff neck and was in no position to play. That’s when I went up to Azhar and our manager Ajit
Wadekar, a former Indian captain and a leading batsman of his time, and pleaded with them to give
me an opportunity at the top of the order. Why did I think I should open? Well, I had the ability to
attack bowlers and play shots from the word go, and in the one-day game, the key was to take
advantage of the field restrictions in the first fifteen overs. I was sure that I just needed a chance to
prove myself. I told Wadekar Sir that if I failed I’d never ask him again. In any case, there was no
reserve opener in the team and they had no choice but to experiment with an irregular opener in place
of Sidhu. If they put me at the top, they could still get a middle-order batsman to fill in for me at
number four or five. After a lot of pleading, they finally agreed.
New Zealand scored just 142 batting first, but we still needed to make a good start. As I walked out
to bat, I felt different in some way. I told myself that this was my big chance to open the batting for
India. I did not want to let down the captain and the coach. Once I was at the wicket I cleared my mind
and was just intent on hitting the ball hard, come what may. It was one of those days when everything
fell into place and soon I couldn’t wait for the next delivery. The quicker the better, as far as I was
concerned. I managed to score 82 off forty-eight balls, finally holing out to the left-arm spinner
Matthew Hart off a leading edge. I had hit fifteen fours and two sixes.
After that I no longer had to plead with Wadekar Sir to allow me to open and I continued to score
runs in that position for the rest of the series, which ended up being tied 2–2. It was no surprise
because New Zealand at home were always formidable opponents. In this series, I was able to dictate
terms to the bowlers and all my plans were working out well. For example, against Gavin Larsen,
known to be a bowler who bowled a stump-to-stump line, I came down the wicket a couple of times,
forcing him to adjust his length. When he bowled short I was waiting for it and promptly dispatched
the ball to the stands.
With one aim achieved, I was determined to accomplish the second as soon as possible. I had
started to feel frustrated and a little embarrassed at not having scored a hundred in ODI cricket.
Having already played seventy-odd games, it was about time. The moment finally came against
Australia in Sri Lanka in the Singer World Series in September 1994 and it was more of a relief than
anything else. So much of getting to a century is in the mind. Once you score one, you know you can
score another and the doubts aren’t there any more – getting the first one is the tricky bit. My first
ODI hundred certainly soothed the nerves and it was an important milestone in my career.

Playing against Brian Lara
With five years of experience, I was now firmly established in the Indian team and people had started
comparing me with other players on the international scene at the time. The press love to set up
rivalries and with a home series against the West Indies coming up at the end of 1994, it was
inevitable that the fans and the media would pit me against Brian Lara.

Without doubt Brian Lara is one of the best players to have played this sport. I first met Brian in
November 1990 during a festival match in Toronto between the West Indies and a World XI, which
was played at the SkyDome, a stadium designed for Major League Baseball. We got along straight
away and I enjoyed talking to him and listening to his insights. He was a clear thinker and had an
excellent grasp of the nuances of the game. To add to his unrivalled flamboyance, he also had great
hands and footwork, making him a champion batsman of our time. Brian was capable of playing a
number of shots to the same delivery and his ability to adjust at the last moment set him apart. His
technique wasn’t orthodox but that had never mattered to him. He more than made up for it with skill
and footwork.
By the time the West Indies came to India in November–December 1994, Brian was already the
premier batsman of his team. We knew we had to stop Brian from scoring to have a chance in the Test
series, but it was easier said than done, and Brian played a very important role for the West Indies in
the third and final Test at Mohali. It was his innings of 91 that set the platform for a series-levelling
West Indies win. For the visitors, Jimmy Adams too played a crucial part, with 252 runs in the match.
I had a pretty good series and in the first match at Mumbai I was pleased with my performance in
the second innings, scoring 85 after coming in to bat at a precarious 11–3. We won the match by 96
runs, having managed to get Brian out early in both innings. In the second Test at the VCA stadium in
Nagpur, I scored 179 in our first innings. I remember this innings for my wild celebrations after
scoring the century, something I hardly ever did in my career. In fact, it was an aberration, caused by a
combination of factors. I was not out on 81 overnight and started the second day against the second
new ball. I hit Kenneth Benjamin for four fours in the first few overs and raced to 97 in no time.
Courtney Walsh was bowling from the other end and I was trying to get into his mind, to understand
what he was likely to do. I had a feeling he would bowl outside off stump or full if he wanted to get
me out. On the other hand, he would probably bowl bouncers if he just wanted to keep me quiet. He
bowled a short ball and that’s when I realized that another one might be coming my way the very next
delivery. I was ready. I played the hook to perfection and the ball sailed into the stands. It was an
exhilarating way to get to a century and I just couldn’t control my emotions. I pumped my fists and
screamed in joy, though none of it was meant for Walsh. It was simply because my plan had come off.

Facing criticism
The story of this series against the West Indies remains incomplete if I don’t talk about the five-match
ODI series that preceded the Tests in October and November 1994. It was played in two parts. The
first two ODIs were followed by a tri-series, with New Zealand joining India and the West Indies as
the third team, before we went back to playing the last three games of the bilateral series.
In both of the first two ODIs against the West Indies, on 17 and 20 October, I was out without
scoring. I didn’t do much better in the first match of the tri-series, on 23 October, making only eight.
After just three failures, a surprising number of people started to find flaws with my game. While they
might have been well-intentioned, it seemed that every ex-cricketer I met during the tri-series had
some advice for me. Everyone was trying to tell me what was wrong with my game, which I found a
little strange.
Yes, I had scored two consecutive ducks, but this reaction was extraordinary. Every performer goes
through lean patches. I was still at ease with myself and knew that with one good score, things would
fall back into place. That’s exactly what happened in the final of the tri-series, when I scored 66 at
Eden Gardens. That was followed by three consecutive half-centuries in the bilateral series,

culminating in a hundred in the final game at Jaipur on 11 November. I ended up as Player of the
Series.
Having won the tri-series and also the five-match ODI series, we had given our fans a lot to cheer
about. Coming on top of the Hero Cup win a year earlier, all these victories helped boost the
popularity of ODI cricket in India ahead of the World Cup, which was being co-hosted by India,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka in 1996. It was set to be a massive event.
India in South Africa 1992–93
1st Test. Durban. 13–17 November 1992
South Africa 254 (KC Wessels 118, JN Rhodes 41; Kapil Dev 3–43) and 176–3 (AC Hudson 55)
India 277 (PK Amre 103, KS More 55, SR Tendulkar 11; BM McMillan 3–52)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Johannesburg. 26–30 November 1992
South Africa 292 (BM McMillan 98, JN Rhodes 91; M Prabhakar 4–90) and 252 (AC Hudson 53, DJ
Richardson 50; A Kumble 6–53)
India 227 (SR Tendulkar 111 ; BM McMillan 4–74) and 141–4 (A Jadeja 43, SR Tendulkar 1 ; CR
Matthews 2–23, AA Donald 2–43)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Port Elizabeth. 26–29 December 1992
India 212 (M Azharuddin 60, SR Tendulkar 6 ; AA Donald 5–55) and 215 (Kapil Dev 129, SR
Tendulkar 0; AA Donald 7–84, BN Schultz 2–37)
South Africa 275 (WJ Cronje 135, AC Hudson 52) and 155–1 (KC Wessels 95*; SR Tendulkar 1–9)
South Africa won by 9 wickets
4th Test. Cape Town. 2–6 January 1993
South Africa 360–9 dec (JN Rhodes 86, BM McMillan 52; A Kumble 3–101) and 130–6 dec (KC
Wessels 34; J Srinath 4–33)
India 276 (SR Tendulkar 73, M Prabhakar 62; CR Matthews 3–32) and 29–1
Match drawn
South Africa won the series 1–0
England in India 1993
1st Test. Kolkata. 29 January–2 February 1993
India 371 (M Azharuddin 182, SR Tendulkar 50 ; GA Hick 3–19, DE Malcolm 3–67) and 82–2 (NS
Sidhu 37, SR Tendulkar 9*; GA Hick 2–9)
England 163 (MW Gatting 33; RK Chauhan 3–30, SLV Raju 3–39, A Kumble 3–50) and 286 (f/o)
(MW Gatting 81, AJ Stewart 49; A Kumble 3–76, SLV Raju 3–80)
India won by 8 wickets
2nd Test. Chennai. 11–15 February 1993
India 560–6 dec (SR Tendulkar 165, NS Sidhu 106, PK Amre 78, Kapil Dev 66, VG Kambli 59)
England 286 (NH Fairbrother 83, AJ Stewart 74, GA Hick 64; SLV Raju 4–103) and 252 (f/o) (CC
Lewis 117, RA Smith 56; A Kumble 6–64)

India won by an innings and 22 runs
3rd Test. Mumbai. 19–23 February 1993
England 347 (GA Hick 178, CC Lewis 49; Kapil Dev 3–35, A Kumble 3–95) and 229 (RA Smith 62,
MW Gatting 61, GA Hick 47; A Kumble 4–70)
India 591 (VG Kambli 224, NS Sidhu 79, SR Tendulkar 78, PK Amre 57; PCR Tufnell 4–142
India won by an innings and 15 runs
India won the series 3–0
West Indies in India 1994
1st Test. Mumbai. 18–22 November 1994
India 272 (NR Mongia 80, SV Manjrekar 51, SR Tendulkar 34 ; CA Walsh 6–79) and 333 ( SR
Tendulkar 85, SV Manjrekar 66, J Srinath 60; KCG Benjamin 4–82)
West Indies 243 (SC Williams 49; SLV Raju 5–60) and 266 (JR Murray 85, JC Adams 81; J Srinath 4–
48, SLV Raju 3–85)
India won by 96 runs
2nd Test. Nagpur. 1–5 December 1994
India 546–9 dec (SR Tendulkar 179, NS Sidhu 107, M Azharuddin 97, A Kumble 52*) and 208–7 dec
(NS Sidhu 76, SR Tendulkar 54)
West Indies 428 (JC Adams 125*, CL Hooper 81, JR Murray 54, BC Lara 50, PV Simmons 50; SLV
Raju 5–127) and 132–5 (CL Hooper 67; A Kumble 3–45)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Mohali. 10–14 December 1994
West Indies 443 (JC Adams 174, AC Cummins 50; A Kumble 4–90, SLV Raju 3–73) and 301–3 dec
(BC Lara 91, JC Adams 78*, KLT Arthurton 70*)
India 387 (M Prabhakar 120, J Srinath 52*, SR Tendulkar 40 ) and 114 (J Srinath 17*, S Manjrekar
17, SR Tendulkar 10; KCG Benjamin 5–65, CA Walsh 3–34)
West Indies won by 243 runs
Series drawn 1–1