BOUNCING BACK

The 2008 one-day tri-series in Australia with Sri Lanka as the third team was a hard-fought
competition. A lot of the tension from the controversial Test series that preceded it was carried into
the limited-overs arena and the Indian team under new captain MS Dhoni were determined to return to
India with the Commonwealth Bank trophy.
The pitch at the MCG on 10 February was one of the fastest I’ve played on. We fielded first and
Dhoni was standing way back and still had to catch most balls at chest height. I was standing at slip,
which was at the edge of the thirty-yard circle, an indication of the pace and bounce of the pitch. I
remember mentioning to Dhoni, after an outside edge off Matthew Hayden’s bat flew past me, that the
pitch was going to favour the fast bowlers throughout the match and no chase was going to be easy.
Our bowlers used the conditions well and dismissed Australia for only 159. Ishant bowled
beautifully again to pick up 4–38 and Sreesanth also did well, taking 3–31. At the break our dressing
room was buoyant, though we knew that their fast bowlers would enjoy the conditions just as much.
Sure enough, in the third over of the innings Lee bowled a fast short ball that flew off the shoulder of
my bat over slip towards third man. Just as I was completing the single, Lee walked up to me and
casually said with a smile that he was feeling very good and was going to bowl really fast at me. Lee
has always been a good friend and while it wasn’t exactly sledging, it was enough to fire me up. As he
walked past I just muttered to myself that, come what may, I was going to take him on. It turned out to
be one of our most memorable contests.
My chance came in the fifth over. Sehwag had just been dismissed at the other end, lbw to left-arm
seamer Nathan Bracken for 11, and Lee was steaming in. His second ball was slightly wide but I still
decided to go for a drive through cover. I connected moderately well and the ball raced to the fence.
Lee just gave me another smile and walked back to his mark. I thought I knew what he would try next.
He ran in fast and, as anticipated, bowled a fuller-length ball. I came down hard at it and hit it straight
back at him. It must have been one of the most powerful shots I have hit in my life. Lee didn’t have a
hope of bending down to stop the ball. In fact, the ball had reached the boundary by the time he
finished his follow-through.
By now Lee was even more pumped up and the next ball was a 151 kph delivery, which I defended
off the back foot. I was determined to keep attacking and I got another opportunity off the fifth ball of
the over. It was full and fast and again I hit it back past Lee for four. While the first straight drive had
gone to the left of the bowler, this one went to his right. Those two drives gave me a lot of confidence
and I went on to make 44. When I got out in the twenty-sixth over we needed 64 runs and Rohit
Sharma and Dhoni played well to finish off the job.
Immediately after the match, I started to feel some soreness in my adductors, the muscles in the
groin, and informed John Gloster about the problem. We took remedial steps but the pain refused to
go away and I was still feeling it when we played our last pool match against Sri Lanka on 26

February in Hobart. It was a game we had to win to qualify for the three-match final against Australia.
Sri Lanka scored 179, with Ishant Sharma and Praveen Kumar both taking four wickets, and when our
innings started I managed to connect well from the off and went on to make 63 as we knocked off the
runs in thirty-three overs. It felt good to spend time out in the middle again after several low scores
and I headed to Sydney for the first final relieved at having scored some runs.
While I was looking forward to the finals, I was conscious that the pain in my adductors was getting
worse after every practice session. I was having problems with running, twisting and even bending
down to pick up a ball. It reached a stage where in fielding practice I had to just stand at the stumps
while my team-mates threw the ball in. With the final just a day away, painkillers were the only
remedy.

CB Series, first final, Sydney, 2 March 2008
Before the finals, the atmosphere got a little heated again when Ricky Ponting declared that Australia
would have to play only the first two of the three finals, as that was all it would take to send India
packing. His comments only added to our determination.
Australia batted first at the SCG after winning the toss. It’s usually a sensible ploy to bat first in a
big final, because even a mediocre score can be made to look good in a must-win situation. Australia
made 239 on the day, with Matthew Hayden contributing 82, and we didn’t think it was a bad total in
good bowling conditions.
Robin Uthappa was opening the batting with me and our first task was to see off the new ball. We
knew that if the team batted our full fifty overs, we should win the match, and I advised Robin to be
patient and not to be aggressive early in the innings. Being a naturally attacking batsman, Robin was
itching to play his shots and at one point I had to get a little angry with him, telling him not to do
anything rash. We managed not to lose a wicket until the eleventh over, when Robin played his first
big pull shot to deep square leg, where Mike Hussey caught the ball low down. Robin might have
scored only 17, but he had helped see off the new ball and we had put together a 50-run first-wicket
partnership.
I sensed that the match would be ours if we kept our nerve. Unfortunately for us, we lost Gautam
Gambhir and Yuvraj within a few overs and needed another partnership to rebuild the innings. Rohit
Sharma had come out to bat and I asked him to play straight and not try any fancy shots early on. He
batted brilliantly and soon we were in a position to grind down the opposition. Rohit finally got out to
the all-rounder James Hopes for 66, just after I had reached my century.
Dhoni came out next and we knocked off the 30 runs needed to finish the match quite easily in the
end. The only scare was a beamer from Brett Lee that hit me on the side of my helmet grille and the
top of my left shoulder. The ball had slipped out of his hand and could very easily have injured me. I
felt a little dizzy and jokingly suggested to Lee that he would have to answer to my son Arjun when he
next went to Mumbai. Lee knew Arjun well and had spent some time with my family when we had
filmed a Boost commercial together. He apologized immediately and the matter was put to rest there
and then. It was an accident, of course, but the shoulder felt sore and the area between shoulder and
elbow turned black.
It was a very satisfying feeling to bat through the innings. It was a big match but we decided not to
celebrate too much because the second final in Brisbane was only a day away and we knew it was
going to be tough because of the high humidity.
I could not sleep a wink that night and ached all over. The pain in my groin had increased and I was

starting to get scared. The next morning I could barely walk and it was an ordeal boarding the earlymorning flight. In Brisbane I was given a long massage as soon as we reached the hotel. Seeing my
condition, Dhoni suggested that maybe I should miss the second final and play in the third if needed. I
said to him that ‘Sher jab gira hua hota hai use tabhi mar do’ (When a tiger is down and out, just
finish it off. Don’t give it a second chance.) He agreed with me that it would be better to close out the
competition in Brisbane if we could.

CB Series, second final, Brisbane, 4 March 2008
When we arrived at the Gabba we found that there was a lot of moisture in the pitch. It was bound to
be difficult for batting early on and the obvious plan was to field first if we won the toss – but I urged
Dhoni not to do so. I reckoned that the Australians might well want to bat first, preferring to bat
without the pressure of chasing a target. I thought it would be better if we set a target, even if it meant
struggling through the initial period of dampness on the wicket.
Dhoni agreed and we batted first. Again, I told Robin Uthappa in no uncertain terms not to risk a
single expansive shot till we had played out the first ten overs. In those conditions not losing wickets
was far more important than trying to score runs. Robin successfully held back and we survived the
first twenty overs intact, giving us a solid foundation to launch an assault. We then scored at almost
six runs an over and ended up with 258, a reasonable score to defend in the circumstances.
I was pleased to score 91, but by the end of the innings I also knew that my body was in bad shape
and if we weren’t able to win in Brisbane I would be in no condition to play the third final. In fact, I
was forced to leave the field in the fourth over of the Australia innings, when Dhoni dived to catch
Hayden off Sreesanth and the ball ricocheted and hit me exactly where I had been hit by the Lee
beamer.
Meanwhile our opening bowler Praveen Kumar produced a great spell and picked up three crucial
Australian wickets. Hayden and Symonds then put together a big partnership and the stage was set for
Bhajji to have the final word on Australian soil. First he ran Hayden out, following a
misunderstanding with Symonds, and then just two balls later Symonds missed a ball that turned a
long way and was trapped lbw. Unsurprisingly, Bhajji enjoyed his wicket more than any other.
The match wasn’t over yet, however, with James Hopes playing some aggressive strokes. In the end,
Hopes was out last, for 63, but by picking up wickets regularly at the other end we had ensured that he
was constantly under pressure. Nevertheless, the match was closer than expected and when the final
wicket fell, Australia were only ten runs away from winning the game.
It was a great feeling to win, and seeing the tricolour being waved all over the Gabba was a terrific
sight. We had beaten Australia in Australia and were also delighted to have proved Ricky Ponting
right. He did not have to play a third final, just as he had predicted.

Grasping the nettle
My physical condition was deteriorating by the day. It didn’t help that the problem still hadn’t been
diagnosed properly and I didn’t know exactly what I was suffering from. In any case, there wasn’t
much time to do anything about it as the first of three home Tests against South Africa was due to
start at Chennai a couple of weeks later, on 26 March 2008.
After getting as much rest as I could, I went to Chennai, and in the evening before the game had
three injections in my groin. The doctors sounded confident that they would enable me to play the next

day. When I got up the following morning the pain was substantially reduced, but John Gloster and I
decided I should undertake a fitness test. I found I was able to run around during practice and also
played our customary game of football without feeling too much discomfort. John declared me fit to
play.
It was unlucky for me that South Africa won the toss and then batted for two long days as they
compiled 540, with Amla making 159. Fielding in the heat quickly brought back the pain and when I
finally batted on the fourth day I was so stiff and sore that I got out without scoring to Makhaya Ntini,
caught by Kallis at second slip. At the end of the match, which was a high-scoring draw, I told Anil
Kumble and John Gloster that there was no point in pushing my body any further.
I flew back to Mumbai and embarked on a process of rehabilitation under Nitin Patel, the physio of
the Mumbai Indians, the IPL team of which I had been made captain. The first season of the IPL was
just round the corner and my initial aim was to get fit for the first match. Despite all my efforts,
however, I was only able to play the last seven matches, and even then I was not 100 per cent fit.
The lack of a diagnosis led to some unhelpful speculation. Apparently, one doctor in Mumbai
suggested to a member of the Mumbai Indians management that the problem was actually in my head.
I found out about it because one night Anjali asked me if the problem was really bad enough for me
not to play. How could Anjali ask me such a question? I said to her that I had played with broken
fingers and toes, and played days after my father’s death, so how could she of all people doubt my
physical condition? It was not until the competition had finished that Anjali told me what she had
heard from a Mumbai Indians official about what the doctor had said. Frankly, I was shocked, but I
was also glad she didn’t tell me until the end of the tournament, because I was trying everything
possible to get fit and play, and it would have been very upsetting to hear that.
Unfortunately for me, no one in Mumbai could diagnose the problem, despite the fact that I’d
undertaken various forms of treatment. Finally, it was in London, when I was there for a family
holiday, that I met up with my surgeon Andrew Wallace and explained my condition. He
recommended Prof. Cathy Speed, who, on seeing the case history, immediately identified my problem
as Gilmore’s Groin, or Sportsman’s Hernia, and referred me to Dr Ulrike Muschaweck in Germany.
Prof. Speed also prescribed a few medicines and gave me some exercises to do and I felt in good
enough shape to go to Sri Lanka with the team for the Test series in July and August 2008. I managed
to get through the series, which we lost 2–1, without too much trouble, but before the start of the oneday series it was apparent to me that I had to do something about the condition.
On 13 August 2008, I left for Munich alone to get myself treated by Dr Muschaweck at the Munich
Hernia Centre. It was a great revelation for me to discover this very specialized centre for hernia
treatment. Dr Muschaweck was highly recommended by Prof. Speed. She has been specializing in
hernia surgery for close to two decades and has developed some new repair techniques in recent years
that have considerably improved the recovery process. She immediately makes her patients feel at
ease and she was quick to assure me that there was no chance of recurrence once she had operated on
me. To my delight she was proved right.
I had the first operation on 14 August and must say the pain was perfectly bearable. I had asked Dr
Muschaweck if both sides of the groin could be done on the same day but was told that it wasn’t
feasible because there would be far too much pain. Anjali hadn’t been able to accompany me initially
because of Sara’s examinations, but she joined me on the evening of the 14th and I underwent my
second operation on the morning of the 15th. I had insisted on having the two operations on
consecutive days to cut down the recovery time, in the hope of getting fit for the Australian Test
series. This time the pain was excruciating. Cleaning myself was quite an ordeal because of the

serious pain in my abdomen and I wasn’t able to eat a thing. I was given a laxative and this, a sweet
sugar syrup with a very nice taste, was the only thing I enjoyed having that night! I could hardly sleep
with all the pain and was looking forward to getting back home.
It was an important operation and one that helped prolong my cricket career. It also draws attention
to the lack of specialized sports science centres in India at that time. While I could afford to go to
Munich and get myself treated by the best experts in the world, for other Indian athletes it might not
always have been feasible.
I certainly knew I’d had a serious operation afterwards. I remember leaving the clinic on 16 August
in a wheelchair because I felt dizzy every time I tried to stand. I also remember telling Anjali that I
was about to faint when standing at the check-in counter at the airport and Anjali rushing to help.
After landing in Mumbai, my friend Faisal Momen picked me up and for the first time in my life I
asked him to drive as slowly as possible. I was frantically monitoring the road and if I spotted a speed
bump I would lift myself a little with my hands to avoid jarring my abdomen.
As soon as I got home Anjali told the kids that for the time being they wouldn’t be able to give their
father a hug. At that time, Arjun used to like play-fighting with me and I had to show him the
bandages to make him understand that I was just too unwell. It was a difficult time for us all. I had
already missed days and months of my children’s childhood. Now I was finally at home with them all
day but was unable to play with them.
Once I’d got over the journey, I started the recovery process under the aegis of Paul Close and Paul
Chapman. I did not go out for three weeks during rehab, as I was so tired from all my training, which
would start at seven in the morning. I spent the second week of my rehab at the National Cricket
Academy, and my training included strengthening exercises, cardio, pool sessions, running – both
straight and sideways – specialized exercises with the Thera-Band, and a number of other drills. It
would end at around two thirty in the afternoon, following which I would just go home, have lunch and
sleep for a few hours, completely exhausted.
The target I had set myself was to recover for the Test series against Australia that started in
Bangalore at the beginning of October 2008. I knew it would be a race against time and I had a lot of
hard work ahead of me. There were days when I would push myself so hard that by the evening I
would just collapse on the bed and had no strength left, then I would get up very early the next
morning and start my exercises all over again. Throughout this period, my group of friends, including
Atul Ranade, Sameer Dighe and Jagdish Chavan, were always there to motivate me and would train
with me all day. Their presence was a great help and I remain ever indebted to them for their support.

Australia in India, October–November 2008
It was a great relief to be back on the field for the first Test against Australia in Bangalore on 9
October. Australia made 430 in their first innings, with Ponting and Hussey both making hundreds,
and we made 360 in reply. I scored only 13 in my first innings, but did better in the second innings
before falling to the leg-spin of Cameron White. I scored 49 but, more importantly, I was able to bat
for close to three hours and faced more than a hundred balls without feeling discomfort. The match
was drawn and we headed to Mohali for the second of the four Tests.
The series had assumed greater significance because Sourav had announced that he would be
retiring at the end of the fourth Test at Nagpur. Sourav and I always had a great rapport and we shared
a lot of great moments together. As teenagers, we both spent a month at an Under-15 camp and were
part of Kailash Gattani’s touring team to England. We played together for over a decade in Test

cricket and opened the batting for India in countless limited-overs international matches.
One of the habits that we got into was that every time I felt that Sourav was tense or that there was
something troubling him, I would say something random to him in Bengali, which is his mother
tongue. Often my words made little sense but they were good enough to make him laugh. There was
no doubt I was going to miss him. I remember trying to persuade him to carry on, but he was sure it
was time to call it a day.
In the second Test at Mohali, starting on 17 October, I scored a fluent 88 in our total of 469 before
falling to Peter Siddle, caught at slip. My timing was definitely coming back. In the process I passed
Brian Lara’s tally and reached the figure of 12,000 Test runs. This achievement was marked by a
fantastic fireworks display at the ground. It went on for close to three minutes and I felt privileged and
honoured at the affection heaped on me. Mr Inderjit Singh Bindra, one of Indian cricket’s most
distinguished administrators, who was then president of the Punjab Cricket Association, told me that
there were more fireworks than the total number of runs I had scored. I felt overwhelmed. The PCA
has always been a great host and is an institution that has made playing in Punjab that much more
special.
From the start of Australia’s first innings, our bowlers were bowling really good lines and managed
to put the Australian batsman under pressure. The ball was reverse-swinging and both Zaheer Khan
and Ishant Sharma were making the most of the conditions. In contrast, the Australian bowlers had
found it difficult to get their rhythm right and Gambhir, Sehwag and Dhoni had all made big scores
against them.
To everyone’s delight, Sourav scored a hundred in the first innings. I couldn’t have been happier for
him and remember how he celebrated what was to be his final Test hundred with a pump of his fist
and then raised his arms to acknowledge the well-deserved applause.
The Mohali match is also memorable for me because of the catch I took in the Australian second
innings. I was fielding at point when Simon Katich tried to cut Bhajji past me for four. He mistimed
the shot and I had to dive forward to reach the ball. I managed to get both hands under it and it was
great to feel the leather on my hands. Such a quick reaction put quite a strain on my groin muscles, but
I got up unhurt and the relief was evident on my face. My hard work during the recovery had paid off.
It was also an important breakthrough for us in the game and we were able to get into the Australian
middle order sooner than expected. Zaheer and Ishant bowled exceptionally well and it was perhaps
the best I have seen Zaheer bowl. He was getting the ball to move late and the Australian batsmen
struggled against late swing. It’s a shame Zaheer suffered so many injuries, otherwise I’m sure we
would have seen his match-winning abilities on many more occasions.
We beat the Australians at Mohali by 320 runs and moved to Delhi for the third Test on 29 October
leading the four-match contest 1–0. There we managed to keep the momentum going and were happy
with a draw, thanks mainly to double hundreds in the first innings by both Gautam Gambhir and
Laxman. I scored 68 and felt comfortable enough to believe that a big score wasn’t far away; I just had
to be patient.
That Delhi Test turned out to be Anil Kumble’s last and it was an extremely emotional moment for
us all. Anil was one of the biggest match-winners India has produced and we had played together for
close to two decades. I was very surprised when he said he was thinking of retiring. He felt he was not
bowling close to his best and was not able to give 100 per cent for the team. My argument was simple.
Even 80 per cent of Anil Kumble was good enough for most batsmen and India still needed him.
I almost managed to persuade him to carry on but an injury to his spinning finger on the third day of
the Test was the final straw. He had just recovered from a shoulder surgery and with the finger injury,

which required eleven stitches, he simply couldn’t bowl. We carried him on our shoulders and it was a
fitting finale for one of international cricket’s true all-time greats.
His final speech was very emotional for all of us and the crowd gave him a standing ovation. I’m
glad to say we managed to convince Anil to come to Nagpur for the last Test to be a part of the
celebration if India went on to win the series. It was only right that Anil should be there, because he
had captained us in two of the first three Tests and had also been the captain when we played in
Australia earlier in the year.
We started well at Nagpur on 6 November, with an opening partnership of close to a hundred by
Sehwag and Vijay, but then lost two quick wickets. I managed to build decent partnerships with
Laxman and Sourav, with a number of lucky breaks going my way. I was dropped in the eighties and
nineties and I told Sourav that God wanted me to score a century on the occasion of Sourav’s farewell
Test match.
In his final Test Sourav scored a valuable 85 for the team. We managed 441 in our first innings but
I still felt we were 100 runs short. It was a good batting wicket and the Australians raced on in the last
session of day two to finish at 189–2. We knew we could not afford to let them get away the next
morning. We had to try something different to make them think and take some risks, because they
were the ones under pressure to level the series. I suggested to Dhoni that we needed to slow down the
game, and after that we employed an 8–1 field, with eight fielders on the off side and one on the on,
something hardly ever tried in Test cricket, to Michael Hussey and Simon Katich, and despite
dropping Katich early on we managed to restrict the runs. Zaheer and Ishant bowled well to the field
and Australia just could not get away.
They added only 42 runs before lunch and Ishant also dismissed Simon Katich in the process. That
wicket changed everything and we took a further three in the session between lunch and tea, conceding
just 49 runs. The momentum had shifted and we knew we were back in control. We eventually set
Australia a target of 382 in their second innings, and then Amit Mishra, the leg-spinner who had
replaced Anil, and Harbhajan Singh finished things off midway through the second session on day five
and we won the series 2–0.
The celebrations went on into the night and both Anil and Sourav were asked to give speeches.
Gary, who had played a huge role behind the scenes, had organized the farewell at the VCA Club in
Jamtha and it was a day everyone who was there will cherish for ever. The whole team stayed on in
Nagpur for this very special occasion and I did the same, despite having to miss Anjali’s fortieth
birthday. I knew that, as always, she would understand and pardon my absence.
India in Sri Lanka 2008
1st Test. Colombo (SSC). 23–26 July 2008
Sri Lanka 600–6 dec (DPMD Jayawardene 136, TT Samaraweera 127, TM Dilshan 125*, SM
Warnapura 115; I Sharma 2–124)
India 223 (VVS Laxman 56, SR Tendulkar 27 ; M Muralitharan 5–84, BAW Mendis 4–72) and 138
(f/o) (G Gambhir 43, SR Tendulkar 12; M Muralitharan 6–26, BAW Mendis 4–60)
Sri Lanka won by an innings and 239 runs
2nd Test. Galle. 31 July–3 August 2008
India 329 (V Sehwag 201*, G Gambhir 56, SR Tendulkar 5 ; BAW Mendis 6–117) and 269 (G
Gambhir 74, V Sehwag 50, SR Tendulkar 31; BAW Mendis 4–92, M Muralitharan 3–107)
Sri Lanka 292 (DPMD Jayawardene 86, KC Sangakkara 68, SM Warnapura 66; H Singh 6–102, A

Kumble 3–81) and 136 (TT Samaraweera 67*, TM Dilshan 38; H Singh 4–51, I Sharma 3–20, A
Kumble 2–41)
India won by 170 runs
3rd Test. Colombo (PSS). 8–11 August 2008
India 249 (G Gambhir 72, SC Ganguly 35, SR Tendulkar 6 ; BAW Mendis 5–56, KTGD Prasad 3–82)
and 268 (R Dravid 68, VVS Laxman 61*, SR Tendulkar 14 ; BAW Mendis 3–81, M Muralitharan
3–99)
Sri Lanka 396 (KC Sangakkara 144, HAPW Jayawardene 49, WPUJC Vaas 47; H Singh 3–104, Z Khan
3–105, A Kumble 3–123) and 123–2 (SM Warnapura 54*, DPMD Jayawardene 50*)
Sri Lanka won by 8 wickets
Sri Lanka won the series 2–1
Australia in India 2008
1st Test. Bangalore. 9–13 October 2008
Australia 430 (MEK Hussey 146, RT Ponting 123, SM Katich 66; Z Khan 5–91, I Sharma 4–77) and
228–6 dec (SR Watson 41, BJ Haddin 35*; I Sharma 3–40)
India 360 (Z Khan 57*, H Singh 54, R Dravid 51, SR Tendulkar 13; MG Johnson 4–70, SR Watson 3–
45) and 177–4 (SR Tendulkar 49, VVS Laxman 42*)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Mohali. 17–21 October 2008
India 469 (SC Ganguly 102, MS Dhoni 92, SR Tendulkar 88 , G Gambhir 67; MG Johnson 3–85, PM
Siddle 3–114) and 314–3 dec (G Gambhir 104, V Sehwag 90, MS Dhoni 68*, SR Tendulkar 10)
Australia 268 (SR Watson 78, MEK Hussey 54; A Mishra 5–71) and 195 (MJ Clarke 69; H Singh 3–
36, Z Khan 3–71)
India won by 320 runs
3rd Test. Delhi. 29 October–2 November 2008
India 613–7 dec (G Gambhir 206, VVS Laxman 200*, SR Tendulkar 68 ; MG Johnson 3–142) and
208–5 dec (VVS Laxman 59*, SR Tendulkar 47; B Lee 2–48)
Australia 577 (MJ Clarke 112, RT Ponting 87, ML Hayden 83, SM Katich 64, MEK Hussey 53; V
Sehwag 5–104, A Kumble 3–112) and 31–0
Match drawn
4th Test. Nagpur. 6–10 November 2008
India 441 (SR Tendulkar 109 , SC Ganguly 85, V Sehwag 66, VVS Laxman 64, MS Dhoni 56; JJ
Krejza 8–215) and 295 (V Sehwag 92, MS Dhoni 55, H Singh 52, SR Tendulkar 12 ; SR Watson 4–
42, JJ Krejza 4–143)
Australia 355 (SM Katich 102, MEK Hussey 90, CL White 46; H Singh 3–94) and 209 (ML Hayden
77; H Singh 4–64, A Mishra 3–27)
India won by 172 runs
India won the series 2–0
