FOREIGN CONDITIONS

New Zealand has always been a very difficult tour for an Indian cricketer. It’s often windy and chilly
and that, coupled with the short boundaries in most of the grounds, makes it very different from
conditions back home in India. In 1990 the challenge was doubly difficult, with Richard Hadlee, one
of the finest ever exponents of swing bowling, close to his best. As a seventeen-year-old on his first
tour away from the subcontinent, I was excited about the opportunity.

India in New Zealand, February–March 1990
The first few days in New Zealand were not easy. The accent of the locals there was very strange to
our ears and the food took some getting used to. The accent problem resulted in an incident involving
Manoj Prabhakar very early in the tour. Prabhakar needed an adapter to charge his gadgets and for
some reason decided to put on what he thought was a New Zealand accent while speaking to the
housekeeping staff in the hotel. When asking for the adapter on the intercom he was almost chewing
up the first ‘a’, as a result of which the word was sounding like ‘dapter’ and the staff were having
difficulty understanding what he was asking for. Prabhakar got angry after a point and said he needed
the ‘dapter’ immediately. In a few minutes there was a knock on his door and he opened it to find a
doctor standing there. The staff had heard ‘doctor’ for ‘dapter’ (partly because they pronounced
‘doctor’ as ‘dactor’) and had sent the resident physician to Prabhakar’s room.
The first game of the tour was in New Plymouth and the ground was surrounded by hills. It was as if
a stadium had been planted in the middle of mountains and Bishan Singh Bedi, our manager, decided
to make the most of the conditions. Bedi, one of the best left-arm spinners of all time, was a really
hard taskmaster and liked to make us run huge distances to improve our fitness. At New Plymouth our
fitness drills involved running in the mountains and by the end of the training sessions we had
absolutely no energy left.
As in Pakistan, I did not start particularly well and in the first Test at Christchurch, which started on
2 February, I was dismissed by Danny Morrison for a golden duck. It was a good delivery but the
send-off was interesting, to say the least. I could hear most of the New Zealand players calling me a
schoolboy, with plenty of F-words thrown in. They kindly advised me to go back to playing cricket
with my school chums, suggesting that I wasn’t fit to compete at international level. I kept my mouth
shut.
The second innings was an improvement in that I managed to stay at the wicket for close to an hour,
playing forty-four balls. My 24 runs were enough to give me confidence that I was capable of holding
my own in strange conditions. Although I had fallen to John Bracewell, trying to cut a ball close to my
body, I had successfully negotiated Richard Hadlee, which I counted as an achievement. Hadlee’s first
two deliveries to me were bouncers, but each was profoundly different from the other. The first was an

outswinging bouncer that went away after pitching; the second came in from the same spot and I had
to keep my eye on the ball till the last moment to get my head out of the way. Such was the ability of
the man that you had to be at your best at all times to keep him at bay.
New Zealand won the first Test by ten wickets and the second Test match at Napier started only a
few days later, on 9 February. We decided to bat first after winning the toss but the first day was
completely washed out by rain. The match finally started on the second day and I was unbeaten on 80
by the end of the third day’s play. The ball was doing a little and batting wasn’t particularly easy, but
not once did I try to dominate the bowling the way I had in domestic cricket.
When I went in to bat on the fourth morning the possibility of a hundred was on my mind. I was just
20 runs short and was determined to take my opportunity. I started well and hit the very first Danny
Morrison delivery for four. For the rest of the over he bowled short and I was content to leave
everything. In his next over, I again hit a boundary off the first ball. The next was pitched up and I had
already made up my mind to go for a big drive but the drive was uppish and I was caught by the New
Zealand captain John Wright at mid off for 88.
I was heartbroken. As I walked back to the pavilion I couldn’t control my tears. Why on earth did I
play that shot when I was just twelve runs short? By the time I reached the boundary rope, tears were
flowing down my cheeks. I’m glad there weren’t too many cameras then, as these days a cameraman
would definitely have picked up an embarrassing shot of me in tears. On reaching the dressing room, I
went straight to the bathroom and cried for a good few minutes. Missing out on what should have been
my first Test hundred was just too painful. It was only later that I was told I would have been the
youngest Test centurion ever. It was a missed opportunity and I remember telling John Wright, after
he took over as coach of India in 2005, that he really shouldn’t have taken that catch!
We eventually lost the three-Test match series 0–1 and then played the Rothmans Cup one-day triseries, with Australia as the third team. As in the first Test, I was out for a duck in the first ODI
against New Zealand at Dunedin on 1 March, caught and bowled by Shane Thomson, who was bowling
medium pace. The only difference was that this time I had lasted one more ball. In the end, we lost the
game by 108 runs.
I made a better fist of it in my next match, on 6 March 1990, an important one in the context of the
tournament. We had lost to Australia in the second game and now needed to beat New Zealand to stay
in contention for the final. I made 36 runs off thirty-nine balls, in the process attacking their seam
bowlers for the first time and hitting them for quite a few boundaries. We won the game by one run,
with Martin Snedden run out and Richard Hadlee bowled in the final over by Kapil Dev, who was
declared Man of the Match for his all-round performance. For the first time my innings had been of
use to the team in an official ODI. I couldn’t do much celebrating, though, because I damaged my
right quadriceps during the game and had to be carried off the field. I couldn’t walk at all by the
evening and was on crutches for the next few days. It was the first serious injury of my career and my
tournament was over.
While we were in New Zealand, Asha Bhosle, one of the all-time great Indian singers, happened to
be performing in Wellington and the team decided to go to her concert. It was the first time I had seen
her live and I just loved the experience. Asha Bhosle and Lata Mangeshkar, another of India’s finest
singers, are still two of my favourites and to see them perform is always very special.
On my return to India, my father told me that I had to hone my God-given cricketing ability. He was
right. It was time for more hard work to master the skills needed to face the fast swinging ball and I
was determined to put in the hours in the nets.

India in England, July–August 1990
After the New Zealand series, India travelled to England for what was our most important assignment
of the year. India had won a Test series in England in 1986 and we were all looking forward to
repeating the feat. We had a training camp in Bangalore just before the series and Bishan Bedi
continued with his policy of making us run miles every day. We had to jog in a line at Cubbon Park,
opposite the Chinnaswamy Stadium, and the last man in the line had to sprint to the front. The same
drill was followed for all the players and the exhausting routine finally resulted in Manoj Prabhakar
jokingly suggesting that he was so fast now he would reach the batsman before his delivery did.
I had been to England twice before, in 1987–88 and 1988–89, as part of the Star Cricket Club, the
team of Kailash Gattani (a former fast bowler who played first-class cricket for Rajasthan in Indian
domestic cricket). In the first instance, I was sponsored by the Kolkata-based Young Cricketers
Organization, who contributed my airfare. Among other things, I remember the tour for the food we
ate. We stayed in school and college dormitories and had breakfast in their dining halls. For the first
time in my life I was served cold meat for breakfast. That meat could be eaten cold was a revelation to
me!
I was also amazed to see so many different types of cars. I have always had an interest in cars,
though we didn’t own one at the time. Kailash Gattani had hired a luxury sedan and I was keen to find
out as much as I could about the engineering details of these fascinating machines. Besides playing
cricket, these were things that kept me occupied and I thoroughly enjoyed the opportunity of exploring
a foreign country. Visiting Lord’s, the mecca of world cricket, was a dream come true, and it all added
to my ambition to play at such venues as a member of the Indian cricket team.
In 1990, the tour started with a few first-class fixtures, which were followed by two one-day
internationals. While I was in good form at the start of the tour and scored runs in the first-class
games, I didn’t do so well in the first ODI at Leeds on 18 July, making only 19. Happily, it didn’t
matter because the team won – thanks to the batting of Manjrekar and Azharuddin – and we had a
chance of victory in the series if we won the next game at Nottingham on the 20th.
In the second match England produced a better performance, batting first, with Robin Smith, the
South African-born middle-order batsman, contributing 103 to their total of 281. We needed to bat
really well to close out the series. When I went in to bat at number six we needed a further 145 off
twenty overs. In those days, that was considered a stiff target. I scored a quick 31 off twenty-six balls
and was dismissed with the score on 249, with 33 still needed to win, but we won the match and the
series 2–0, with Azhar seeing us home with an unbeaten 63. It was a perfect start to the tour, giving us
some welcome confidence going into the Test series.

First Test, Lord’s, 26–31 July 1990
The first Test at Lord’s will always be remembered for Graham Gooch’s heroics with the bat. After
being dropped on 33, he went on to make a triple hundred. He was eventually out for 333 and then
produced another century in the second innings. For India, the highlights were Azhar’s hundred and
Kapil Dev hitting four successive sixes off Eddie Hemmings, the off-spinner, to save the follow-on.
My only significant contribution in the match was a catch off leg-spinner Narendra Hirwani’s
bowling to dismiss England’s batting mainstay Allan Lamb in the second innings. It remains the most
memorable catch of my career. Hirwani had beaten Lamb in the flight as he stepped out to hit straight
down the ground. Despite failing to get to the pitch of the ball, Lamb went through with the shot and

the ball went high into the air, looking as if it was going to land some 25 yards behind the bowler.
As soon as Lamb hit the shot, I started sprinting from my position at long off. There was very little
chance that I would make it, because I had been positioned a few yards wide of the conventional longoff position. It was only during the last few steps that I realized I had an outside chance. I had covered
a distance of more than 25 yards and was still short. I could dive forward, but I knew I would not have
enough control to catch the ball. The other option was to carry on sprinting and try somehow to get a
hand to the ball, which was dying on me. I chose the second option and to my surprise felt the ball
land in my fully outstretched right hand at knee height.
Having completed the catch, I threw the ball up in the air in sheer ecstasy. My team-mates were
naturally delighted. Hirwani rushed to congratulate me and I felt thrilled at having pulled it off. The
crowd appreciated the athletic effort and I vividly remember the warm applause as I walked back to
my fielding position. The key to taking catches like these, it seems to me, is not to be afraid of taking
the initiative and deciding quickly, while always keeping an eye on the trajectory of the ball.
We lost the Lord’s Test by the huge margin of 247 runs and needed to tighten our game before the
second Test at Old Trafford a week later to remain alive in the series.

Second Test, Old Trafford, 9–14 August 1990
In the first innings at Old Trafford, England once again put together a total of more than 500, with
centuries from Gooch and Mike Atherton, and we simply had to get as close to their score as possible
in our reply. We were due to bat fourth in the match and any total in excess of 250 would be difficult
to chase down on a wearing pitch. Azhar made another hundred and almost everyone in the top order
contributed to our first-innings effort. Had the lower middle order scored runs, we may have got closer
to the English total and even managed a first-innings lead. It might also have given me an opportunity
to go for my maiden hundred. But they got out in quick succession and I ran out of partners. I went in
to bat at number six with the team score on 246 and was last man out for 68, trying to play a big shot
off Eddie Hemmings. As Hirwani would I am sure agree, he was not the best number eleven in the
world. I felt I had to go for my shots sooner rather than later and I holed out to Chris Lewis at deep
midwicket as a result.
Hirwani was always fun to bat with and when he came in he said to me at the wicket that he would
be fine as long as the balls were pitched up. He said he had a problem facing bouncers and I assured
him that the English bowlers would not bowl bouncers at him because he wasn’t a recognized
batsman. He managed to bat on for a while and gradually gained in confidence. So much so that he
suddenly charged out to Chris Lewis to give the ball a real whack. Chris’s expression said it all. He
did not take kindly to a number-eleven batsman giving him the charge. He was fuming as he walked
back to his bowling mark and a bouncer was now inevitable. However, in charging out Hirwani had
somehow broken his bat and it took a bit of time to get a replacement from the dressing room.
Luckily, the few minutes that were lost in the bat change had a calming effect on Chris Lewis and
Hirwani survived his innings unscathed.
We were finally all out for 432, conceding an 87-run first-innings lead. It was evident that England
would want to score quickly and set us a target. Allan Lamb made a hundred in the England second
innings and on the final day they declared on 320–4, leaving us ninety-two overs to bat out. The
English attack, consisting of Angus Fraser, Chris Lewis, Devon Malcolm and Eddie Hemmings, had
some variety, and while the fast bowlers used the cloud cover to good effect, Hemmings extracted
considerable purchase from the fifth-day track. With all the bowlers performing at their best, we were

soon reduced to 109–4. Then Azhar fell with the score on 127 and Kapil Dev was yorked by Eddie
Hemmings, leaving us at a perilous 183–6.

My first Test hundred
When Manoj Prabhakar joined me in the middle we badly needed a partnership to save the game. I had
been lucky at the start of my innings, with Eddie Hemmings dropping me when I had tried to play an
on drive. The ball had hit the outside part of my bat and spooned back to Hemmings, who failed to
hold on to it. I learnt my lesson and decided not to play any more uppish strokes. At the same time I
was determined to play some shots and not go into my shell. Getting ultra-defensive would allow the
English bowlers to put more and more fielders round the bat, and by trying to score I would be able to
keep the field spread out. Every time I got a chance to score runs, I did so. Most of my scoring strokes
were in the nature of punches played with minimum risk. The balance between aggression and caution
was crucial and I was trying to focus on each and every ball. My fifty came up but it did not excite me.
The match was far from saved and that was the goal.
At the other end, Manoj Prabhakar was playing well and after a while it was clear we had succeeded
in frustrating the English bowlers. The first task had been accomplished. When trying to save a match,
the important thing is to set small targets. These can be as little as batting the next five overs, or the
next hour, or even a session. If a wicket doesn’t fall for close to a session, the opposition, however
much they are in control, are bound to feel pressure. Time was gradually running out for England and
restlessness was creeping in.
When I passed 90 runs, it was obvious that the thought of scoring a hundred would start to affect
me. After all, it would be my first international century and the crowd had already started expecting it
from me. I reminded myself of what had happened in New Zealand and was conscious not to repeat
the same mistake. There was still some time left in the day’s play and England could press for victory
if I got out.
In the mid-nineties I got a lucky reprieve against Angus Fraser. He bowled me a bouncer and I
ducked under it with my bat held above my head like a periscope. The ball hit the back of the bat and
went along the ground to fine leg. It could have gone straight into the hands of any of the close-in
fielders or to the wicketkeeper. But it didn’t. I was glad and thanked God for the reprieve.
At Old Trafford luck seemed to be with me. I batted patiently until I finally played a punch off
Angus Fraser through mid off when on 98. Chris Lewis chased down the ball but by the time he threw
it back to the bowler I had run three, completing my first Test hundred. The crowd stood to applaud
but I was extremely uncomfortable about acknowledging them. I had never been in that position
before and was acutely embarrassed about raising my bat to the stadium.
Every time I look back at the footage of my first century, I realize that celebrating was not
something that came naturally to me. It was only with time that I became more confident of my
presence in the middle. ‘Presence’ is actually very important in international sport. It is one thing just
being there in the middle, but it is another making people aware of your ‘presence’. It is about body
language and radiating confidence, something that the West Indian batting legend Viv Richards would
personify. With me it happened after I had scored a few hundreds and felt more established in
international cricket. As I grew more assured of my presence, I came up with my own signature style
of celebrating an achievement by showing the bat to the dressing room. Most cricketers develop their
own style of celebrating. For example, the way Glenn McGrath and Shane Warne showed the ball to
the crowd after picking up five wickets in an innings was something they evolved over the course of

their careers.
At Old Trafford I continued to bat on after reaching my hundred and with every passing over it was
becoming apparent that the match would end in a draw. When the match was finally called off with
two of the twenty mandatory overs still to be bowled, we had reached 343 for no further losses.
Prabhakar and I had put together an unbeaten 160-run stand.
I remember walking back to the pavilion to a standing ovation. Both umpires, John Hampshire and
John Holder, congratulated me on my hundred and all the England players walked up to me to offer
some kind words. In the dressing room my team-mates congratulated me – not just on my maiden Test
hundred but also for batting through the day and saving the game for the team, meaning that it was all
to play for in the third Test. It was the second occasion I had done so. This one was more satisfying,
though, because this time I played a central part in the effort, unlike in the fourth Test in Pakistan,
where I had a supporting role.
Just when I was about to relax after a good day’s work, I was informed that I had to face the media.
It was going to be the first time I addressed a press conference. I asked our manager Madhav Mantri, a
former Test cricketer who toured England with India in the 1950s, if it was compulsory or if I could
just skip it. He assured me it was a routine matter and said that the journalists would only ask me
questions about my performance and about the match. My team-mates, however, started pulling my
leg, saying they’d ask me questions I couldn’t answer and that it was going to be a really difficult
session. Looking back, I must admit that I quite enjoyed the experience. I was uncomfortable to start
with, but it was quite straightforward really. I just needed to share my thoughts and it wasn’t such a
daunting task after all. Most of the questions were pleasant and it felt good to receive compliments
from well-known cricket writers.
I was declared Player of the Match – my first such award – and once again felt awkward at the
ceremony. I was handed the bottle of champagne but, not being eighteen, I didn’t drink at the time. I
just wanted the presentation to be over and to hurry back to the dressing room with the award as soon
as possible. In the end I brought the bottle home with me to Mumbai and finally opened it on the
occasion of my daughter Sara’s first birthday in 1998.

On returning to the hotel after the match I got a call from home and remember speaking to what must
have been thirty or forty people on the phone. It was a spontaneous gathering of all my friends at our
neighbour’s apartment to celebrate the hundred and it was really touching to know that people in the
colony were so thrilled at the accomplishment. Some of them jokingly mentioned to me that as I
wasn’t old enough to drink, they were enjoying a drink on my behalf. My parents were extremely
happy with my performance and my brother too felt vindicated.
The third Test match, at The Oval at the end of August, was another draw, which meant that we lost
the series 0–1, but I was still reasonably satisfied with my performances in England and felt I had
taken a few important strides. I returned to India a better Test cricketer and far more confident of
myself as a performer, ready for the next big challenges: a tour of Australia at the end of the following
year, followed by the World Cup jointly organized by Australia and New Zealand.

India in Australia, November 1991–February 1992

We began the tour with a couple of one-day practice matches in Perth in November 1991, the first at
Lilac Hill and the second at the WACA, one of the fastest cricket wickets in the world. At the WACA
we were bowled out for just 64 and it was clear we had to adjust to Australian conditions as soon as
possible if we were going to be competitive in the series.
Our first three-day tour game was against a full-strength New South Wales team at Lismore
between 23 and 25 November and it was in that game that I got my first taste of real Australian
competitiveness. It was a fast, lively wicket and Geoff Lawson, the NSW captain, had no hesitation in
putting us in after winning the toss. In addition to Lawson, their bowling attack included Mike
Whitney, Steve and Mark Waugh, Greg Matthews and Wayne Holdsworth, and it was a tough test for
us. The team also included Mark Taylor and five players – Whitney, Lawson, Steve Waugh, Mark
Taylor and Matthews – had already played Test cricket for Australia.
I was looking to be aggressive from the very beginning and played a number of horizontal-bat shots
over point and gully. It was in this match that I had my first exchange with Steve Waugh, who didn’t
seem keen on the idea of an eighteen-year-old attacking the bowling like that. A lot of things were
said to me and they were the first of many over the years.
It was in the course of this match that the Australian Test team for the first Test at Brisbane was
announced. Steve Waugh was not included in the side, so I said to him that if he wanted to fight with
me, he first needed to get into the Australian team. It was all done in good spirit and throughout our
careers we had great mutual respect; in fact, the banter, it must be said, was a result of this. We knew
how important it was to get Steve Waugh out early and tried all we could to unsettle him. There were
occasions when we even resorted to observing total silence when Waugh batted as we came to believe
that saying things to him actually strengthened his resolve to do better.

A tough start
In the first Test at Brisbane, starting on 29 November 1991, the Australians beat us convincingly,
thanks in large part to superb bowling from Craig McDermott and Merv Hughes. Like most of our
team, I didn’t do much with the bat and we knew we had to bounce back in Melbourne in the Boxing
Day Test. At the MCG we remained competitive till the middle of the third day, with Kiran More
coming to the rescue with 67 in our first innings and Kapil Dev and Prabakhar both bowling well,
before a batting collapse in our second innings dampened our hopes. I managed to stay in for a
reasonable time and scored 40 off 107 balls, but I was disgusted with myself for trying to hit a big
shot and getting out caught by Allan Border against the off-spinner Peter Taylor after doing all the
hard work and playing myself in. I was so fed up that I didn’t eat lunch in the dressing room and was
on edge for the whole day!
Something else happened in Melbourne that has never happened again in my life, I’m pleased to
say. When I went back to the dressing room I realized that my abdominal protector had been broken
into three pieces when I was hit by a Bruce Reid delivery. Reid, the tall left-arm fast bowler, got a lot
of wickets in the series and I was lucky that no major damage was caused by the accident!

Fighting back
Down 0–2, we went to Sydney for the next Test on 2 January 1992 knowing it was our last chance to
get back in the series. It was a typical SCG wicket, helpful to the batsmen to start with, and I thought
our bowlers did very well to bowl Australia out for 313 in the first innings. It was essential for us to

take a substantial lead and give our bowlers a chance to bowl Australia out again in the second
innings. I didn’t sleep much the night before batting. I was sharing a room with Sourav Ganguly, who
later captained India and is a very good friend. I remember a startled Sourav waking up in the middle
of the night and seeing me shadow-practise. Sourav wasn’t playing in that game and was surprised to
see me up so late. I told him I was planning how to play McDermott and the other bowlers.
Unsurprisingly, the next day I was feeling rather tired. India were batting and I was batting at
number six, so I decided to take a nap on the dining table inside the SCG dressing room – asking
Sourav to wake up me up at the fall of the next wicket. He did so when Azhar got out. By then I was
feeling refreshed and was ready to go out and bat.
For the first time in the series our top order had fired and by the time I went in, the score was a
healthy 201–4, with Vengsarkar having contributed a half-century. We needed another good
partnership to push on for a lead and, with the opener Ravi Shastri playing extremely well at the other
end, that’s what we managed to do. The second innings at Melbourne had definitely helped me and I
was now able to middle the ball from the very start. There was a phase halfway through when I began
to lose concentration and feel edgy, but I forced myself to exercise restraint and it soon passed.
After reaching my half-century, I began to play a lot more shots and was soon close to my second
Test hundred. I vividly remember the glance to fine leg that brought up my century. I ran two and the
second run was the fastest I have ever run. Ravi went on to score an excellent double hundred, the first
by an Indian in Australia, as we put on 196 runs for the fifth wicket. Sydney continues to be my
favourite ground outside India and to score my first hundred in Australia at the SCG was special. I had
grown up watching cricket in Australia on the TV and used to wake up early to watch the Victoria Cup
in 1985. Now I was playing at the actual venues and scoring runs.
The SCG Test is also remembered for the debut of a plump Australian leg-spinner with a mop of
blond hair. Though Shane Warne took only one wicket in the match, it was evident to us all that he
could give the ball a fair rip. While no one could have predicted the 708 Test wickets he would take in
his career, the fact that he had talent was obvious from the very first day he took to the field in
January 1992.
Knowing that we could bat only once – because of valuable time lost to rain and bad light on the
third and fourth days – we batted for close to an hour on the final day and declared with a lead of 170
runs. With the track doing a fair bit and the bounce turning variable, we had a good chance of closing
out the game in the time remaining. A win still seemed on the cards when Shastri’s bowling helped
reduce Australia to 114–6 and it was only some dogged rearguard action from Allan Border and Merv
Hughes that saved Australia.
In the one over I bowled I picked up the wicket of Hughes and it was a big moment for me because
it was my first wicket in Test cricket. He was caught by Prabhakar in the slips for 21 after playing
seventy-three balls, and if we had got his wicket a little earlier, we might have been able to close out
the game.

Learning some lessons
The fourth Test of the series started at Adelaide on 25 January 1992 and for the first time I was going
to bat at the home ground of the legendary Sir Donald Bradman, the greatest batsman to have played
the game. While I did not do much at the Adelaide Oval, the team played some good cricket. We lost
the match by 38 runs in the end, but we remained competitive throughout and dominated the first two
days of the match. Kapil Dev had a good match with both bat and ball and in our second innings Azhar

played a wonderful captain’s innings, scoring 106. He and Prabhakar, who made 64, had brought us to
the brink of victory, but we were eventually all out for 333 chasing 371. With a bit of luck, the series
could have been 2–2 at Adelaide. Instead we went to Perth for the final Test 0–3 down.
I scored my second hundred of the series in the fifth Test, which started on 1 February, and I count
it as one of the very best I have scored. It was a quick wicket and for the first time since my debut I
was going in at number four in a Test. I relished the opportunity from the outset and hit sixteen
boundaries in my 114. By that stage of the tour I had mastered a back-foot punch. While most batsmen
favoured the cut shot at Perth because of the extra bounce, I used the back-foot punch at every
opportunity and because I was able to do so against good-length balls, it was making the bowlers’ job
that much more difficult. It would usually bring me at least a couple of runs and when I timed the ball
really well it would even go all the way to the boundary.
Earlier, the Australian media had talked up the fast, bouncy WACA wicket and how difficult it
would make it for us to cope with the Australian quick bowlers. But I never had a problem batting at
the WACA. This was because I managed to adjust to the bounce. Every time the ball got big on me, I
stayed on the back foot and played the ball with soft hands at the last moment, standing up on my toes
rather than playing a flat-footed defensive stroke.
One incident at the WACA brought home the intensity and competitiveness of the game in
Australia. I had just played a ball defensively and had no chance of a run. In what I thought was the
spirit of the game, I was about to pick the ball up and throw it to Allan Border, the Australian captain,
who was fielding at gully. When AB spotted me bending down he screamed at me, saying, ‘Don’t you
dare touch the ball.’ After that I never tried to pick up the ball and throw it back to fielders. It was a
lesson in how international cricket is played and I remembered it till the last day of my career.

Meeting a hero
It was on this tour of Australia that I first saw a batsman who had been my hero when I was growing
up – though it wasn’t on the cricket field. I was in a hotel lobby in Adelaide with Sanjay Manjrekar
when a cab pulled up outside. A guy wearing a cap got out and I immediately said, ‘I’ve seen him
somewhere before.’ As he got closer I said, ‘I don’t believe it – that’s Viv Richards!’
When he walked past us and headed up to his room, I turned to Sanjay and told him that I just had to
meet my hero. So we went to Reception and found out his room number and I made Sanjay call him –
Sanjay had played a series against him in the West Indies in 1989 – and before long we were on our
way to his room. That was my first meeting with Viv. I spent only three minutes with him, just to say
hello, but it was a very exciting moment for me.

1992 World Cup in Australia and New Zealand
After the Test series we stayed in Australia, as the World Cup – my first – was just a few weeks away.
The idea was to help us acclimatize to the conditions, not that this was necessary after being in
Australia for close to three months. We had a few weeks to ourselves and with Vinod Kambli around
there was never a dull moment. Vinod and I shared a room and one thing that always stood out about
him was his dress sense. Vinod’s clothes were as colourful as they could possibly get and on one
occasion our manager Ranbir Singh Mahendra even said to him, ‘Arre India ke liye khel rahe ho, aise
clown jaise dress kyun pehente ho tum? Kuch dhang ka kapda pehna karo. ’ (You are playing for India.
Why do you dress like a clown? You should wear some decent clothes and dress sensibly.) Not that it

had any impact on Vinod, though!
Those few weeks were relatively stress-free and we spent a lot of time relaxing in each other’s
company. On one occasion the leg-spinner Narendra Hirwani and I were having tea in our physio Dr
Ali Irani’s room. Ali used to make special tea for us, with a particular kind of sugar. In the middle of
our conversation Ali got a call from Ranbir Singh Mahendra, who was a vegetarian, asking if he could
get him some garlic bread. After the call Ali turned all philosophical and said, ‘There will come a
time when you guys will be there and will think about old Ali Irani who used to take care of us and
make us really nice tea.’
Hirwani and I found it funny that he had turned unnaturally thoughtful and Hirwani asked him to
repeat what he had just said. Ali was reluctant to do so but when Hirwani insisted, he said it again. At
this Hirwani jokingly said to Ali with reference to his efforts to keep Ranbir Singh Mahendra in good
humour, ‘Tu to har din 200 marta hai. India team mein tera naam pehle likha jata hai. Uske baad
hamara naam aata hai.’ (You score a double hundred every day by being in the good books of the
manager. Your name will come first in an Indian team and only then will our names be listed.)
In the World Cup, India failed to make the semi-finals, despite being competitive in most of the
matches. We lost to England and Australia by the narrow margin of nine runs and one run respectively
and our second match against Sri Lanka at Mackay on 28 February was washed out because of rain.
The high point of the tournament for us was the match against eventual winners Pakistan on 4
March 1992 at Sydney. After two consecutive defeats, we were determined to turn things round
against Pakistan. Batting first, we had to negotiate a hostile spell of fast bowling from Wasim Akram.
At one stage he was bowling magnificently to Vinod Kambli and, batting at the other end, I just kept
telling Vinod to nudge the ball and run. We put together an important partnership and I followed it up
with another with Kapil Dev, who scored a valuable 35 off just twenty-six balls. I was unbeaten on 54
at the end of the innings.
Our total of 216 wasn’t a big score to defend, but we started well and Kapil Dev and Prabakhar
picked up two early wickets for very little on the board. Our bowlers and fielders were charged up and
there was a lot of chat out in the middle. We were cheering each other on and giving the Pakistan
batsmen a hard time.
This match is often remembered for the tussle between our wicketkeeper Kiran More and Javed
Miandad. Javed, if I remember right, was having back spasms and could not play his strokes freely. He
was finding it difficult to bat but was performing an uncharacteristic job for his team, trying to anchor
the innings and hold up one end. Behind the stumps, Kiran was constantly up and down, shouting out
instructions to our bowlers, saying Javed was in no position to play his shots. Infuriated at the
continuous chatter, Javed imitated Kiran’s actions by doing a frog jump. We were all stunned and
amused at the same time and this tiff between Kiran and Javed made the eventual victory even
sweeter.
I bowled my full quota of ten overs, conceding just 37 runs and picking up the vital wicket of
opener Aamer Sohail. It was a satisfying win and by the end of the match I had completely lost my
voice because of all the shouting. It was the first time India had played Pakistan in the World Cup
since the inception of the tournament in 1975 and it was the start of a string of victories against them
in World Cups. The 1992 victory was particularly pleasing because I was also Player of the Match.
When we returned to India at the end of March after four and a half months in Australia I was a
transformed cricketer. The 1991–92 Australia tour undoubtedly had a fundamental impact on my
career.

A brave man
The story of the Australia tour is incomplete without a story that has stayed with me over the years. It
involves Venkatapathy Raju, our left-arm spinner, and Merv Hughes. They were great pals and on a
flight to Perth, which is a little under four hours from Sydney, we dared Raju, one of the skinniest
cricketers in the team, to go and grab Hughes’s famous thick moustache. Merv, a huge man, was
known for his volatile temper and most of us were convinced that Raju would chicken out in the end.
To our surprise, he boldly went up to Merv and pulled his moustache, a feat of incredible bravery – or
foolishness. Merv took it all very sportingly and the act was applauded by everyone on the flight,
making Raju an instant hero.
India in New Zealand 1990
1st Test. Christchurch. 2–5 February 1990
New Zealand 459 (JG Wright 185, KR Rutherford 69, AH Jones 52) and 2–0
India 164 (NS Sidhu 51, M Azharuddin 48, SR Tendulkar 0 ; DK Morrison 5–75) and 296 (f/o) (WV
Raman 96, SR Tendulkar 24; RJ Hadlee 4–69)
New Zealand won by 10 wickets
2nd Test. Napier. 9–13 February 1990
India 358–9 dec (M Prabhakar 95, SR Tendulkar 88, KS More 73; DK Morrison 5–98)
New Zealand 178–1 (JG Wright 113*, TJ Franklin 50)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Auckland. 22–26 February 1990
New Zealand 391 (IDS Smith 173, RJ Hadlee 87; AS Wassan 4–108) and 483–5 dec (AH Jones 170*,
MD Crowe 113, JG Wright 74)
India 482 (M Azharuddin 192, AS Wassan 53, KS More 50, SR Tendulkar 5 ; DK Morrison 5–145)
and 149–0 (M Prabhakar 63*, WV Raman 72*)
Match drawn
New Zealand won the series 1–0
India in England 1990
1st Test. Lord’s. 26–31 July 1990
England 653–4 dec (GA Gooch 333, AJ Lamb 139, RA Smith 100*) and 272–4 dec (GA Gooch 123,
MA Atherton 72)
India 454 (M Azharuddin 121, RJ Shastri 100, Kapil Dev 77, SR Tendulkar 10 ; ARC Fraser 5–104)
and 224 (SK Sharma 38, SR Tendulkar 27)
England won by 247 runs
2nd Test. Old Trafford, Manchester. 9–14 August 1990
England 519 (MA Atherton 131, RA Smith 121*, GA Gooch 116; ND Hirwani 4–174) and 320–4 dec
(AJ Lamb 109, MA Atherton 74, RA Smith 61*)
India 432 (M Azharuddin 179, SV Manjrekar 93, SR Tendulkar 68 ; ARC Fraser 5–124) and 343–6
(SR Tendulkar 119*, M Prabhakar 67*, SV Manjrekar 50)

Match drawn
3rd Test. The Oval. 23–28 August 1990
India 606–9 dec (RJ Shastri 187, Kapil Dev 110, M Azharuddin 78, KS More 61*, SR Tendulkar 21)
England 340 (GA Gooch 85, RA Smith 57, EE Hemmings 51; M Prabhakar 4–74) and 477–4 dec (f/o)
(DI Gower 157*, GA Gooch 88, MA Atherton 86, AJ Lamb 52)
Match drawn
England won the series 1–0
India in Australia 1991–92
1st Test. Brisbane. 29 November–2 December 1991
India 239 (M Prabhakar 54*, SR Tendulkar 16 ; CJ McDermott 5–54) and 156 (RJ Shastri 41, SR
Tendulkar 7; CJ McDermott 4–47, MG Hughes 4–50)
Australia 340 (MA Taylor 94, DC Boon 66; Kapil Dev 4–80) and 58–0
Australia won by 10 wickets
2nd Test. Melbourne. 26–29 December 1991
India 263 (KS More 67*, SR Tendulkar 15 ; BA Reid 6–66) and 213 (DB Vengsarkar 54, SR
Tendulkar 40; BA Reid 6–66)
Australia 349 (GR Marsh 86, IA Healy 60, DM Jones 59; Kapil Dev 5–97, M Prabhakar 4–84) and
128–2 (MA Taylor 60, DC Boon 44*)
Australia won by 8 wickets
3rd Test. Sydney. 2–6 January 1992
Australia 313 (DC Boon 129*, MA Taylor 56) and 173–8 (AR Border 53*; RJ Shastri 4–45, SR
Tendulkar 1–2)
India 483 (RJ Shastri 206, SR Tendulkar 148*, DB Vengsarkar 54; CJ McDermott 4–147)
Match drawn
4th Test. Adelaide. 25–29 January 1992
Australia 145 (DM Jones 41; SLV Raju 3–11, Kapil Dev 3–33, SR Tendulkar 2–10 ) and 451 (DC
Boon 135*, MA Taylor 100, AR Border 91*; Kapil Dev 5–130)
India 225 (Kapil Dev 56, SR Tendulkar 6 ; CJ McDermott 5–76) and 333 (M Azharuddin 106, M
Prabhakar 64, SR Tendulkar 17; CJ McDermott 5–92)
Australia won by 38 runs
5th Test. Perth. 1–5 February 1992
Australia 346 (DC Boon 107, AR Border 59, TM Moody 50; M Prabhakar 5–101) and 367–6 dec (DM
Jones 150*, TM Moody 101)
India 272 (SR Tendulkar 114 , KS More 43; MR Whitney 4–68, MG Hughes 4–82) and 141 (K
Srikkanth 38, SR Tendulkar 5; MR Whitney 7–27)
Australia won by 300 runs
Australia won the series 4–0
India in the 1992 World Cup

2nd match. England v India at Perth. 22 February 1992
England 236–9 (50/50 ov); India 227 (49.2/50 ov)
England won by 9 runs
9th match. India v Sri Lanka at Mackay. 28 February 1992
India 1–0 (0.2/20 ov)
No result
12th match. Australia v India at Brisbane. 1 March 1992
Australia 237–9 (50/50 ov); India 234 (47/47 ov, target: 236)
Australia won by 1 run (revised target)
16th match. India v Pakistan at Sydney. 4 March 1992
India 216–7 (49/49 ov); Pakistan 173 (48.1/49 ov)
India won by 43 runs
19th match. India v Zimbabwe at Hamilton. 7 March 1992
India 203–7 (32/32 ov); Zimbabwe 104–1 (19.1/19 ov, target: 159)
India won by 55 runs (revised target)
24th match. India v West Indies at Wellington. 10 March 1992
India 197 (49.4/50 ov); West Indies 195–5 (40.2/46 ov, target: 195)
West Indies won by 5 wickets (with 34 balls remaining) (revised target)
27th match. New Zealand v India at Dunedin. 12 March 1992
India 230–6 (50/50 ov); New Zealand 231–6 (47.1/50 ov)
New Zealand won by 4 wickets (with 17 balls remaining)
32nd match. India v South Africa at Adelaide. 15 March 1992
India 180–6 (30/30 ov); South Africa 181–4 (29.1/30 ov)
South Africa won by 6 wickets (with 5 balls remaining)
Final. England v Pakistan at Melbourne. 25 March 1992
Pakistan 249–6 (50/50 ov); England 227 (49.2/50 ov)
Pakistan won by 22 runs
