AWAY WINS

As soon as the World Cup was over I consulted a series of specialists and was advised to have an
operation on the ring finger of my left hand because of calcification. There was no other option and in
April 2003 I travelled to Baltimore, USA, with my family to get the surgery done. Dr Anant Joshi, as
on many occasions in the past, was with me, and his reassuring presence, together with that of my
friends Vini Desai and Paresh Bhakta, was always a great source of strength in moments like these.
The surgical process turned out to be slightly out of the ordinary because I was not the best patient.
I was extremely worried that the doctors would cut open my palm. Cutting the palm would mean
substantially altering my grip, which I really didn’t want to do. I explained to both my surgeons the
nuances of cricket and urged them to cut open the back of the hand. I was so obsessed with this issue
that I woke up during the surgery and asked them to show me where they had made the incision. Dr
Joshi later told me that they were all surprised to see me awake despite the anaesthesia. The doctors
showed me that my palm had been left untouched and told me to calm down and allow them to carry
on. Satisfied, I instantly drifted back to sleep.
The surgery kept me off the field for close to four months. There was not much cricket scheduled
then and I missed only one tour, of Bangladesh, in the period I was out. The recovery was painful and,
as often happens, I jarred the hand on a number of occasions during the period of convalescence. The
one time I hurt it really badly was when I was holidaying in London in June 2003. Anjali and I went
out for dinner and then took a taxi back to the hotel. While paying the taxi driver my finger got stuck
in the glass of the window and I fell to the ground in severe pain. The taxi driver was alarmed but
Anjali assured him that it was not his fault and told him to carry on. After a few painful minutes I
finally managed to walk back to the hotel.

India in Australia, November 2003–February 2004
So far, 2003 had turned out to be a good year for Indian cricket. Making the World Cup final was
something to be proud of, but there were still plenty of challenges ahead. We were due to play a Test
series against the world champions in Australia at the end of the year and that tour was to be followed
by one to Pakistan in early 2004.
Before leaving for Australia we played a one-day tri-series at home against Australia and New
Zealand in October and November 2003. I was in good form and scored a couple of hundreds on the
way to the final. Though we lost to Australia at Eden Gardens, I came away from it feeling confident
of doing well in front of big Australian crowds.
Unfortunately my series Down Under started in the worst possible fashion at the Gabba on 4
December 2003. I lasted just three balls and was given out lbw to Jason Gillespie when the ball struck
the top flap of my pad. I thought it would have gone over the stumps by six inches or more and I was

disappointed to see the umpire raise his finger. Sourav and VVS Laxman managed to steady the ship,
and Sourav, captaining India for the first time in Australia, duly played one of his finest Test innings.
His 144 at Brisbane helped to set the tone for the series. At the end of the day’s play he was ecstatic
and had every reason to be so.
The first Test was drawn and we moved to Adelaide for the second Test on 12 December. The
Adelaide wicket was good for batting and the Australians made the most of their opportunity. When
they scored 400 runs on the first day, I clearly remember the Australian team standing up on the
dressing-room balcony and cheering the batsmen off the field. Day two started better for us and, with
Anil bowling beautifully, we managed to restrict Australia to 556 in their first innings. With the good
batting conditions and a lot of time still left in the match, there was every chance we could make a
contest of it if we batted well enough.
Rahul was outstanding and his double hundred helped us get close to the Australian first-innings
total. Laxman too was majestic and it reminded us of the incredible partnership Rahul and Laxman
had put together at Eden Gardens in March 2001, only this time the roles were reversed, with Rahul
getting a double hundred and Laxman a hundred. I lasted just six balls before I was caught by Gilchrist
off the fast bowler Andy Bichel. It was an annoyingly soft dismissal.
The Australian second innings belonged to Ajit Agarkar, my team-mate from Mumbai. He produced
his best ever spell to set up the match for us. He took six Australian wickets for just 41 runs as we
bowled the Australians out for 196, leaving us with 230 to chase. We fielded brilliantly in this innings
and took some amazing catches, Aakash Chopra’s catch of Ponting at point off Ajit being the standout. I chipped in with two crucial wickets, bowling leg-spin. Steve Waugh and Damien Martyn had put
together a good partnership and it was immensely satisfying to be able to get both of them out caught
in the slips. It was time for the batsmen to close out the game.
Rahul was yet again the star performer and I managed to contribute 37 before falling lbw to legspinner Stuart MacGill. We had put together a 70-run partnership at a critical time in the match, which
was particularly satisfying. Rahul hit the winning runs for us, remaining unbeaten on 72, and the team
was thrilled to have taken a 1–0 lead in the series. We stayed in the dressing room till late and
thoroughly savoured the moment. Never in our history had we managed a 1–0 lead against Australia in
Australia. We had matched the Australians in every aspect of the game and had a very good chance of
winning the series if we continued to play at our best. Rahul and Laxman were in imperious form;
Sehwag and Sourav had made important contributions in both Tests; Aakash Chopra, our second
opener, had done a good job of blunting the new ball.
On the eve of the next game – the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne – I decided to take Anjali, Sara
and Arjun out onto the ground, just to give them a feel of what it is like to be inside a stadium.
Standing in the middle of the MCG, they could imagine for themselves what we go through with more
than 80,000 people in the stands. It was Arjun’s first visit to a stadium.
We batted first after winning the toss on 26 December and Virender Sehwag played what must be
one of the best Test innings ever seen at the MCG. He was in his attacking mode and played some
strokes that only he can play. I have no doubt that Sehwag at the top of the order was one of the best
things to happen to Indian cricket and he played a key role in leading us to the top of the world Test
rankings in 2009. He really should have got a double hundred at the MCG, but was out for 195 hitting
a Stuart MacGill full toss to long on.
The rest of the batsmen unfortunately failed to capitalize on the start Sehwag and Aakash Chopra
had given us and we were all out for 366, allowing Australia back into the game. I faced only one ball,
getting a faint tickle down the leg side to Gilchrist, who was standing way back to Brett Lee. I turned

around to see the ball travelling to Gilchrist and knew that it was the end of me. That is one of the
worst ways of getting out and I felt embarrassed. I felt even worse when I was told that Anjali had
come to the MCG to watch after being persuaded by some of the other wives. I heard that she left the
ground the moment I was out and walked all the way back to the hotel. I couldn’t help reflecting on
the occasionally cruel and unpredictable nature of our much-loved game.
Australia responded impressively, playing brilliantly in their first innings and, with Ponting scoring
257 and Hayden 136, effectively batted us out of the game with their 558 total. Close to 200 runs
behind, we would have to bat exceptionally well to save the match. We did not, and the series was 1–1
with one Test to play.
Once again, I did not make the contribution I had hoped for in the second innings at the MCG. To
change things a bit, I asked Sourav what he thought about batting ahead of me. It was towards the end
of the third day’s play and Sourav, who was in good form, agreed to step up, allowing me the cushion
of going in to bat the following morning at number five. The ploy seemed to work and all was going
well until I got out for 44, caught by Gilchrist off the fast bowler Brad Williams. I had been in control
until I played one false shot, the feature of my batting in the series. It seemed that every time I tried to
move up a gear, I lost my wicket.

It all comes down to Sydney
On the eve of the fourth and final Test match in Sydney at the beginning of January 2004, John Wright
came to my room to try to get me to think positively and boost my confidence, which was a great help.
I had also had a long conversation with Ajit, and one challenge he put in front of me was to try to
remain not out in both innings. He said that I was allowing myself to get out to bowlers, rather than
making them have to take my wicket, and that if I decided to rein myself in, no bowler would be able
to get me out. I took up the challenge and decided to play a waiting game. Even if I looked ugly in the
middle I was intent on sticking to my plan. Having got out twice in the series playing aggressive shots,
I was simply not going to try anything extravagant at the SCG. True to my promise, I played what was
in some ways one of my most difficult Test innings. I consciously checked my shots and was
determined not to get out. In more than ten hours at the crease I did not play a single cover drive.
When the Australian bowlers cracked a few jokes at my expense, I remained focused. It was a real
test. Even when balls were there for the drive, I let them go. It was all totally against my natural
instincts and it left me drained but immensely satisfied. At the end of our first innings, I was not out
on 241 and had taken the team score past 700.
When I think about this Test, I can’t help remembering that for some reason I turned unusually
superstitious. Anjali, her parents, Sara and Arjun were with me on the eve of the match and we
decided to go to a Malaysian restaurant for dinner. The food was excellent and we ended up ordering
noodles, chicken and a host of other dishes. My family then left for India the next morning, but I had a
very good first day and was unbeaten on 73. In the evening I decided to stick to the routine of the
previous night and went to the same Malaysian restaurant, this time with Ajit Agarkar and a couple of
other players. Not only did we sit at the same table, but I had exactly the same food. The next day
went even better and I was not out on 220. That night, I again went to the same restaurant and
occupied the same table and ate the same food. On the third day of the match, with the Test match
going really well for us, we went to the same restaurant one final time. The restaurant manager must
have thought we were mad. At the same time he must have been elated at the thought that we had
returned because of the food. Little did he know the real reason for our fourth consecutive visit!

After my double century, I was sent to address the media. A local journalist said that I had been
getting a lot of flak in the press recently but, now that I had scored an unbeaten double hundred, would
I be reading the papers the following morning? All I said to him was that I had not read anything
during the series – which was my way of keeping myself insulated from all the hype – and I was
unaware of what they had written about me. I didn’t have a problem with getting flak if I had not
performed. The media needed to do its job, after all. But I was not looking forward to reading the
papers just because I had scored some runs – I did not need validation from the media. Criticism and
praise are two sides of the same coin and, having played international cricket for fifteen years, I had
learnt to take these things in my stride.
We backed up the first-innings batting performance with a very good bowling effort and dismissed
Australia for 474, with Anil taking a remarkable 8–141. We were ahead by 231 and now we needed
quick runs to give our bowlers time to close out the match. Yet again we batted well and Rahul and I
were in the middle of a good partnership when Sourav sent two or three messages out to check when
we should declare. Rahul was the vice captain of the team and I said to him that it was his decision as
much as Sourav’s. I was ready to go off whenever they wanted. Rahul was keen to bat on for a little
longer and we finally declared just after he was hit on the head by a Brett Lee bouncer when he was on
91 and I was on 60 not out. In hindsight I must say we delayed the declaration too long. The ball was
turning and bouncing, and we should have given Anil and the bowlers a few more overs on the fourth
evening than the four they eventually bowled.
Set 443 to win, Australia were under pressure throughout their second innings. Anil bowled a
marathon spell of forty-two overs, picking up four more wickets on the fifth day. In his final innings
in Test cricket Steve Waugh played well to save his team some blushes. He was eventually out for 80,
caught by me at deep square leg off Anil. The crowd was desperate for a final Steve Waugh hundred
but it didn’t work out that way. Straight after taking the catch, I ran over to Steve and congratulated
him on a fantastic career and wished him all the best for his future endeavours as he received a
standing ovation from the Sydney crowd.
Australia held on for a draw and the series finally ended 1–1. Personally, it had been a great Test
match for me and I was satisfied at having kept my promise to Ajit not to get out in both innings. It
had been extremely difficult to go against my natural instincts. But it was a series we really should
have won. We were the better team for most of it and had played exceptional cricket in patches. Had
the declaration on the fourth evening come a little earlier, and had we grabbed more of the chances
that came our way, we might have made history. Despite missing out on a series win, we still had
reason to be happy and were looking forward to the tour of Pakistan that was just round the corner.

India in Pakistan, March–April 2004
There was a lot of excitement about our tour to Pakistan. Playing Pakistan is always a big occasion for
an Indian cricketer, and this was the first time we had played them in Pakistan since my debut series
in 1989. The tour also seemed to have come at the best possible time for India; we had done well in
the series Down Under and most of the players were in good form.
As soon as we landed in Pakistan we realized just how different this tour would be. Unlike the first
time, when I was just sixteen, in 2004 I understood the full significance of an India–Pakistan series.
The security was simply unbelievable. We were whisked through immigration and on our way to the
hotel we had a security vehicle ahead of the team bus. There were also bikes escorting the bus and we
even had a chopper flying above us. In the hotel we were received warmly and given instructions

about the security protocols we were expected to follow. We were informed that the first room on our
floor was to be occupied by security personnel, who would check every visitor who came to the floor.
The floors above and below us had been sealed off. I had not experienced security like that before and
it was a very strange feeling, because we were just sportsmen who had come to Pakistan to play
cricket.
Leaving the hotel wasn’t an option and this meant the players spent a lot of time in each other’s
rooms having dinner, playing cards and watching movies. It was always fun to be able to spend time
together and the spirit of the team was excellent as we prepared for the first one-day international in
Karachi on 13 March 2004.
It was the best possible start to the series, with the match decided on the very last ball. After we had
scored 349 batting first, Pakistan responded well but came up short, with 344 in their fifty overs.
Unfortunately, we lost the next two matches, but we did well to come back with victories in the final
two games, winning the series 3–2. The final match was a thriller and we beat Pakistan by 40 runs in
the end. I have fond memories of this match, having taken a very good catch to dismiss the Pakistan
captain Inzamam-ul-Haq. In this series Inzamam would invariably try and hit the slow bowlers
straight back over the bowler’s head, so before the fifth ODI Murali Kartik and I made a plan for him.
We agreed that I would stand far straighter than normal at long on and would be ready to move
towards the sightscreen the moment Inzamam was on strike. Sure enough, he hit Kartik straight back
over his head and I was ready for the opportunity. I caught the ball above my head just inches from the
boundary rope and then sprinted towards my team-mates in the middle, knowing we had managed to
prise out the most important Pakistan wicket. In the end it was a terrific result and it gave us
tremendous confidence ahead of the first Test at Multan.

First Test, Multan, 28 March–1 April 2004
At Multan, Virender Sehwag played a blinder. We won the toss and from the word go he was in
control. He played some outstanding shots and his innings had the effect of demoralizing the
opposition on the very first day of the series. He flayed the Pakistani bowlers to all parts of the ground
and by the time I joined him in the middle he was already well past his century.
I remember that just after tea Sehwag seemed to lose concentration. He began trying to hit every
ball and looked a bit agitated. I walked up to him to calm him down and told him that he just needed
to hang in there and let this spell pass. I also said to him that he should check himself a bit, as
something big was about to happen. It was important to grab this opportunity and not let it slip away. I
was glad to see him grind it out on his way to a double hundred. As soon as he reached the milestone,

he was back in his groove and the shots started to flow again. I was even more delighted when he
managed to get to a triple hundred on the second morning. It was an incredible effort and coming
against Pakistan made it all the more special.
By the time Sehwag reached that landmark, I had made a century. I had paced my innings nicely
and we were now firmly in the driver’s seat. At teatime I asked stand-in skipper Rahul Dravid, who
was in charge because Sourav was out with a back injury, and coach John Wright what the plan was. I
was informed that we were looking to give Pakistan an hour to bat and so would put them in with
fifteen overs left on the second day.
It was perfectly sensible and I went about my business after tea with this plan in mind. In fact, I was
pacing my innings so that I could reach my double hundred and we could still give Pakistan fifteen
overs to bat, as was the plan. But then, a little more than half an hour into the post-tea session, Ramesh
Powar, who was substituting in the game, came onto the field and asked me to accelerate. I even joked
with him, saying I was aware that we needed quick runs but with the field totally spread out, there was
only so much we could do.
A little later, when I was on 194, he came out again and said that I should try and get to my double
hundred in that over itself because Rahul had decided to declare. I was startled, to say the least,
because in my mind I still had twelve balls in which to score the remaining six runs before fifteen
overs were left for the day. However, as it happened, I did not get to play a single ball in that over,
with Yuvraj on strike against Imran Farhat, Pakistan’s opening batsman and part-time leg-spinner. He
blocked the first two balls before picking up two runs off the third ball. He once again blocked the
fourth ball and was out to the fifth ball. Then, just as Parthiv Patel, the next batsman, started to come
out, I saw Rahul gesturing us to go back to the pavilion. He had declared the innings with me stranded
on 194 and with sixteen overs still left for the day, one more than we had agreed at tea. I was shocked,
as it did not make any sense. It was day two of the Test match and not day four, as it had been in
Sydney a month earlier.
Disappointed and upset, I made my way back to the dressing room and could sense that the whole
team was surprised at the decision. Some of my team-mates perhaps expected me to throw my gear
about in the dressing room in disgust and create a scene. However, such things are not in me and I
decided not to say a word to anyone about the incident. I calmly put my batting gear away and asked
John Wright for a little time before I went out to field because I was feeling a little tight after batting
for so long. Inside I was fuming.
Just as I was washing my face in the bathroom, John walked up to me and apologized. He was sorry
about what had happened and said he had not been party to the decision. I was surprised and said to
him that as coach he was one of the decision-makers and there was no reason for him to be sorry if he
believed in what had been done. I also said that what was done could not be reversed and it was best to
leave it alone. Finally, I couldn’t help reminding him that the declaration was contrary to what had
been discussed at tea and it was strange that I was not given even one ball to get to my double hundred
after a message had been sent out asking me to get there as quickly as possible.
Soon after my exchange with John, Sourav came up to me and said he was very sorry at what had
happened and that it wasn’t his decision to declare. This was a little surprising because Sourav, as the
skipper, was part of the teatime discussion and was also present in the dressing room at the time of the
declaration. I said to him there was no point going over it any more.
At the end of the day’s play I was asked by the press if I was disappointed by the declaration and I
had no reason to shy away from the truth. Soon after the press conference I put my headphones on and
listened to music all the way back to the hotel. Then I hit the gym to work out my frustration. Some of

the Pakistan players were also in the gym but none of them spoke to me, sensing the state of mind I
was in. I worked myself hard, trying to get the declaration out of my mind, then headed up to my room
for some time alone.
In the evening Professor Ratnakar Shetty, our manager, came to my room for a chat. I had known
Professor Shetty since I was a youngster in Mumbai. He apologized for what had happened and said he
did not agree with the declaration. However, it was a cricketing decision and he did not ever interfere
with cricketing decisions as manager. I assured him that it was over and done with and would not
affect my contribution to the team.
It was when I was talking to Professor Shetty that Sanjay Manjrekar, who was in Pakistan as a
commentator, turned up in my room. Sanjay said that it had been a brave decision to declare and that
it was a good sign for Indian cricket. He carried on in that vein until I asked him if he really knew
what he was talking about. I explained to him that he was not aware of what had transpired in the
dressing room and had arrived at his judgement without knowing the real facts of the matter. I made it
clear that I did not appreciate his opinion, which I thought was a deliberate attempt to be different.
The following morning, Rahul finally came to me and said he had heard that I was upset and wanted
to have a chat. I informed him that I was indeed upset and there was no way I would pretend
otherwise. I asked him what the thinking was behind declaring at the time that he did. It wasn’t as if
we were pressing for a win, and one over wouldn’t have made much difference. We had agreed to a
plan at tea and I was doing exactly as I had been told.
Rahul said that the call was taken with the interests of the team in mind. It was important to
demonstrate to the Pakistanis that we meant business and were keen to win. I wasn’t convinced. First,
I said to him that I was batting for the team as well. Yes, I had scored 194, but the 194 was meant to
help the team and it was my individual contribution to the team’s cause. So to say that the decision
was taken in the best interests of the team wasn’t altogether correct.
I reminded him of what had happened in Sydney less than a month earlier, when we had both been
batting on the fourth evening and Sourav had sent out two or three messages asking when we should
declare and Rahul had carried on batting. The two situations were comparable and, if anything, the
Sydney declaration was far more significant and may have cost us a Test match and series victory. If
Rahul was so keen to show intent here in Multan, he should have done the same in Sydney.
Rahul didn’t say anything to this and stated that I would surely get another opportunity to score a
double hundred. I disagreed, saying it would not be the same. I would have to bat from zero to score a
double century and would not be starting my innings at 194. Before I brought the conversation to a
close, I assured Rahul that the incident would have no bearing on my involvement on the field, but off
the field I would prefer to be left alone for a while to come to terms with what had happened.
Despite this incident, I am glad to say Rahul and I remain good friends, and even on the field our
camaraderie remained intact until the end of our careers. We continued to have some good
partnerships and neither our cricket nor our friendship was affected.

Learning from history
A very similar situation arose a few years later, in December 2008, when we were playing England at
Mohali. It was the last day of the Test match and Gautam Gambhir and Yuvraj were both in the
seventies. Yet again there was talk of a possible declaration in the dressing room. It was being argued
that we needed to declare immediately and put the English in for some thirty overs so that we could
try and force a win.

I intervened and stopped the declaration. Dhoni was our captain then and Gary Kirsten our coach. I
said that I had been in this situation before and did not want a repeat of what had happened to me.
There was no way we could win the game by putting the English in after lunch. There was not enough
time – particularly because on each day so far, play had finished early because the light in Mohali did
not last long and the last day was expected to be no different. In such a situation, what was the point of
declaring and depriving the two batsmen of the chance to get their hundreds? Gautam had already
scored one in the first innings, so he had a rare opportunity to make a hundred in each innings. Yuvraj,
on the other hand, had played a key role in winning us the first Test at Chennai and it was only fair to
give him the chance of a Test hundred.
Finally, I said it was our responsibility to look after the interests of all individuals who were part of
the team, because a bunch of happy individuals make a happy team. I wasn’t suggesting that we
should place individual interest ahead of team interest. However, in a situation where there was no
chance of winning the match, it was essential to give both batsmen a chance to get their hundreds. I
convinced Gary that it was the right thing to do for the team and was glad that he agreed with me.
Unfortunately, however, both Yuvraj and Gautam missed their hundreds. Yuvi was run out for 86
and then Gautam was out for 97, which was when we finally declared the innings at 251–7. Soon
afterwards, I joked with Yuvraj and Gautam, complaining that I had delayed the declaration for them
both and yet they had not scored their hundreds. In fun, I said to Yuvraj, ‘ Tumhe mein ek laath dunga,
tum run out ho kar aaye for 86 aur maine tumhare liye declaration ko roka! ’ (I will kick you. I
stopped the declaration for you and you got run out for 86!)

A series win to remember
In the end it took us just thirty minutes on the final day to wrap up that first Test at Multan in 2004.
Before that I had had a part to play with the ball against Pakistan wicketkeeper Moin Khan. I had
dismissed Moin before in exhibition games and started playing mind games with him, telling one of
my team-mates, ‘Main ise pehle bhi out kar chuka hoon. Aaj bhi yeh main isko out karunga.’ (I have
dismissed him before and today also I will get him out.) Moin heard the conversation and smiled at
me, saying, ‘Aaj toh main tujhe chakka marunga.’ (Today I will hit you for six.) I told him that I
promised to flight the ball, so ‘Chalo mar ke dikhao.’ (Come on, try and hit me.) Then I shouted to my
team-mates to give Abdur Razzak a single and get Moin back on strike. For the last ball of the day, I
decided to bowl him a googly, because he was trying to pad up to every delivery. The ball pitched on
off stump, turned exactly as I had hoped and went through his legs to hit leg stump. It was a key
wicket and helped to swing the momentum in our direction. In the second Test at Lahore, however, we
were outplayed. Though Yuvi scored a very good hundred for us, we were always playing catch-up and
were never in the contest.
The third and deciding Test at Rawalpindi started on 13 April. Sourav was back in the side and to
maintain balance we decided to open with Parthiv. Lakshmipathy Balaji and Irfan Pathan, our two
swing bowlers, bowled very well throughout the series and this match was no different. Balaji picked
up four wickets and we restricted Pakistan to 224 in the first innings. Then, with Rahul leading the
way with a spectacular double hundred, we put 600 on the board in reply.
This time Pakistan had been outplayed and we finished the formalities on day four by bowling them
out for 245. Anil took four wickets and I took the tenth and final wicket of the innings bowling legspin. Though the match was over on the fourth day, it was not without drama or embarrassment. That
morning we dropped four catches in no time. They weren’t difficult and we all seemed to be dropping

the ball like a hot potato.
It was a terrific series win and our first in Pakistan in fifty years. Coming at the back of the 3–2
ODI series win, it marked the end of a brilliant tour.
India in Australia 2003–04 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Brisbane. 4–8 December 2003
Australia 323 (JL Langer 121, RT Ponting 54; Z Khan 5–95, AB Agarkar 3–90) and 284–3 dec (ML
Hayden 99, DR Martyn 66*, SR Waugh 56*, RT Ponting 50)
India 409 (SC Ganguly 144, VVS Laxman 75, SR Tendulkar 0 ; JN Gillespie 4–65, SCG MacGill 4–
86) and 73–2 (R Dravid 43*; NW Bracken 2–12)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Adelaide. 12–16 December 2003
Australia 556 (RT Ponting 242, SM Katich 75, JL Langer 58; A Kumble 5–154) and 196 (AC Gilchrist
43, SR Waugh 42; AB Agarkar 6–41, SR Tendulkar 2–36)
India 523 (R Dravid 233, VVS Laxman 148, V Sehwag 47, SR Tendulkar 1 ; AJ Bichel 4–118) and
233–6 (R Dravid 72*, V Sehwag 47, SR Tendulkar 37; SCG MacGill 2–101)
India won by 4 wickets
3rd Test. Melbourne. 26–30 December 2003
India 366 (V Sehwag 195, R Dravid 49, A Chopra 48, SR Tendulkar 0 ; SCG MacGill 3–70) and 286
(R Dravid 92, SC Ganguly 73, SR Tendulkar 44; BA Williams 4–53)
Australia 558 (RT Ponting 257, ML Hayden 136; A Kumble 6–176, SR Tendulkar 1–57 ) and 97–1
(ML Hayden 53*, RT Ponting 31*)
Australia won by 9 wickets
4th Test. Sydney. 2–6 January 2004
India 705–7 dec (SR Tendulkar 241*, VVS Laxman 178, V Sehwag 72, PA Patel 62; B Lee 4–201, JN
Gillespie 3–135) and 211–2 dec (R Dravid 91*, SR Tendulkar 60*, V Sehwag 47)
Australia 474 (SM Katich 125, JL Langer 117, ML Hayden 67; A Kumble 8–141) and 357–6 (SR
Waugh 80, SM Katich 77*; A Kumble 4–138)
Match drawn
Series drawn 1–1
India in Pakistan 2004
1st Test. Multan. 28 March–1 April 2004
India 675–5 dec (V Sehwag 309, SR Tendulkar 194, Y Singh 59; M Sami 2–110)
Pakistan 407 (Y Hameed 91, Inzamam-ul-Haq 77, A Razzaq 47; IK Pathan 4–100, SR Tendulkar 2–
36) and 216 (f/o) (Y Youhana 112; A Kumble 6–72, IK Pathan 2–26)
India won by an innings and 52 runs
2nd Test. Lahore. 5–8 April 2004
India 287 (Y Singh 112, IK Pathan 49, SR Tendulkar 2 ; Umar Gul 5–31) and 241 (V Sehwag 90, PA
Patel 62*, SR Tendulkar 8; D Kaneria 3–14, S Akhtar 3–62)
Pakistan 489 (Inzamam-ul-Haq 118, I Farhat 101, A Kamal 73, Y Youhana 72; L Balaji 3–81, IK

Pathan 3–107, SR Tendulkar 1–38) and 40–1
Pakistan won by 9 wickets
3rd Test. Rawalpindi. 13–16 April 2004
Pakistan 224 (M Sami 49; L Balaji 4–63, IK Pathan 2–49, A Nehra 2–60) and 245 (A Kamal 60*, Y
Youhana 48; A Kumble 4–47, L Balaji 3–108, SR Tendulkar 1–1)
India 600 (R Dravid 270, SC Ganguly 77, VVS Laxman 71, PA Patel 69, SR Tendulkar 1; S Akhtar 3–
47)
India won by an innings and 131 runs
India won the series 2–1