‘ENDULKAR’

My primary goal now was to win the 2007 World Cup in the Caribbean. We had made the final four
years earlier and had faltered at the very last hurdle. We were all desperate to go one better this time
and expectations at home were very high.
We played well in our two practice matches against the Netherlands and the West Indies in Jamaica
in early March. We scored 300 batting first against the Netherlands, for a decisive 182-run win, and in
the next match our bowlers polished off the West Indies for 85, setting up a nine-wicket victory. We
seemed to be getting into a good rhythm for our first group match against Bangladesh on 17 March,
but at the same time there was no question of being complacent or taking them lightly. Bangladesh
had beaten decent opposition before.
The match was tough for many reasons. When we batted, the pitch was damp and it was extremely
difficult to play shots in the first ten overs. Mashrafe Mortaza, Bangladesh’s medium-fast bowler, was
performing well and we had lost two early wickets when I went in to bat. I was batting at number four
in this competition, as requested by the team management. I was perhaps a little surprised to bat in
that position, because we had experimented with my batting position before, on the eve of the 2003
World Cup, only to agree that I could contribute most as an opener. But the team management’s
theory was that the tracks in the West Indies would be slow and low and I would be able to manoeuvre
the spinners in the middle of the innings. As it turned out, almost all the wickets had bounce and
movement and the strategy backfired on us.
My plan was to see off the new ball before gradually picking up the scoring rate. Sourav and I
successfully negotiated the early swing and, with the spinners on, I decided to play an inside-out shot
over extra cover. Unfortunately the ball from left-arm spinner Abdur Razzak hit the inside edge of my
bat, ricocheted into my pad and went on to hit the stumps. It was not the start to the World Cup I had
hoped for.
Not much went right for us on the day. Although Sourav scored 66 while opening the batting, Rahul,
the captain, made only 14 and then Dhoni got out for a duck trying to play a cut shot, caught at short
third man. It was one of those days when things just didn’t click and we ended up with a below-par
score of 191. In reply Tamim Iqbal, the left-handed opening batsman, gave Bangladesh a quick start
and they managed to reach the target fairly easily in the end, with five wickets to spare.
Not all was lost after one defeat, however, and there was still time to pull things round. We knew
we had to win the two remaining group matches and that the run rate might come into the equation. In
our second match against Bermuda, we went out and played our shots and won by 257 runs. Thanks to
our total of 413, the net run rate had been beefed up and we only had to beat Sri Lanka to progress to
the next stage.
We started well against Sri Lanka on 23 March and kept their score to a manageable 254. There’s
little doubt that we were capable of chasing down that total, but despite our best efforts things did not

go to plan. I got an inside edge to a ball from fast bowler Dilhara Fernando; hearing the ball hitting the
stumps in such a crucial match was devastating. When we were all out for 185 the dressing room was
in shock and some of the players were in tears. Most were just completely silent. I found it very
difficult to get over the disappointment. It was definitely one of the lowest points of my cricket career.

A difficult homecoming
After we returned to India, the media followed me back home and it hurt when I heard my own people
doubting the commitment of the players. The media had every right to criticize us for failing, but to
say we were not focused on the job was not fair. We had failed to fulfil the expectations of the fans,
but that did not mean we should be labelled traitors. At times the reaction was surprisingly hostile and
some of the players were worried about their safety.
Headlines like ‘Endulkar’ hurt deeply. After eighteen years in international cricket, it was tough to
see things come to this and retirement crossed my mind. My family and friends like Sanjay Nayak did
all they could to cheer me up and after a week I decided to do something about it. I started to do some
running, to try to sweat the World Cup out of my head.
On top of all this our coach, Greg Chappell, was publicly questioning our commitment and instead
of asking us to take fresh guard, was making matters worse. It seems to me that Greg Chappell must
take a lot of responsibility for the mess. I don’t think I would be far off the mark if I said that most of
us felt that Indian cricket was going nowhere under Chappell.
In my opinion, Indian cricket benefited significantly when the BCCI decided to end Chappell’s
tenure in April 2007. Several of our senior players were relieved to see him go, which was hardly
surprising because, for reasons hard to comprehend, he had not treated them particularly fairly. His
attitude to Sourav, for example, was astonishing. Chappell is on record as saying that he may have got
the job because of Sourav but that did not mean he was going to do favours to Sourav for the rest of
his life. Frankly, Sourav is one of the best cricketers India has produced and he did not need favours
from Chappell to be part of the team.
Chappell seemed intent on dropping all the older players and in the process damaged the harmony
of the side. On one occasion, he asked VVS Laxman to consider opening the batting. Laxman politely
turned him down, saying he had tried opening in the first half of his career because he was confused,
but now he was settled in the middle order and Greg should consider him as a middle-order batsman.
Greg’s response stunned us all. He told Laxman he should be careful, because making a comeback at
the age of thirty-two might not be easy.
Unlike John Wright and Gary Kirsten, who coached India before and after Greg and made a priority
of keeping the players happy, Greg was like a ringmaster who imposed his ideas on the players
without showing any signs of being concerned about whether they felt comfortable or not. In fact, I
later found out that Greg had spoken to the BCCI about the need to remove the senior players, no
doubt hoping to refresh the team.
I also remember that every time India won, Greg could be seen leading the team to the hotel or into
the team bus, but every time India lost he would thrust the players in front. In general John and Gary
always preferred to stay in the background, but Greg liked to be prominent in the media.
Just months before the World Cup, Chappell had come to see me at home and, to my dismay,
suggested that I should take over the captaincy from Rahul Dravid. Anjali, who was sitting with me,
was equally shocked to hear him say that ‘together, we could control Indian cricket for years,’ and that
he would help me in taking over the reins of the side. I was surprised to hear the coach not showing

the slightest amount of respect for the captain, with cricket’s biggest tournament just months away. I
rejected his proposition outright. He stayed for a couple of hours, trying to convince me, before finally
leaving.
A few days after Greg had come to my house, I suggested to the BCCI that the best option would be
to keep Greg back in India and not send him with the team to the World Cup. I also said that we as
senior players could take control of the side and keep the team together. That’s not what happened, of
course, and the 2007 campaign ended in disaster.
Greg has since written a lot of things about the Indian cricket team. Perhaps it is time to set matters
straight. It came to light later that Greg was being filmed for a documentary, Guru Greg, during this
period which went into a lot of detail about what was happening behind the scenes. It says a great deal
about his tenure as coach that I and other players did not even know about this. Why were the players
never asked if they felt comfortable with this? I wonder if he had permission from the BCCI to record
his documentary. Wasn’t it a clear infringement of the players’ privacy?
While we may never get answers to these questions, suffice to say that Greg’s tenure as coach was
the worst of my career. There is no doubt we failed as a collective in 2007, but his high-handed
manner added to our disappointment and, in the immediate aftermath of defeat, had a harmful impact
on Indian cricket.

Unwelcome opinions
The outrage in India after the 2007 World Cup was not helped by armchair experts who were sitting
thousands of miles away but still passing judgement on Indian cricket and suggesting I should ‘have a
good long look into the mirror’ and think about retiring. Such opinions, which were published in
Indian newspapers, provoked fans across the country. I have never quite understood why Ian Chappell,
who was merely reporting on the game, should have got a headline in the Indian press. Would any of
our former players commenting on Ricky Ponting or Michael Clarke have had a headline in the
Melbourne Age or the Sydney Morning Herald? Chappell would have done better to stick to Australian
cricket.
I remember meeting Ian Chappell in Durban in 2010 during the Champions League Twenty20 and
having a most interesting discussion with him. I bumped into him as I was coming out of a health club
after a session in the gym with my physio, Nitin Patel, who was party to the entire exchange. Ian
started the conversation by saying that now he knew the secret behind my scoring big runs. I reminded
him that he was conveniently changing his stand, considering what he’d written about mirrors and
retirement in 2007. I said to him that I had not done what he suggested back then because I was well
aware of what I needed to do and how much cricket I had left in me.
I also said that critics like him change with the wind. When the going is good, they write positive
things and when the going gets tough, they start making a lot of negative comments without ever
trying to find out what actually is going through a player’s body or mind. He then asked me if I had
changed the weight of my bat. I told him that I hadn’t changed a thing and was doing exactly what I
had been doing for twenty long years. He was the one who had conveniently changed his opinion
because I had been scoring heavily between 2008 and 2010.
Finally the conversation moved to Greg. I told Ian bluntly that Greg had not been popular and I
would not want to share a dressing room with him again. Ian attempted to argue that Greg had always
had a problem trying to understand failure and had had issues as captain of Australia. I said that that
was not my concern and all that mattered to me was that he had failed to take Indian cricket forward.

Ian was most surprised to hear all this. In fact, Nitin Patel told me soon after that I was the last person
he had expected to lash out like this.

A welcome phone call
All in all, I was in a bad state after the 2007 World Cup. I was not enjoying my cricket at all and was
thinking about retiring – until I received some encouraging words from Viv Richards. Out of the blue,
he called me in India from the West Indies and we spoke for about forty-five minutes. He assured me
that there was a lot of cricket left in me and insisted that I shouldn’t even think about stopping
playing.
Viv was my hero when I was growing up and he will always be a hero, no matter what success I’ve
achieved myself. We have got to know each other well over the years and whenever we meet, he treats
me like his younger brother and I treat him like my older brother. I’ve always respected him and his
views, so when he chose to call me and spend all that time convincing me to carry on, it meant a great
deal to me. When I finally got back into some good form and put together a very satisfying century in
Sydney at the beginning of 2008, I made a point of calling Viv to thank him for his crucial support.
India in the 2007 World Cup
8th match, Group B. Bangladesh v India at Port-of-Spain. 17 March 2007
India 191 (49.3/50 ov); Bangladesh 192–5 (48.3/50 ov)
Bangladesh won by 5 wickets (with 9 balls remaining)
12th match, Group B. Bermuda v India at Port-of-Spain. 19 March 2007
India 413–5 (50/50 ov); Bermuda 156 (43.1/50 ov)
India won by 257 runs
20th match, Group B. India v Sri Lanka at Port-of-Spain. 23 March 2007
Sri Lanka 254–6 (50/50 ov); India 185 (43.3/50 ov)
Sri Lanka won by 69 runs
Final. Australia v Sri Lanka at Bridgetown. 28 April 2007
Australia 281–4 (38/38 ov); Sri Lanka 215–8 (36/36 ov, target: 269)
Australia won by 53 runs (D/L method)