WORLD CUP 2003

India’s preparation for the 2003 World Cup in South Africa and Zimbabwe really started during the
tour to New Zealand in December 2002. We lost to the Kiwis in both formats of the game and while
those defeats were demoralizing, as defeats always are, they helped the team to focus with just a
month to go before the World Cup.
We played two Test matches in New Zealand and lost both. In the first Test at Wellington, which
started on 12 December, we were beaten by ten wickets, with the match finishing in just three days.
The pitch offered a lot of assistance to the fast bowlers and even Parthiv Patel, our wicketkeeper, was
getting the ball to swing prodigiously in the nets.
I played the first Test with an injured finger, which I had hurt during practice. On the first morning,
when the rest of the team were on the ground preparing to play, I was in hospital with Andrew Leipus
getting my finger checked. The pain was getting severe and I was finding it impossible to catch the
ball. Even when a fielder gently tossed the ball to me to pass on to the bowler I was having difficulty
catching it. Batting was not so much of a problem, as I could grip the bat as normal, but fielding was a
real issue. I asked the doctor to numb my finger, but he refused, saying I would have no idea where my
finger was and might break it if I didn’t catch the ball properly. All I could do was put up with the
pain.
When I got back to the ground, I went up to captain Sourav Ganguly and suggested I should field at
short leg. In that position, the ball would either lob to me or, if it was a firm hit, I would receive the
blow on my body instead of attempting to catch it. Both of these possibilities were fine by me. At
short leg no one expects you to stop a full-blooded shot with your hands. It was one of the few times I
stood in that position in the second half of my career.
Although the second Test match at Hamilton the following week was a low-scoring game, in the end
it turned out to be a competitive one. On reaching Hamilton, we were shocked to see the track had
been watered so much that the pitch was incredibly damp two days before the Test match. Then a lot
of rain fell and the covers couldn’t be removed to allow it to dry properly. John Wright, our coach,
tried inserting a key into the pitch the day before the match and the whole key went in without any
effort. It was anything but a good Test wicket.
The dampness delayed the start by four hours on the first day, despite it being bright and sunny in
Hamilton. The umpires did the right thing by waiting, as there was no way Test cricket could be
played in such conditions. The crowd was getting restless but there was nothing the umpires or players
could do. When the match finally started we lost the toss and were sent in to bat first in nigh-on
impossible batting conditions. We were bowled out for 99, with no one managing to get in.
I was sitting next to John Wright when Harbhajan was going out to bat, with India six wickets down.
John, a New Zealander, had tried telling us that we needed to stay at the wicket and that batting was
expected to become easier with time. I told John not to say anything to Harbhajan about digging in.

Far better that he should just go out and swing his bat. Time wasn’t a factor, as the match was not
likely to last the full five days anyway, and whatever runs he managed to score would be valuable.
Harbhajan went on to make a quick 20, all in boundaries, and got out trying to defend the ninth ball he
faced. His innings gave John a good laugh amidst all the disappointment of the low score. While
Bhajji had scored 20 in no time, all the batsmen who had tried to stick around struggled to reach
double figures.
New Zealand didn’t do any better; in fact, we managed to get a first-innings lead of five runs, which
just goes to show the nature of the wicket. In the second innings Rahul and I had a pretty good
partnership but neither of us managed to kick on for a big score. After the partnership was broken,
wickets fell in a heap and we finally set New Zealand a target of 160.
I must mention the unique feat of Ashish Nehra in this game. He was the first man to bat twice and
bowl in two innings on the same day in Test cricket. We had scored 92–8 by the end of the first day’s
play and Ashish was one of the not-out batsmen. He resumed his innings on the second day but we
were soon all out for 99. He was then part of our attack as we bowled New Zealand out for 94 in their
first innings, before we ourselves were bowled out in our second innings for 154. Finally, when New
Zealand came out to bat in the fourth innings of the match, Ashish had another bowl at them in the
final moments of the day.
We discussed his feat in the dressing room and wondered if anything of the sort had happened
before. A total of twenty-two wickets had fallen in a day and there wasn’t much that the batsmen on
either side could do in such conditions. It was disappointing for the crowd, who had come to watch a
five-day game. Their only consolation was that the match was very close in the end and the home team
won by four wickets.

Fighting for fitness
With both Test matches over early, I decided to spend a lot of time in the gym working on my fitness
ahead of the World Cup. Sehwag was my training partner and we used to award marks. We worked on
specific body parts each day and rated each other for the effort put in. We even joked that we were
perhaps scoring more marks in the gym than the total runs we had scored in the series. But both
Sehwag and I were confident that the effort put in would pay off sooner or later.
After the Test series was wrapped up we played a seven-match one-day series, losing 2–5. Again,
most of the wickets weren’t really suitable for international cricket. I did not feature in the first four
matches because of an ankle injury, which I sustained in practice on the eve of the first one-dayer at
Auckland. It was one of the few freakish injuries I have had in my career. I had just finished bowling a
long spell to each of our batsmen when Srinath called out, ‘Last ball, with four runs to win.’ I picked
up the ball again to bowl one final delivery at him. I had not noticed a big hole in the corner of the
practice pitch and, unluckily for me, as I ran to stop Srinath’s shot, my foot landed in the hole and I
slumped to the ground in agony. After a frustrating couple of weeks, I eventually made a comeback in
the fifth match of the series, at Wellington, and was promptly out for a duck. In fact I scored just one
run in each of the next two matches and Anjali and I joked about my scores – which read 0, 1, 1 –
being the dialling code for an Indian city!
The New Zealand experience was best summed up by the home captain Stephen Fleming. At the end
of the tour Fleming stated that the tour had done enough to breed a sense of false complacency among
the bowlers, while the batsmen were now worrying about flaws in technique that weren’t really there.
The conditions were simply not good enough for international cricket and the series was not the best

advertisement for the game.

Warming up
There was no doubt I was not in the best physical shape when the team left for the World Cup in South
Africa and Zimbabwe in February 2003. I was recovering from three injuries: the finger, the ankle and
a strained hamstring. As a result, at our training camp in Paarl, in the Western Cape, I was not able to
run with the team and spent my time cycling to keep up my cardio exercises. It was frustrating, but I
knew I had to push myself to get back to fitness before the first match of the tournament against the
Netherlands on 12 February.
The injury that bothered me most was the ankle. It had not fully healed and I had to strap it before
every practice session and match. Strapping the ankle all the time became an ordeal and it started to
frustrate me. So much so that one day I was careless when removing the strapping after training and
suddenly felt a strange sensation in my hand. I was holding the strapping, which had a thick layer of
my skin on it, which had come out of my heel. The skin was stuck to the tape and I ended up putting it
back because otherwise there would have to be a hole in a sensitive area of the foot. I know it sounds
gruesome, but there was little else I could do in the circumstances. After that it was particularly
painful when I had to go into the sea with the rest of the team as part of our recovery routine and the
salty water would really sting. The incident at least taught me to be more careful about handling my
injuries, however frustrating they might be.
We played two practice games, both against the KwaZulu-Natal side. While we batted reasonably in
the first game on 4 February in Pietermaritzburg, with Yuvi and Dravid both doing well, the game on
6 February at Chatsworth didn’t go according to plan. We managed to get the opposition out fairly
cheaply, and I remember Sourav saying that, because we needed as much batting practice as possible,
the opposition should bowl the full quota of fifty overs to us, even if we’d achieved the target. In fact,
towards the end of the Natal innings we were all trying to give them some extra runs and Sourav kept
close-in fielders in the ring to allow them to score freely, so that we would have a decent total to chase
down. But in our reply we collapsed well before the fifty overs and the question of the opposition
bowling the full quota never arose! We were all out for 158 and lost the match by 32 runs.
In both matches I had batted at number three, which was the result of a decision that had been taken
soon after we had reached South Africa. There had been a meeting of the senior players and the coach,
and most of my team-mates, including Sourav, Rahul and Srinath, felt I should bat at number three in
the competition. Only Anil suggested that I should open. The majority argument was that at the top of
the order I might get a good ball early on and get out, which would end up putting the team under
pressure. After the second practice game John Wright came to my room and asked me if I was really
happy batting in the number three position. I assured him that I would bat anywhere the team wanted
me to. John, however, insisted that I should voice my personal opinion as a player, so I said that, if it
were up to me, I would prefer to open. I went on to say that I felt I could control the game from that
position, and I also told him that there was no guarantee anyway that I wouldn’t get out early if I was
batting at number three or four, as it only takes one good ball. So I thought my best opportunity to set
up the match for India was as an opener. John agreed with me and finally convinced Sourav and the
rest of the team that having me at the top of the order was our best option.

The pool games

The less-than-impressive performances in our warm-up matches had made the first pool match on 12
February 2003, against the Netherlands, extremely important. We had to start well to give ourselves a
fighting chance in the tournament. Even if the Netherlands were not the best opposition in the world,
they had some good players in their team who had experience of playing on the county circuit in
England. As I went out to bat, I was unusually nervous. The expectations in India were huge and the
dressing room was also expecting a lot from me, now that they’d agreed to my wish to open the
batting. I’d caused our plans to be changed completely and now it was up to me to deliver.
I was deliberately conservative in my approach at the start and set out to build a solid foundation
before we went on the attack. We had been getting out for scores of 150 and less and it was important
that we batted the full fifty overs and posted a reasonable total. I managed to score a half-century and,
with Mongia contributing 42 runs down the order, we just passed the 200-run mark, making 204 all
out. It wasn’t a score to rave about and we knew that with one good innings from a Netherlands
batsman we might have a contest on our hands. At the team meeting before the start of their innings
we agreed that we should play as if we had to bowl the opposition out for 150, to force us to apply
ourselves properly. Eventually, it was Srinath and Kumble, with four wickets each, who helped us
achieve that aim as we bowled them out for 136. We had not played our best but had still managed to
win.
Our next match was against defending champions Australia at Centurion on 15 February. They were
playing excellent cricket and were firm favourites to win the tournament again. We played a very bad
game from the start and lost a heap of early wickets. I scored 36 and we were bowled out for a very
poor 125 and lost the game by nine wickets.
Our underwhelming performances in South Africa so far were not going down well with supporters
at home and we heard that some irate fans had vented their fury that evening by throwing tar at
Mohammad Kaif’s home in Uttar Pradesh. It was alarming to read about the hostile reaction in India
and I eventually had to issue a formal appeal, in the form of a media release, to try to pacify the fans. I
stated that we were all trying our best and there was no dearth of commitment at our end. This had
some effect and we were able to concentrate once again on the task at hand.

Stopping the rot
In 2003 Zimbabwe were a very good side in home conditions, and included some very talented players
in their ranks. It was only after 2004–5, when the country was laid low by political turmoil, that many
of these players stopped playing for Zimbabwe. In our pool game against them in Harare we played
well from the start and won by 83 runs in the end. We could sense that we were getting back into form
and it was surprising how one good win could boost a team’s confidence. I scored 81 off ninety-one
balls and Bhajji picked up the crucial wicket of Andy Flower, Zimbabwe’s best batsman. Now we
needed to carry this form forward, as we would soon be playing England in what was likely to be a
crucial match for us, one that could guarantee a place in the Super Six.
Before the England match, however, we had to play Namibia on 23 February and it was important
not to take it easy against a relatively weak team. We kept the pressure up and scored 311–2, with
Sourav and me both scoring hundreds. Our bowlers then dismissed the opposition for 130, with Yuvraj
Singh taking four wickets for six runs, and though not much could be read into our performance
against a team like Namibia, it was apparent that things were moving in the right direction.
The build-up to the England game at Durban on 26 February was something else. England versus
India is always a big game, but this time it was the World Cup and it was a must-win game for both

teams. Apparently Andrew Caddick said a number of things before the game and our players who read
those statements were fired up on the eve of the match. I had not read them and to this day don’t know
exactly what was said. I had scored runs in all three matches so far and was simply looking forward to
another opportunity.
We won a very important toss and decided to bat first. Batting under lights at Durban is always a
challenge and winning the toss had given us the early advantage. Our plan was not to give away early
wickets, even if we didn’t score quickly. Once the first five or six overs had gone by we started
shifting gear and looking for runs, passing 50 in no time. Durban always offers something for the fast
bowlers and I knew that Caddick and the other tall England bowlers would look to exploit the extra
bounce by bowling short of a length. I was ready for the short ball and it finally came in the ninth over
of the innings when Caddick bowled one a foot and a half outside the off stump. It was exactly what I
was waiting for and I swivelled back and hit him over midwicket for six. The moment the ball hit my
bat I knew it was going the distance.
In his next over I played one of my favourite shots of the World Cup. I was hoping Caddick would
over-compensate and bowl a fuller delivery, which he did. It wasn’t a bad ball but I managed to play
an off drive on the up, bisecting mid off and the bowler for four. The timing and impact felt
wonderful. I hit two more boundaries in the same over and we raced to 75 off just eleven overs.
It was a dream start in a very big game and it took a great spell from Andrew Flintoff to bring
England back into the match. He conceded just 15 off his ten overs and picked up two wickets. He
caught and bowled Sehwag for 23 and then had me caught by Collingwood at point for 50. It was an
extraordinary spell that undid our good start. At this point Yuvraj was getting increasingly restless in
the dressing room and I remember saying to him that it had to be his day. It was now his responsibility
to finish the innings off with a flourish and make sure that we did not squander the early advantage.
Yuvraj and Rahul went on to bat beautifully to take us to 250 at the end of our innings, but we still felt
we were 20 runs short.
The England innings started well for us with an incredible piece of fielding by Mohammad Kaif.
Nick Knight, the left-handed opening batsman, had played the ball off the back foot and was running a
quick single when Kaif swooped in from cover to pick up the ball and dived full-length to break the
wicket. England were 6–1 and we had an early breakthrough. It was an excellent piece of athleticism
from one of our best fielders.
We picked up Marcus Trescothick, the other opener, when he mistimed a pull off Zaheer and ended
up giving me an easy catch at backward square. It was then that Ashish Nehra took over. It was easily
the best I have seen Ashish bowl and he looked a man possessed that night in Durban. He was getting
the ball to move both ways and was bowling at speeds between 140 and 145 kph, making it extremely
difficult for the England batsmen to negotiate his pace and swing. It must be one of the best spells of
fast bowling by an Indian bowler in a limited-over international. By the thirtieth over England were
eight wickets down with more than 140 runs still required. Rahul, who was keeping wicket in that
tournament, and Sehwag took some good catches off Ashish’s bowling and the whole team was fired
up. We could sense we were knocking on the door of the Super Six stage.
India eventually won the match by 82 runs. It was now a question of sustaining the momentum for
the rest of the tournament. This time there were great celebrations back home and India were suddenly
the team to beat in the competition. While Durban had set us on course, our next match against
Pakistan was just massive. It was one of the most high-pressure cricket matches I have played in and
had enormous significance for our fans back home. Without doubt it was the match of the World Cup.

Battlefield Centurion
The first time I heard people talking about the India–Pakistan fixture at Centurion Park on 1 March
2003 was exactly a year earlier, when some of my friends had been discussing it with great
excitement. It was always going to be a huge game for both teams. The intensity was such that I could
not sleep properly for three nights before the game. If there was ever a match we wanted to win, it was
this one. The nation would brook no failure and for many of our fans this was the true final. It really
did not matter to them what happened in the rest of the tournament, as long as we managed to beat
Pakistan at Centurion.
The ground was buzzing hours before the match. It was sport at its best. This is why I played
cricket, to be out in the middle for my team, on the world’s biggest cricketing stage, against India’s
arch rival. Listening to the national anthem and singing the words gave me goose bumps.
Pakistan batted first after winning the toss and put together a very good score. Saeed Anwar held the
innings together and made a very important hundred for his team. Their total of 273 was at least 20
runs more than we wanted to chase. As we were walking off the pitch, Sourav asked me if we should
hold a brief team meeting. I said there was no need. Everybody knew what to do and it was now time
to go out there and do the job.
During the break I hardly spoke to anyone at all. Nor did I eat much. In fact, for most of the time I
had my headphones on and listened to music, trying to work myself into the right frame of mind. I just
had a big bowl of ice cream and a banana to give myself some energy and asked one of the players to
let me know as soon as the umpires had walked out to the middle. When they were in position, I
picked up my bat and went out to start the run chase.
Generally it was Sehwag who took first strike, but this was a day with a difference. On the way out I
told him that I would take strike and said that we needed to play out the initial burst from the
Pakistani fast bowlers before we started attacking. Needless to say, Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis and
Shoaib Akhtar were capable of doing a lot of early damage.
That’s not how it turned out, however. In the very first over of our innings, I drove Wasim to the
cover boundary. Then I took a single off the next ball and Sehwag scored a boundary off the final
delivery. Shoaib Akhtar bowled the second over and in many ways it turned out to be the defining over
of the match. His first ball to me was a wide. The next ball I played watchfully. I scored a single off
the third ball and then he bowled another wide to Sehwag, which also allowed us to go through for a
single. It was his sixth ball that allowed me to go after him. It was short and wide. I sighted the ball
early and within a fraction of a second had made up my mind to go over third man. It wasn’t exactly
the upper cut but more of a hard slash over the third-man fielder that sailed over the boundary. Trying
to compensate for the short ball, Shoaib bowled the next one on a length on the off stump and I
shuffled across and flicked him behind square for four.
It was a dream start. We had shed our initial inhibition and had started to attack. Having already
scored 10 off his last two balls, I was intent on playing the final ball of the over cautiously, so I just
punched it back towards mid on. It was a defensive stroke, but the timing was such that it sped across
the turf to the long-on boundary. We had scored 18 off the over.
Pakistan were obviously feeling the pressure when Waqar came on to bowl in the fourth over,
giving Shoaib a break after one disastrous over. Sehwag launched Waqar’s first ball for six over third
man and we attacked him straight away. We were now egging each other on and were speaking to each
other loudly in Hindi, which the Pakistanis could understand, of course. Our body language had turned
aggressive and when I finished off the Waqar over with another four we were firmly in control. We

had not allowed the bowlers to settle down and had seized the advantage. It was the best early assault
against Pakistan that I had been involved in and it could not have come at a more important time. We
reached 50 in just five overs and the target of 273 was no longer the huge mountain it had seemed at
the start of our innings.
As with most India–Pakistan matches, however, there had to be a shift in momentum and against
the run of play Pakistan picked up two wickets in Waqar’s next over – first Sehwag and then Sourav
with the very next ball. Pakistan were back in the match. Mohammad Kaif came in next and it was
important for us to put together a partnership and also not to get bogged down. Kaif played well and
ran hard between the wickets to make sure I had as much of the strike as possible. The run rate had not
dipped and I reached my fifty with a scoring rate of over 150 for the innings.
This innings must rank as one of the best I have played because of the immense pressure it was
played under. Each boundary brought me an ovation from the raucous crowd. Wearing the tricolour on
my helmet on sport’s biggest stage against the nation’s premier opposition while being watched by
close to a billion fans – what more could I have asked for? I just had to bat Pakistan out of the game.
It was in my seventies that I started cramping up. I received some treatment but refused to have a
runner as I have always been uncomfortable with someone else running for me. My concentration was
affected and much as I would have liked to power on, it wasn’t possible. I eventually got out to a short
ball from Shoaib Akhtar for 98. In that physical state I found it difficult to get up on my toes to keep
the rising ball down. I walked back to a standing ovation.
Importantly, we still had a deficit of 96 runs and my innings would have little value if we lost a
couple of quick wickets. There was no need to fear, as Rahul and Yuvraj took control and finished the
match with almost five overs to spare. They both made half-centuries and India had won a famous
contest, continuing our run of success against Pakistan in World Cups.
I felt very proud when I went out to receive the Man of the Match award, a watch. It was one for all
our passionate fans back home. I called a number of my friends in India and was told that the country
had erupted in celebrations. We were glad we could give our people such a moment to cherish.
Nobody wanted to call a halt to the celebrations in the dressing room, until finally the team decided
to go out for something to eat, as we were all starving. It was close to midnight and we ended up going
to a roadside stall for Chinese food. My friends Sunil Harshe and Sanjay Narang, there to cheer on the
Indian team, also came along, and it was over our dinner of noodles that I decided to give Sanjay my
Man of the Match watch to take back to Mumbai.
Some time later, after we had finished dinner and were on our way back to the hotel, Sanjay
panicked. He told me that he had left the watch at the Chinese food stall. At first I thought he was
joking, but he wasn’t and he said he would never joke about something as precious as a World Cup
Man of the Match award. He immediately called the stall and told them he had left his Adidas bag
behind, saying that it contained his shoes rather than a gold watch. Then we rushed back and, to our
enormous relief, an elderly lady handed over the bag with a smile.

The road to the final
Our next three matches were against Kenya, Sri Lanka and New Zealand and we won them all
convincingly. India were playing fantastic cricket and we had started to believe that we could give
Australia a run if we made the final. Here I am a bit embarrassed to reveal a very personal secret
relating to the Sri Lanka match. On the eve of the match I had a bad stomach and was feeling
dehydrated. This happened because I had not yet fully recovered from the cramp I had suffered while

playing Pakistan and as a result had had a lot of isotonic drinks. I also added a teaspoon of salt to the
energy drinks, thinking it would help the recovery, and that caused a tummy upset. In fact, the
situation was so bad that I had to bat with tissues inside my underwear. I even had to go back to the
dressing room during one of the drinks breaks and was feeling extremely uncomfortable in the middle.
I somehow scored 97, but batting with stomach cramps wasn’t a pleasant experience. I was pushing
myself to the limits of endurance and in the end I was glad that the effort paid off.
India were now in the semi-final and we were drawn to play Kenya, who had caused a stir by
beating a few of the top-ranked teams. In fact, during the match between Kenya and Sri Lanka, which
we watched in the games room in our hotel, a rather odd thing happened. Every time we said
something good about a Sri Lankan player, the player got out. It was strange and in no time Kenya had
caused a huge upset.
We played our semi-final against Kenya at Durban and managed to win the match comfortably.
Sourav and I had a very good partnership and the team managed 270 in our fifty overs before bowling
the Kenyans out for 179. We were in the World Cup final, with eight straight wins behind us. The
defeat to Australia in the qualifying rounds seemed a lifetime away. Now we were playing them in the
final and we were convinced we had the team to stop them from winning back-to-back world titles.

So near and yet so far
Up till then, all of the players in the team had only watched others take part in a World Cup final. Now
it was our turn. The excitement back home was extraordinary and a huge number of people had come
to South Africa to cheer on the team. We had peaked at the right time and were playing some really
good cricket. Naturally we were all determined to give our best in the final but perhaps we got
ourselves too wound up. The evening before the final the team decided to spend some time in the pool.
To our surprise, the water was freezing but that did not stop us from jumping in together. I didn’t
sleep well that night.
When we got to the ground the next morning, we immediately went over to take a look at the
surface. It was apparent to us all that there was moisture in the pitch and, given it was a day game, the
fast bowlers were sure to get some early assistance. It would not be a bad idea to field first if we won
the toss. That’s what we did, but the decision turned out to be a disaster, with Ricky Ponting playing
one of the best one-day innings of all time, making 140. Australia scored a mammoth 359 in their fifty
overs and had almost batted us out of the game.
In hindsight, I would still have opted to field. It was because we could not keep a lid on our
excitement that we lost the plot early on. Zaheer conceded 15 runs in the first over and though we still
felt we could make a comeback after that one bad over, it just didn’t happen. Towards the concluding
stages of their innings, every big shot that Ponting played made our task that much more difficult. In a
final, every run scored after the total passes 300 is worth double and 358 was an intimidating target
against a fantastic Australian bowling attack. In the team discussion at the interval we reckoned that
we needed to hit one boundary every over and then score the remaining 160 runs in 250 balls. It was
an attempt to be positive, as there was no other option left to us at that point.
I took first strike again and managed to score a four with a mistimed pull off McGrath. When I
attempted a second pull shot I got a top edge and felt utterly dejected to see McGrath settle down
under the ball to take the catch. In situations like those you can only pray that the ball falls in no
man’s land or that the fielder makes a mistake. It was not to be and I was on my way to the pavilion.
While walking back, I kept asking myself why on earth I had played that shot. Maybe I should have

given myself two or three overs to settle down, but the pressure of the chase was such that attack
seemed the only option.
In the middle of the innings there was some light drizzle and it turned really dark. My thoughts
went back to the South Africa series in January 1997 when rain had denied us victory. This time I was
praying for rain and hoping that the match would be washed out, forcing a re-match the next day. We
were not so lucky and were eventually all out for 234.
At the presentation it was difficult to watch the Australians celebrate while our own camp was
feeling the pain of defeat. When my name was called to collect the Man of the Tournament award for
the 673 runs I had scored, it didn’t give me much excitement. I am not suggesting that I did not feel
honoured or proud, but the feeling was overshadowed by the loss. Now we would have to wait four
years before we could have another crack at the World Cup.
In my disappointment, I had not even noticed that the bat I was presented with as the Man of the
Tournament was made of gold and I just stuffed it in my kitbag and checked it in as luggage on the
way back. Only when people asked to see the bat after we landed in Mumbai did I realize it was gold
and had been specially crafted. All I did on the flight back was sleep. Most of the players were still
upset and were in no mood to talk. It would take a long time to get over the disappointment.
Looking back, the 2003 World Cup remains a bitter-sweet memory. We played some excellent
cricket as a team and I contributed well in almost all of the matches – but not in the final. Beating
England and Pakistan were unforgettable high points, but the World Cup trophy was still eluding me.
India in the 2003 World Cup
7th match. India v Netherlands at Paarl. 12 February 2003
India 204 (48.5/50 ov); Netherlands 136 (48.1/50 ov)
India won by 68 runs
11th match. Australia v India at Centurion. 15 February 2003
India 125 (41.4/50 ov); Australia 128–1 (22.2/50 ov)
Australia won by 9 wickets (with 166 balls remaining)
17th match. Zimbabwe v India at Harare. 19 February 2003
India 255–7 (50/50 ov); Zimbabwe 172 (44.4/50 ov)
India won by 83 runs
25th match. India v Namibia at Pietermaritzburg. 23 February 2003
India 311–2 (50/50 ov); Namibia 130 (42.3/50 ov)
India won by 181 runs
30th match. England v India at Durban. 26 February 2003
India 250–9 (50/50 ov); England 168 (45.3/50 ov)
India won by 82 runs
36th match. India v Pakistan at Centurion. 1 March 2003
Pakistan 273–7 (50/50 ov); India 276–4 (45.4/50 ov)
India won by 6 wickets (with 26 balls remaining)
2nd super. India v Kenya at Cape Town. 7 March 2003

Kenya 225–6 (50/50 ov); India 226–4 (47.5/50 ov)
India won by 6 wickets (with 13 balls remaining)
4th super. India v Sri Lanka at Johannesburg. 10 March 2003
India 292–6 (50/50 ov); Sri Lanka 109 (23/50 ov)
India won by 183 runs
7th super. India v New Zealand at Centurion. 14 March 2003
New Zealand 146 (45.1/50 ov); India 150–3 (40.4/50 ov)
India won by 7 wickets (with 56 balls remaining)
2nd semi-final. India v Kenya at Durban. 20 March 2003
India 270–4 (50/50 ov); Kenya 179 (46.2/50 ov)
India won by 91 runs
Final. Australia v India at Johannesburg. 23 March 2003
Australia 359–2 (50/50 ov); India 234 (39.2/50 ov)
Australia won by 125 runs
