WINDING DOWN

After surgery on my left hand in London in July 2013, I worked hard on getting back to full fitness. It
was painful and time-consuming and it was a great relief to be able to resume practice by the end of
August, some weeks ahead of the Champions League Twenty20. However, the period of recuperation
was never boring. When I’d got back from England my friends Atul Ranade, Faisal Momen and I
decided to start cycling as a part of my cardio exercise. Atul was already cycling on alternate days to
stay fit, and Faisal decided to join in, making the whole thing more enjoyable. On the first day, after
cycling for nearly forty minutes in the early morning, we decided to attempt the really steep incline
that leads to the Mount Mary Church in Bandra. Faisal opted out when he saw the steepness of the
slope, but Atul and I embarked on the climb. It was a difficult one, and by the time we reached the top
we were both breathing heavily. I suggested repeating it, and Atul and I tried going up again. On the
second attempt, I overtook Atul halfway up, but when I got to the top I started feeling seriously giddy.
I tried drinking some water and did a few stretching exercises, but things did not improve and, by the
time Atul had reached the top too, I was seeing white in front of my eyes and was forced to sit down
on a divider on the road with my arms stretched out. In panic, Atul even started fanning me with a
huge leaf that he plucked from a nearby tree! Things did not improve and I soon realized that what I
really needed was to lie down to get the blood circulation back to my brain. When I told Atul, he saw
an open-top jeep standing next to the church and, in desperation, suggested I lie down in it. That’s
when I spotted a rickshaw and asked Atul to persuade the driver to allow me to lie on the back seat for
a while. The driver was shocked to see me in that state, to say the least. As Atul stood outside
explaining to him what had happened, I got onto the seat and lay flat for a good five minutes. Never in
my life had I imagined I’d be doing such a thing just a few minutes from my house, at 6 a.m.! When I
was feeling a little better we thanked the rickshaw driver profusely for his help, paid him a hundred
rupees and started slowly cycling back down the hill. By now Faisal, at the foot of the hill, was getting
impatient, because he thought we must be drinking tea at the top, and he was stunned to hear what had
happened. However, none of this deterred me from continuing with my training ahead of what turned
out to be my last few months in international cricket.
I had announced my retirement from the IPL in May 2013 and this was to be my last Champions
League. To my great satisfaction, the Mumbai Indians won the trophy, beating Rajasthan Royals in the
final, and it meant my team had won both the IPL and the Champions League in my last season as a
player. We had gelled well as a team and Rohit Sharma did well as captain.
It was during the Champions League campaign that, for the first time in my career, I found I had to
force myself to go to the gym. It was also the first time in my career that I didn’t feel bad about
missing a session. Now, it wasn’t as if I hit the gym every day of my career. I have always tended to
train in bursts, before taking a break for a few days. But this was the first time that I just did not feel
like pushing myself. I was also taking far longer to recover from injuries and was feeling a number of

aches and pains.
India’s next scheduled Tests were in South Africa in December 2013 and that’s where I was
expecting to play my 200th Test match. After that, there was an away series in New Zealand in early
2014 and I was looking forward to both tours. A number of my friends had discussed the 200th Test
match with me and made plans to travel to South Africa to watch me reach this milestone. In fact, I
had to keep reminding Ajit to book his tickets. But then the BCCI announced that there would be a
two-Test home series against the West Indies at the beginning of November 2013 and I had to rethink
my plans. It was then, and I don’t know exactly how and when, that the thought of retirement first
came to me. I started to wonder whether those two Tests against the West Indies should be my last.
I remember discussing it with Anjali and Ajit. We were sitting in the first-floor lounge of my house
when I told them that I was thinking about retiring after the West Indies series. The second Test would
be my 200th and I would not have another opportunity to retire on home soil till the end of 2014 and I
wasn’t sure if I could battle with injuries for that long. There was no point in dragging things out if my
heart wasn’t in it.
Anjali and Ajit were both fully supportive and Anjali said that she was behind me in anything that I
decided. She just wanted me to be sure that I wouldn’t regret the decision a few months down the line.
Ajit agreed that the timing was right and that it was a good decision to retire in India. Playing my final
Test away from home just wouldn’t be the same.
Once I had made up my mind, I decided to ask the BCCI if they would consider allotting the second
Test to Mumbai. It would mean that I would play my last series in front of my home crowd and above
all I would get my mother to watch me for the first time in my life. My mother had never watched me
play live and this was something I really wanted to do for her. I had begun my first-class career in
Mumbai in 1987 and playing my last Test at the Wankhede would mean I had completed the circle. It
was as if I was being told from above that this was an opportunity to thank cricket. There would be no
better occasion to pay my respects to the game than in a farewell Test match in Mumbai.
When I talked through the decision with my friend and manager Vinod Naidu and our close friend
Aparna Santhanam, it turned out to be a memorable and magical evening. I opened a bottle of
champagne and we toasted the game of cricket and all the years gone by. There was no sense of gloom
or dejection or talk of anything ending. Instead, there was a sense of joy, of anticipation and
fulfilment. We laughed and reminisced about twenty-four years on the cricket field and chatted
happily about the upcoming series. It all convinced me that I had taken the right decision. The timing
was perfect. It was a call made from the heart. I wasn’t prepared to let my mind interfere in the
decision because the mind has a habit of asking too many awkward questions. I had not given a
thought to what I would do after retirement. I was simply sure that this was the best time to stop.
It was a day later, on the morning of 10 October 2013, that I called BCCI President N Srinivasan to
communicate my decision to retire. He said that while the BCCI would always want me to continue
for as long as I wanted, they would also back me on any decision. He was clear that retirement was
entirely my call. Then I raised the question of allotting my last Test match to Mumbai and he
promised to look into the matter. Allotting a Test match to a city based on a request from a player was
a rare and touching gesture.
Before speaking to the BCCI president, I had informed my family that I was planning to retire. Sara
asked me if I was retiring from all forms of cricket. I realized she was feeling emotional about the
decision. It was natural, but she did her best to conceal it. Arjun was in South Africa at the time and I
knew that telling him wouldn’t be easy. I was aware of just how much my cricket meant to him. Arjun
and I used to laugh about retirement and I often joked that the next series would have to be my last as

I was getting so old. This time it wasn’t a joke.
On the morning of 10 October, I called Arjun in South Africa and asked him to go to a room where
he would be alone as I wanted to tell him something very important. I rang him back after a few
minutes and told him that the two Tests against the West Indies in November would be my last. There
was complete silence at the other end, so much so that I had to ask if he was still on the line. He said
he was but he wasn’t able to say anything else and actually hung up on me. I knew he was crying.
There was a lump in my throat. I was suddenly feeling a sense of emptiness and needed a few minutes
to regain my composure. He called me back ten minutes later and chatted away about what he was up
to in South Africa, but my retirement was not mentioned again. It was his way of coping with the
news.
The decision was made public that afternoon and it was an emotional time for my family. I felt
remarkably calm, though, because I was convinced I had made the right call at the right time. Soon
after the news broke, Anjali suggested to me that she should go and fetch Sara from school. On the
way back, Anjali read Sara the kind messages she had received on her phone, telling her they were
indicative of what the world thought about her baba. When Sara got home, she ran up to me and,
without saying a word, just hugged me tight. This time I couldn’t help getting emotional too. I was a
happy father. My children mean the world to me and it touched me to know that they were proud of
what I had achieved. I hoped it also meant that they understood why I had had to go away for such
long periods when they were growing up.
By now a crowd had started to build outside the house and I was overwhelmed at the outpouring of
emotion. I received a huge number of text messages and calls and made plenty myself. Despite trying
my best to speak to every person who played a key role in my life, I missed out on calling many. I am
sure they will all understand how much I value their contribution and that the omission was totally
unintentional.
I continued sending messages late into the night, but that is not to suggest I was having trouble
sleeping again. On the contrary, I slept very well and was very much at peace with myself. On the
other hand, I was still an active cricketer. I wasn’t prepared to lead a retired cricketer’s life just yet
and I was looking forward to resuming practice the next day and doing my best for Mumbai and India
in the month I had left.

Getting ready for the West Indies
My practice sessions following the announcement were very interesting. The next morning I went to
the Mumbai Cricket Association’s Bandra facility to practise and the groundsmen came over to see
me. They all thanked me for my contribution to cricket, when it should have been me thanking them
for all they had done for me. Some became quite emotional and said they would miss me now that I
wouldn’t be turning up to practise any more. I reminded them that I hadn’t retired quite yet, and in any
case I would still come and practise after I’d retired – there was no way I was going to leave them in
peace!
The evening before my last session at the MCA, I called the supervisor Ajay Desai and asked him to
inform all the groundsmen and helpers that I would like to meet them personally the next morning. It
was my way of recognizing everything they had done for me and thanking them for their contribution
to my career. I carried tokens of appreciation for them and it was deeply touching to see them all
waiting patiently for me. As I thanked them for their help and support, some hugged me and a few had
tears in their eyes. It was a very moving moment and I felt humbled. The best part, however, was yet

to come. When I’d finished, I was expecting the groundsmen to resume their normal duties. However,
to my surprise they announced that on this occasion they weren’t going to leave me. Instead, they all
stood there while I went through my routine. Having spent a lifetime with the groundsmen in Mumbai,
I must say I was overwhelmed at the gesture.
It was a similar story with the groundsmen at the Wankhede. I have known these men for years and
many watched me grow up as a cricketer. Once again I brought tokens of appreciation for all of them
and we took a group photograph to mark the occasion. I will always remember the way they treated
me.
It was during my early-morning training sessions at the Wankhede that I met up with the MCA
officials and told them about the ramp I required for my mother. I did not want to leave a single thing
to chance and also checked out the box allocated to my family. In fact, it was when I was doing the
initial recce that I realized that my mother would find it difficult. She is not in the best of health and it
would have been difficult getting her up to the box from the car. That’s when we decided that she
should sit in the president’s box instead and for safety I had also booked a room for her at the Garware
Pavilion in case she felt tired and wanted to rest.
Having checked the route the wheelchair would have to take from the car to the ramp and finally to
the president’s box, and being fully convinced that it could all be done, I went ahead with the plan of
formally inviting her. Being able to do this thing for my mother made the retirement Test match all
the more special.

The last Ranji match
When I first met my team-mates from the Mumbai Ranji Trophy team after the announcement, a lot
of them came up and asked me why I had decided to retire when I could have carried on for a while. It
was an encouraging reaction and it felt good to see the faith they continued to have in me.
The last Ranji Trophy game I played for Mumbai was in Lahli against Haryana, which is a state just
north of Delhi, and it turned out to be quite an experience. Before travelling to Lahli, I spoke with
Anirudh Chaudhry, who was our manager in England in 2011, and his father Ranbir Singh Mahendra,
who was our manager in Australia in 1991–92, at the Haryana Cricket Association. Anirudh had made
special arrangements to put some of us up in the Chief Minister’s guest house, which he said was a
very relaxing place to stay. He had also arranged for extra security in order to make us feel
comfortable.
We flew to Delhi on our way to Lahli and when we landed we were told by Anirudh that we should
have lunch at the ITC Maurya hotel while he made the final arrangements. There was a pleasant
surprise awaiting me. As soon as we stepped into the lobby the lights were dimmed and I was
accorded a red-carpet welcome by the general manager Anil Chadha, with all the employees standing
in line and throwing rose petals at me. It was a deeply touching gesture.
After lunch we left for Lahli. It took us approximately two and a half hours to drive to the guest
house, but all along the route people were waving banners and posters and all sorts of things, making
it a very memorable journey. When we finally reached the guest house, I was surprised to see the
butler who had been with me in Delhi already stationed there to take care of us! He informed us that
four of them had travelled from Delhi at Anirudh’s request and would be looking after us all the way
through the match.
At Lahli I felt like trying some local food and asked the manager to recommend some authentic
local cuisine. The manager did not say anything in response and left the room, but then he apologized

to Zaheer and informed him that Anirudh had left strict instructions about what should be served to us.
He had made it clear that every day breakfast, dinner and snacks would come from the ITC Maurya in
Delhi and that nothing else should be served, to avoid any risks. I must say it really was a maharajastyle outing. The Haryana Cricket Association had gone out of their way to spoil us.
The stadium was forty minutes away from the guest house but the roads were nearly empty and it
was never a problem reaching the ground in the morning. It was a beautiful arena and the conditions
were tailor-made for fast bowling. The outfield was a little soft to start with because of the dampness
and it would be a good test of my fitness ahead of the West Indies series. Soft outfields can put
pressure on calves and hamstrings and if I had no trouble on this outfield, I would be fine at Eden
Gardens or the Wankhede, the venues for my 199th and 200th Test matches.
Mumbai’s first Ranji match of the season, which was also my last, turned out to be fascinating. A
large crowd had come along and the build-up to the four-day game was unprecedented. Media from
India and the rest of the cricket-playing world had descended on the small town of Lahli and while the
police tried their best to keep them at a distance, I knew that my every move was followed and every
practice session filmed.
In the first innings I was out bowled for five to a ball that jumped a little and ricocheted off my
elbow onto the stumps. It was a rather disappointing dismissal after all the build-up. At Lahli, most
matches are low-scoring and, sure enough, our reply to their first-innings total of 134 was only two
runs more. It was a keenly contested match and in our second innings we were set 240 to win, which in
a way was more like 280 because of the slow outfield.
I had a brief chat with my team-mates in the innings break and emphasized to them the need to be
aggressive after the opposition had bowled close to fifty overs, which would be approximately around
teatime. On a pitch offering assistance to the fast bowlers, that was the best time for batsmen to cash
in and score quickly, because that was when the ball would be older and the opposition bowlers tired.
Better to take a few chances then than wait for the morning, when the bowlers would start fresh and
the new ball would also be due.
Dhawal Kulkarni, the fast-medium bowler, and I had a really good partnership towards the end of
the day’s play and I kept telling him that he needed to hang in there at any cost. There wasn’t much
batting left after him and a new batsman would find it difficult on the greenish pitch. Dhawal batted
extremely well and showed great courage. He was hit on the helmet a couple of times but never got
rattled or gave up. By the end of the day we needed 39 runs to win, with four wickets left.
It was a 9 a.m. start on the last day and it was important to make the right call with the roller.
Having seen the wicket, I told Zaheer, our captain, that the grass was dry at the top but at the bottom it
was still wet. It still needed some sun to dry out completely. If we took the heavy roller the wetness
would spread to the top and the pitch would turn damp. I suggested that we should not use a roller but
just leave the surface as it was, because all that was required was 39 runs, which wouldn’t take more
than an hour or so to get.
Again Dhawal batted well and showed great resilience and we managed to knock off the runs in an
hour or so. His contribution of 16 was critical because on that surface we could easily have lost the
last four wickets for ten runs. I was pleased to remain unbeaten on 79 in my final Ranji outing. It was
a satisfying victory and a good way for Mumbai to start their Ranji Trophy campaign.
At the end of the game, the Haryana team gave me a guard of honour and my own team-mates
chaired me off the ground on their shoulders. While the gesture was touching, it’s always slightly
concerning being carried on the shoulders of team-mates. There’s a good chance of being dropped and
with two Test matches still to play, it wouldn’t have been a great way to get injured. The Mumbai

team had also arranged for a send-off in the room adjoining our dressing room, which was particularly
touching. The Mumbai Cricket Association secretary Nitin Dalal was also there and a cake was cut in
my honour and all the players said a few words. A number of them turned emotional as they spoke,
and some had tears in their eyes. It was all very moving.
That wasn’t the only surprise at Lahli. Unbeknown to me, Anirudh had invited a few of my closest
friends – Sameer Dighe, Faisal Momen and Jagdish Chavan – to watch the game. He had sent them
tickets himself and also arranged for their accommodation. On the evening of the first day of the
game, the local manager came up to me and said there was someone waiting to take a picture and it
wouldn’t take more than a minute. I stepped outside, ready to pose, only to see my friends grinning at
me. It was a great feeling to see them in Lahli. They have all been by my side through good and bad
and it was a pleasant surprise to have them around me for my last domestic game.
Winning that Ranji Trophy match meant I had won all my final matches in every format of the
game so far. It was a record I was extremely proud of and I hoped I would be able to keep it intact in
my final series for India. Lahli had served as good preparation. Now I was looking forward to my
penultimate Test match in Kolkata.

Farewell Eden Gardens
Having relaxed for a couple of days at home in Mumbai, and having visited the temples in Mumbai
and Goa that I always visit to seek the blessings of God, I arrived in Kolkata on the evening of 3
November 2013. As always, Dwarkanath and Kalpa Sanzgiri had sent me ladoos (a type of Indian
sweet) on the eve of the series to wish me luck. There was a mini welcome ceremony arranged by the
Cricket Association of Bengal at the airport and there were a lot of people inside the terminal to
receive me. In fact, the police were finding it very difficult to control the crowd and I had to hurry into
the lounge to give them time to calm things down.
The situation showed no signs of improving in the next half an hour and I realized that the longer I
waited, the more difficult it would be for us to leave the airport. I called the police and informed them
I had to leave for the hotel as soon as possible. A large number of security personnel accompanied me
to the car while the crowd showered me with rose petals. The affection was overwhelming. Kolkata
has always been a city that loves its cricket and the people there have always embraced me with
warmth. I was delighted that the 199th Test match was being played at Eden Gardens, one of the best
cricket grounds in the world when it comes to atmosphere.
During my first two days in Kolkata, Pintu (Raghunath Basak) gave me a massage for almost two
hours each day to help me relax and my friend Samar Paul brought me food from home and we all had
dinner in my room with Virat, Rohit, Ajinkya and Pragyan Ojha. I have known Samarda from 1991
and was first introduced to him by Dilip Vengsarkar. Every visit to Kolkata has been made special by
the food that Samarda has kindly brought from home. Pintu too has been a constant in Kolkata from
1994, and it has been a routine that he would give me a massage and we would then end up having
dinner in my room. Also, Joydeep Mukherjee would always take me to the Kali temple whenever I
went to Kolkata, visits I have always looked forward to.
When I arrived at the ground on the morning of 4 November, I was very surprised by what was there
to greet me. A wax statue of me was standing right outside the dressing room and the walls were
covered with pictures of me from different stages of my career.
I tried to follow my normal pre-match routines as far as that was possible. I batted for a while in the
nets, but I was fairly cautious while playing football with the rest of the boys, because the last thing I

wanted to do was get injured. Afterwards we went back to the hotel and I went to the gym and later
relaxed in my room watching movies and listening to music. It was all very normal. I ate dinner with
my team-mates and was in a very good frame of mind.
Since the retirement announcement every news channel had been talking about my career and I tried
to cocoon myself from it all as much as possible. I did see some of the coverage, however, and
couldn’t help thinking about how many years had gone by since my debut. It was pleasing to be
reminded of everything I had been able to achieve in my career, but I still had a job to do and I didn’t
want to let myself get distracted. I did not want to retire mentally before I finally called it a day at the
end of the second Test in Mumbai.

The 199th Test
On 6 November 2013, the West Indies won the toss and decided to bat first. There was a sizeable
crowd at Eden Gardens on the first morning. Making a rare exception to her routine of praying at
home, Anjali had come to see the match and it was a real surprise for me to see her and Arjun in the
stands. When I had spoken to her the night before, I had sensed that something was cooking but didn’t
know exactly what. It turned out she had spoken with my friend and co-writer Boria Majumdar and
planned the visit as a surprise. I became aware of her presence only when an announcement was made
that she was in the stands. I must say it was a delight to see them both when we met up at the end of
the day’s play.
This is what Anjali told me about making that special trip to Kolkata. It was a ritual with us that she
would wish me well on the eve of a Test series. Before leaving for Kolkata, I had said to Anjali that it
would be the last time she would have to do so. Anjali told me later that as I left for the airport with
Ajit, who always dropped me off whenever I travelled, she could not control her tears. She had to go to
meet Arjun’s cricket coaches, who had come from England, at the Waterstones Club, which was close
to the airport, and so she was in a car behind me for most of the way, with tears rolling down her
cheeks. Even when she reached the club, she just could not control her emotions and burst into tears
when she met up with Arjun’s coaches. The poor chaps did not understand why coming to see them
had made her cry! That’s when she told them the real reason and then they insisted on accompanying
her to Kolkata to watch me play.
We had bowled the West Indies out for 234 on the first day and I was keen to do well when I went
out to bat on the morning of day two. I had played a couple of good shots when I fell to an lbw
decision I wasn’t very happy with. These things are part of the game, of course, but it seemed to me
that the ball from the off-spinner Shane Shillingford was going over the stumps. It was frustrating, but
there was nothing I could do about it. Replays showed the ball was going at least six inches over the
stumps.
Having lost a few quick wickets, we were under pressure when Rohit Sharma and Ashwin started a
rebuilding act. Rohit played spectacularly on debut and Ashwin was the perfect foil. Both got
hundreds and their partnership of 280 was instrumental in winning us the Test. It had taken the wind
out of the West Indies’ sails. Mohammed Shami, another debutant, finished the job in the second
innings with an excellent spell of reverse-swing bowling, taking five wickets to add to his four in the
first innings. He was getting the ball to move appreciably and has a bright career ahead.
We won the match by an innings and 51 runs in under three days. The awards ceremony turned into
a special occasion, with tricolour balloons released to commemorate my 199th Test match, and I left
Eden Gardens with some really pleasing memories.

Time to gather my thoughts
I decided to go back to Mumbai on the evening of 8 November to give myself more time at home
before my 200th Test match. At Kolkata airport on the way back, a huge crowd started to walk with
me everywhere I went. Luckily for me, there were eight armed commandos with me at the airport, as
otherwise things might have got a little out of hand. It was slightly disconcerting because there was no
way I could oblige the entire crowd with pictures and autographs and I asked the airport manager to
take me to the lounge as quickly as possible. We walked to the far end of the terminal past the security
check and it was only then that I saw it was a public lounge.
The crowd was continuing to follow me around and I asked the manager if we could go and sit in
another lounge instead. He said this was the only available option after the security checkpoint and he
would cordon off the area where I would be sitting. I wasn’t prepared to do this because I didn’t want
to give people the wrong message. It was not as if I wasn’t willing to meet them or sign autographs. I
have never refused to sign autographs, because I consider it my duty towards my fans, who have stood
by me throughout my careeer. However, if I did start to sign or pose for pictures, there was a risk that
it would become a serious security issue inside the lounge.
It was then that I advised the duty manager to check if the aircraft was ready, hoping that I could go
and sit in it. I was informed it was being cleaned but I thought it was still better to board it than to
keep the crowd at a distance. I went in and sat all by myself. Once inside, I posed for pictures with all
the cleaners and the crew that had brought the aircraft to Kolkata and who were still on board. I waited
patiently as the crew changed. Once the new crew had taken up their positions, I asked them to screen
off one side so that the incoming passengers wouldn’t start taking pictures, which might end up
delaying the flight. I was happy to sign autographs once we were airborne rather than inconveniencing
other passengers and delaying the journey. The crew agreed and I settled down in my seat.
Soon after take-off it hit me that I was travelling to play the last Test match of my career. It had all
come to an end very quickly. In no time I would have a microphone in my hand and would be expected
to speak to the world, to say something to all my fans and supporters about what I was feeling. It
would also be my last opportunity to thank the people who had stood by me over the years. And yet I
had not planned what I would say or exactly who I needed to thank. I knew I had to be careful, because
on a previous occasion I had had to make a similar speech and thought I had thanked everybody – until
the commentator Harsha Bhogle came to the rescue and whispered in my ear that I hadn’t mentioned
Anjali! Sitting on that plane from Kolkata, I realized that I had two hours when no one would call me
or speak to me and it was the ideal time to think about my speech. I took out my iPad and started to
make a note of all the people I needed to thank, going right back to the very beginning.
While I was doing so, I had to keep reminding myself that I still had ten days left in my career and
that I was going to enjoy every moment on the field. I had two innings left and wanted to leave my
fans with memories they would cherish. As the flight started its descent into Mumbai, I thought back
to the years gone by. It had been quite a journey.