A FOUR-MONTH HONEYMOON

The three-Test series in March 1998 was the first fully fledged home series against Australia of my
career. It generated a lot of hype and much of it was being built up as a contest between myself and
Shane Warne. It’s inevitable that there are times when battles between two individuals hog most of the
limelight. For example, Brian Lara versus Glenn McGrath, Ricky Ponting versus Courtney Walsh, or
even Tendulkar versus Lara, as had been the case in 1994. I always said that this series was a contest
between two teams and not two individuals, though in my heart of hearts I knew it was a very
important match-up against Warne. Shane was bowling beautifully and had just had a great series
against South Africa in Australia, taking twenty wickets in three Tests.
Knowing that I would soon be facing him, I studied Warne’s bowling in that series carefully. It
appeared to me that his biggest strength was the drift he managed to get, which meant that the
batsman was somewhat blinded by the delivery if he was batting with a traditional side-on stance.
Because of the extra drift, the ball would tend to go away from the vision of the batsman and it
became that much more difficult to negotiate the extra spin. As a result, I decided to open up my
stance a little to Warne and to stand slightly outside the leg stump. I also planned to play him more
from the crease and as late as possible. I hardly stepped out to him all series and, more often than not,
kept hitting him towards midwicket with a horizontal bat whenever he tried to extract extra spin from
leg stump or slightly outside. By playing from the crease and by using the horizontal bat, I reckoned I
had opened up the option of punishing him if he bowled short and could also play the cut shot on the
off side. While there was always the risk of a top edge, I was prepared to accept it to surprise Warne.
After all, he was Australia’s most potent weapon and I had to have a strategy against him.
Having worked on the theory, I now needed to practise against the kind of deliveries Warne would
use when under pressure. I started training in late January, with still a month to go before the series,
and asked for the best spinners available in Mumbai to bowl at me from round the wicket into the
rough outside leg stump. I was certain that’s what Warne would do if I succeeded in attacking him
when he bowled from over the wicket. All that practice in Mumbai against Sairaj Bahutule and Nilesh
Kulkarni, both of whom played for India against Australia in 2001, and subsequently in Chennai
against Laxman Sivaramakrishnan, now a respected television commentator who played for India in
the mid-1980s, proved immensely useful, and by the time the Australians arrived in India in February
1998 I felt ready to face Warne.

An early skirmish
The first game the Australians played was against Mumbai on 24 February. I was captaining Mumbai
and knew it was crucial to establish a psychological advantage over the visitors at the start of the tour.
The most important thing was to attack Warne. I had instructed all our batsmen to take Warne on

whenever he came on to bowl. I did not care if we lost wickets, but there was no way we would allow
Warne to settle into his groove and dictate terms.
When it was our turn to bat, Amit Pagnis, opening the batting for Mumbai, did exactly what we had
planned. Though we lost an early wicket in Sulakshan Kulkarni, Pagnis and I attacked Warne from the
start. While Pagnis hit Warne for four boundaries in two overs, I hit him for a six in his very first over
and continued to attack him right through the innings. His sixteen overs cost him 111 runs and that
was far more important than my own double hundred off 192 balls – though I was particularly pleased
with my effort because I had made a conscious attempt to dominate the bowling and it was my first
double in first-class cricket. Having conceded a lead of more than 100 in the first innings, the
Australians collapsed to 135 all out in their second innings, with Nilesh Kulkarni, who had first played
for India in 1996, running through half the side. We finished the match without losing a wicket in our
second innings, handing the Australians a ten-wicket defeat.
A crushing loss in the first tour game was the worst possible start for the world’s best team and was
more than we could have hoped for. We now needed to carry the momentum forward into the first Test
match in Chennai. Of course, I was well aware that the Australians had not played all their cards
against Mumbai. Even when we were attacking Shane Warne, not once did he bowl from round the
wicket into the rough outside leg stump. I was certain he would do so at the first available opportunity
in Chennai, and I even said as much in the post-match press conference in Mumbai. The series was
nicely set up.

First Test, Chennai, 6–10 March 1998
Having played a lot of cricket in Chennai, I knew that the physical preparation in the lead-up to a
Chennai Test has to be different from normal. You have to prepare your body for the heat and
humidity well in advance and I always did so at least thirty-six hours before the match by drinking a
lot more water than normal. The extra water intake was particularly important, because you lose so
much fluid during matches at the Chidambaram Stadium.
Nowadays, unlike in the late 1980s and 1990s, when there wasn’t much research about players’
diets and training schedules, cricket is much more sophisticated about such matters. There are
specialized dieticians who draw up charts of what players can or can’t eat. After long and arduous
batting stints, players take ice baths and drink specially prepared shakes to rehydrate the body and
replace lost energy. For example, I remember Paddy Upton, our high-performance trainer, asking me
to drink two glasses of a shake made of crushed dry fruits after a particularly draining innings at
Gwalior in 2010.
At Chennai, we won the toss and opted to bat first. It was an important toss to win, as the ball was
expected to turn in the fourth innings and we were playing three spinners in Anil Kumble, Rajesh
Chauhan and Venkatapathy Raju. Despite a good start, with the top three of Mongia, Sidhu and Dravid
all scoring fifties, we lost our way in the middle of the first innings and failed to push home the
advantage, getting bowled out for a modest 257. Batting at number four, I managed just four runs and
fell to Warne. I hit him for a boundary and then tried to repeat the shot, only to get an outside edge to
Mark Taylor at slip. I was extremely disappointed with myself for not playing myself in and was
determined to make amends in the second innings.
Our bowlers, in particular Kumble and Raju, did well to get the first eight Australian wickets for
201. It seemed we had a good chance of taking a first-innings lead, but we were frustrated when the
Australian wicketkeeper Ian Healy and off-spinner Gavin Robertson, the debutant, put together a very

good partnership. They added 96 runs between them, and Australia eventually gained a 71-run
advantage. It seemed a crucial lead and at a dinner organized by former BCCI president AC Muthiah,
Srinivas Venkataraghavan, a former India captain and leading off-spinner of the 1970s, said to me that
it would be very difficult for us to get back into the match. He said that he thought there wasn’t
enough time left in the game to make up the deficit, set a target and finally bowl Australia out to win
the match. I replied confidently that there was still plenty of time and that I was sure we would be able
to turn things round.
Before the start of our second innings I remember saying in the dressing room that it was the
responsibility of the batsmen to put their hands up and try to score 75 runs each for the team. You
don’t always need to set the bar really high and demand a hundred. I thought that scoring 75 in the
second innings at Chennai would be good enough to set up the match.
When Sidhu was out for an important 64, I walked out to bat at 115–2, in effect 44–2 after
deducting the deficit of 71 runs, and as on many occasions in my career I had Rahul Dravid for
company in the middle. I started out watchfully and was soon into my groove. As expected, Shane
Warne started to bowl round the wicket and I instantly took the attack to him and hit him over
midwicket. From an individual perspective it was a defining moment in the game. We couldn’t afford
to lose another wicket, but we also couldn’t go too much on the defensive.
Rahul and I added more than a hundred runs, to set up a strong platform. By the time Rahul was
dismissed for another well-played half-century, I felt in control. I went on the attack and scored at a
fair clip, hitting fours and sixes with regularity. Azhar gave me good support and we also added over a
hundred runs, at almost five runs an over, a potentially match-winning partnership.
When we declared, I was not out on 155, the first-innings lead had been nullified and we were in
with a great chance of winning the match, having set the Australians a target of 348 on a turning track.
It was certainly one of my better hundreds and what made the sensation sweeter was that we
proceeded to bowl the Australians out for 168, with Kumble taking four wickets, and we won the
match by 179 runs. It was a tremendous start and, to add to my delight, I was Man of the Match. I had
made up for getting out to Warne cheaply in the first innings of the match.
Importantly, we had performed as a unit and most of the senior members had played their parts to
perfection. Anil had taken eight wickets in the game while Navjot Sidhu, opening the batting, had
done a good job in both innings. He had attacked Warne from the start of our second innings and had
set the game up for the other batsmen. Rahul too batted well in each innings and pocketed a couple of
important catches at slip. We had shown good fighting spirit and that, more than anything, augured
well for the team for the second Test match at Eden Gardens in Kolkata later that month.

Second Test, Kolkata, 18–21 March 1998
If Chennai was a rollercoaster, we were in control in Kolkata from the start. Australia won the toss at
Eden Gardens but failed to press home an early advantage, losing four top-order wickets within the
first hour of play. Srinath bowled a fine opening spell to take three wickets and Sourav too chipped in
with the wicket of Mark Taylor. Despite a brief period of Australian resurgence under Steve Waugh
and Ricky Ponting, we kept our nerve and bowled them out for 233 in the first innings.
Our batsmen followed up with some big runs and for a rare occasion in Test cricket all first five
batsmen passed 75, with Azhar going on to score a hundred at his favourite venue. I scored 79 and
once again took the attack to Shane Warne, who went wicketless in his forty-two overs, conceding 147
runs. The plan against Warne was working and without his wickets the Australians were in trouble. I

remember one particular shot against Warne on day two. In my determination to attack him, I hadn’t
noticed that it was the last over before tea and I hit him for a big six over long on, which I normally
wouldn’t have risked so close to a break. It just goes to show how hard you had to concentrate to cope
with Warne.
We knew, of course, that the Australians were all excellent players, despite being at the receiving
end for the time being, and we knew that it was important to keep them under pressure throughout the
match. A champion team needs only a small window of opportunity to stage a fightback, something I
had learnt over the years. If the Australians were on the back foot, you couldn’t allow them the whiff
of an opportunity to stage a recovery. We needed to be ruthless and we were. Having scored 633 in our
first innings, we let Kumble and Srinath do the rest on a track that was offering variable bounce.
Australia collapsed for 181 in their second innings, giving us one of our biggest Test wins. More
importantly, we were 2–0 up in the three-Test series against the best team in the world and were justly
proud of the achievement.

Third Test, Bangalore, 25–28 March 1998
In the final match of the series our team included a teenaged debutant in off-spinner Harbhajan Singh.
I scored a big hundred in the first innings and once again we managed to put the Australian bowlers
under pressure. Though Warne picked up three wickets, he also went for a lot of runs. To his credit, he
was always in the game, despite being attacked. In fact, as I played out the last over of the first day
against him, I had to keep telling myself to concentrate till the very last ball was bowled. A true great,
Warne would not let you relax for a single delivery.
Mark Waugh batted brilliantly in the Australian first innings, scoring an unbeaten 153, and Michael
Kasprowicz, the fast bowler, picked up a five-wicket haul in our second innings to set up the match. I
was caught and bowled by Kasprowicz for 31, playing a ball early, and we collapsed for a paltry 169.
There was no doubt about it: Australia had played better than us in Bangalore and had shown what
they were made of. For our part, we were disappointed at not closing out the series on a winning note.
It was one of the most intense series I played in my career, and one of the most personally
successful. I had scored close to 450 runs at an average of 111. Weeks of rigorous practice had paid
off and it was a deeply satisfying feeling.

Pepsi triangular series, April 1998
The Test series was followed by a one-day tri-series, with Zimbabwe as the third team. Our first match
was against Australia at Kochi on 1 April, and it remains a match I have extremely fond memories of.
I was opening the batting again in one-day cricket by this stage but unfortunately got out early.
Luckily it did not matter, with Ajay Jadeja batting well in the middle order for a hundred and taking us
past 300.
Australia got off to a flier. Adam Gilchrist, the best wicketkeeper-batsman of our generation, went
after the bowling and they cruised to 100 in just twelve overs. It was apparent that if they played out
the full fifty overs they’d win the game. Midway through the innings, I was brought on to bowl and I
started bowling off-spin to the left-handers and leg-spin to the right-handers.
It’s one of those strange things, but for some reason sometimes a batsman just does not like the
sight of a particular bowler. In my case, I was never comfortable facing Hansie Cronje, who got me
out on a number of occasions with his medium pace. Even when I was in control against the likes of

Allan Donald, Hansie would somehow get the better of me and I’d get out to him in the most
unexpected ways. So you don’t always need to be a front-line bowler to trouble a particular batsman –
and that’s what happened between me and Steve Waugh. Throughout my career I had a feeling Steve
wasn’t comfortable against my leg-spin. At Kochi, I bowled a perfect leg-spinner to him and he
lobbed the ball straight back to me.
I was elated at the dismissal and it was a big moment in the game. It was the opening we needed to
put the pressure back on the Australians. The other big wicket that gave me a lot of satisfaction was
that of Michael Bevan, a very effective batsman in limited-overs cricket, who was constantly trying to
come down the wicket to negate the turn. I had warned Nayan Mongia, our wicketkeeper, that I’d bowl
a quick one down the leg side if I saw Bevan try that against me. The ploy worked and Bevan was
stumped off a wide ball down the leg side.
This was one of those rare matches when every ball was coming out of the hand perfectly, and I
even had a fielder at slip past the thirty-over mark. The odd thing is that over the course of my career I
found that whenever I practised hard at bowling leg-spin, I could never land the ball properly. And yet
sometimes when I hadn’t practised for months it just landed on the spot at crucial times in a match. In
the end I decided to bowl leg-spin in the nets as and when I felt like it, without thinking too much
about the technical aspects. In any case, Anil Kumble once explained to me that to bowl leg-spin
consistently, I needed to hold my shoulder while bowling. What he meant was that I needed to have
my fingers, arm and shoulder position aligned for longer. It was something I could never get the hang
of, so I just left it to my natural ability, and I rarely bowled more than three overs at a stretch in a
match unless I was bowling really well. This gave me licence to experiment and I could give the ball a
rip if I wished to. At Kochi it all worked beautifully. I finished with 5–32 and Australia were bowled
out for 268 in the forty-sixth over. We had won the match by 41 runs.
We continued the good form against the Australians in the next ODI at the Green Park stadium in
Kanpur on 7 April. It was a low-scoring encounter, with the Australians setting us 222 to chase. The
pitch was keeping low and I had figured out that the best option was to be aggressive at the start. I got
another hundred in this match and remember one particular shot against Tom Moody. Even before he
had released the ball, I stepped out and he followed me. The ball was down the leg side and, having
stepped out of my crease, I wasn’t in the best position to meet the delivery. I connected on the full but
played it slightly off-balance. To my surprise, the ball landed in the stands, way beyond the boundary.
Later in the innings I came down the wicket to Warne and this time the ball hit the bottom of my bat.
Warne immediately screamed ‘Catch it!’ – only to see the ball soar over the long-on fielder and land
10 yards behind him for another six. I hit seven in all and we won the game comfortably, to book a
spot in the final, which we unfortunately lost to Australia. It was disappointing after winning all the
group matches and it resulted in an imperfect end to the tour.

Coca-Cola Cup, April 1998
Soon after the series was over we went to Sharjah for yet another tri-series, with Australia and New
Zealand. It is a tournament I remember well because I played some of my best cricket and because of
an incident that took place on the flight out to Sharjah. The Indian team included two relative
newcomers, Harbhajan Singh and Harvinder Singh, the medium-fast bowler. The flight attendant
asked both of them if they wanted soup. Not very good with English at the time, Harvinder may not
have understood the question. I overheard Harvinder tell Bhajji that it was prudent just to take what
was being served. Then Harvinder, trying to figure out what to add to his soup, ended up adding sugar-

free sweetener instead of salt. Bhaji, who always enjoyed a laugh, was aware of what Harvinder had
done and kept asking him if he was enjoying his food! Harvinder was too embarrassed to admit his
mistake and so he pretended to like it.
Sharjah, in April, was hot, very hot. The heat was oppressive and it was a real test of stamina. I
could feel the heat through my shoes and it often caused a burning sensation, which was extremely
discomforting. It was physically draining to bat for long hours and, with little recovery time between
games, it was a stern test of a player’s skill, both physical and mental.
The two matches everyone remembers were both against Australia, on 22 and 24 April 1998. The
first one was our last round-robin game, which we needed to win, or score a certain number of runs in,
to qualify for the final. Australia had already made it to the final by winning all three of their pool
games.
In the first of the two games, Australia batted first and scored a very healthy 284, with 81 from
Mark Waugh and a century from Bevan. We needed a good start to get our chase on track.
Unfortunately, however, we had lost four wickets for just 138 runs in twenty-nine overs when the
match was interrupted. I had never seen a sandstorm in my life. Waves of sand were blowing from one
end of the ground to the other and the wind was so strong that I feared my five-foot-five-inch frame
would get blown away. The wind was also causing a strange sound and we could only see a few metres
ahead of us. Players and umpires were understandably worried about getting sand in their eyes and
instinctively dropped to the ground. I quickly went and lay down behind Adam Gilchrist, who I
reckoned was strong enough to withstand the force of the wind. My plan was simple – if the wind ever
got too strong, I would hold on to Gilchrist for support. While it appears funny in hindsight to have
used an Australian wicketkeeper as a shield, the whole experience was rather strange to start with.
Because the match was interrupted for more than forty-five minutes, it was reduced to forty-six
overs a side but the target was cut by only eight runs. To win the match, we now needed 138 off
seventeen overs, which may appear eminently gettable in this age of Twenty20 cricket but was a really
steep target in 1998. A deduction of eight runs for the loss of four overs didn’t make sense to us, and
we knew we were up against it. Effectively the target to win had become stiffer. On the other hand, to
qualify, we only needed 100 runs.
Anshuman Gaekwad, a former India opening batsman and then our coach, was in charge of the
calculations and I asked him the exact target before I went out to resume the innings. Several of my
team-mates thought we should just concentrate on getting the 100 runs we needed for qualification
and not risk our place in the final by going for the win. However, I was determined to win the match
and go to the finals, because I was timing the ball well and felt good about my batting. And beating
Australia would give us an edge over them in the final.
It was important not to let the Australian bowlers settle. I hit Tom Moody for a six as soon as the
game resumed, making my intentions clear. I followed it up with another six off Warne and attacked
the Australians in every over I faced. They were doing their best to keep me off strike, while my
partner VVS Laxman was doing his best to make sure I faced the bulk of the bowling. Looking back, I
feel I owe him an apology as at one point I lost my temper with him when he refused a second run,
thinking I was in danger of getting run out. I just wanted to play every ball I could.
When we passed 200 I started to feel that the Australian score was within reach. I was determined to
bat on and finish the game. I have to say that if I had not got out to a dubious decision by the umpire
with three overs still left in the game, I think we would probably have chased down the Australian
score. I was given out to Damien Fleming, caught by Gilchrist for 143, when the ball seemed to me to
be above shoulder height and should have been declared a no-ball. But such things happen in cricket

and in the end we lost the game but qualified for the final and still had a chance for revenge.
Thinking of this match reminds me of a story about Anshuman Gaekwad. I have very fond
memories of Anshu bhai as our coach and he undoubtedly had a very positive influence and helped me
in a number of ways, but I can also never forget his amazing capacity to eat the hottest of hot food. On
one occasion in New Zealand in 1999 he asked the hotel chef to make a paste of green chillies for him.
The chef took on the challenge and returned later with a fresh bowl of chilli paste, warning him that he
should be careful only to have a little because it was extremely hot. To the chef’s amazement, Anshu
bhai gratefully took the bowl from him and polished off the lot without breaking sweat – and even
asked for some more! Frankly, no one else could have eaten even half a spoonful.

A final to remember
When we returned to the hotel after the last pool game, I was very tired and yet I just couldn’t get to
sleep. I eventually dropped off well after 2 a.m. With just a day before the final, this didn’t bode well.
In the extreme heat I had lost a lot of fluid and I needed time to get myself rehydrated and allow my
body and mind to recover.
When I got up in the morning my body was stiff. My back was tight and I was even finding it
difficult to walk to the bathroom. The stiffness was partly a result of the dehydration and the first
thing I did was drink a lot of water. There have been a few occasions in my career when I have had
difficulties standing up straight in the mornings. Sometimes I have really had to push myself to get off
the bed and in extreme situations the physio and the masseur have had to give me a helping hand. Of
course, I didn’t mind the stiffness so much if I had scored a hundred or played a match-winning knock
the day before. In that case, it was a happy feeling and a reminder of the effort I had put in! However,
if the stiffness was caused by fielding for two long days, I would resent it immensely. So at Sharjah I
had no reason to complain about the pain – it was a very small price to pay.
At lunchtime, I met Mark Mascarenhas for a meal at his hotel. Ravi Shastri, Shane Warne and
Richie Benaud, former Australian captain and one of the greatest cricketers to have played the game,
were also present and I had a brief non-cricketing chat with them all before returning to the hotel. I
wasn’t particularly concerned about the physical aspect of the recovery, as I was confident of digging
into my reserves. I was more concerned with the mental recovery after such a high-intensity
encounter.
In the evening, I had an interesting conversation with Mark. It was the Coca-Cola Cup and I was
informed that, as sponsors, Coca-Cola wanted to announce a reward for me for the innings I had
played the night before. They wanted to give me £25,000, which was a substantial sum of money.
When Mark asked me what I’d do with it, I said that I would share it with my team-mates. It was our
practice to share rewards among all players and I’d do no different. After that the issue wasn’t raised
again and I had put it out of my mind by the time I went to bed.
In the final, Australia batted first and put 272 runs on the board. It was a very good score,
considering it was the final. We couldn’t afford to lose an early wicket and I knew I had to stay in to
set up the game. People were expecting me to blast the Australian attack from ball one, but that was an
impossible proposition. Perhaps in people’s minds I could just pick up from where I had left off two
nights before. The reality, of course, was different. It was a new match and I was starting a new
innings. I had to play myself in all over again and it wasn’t going to be easy.
To make matters more difficult, the Australians bowled a good line and I had to work very hard not
to get out. In the first over I faced against Damien Fleming, I played five dot-balls and was trying to

leave the sixth ball, which hit my inside edge and went for a streaky boundary, missing the stumps by
two inches. It was a lucky escape and I told myself that I was obviously still fatigued and wasn’t
moving my feet properly. I would have to spend time in the middle for my body to get used to the
conditions and for my timing to come back.
We managed to score just 12 in the first five overs and the Australians continued to apply pressure
by bowling a very tight line around the off stump. There were no loose balls on offer and I wasn’t
happy. The pressure was mounting and it was time to try something different. I was forced to take a
risk to push the run rate up and so I came down the wicket to Michael Kasprowicz in the sixth over of
our innings. I managed to connect well and the ball soared over the boundary. The crowd was in
raptures and the bowler was taken by surprise. I now anticipated that he’d bowl me a bouncer the very
next ball. It is a fast bowler’s natural response and I was more than prepared for it. I stayed back in the
crease and easily hit the short ball for another six. It definitely rattled Kasprowicz and the Australians.
The risks I had taken had paid off and the touch had come back. There was no need for any further
risk-taking and the run chase was back on track.
With Nayan Mongia, who had been promoted up the order, and Azhar giving me good support, I
was able to pace my innings without allowing the Australian bowlers to dominate and gradually the
match was turning our way. Shane Warne tried coming round the wicket and yet again I countered him
by hitting him over midwicket and square leg. With Warne ineffective – he conceded more than six
runs an over in his spell – the Australians were forced to turn to Tom Moody. We attacked him
throughout his spell and also put pressure on Australia’s irregular bowlers, Mark and Steve Waugh.
By the time I finally got out for 134, the result was a mere formality. We needed just 24 from six
overs. As I was walking back to the pavilion I could see Mark Mascarenhas waiting for me next to the
sightscreen. I was soaked in sweat and, seeing Mark was about to give me a hug, I remember warning
him that he would spoil his smart clothes. Mark wasn’t bothered and he lifted me up into the air with a
smile.
The post-match presentation turned out to be really special. Steve Waugh said that they had lost to
me, which was quite something coming from the Australian captain on a day which also happened to
be my twenty-fifth birthday. There could have been no better birthday present.
During the presentation an announcement was made by Coca-Cola that they had decided to give me
a Mercedes SL600. I have always been interested in cars and remembered my first introduction to a
variety of fancy cars such as BMWs on my first trip to England with the Star Cricket Club in 1988.

Good to be back
On our return to Mumbai we were greeted by a sea of humanity and it was touching to see fans
showering such warmth on the players. In the ultimate analysis, we play for our fans and to be able to
make them happy has always been extremely important.
Sometimes things can get a little out of hand, however. After coming back from Sharjah I was
invited to a double-wicket tournament at the Shivaji Park Gymkhana in Mumbai. Pravin Amre called
me and said the organizers were keen for me to go along to encourage the players. Shivaji Park has
always been special to me and I decided to take Anjali with me. When we arrived we found that a huge
crowd had assembled to see me. My visit had caused a law-and-order situation and in the end it was
difficult to get away from the chaos. We somehow managed to leave Shivaji Park Gymkhana for home
and I felt humbled at the affection I had received. Fans asking for autographs always made me feel
special and I make it a point to oblige them whenever I can. The people who wait for hours are the

ones who make the game what it is in India and we are lucky that we have such a passionate fanbase
for the sport in the country.
Looking back at the four months between January and April 1998, I feel a sense of deep
satisfaction. I had led the charge against the Australians and had enjoyed the personal contest against
Shane Warne. But it didn’t stop there. I went on to bat at close to my best throughout 1998 and in
November played my part in winning us the Champions Trophy tri-series at Sharjah against Sri Lanka
and Zimbabwe.
What I remember about that competition is that the Zimbabwe fast bowler Henry Olonga had taken
me by surprise in the last match of the group stage with a short ball and the manner of my dismissal
had kept me restless right up to the final. So much so that I decided I had to settle the scores. It was
like in boxing – either you go down or I go down. In the final I managed to score 124 off ninety-two
balls, but I must confess that some of my shots were not what you might call orthodox cricketing
shots, as all I was doing was smashing the ball. That’s what happens when you are batting well – even
slogs go for boundaries – whereas during a lean patch, you get out to bad balls.

Invitations I couldn’t turn down
A few months before that Champions Trophy, in July and August 1998, two things happened that I
will never forget. The first was that I was invited to play in the Princess Diana Memorial Match at
Lord’s on 18 July. The opposition bowling line-up included Glenn McGrath, Javagal Srinath, Allan
Donald and Anil Kumble, and I managed to score 125 against them while opening the batting. Though
I didn’t manage to make a hundred at Lord’s in Test cricket, this was a ton I have fond memories of,
especially because it came against a top-quality bowling attack.
The second memorable thing happened in August when Shane Warne and I had the great honour of
being invited to visit Sir Don Bradman at his house in Adelaide on the occasion of his ninetieth
birthday. We were both very nervous about meeting the great man and I remember debating with
Shane in the taxi on the way about who should talk to him first. I said that it should be Shane, because
he’s a fellow Australian; he said that it should be me, because I’m a fellow batsman. In the end, Sir
Don, who fondly referred to me as ‘Bonzer’, took control of proceedings as soon as we arrived and
quickly made us feel at ease.
One of the things I remember asking him was how he thought he would have coped in the
contemporary game. He said that he didn’t think he would have scored quite so many runs because of
the more defensive field settings that are used nowadays; when he was playing, the fields weren’t
changed much, even if a batsman was scoring a lot of runs, and fielding positions like deep point
weren’t in vogue back in the 1930s. He also said that the standard of fielding was much better in the
contemporary game.
Finally, we asked what he thought his Test average would be if he played today. ‘Around 70,’ he
said. We were slightly surprised and asked if he was sure it would be so much lower than his famous
career average of 99.94. He said, ‘Well, 70 isn’t bad for a ninety-year-old!’
All in all, 1998 was a special year in my career.
Australia in India 1998 – The Border–Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Chennai. 6–10 March 1998
India 257 (NS Sidhu 62, NR Mongia 58, R Dravid 52, SR Tendulkar 4 ; GR Robertson 4–72, SK

Warne 4–85) and 418–4 dec (SR Tendulkar 155*, NS Sidhu 64, M Azharuddin 64, R Dravid 56)
Australia 328 (IA Healy 90, ME Waugh 66, GR Robertson 57; A Kumble 4–103, SLV Raju 3–54) and
168 (SK Warne 35, IA Healy 32*; A Kumble 4–46)
India won by 179 runs
2nd Test. Kolkata. 18–21 March 1998
Australia 233 (SR Waugh 80, RT Ponting 60; SC Ganguly 3–28, A Kumble 3–44, J Srinath 3–80) and
181 (MA Taylor 45; A Kumble 5–62, J Srinath 3–44)
India 633–5 dec (M Azharuddin 163*, NS Sidhu 97, VVS Laxman 95, R Dravid 86, SR Tendulkar 79 ,
SC Ganguly 65)
India won by an innings and 219 runs
3rd Test. Bangalore. 25–28 March 1998
India 424 (SR Tendulkar 177 , NS Sidhu 74, M Azharuddin 40; AC Dale 3–71, SK Warne 3–106) and
169 (NS Sidhu 44, SR Tendulkar 31; MS Kasprowicz 5–28, GR Robertson 3–28, SK Warne 2–80)
Australia 400 (ME Waugh 153*, MJ Slater 91, DS Lehmann 52; A Kumble 6–98) and 195–2 (MA
Taylor 102*, MJ Slater 42; SR Tendulkar 1–41)
Australia won by 8 wickets
India won the series 2–1
