THE IPL

The Indian Premier League, the franchise-based Twenty20 competition that started in April 2008, has
had a revolutionary impact on world cricket. It seems to have captured the imagination of the modern
fan and has attracted the best players from around the world. I am convinced that the IPL will continue
to be a permanent feature of the global cricket calendar, just as it has already become a part of Indian
households every April and May.
Despite sometimes being played in rather adverse weather conditions and on occasions outside of
India, most of the games have been played to sell-out crowds. And this is not restricted to the smaller
venues. In May 2013, people came out in droves to support quality cricket, despite all the talk of spotand match-fixing surrounding the tournament. I was disappointed, shocked and angry at the goings-on,
and said so in a press release at the time. There has to be a complete zero-tolerance policy against
corruption and more should be done to educate the players, but on the other hand the tournament as a
whole cannot be blamed for the wrongdoings of a few.
There is little doubt that the IPL has added an entirely new dimension to Indian cricket. Not only
has interest grown in domestic competitions, but there is also a spill-over effect that has helped
improve general awareness about domestic cricket. It has certainly made domestic performances more
significant, with players knowing that playing well on the domestic circuit may earn them an IPL
contract.

Early fears
When the IPL was originally launched by the BCCI in late 2007, there was, understandably, a lot of
apprehension surrounding the tournament. Indian cricket had to come to terms with the club culture,
and the concept of player auctions was alien to the average Indian cricket fan. No one was quite sure
what standard the cricket would be or whether fans would come out to support the tournament in the
oppressive heat of April and May.
A confession is in order here. While I never had any doubt that the IPL would be popular, I did not
expect the tournament to take off quite so quickly. Secondly, I did not expect the standard of cricket to
be so high. The matches in the IPL are played with as much intensity as international cricket and the
level is very close to the highest international standard. Players turning up for the franchises always
give their best and the fans appreciate this and, of course, they also enjoy seeing the world’s best
players in action alongside the best of Indian domestic talent.

Differences from international cricket
There are some fundamental differences between the IPL and international cricket. One is the close

involvement of the team owners. Their presence adds to the character of the tournament. For example,
some have their own peculiar superstitions, which they impose on the team. In one team the owner’s
priest decides when the players should leave their hotel rooms on match days, and the players go along
with this. Whatever state the players are in, they have to leave the room.
Another team owner believes in ‘vastu’ (which is a little like feng shui) and their dressing room is
always organized in a particular manner, with mirrors set at specific angles. Once in a match against
us this team even went ahead and changed our dressing room, putting in mirrors just as they did at
their home venue. In turn, we changed this arrangement late at night and all the mirrors were covered
with towels to unsettle the opposition.
On another occasion we were told by one team management not to use a washroom in our dressing
room and a sign was placed outside it declaring ‘BATHROOM OUT OF ORDER’. One of the players
couldn’t resist going in, just to have a look, only to discover that it was working perfectly. Eventually,
the team made a point of using that particular bathroom and we even went on to win the game!
Another key difference from international cricket concerns culture. Almost all the players in the
Indian team come from a similar background and are well versed in the Indian system of playing the
game by the time they make the national team. In the IPL, there can be vast cultural differences
between a rookie Indian youngster and an established international stalwart, which makes the need for
team bonding all the more important. Looking after the youngsters and making sure they are not
overawed are added responsibilities for team owners, senior management and senior players. I have
particularly enjoyed mentoring young Indian talent and trying to act as a bridge between them and the
international professionals playing for the Mumbai Indians.

Impact on Indian cricket
That the IPL has had a profound impact on Indian cricket is beyond doubt. The benefits are obvious,
but there are also a few concerns that need to be taken seriously if the tournament is to evolve further
in the years to come.
On the plus side, the IPL has contributed to improving international player relations. The best
example is the case of Andrew Symonds and Harbhajan Singh. In the fourth season of the IPL in 2011,
Symonds and Bhajji played for the Mumbai Indians. I clearly remember our first meeting with
Andrew when he joined the team. I told him that the Sydney controversy of 2008 was in the past and
that neither I nor Harbhajan would ever refer to the incident in our dealings with Andrew. Andrew, for
his part, reciprocated the camaraderie and we became good friends. We played some really good
matches side by side and I am sure when we meet next we will share the same chemistry.
Since the start of the IPL, none of the India–Australia series have featured the kind of acrimony on
show during the 2008 tour. In IPL season six in 2013, for example, I had the opportunity to play with
Ricky Ponting. Ricky and I had played international cricket against each other for years but the only
interaction we had had before playing together for the Mumbai Indians was the occasional hello.
Suddenly we were sharing the same dressing room and opening the batting together. It was enriching
to get to know Ricky better and understand his perspectives on the game. I also enjoyed opening the
batting with Sanath Jayasuriya in IPL season two, Shikhar Dhawan in season three and Dwayne Smith
in season five.
The transformation in player relations has also had a knock-on effect on spectator behaviour at IPL
matches. For example, when Shane Warne, playing for the Rajasthan Royals, rushed to congratulate
the Indian all-rounder Yusuf Pathan after his Super Over heroics against the Kolkata Knight Riders in

South Africa in 2009, the large Indian diaspora at the stadium was spontaneous in applauding Warne
for his gesture.
Perhaps the biggest benefit of the IPL, however, is that it offers the Indian domestic cricketer an
opportunity to play with the best in the world. There are plenty of players in India who are good but
have narrowly missed the opportunity to represent their country. Some of them might be on the wrong
side of thirty and have little hope of playing for their country. The IPL has given a lot of these players
recognition unthinkable a few years earlier, as well as respect and a good income. The IPL is the best
platform after international cricket at the moment, with a massive presence of international stars, and
the Indian domestic players get a share of the glory associated with the international game by playing
in the IPL. IPL performances are covered in detail in the media and the status of the domestic Indian
cricketer has improved as a result.
Young rookies cutting their teeth in Twenty20 cricket have also benefited from the competition. To
be able to face up to Dale Steyn or Morne Morkel in the nets, share a dressing room with Jacques
Kallis, AB de Villiers or Kevin Pietersen, practise and play alongside the likes of Chris Gayle or
Michael Hussey is a dream come true for Indian youngsters. They have a chance to learn from the
greats of the contemporary game. In the Mumbai Indians, the youngsters can play in the nets against
one of the best Twenty20 bowlers in the world in Lasith Malinga, rub shoulders with the likes of
Kieron Pollard and discuss bowling techniques with Anil Kumble, the mentor of the team. I absolutely
loved it when Malinga, fielding at mid on, walked up to Dhawal Kulkarni, the Mumbai medium-fast
bowler, and offered him tips. These are gains that go far beyond the monetary riches offered by the
IPL. For established Indian players, there are other benefits to be had. Invaluable knowledge about the
strengths and weaknesses of players from other countries can be gained from playing with and against
them in the IPL.

Making the national team
The IPL has enabled many an Indian player to get noticed and subsequently make it to the national
team and many others to come back into the reckoning. It was by virtue of their standout
performances in the first season of the IPL that Yusuf Pathan and Ravindra Jadeja caught the attention
of the Indian selectors. Similarly, Irfan Pathan made a comeback to the national side by doing well in
the fourth IPL season and there are countless other examples.
While I agree that IPL performances are important enough to open doors to the national team, I am
sure that IPL performances should only be used as a reason to pick a player for the Twenty20 format
or, in exceptional cases, for ODI cricket. Playing well in the IPL does not make a player good enough
for Test cricket, and arguably not fifty-over one-day cricket, for they require completely different skill
sets. For those formats, selectors should continue to look at performances in the Ranji and Duleep
trophies, the Irani Trophy and other domestic competitions.

Rewarding our past stars
One of the best legacies of the IPL is that it has allowed the BCCI to reward former cricketers who
played for India at a time when there wasn’t much money on offer. While every player in the IPL is
assured of a decent standard of living, many former Indian greats had to suffer hardship in old age. In
a fantastic gesture during the fifth season of the IPL in May 2012, the BCCI decided to use the
revenues generated by the competition to reward every player who had ever played for India. Even

domestic players who had played a certain number of first-class games were brought within the ambit
of this scheme. Such a gesture serves as huge encouragement for aspiring cricketers, who know that if
they make the national team they will never have to worry about the basic necessities of life.
It was a nice touch that these special payments were presented during the play-off stages of the
tournament in front of full stadiums, highlighting the achievements of these former servants of Indian
cricket. This certainly wouldn’t have been possible without the IPL.

Apprehensions
A major apprehension concerning the IPL is that its riches will make playing for India somewhat less
significant and correspondingly less appealing. Many say that a lot of Indian youngsters are content to
earn substantial sums of money and lead a good life playing Twenty20. For me personally there is
nothing that compares to playing for India, but it depends on the individual: is he prepared to put in
the extra work required to play for his country, or is he satisfied with a couple of months of fame a
year? Someone who is determined to play for his country will inevitably strive towards his goal, while
those who aren’t motivated enough to do so don’t really deserve to don India colours.
Another concern is that the IPL might cause burn-out in Indian players. I don’t quite agree with this
proposition. While I am not debating the need to control the number of Twenty20 games played each
year, putting all the blame for injuries on the IPL isn’t always correct. The best players from all
countries play the IPL and every country, at the moment, has a similar schedule. Given the amount of
cricket being played around the world, injuries are now part of a cricketer’s life. Australian players
who haven’t played the IPL have also been out for months injured, even though Australia has one of
the best injury-management programmes in the world. Most international cricketers play with niggles
and ultimately players themselves are the best judges of their bodies, and they have to be sensible and
responsible when deciding whether to play or not.

Playing for the Mumbai Indians
I thoroughly enjoyed playing for the Mumbai Indians. Just after the IPL was launched in late 2007,
Mukesh Ambani, the owner, told me that he would like me to captain the team and I readily agreed.
As skipper, I made it very clear to my team-mates that all I wanted from them was total commitment
on the field, and that’s what we tried to do in my six seasons in the IPL.
It took some time to get used to how the auction worked. I was in Australia when the first one took
place in February 2008 and had provided the management with a list of players I wanted for every
position; in fact, I had provided multiple options. But the team we ended up with didn’t have quite the
balance I’d hoped for and our first season wasn’t particularly successful. It also didn’t help that I
wasn’t able to play the first seven games because of injury.
Happily, one of the players we did manage to pick was Lasith Malinga. I was keen to have him at
any cost as I was sure he would be a handy option for this format, and he has proved to be an excellent
performer in Twenty20. Mind you, no one bowls quite like Malinga. With his low, slingy action, it’s
almost as if the umpire becomes the sightscreen. I remember an occasion in Sri Lanka when Malinga
was bowling to me with a white ball and I had to ask the umpire to remove his white hat, because I
was losing the ball against it! Unfortunately for us, Malinga wasn’t able to play the entire first season
owing to a knee injury.
After the Mumbai Indians failed to make the semi-finals in the first two seasons, we were

determined to put in a better performance in 2010. Mrs Nita Ambani was personally involved from the
beginning of the season and this time we began our preparations weeks before the season started. We
had a two-day bonding camp at the Waterstones Club in Mumbai and enjoyed getting to know each
other. Mrs Ambani was present on both days and the players enjoyed interacting with her. The
youngsters in the team mixed with the senior players and I remember that Zaheer Khan, Harbhajan
and I were asked a series of questions by the other players about our careers and our lives as Indian
cricketers. It was interesting to learn that Zaheer found it very difficult to adjust to the Mumbai
lifestyle after coming from the relatively smaller town of Ahmednagar and I was particularly
fascinated by Harbhajan’s stories about his childhood while growing up in Punjab. We played a
variety of sports, including table tennis, squash and water polo, but no cricket.
The camp worked brilliantly and that season we finally did ourselves justice and were the team to
beat throughout the competition. Unfortunately, I got injured while catching a ball in the slips in the
semi-final, splitting the webbing between my fingers on my right hand. I had to have six stitches and
couldn’t hold the bat properly and most people who saw the injury felt I wouldn’t make the final
against the Chennai Super Kings, led by MS Dhoni. I was determined to take part, however.
On the morning of the final I tried having an injection to numb the injured area, which I thought
would help me hold the bat. I had also had some special gloves made, with added protection for the
injury, but it seemed that the pain was going to be too much. However, the plan did not work as well
as I’d hoped and after the area was numbed I found I had no idea where my fingers were. I actually
went back to the hotel, disappointed that even after having the excruciatingly painful injection the
situation had not improved. In the end, though, I managed to play in the final, despite being in
considerable pain. In the gap between the semi-final and the final I had also visited a doctor in Sri
Lanka, who said he could get me ready for the final and that I would have to take the medicine he
prescribed twice a day. However, as a side effect I would not be able to sleep properly for the first
three days, but once the medicine had run its course I would sleep a lot. He was right. The medicine
did help and I did eventually play in the final – but, as warned, I wasn’t able to sleep for three nights
and then slept for three days!
In the warm-up before the match, the umpires walked up to me to check that I was aware of what I
was getting into: because I was carrying an injury suffered before the game started, I would not be
allowed a substitute. But I had considered all the consequences and was ready to pull myself through
the pain to try and win the coveted IPL trophy.
Twice in the match the ball hit my injured hand. The first time was when I was fielding at fine leg.
On the second occasion I was standing at cover when Suresh Raina, the left-handed middle-order bat,
played a full-blooded cover drive that came to me in a flash. I instinctively stopped the ball and
realized soon afterwards that my stitches had burst. At the changeover my hand was bleeding. I
ignored it and went out to bat wearing the special gloves, which had no gap between the middle and
index fingers. Wearing these, I could at least get a grip on the bat, and I managed to make 48.
Unfortunately for us, the IPL trophy continued to elude us as we lost too many wickets in a heap and
fell 22 runs short of the target.
A lot was written about the decision to bat Kieron Pollard at number seven during the run chase in
that 2010 final. It was a decision taken by the management based on my input and the reasoning was
clear. As long as the spinners were bowling, we wanted the likes of Ambati Rayudu and Saurabh
Tiwary, both of whom were good players of spin, to be out in the middle. Pollard could then come in
and take on the faster bowlers. In hindsight, however, I believe that sending Pollard up the order
would have been the better option. It was a mistake and I have no hesitation in admitting it.

We had another good competition the following season and made the play-offs again. I got my first
and only Twenty20 hundred against the Kochi Tuskers team. In fact, in those two seasons, I was
consistent at the top of the order and there was talk about me playing for the Indian team for the
World Twenty20 in the Caribbean in April–May 2010. However, the thought never crossed my mind.
By early 2010 the Indian Twenty20 team had a settled look to it and it would not have been right to
reconsider my decision not to play international Twenty20 cricket for just one tournament.
I thoroughly enjoyed my experiences in Twenty20 with the Mumbai Indians. The overwhelming
sense of positivity that surrounds the team made playing for them a real pleasure. I also enjoyed being
captain in the first four seasons, but I am glad that I then handed over the captaincy to Harbhajan, a
decision that caused a stir in the media at the time. The fact was that 2011–12 was one of my toughest
years in cricket and by the time of the fifth season of the IPL, which started on 4 April 2012, I was
feeling mentally drained. I was in no position to cope with the stress of captaincy and just wanted to
continue as a batsman. It was for this reason that I asked the owners to consider giving the captaincy
to Harbhajan. I would be there to help and offer advice to him on and off the field, especially because
he and I had always shared a great camaraderie while playing for India.
I have known Bhajji since 1994, when he first bowled a few doosras to me during practice in
Chandigarh, and we became very good friends when he broke into the Indian team against Australia in
Bangalore in 1998. Bhajji had already shown his mettle as captain of the Mumbai Indians in the
Champions League Twenty20 in October 2011, which I missed through injury, when he did brilliantly
to lead the team to the title.

The final season
I knew that 2013 was always going to be my last year in the IPL. Dedicating three more years to the
IPL as a player after I turned 40 in April 2013 was never an option. I was desperate to win the title,
having come so close in 2010. We had a good unit and all the players were fit going into the
tournament. Ricky Ponting was now captain, John Wright was coach, and Anil Kumble had joined us
as mentor, making it a very strong support unit.
I started the season with a disappointing run-out but batted well from the middle of the tournament.
Ricky, however, was not in the best of form and he decided to drop himself for a few games and hand
the captaincy to Rohit, who was batting well. Rohit did a very good job as skipper and the bowling too
came together nicely, with Malinga, Mitchell Johnson, Harbhajan and Pragyan Ojha consistently
doing well for us. But just when my own form was peaking, I sustained the injury that brought my IPL
career to an end.
We were playing the Sunrisers Hyderabad on 13 May 2013 and were in control, having scored 91
off twelve overs, with the loss of just one wicket. The asking rate was slightly over ten runs an over
and with nine wickets in hand we had every reason to feel confident. I was starting to accelerate and
hit the first ball of the thirteenth over for six over long on. Just as I was completing the shot, I heard a
click in my left hand and then felt excruciating pain. I immediately called for the physio, but massage
didn’t do any good. I was finding it impossible to hold the bat, let alone play a shot. It was a critical
time in the match and there was no way I could keep playing on and waste balls in the process. The
only option was to retire hurt.
I had a series of scans, which showed inflammation of the tendons and fluid accumulation in the
hand. The doctors said it would take a minimum of three weeks to heal and it was clear my campaign
was over. Though I wasn’t able to play, I decided to travel with the team. I bowled long stints in the

nets and did what I could to help the boys with their preparation. It was hard to sit out for the final,
though, particularly because I was getting into a good rhythm, but it was an incredible feeling when
the Mumbai Indians won the 2013 IPL trophy in front of a packed Eden Gardens crowd in Kolkata. To
cap it all, my team-mates very kindly said that the triumph was for me.
It was during the final that I was asked in an interview if I would play the first game of the next IPL
season in front of my home crowd at the Wankhede. It was clear to me that I would not be able to and
I found myself saying so. I hadn’t actually planned to announce my retirement from the IPL and it
happened on the spur of the moment. Anjali was at the ground and a number of journalists went on to
ask her what she thought of me announcing my retirement from the IPL. She was a little taken aback
at what I’d said, though she knew very well that season six was going to be my last.
While I was very sorry not to play for Mumbai in the last five games of IPL season six, I will look
back with fondness at my IPL career, which came to an end with me hitting a six off the last ball I
faced!

Play-off stage
Qualifier 1. Chennai Super Kings v Mumbai Indians at Delhi. 21 May 2013
Chennai Super Kings 192/1 (20/20 ov); Mumbai Indians 144 (18.4/20 ov)
Chennai Super Kings won by 48 runs
Eliminator. Rajasthan Royals v Sunrisers Hyderabad at Delhi. 22 May 2013
Sunrisers Hyderabad 132/7 (20/20 ov); Rajasthan Royals 135/6 (19.2/20 ov)
Rajasthan Royals won by 4 wickets (with 4 balls remaining)
Qualifier 2. Mumbai Indians v Rajasthan Royals at Kolkata. 24 May 2013
Rajasthan Royals 165/6 (20/20 ov); Mumbai Indians 169/6 (19.5/20 ov)
Mumbai Indians won by 4 wickets (with 1 ball remaining)
Final. Chennai Super Kings v Mumbai Indians at Kolkata. 26 May 2013
Mumbai Indians 148/9 (20/20 ov); Chennai Super Kings 125/9 (20/20 ov)
Mumbai Indians won by 23 runs
