A GLORIOUS ENGLISH SUMMER

Within a week of returning from South Africa we faced Nasser Hussain’s Englishmen at home in
December 2001. Nasser, nowadays a respected commentator, played hard and came up with some
ultra-defensive tactics against me. It was in this series that Nasser instructed his left-arm spinner
Ashley Giles to bowl from over the wicket and consistently pitch the ball way outside my leg stump.
Nasser and Giles were counting on the fact that I would have limited scoring options off balls bowled
there and were hoping to frustrate me and induce me to play a false shot. They had essentially given
up any attempt to get me out in favour of trying to get under my skin.
While Giles did manage to have me stumped, for the first time in my Test career, in the third Test
in Bangalore, overall these tactics had little impact on the result of the series. I scored a lot of runs in
all three Test matches and was declared Player of the Series.
I was reminded of this series when Nasser, who is a good friend, met me a couple of years later in
South Africa during the 2003 World Cup. We were in the washroom during the inaugural function and
Nasser jokingly started the conversation, saying, ‘So I am in the washroom with the great Mr
Tendulkar.’ It was a minute-long conversation and we were both enjoying ourselves. It was friendly
banter between two people who have great regard for each other. From memory, the conversation went
something like this:
NASSER: You have to agree that I was successful in stopping you and getting you frustrated during
the 2001 England tour of India when I got Ashley Giles to bowl to you from over the wicket.
SACHIN: You did indeed, but despite his efforts, my batting average for the series was 76, with
scores of 88, 103 and 90 in the three Test matches, and I was in fact nominated Player of the Series. I
would love to have that average right through my career.
We won the series 1–0, a result that gave us considerable confidence as we looked forward to the
return tour of England the following summer. It looked likely to be an enthralling series.

Some thoughts on batting
It was in the early stages of the 2002 tour of England that I first gave a masterclass. It was at the Rose
Bowl, where we were playing a warm-up game against Hampshire, and it was organized by Mark
Nicholas for Channel 4 television. I enjoyed talking to a group of youngsters about the basics of
batting, including how to grip the bat.
People have often commented on my own grip, which is very low down on the handle. It all goes
back to when I started playing cricket when I was eleven with my brother Ajit, who is ten years older.
As I didn’t have a bat of my own, I had to use Ajit’s full-size bat and the only way I could cope with
the weight at that age was to hold the bat right at the bottom of the handle. Some coaches suggested
changing my grip, and I did experiment, but it never felt right. I had got used to feeling the end of the

handle pressing against the inside of my forearm and if I gripped the bat further up I didn’t have that,
and batting just didn’t feel natural.
That’s not to say that my technique didn’t change at all, though. Throughout my career, I was
always looking to improve and constantly tried new things to cope with different situations. My
backlift changed significantly over the years, for example. I used a pretty heavy bat and I was
sometimes encouraged to move to a lighter one. Again, I did try but I never felt comfortable, as my
whole bat swing depended on that weight. When I was hitting a drive, I needed the weight to generate
the power. It was all to do with the timing. To me the bat should be an extension of your arm, and if
you’ve reached the stage where it’s become an extension of your arm, why do you need to change?
What mattered to me most when I was batting was feeling comfortable. As long as I felt
comfortable, it didn’t matter where I was playing or who I was playing against. If you make technical
adjustments, such as moving to a lighter bat, to cope with different conditions, there’s a risk of
making yourself feel uncomfortable and of thinking too much about your technique. I’ve always felt
that I’ve batted best when my mind has been at the bowler’s end of the pitch, not at my end. In fact,
for both batsmen and bowlers, I’ve always believed that cricket is played best when your mind is at
the opposite end and that problems occur when your mind is stuck at your own end.
For example, if a bowler is thinking too much about bowling no-balls, he’s not going to be able to
bowl what he wants to bowl. Instead, his mind should be at the batsman’s end, focusing on where he’s
going to pitch the ball, which way he’s going to swing it and so on. As a batsman, if I’m not
consciously worrying about my footwork or my backlift or my wrist-work, then I know that I’m in the
right space, because my mind needs to be at the opposite end, figuring out what the bowler is trying to
do. There’s no time to think about both ends at the same time. So in general it always seemed to me
that if I was comfortable with my gear, it would allow my mind to be at the opposite end and I had a
better chance of playing well.

India in England, the Test series, July–September 2002
I have always enjoyed playing in England, but on the 2002 tour it took the team a little time to adjust
to the conditions. The first of the four Tests, at Lord’s, started on 25 July 2002 and England won pretty
convincingly, with Hussain making his highest score for five years and Michael Vaughan also
contributing a century. For India, the high point was my friend Ajit Agarkar’s second-innings hundred,
and I was delighted to see his name go up on the famous honours board in the dressing room.
We knew we needed to be more competitive in the next Test at Trent Bridge ten days later if we
were to stay alive in the four-match series. Once again England posted a huge score, with Vaughan
again in good form, and we were faced with batting out the last day to survive. The pitch was assisting
the bowlers and quite a few balls were taking off from a good length, while some were keeping low. In
difficult circumstances, Rahul and I put together an important partnership. There were occasions when
we were beaten by balls which had either taken off or kept low and all we did was smile. We chatted at
the end of every over but never once talked about the deliveries we had missed. It was natural that the
ball would occasionally beat us on a fifth-day wicket offering uneven bounce; we enjoyed the
challenge.
Rahul got a hundred and both Sourav and I fell in the nineties. Sourav was out for 99 while I was
bowled for 92 by part-time off-spinner Michael Vaughan to what was probably the best ball he ever
bowled. The ball pitched in the rough outside my off stump and turned a long way to go through the
gap between bat and pad to hit the stumps. That we managed to hold on for a draw, thanks to some

dour resistance from wicketkeeper Parthiv Patel, a teenager at the time, was an important statement
and it laid the foundation for the fightback at Headingley in the third Test.
There was a long gap between the second and third Tests, which allowed us to unwind and refocus.
By now we had come to terms with the conditions and were feeling more relaxed. We were enjoying
ourselves socially, going out to interesting restaurants to try out different types of food and spending a
lot of time together, which is always essential in the middle of a difficult tour.
It was around then that a friend of mine suggested visiting the famous Harry Ramsden’s, in
Guiseley in West Yorkshire. This restaurant, I was told, served great fish and chips and Ajit Agarkar
and I decided to try out the fare. There was one item on the menu titled Harry’s Challenge, which
invited the customer to eat a giant portion of fish, either cod or haddock, served with chips, bread and
butter and two other side dishes. If successful, the head chef would personally sign a certificate for the
customer. I’ve always been a big eater, so I decided to take on the challenge. I must say I managed the
giant portion of fish fairly comfortably and also polished off the salad and other side dishes served to
me. The only thing I did not eat was the chips, which I thought might be just a little too fattening.
Impressed with my performance, the chef signed my Harry’s Challenge certificate all the same.

Third Test, Headingley, 22–26 August 2002
The wicket was very damp at the start of the Headingley Test on 22 August 2002. Despite this, we
decided to bat first after winning the toss. We were all in agreement that we should put runs on the
board and try to put the English under pressure. Sehwag got out early but then Rahul Dravid and
Sanjay Bangar, our makeshift opener for the game, put together an excellent partnership of 170 that
turned things our way. Batting wasn’t easy on a fresh wicket and they both played exceptionally well,
leaving a lot of balls outside the off stump.
I went in to bat in the last session of day one and decided to wear an inner-thigh guard. I had never
used one before, even in practice, but Andrew Flintoff was getting the ball to jag back in to the
batsmen and I thought the inner-thigh guard might be a sensible protection against injury. However, I
soon realized that my stance had completely changed. Normally the forearm of my bottom hand rests
on my thigh while I take stance, but at Headingley it felt completely different because of the new
guard. I immediately decided to get rid of it and the experiment was never tried again.
In this innings I was circumspect to start with and decided to play out the day, waiting for my
opportunity the next morning. Flintoff bowled a hostile spell and I really had to knuckle down. He was
getting the ball to swing and bounce and there was not much I could do but defend. The following
morning Matthew Hoggard, who had the ability to swing the ball both ways, also bowled impressively,
getting the ball to move away from the bat at good pace. Quality outswing is difficult to negotiate and
I had to be watchful while playing big drives on the rise. Shot selection in this innings was the key.
Andrew Flintoff produced another really probing spell. He was bowling into Sourav’s body and it
was decided that I would face up to him while Sourav, a left-hander, took as much strike as possible
against Ashley Giles, who was once again bowling a defensive line to me outside my leg stump. When
we went back for tea to the dressing room, Sourav said, ‘Woh beech wale Flintoff ka spell humne kya
jhela yaar. ’ (We did really well to see off Flintoff’s spell.) I couldn’t resist pulling his leg and
jokingly said to him, ‘Humne jhela? Saala maine jhela hain!’ (Did we? I was the one who negotiated
Flintoff!) The whole dressing room burst out laughing.
In the third session of the day we shifted gears and launched into the English bowlers, who were
gradually starting to tire. It was one of those rare matches in which we refused to take the light even

when the umpires offered it to us. We were dominating proceedings and there was no reason to go off.
In the end the umpires came up to us and said that as they could not see the ball they were calling it
a day. I was unbeaten on 185 and we had a mammoth score on the board. We could not lose the Test
match from that position and we already had enough runs for our bowlers to play with. By the time
England’s turn came, their task would be even more difficult, because the wicket was becoming
uneven and the odd ball had started to keep low. In fact, it was a low bounce that cost me my wicket
on the morning of the third day, when I was lbw to Andrew Caddick for 193. We finally declared our
first innings at 628–8, one of our highest ever scores on English soil.
The bowlers took over and from the start of the English innings managed to put them under
pressure. Kumble and Harbhajan bowled beautifully in tandem in conditions that were not so helpful
for spinners and picked up three wickets each in the innings. There were no big partnerships and we
kept taking wickets at regular intervals, finally bowling England out for 273 and then enforcing the
follow-on. Our huge first-innings score had allowed us to put a lot of fielders in catching positions and
we attacked the whole time.
In the second innings, with close to 400 runs in the bank, we kept up the pressure and gave each
English batsman a hard time. Even Nasser, who scored a hundred in the second innings, wasn’t spared
and there was a lot of banter in the middle. We were all extremely motivated and did not want a single
English batsman to settle down and take control. Nobody held back and our bowlers made regular
inroads into the English batting. Each wicket was followed by a lot of talk and the new batsman was
given a rousing welcome. When Andrew Flintoff got out for a pair, caught by Dravid at slip off Zaheer
Khan, our left-arm fast bowler, we knew we were within striking distance of a famous victory. Anil
did the rest, picking up four wickets, and we bowled England out for 309, winning the match by an
innings and 46 runs.
At Trent Bridge in the previous Test we had played well to draw the match and now we had cashed
in at Headingley. Kumble bowled his heart out for his seven wickets in difficult conditions and all the
other bowlers – Zaheer, Ajit Agarkar, Sanjay Bangar and Harbhajan – chipped in with important
wickets.

Fourth Test, The Oval, 5–9 September 2002
We followed up with another very good performance at The Oval. Rahul played a gem of an innings
and his 217 allowed the rest of the batting to revolve around him. This match had special significance
for me because it was my 100th Test. I was nervous and excited on the morning of the game and the
chief executive of Surrey County Cricket Club, Paul Sheldon, presented me with a commemorative
plaque. A special announcement was made and when it was my turn to bat people were expecting me
to carry on from where I had left off at Headingley. I hit some good shots on my way to my halfcentury, but then I unexpectedly got out to a ball I completely misread.
I could see the ball in Caddick’s hand as he was about to start his run-up and it was clear that the
shiny side was on his right side, or the on side. With normal swing, that would indicate an outswinger,
so I said to myself here’s an opportunity for a big drive and I was ready to play the ball between mid
off and cover. To my complete surprise, the ball came in a long way and hit me on my heel. I have
rarely been beaten so comprehensively and was out plumb lbw. The ball had reverse-swung and it was
the first and only ball that did so in the innings. In normal circumstances Caddick didn’t bowl big
inswingers, but got the ball to cut in to the batsmen. On this one occasion he somehow got the ball to
reverse-swing a mile. It was particularly difficult to deal with because it was a Yorker-length delivery.

It was unusual for me to misread a bowler’s swing in that way, as I normally backed myself to work
out what the bowler was up to by watching the ball in his hand. For example, every time Ben
Hilfenhaus, the Australian fast bowler, held an old ball cross-seam, I knew he would bowl a bouncer –
and I would be prepared for it. This strategy came in handy during the India–Australia series in India
in 2010, when I managed to score a double hundred in Bangalore. Similarly, I noticed that the Pakistan
fast bowler Shoaib Akhtar would swing his bowling arm twice before he delivered his effort ball as he
tried to generate more pace into the delivery. Again, I would be prepared for it.
As for spin bowlers, I have always monitored a bowler’s release point to work out what the bowler
was planning. In the case of the Sri Lankan legend Muttiah Muralitharan, he would have his thumb on
top of the ball when bowling a doosra. For his normal off-spin deliveries, he had his thumb below the
ball. We once had a conversation in the dressing room on how to pick Murali’s doosra and I told
everyone that all they needed to do was watch his thumb. One day, we were practising at the SSC
Ground in Colombo when Murali came to the ground. Bhajji decided to go up and ask him how to
bowl the doosra. Murali told Bhajji to use his thumb to support the ball from the top – that was the
secret. I had no idea about this conversation until Bhajji told me later. I felt very gratified that I had
worked it out for myself.
Being able to spot the doosra helped me a lot, and not just when I was batting. When I did an over
of commentary during the final of the IPL in May 2013, I said on air that Bhajji had just bowled a
doosra to dismiss the South African fast bowler Chris Morris. Morris had played for conventional offspin when the ball had actually gone the other way. The commentators, including Harsha Bhogle on
air, said they were impressed because they had not been able to pick the doosra and the replay had not
yet been shown.
I should also say here that there were other occasions when I found it difficult to figure out what a
bowler was planning to do. One bowler I found particularly challenging in this respect when I first
faced him was the New Zealand fast-medium bowler Dion Nash. His action was such that I thought he
would bowl inswingers at me, which he never did. I got out to Nash on the flattest of decks because I
played for the inswinger when the ball was actually an outswinger. Eventually I worked him out, and
even got a hundred against him in Wellington, but it did take me a while to do so.
Another bowler I had great difficulty picking at first was the West Indian left-arm fast bowler Pedro
Collins. I had first seen Collins in a practice match during our May–June 2002 tour of the West Indies,
when he bowled our opening batsman Wasim Jaffer with a big inswinger. I made a note that here was
a bowler who started with inswing early on. Accordingly, in the next few innings I played for this
inswing, only to see the ball leaving me and I ended up nicking deliveries behind the wicket. I was out
to him three times and didn’t last more than two or three balls in each of these innings. Midway
through the series, I spoke with a number of West Indies players and I was told that actually Collins
hardly ever bowled inswing – he normally got the ball to angle away from the right-hander. So by the
time of the final Test in Jamaica I was more confident against him and I managed to score 86.
The best bit about dealing with Collins, however, happened in India when the West Indies visited in
November 2002. By then I had fully worked him out and had started to consciously watch the shine to
tell which way the ball would be moving, because he was reverse-swinging the ball. If the shine was
on the outside I would even leave balls pitched on middle stump because I knew that by the time the
ball passed the stumps it would be close to the sixth or seventh stump. This frustrated Collins and
after a while he realized my strategy and decided to go round the wicket. That’s when the mind games
started. He did all he could to stop me seeing the shine of the ball. He ran in from right behind the
umpire so that he wasn’t in my line of vision. To counter this strategy, I deliberately pulled away once

or twice and subsequently asked the umpire to crouch. I said I wasn’t able to see the bowler and did
not know when he was about to deliver the ball.
Then I did something completely unorthodox. I decided not to take my stance when Collins was at
the top of his run. Instead, I moved to the off side so that I could see how Collins was holding the ball.
I knew once he started running in he couldn’t change the grip and I had just enough time to come back
and take my stance. It was actually hilarious: a batsman standing wide of off stump, craning his neck
to see a bowler’s grip. It’s not an everyday sight in international cricket. The strategy worked
surprisingly well and I more than made up for my bloopers against him in the West Indies earlier in
the year.

NatWest Series, June–July 2002
The Headingley win, which helped us to draw the Test series, followed a memorable victory in the
NatWest tri-series, making it a fabulous English summer for India. England, Sri Lanka and India were
the three teams playing for honours and we met England in the final after playing each other three
times in a round-robin format. The final on 13 July was one of the most exciting one-day
internationals of my career, and it is still fondly remembered by scores of Indian cricket fans.
All the way through the NatWest series I had been in good form, with two hundreds in the six pool
games. We had successfully chased down several high scores and we weren’t overawed by the
England total at Lord’s. Rather, we were silently confident of reaching the steep target of 325. We
started the run chase well, with Sehwag and Sourav scoring freely and laying a brilliant foundation.
However, as often happens in cricket when you are chasing a big total, we lost a number of quick
wickets and slipped to 146–5 in no time. I was out bowled trying to cut a ball from Ashley Giles. By
now the mood in the dressing room had turned sombre and nobody was speaking – until Yuvraj Singh,
the talented left-handed batsman, and Mohammad Kaif, a right-handed middle-order batsman and
excellent fielder, started an unlikely recovery act. They were scoring boundaries freely and at no point
did the asking rate go beyond manageable limits.
Once the partnership had started to blossom I had a feeling that something dramatic might happen. I
can’t explain why, but I was convinced it was not all over for us yet. The rest of the team sensed the
opportunity too and soon each run was cheered in the dressing room. I was sitting on a table in the
middle of the room and was eating one energy bar after another. I was not particularly hungry but in
the intensity of the moment kept polishing off the bars. Before long the atmosphere had changed
dramatically and everyone was engrossed in the game. Cricketers are a superstitious lot and no one
was allowed to shift position. If someone wanted to go to the toilet, he wasn’t allowed to do so in the
middle of an over; he could only go at the end of an over and had to come back before the start of the
next.
By the fortieth over, Yuvraj and Kaif had got the measure of the English bowling and we realized
we had a real chance of winning the title. The next few batsmen were all charged up and even when
Yuvraj got out for 69 there was no dip in intensity. Kaif was still out there and we knew that the target
was within reach. Finally, when Zaheer and Kaif ran the winning runs in the last over of the match, the
dressing room leaped in delight. We could not stop smiling and hugging each other – and Sourav did
the unthinkable of taking off his shirt and waving it above his head as he stood bare-chested on the
Lord’s balcony. It is an iconic image now but for some reason Sourav is always much too embarrassed
to talk about it whenever I ask him!
We stayed in the dressing room for hours, picking over the finer points of the victory. We’d heard

that the England team had ordered champagne by the middle of our innings and had put a number of
bottles on ice. With India at 146–5, an English win was deemed a mere formality. I don’t know if this
story is true, but a number of our players suggested to the England team at the end of the game that it
was time to pass the champagne over to us. We would be happy to take care of it. A number of bottles
did make their way to our dressing room and we finished them off before we left Lord’s.
There were Indian supporters everywhere and the stretch from the WG Grace Gate to St John’s
Wood Tube station was packed with fans waving the tricolour and celebrating. The traffic had come to
a standstill, with people playing music on the road and enjoying the moment. The police were
extremely patient and realized it was a special occasion. A large crowd had waited for us to leave and
were all waving at the team bus and taking pictures as we finally left Lord’s with the trophy. It was a
day few of us would forget.
The victory, which had seen youngsters like Yuvraj and Kaif come to the fore, suggested that the
core of India’s team for the 2003 World Cup was gradually coming together. It also proved that we
had a side capable of doing well in overseas conditions. In Zaheer Khan, Ashish Nehra, Javagal
Srinath, Anil Kumble and Harbhajan Singh we had a more than competent bowling line-up, and with
Sehwag, Sourav, Rahul, Yuvraj, Kaif and myself, we were capable of out-batting any opposition. Now
it was important to sustain the momentum and peak at the right time to have a crack at the world title
that had eluded us for so long.
England in India 2001
1st Test. Mohali. 3–6 December 2001
England 238 (N Hussain 85, ME Trescothick 66; H Singh 5–51) and 235 (GP Thorpe 62, ME
Trescothick 46; A Kumble 6–81)
India 469 (D Dasgupta 100, SR Tendulkar 88 , R Dravid 86, SC Ganguly 47; RKJ Dawson 4–134, M
Hoggard 3–98) and 5–0
India won by 10 wickets
2nd Test. Ahmedabad. 11–15 December 2001
England 407 (C White 121, ME Trescothick 99, MA Butcher 51; A Kumble 7–115, SR Tendulkar 1–
27) and 257 (MA Butcher 92, N Hussain 50; H Singh 5–71, A Kumble 3–118)
India 291 (SR Tendulkar 103 , VVS Laxman 75; AF Giles 5–67) and 198–3 (D Dasgupta 60, SS Das
58, SR Tendulkar 26; RKJ Dawson 2–72)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Bangalore. 19–23 December 2001
England 336 (MP Vaughan 64, MR Ramprakash 58, JS Foster 48; J Srinath 4–73, S Singh 3–54) and
33–0
India 238 (SR Tendulkar 90, V Sehwag 66; A Flintoff 4–50, MJ Hoggard 4–80)
Match drawn
India won the series 1–0
India in England 2002
1st Test. Lord’s. 25–29 July 2002
England 487 (N Hussain 155, JP Crawley 64, A Flintoff 59; Z Khan 3–90, A Kumble 3–128) and 301–

6 dec (JP Crawley 100*, MP Vaughan 100; A Kumble 3–84)
India 221 (V Sehwag 84, R Dravid 46, SR Tendulkar 16; MJ Hoggard 3–33, A Flintoff 2–22) and 397
(AB Agarkar 109*, VVS Laxman 74, R Dravid 63, W Jaffer 53, SR Tendulkar 12 ; MJ Hoggard 4–
87)
England won by 170 runs
2nd Test. Nottingham. 8–12 August 2002
India 357 (V Sehwag 106, SC Ganguly 68, H Singh 54, SR Tendulkar 34 ; MJ Hoggard 4–105, SJ
Harmison 3–57) and 424–8 dec (R Dravid 115, SC Ganguly 99, SR Tendulkar 92 ; DC Cork 2–54,
SJ Harmison 2–63, MP Vaughan 2–71)
England 617 (MP Vaughan 197, C White 94*, AJ Stewart 87, MA Butcher 53; Z Khan 3–110, H Singh
3–175)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Leeds. 22–26 August 2002
India 628–8 dec (SR Tendulkar 193 , R Dravid 148, SC Ganguly 128, SB Bangar 68; AR Caddick 3–
150)
England 273 (AJ Stewart 78*, MP Vaughan 61; H Singh 3–40, A Kumble 3–93) and 309 (f/o) (N
Hussain 110, AJ Stewart 47; A Kumble 4–66, SB Bangar 2–54)
India won by an innings and 46 runs
4th Test. The Oval. 5–9 Sep 2002
England 515 (MP Vaughan 195, ME Trescothick 57, MA Butcher 54; H Singh 5–115, SB Bangar 2–48,
Z Khan 2–83) and 114–0 (ME Trescothick 58*, MP Vaughan 47*)
India 508 (R Dravid 217, SR Tendulkar 54, SC Ganguly 51; AR Caddick 4–114)
Match drawn
Series drawn 1–1
