LAST WORD

I leave Indian cricket in safe hands. I have played with the current generation of cricketers who now
constitute the core of the Indian team. Batting, I feel, will continue to be our strength and the current
crop, which is a good mix of experience and youth, will surely play together for many years and serve
the country with distinction. On the bowling side, while some of our bowlers are doing well, we need
to find a few more talented fast bowlers. In the past we have had some really good bowling pairs, but
what we need now is a bowling unit that will play for the team at the same time. This is a tough
challenge, but with the depth of talent available in the country, I am sure we are up to it.
Finally, the game of cricket itself is extremely vibrant. Cricket is the only sport that has three
distinctive formats and each format has a constituency of its own. While Test cricket will always
remain the pinnacle, one-day international cricket too is in good shape, with the Champions Trophy
and the fifty-over World Cup seeing tremendous support the world over. Also, Twenty20 continues to
attract the youth, as shown by the popularity of the IPL.
A lot of people have asked me what I will be doing in the future. Frankly, I don’t know. When I
started out playing cricket at eleven years of age I had no idea I would go on to play for India or would
play 200 Test matches. All I knew was that I wanted to play the game well and enjoy every moment. I
stayed in the moment and lived each situation as they came to me.
I had never thought there would come a time when I would not be able to go out for walks with my
children, or take them shopping, that going out to watch a film or taking my family out for dinner
would require meticulous planning. However, I don’t regret any of it, for all of that is a small price to
pay for the affection and warmth the people of my country have showered on me all the way through
my career.
I am in a very similar state at the start of my second innings. All I am doing now is trying to spend
a lot of time with my family and sometimes not doing anything at all! This was impossible when I was
an active cricketer but now I am learning to take time off, and I must say I am enjoying myself at
home. Cricket allowed us to have a place of our own, our current bungalow in Bandra West, and Anjali
and I have taken care to ensure every little thing has been handpicked by us. From growing up as a
child in a one-room place next to Shivaji Park, to sleeping in our living room with Ajit till 1994, to
finally owning a bungalow in Bandra – by being true to cricket I have been able to fulfil a lifelong
dream of owning my own house.
Something else I always wanted was to have my parents stay with me, and while my dream of
having my father to stay at my own place was not fulfilled – he passed away in 1999, and we moved
into our apartment in La Mer in 2000 – my mother now stays with me, giving me immense fulfilment
and pride. In fact, on 28 September 2011, the day we moved into our bungalow in Bandra West, I took
my mother to the bungalow at six in the morning and showed her around the whole house in her
wheelchair. I had driven her in a small car to avoid attention and wheeled her in her chair myself for

the entire time. She was actually the first person to enter the house, which made the occasion all the
more joyous.
As I start my second innings, I will do exactly what I did when I was eleven, live and enjoy each
moment. I don’t know where my life is heading, nor do I want to predict anything. I will just take
things as they come, as I did when I played my first innings. There is one difference, however. As I
move on in life I will always live with the satisfaction that I managed to play the first innings my way,
and have been able to leave behind a legacy I can now look back on with pride.

Appendix
FAREWELL SPEECH

All my friends … settle down, let me talk, I will get more and more emotional … my life, between 22
yards for twenty-four years, it’s hard to believe that that wonderful journey is coming to an end, but I
would like to take this opportunity to thank people who’ve played an important role in my life. Also,
for the first time in my life I am carrying this list, to remember all the names in case I forget
someone. I hope you understand … it’s getting a little difficult to talk, but I’ll manage.
The most, the most important person in my life, and I have missed him a lot since 1999 when he
passed away, my father. Without … without his guidance, I don’t think I would have been standing
here in front of you. He gave me freedom at the age of eleven and told me ‘Chase your dreams, but
make sure you don’t find short cuts. The path might be difficult, but don’t give up.’ And I have simply
followed his instructions. Above all, he told me to be a nice human being, which I will continue to do
so, I have tried my best. Every time, every time I have done something special, whenever I’ve showed
my bat, it was for my father, so I miss him today.
My mother, I don’t know how she dealt with such a naughty child like me. I was not easy to
manage. She must be extremely patient. For a mother, the most important thing is that her child
remains safe and healthy and fit, and that’s what she was most bothered about and worried about. She,
she took care of me … for the last twenty-four years that I have played for India, but even before that,
she started praying for me the day I started playing cricket. She just prayed and prayed and prayed,
and I think her prayers and blessings have given me the strength to go out and perform, so a big thank
you to my mother for all the sacrifices.
In my schooldays, for four years I stayed with my uncle and my aunt, because my school was quite
far from my home, and they treated me like their son. My aunt – after having had a hard day’s play, I
would be half asleep and she would be feeding me food so that I could go and play again tomorrow. I
can’t forget these moments. I am like their son and I am glad that it has continued to be the same way.
My eldest brother, Nitin, and his family have always encouraged me. My eldest brother doesn’t like
to talk much, but the one thing he always told me is, ‘Whatever you do, I know you will give a
hundred per cent, and I have full confidence and faith in you.’ His encouragement meant a lot to me.
My sister, Savita, and her family, was no different. The first cricket bat of my life was presented to me
by my sister, it was a Kashmir willow bat … but that is where the journey began. She is one of those
many who still continue to fast when I bat, so thank you very much.
Ajit, my brother, now what do I talk about him? I don’t know, really. We’ve, we’ve lived this dream
together. He was the one who sacrificed his career for my cricket. He spotted the spark in me. And it
all started from the age of eleven when he took me to Achrekar Sir, my coach, and from there on my
life changed. You will find this hard to believe that even last night he called me and we were
discussing my dismissal, knowing that there was a remote chance of batting again, but just that, the
habit which we have developed and the rapport that we have developed, since my birth, it has

continued and it will continue. Maybe even when I’m not playing cricket we will still be discussing
technique. Various things, various things we agreed upon, my technique, and so many technical things
which I didn’t agree with him, we have had arguments and disagreements, but in the end when I look
back at all those things, if that hadn’t happened in my life, I would have been a lesser cricketer.
The most beautiful thing happened to me in 1990 when I met my wife, Anjali. Those were, those
were special years and it has continued and it will always continue that way. I know, I know Anjali,
being a doctor, there was a wonderful career in front of her. When we decided to have a family, Anjali
took the initiative to step back and say that, ‘You continue with your cricket and I’ll take the
responsibility of the family.’ Without, without that, I don’t think I would have been able to play
cricket freely and without any stress. Thanks for bearing up, bearing with all my fuss, all my
frustrations and all sorts of rubbish that I have spoken – I normally do. Thanks for bearing with me
and always staying by my side through the ups and downs. You are the best partnership I’ve had in my
life.
Then, then the two precious diamonds of my life, Sara and Arjun. They have already grown up. You
know, my daughter is sixteen, my son is fourteen. Time has flown by. I wanted to spend so much time
with them on special occasions like their birthdays, their annual days, sports day, going on holidays,
whatever. I have missed out on all those things. Thanks for your understanding. Both of you … have
been so, so special to me … you cannot imagine. I promise you, I promise you, for fourteen years and
sixteen years I have not spent enough time with both of you, but the next, the next sixteen years or
even beyond that, everything is for you.
My, my in-laws, Anand Mehta and Annabel, both have been so, so supportive, loving, caring … I
have discussed on various, various things in life, generally with them, and taken their advice. You
know, it’s so important to have a strong family who is always with you and guiding you. Before you
start clapping, the most important thing they did was allowing me to marry Anjali, so thank you very
much.
In the last, in the last twenty-four years that I have played for India I have made new friends, and
before that I have had friends from my childhood. They all have had a terrific contribution. Right
from, you know, as and when I have called them to come and bowl to me in the nets, they have left all
their work aside and come and helped me. Be it joining me on holidays and having discussions on
cricket, when I was a little stressed and wanting to find a solution so that I could perform better – all
those moments, my friends were with me. Even for whenever I was injured, I would wake up in the
morning because I could not sleep, I thought my career was over because of injuries, that’s when my
friends have woken up at three o’clock in the morning to drive with me and just make me believe that
‘Your career is not over.’ Life … would be incomplete without all those friends. Thanks for being
there for me.
My cricket career started when I was eleven. The turning point of my career was when my brother
took me to Achrekar Sir, my coach. I was extremely delighted to see him up in the stands. Normally
he sits in front of the television and he watches all the games that I play. When I was … when I was
eleven/twelve, those, those were the days where I used to hop back on his scooter and play a couple of
practice matches a day. You know, first half of the innings I would be batting on Shivaji Park, the
second half some other match at Azad Maidan. Sir would be taking me all over Mumbai to make sure
that I got match practice.
On a lighter note, in the last twenty-nine years Sir has never ever said ‘well played’ to me because
he thought I would get complacent and I would stop working hard. Maybe he can, he can push his luck
and wish me now ‘well done’ on my career, and because there are no more matches, sir, in my life. I

will be witnessing cricket, and cricket will always stay in my heart, but you had an immense
contribution in my life, so thank you very much.
My cricket for Mumbai started right here on this ground, the Mumbai Cricket Association, which is
so dear to me. I remember landing from New Zealand at four o’clock in the morning and turning up
for a game at eight o’clock here, just because I wanted to be part of Mumbai cricket, not that anyone
forced me or Mumbai Cricket Association pressurized me to be here, but that was for the love of
Mumbai cricket. And thank you very much – the president is here – thank you very much, along with
your team, for taking care of me and looking after my cricket.
The dream was obviously to, to play for India, and that’s where my association with BCCI started.
BCCI was fantastic, right from the, from my debut. Believing in my ability, selecting me in the squad
at the age of sixteen was, was a big step. So thanks to all the selectors for having, having faith in me
and the BCCI for giving me the freedom to express myself out in the middle. Things would have been
different if you had not been behind me, and I really appreciate your support. Especially when I was
injured, you were right with me and making sure that all the treatments were taken care of and I got fit
and fine, playing back for India.
The journey has been special, the last twenty-four years. I have played with many, many senior
cricketers, and even before that there were many senior cricketers whom I watched on television –
they inspired me to play cricket and play it the right way. Thanks so much to all those senior
cricketers. Unfortunately I have not been able to play with them, but I have high regards for all their
achievements and all their contributions.
We see it on the mega-screen, Rahul, Laxman, Sourav – Anil is not here – and my team-mates right
here in front of me. You are, you are like my family away from home. I have had some wonderful
times with you … it’s going to be difficult not to be part of the dressing room, sharing those special
moments. All the coaches, for, for their guidance, it has been special for me. I know when MS Dhoni
presented me the 200th Test match cap on day one morning, I had a brief message for the team. I
would like to repeat that: I just feel that all of us are so, so fortunate and proud to be part of the Indian
cricket team, serving the nation. Knowing all of you guys, I know you will continue to serve the nation
in the right spirit and the right values. I believe, I believe we have been the lucky ones to have been
chosen by the Almighty to serve this wonderful sport. Each generation gets this opportunity to merely
take care of this sport and serve it to the best of our ability. I have full faith in you that you’ll continue
to serve the nation in the right spirit, to the best of your ability, and bring all the laurels to our
country. All the very best.
I would be failing in my duties if I didn’t thank all the doctors, the physios, the trainers, who’ve put
this difficult body together to go back on the field and to be able to play. The amount of injuries that
I’ve had in my career, I don’t know how you’ve managed to keep me fit, but without your special
efforts, it would never have happened. I mean, the doctors have met me at weird hours. I mean, I have
called them from Mumbai to Chennai, Mumbai to Delhi, wherever, and then they have just taken the
next flight and they’ve left their work and they’ve come, they’ve treated me, which has allowed me to
play. So a big thank you to all three of you for keeping me in good shape.
My dear friend, late Mark Mascarenhas, my first manager – we unfortunately lost him in a car
accident in 2002, but he was such a well-wisher of cricket, my cricket, especially Indian cricket. He
was so passionate. He understood what it takes to represent a nation and gave me all the space to go
out and express myself, and never pressurized me to do this ad or promotion, whatever the sponsors
demanded. He took care of that and today I miss him, so thank you, Mark, for all your contribution.
My current, my current management team, WSG, for, for repeating what Mark has done, because

when we signed the contract I exactly told them what I want from them and what it requires to be
representing India. They have understood that and respected that, so thank you very much, WSG.
Someone who has worked closely with me for fourteen years is my manager, Vinod Naidu. He is
more like my family and all the sacrifices, spending time away from his family for my work, has been
special, so a big thank you to your family as well, for giving so much time for my work with Vinod.
In my schooldays, when I performed well, the media backed me a lot. You continue to do that till
this morning. Thank you so much to all the media, for supporting me and appreciating my
performances. It surely had a positive effect on me. Thank you so much to all the photographers as
well, for those wonderful captured moments will stay with me for the rest of my life, so to all the
photographers a big thank you.
I know my speech is getting a bit too long, but this is the last thing I want to say … I want to … I
want to thank all the people here who’ve flown in from various parts of the world and supported me
endlessly, whether I scored a zero or I scored a hundred-plus, whatever. Your support was so dear to
me and it meant a lot to me.
Whatever you’ve done for me – I know I’ve met so many guys who’ve fasted for me, prayed for me,
done all sorts of things for me – you know, without all that, life wouldn’t have been like this for me. I
want to thank you from the bottom of my heart, and also say that time has flown by rather quickly, but
the memories that you have left with me will always be with me for ever and ever, especially ‘Sachin,
Sachin’. That will reverberate in my ears … till I stop breathing.
Thank you very much. If I’ve, if I’ve missed out on saying something, missed out on a few names, I
hope you understand. Goodbye.
Wankhede Stadium, Mumbai
16 November 2013
