ANJALI

As I was trying to establish myself as an international cricketer, my personal life changed
dramatically in August 1990 when I met Anjali, my future wife. It was the beginning of by far the best
partnership of my life.
I had just landed in Mumbai on our return from the 1990 tour of England and was waiting to pick up
my bags when I first saw an extremely attractive woman looking down from the viewing gallery in the
airport. Little did I know then that I had just seen my life partner. She was standing with a friend of
hers, Dr Aparna Santhanam, now a well-known dermatologist in Mumbai. We had fleeting eye contact
and then she disappeared.
The next I saw of the two of them was when I was making my way out of the airport. I spotted
Anjali, dressed in an orange T-shirt and blue jeans, running out of the gate, apparently chasing after
me. That was not all, because she soon started yelling, ‘He is sooooo cute!’ I felt awkward and started
to blush, as I knew both Ajit and Nitin were waiting outside to take me home. My childhood friend
Sunil Harshe was with me and he murmured in my ear that a very good-looking girl was calling my
name and seemed keen to meet up with me. I had of course seen her and found her particularly
attractive, but I told him there was no way I could speak to her at the time, not with Ajit and Nitin
around.

The years of courtship
Anjali and I courted each other for five years between 1990 and 1995, a commitment that led to
engagement and finally marriage. It has to be said that the two of us come from very different
backgrounds. Anjali is half Gujarati, half English and is a South Mumbai girl from a very well-to-do
family. She went to St Xavier’s College and then studied medicine at JJ Hospital. She was wellspoken and had an upbringing fundamentally different from my own. In her family, wearing Western
outfits was the norm. My situation was completely different. I had hardly ever been out of my colony
and had always mingled with cricket friends. I had never gone out with a girl, let alone brought one
home. Unlike most men of my age, who were able to meet girls at college, I had been playing for India
from the age of sixteen and simply hadn’t had the opportunity.
While I first saw Anjali at Mumbai airport, it turns out that she had actually seen me a few weeks
earlier on 14 August, when I got my first Test hundred at Old Trafford. At the time she was in England
with her parents, and her father, Anand Mehta, a former national bridge champion and a serious
cricket fan, had called her to catch a glimpse of the innings on television. However, she had no interest
in cricket and didn’t watch at all. Soon afterwards she came back to India and it was when she went to
the airport to receive her mother, Annabel, who is English but has worked in India tirelessly as a
social worker for more than three decades, that we ran into each other for the first time.

The day after she saw me at the airport – and this is her version, by the way – she asked a friend of
hers, Mufi Muffazal Lakdawala (who played club cricket and is now a very well-known surgeon), if he
could get her my phone number. After coming home from the airport, she apparently jokingly
declared to her parents that she had seen the man she wanted to marry.
Mufi did get her my number but it was pure chance that I happened to pick up her call. There were
no mobile phones then and I was hardly ever at home to pick up the land line. The stars, I can say in
hindsight, were aligned. She said she was the girl from the airport and asked if we could meet. While
not trying to sound too eager, I told her that I remembered her and could meet with her at the Cricket
Club of India, where I was playing. At first she did not believe me and asked if I could remember what
she was wearing on the day I had first seen her. When I mentioned the orange T-shirt and blue jeans,
she was impressed.
She came along to the CCI, as we’d arranged, but we couldn’t really meet up and talk properly with
so many people around. Being discreet was the best thing under the circumstances. All we did was
exchange numbers and after that we started talking on the phone fairly regularly. It wasn’t long before
my sister-in-law Meena began to suspect that something was cooking between the two of us. She often
asked me about this girl who kept on calling me but I tried to avoid answering. I wasn’t used to
discussing private things with my family and felt distinctly uncomfortable.
Our first proper meeting finally happened at my house when we came up with the idea that Anjali
should come over posing as a reporter wanting an interview. That was her first and last foray into
journalism. A female reporter had never come to my home for an interview before and, in light of all
the phone calls, my sister-in-law was particularly suspicious about who this special reporter was.
For that first visit, I was keen to offer Anjali something to eat and was disappointed to see that
hardly any of the chocolates I had brought back from England remained. In fact, there were only two
left and in my keenness to salvage the situation I carefully cut them up and set a plate of chocolate
pieces in front of her. She couldn’t stay for long, however, and our first meeting was much too brief
for my liking.
Despite being brief, it left a lasting impression. I simply felt happy in her presence. I can’t really
pinpoint what I liked about her but what I can say is that I was able to relax and be myself with her
from the very first day. I had intentionally spoken very little because I was worried about
embarrassing myself by saying something stupid. She did most of the talking and that was fine with
me. In any case, at the time I wasn’t as fluent with my English, which was the language of
conversation. It was perhaps a defensive act, but Anjali never made me feel self-conscious. She was
just the most ideal soulmate I could have asked for.
While we continued to speak for long periods on the phone after our first meeting, we hardly ever
got a chance to meet. On some occasions we did plan to meet at around 8.30 p.m. and go for a drive.
However, it turned out that Anjali’s parents, who were unaware of the relationship then, were
watching television and so, despite wanting to meet, Anjali was unable to leave the house without
arousing suspicion. For my part, I drove all the way from Bandra to Warden Road, a journey of about
forty minutes, and waited in the car until I was finally forced to turn back. Because of the risk of
people recognizing me, I couldn’t even call her from the public phone close to her house (there were
no mobiles then) and had to go all the way back to Bandra to find out what had gone wrong, then I’d
ask her to try again and drive all the way back. Needless to say, I am now an ardent advocate of
mobile technology!
The second time we met was when Anjali suggested I pick her up from her house and we go for a
drive in her Maruti 800, India’s most affordable small car in the early 1990s. She wanted to have

coconut water along Marine Drive and it was the only time in our lives that we have sat on the bench
opposite the Air India building in Mumbai drinking coconut water. In my eagerness to please her, I
had agreed, despite knowing that there was a possibility of people spotting me and coming up to speak
to me. The century in England had made me a household name and people had started to ask for
autographs. I did not mention this to her in case she thought I was pompous. Because Anjali knew
nothing about cricket, it had never occurred to her that people might recognize me. She simply wasn’t
aware of how public a cricketer’s life in India can be. It is true that there is hardly any privacy, which
means that we’ve never been able to do the things couples normally do – watch a film, stop at roadside
eateries in the evening, take a walk along the beach and the like. It was an adjustment Anjali and I had
to make very early on in our lives together. The one time we tried to defy the odds was when a few of
us – Anjali, her father Anand and some of our friends – went to see the film Roja in Worli in South
Mumbai in 1993. We planned the outing meticulously and I put on a wig, a false moustache and
glasses in an attempt to hide my identity. Things went smoothly till the interval, when I dropped my
glasses and broke one of the lenses. My friends asked me not to put the broken spectacles back on just
in case something went into my eye, but in my panic the moustache came off too and soon people
recognized me, causing us all a lot of embarrassment. There was such pandemonium that we had to
flee from the cinema halfway through the film.
We had a similar experience in Switzerland just a few years ago, when we were holidaying as a
family. I had suggested we stay in a chalet rather than in a hotel and do our own cooking. Things were
going to plan till the day we decided to visit Interlaken, now famous for Indian tourists as the location
of the hit Bollywood musical Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge. We had planned to leave early in the
morning and walk to the site. A few of our friends had advised us not to do so in case people
recognized me on the way, so instead we hired a horse and carriage. Just as we were setting out, a few
of the other Indian tourists spotted me. Within minutes they started following us and even when I told
the carriage driver to go faster, they kept running behind us, trying to catch up. It was only when they
realized that they couldn’t keep pace that they finally gave up.
Such intrusion meant that Anjali and I could hardly meet in public and after our second meeting we
weren’t in touch at all for a period of six months. I was away on tours, while Anjali was busy
preparing for her medical finals. I knew how hard she had worked and was sure she’d do well in the
exam. On the day of the exam I rang her from Australia very early in the morning to wish her luck. I
must say I was delighted to hear her voice after so long. She was panicking and was worried that she’d
fail the exam. Knowing that was impossible, I said to her that if she failed the examination, so would
everyone else in Mumbai. She had always come top and there was no way it would be different this
time round. I also said that the number of hours she studied in a day equalled the total number of
hours I used to study in a whole month! It was only much later that she told me that my call made a
big difference to her. She felt I must have really cared to have called from Australia after six months.
It was far more than care, as far as I was concerned.
As expected, she topped the examination and wanted to go ahead with pursuing an MD in
paediatrics. I was extremely proud of her achievement and encouraged her to do so, which resulted in
her getting posted to a hospital at Palghar, on the outskirts of Mumbai, as an intern. Luckily for us
both, her friend Mufi was also posted in the same hospital. Palghar was such a small town that Anjali
had to take a train to Boisar, some twenty minutes away, to find a phone to call me, and Mufi was her
partner during these trips.
It was while studying for the MD that she began to take more of an interest in cricket. We had
started talking about the game on the phone and she even bought a book of rules. Often she’d come up

with questions like: where’s cow corner, or is the wicketkeeper right- or left-handed? But she picked
up the game quickly and I would ask her questions from time to time to keep her interest going. The
first tournament she watched on television was the 1992 World Cup and she was heartbroken to see
me get out cheaply against the West Indies after I had edged a ball from Curtly Ambrose. So much so
that Mufi had to console her, saying the ball was so good that others wouldn’t have come near it and it
was because of my exceptional batting prowess that I had managed to somehow get an edge. If only
that were the truth!
In the absence of mobile phones and text messages at the time, Anjali and I wrote a series of letters
to each other. Because I was not stationed in a particular city for more than a few days when on tour,
Anjali would have to work out where I would be in two or three weeks’ time and post the letters
accordingly. These letters remain prized possessions and when I look at them again one thing that
stands out is Anjali’s handwriting. Compared to mine, hers was wonderful to look at. I also have to
confess that writing did not come naturally to me. I would often take a very long time thinking
through each word that I would write for my beloved.
After coming back from the World Cup in March 1992, I visited Anjali in her family’s house for the
first time. Once again Mufi played a crucial role. Anjali’s parents were told that it was our first
meeting and that Mufi had orchestrated the visit. It was carefully stage-managed and was quite a
performance. In fact, it was only after we decided to get engaged that we told her parents the real
story. I must say I was extremely thankful to Mufi for all the help.
We weren’t comfortable with the fact that the relationship was still a secret and decided it was time
we let our families know that we were serious about each other. So I asked my childhood friend Sunil
Harshe to arrange for Ajit and Anjali to meet, and the three of them got together at the Willingdon
Club in South Mumbai. Waiting at home, I was anxious the whole time the meeting was on. It wasn’t
that I was looking for approval as such from Ajit, but it meant a lot to me to see my friends and family
like Anjali as much as I did. I remember waiting for what seemed like an age, but when I finally saw
Sunil and Ajit coming back, Sunil, who was walking one step behind Ajit, gave me a quick thumbs up
to indicate the meeting had gone well. I was delighted to know that Ajit too thought Anjali was the
right person for me.
All this time Anjali’s interest in cricket was growing and by the time I went to New Zealand in 1994
she had a grasp of the nuances of the game. It was the series in which I started opening the batting for
India in one-day cricket. I was delighted with my new role and was happy to be able to share my
sentiments with Anjali when I spoke to her from New Zealand.
By the end of the New Zealand tour we had been seeing each other for four years and it was time to
move on to the next stage of the relationship. It was during one of our numerous phone conversations
from New Zealand that Anjali broached the subject of engagement and I immediately took her up on
the suggestion. I told her that I was ready to get engaged whenever she was but it would be better if
she could speak to both of our parents on my behalf – talking was never my strong point. She was
hesitant at first but it was a great relief to me when she reluctantly agreed to take on the responsibility,
as I would not have felt comfortable discussing the engagement with my father. Not that my father
would not have agreed – I was absolutely certain he would – it was just that I felt slightly embarrassed
at the thought of discussing my future wife with him.
Anjali later told me that she too had initially felt self-conscious informing my parents that their son
wanted to get engaged to her. But my parents knew me well enough to realize why she had ended up
being the one to speak to them about it and all they wanted to know was if we both felt the same way
about the engagement. They were in fact delighted with the decision. The same thing happened a year

later, when it was Anjali who spoke to both families about our wedding plans. She has far better social
skills than I do and I was once again relieved to see her take on the rather difficult task. I have no
hesitation in acknowledging that she did a commendable job!

Engagement and marriage
We got engaged on 24 April 1994, which also happened to be my twenty-first birthday. The
engagement party was a low-key affair with family and close friends and was held at Anjali’s family’s
house at Warden Road, Breach Candy, in South Mumbai. It was an occasion of great significance in
our lives and we will always remember the joy we felt. Our families were delighted at the union and it
marked a whole new beginning for me. We finally tied the knot on 25 May 1995. Anjali Mehta had
become Anjali Tendulkar and I entered a new phase in my life.
Even before we got engaged, Anjali had mentioned to me that she wanted me to pursue my dream
and was willing to give up her career for the family. This was a huge sacrifice. We were aware that it
was impossible for us both to continue with our respective careers and that one of us needed to be at
home to take charge of the house and family. To my relief, Anjali took over the home front, allowing
me to continue with my cricket, and I will always appreciate the sacrifice she made very early in our
lives.
The wedding was a traditional affair and, as in most conventional Maharashtrian households, my
mother gave Anjali the mangalsutra (a necklace worn by the wife to ensure her husband’s good
health), sindoor (vermilion, the red powder worn as an auspicious mark by Indian married women),
green bangles, anklets and a toe ring, which are all considered part of the wedding ritual. In fact, I
remember her asking me if I wanted her to wear all or any of the things that my mother had given her.
All I said was I wanted her to wear the mangalsutra, and to this day she has never taken it off.
These adjustments, both in her professional and personal life, could not have been easy but she has
never shown any resentment. This has not only added to my respect for Anjali but also meant I had
actually found someone who I could love and depend on. I must confess it is not always in my nature
to say what I feel, but there is no doubt how much I owe her. Funnily enough, I have never called her
by her name. I haven’t ever said ‘Anjali’ or ‘Anja’ or any such thing while calling her. In all these
years I have not been able to figure out how I should refer to her. Frankly, it doesn’t really matter, for
that is how I am and, despite all my shortcomings, my wife has been with me every step of the way.
At the beginning, marriage did have one unfortunate side-effect, however. Marital bliss led me to
relax my routine and the outcome was weight gain. I enjoyed myself thoroughly during our
honeymoon and indulged my palate to a nicety. We had a few of our friends with us in Goa, where I
was also playing a double-wicket tournament, and that added to the fun. Almost every day during the
honeymoon I feasted on deliciously decadent desserts and other delicacies I normally kept away from
during the playing season. There were plenty of chocolates and ice creams and such indulgence came
at a price.
When I returned to Mumbai I realized that I couldn’t get into any of my clothes. I had put on a few
inches around the waist and it was time for some strict control on the culinary front. We weren’t
playing a great deal of cricket in 1995 and that was another reason why I had let down my guard. So
for twenty straight days after returning to Mumbai, I put myself on a diet of nothing but tea without
sugar, boiled chana (chickpeas), oranges and sweet lime. I also started doing some rigorous exercise
again to get back into shape. I used to run for an hour in the morning, followed by weight training, and
played two hours of table-tennis every evening. And during the table-tennis sessions I’d go and fetch

the ball from wherever it went. Even if I had played a smash and the ball had gone behind my
opponent, I’d perform the chore myself, to get more exercise. The result was a weight loss of 10 kg in
twenty days. But I had started to feel dizzy and weak and my trousers were now too loose, so I decided
it was time to stop. The first meal I had after three weeks on the diet was boiled spinach and broccoli
and after that I went back to eating normally.

The perfect partner
To come from such a different background and yet be able to integrate herself into the more
traditional Tendulkar household speaks volumes for Anjali’s character and commitment. Frankly, no
credit can be enough for her. She was an exceptional student and could have had an exceptional career.
But she decided to stand by me and has been with me every moment over the past two decades and
more. There have been occasions when I have been away from home and haven’t seen my kids, Sara
and Arjun, for months. For example, soon after the 2011 World Cup I suddenly realized that I hadn’t
noticed that Arjun was almost my height. (He is in fact taller than me now.) There is no doubt I have
missed out on some really precious moments with my family. Such separations are part of a
professional sportsman’s life, of course, but I was only able to get through them because I always
knew Anjali was there.
At the same time, I knew Anjali appreciated why I was away and was proud of what I was doing.
She is the one person I can turn to at all times, for whatever she says is always in my best interests.
Not only has she given me critical feedback on key decisions; she has taken care of everything on the
domestic front. Starting with the kids, my mother, extended family, finances and a host of other
issues, with Anjali in control I could focus on playing cricket. She is also my emotional rock, someone
I turn to at every moment of self-doubt. There has never been any pressure on me to return home early
from my engagements, for Anjali has always insisted that I should get back home only after I have
finished work to my satisfaction. Of course I regret that I couldn’t spend more time with her and the
kids during my cricket career, and I also appreciate more than I can say the understanding and support
I have received from her and the children at all times. Finally, I have always cherished the advantages
of having a doctor wife who has shielded me at times when I have been injured in the course of my
career.