THE FINAL TEST

Thanks to the early finish at Kolkata, I spent two quiet days at home before rejoining my team-mates.
I made the most of the time to myself ahead of all the frenzy. The only cricket I played was with my
son in our back yard, when he tried to test me out with some short-pitched stuff – with a tennis ball. It
was great just to have some fun with him.
On 11 November, I met up with the rest of the team on the Mumbai Sea Link on our way to
Kandivali Gymkhana, which was being renamed after me in a function organized by the Mumbai
Cricket Association. It was a great honour. It is an excellent facility and I hope it will serve as a
breeding ground for young talent in the region.
When we eventually got to the Taj Mahal Palace hotel, I couldn’t believe the lengths they had gone
to. My pictures were in all the lifts and on the nineteenth floor, where the team was staying, there were
photographs on every wall. In my own room every little thing you could think of was personalized.
From the soaps and shampoos to the pillow covers, everything had my name on it, and every day the
Taj management sent me a personalized sweet of some kind, such as cake or chocolate.
I was busy sorting things out in my room when I got a call from our coach, Duncan Fletcher. He
said the team wanted to honour me by wearing special shirts that said ‘Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar –
200th Test match’, and he asked if I had any problems with this. I said it was an absolute privilege and
I was overwhelmed.
There was no doubt that this would be a Test match like no other. There was a huge media presence
everywhere, bigger than ever before. They were outside the hotel at all hours, waiting to catch us
getting on and off the bus on our way to practice. I did my best not to be affected by it all. It helped
that the practice sessions were just the same as they’d always been and I batted in the nets and played
football with the boys just as I had always done.

Sporting the tricolour
One thing I was looking forward to was playing with some special new bat stickers and grips. The
design featured the tricolour and I had worked closely on it with my sponsors Adidas and my manager
Vinod Naidu. The stickers had been specially designed for my last game and they were never going to
go on any other bat in the market. I looked forward to revealing them when I batted in my 200th and
final Test match.
The stickers and grips arrived the day before the game and I didn’t want to let anyone see them till
the morning of the match. I borrowed Rohit Sharma’s bag to take all my bats to my room, where I
spent hours changing the stickers and putting on the new grips. I have always worked on my bats
myself and have spent many happy hours doing repairs over the years. I enjoyed the close connection
with the tools of my trade and the rest of the team often took advantage of this. If anyone wanted

sandpaper, glue or bat tape, bat coat, grip or gripper, it was me they would come to.
I couldn’t resist taking a picture of the new-look bats to send to Anjali. I was very happy with the
way they had turned out. The tricolour has always meant the world to me and this was my way of
showing respect to my country. I was looking forward to using them the next morning. As I was
packing my clothes and other things to take to the ground the following day, my sense of excitement
was also tinged with sadness at the thought that I only had a few days left.

14 November 2013, day one of the final Test
After a good night’s sleep, I got up at my usual time on the morning of the first day. I made my own
tea in the room, which I have always done, and went through my routine of taking a shower and doing
my prayers before putting on my headphones and going down to board the team bus, which was
surrounded by at least a thousand people.
When we got to the ground, I carefully brought out my bats from Rohit’s bag with their new livery
and walked out to practise with them. They were looking superb and my team-mates all commented
on them as they could see the thought that had gone into the design. There’s no doubt they added to
the occasion.
One way and another, it was a morning like no other. First the Mumbai Cricket Association
congratulated me on notching up 200 Test matches and then the Government of India launched a
special stamp to celebrate the achievement. I was told that I was only the second living person to be
honoured with a stamp in that way, the first being Mother Teresa. What could I say to such a thing?
Frankly, I was speechless.

Cricket at last
Most of the crowd wanted to see me bat, so a loud cheer went up when it was announced that India had
won the toss. But they were quickly disappointed when MS Dhoni opted to field because the wicket
was expected to offer some assistance to the fast bowlers in the morning. There was some bounce and
even the spinners might come into play on the first day.
As we left the dressing room, the captain gave me the honour of leading the team out, which I did
throughout the match. Gestures like that are memories I will always cherish. As we stepped onto the
field the team also presented me with a special commemorative cap, and I spoke to them briefly
during the team huddle. I reminded them of our duty towards the sport and the need to uphold the
spirit of cricket at all times. I consider it the duty of every generation of cricketers to set examples for
the next generation and inspire the youth to embrace the sport. It is the least we can do for the sport
that has given us our identity.
As I looked around the stadium I was feeling really happy that, for the first time, my mother was
there to watch me. In fact, my entire family, my wife and children, brothers, sister and her husband,
uncle and aunt, were all in the stadium and I felt blessed by the affection and support the crowd was
showering on me. There was nothing more a sportsman could have asked for. All that was needed to
top it off was to perform well with the bat to leave my final mark on the sport I love so much.
We bowled brilliantly to get the West Indies out for 182 on the stroke of tea, at 2 p.m., with Pragyan
Ojha taking five wickets and Ashwin three. My mother, I was later told, had been planning to leave the
ground at tea when a friend told Anjali that there was a chance I might bat after all if India lost a
couple of wickets. Anjali asked my mother if she felt up to it and luckily she agreed to stay on, hoping

to see me bat from the stands for the first time.
The gods must have been listening and it was a little past 3.30 p.m. when, with the score at 77–2, I
walked out to the middle. The crowd was chanting ‘Sachin Sachin’ and the West Indians and the onfield umpires gave me a guard of honour as I walked to the pitch to take strike. I tried to soak in every
moment. I was relieved to score the first run quickly. After that, I started to enjoy myself, my
confidence growing with every boundary.
It was during the last over of the first day’s play that my mother was shown on the stadium’s giant
screen for the first time. The moment she appeared the crowd gave her a standing ovation. As soon as
I saw her face I got very emotional. I now had to deal with two very difficult challenges – protecting
my wicket and controlling my emotions. I took my time to settle down before taking guard again.
In hindsight, I’m not sure it was such a good idea to show my mother on the screen with just one
over to go for the day. The broadcasters could have shown her on television but to show her in the
stadium when I was doing my best to survive the day was perhaps inappropriate. While I understand
they were trying their best to make the occasion memorable, and I much appreciate them for doing so,
this one thing could perhaps have been done differently. It did not stop with my mother. One after the
other, they kept showing my family members on the screen, much to the delight of the huge crowd.
It all made it very difficult to concentrate and I had to keep telling myself that I needed to shut out
everything that was happening around me. On this day of all days I wanted to give it my absolute best.
Happily, I managed to survive the day and was unbeaten on 38. I was delighted to have stayed out
there for close to an hour and a half. As I was about to leave the park, I raised my bat towards my
family.
When I look back at these moments they feel surreal, to say the least. My mother’s reaction when
she first saw herself on the giant screen, her tongue coming out in embarrassment because she wasn’t
used to the limelight, was so natural that I had tears in my eyes. The crowd standing up to
acknowledge her was more than I could have asked for as a son and I am deeply thankful to everyone
for showing her that affection and respect.
Amidst all the emotion, I was actually rather surprised to see Arjun in the ground. Before I left
home for the Test match we had had a lengthy discussion about whether he should watch me or play
his own Under-14 match. It was eventually decided that he should go to his match. Yuvraj Singh then
kindly dropped Arjun off at his game to try and make up for his disappointment at missing my 200th
Test match. All of Arjun’s friends were delighted to see Yuvi and Arjun was proud to be dropped off
by him. Arjun’s day then got even better when his team got a walkover and he jumped into a taxi and
found his way to the Wankhede. He managed to convince the police of who he was and the next thing I
knew was when I saw him on the giant screen, working as a ball boy.
Back in the hotel that evening, I tried to relax and enjoy the moment. I was exhausted but happy that
I was still batting. I ate dinner and retired early, knowing that I had important work to do in the
morning.

15 November 2013, day two of the final Test
The next day I got up at my usual time and, having finished my morning routine, put my headphones
on and listened to some music. As I was walking down to the lobby and then to the bus, people wished
me luck. There were happy and excited crowds on both sides of the road. I just tried to concentrate on
the music and stay removed from what was happening around me. Clearly, it was not business as
usual, but I did not want the enormity of the occasion to get to me.

After reaching the ground, I took out my bats and went out to the middle. It was our batting day and
on such days players are allowed to follow their own routine. On fielding days, we are expected to take
a few catches and do some fielding practice. Duncan said that we just needed to do a few stretching
exercises and then we were on our own. I went to the nets to bat to a few throw-downs and then came
back to the dressing room to get ready.
When we went out to bat I was feeling surprisingly good. Every time I took guard and saw the new
bat sticker I felt a strange feeling of elation. I had always played cricket for the tricolour. Now I could
see it on my bat every time I looked down. It was a terrific feeling. My mother’s presence in the
stands only added to my determination.
Tino Best produced an inspired spell of fast bowling, testing me on quite a few occasions. It was
only later that I learned that it was his son’s birthday and he had promised him he would get my
wicket as a birthday present. On one occasion when I was beaten, he appealed and I laughed and asked
what was wrong with him, because the ball was miles away from my bat! In the next over I could
sense that he was about to bowl me a bouncer and I was ready for it. I had all the time in the world to
play the upper cut – but I missed it by a few inches. I don’t know why I wasn’t able to connect with
any of the short balls. I finally managed to play a cover drive and as the ball was being retrieved from
the boundary, I mock-punched Tino Best and said it was his lucky day because I had missed out on at
least four boundaries against him. We are good friends off the field and fierce competitors on it.
I brought up my half-century with a straight drive and raised my bat to my mother. The delighted
crowd kept shouting ‘Sachinnn Sachinnn’ and it was tremendous to be out there. Even when I was not
facing the ball, the crowd kept chanting.
About five minutes after the first drinks break, Narsingh Deonarine was given the ball. I was aware
that he was an occasional off-spinner who would probably bowl only three or four overs. I told myself
that I should do nothing foolish against him but just take a few singles. Only if there was a loose ball
should I put it away for a boundary.
The ball I got out to bounced slightly more than I expected. It was a fuller delivery and faster than
his normal one. I thought I could cut it to backward point for four. I had played a similar shot against
Shillingford a little earlier. It all happened in a flash. Before I knew it, I had played the shot and the
ball was on its way to Darren Sammy at slip. It hit his chest and he caught it on the rebound. I was out,
for 74, with the score at 221–3.
As I turned to walk to the pavilion, my mind was flooded with thoughts. Why did I have to play that
stroke? Why cut the ball when I could have played it to cover for a single or even left it for the
keeper? What prompted me to go for the cut shot at all? Throughout my career I have always
questioned my shot selection after getting out and it was no different in that innings.
That’s when the thought came to me that there might not be another innings. It dawned on me that
this could well be the last time I walked off the field as an India batsman. The way the match was
going, there was a good chance we wouldn’t have to bat again. It was this thought that prompted me to
stop for a moment and take in the crowd and raise my bat to them for all their support and
encouragement. But the disappointment was still very much with me as I walked up the steps to the
dressing room. I knew I had missed out on a big one.
As he had in Kolkata, Rohit Sharma batted exceptionally well and his second consecutive ton, as
well as 113 from Pujara, helped us to a total of 495 and a lead of 313. In their second innings, the
West Indies top order fell without offering much resistance. At one point the crowd was actually
cheering for Chris Gayle. They wanted the game to go on so that I could bat one more time! It was
funny and unreal at the same time.

By the end of the second day it was fairly clear that we would win by an innings and that 16
November 2013 would be my last day as an Indian cricketer.

16 November 2013, day three of the final Test
The West Indies started the day at 43–3 and were soon 89–6. It was at the fall of the seventh wicket
that I started to feel that there wasn’t long to go. Each wicket was bringing the final moment nearer. A
quest of twenty-four years was about to come to an end.
When the ninth wicket fell and I ran in to congratulate the bowler, Dhoni asked me to stay away
because the team was planning something. I went and stood next to the square-leg umpire while the
rest were all huddling in the middle. I could not stop myself from getting emotional. It was all ending
so quickly.
Within a few overs the final moment came. Mohammed Shami took the final wicket with a full
delivery that knocked out Shannon Gabriel’s middle stump. I rushed in again from my fielding
position and picked up a stump, saying to one of my team-mates ‘Yeh stump to mujhe chahiye hi
chahiye.’ (I want this stump at any cost.) But again Dhoni asked if I could stand apart for a while
because they had planned something special.
I stood at the other end of the pitch while the rest of the team finalized the plan. Then Ravi Shastri
walked across the ground to do his television broadcast. He congratulated me on my career and said
some very kind things about my contribution to the game. I was still just about holding myself
together. Then the team started another guard of honour, only this time it was different. They stood in
two lines on both sides of the wicket with me in the middle, but as I started walking, players from the
end of the lines kept running to the front in order to extend the guard of honour all the way to the
boundary.
I could no longer hold back my tears. It was just too much. Such respect and affection was
overwhelming and I will always remember the way my team-mates gave me my final send-off. By the
time I walked off the ground I was openly crying. I could not look people in the eye and had to shake
hands with the opposition players with my face turned to the ground. I did not want them to see me cry
like a child. I did the same with our support staff and then just ran up the stairs to the dressing room
and went straight to the bathroom.
That’s where I broke down completely. I cried for about ten minutes until I finally told myself that
enough was enough. I washed my face and came back to the dressing room with a towel over my head
and sat in my seat completely alone. My team-mates had given me space and there was no one in the
dressing room to disturb me. I looked at my kitbag and thanked my gear for being with me all my life.
I was gradually starting to come to terms with the moment when someone came in to say that Brian
Lara and the West Indian team were waiting for me and that Brian had planned something special. It
was rather unusual for an opposition team to do anything like that and it was very touching. My 200th
Test was also Shivnarine Chanderpaul’s 150th and Brian congratulated us on our achievements. Brian
and I have been great friends and his words meant a lot to me. I then spoke briefly about Chanderpaul
and the West Indian way of cricket before all the players took pictures with me.
I went back to the dressing room to get ready to walk out with the team for the presentations.
Someone from Star Sports, the host broadcasters, came up to me and said that Ravi Shastri would ask
me a few questions at the presentation, but I said I would rather speak by myself. I also said I would
like to go on for a bit longer than usual, if they were agreeable, and suggested that it might be better if
I was given the microphone after the players had collected their awards. They readily agreed and said I

could go on for as long as I wanted, as they had all the time in the world for me!

A speech from the heart
I was finally given the microphone at the end of the presentation, but before I could speak the crowd
started chanting ‘Sachinnn Sachinnn’ and they just would not stop. As I have said many times before,
these chants will reverberate in my ears for as long as I live. I asked the crowd to calm down and not
make me more emotional than I already was. I had also brought a bottle of water in case I was choked
with emotion in the middle of it all.
I took from my pocket the list of people I wanted to thank that I had written on the plane back from
Kolkata after the first Test match. The challenge now was to say different things about each one. They
all meant the world to me and I wanted to thank them individually for their contribution. Somehow,
the words just came to me. I spoke my heart out.
When they showed my team-mates Sourav, Rahul and Laxman on the big screen I spoke about
them. When I was speaking about my wife I could see her break down in front of me and Sara trying
to console her. Arjun also comforted his mother as I went on to thank the best partner I have ever had.
I can never say enough about her.
I thanked my fans and the supporters of Indian cricket, who have always stood by me. It did not
matter to them if I scored a zero or a hundred. They were always there with me and their support has
been my biggest source of strength.
It is pertinent to recount here an incident I will remember forever, one that demonstrates what my
fans mean to me. I was once in Chennai when I had the opportunity to meet a number of special
children. Their teacher pointed to one child in a wheelchair and said that he was my biggest fan and
his ultimate ambition was to hold my bat. I put my arm around him and told him, ‘Okay, done. Let’s
play cricket together.’ Immediately, I sent someone to fetch my bat and a couple of tennis balls from
the dressing room. To my complete amazement and absolute utter delight, the boy stood up and played
three balls on his own. For him to be able to do so was incredible. We all gave him an ovation and I
have often spoken about this child, who left a lasting impression.
After a while I told the crowd I’d finish soon, only for them to scream ‘Nooooooooo!’ It seemed
they wanted me to carry on. In the end I spoke for twenty minutes, the longest I have ever spoken at a
stretch in my life. I genuinely do not know how I did so at such a difficult time; it was as if someone
from above had blessed me. Other than that, I can’t explain how I managed to navigate the speech
without a hiccup.
Once it was over, we went for a victory lap and my team-mates decided to carry me around the
Wankhede. No one had left the stadium and I waved to the crowd from the shoulders of my teammates and thanked them for being with me all through my career. I had always hoped that this final
lap of honour would be one in victory, because that would mean so much to me as a cricketer. In
defeat it would not have had even 10 per cent of the significance it had in victory. We had won the
match and the series in style and it meant I had won all of my final matches in all formats of the
game.
That was when Virat Kohli reminded me about going out to pay my respect to the pitch and I
walked out to the middle by myself. It was a very personal moment and something I had always meant
to do at the end of my innings in cricket. I would be no one without the 22-yard strip and it had taken
care of me all my life. It was only right to thank the pitch for everything and do namaskar (offer my
respects).

One final goodbye
As I was sitting by myself back in the dressing room, Virat walked up to me again. I could see tears in
his eyes. He held out his hands and said his dad had given him these threads, the kind that Indians
wear around their wrists for good luck, and he had always wondered who he would give them to. It had
to be someone very special. Then he handed them to me before touching my feet as my younger
brother. I was speechless. I held him tight and said, ‘Arre tu yeh kya kar raha hain? Tujhe yahan nahi,
yahan hona chahiye.’ (What are you doing touching my feet? You should be giving me a hug.) I
couldn’t say another word because I felt choked with emotion. A lump had formed in my throat and
finally I had to ask Virat to leave, knowing I would burst into tears if I tried to say anything else. It
was a gesture I can never forget and I wished Virat all the success in his career.
A little later, I called Ajinkya Rahane, my Mumbai team-mate who was our twelfth man in this
match, to a room adjoining our dressing room. I had known Rahane for years and had seen how much
he loves the game. He had served cricket with complete dedication and commitment over the last few
years. I said to him that he might feel hard done by what had happened in his career so far, but he
should continue to be the way he is, for I was sure Ajinkya would get another chance. For the moment
he might feel it is a cruel game, but I was certain the game would take care of him in the future if he
continued to serve it the way he had always done.
Finally it was time to leave the stadium. It had been hours since the match had ended and I had not
eaten a morsel since breakfast. The Taj management had sent me some haleem (a kind of stew with
lentils and meat) and I handed it to Anjali so that we could take it back to the hotel to eat there. As we
boarded the bus, Sourav Ganguly, one of my good friends over the years, came to congratulate me one
final time. I got off the bus to give him a hug. Dada and I have shared some great moments over the
years and have known each other since we were thirteen years old.
Once the bus was on its way to the hotel, Anjali asked me to go and stand next to the driver to wave
one final goodbye to the supporters. They were waiting on both sides of Marine Drive and were
celebrating and shouting ‘Sachinnn Sachinnn’. We had to pinch ourselves to believe what we were
seeing. This was my final send-off and these people, each and every one of them, were making it a
fairy tale. I don’t really know what I had done to deserve all this, but it made me feel really blessed to
witness these scenes. I was leaving the cricket field with no regrets whatsoever.

An unexpected honour
There was a special reception in the hotel lobby and it was not until 3 p.m. that Anjali and I finally
managed some privacy in my room. I took out the haleem that we had brought back and we were both
enjoying it and sipping champagne when I received a phone call from the prime minister’s office. I
was told that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh wanted to speak to me and after a couple of moments
the PM came on the line. He congratulated me on my career and thanked me for serving Indian cricket
for twenty-four years. Then he told me that in recognition of my contribution to Indian sport I had
been awarded the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest civilian honour.
After I put down the phone, I asked Anjali to stop eating and took her to the table where I had put
all my gods and goddesses. We both placed our hands on the table and I told her that she was now
looking at a Bharat Ratna. Anjali screamed in delight and gave me a hug. We did not say a thing to
each other for a while as the news sank in. Every dream of mine was being fulfilled and I thanked God
for all the blessings and kindness. Then we opened a bottle of champagne to celebrate and, to be

honest, the champagne just flowed from then on.
We watched television for a while as we tried to come to terms with the enormity of the award.
Every channel was showing it as Breaking News. I was the first sportsperson in the history of India to
be awarded the Bharat Ratna. It was certainly the biggest honour of my life and coming on the day I
had bid my final goodbye to cricket made it all the more special. I had already been appointed to the
Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Indian Parliament, in 2012, and now to be given the highest
civilian honour by the Government of India meant a lot to me. As a Member of Parliament, my plan is
to work towards making sports that much more viable in India (Sport for All) and also to integrate
sports within the educational framework in the country.
The honour was formally conferred on me at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in Delhi on 4 February 2014 in
an extraordinary ceremony at the Ashok Hall. As we entered the hall, a military band started playing
and when my name was called, it was one of the most unbelievable moments of my life. To receive
the Bharat Ratna in front of my wife and daughter (Arjun could not make it because he had a game in
Mumbai), and to be told by the President that the whole country was proud of me, gave me an
incredible sense of fulfilment. It was a day when I felt well and truly overwhelmed.
When I started out as a sixteen-year-old against Pakistan in 1989, I could never have imagined how
it would all end. I always tried to work as hard as I could and give my best for the team. While I may
have failed on occasions, I never gave up. It was my country I was playing for and that was all I had
wanted to do when I had started to play under the strict vigil of Achrekar Sir in Shivaji Park.
In all those years, I never compromised on hard work and discipline and always tried to push the bar
higher. To achieve something worthwhile for India was a dream I chased all my life.

Full circle
In my farewell speech at the Wankhede Stadium, I mentioned that during my career Achrekar Sir had
never said ‘well done’, but the truth is that that was never something I expected from him. The smile
on his face was enough to understand he was pleased with my performance. The day after my speech,
however, I went to visit Achrekar Sir, to thank him for all he had done for me, to mark the fact that we
had come full circle. It was very important for me to pay my respects in this way.
Sir doesn’t speak much these days, but I think that he was happy.
The other thing I did on the day of my retirement was attend a farewell party at the Waterstones
club in Mumbai organized by Anjali and my friends Sanjay and Rachna Narang. I have fond memories
of the club because it was where Anjali and the Narangs had organized our World Cup celebration
party as well. On that occasion, the party was organized overnight and invites sent entirely by text
message. This time, however, it was far more elaborate – something I found out later. Friends and
well-wishers from around the world had turned up to celebrate my career and we spent a lovely
evening together. Some of my closest friends stayed till ten the following morning and we enjoyed
reminiscing about the best moments from a twenty-four-year-long career.
West Indies in India 2013
1st Test. Kolkata. 6–8 November 2013
West Indies 234 (MN Samuels 65; M Shami 4–71, R Ashwin 2–52, SR Tendulkar 1–5 ) and 168 (DM
Bravo 37, KOA Powell 36; M Shami 5–47, R Ashwin 3–46)
India 453 (RG Sharma 177, R Ashwin 124, SR Tendulkar 10; S Shillingford 6–167, V Permaul 2–67)
India won by an innings and 51 runs

2nd Test. Mumbai. 14–16 November 2013
West Indies 182 (KOA Powell 48; PP Ojha 5–40, R Ashwin 3–45) and 187 (D Ramdin 53*, S
Chanderpaul 41; PP Ojha 5–49, R Ashwin 4–89)
India 495 (CA Pujara 113, RG Sharma 111*, SR Tendulkar 74 , V Kohli 57; S Shillingford 5–179, N
Deonarine 2–45)
India won by an innings and 126 runs
India won the series 2–0
