THE BEST SERIES EVER

India started well under Sourav, winning the ODI series 3–2 against South Africa in March 2000. But
soon afterwards cricket plummeted to a low in the wake of the match-fixing scandal. The credibility
of the game had been compromised and I found the revelations about matches being thrown for money
distasteful and disgusting. The whole thing was repulsive and what was seriously worrying was that
fans had started to lose faith and the integrity of our sport was in doubt. We desperately needed to
bring credibility back to the game and we hoped that we could do so in the course of playing the
Australians at home in a much-anticipated Test series in February–March 2001. It would allow fans to
move away from the sordid tales of corruption and focus on the real thing: quality Test cricket.
At the time, Steve Waugh’s Australian team were hammering opposition teams both at home and
away. They had won fifteen Test matches in a row when they landed in India. In Glenn McGrath,
Jason Gillespie, Damien Fleming, Michael Kasprowicz and Shane Warne they had a bowling line-up
capable of taking wickets in all conditions. The batting was also exceptional, with Matthew Hayden,
Michael Slater, Justin Langer, the Waugh twins, Ricky Ponting and Adam Gilchrist all in good form.
A few months before the Australia series my family had relocated from Sahitya Sahawas to our new
haven, an apartment at La Mer Residency in Mumbai’s Bandra West, a move to which I contributed
very little, I have to confess. It was Anjali who organized everything and all I did was walk into a
sprawling apartment with all my things beautifully set up for me.
On the morning of 26 January 2001, just ten months after we had moved into the new apartment, I
heard Anjali screaming in fear, yelling ‘Earthquake!’ The building was swaying from side to side and
my first thought was that the builder must have messed up with the construction. However, within
moments I realized that it was far more serious than that and people from nearby buildings were all
screaming ‘Bhago, bhago!’ (Run, run!) Because we were on the tenth and eleventh floors, it would
have taken us a few minutes to walk down with two kids, so all we did was stand in the middle of the
drawing room, huddled together as a family, praying for the catastrophe to stop.
The earthquake that rocked Western India lasted less than a minute, but it left devastation in its
wake. The town of Bhuj in Gujarat was almost destroyed and we in Mumbai did not escape unscathed.
From my bedroom at La Mer I could see Mount Mary Church on the one side and Siddhivinayak
Temple on the other and for days after the earthquake I would pray at night, urging God never to
unleash such wrath on us again.
In fact, even when I played a Duleep Trophy match in Pune for West Zone against East Zone in
early February, I still could not sleep properly at night. The nightmare of the quake was too fresh to
forget. In Pune we were staying in an ordinary hotel but the staff did everything possible to make
things comfortable for me. In fact, they overdid things on occasions and were themselves embarrassed
as a result. To ensure we all had hot water, the maintenance person had switched on the boiler very
early in the morning. As a result, the boiler overheated and all we ended up with was black muddy

water in the room. Being used to staying in five-star hotels, initially I was irritated with the hotel staff,
but later I found it funny that they were trying so hard to make me comfortable. The effort was
overwhelming and left a lasting impression.
Soon after the end of the Duleep Trophy game, in which I scored 199 in our only innings, a number
of journalists asked me if we stood a chance against Australia. I said we did and felt confident we
could beat them, provided we were able to put them under pressure. It seemed to me they weren’t
accustomed to handling pressure and it would be interesting to see how they reacted if we gained the
upper hand.

First Test, Mumbai, 27 February–1 March 2001
Though we lost the first Test in Mumbai in three days, we did have our moments in the match. I
scored 76 in the first innings, getting out when I went for an expansive shot to a McGrath delivery that
was wide of off stump. In the Australian first innings we reduced them to 99–5, with Harbhajan Singh
taking three quick wickets, before an aggressive counter-attacking partnership between Hayden and
Gilchrist took the match away from us again. We dropped a few catches and they both managed to
score hundreds, giving Australia a sizeable first-innings lead.
We started the second innings with thirty overs remaining in the second day and had lost two
wickets by the time we came to the last over. Then the nightwatchman Nayan Mongia was hit on the
finger by a ball from Gillespie and retired hurt. I had to go in and play out the last five balls, a task
that is never easy, particularly with Gillespie bowling at his best. The next morning I resumed with
Rahul Dravid, knowing it was going to be a stern test of our character. McGrath and Gillespie were
bowling in tandem and while Rahul mostly played Gillespie, I played out a very good spell from
McGrath. We hardly rotated strike, knowing that once we had played out the initial burst from these
two bowlers, things would become a lot easier.
I scored a half-century but I think even my harshest critic would concede that I got out in a most
unfortunate manner. I played a full-blooded pull shot to a short Mark Waugh delivery, which would
have been a definite boundary had the ball not hit Justin Langer’s back at forward short leg and
spooned up to midwicket. Ricky Ponting ran fifteen yards and dived forward for a very good catch.
The momentum had shifted and Australia soon capitalized on the advantage and closed out the game.
The Australians had now won sixteen straight Tests and needed to win just one more to set a new
world record.

Second Test, Kolkata, 11–15 March 2001
The Kolkata Test match was undoubtedly one of the best I played in, but it didn’t start well for us.
Australia scored 445 in the first innings, thanks to 110 from Steve Waugh and 97 from Matthew
Hayden, and when we were at a dismal 128–8 at the end of day two, with the Australian quartet of
McGrath, Gillespie, Kasprowicz and Warne all taking wickets, not even the most ardent Indian fan
thought we’d be able to save the match. I had scored ten in our first innings and everybody was
dejected after our frankly pathetic batting display. John Wright, our coach, was livid and took it out on
a few plastic bottles in the dressing room.
The poor performance hurt even more because it followed the high of the first ever Indian hat-trick
in Test cricket. Harbhajan had picked up Ponting, Gilchrist and Warne in succession on the first day,
swinging the match in our favour again after Australia had reached a position of strength at 252–4.

Bhajji was brilliant throughout the series and this was the very best I had ever seen him bowl. First he
had Ponting lbw, then he followed up with the wicket of Adam Gilchrist. Understandably there was a
lot of talk among the players before the hat-trick ball and I had an urge to tell Bhajji what I thought he
should bowl to Warne, the new batsman. However, I decided not to and all I said was that he should
bowl what he thought best. He ended up bowling a low full toss, which Warne played into the hands of
forward short leg.
At the end of our first innings on the third morning at Eden Gardens, even though we failed to avoid
the follow-on, there were signs of better things for us when Laxman, batting at six, managed to add a
few runs with the tail. He scored 59 and was the last man out. There was a brief discussion in the
dressing room and we all agreed that Laxman, who was obviously in good touch, should go in at three
for the second innings, with Rahul moving to six. None of us had any idea that this swap would result
in history being written.
Laxman and Rahul batted like champions in the second innings and I thoroughly enjoyed seeing an
extraordinary batting effort unfold before my eyes. India scored 335 runs in the second innings on day
four without losing a single wicket. Not to lose a wicket in a day is unbelievable and to do it against
the world’s best team makes the achievement all the more miraculous. Laxman played some
unbelievable shots off Warne and both he and Rahul had to battle serious physical exhaustion in the
intense heat and humidity, but they held on, eventually scoring 281 and 180 respectively, and by the
end of the day we knew we couldn’t lose the Test match. In fact, we had started to believe that we had
a slim chance of winning if we bowled well on the last day. This in itself was a dramatic turnaround,
because for the first time in the series we had managed to put Australia under pressure, just as I’d
hoped.
We declared early on day five with a lead of 383 and knew we had a chance if we could force the
Australians back with a few quick wickets. Harbhajan was bowling with exceptional skill, but we
needed someone to back him up from the other end. We did not get the wickets we were after in the
post-lunch session, however, and Australia went to tea with just three down. The game was drifting
towards a draw unless something dramatic happened.
Wanting to try something different, Sourav decided to give my bowling a go. He hoped that a
couple of breakthroughs might open up the game and he knew that the large Kolkata crowd would get
behind us if they sensed an opportunity. I would always bowl for two or three overs when there were
partnerships, and being an irregular bowler, I had licence to experiment. On the fifth-day pitch I
decided to bowl leg-spin, pitching the ball in the rough with two left-handers at the crease. It was one
of those rare days when the ball came out perfectly and I managed to take three quick wickets for the
team in a five-over spell, including the wickets of in-form Matthew Hayden and the dangerous Adam
Gilchrist.
However, the wicket that gave me the most satisfaction was that of Shane Warne. I tried to bowl
him a googly and the ball ended up being a half-tracker, landing in the middle of the pitch before
turning in to hit Warne plumb in front. Warne had perhaps misread the delivery and had first tried to
cut before playing a half-pull. I had bamboozled one of the great spinners of all time!
We now had the opening we were after and Bhajji did the rest. When we finally took the last wicket
of Glenn McGrath, with just three overs or so remaining in the match, the stadium went mad. Close to
100,000 spectators at Eden Gardens could not believe we had managed to win – and it was only the
third time in history that a team had won after following on.
We celebrated for a long time after the match. The atmosphere in the changing room had changed
completely after such an incredible win. There was a tremendous sense of positivity and we started to

believe that we could go on to win the series. The Australians had collapsed in the face of sustained
pressure. The myth of invincibility had been shattered. The series was now locked at 1–1, with all to
play for in the third and final Test at Chennai.
The impact of the victory, celebrated all across the country, is perhaps illustrated by an incident
involving SK Bansal, one of the umpires officiating in the Test. Mr Bansal later recounted to me that
he had gone out for a meal after the match and his driver had mistakenly taken a wrong turn. He was
heading the wrong way up a one-way street and was soon stopped by a traffic constable. Mr Bansal,
dreading the consequences the driver would be subjected to, stepped out of the car to ask the constable
to forgive the poor fellow. The constable, who turned out to be an ardent cricket fan, recognized Mr
Bansal and promptly decided to let the driver off.

Third Test, Chennai, 18–22 March 2001
The Australians started well, with Matthew Hayden once again leading the way. He had batted
wonderfully throughout the series and was the only Australian batsman who looked comfortable
against Harbhajan. He scored an impressive double hundred and the Australians notched up a firstinnings score of 391. I bowled a good spell on the first day, carrying on from Kolkata, and got the ball
to turn sharply but did not take any wickets, but by the end of the spell, the skin of my fingers had
started to peel off and I was finding it hard to grip the ball.
Australia, who were at 326–3 at the end of day one, suffered a collapse on day two, ending up with
just 391. It all started with an unusual dismissal. Against skipper Steve Waugh we were trying to keep
things tight and when he tried taking a single to short cover I prevented the run and said a few things
to him on the lines that he was trying to get away from the strike. Rahul, fielding at leg slip, offered a
few words and before long we were able to get under Waugh’s skin. Finally, when Harbhajan beat him
with a good off-spinner and appealed for lbw, Waugh, in a momentary lapse of concentration, moved
the ball away with his hand. We appealed for handling the ball, and the Australian captain was on his
way back to the dressing room. Mission accomplished, we didn’t say another word to him.
I was determined to make amends for my batting failures in Kolkata and had practised hard against
reverse swing in the gap between the two Test matches. I decided to follow the ball throughout my
innings and not to lose sight of it at any time. To play well against reverse swing you have to keep
your eye on the ball for as long as possible and that was what I did all day, as it was passed from the
wicketkeeper to the slips and through the hands of various fielders back to the bowler. I focused on the
ball and nothing else. The only time I was not following the ball was when I was talking to the nonstriker about something. As the bowler came in to bowl I concentrated on the ball and monitored the
release as closely as possible. From the arm position and the release point I could assess what was
coming at me and I tried to play as late as possible.
This exercise was draining and by the end of the day I was mentally exhausted. However, I had done
what the team needed me to do: I had scored a hundred. I had forged an important partnership with
Rahul, which was all the more satisfying because we had to negotiate a very hostile Jason Gillespie
spell with the second new ball. Gillespie, who was tired after bowling all day, wasn’t bowling quite so
fast with the second new ball, but suddenly he gained inspiration from an unlikely source. One solitary
Australian fan, sitting at the top of the sightscreen and carrying a huge toy kangaroo, started
screaming after every delivery, urging Gillespie on. He was shouting ‘Come on Aussie’ each time he
walked back to the end of his run-up. The fan had a huge impact on him. Within minutes Gillespie
started to bowl really quickly again and was all fired up. Rahul and I even discussed what had

happened to him all of a sudden. It just goes to show that you don’t always need thousands of fans to
motivate you.
Our partnership of 169 helped the team to an important 110-run lead, giving our bowlers some runs
to play with in the second innings. The match was nicely poised in our favour and we knew we had a
chance to close out the series. Hayden was once again going to be the crucial wicket. He fell for 35 to
the bowling of Nilesh Kulkarni. Gilchrist was the other danger man lower down the order, because we
knew he could score quickly and put the pressure back on us. But Bhajji, who had a grip on Gilchrist
and Ponting right through the series, once again took the bulk of the Australian wickets, finishing off
with a career-best haul of 8–84 in the innings. We needed 155 runs to win the series.
The chase started well and we were cruising before Mark Waugh pulled off an unbelievable catch at
short midwicket. It was a full-blooded pull shot from VVS Laxman and Waugh just flung himself at
full stretch to come up with a stunning catch. Laxman had been batting brilliantly for his 66 and his
dismissal left us at 135–6, changing the course of the match yet again. Suddenly we had a contest on
our hands.
By this stage, the whole team was sitting nervously outside the changing room. Everyone was told
not to change seating positions and we were all feeling the tension. There were not too many runs left
to get, but at stake was a series win against the world’s best cricket team. The crowd was cheering
every Indian run. It could not get any bigger.
At a crucial time, Harbhajan Singh and Sameer Dighe, our wicketkeeper and my very close friend,
put together a partnership that, though not a big one, was perhaps the most significant of the series.
Fighting unbelievable pressure, they somehow held things together to take us over the line and the rest
of the team were in raptures. The way the two of them ran the winning runs was almost comical, but it
was an incredible feeling to know we had won the match and the series. We were all shouting with
delight and handing out high-fives and hugs. We had beaten the best team in the world and it felt truly
amazing to have accomplished what I had predicted before the start of the contest. We had put the
Australians under pressure and had reaped the rewards for doing so. The whole team had stuck
together despite losing the first Test, and this series is without doubt one of the best I have played in
my career.
Coming at a critical time, the series also helped restore Indian fans’ faith in the game. Cricket had
once again triumphed over all odds. Both teams had played hard cricket and the passion and intensity
was at a high level throughout. Played before huge crowds, it was the best possible advertisement for
Test cricket. To Australia’s credit, they were always competitive and had actually come close to
winning in Chennai themselves, picking up eight Indian wickets in the second innings.
As we celebrated the series win I remember being very pleased to see Anil, who had not played a
part in the series because of injury. He had been present in the pre-series training camp and had come
along to cheer on the team during the third and deciding Test.
During the ODI series that followed, which we lost 2–3, I reached 10,000 runs in ODIs, in the third
game in Indore, and in the last match in Goa I did something that I have never done again in my life. I
injured my index finger and ended up bowling off-spin with my middle finger for ten overs, picking
up 3–35 in the spell, including the wicket of Steve Waugh. The moment Waugh came in to bat I
started gesturing towards the midwicket fielder, suggesting to Waugh that I would get him out there. It
was friendly banter and Waugh retorted by saying I wasn’t playing in my garden. As luck would have
it, Steve tried playing a slog sweep to midwicket and was caught there by Ajit Agarkar.
Australia in India 2001 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy

1st Test. Mumbai. 27 February–March 1 2001
India 176 (SR Tendulkar 76 ; SK Warne 4–47, GD McGrath 3–19) and 219 ( SR Tendulkar 65 , S
Ramesh 44; ME Waugh 3–40, JN Gillespie 3–45)
Australia 349 (AC Gilchrist 122, ML Hayden 119, SK Warne 39; H Singh 4–121) and 47–0
Australia won by 10 wickets
2nd Test. Kolkata. 11–15 March 2001
Australia 445 (SR Waugh 110, ML Hayden 97, JL Langer 58; H Singh 7–123) and 212 (ML Hayden
67, MJ Slater 43; H Singh 6–73, SR Tendulkar 3–31)
India 171 (VVS Laxman 59, SR Tendulkar 10; GD McGrath 4–18) and 657–7 dec (f/o) (VVS Laxman
281, R Dravid 180, SC Ganguly 48, SR Tendulkar 10; GD McGrath 3–103)
India won by 171 runs
3rd Test. Chennai. 18–22 March 2001
Australia 391 (ML Hayden 203, ME Waugh 70, SR Waugh 47; H Singh 7–133) and 264 (ME Waugh
57, MJ Slater 48, SR Waugh 47; H Singh 8–84)
India 501 (SR Tendulkar 126 , SS Das 84, R Dravid 81, VVS Laxman 65, S Ramesh 61; GD McGrath
3–75) and 155–8 (VVS Laxman 66, SR Tendulkar 17; CR Miller 3–41, GD McGrath 2–21)
India won by 2 wickets
India won the series 2–1