BAD LANGUAGE

The process of getting Indian cricket back on track after the World Cup started with a two-Test series
in Bangladesh in May 2007, which we won 1–0. Ravi Shastri, who was interim coach, played a key
role in helping us put the disappointment of the Caribbean behind us. Personally, it was a welcome
change, because Ravi and I have always been very good friends. Not only did we play together in the
early years of my career, but even after Ravi’s retirement we spent a reasonable amount of time
together on tours when he was commentating. He has an astute cricket brain, and, with his
straightforward and transparent attitude, we felt that we finally had a coach we could confide in.
In June we went to Ireland for a limited-overs series against South Africa. I was particularly excited
about visiting Ireland because my favourite rock band, U2, come from there. The series posed an
unusual challenge for us because it was freezing cold and it took us a while to get used to the
conditions. Despite the weather, I had a good outing and twice got out in the nineties in the threematch contest, which we won 2–1.
I also remember the series for an incident with Yuvraj during dinner in Belfast. I suggested to some
of my team-mates, including Yuvraj and Zaheer, that we should have some Japanese food one evening
and we found a restaurant that served Thai, Chinese and Japanese cuisines. We ordered a number of
entrées, including some sushi and sashimi. They served wasabi with the sushi and also gave us some
bread rolls to go with the other starters.
I asked Yuvi if he liked wasabi and he swore that he did. To our amazement, he then proceeded to
spread the hot wasabi on a roll as if it was butter and was just about to pop it in his mouth when I
stopped him. Zaheer was kicking me under the table, telling me to let him eat it, just to see what
happened. The wasabi was very strong, though, and there is no doubt that if he had eaten that roll he
would have been in serious trouble!
We forced Yuvi to admit that he had never tried wasabi before and we ribbed him mercilessly,
though he tried to put on a brave face.

India in England, July–August 2007
After the Ireland tour we went to England for a series of Tests and ODIs. The first Test started on 19
July 2007 and I have to say we were fortunate to avoid defeat after Michael Vaughan’s England had
put themselves in a good position. Anderson and Sidebottom had taken nine wickets between them as
we were dismissed for 201 in our first innings, and Kevin Pietersen’s spectacular 134 had helped to set
us a target of 380 in our second innings. On the last day of the match we were nine wickets down and
struggling when Steve Bucknor ruled Sreesanth not out, even though it appeared that he had been hit
right in front of middle stump. The match was stopped shortly afterwards because of rain and it was a
lucky escape.

We played much better in the second Test at Nottingham a week later, and on the first day, which
was also curtailed because of rain, we took control. We dismissed England for under 200, thanks to
excellent bowling from Zaheer Khan and Anil Kumble, with good support from RP Singh and
Sreesanth, and followed up with a total of 481. Five out of our top six batsmen passed 50 without
going on to make a century. I contributed 91 before being given out lbw by Simon Taufel. He later
came to see me to admit that it had been a mistake on his part and that he had seen from replays that
the ball was clearly missing the stumps. It added to my respect for Simon and we are still good friends
today.
Our innings was tinged with controversy when Zaheer Khan had an unusual welcome to the middle.
When he reached the wicket, Zaheer saw several jelly beans sprinkled on the crease. Clearly it was a
prank by one of the England players. Zaheer removed the jelly beans but they reappeared as soon as he
was back on strike. Zaheer directed a few words at Kevin Pietersen at gully – though it was never clear
who was actually involved – and when he came back to the pavilion he was furious. He shouted to the
team that we needed to play aggressive cricket and finish England off in the second innings. Zaheer is
normally a cool guy and he very rarely gets angry. It was a blessing in disguise for us, as Zaheer
backed up his words with one of his best ever spells in Test cricket, taking five wickets and leading us
to a famous victory. We went on to win the Test series 1–0 and the recovery that had started in
Bangladesh was complete.
We celebrated heartily, in which we were greatly helped by Rajiv Shukla, our manager for this tour.
Rajiv was a positive presence throughout the tour, and had been part of the team in some of our most
crucial away victories, including the NatWest tri-series win in 2002. On that occasion he took the
entire team out to dinner at the Four Seasons to celebrate the victory and also organized a special
performance of the musical Bombay Dreams, something we very much enjoyed.
We were playing some very good cricket by now and were looking forward to taking on Australia in
October 2007 in a series of ODIs in India before heading Down Under for a full tour a couple of
months later. Before that ODI series, however, Indian cricket received a huge fillip when we won the
inaugural World Twenty20 in South Africa in September under MS Dhoni. I was not part of the
Twenty20 team, of course, but I watched the team’s progress with great interest. The Twenty20 win
helped restore the nation’s passion for cricket and the players received a hero’s welcome on their
return to India.

India in Australia, December 2007–January 2008
India’s tour to Australia in 2007–08 was perhaps the most eventful series of my career. While we had
come close to beating Australia in 2003–04, drawing the series one apiece and dominating the last
Test in Sydney, we played even better in 2007–08. Even though the Test series is still talked about
because of an incident involving Andrew Symonds and Harbhajan Singh in Sydney, a lot of other
issues combined to make it an extremely intense couple of months.
We were full of confidence by the time we set off for Australia. After the series of ODIs in India in
October, which Australia won 4–2, we had played Pakistan at home in November and early December
2007 and won the three-Test series 1–0. Most of the batsmen were in good form and we were hopeful
of achieving our first ever series win Down Under. Unfortunately, before the first Test at the MCG
there was only one warm-up game, as is often the case with scheduling these days, and even that was a
near washout because of a storm, which meant we had very little chance to adjust to Australian
conditions.

First Test, Melbourne, 26–29 December 2007
We had a reasonable first day at the MCG, picking up nine Australian wickets, and we quickly
finished off their innings the next morning for 343. Anil and Zaheer had bowled well and now it was
down to the batsmen. I came in with the score at 31–2.
I had thought carefully about the way I would approach my innings and had a plan for each
Australian bowler. In fact, a glance at my scoring chart for the series will show up where I played the
big shots: I really went after the bowling in the area between long on and midwicket. This was based
on my experience of playing the Australian attack in the one-dayers in India a couple of months
before, when the left-arm chinaman bowler Brad Hogg had caused us problems. I was determined to
attack him because I knew it would force the Australians to rethink their plans. If they couldn’t rely on
Hogg, the fast bowlers would have to bowl longer spells than expected and we could attack them when
they got tired in the hot and testing conditions. I went into the Melbourne Test with a set plan against
Hogg. However, once in the middle, I realized that I needed to play differently and changed my plan
on the ground itself. Looking at his field placements, I started taking the aerial route and hit him in the
area between deep midwicket and long on, forcing him to change his game plan and remove the closecatching fielders. This strategy paid off and I could subsequently milk singles, with no men close on
the leg side. For other bowlers, however, I stuck to the same game plan that I had originally decided.
Brett Lee bowled at his best in this series. Back in 1999 Lee had been fast but raw; in 2008 he was
the complete package. He had real pace, a vicious bouncer, a yorker, a fast swinging delivery and also
a slower ball. He was consistently clocking 145 kph and I relished my contests with him. Among the
other bowlers, Mitchell Johnson bowled some incisive spells, while the accurate Stuart Clark had the
job of trying to keep things tight. To his credit, he also picked up some key wickets.
I went after the bowling from the start of my innings. I was feeling good and was set to kick on for a
big score. However, you don’t always get a hundred just because you’re feeling good and I got out
after scoring 62. We were all out for 196, which was nowhere near enough. Australia soon managed to
establish a stranglehold over us, eventually winning the Test in four days. It was not the start we had
hoped for.

Red faces all round
Something unexpected that I had to deal with at the time of the Melbourne Test was a severe allergic
reaction. On our way to Australia, Harbhajan Singh and I had bought a newly launched moisturizing
cream at Singapore airport and for the first few days I had no problems using the cream. It was during
the first Test that I started feeling a serious burning sensation on my face. Harbhajan did not have any
such problem, so at first I attributed my reaction to a massage. I had had to lie down with my face on a
towel and I thought it must have been something to do with the detergent used on the towel.
The problem started to bother me on the third day and I remember putting more cream on my face
before going to bed, thinking it would help. The next morning I awoke in agony. My face was on fire
and it was as if someone had pushed it into a barbecue. It was even worse by the evening with my face
all red and swollen. So much so that I was too embarrassed to go out in public and had to hide behind
large sunglasses.
Anjali was arriving in Sydney the next day. With the Melbourne Test over on the fourth day, I got
permission to fly to Sydney a little earlier than planned and met up with her and the children at the
airport. They were horrified by my face and asked what on earth I had done to it. I was not in the best

of moods and wanted to get to the hotel as quickly as possible. When we finally arrived, after a fortyfive-minute drive because of the traffic, I was really irritable. The hotel staff then took a long time to
give us our rooms and I ended up shouting at the hotel manager. By the time we got to the room I had
started to feel worse and told Anjali to ask the kids to sit in the adjoining room and leave me alone.
The poor kids were wondering what was wrong with me to behave like this. By then, my face was
troubling me even more. We called Reception and asked for a doctor to come to my room but were
told that there wasn’t one available at that hour. I asked where the nearest hospital was and went there
immediately. After a brief examination, I was given a lotion for the night and was asked to come back
the following morning.
We got a taxi from the hospital and after a few minutes the driver said to me in Hindi, ‘ Aap wohi ho
jo main samaj raha hoon.’ (I think you are the person I think you are.) I admitted that I was and he
offered to show us around Sydney, which I was in no mood to do. I asked him if he wouldn’t mind
taking us to a fast-food place instead and Anjali got out to get some burgers for dinner while I waited
in the cab. The driver accompanied her and when they returned she told me that he had insisted on
paying for the food. He also refused to take any money from us after dropping us off at the hotel and
left his number in case we needed to go anywhere else in Sydney during our stay. I was very touched
by the gesture and told him that I would leave match tickets for him at Reception. Later I got one of
my Test shirts signed by the team and left it with the tickets.
I returned to the hospital the following morning and asked the doctor to do whatever he thought
necessary to give me some quick relief, as I had a Test match to play the following morning. The
doctor was a little taken aback, considering my condition, but I was absolutely determined to play.
That afternoon we were supposed to be practising but I was in no state to stay out in the sun. I ended
up batting against my dear friend Subroto Banerjee, the former India medium-fast bowler, who was
then a resident of Sydney, in the indoor nets for a good forty-five minutes. I managed to take the field
the next day, however, and that was the first time I wore a floppy white hat, which from then on
became my trademark on the field. I applied a lot of ice to my face and then plastered it with zinc
cream. It looked ridiculous but that didn’t bother me.
After a couple of days, it finally started to settle down and I looked almost human again.

Second Test, Sydney, 2–6 January 2008
We suffered a blow on the eve of the Sydney Test when Zaheer was forced to return to India with a
heel injury. Someone’s loss is always another person’s gain, however, and Zaheer’s return meant
young Ishant Sharma would get an opportunity to play in Australia for the first time.
On the first day, we started well and soon had the Australians on the ropes, with six wickets gone
for only 134, four of which were taken by RP Singh. Just when we seemed to be in control and were
trying to press home the advantage, what seemed to us to be an error by umpire Steve Bucknor caused
a shift in momentum. Andrew Symonds was ruled not out after he had very clearly edged the ball to
Dhoni off Ishant – the sound was heard not just by the players but also by the spectators. My son heard
the sound of the edge sitting in the stands and reminds me whenever we discuss the Sydney Test
match. Symonds stood his ground and, riding his luck, got a very important century for Australia. His
162 changed the course of the game and Australia managed to put together a total of 463 after being in
a lot of trouble. That wasn’t their only piece of luck, though. Even before Symonds had been given
this reprieve, Ricky Ponting had been adjudged not out by umpire Mark Benson after he seemed to
edge a ball down the leg side.

The best response was to go out and make some runs. I was glad to make amends for missing out in
Melbourne by making 154, and it was a delight to watch Laxman score a hundred at the other end,
with Rahul and Sourav also chipping in with half-centuries. But just when the momentum seemed to
be swinging our way, Andrew Symonds started swearing at Harbhajan, who was batting with me and
playing really well.
Bhajji had gone past 50 when it all started. For a number of overs he had been telling me that
Andrew Symonds was trying to get him riled. I asked Bhajji not to rise to it but to continue batting the
way he was. I knew only too well that by retaliating he would just play into the Australians’ hands.
The best thing to do is to ignore such provocation. That’s easy enough to say, but of course it’s not
always so easy to keep your cool at moments of intense pressure.
Bhajji was doing his best and was actually trying to be civil with some of the Australian players,
including Brett Lee, when all hell broke loose. Bhajji had playfully tapped Lee on the back after
completing a run and Symonds at mid off took exception to this. He apparently did not want an
opposition player meddling with Lee and once again hurled abuse at Bhajji. Bhajji is an impulsive and
passionate individual and it was only a matter of time before he would retaliate, which he soon did.
That was the start of the controversy that almost caused the tour to be called off.
I want to state very clearly that the incident arose because Andrew Symonds had been continually
trying to provoke Bhajji and it was inevitable that the two would have an altercation at some point.
While walking up to Bhajji to try to calm things down, I heard him say ‘Teri maa ki’ (Your mother …)
to Symonds. It is an expression we often use in north India to vent our anger and to me it was all part
of the game. In fact, I was surprised to see umpire Mark Benson go up to Bhajji and speak to him.
While the umpire was talking to Bhajji, some of the Australian players started to warn him of the dire
consequences of his words, presumably to rattle him and disturb his concentration. The ploy paid off
when a few overs later Bhajji was out for 63.
I thought the matter had ended with Bhajji’s dismissal and later I was surprised when I was told that
the Australians had lodged a formal complaint at the end of that day’s play, apparently alleging that
Bhajji had called Symonds a ‘monkey’, which was being treated as a racial insult. What surprised me
most was the haste with which the Australians had lodged their complaint. I was later informed that it
had apparently been agreed between the Australian and Indian boards during their tour of India in
October 2007, following an incident in Mumbai, that the respective captains were to report to the
match referee any incident with a racial element. Even so, I still believe that the matter would not
have been blown so out of proportion if Ponting had discussed it with the captain Anil Kumble,
Harbhajan and the Indian team management before reporting the incident to Mike Procter, the match
referee. In turn, Mike Procter could also have handled the matter with a little more sensitivity.
Soon after the end of play on the third day we were informed by Mike Procter that there would be a
formal hearing on the incident at the end of the fourth day, which was later changed to the end of the
match. It did not leave us in the best frame of mind in the middle of an intense contest. While it was
distressing to hear that Symonds felt he had been racially abused, it was equally distressing to observe
what Bhajji was going through. As far as we were concerned, he had retaliated in the face of
provocation, which was par for the course in an Australia–India cricket match. But he did not racially
abuse another cricketer.
With the controversy overshadowing everything, the Test match assumed a completely different
character. By the fifth day we were batting to save the game. Mind you, there is little doubt in my
mind that we would have drawn had it not been for what seemed to us to be mistakes by the umpires
and some rather unsportsmanlike conduct by a few of the Australian players.

Rahul Dravid was given out caught behind off Symonds for 38 by umpire Bucknor when his bat
seemed to be a fair distance away from the ball. The wicketkeeper Adam Gilchrist was standing up to
the stumps at the time and was in the best position to see if the ball had touched Rahul’s bat. Yet he
who prided himself on walking off if he nicked the ball appealed for the caught-behind and to our
disbelief we saw the umpire raise the finger. It was a shocking decision. Some of us actually wondered
if Rahul had been given out lbw.
A few overs later, Sourav was given out by umpire Benson after Michael Clarke and Ricky Ponting
decided to appeal for what we thought was a grassed catch at slip. Finally, umpire Bucknor gave
Dhoni out leg-before when to us the ball would clearly have missed the stumps. It seemed that every
decision that could go against us had done so.
After the Test had ended with an Australian victory in the dying minutes of the fifth day, the Indian
team were instructed to stay behind at the ground for the Bhajji hearing. Despite this, however, I was
the first person to go out and congratulate the Australians, regardless of all the controversy and
disappointment. In those circumstances, to have to hang around in order to testify on an important
incident like that wasn’t ideal, to say the least.
The hearing was conducted rather strangely, it seemed to me, with the Australians and Indians
asked to testify separately, without the other side being present in the room. This certainly didn’t
improve the trust between the Indian and Australian players. I was the principal witness because I was
batting at the other end from Bhajji and I recounted the incident to the match referee in detail. Apart
from Bhajji himself, Chetan Chauhan, our manager on this tour, MV Sridhar, the media manager, and
Anil Kumble, the captain, were also called.
Mike Procter did not look very convinced by our version of events and we found it surprising that
he asked us to wait in our dressing room till well past midnight. In fact, it was not until 2 a.m. that we
were allowed to return to our hotel. The controversy had started to cast a pall over the series. After the
hearing there was serious ill-feeling between the two teams and we felt betrayed by the turn of events.

Standing up for justice
We were preparing to travel to Canberra the day after the Sydney Test to play a first-class fixture
when we heard that Bhajji had been banned for three matches. We had had enough. It was just not
acceptable and we decided it was time to take a stand against the judgement. We did not agree with
what the referee had done and felt that the hearing at Sydney had been something of a farce. We
informed the BCCI of the players’ feelings and held a team meeting to decide what to do about it.
Anil Kumble and I took the lead and it was unanimously decided that we would boycott the tour if
Bhajji’s ban was upheld. Anil is one of the politest cricketers I have known but he is also very strongminded. I have great admiration for the role he played as captain during this controversy. We decided
to lodge an appeal against the ban and, in a gesture of protest, we also decided not to travel to
Canberra – even though we had already loaded all our cricket gear into the bus. It was time for stern
words and strong action.
The BCCI was behind us all the way and duly lodged a formal appeal contesting the ban. Mr VR
Manohar, one of India’s legal luminaries, was handling our case. We had regular conversations with
him and provided him with all the relevant details. I must reiterate that we were very serious about the
boycott. If Bhajji’s ban was upheld, it would mean an acceptance of guilt and imply that Bhajji had
racially abused Symonds, which he most certainly had not. We were fully prepared to accept the
consequences of walking out of a tour, knowing that such an action might have resulted in the ICC

banning the Indian team. The issue was now bigger than just Bhajji. Indians all over the world felt
slighted and we felt it was our responsibility to stand up for our cause.
Having made our decision, we needed to find some way of reducing the tension. In the end we went
to Bondi Beach and played a game of volleyball. It had a magical effect. It served as a fantastic teambonding session and helped give us the determination to carry on. Unsurprisingly, perhaps, the media
followed us wherever we went, particularly Bhajji. On a lighter note, I remember saying to him that he
must be the second most popular man in the world after Michael Jackson, with so many cameras
following him. In fact, I called him MJ for some time during and after the controversy.

Third Test, Perth, 16–19 January 2008
Once we had lodged our appeal, we agreed to go to Perth for the third Test. On the eve of the match
the ICC had flown in Ranjan Madugalle, its senior match referee, in an attempt to defuse the
simmering tension between the two teams. A meeting was staged between the two captains at the
Hyatt Hotel in Ranjan’s presence and Anil and Ricky shook hands for the cameras. In reality nothing
had changed. The unpleasantness of Sydney would not go away and a number of issues remained to be
straightened out at the WACA, where India had never won a Test.
The Perth Test turned out to be one of the best Test matches I was involved in. There is little doubt
in my mind that the controversy had brought us together as a team. Sehwag was back and he gave us a
quick start against Brett Lee, Mitchell Johnson, Shaun Tait and Stuart Clark on the first morning,
helping us to win the first skirmish. He only scored 29 but it was enough to set the foundation for the
middle order. Rahul and I then put together a very important partnership of 139.
It was in this innings that I had one of my toughest contests with Brett Lee. He bowled at real pace
and I had to be at my best. I hadn’t been in long when Lee bowled a fast bouncer. The shot I played
still gives me a lot of satisfaction. I readied myself to play the upper cut over the slips, but then I
realized that the ball was jagging back at me at furious pace. Within a fraction of a second the ball was
just inches away from my head. I kept my eyes on the ball and was leaning back at almost 45 degrees
when I finally met the ball with the bat right in front of my eyes. The ball flew over the
wicketkeeper’s head to the boundary. After that, I had a feeling it was going to be a good day. I went
on to make 71 in our score of 330, with Dravid contributing 93.
Anil picked up his 600th Test wicket in Australia’s first innings when he had Symonds caught by
Rahul at slips. Anil’s uncharacteristically exuberant celebration was an eye-opener for all of us and
showed how much the wicket meant to the team after the Sydney Test. Breaking the partnership
between Symonds and Gilchrist proved crucial. We went on to bowl Australia out for 212, with RP
Singh taking four wickets, giving us a 118-run lead. We had set Australia a target of 413 and were
beginning to scent victory. But there was still a job to be done and there was no room for
complacency.
The final day was a classic piece of Test cricket. In fact, Ishant Sharma’s spell of fast bowling that
morning was one of the best spells by an Indian bowler in all my years of international cricket.
Ponting and Michael Hussey came in intent on staging a fightback after Irfan Pathan had picked up the
two openers the previous evening. Anil had set a good field to Ponting and Ishant was given the ball. It
was inspiring to see an Indian fast bowler bowl at real pace to one of the world’s premier batsmen and
mesmerize him with balls that came in from a good length.
The length Ishant was hitting was the key. I was standing at mid on and kept reminding him to bowl
the same line and length over and over again. There was no need for anything fancy, as he already had

Ponting in some difficulty. I could also sense Ponting trying to upset Ishant by threatening to come
forward, to force him to alter his length. It was a true test between bat and ball and I was impressed to
see Ishant stick to doing exactly what had been asked of him.
By the end of eight overs Ishant showed no reduction in pace. He had beaten Ponting on numerous
occasions but somehow the batsman had survived. It was an important moment. If he managed to play
Ishant off, Ponting would be able to relax and we would have missed an opportunity. Anil, however,
was tempted to give Ishant a rest – until some of the senior players persuaded him to allow Ishant one
more go at Ponting.
The gamble paid off and Ishant finally got Ponting to edge one to Rahul at slip. It was a just reward
for a great piece of fast bowling. We had our man and could now have a crack at the Australian middle
order. We kept taking wickets at regular intervals and in the end it was the left-arm seamer RP Singh
who clean-bowled Stuart Clark to give us an amazing victory.

Reasons to be cheerful
After the game a number of bottles of champagne were opened in the dressing room and one was also
sent across to the touring Indian media contingent, who had played a very important role in standing
behind us during the Sydney controversy. I’m pleased to say that Brett Lee and Adam Gilchrist also
came to our dressing room to congratulate us and it was a gesture that was much appreciated.
As I look back at the Perth Test a few things stand out. We arrived in Perth with a sense of purpose.
We all felt hurt by what had transpired in Sydney and the best way to vent our anger was on the cricket
field. And that is what we did.
The second thing I remember about Perth is the arrival of Gary Kirsten, who had been nominated as
coach of India but who was yet to take charge. Gary did not say much at first and just wanted to
observe how the Indian players went about their routines. It was Gary who suggested that the team
should go cycling in Perth, to get our minds off cricket for a while. It certainly did us a lot of good. At
such times net practice is not always the only answer. No one will ever become a Sunil Gavaskar or a
Kapil Dev in two days of practice. It is just as important to recharge mentally and it often helps to
spend some time together away from the cricket field.
Finally, the support of the fans was particularly memorable. We were 2–0 down in the series and a
lot had been written about the fragility of the team on the fast and bouncy WACA track. None of this
gloomy talk stopped the Indian fans from coming and lending their support. It was terrific to see the
tricolour being waved in the stands and it was a reminder of what the game meant to Indians all round
the world. It felt good to have made them proud.
We had proved that the Indian team could play within the spirit of the game both on and off the
field.

Fourth Test, Adelaide, 24–28 January 2008
As we prepared for the final Test at Adelaide, Gary asked me if I wanted to bat in the nets and I said
I’d prefer to practise to some short-pitched throw-downs. This was the start of a ritual that continued
for four years, with Gary throwing hundreds of balls to me before every game. He never seemed to get
tired and his commitment to the job was amazing.
When he asked me at Adelaide if I wanted to practise against short throw-downs, I asked him to
throw full and fast at me, because I had a feeling Brett Lee would bowl a full-length delivery the

moment I went in, as he had got me out with a full delivery at Perth. Sure enough, as soon as I walked
out to bat at the Adelaide Oval, Lee bowled a delivery at my pads. I was prepared and instead of
playing square, which perhaps he was expecting me to do, I played a straight drive past the umpire for
four. After the stroke I looked towards Gary in our dressing room.
I went on to score 153 and we put more than 500 runs on the board, with Sehwag and Bhajji both
scoring 63 and Kumble playing a captain’s innings down the order of 87. Australia batted just as well
in response, with Hayden, Ponting and Clarke all making hundreds, and the match ended in a draw –
but only after Sehwag had added an impressive 151 in our second innings. We had not managed to
level the series but we had won back credibility and respect.

The final verdict
Before bringing down the curtain on the controversial ‘Monkeygate’ saga, as it had been dubbed in the
press, Justice John Hansen heard everybody’s evidence in the appeal on 28 January 2008. I stated
exactly what I had heard and seen and also said that I had taken exception to us being labelled ‘liars’
by the match referee, Mike Procter, who had mentioned in his statement that ‘I believe one group is
telling the truth’. That he banned Bhajji for three Test matches seemed to us to show which group, in
his opinion, was lying. It is never a pleasant thing to be called a liar and I was extremely angry.
In the end justice prevailed. The verdict of the appeal was that there was no evidence to suggest the
use of a racist remark by Bhajji and the ban was lifted. Instead Bhajji was fined half of his match fee
for using abusive language against Symonds. Bhajji could finally breathe a sigh of relief and we as a
team felt vindicated.
India in Bangladesh 2007
1st Test. Chittagong. 18–22 May 2007
India 387–8 dec (SR Tendulkar 101, SC Ganguly 100, R Dravid 61, KD Karthik 56; M Mortaza 4–97,
S Hossain 3–76) and 100–6 dec (SR Tendulkar 31; M Rafique 3–27, S Hossain 2–30)
Bangladesh 238 (M Mortaza 79, R Saleh 41; RP Singh 3–45, VRV Singh 3–48, SR Tendulkar 1–15 )
and 104–2 (J Omar 52*, H Bashar 37)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Dhaka. 25–27 May 2007
India 610–3 dec (W Jaffer 138, KD Karthik 129, R Dravid 129, SR Tendulkar 122* , MS Dhoni 51*;
M Rafique 2–181)
Bangladesh 118 (Shakib-Al-Hasan 30; Z Khan 5–34, A Kumble 3–32) and 253 (f/o) (M Mortaza 70, M
Ashraful 67; RR Powar 3–33, SR Tendulkar 2–35)
India won by an innings and 239 runs
India won the series 1–0
India in England 2007 – The Pataudi Trophy
1st Test. Lord’s. 19–23 July 2007
England 298 (AJ Strauss 96, MP Vaughan 79; S Sreesanth 3–67) and 282 (KP Pietersen 134, MJ Prior
42; RP Singh 5–59, Z Khan 4–79)
India 201 (W Jaffer 58, SR Tendulkar 37 ; JM Anderson 5–42, RJ Sidebottom 4–65) and 282–9 (MS

Dhoni 76*, KD Karthik 60, SR Tendulkar 16; CT Tremlett 3–52, RJ Sidebottom 2–42, MS Panesar
2–63, JM Anderson 2–83)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Nottingham. 27–31 July 2007
England 198 (AN Cook 43; Z Khan 4–59, A Kumble 3–32) and 355 (MP Vaughan 124, PD
Collingwood 63, AJ Strauss 55; Z Khan 5–75, A Kumble 3–104)
India 481 (SR Tendulkar 91 , SC Ganguly 79, KD Karthik 77, W Jaffer 62, VVS Laxman 54; MS
Panesar 4–101, CT Tremlett 3–80) and 73–3 (KD Karthik 22, W Jaffer 22, SR Tendulkar 1; CT
Tremlett 3–12)
India won by 7 wickets
3rd Test. The Oval. 9–13 August 2007
India 664 (A Kumble 110*, MS Dhoni 92, KD Karthik 91, SR Tendulkar 82 , R Dravid 55, VVS
Laxman 51; JM Anderson 4–182) and 180–6 dec (SC Ganguly 57, SR Tendulkar 1 ; PD
Collingwood 2–24, JM Anderson 2–34, CT Tremlett 2–58)
England 345 (IR Bell 63, PD Collingwood 62, AN Cook 61; Z Khan 3–32, A Kumble 3–94, SR
Tendulkar 1–26) and 369–6 (KP Pietersen 101, IR Bell 67; S Sreesanth 3–53)
Match drawn
India won the series 1–0
India in Australia 2007–08 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Melbourne. 26–29 December 2007
Australia 343 (ML Hayden 124, PA Jaques 66; A Kumble 5–84, Z Khan 4–94) and 351–7 dec (MJ
Clarke 73, PA Jaques 51; H Singh 3–101).
India 196 (SR Tendulkar 62, SC Ganguly 43; SR Clark 4–28, B Lee 4–46) and 161 (VVS Laxman 42,
SC Ganguly 40, SR Tendulkar 15; MG Johnson 3–21, B Lee 2–43, GB Hogg 2–51)
Australia won by 337 runs
2nd Test. Sydney. 2–6 January 2008
Australia 463 (A Symonds 162*, GB Hogg 79, B Lee 59, RT Ponting 55; A Kumble 4–106, RP Singh
4–124) and 401–7 dec (MEK Hussey 145*, ML Hayden 123, A Symonds 61; A Kumble 4–148)
India 532 (SR Tendulkar 154* , VVS Laxman 109, SC Ganguly 67, H Singh 63, R Dravid 53; B Lee
5–119) and 210 (SC Ganguly 51, A Kumble 45*, SR Tendulkar 12 ; MJ Clarke 3–5, A Symonds 3–
51)
Australia won by 122 runs
3rd Test. Perth. 16–19 January 2008
India 330 (R Dravid 93, SR Tendulkar 71; MG Johnson 4–86, B Lee 3–71) and 294 (VVS Laxman 79,
IK Pathan 46, SR Tendulkar 13; SR Clark 4–61, B Lee 3–54)
Australia 212 (A Symonds 66, AC Gilchrist 55; RP Singh 4–68, I Sharma 2–34, A Kumble 2–42) and
340 (MJ Clarke 81, MG Johnson 50*, MEK Hussey 46; IK Pathan 3–54, V Sehwag 2–24)
India won by 72 runs
4th Test. Adelaide. 24–28 January 2008
India 526 (SR Tendulkar 153 , A Kumble 87, V Sehwag 63, H Singh 63, VVS Laxman 51; MG

Johnson 4–126, B Lee 3–101) and 269–7 dec (V Sehwag 151, SR Tendulkar 13; MG Johnson 2–33,
B Lee 2–74)
Australia 563 (RT Ponting 140, MJ Clarke 118, ML Hayden 103, PA Jaques 60; IK Pathan 3–112, I
Sharma 3–115, V Sehwag 2–51)
Match drawn
Australia won the series 2–1
