WORLD CUP 2011

The 2011 World Cup was jointly hosted by India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh and we launched our
campaign against Bangladesh in the very first game of the competition on 19 February in Dhaka. As
we knew only too well, having lost to them in the 2007 World Cup in the Caribbean, Bangladesh can
be a dangerous one-day side and at the Shere Bangla National Stadium in Mirpur they had raucous
crowd support.
The general excitement was the first thing that struck us when we arrived in Bangladesh. Every time
we went for practice there were close to 30,000 people outside the ground waiting to catch a glimpse
of the cricketers. Most of them didn’t have tickets for the game, but they were happy just to be there
singing, dancing and enjoying the moment. The passionate and enthusiastic Dhaka crowd undoubtedly
added a unique dimension to the tournament.
We were feeling confident after winning both of our warm-up games against Australia and New
Zealand in Chennai and we all knew this was our best chance to win cricket’s ultimate prize. The
whole country was behind the team during the competition – in fact, for a month and a half it seemed
that all that mattered in India was how we fared in the World Cup. However, we needed to remain
calm, and Gary, Paddy Upton, Mike Horn – the well-known explorer who was with us for most of the
World Cup and shared stories of his adventures – and the support staff did a wonderful job of keeping
our minds on the task at hand.
In Dhaka I invited Yuvraj Singh to my room to have dinner. I have always enjoyed a special
friendship with Yuvi and believed that he had a key role to play in the tournament. Yuvi was a little
down at the time, as things had not been going well for him, so I encouraged him to set some targets
and concentrate on meeting them. We really needed a fully focused Yuvraj and I am delighted to say
that’s what we got from him all the way through the tournament.
It is a priceless moment in a cricketer’s career when he lines up for the national anthem at the start
of a multi-nation competition. Right through my career, listening to the anthem while standing
alongside my team-mates has given me goosebumps. As they played the ‘Jana Gana Mana’ at Mirpur,
none of us could hold back our emotions. We knew that for the millions of Indians supporting us, what
we were playing was not just a game but a passion.
We won the toss and Virender Sehwag and I stepped out to start our campaign. Viru began in style,
hitting the very first ball for a four, and we were off. The early nerves disappeared in no time and we
started to enjoy ourselves. We set up a good foundation, scoring at a fair clip, before I was run out for
28 and then Gautam Gambhir for 39. Viru was sublime in his innings of 175 and Virat Kohli
contributed a superbly orchestrated century to help take us to 370–4. In the end we won the match
comfortably by 87 runs. The 2007 defeat had been avenged and we were off to the start we had hoped
for.

An epic encounter
Our next match was against England in Bangalore on 27 February and, as it was our first match at
home, the excitement was off the scale.
Something a little odd happened just hours before the England match. In the tournament I was using
a favourite bat of mine, the one I had used the previous season, when I was the ICC Cricketer of the
Year. Though it was showing its age, I had not discarded it. Rather, I had repaired it time and again
and had even sent it to the bat manufacturers for restoration. There was a kind of emotional bond with
this bat and every time I couriered it to the manufacturers I felt nervous and prayed that it would not
get lost in transit. In the dressing room, with just a few hours left until the match, for some reason I
started to knock in a brand-new bat and work on it in my usual way to get the weight exactly right. I
even remember telling myself that I was being foolish and wasting my time, because there was no way
I would be using a new bat and I would be better off concentrating on the game.
We won the toss at the Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bangalore and opted to bat first. I used my trusted
old bat and managed to hit a few boundaries. However, most of them were deflections behind the
wicket and it was only when I tried to play a square cut off Ajmal Shahzad that I realized something
was wrong. It was a full-blooded stroke but the ball did not travel to the fielder as fast as it should
have. It was time to retire the old bat and call for the new one I had been knocking in. While I felt a
little sad sending the old bat back to the pavilion, I did score a century with the new one – though I
ended up breaking it in the quarter-final against Australia.
I have always enjoyed playing in Bangalore. I began cautiously and with Sehwag in full flow I was
content to anchor the innings, but I decided to push the accelerator when Viru was dismissed for 35.
Graeme Swann was England’s leading spinner and I hit him for consecutive sixes at the start of his
second spell, turning the momentum in our favour. I was finally out for 120 and, with fifties from
Gambhir and Yuvi, we made 338 in our fifty overs.
England were brilliant in reply and also benefited from the very heavy dew, which meant our
spinners had been rendered ineffective. In conditions of heavy dew the ball just skids on to the bat,
something England were to encounter in their match against Ireland at Bangalore. (The Irish, despite
losing five wickets cheaply, managed to get home, with Kevin O’Brien scoring a very good hundred.)
Against us, Andrew Strauss played one of his best ever one-day innings, making 158, and he almost
took England to victory before Zaheer pulled it back for us with a superb second spell, taking three
wickets for just 11. The match finally ended in a tie, and it was a terrific advertisement for the game.
A total of 676 runs were scored and still the two sides could not be separated. The fans loved the
contest and the World Cup had captured the imagination of the cricket-playing world.
It was immediately after this match that talk of us winning the title started in the digital world and
slowly the messages started reaching us in the dressing room. These discussions were based not just
on our on-field performances. Someone had pointed out that every time Dhoni had been involved in a
tie in a multi-nation competition, he had ended up winning the title. This had been the case in the
World Twenty20 in 2007 (the India–Pakistan game was tied before India won in a bowl-out), in the
IPL and even in the 2010 Champions League Twenty20 that Dhoni had won. This World Cup, it was
argued, would be no different.

There’s many a slip
We won our next two pool matches against Ireland and the Netherlands fairly comfortably and met

South Africa in Nagpur on 12 March 2011. It was this match that in many ways turned our campaign
on its head. We began well and were soon firmly in control. Sehwag and I got off to a quick start – I
scored my ninety-ninth international century in this match, but it was not much talked about at the
time because the focus was squarely on the World Cup – and we set South Africa a target of 297 after
a dramatic batting collapse, losing nine wickets in the last ten overs, with Steyn getting a five-for.
Eventually we lost the match with two balls of the South African innings remaining and the defeat
hurt us badly.
Unsurprisingly, there was stinging criticism in the media. We had slipped once but we all knew we
could not afford to slip again. We simply had to get the campaign back on track in the next match,
against the West Indies in Chennai on 20 March, and we managed to do just that, thanks to a Yuvraj
Singh century and a surprise slower ball from Zaheer Khan to dismiss the in-form Devon Smith for
81. The crucial knockout phase was about to begin and in the quarter-final at Ahmedabad we drew
Australia, the defending champions.

Spicing up practice
It was on the eve of that West Indies match that I tried to introduce an element of fun into my batting
practice. I was practising to some throw-downs from Gary Kirsten and was just about to wrap up the
session when the idea came to me. I decided to close my eyes for six deliveries, just after the bowler
released the ball, then I asked Gary if he had noticed anything different. Gary said he hadn’t, except
that my head was staying up when I was driving. I had to keep my head steady, because with your eyes
shut you can easily lose the path of the ball with a very slight movement of the head. When I told him
I’d had my eyes closed, he was shocked. I explained that I had watched his wrist position when he
released the ball, to see if it was, say, an outswinger, and then closed my eyes and visualized the path
the ball would travel. After that I went a step further by keeping my eyes shut and telling the fielders
where I had hit the ball, based on how and where I felt the ball on the bat. It was just for fun, and I
only did it once, but it did help me focus on the release of the ball, which is so important for a
batsman.
In my early days I used to practise in an even more unusual manner. In the monsoon season in
Mumbai – in June/July/August – it’s not possible to play much normal cricket, but my friends and I
would still get together and play in the rain, using rubber balls. Sometimes this would be on a normal
pitch without any cover, sometimes on a wet concrete pitch and sometimes on a concrete pitch with a
plastic cover. There were times when I actually wore a proper helmet and my full cricket gear in the
pouring rain. The rubber ball would come off the surface at quite a pace and it was a good way of
sharpening up my reactions. While practising in the rain I would always ask the guys to bowl to me
from 18 yards. They were allowed to bowl or chuck, but the object was always to try to hit me!
It was great fun but it also had a serious side. At the time, we didn’t have any indoor facilities and I
had to practise somehow. Things have changed, of course, but in some ways I miss all that. I’ve even
thought about doing it again with my son. Young players now grow up with all the best facilities,
whereas I had nowhere to go. I had to practise on the roads or on wet outfields, where first the mud
would splash onto my face and then the ball would follow! It was tough at times but it all contributed
to my enjoyment of cricket, and I would love my son to share that experience.

Taking on the champions

Australia were chasing their fourth consecutive World Cup title and, remarkably, were meeting us for
the first time in the competition since beating us in the 2003 final in South Africa. I remember two
things about getting ready for the quarter-final. First, I did not eat non-vegetarian or spicy food after
setting foot in Ahmedabad, which was boiling hot. I don’t really know why not. Something inside just
seemed to suggest that I should stay away from that kind of food in the heat. I ate a lot of salad and
yoghurt and things that I hoped would keep my system cool.
The other thing I remember is that I did not sleep well. This time it was not the mounting tension
but my hotel bed that caused the problem. On the eve of the match I even resorted to sleeping on the
floor. It was our masseur Amit Shah who pointed out that the problem was with my bed. When he
came to give me a head massage to help me sleep, he immediately noticed that it was raised on one
side, but unfortunately it was impossible to replace the bed at that late hour!
Playing against Australia is always a high-pressure contest, and a knockout game even more so.
Despite a good start by Australia at Ahmedabad on 24 March, our bowlers did well in the powerplay to
keep the run rate close to four an over. Eventually, the Australians put 260 on the board, with Ponting
making an impressive 104, and we knew it wouldn’t be easy to chase down that total under lights.
Viru and I were aware of the enormity of the occasion as we walked out to deafening applause at the
Sardar Patel Stadium. It really was now or never. When Viru got out for 15 trying to pull Shane
Watson, caught at midwicket, we had put 44 on the board. Gautam and I added exactly 50 runs before
I got out after reaching my half-century. We then lost Gautam and Dhoni in quick succession and
Suresh Raina, playing only his second World Cup game, joined Yuvraj in the middle with 74 runs still
needed.
At the time, I was lying on the massage table with my eyes closed, with Viru on the other table. I
lay there completely still while Amit Shah gave me a neck massage. I was actually praying, asking
God to do the best for us. At one point Viru thought I was sleeping and told Amit Shah, ‘ Tu apna time
waste mat kar, woh so gaya hai. Ja ke match dekh le. ’ (Don’t waste your time. He has gone off to
sleep, please go and watch the match.) I could hear his every word, but I didn’t want to move or react.
Amit was aware that I was awake and said, ‘Woh soya nahi hai, mujhe malum hai! ’ (He is not
sleeping, I know!)
As Yuvraj and Raina gradually pulled things round I remember hearing my team-mates shout, ‘One
more boundary … ah! Two more runs.’ We were getting very close to the semi-final and were about to
knock the three-time champions out of the World Cup! And when Yuvi hit the final boundary, the
Indian dressing room went mad. It was an unforgettable match.
On our way back to the hotel, it seemed as if the entire city was celebrating – or rather the entire
country. When the team bus left the ground at close to midnight, there were still a few thousand fans
at the gate waiting to cheer us. People were honking, dancing and waving the tricolour at every
roundabout and street corner – and we hadn’t even reached the final yet.
I remember standing on the balcony of my hotel room and watching the celebrations till late at
night. I also remember telling Anjali that it was an unbelievable sight and she had to see it to believe
it. It emphasized to me yet again how much the World Cup meant to our cricket fans. However, it was
only to get bigger with India meeting Pakistan in the semi-final.

Neighbours
Soon after we landed in Mohali and were on our way back to the hotel, I asked my team-mates if any
of them had the Amit Kumar song ‘Bade Achhe Lagte Hain’ on their iPods. Finally, it was Mane

Kaka, our masseur, who said to me that he had it with him. Mane Kaka has always been an
exceptionally affectionate person, constantly doing the best for us without expecting anything in
return. I subsequently requested DJ, our computer analyst, to download the song onto my iPod as soon
as possible, and it was the only song I listened to for the next seven days.
The match in Mohali on 30 March was always likely to be the most intense of the competition and
in fact it turned out to be one of the most pressured games of my career. Playing Pakistan in a World
Cup semi-final on Indian soil – it just couldn’t get any bigger. As the two teams practised side by side
we could feel the tension. Both teams badly wanted to win this one. Up till then India had an
impeccable record against Pakistan in World Cups, and we wanted to keep that record intact.
We got off to a dramatic start in what turned out to be a rollercoaster of a game, thanks to Virender
Sehwag taking on Umar Gul. He was the form fast bowler for Pakistan in the tournament and Viru’s
assault set us rolling. Viru raced off the blocks and hit Gul for four fours in his second over.
Fortunately the Pakistanis dropped me a few times, the chance to midwicket being a relatively simple
one, and my innings of 85 proved vital as we lost a few quick wickets in the middle overs, with Wahab
Riaz taking five in the match. Riaz bowled Yuvi first ball and the momentum shifted like a pendulum
many times in the course of the match. So much so that I had my heart in my mouth on a number of
occasions during this nailbiter. Suresh Raina played well for his 36 not out and helped us to 260,
exactly the score we had chased down in the quarter-final against Australia. It was a good total but not
a clear winning score on a decent pitch.
In their reply, Pakistan also got off to a good start, but just as the pressure was starting to build on
us, Zaheer struck. Munaf also got a wicket in the powerplay and then Yuvraj took two quick wickets to
put us in control. In the middle of the innings, Umar Akmal was trying to counter-attack but we knew
that all it would take was one good delivery. Harbhajan did the job for us by bowling Akmal with the
first ball of his second spell. He had decided to come round the wicket and Akmal misjudged the line.
Pakistan still had a chance while Afridi and Misbah were batting, but then Afridi fell to Harbhajan,
trying to hit a full toss out of the ground. He would normally have made that shot nine times out of ten
but on that night he spooned a simple catch to cover. It was one of those days when things seemed
destined to go our way. After dismissing Afridi, we knew we could close out the match. Soon enough
Misbah holed out to Virat at long on and we were in the World Cup final. As if that wasn’t enough, I
also received the Player of the Match award, the third time I had that honour in a World Cup match
against Pakistan.
The celebrations were quite something. We could see thousands of fans waving the tricolour and
celebrating in Mohali. Navigating our way back to the hotel was a tricky business, with every corner
taken over by delirious fans wanting to relish the moment. My friend Aamir Khan, the actor, came
over to my room to offer his congratulations and I remember chatting away into the small hours. It
was a night that India could never forget and we, having played a part in it, will never want to forget.
A number of dignitaries had come to Mohali, including our prime minister, Dr Manmohan Singh.
The Pakistani premier, Yousaf Raza Gillani, was also present, but frankly we were not really taking in
what was going on beyond the boundary because we were so preoccupied with the job at hand. We
were soon on our way to Mumbai, convinced that we were peaking at the right time.

A city full of expectations
When we arrived in Mumbai for the final against Sri Lanka, the first thing I noticed was the increased
police presence. It didn’t feel like the same city. Despite all the extra security, there were fans

everywhere waiting to catch a glimpse of the team and wish us well. It was a kind of passion we had
not seen before.
On the way from the airport, the police didn’t want to take any chances and escorted our bus to the
hotel. On the way, I met Anjali on Mumbai’s Sea Link, the bridge that is now a landmark and has
made commuting in the city much easier. (Before, there were times when I was playing a first-class
match in Mumbai and I would choose to stay the night at the CCI rather than go to my own home, as it
could take an hour and thirty minutes to drive there, which is not what you want after a long day in the
field!) I had already informed the security personnel on the team bus that Anjali would be waiting for
me and that I would be moving from the team bus to my car. Driving my own car didn’t make the
journey to the hotel any quicker, because I was keeping the team bus in my sight. There were people
everywhere and I don’t think I went above 40 kph. In fact I remember saying to Anjali that my car
must think someone else is driving it at that speed.
While driving to the hotel I was also trying to take stock of the situation. It was hard to imagine I
was going to play the World Cup final in front of my home crowd. I couldn’t help thinking back to
March 2007 when I had returned to Mumbai after a disastrous World Cup campaign. That year, in
hindsight, was a real nightmare. However, 2011 felt different, because we were gradually writing a
national fairy tale. I told Anjali that this time there was no turning back.
We had played Sri Lanka a number of times in the recent past, in 2010 and 2011, and knew exactly
what to expect from them in the final. They were a good side but we were confident of beating them.
There was no need for a long team talk. We did meet for a team dinner, but after barely five minutes
of cricket discussion, Mike Horn took over. All through the final week, Mike talked to us about his
experiences. While for most of us there is always another day, for Mike it was often a matter of life
and death. One mistake and it could all be over. The stories of how he coped with extreme pressure
during his adventures – such as circumnavigating the globe at the Equator without motorized transport
or walking to the North Pole during the dark season – definitely helped us deal with our own concerns
on the eve of the World Cup final. They put our situation into perspective, reminding us that we were
not the worst off in the world.
Unlike in Ahmedabad or even Mohali, I slept well in Mumbai on the eve of the final. On 2 April, we
left the hotel early for the stadium and I was surprised not to see a single soul on the way. Security
was so tight that fans were not even permitted to stand along the team bus’s route. It was difficult to
believe that I had not seen a single cricket fan. However, the Wankhede presented a completely
different picture. It was already packed, hours before the match was due to start.
As we did our warm-up exercises on the pitch, I could feel the buzz inside the stadium, which was
feeling more like an amphitheatre. All round there were excited faces. India were playing the most
important match ever on home soil. No team had won the World Cup as hosts, but one good day and
we could call ourselves world champions for the rest of our lives.

The final
We managed to get off to a good start in the match thanks to an excellent early spell from Zaheer and
some great fielding at point and cover from Yuvraj and Raina. Zaheer reeled off three maidens on the
trot, which said it all. Sri Lanka lost Upul Tharanga for two to an excellent catch in the slips by Viru
off Zaheer and we had sprinted off the blocks. While Zaheer was bowling very well, Sreesanth was not
quite so effective from the other end. Harbhajan and I, fielding at mid off and mid on, kept telling him
not to give up, saying that he just needed to land one ball on the spot and he would get us a wicket. He

said he was not feeling well and felt like being sick. To his credit, he forced himself to keep going in
the oppressive Mumbai heat. Sometimes you have to endure pain to succeed, especially when you are
playing the World Cup final.
Sri Lanka fought back well through Kumar Sangakkara and Mahela Jayawardene, two of the finest
batsmen in the world. But as was the case throughout the World Cup, Yuvraj made a vital
breakthrough to get us back in the match by having Sangakkara caught behind for 48. Jayawardene,
however, was still out there and he played one of the truly great World Cup final innings. His century
set the match up for Sri Lanka, with 274 the target that faced us.
It was not insurmountable, but it was important for us to forge partnerships in the early overs,
because the wicket was expected to become slightly easier as the match progressed. The outfield was
dewy and I thought it was important for us to try to get the ball outside the thirty-yard circle to make
it wet. That would mean the ball would stop swinging. Unfortunately for us, we lost Sehwag for a duck
in the first over of the chase and it was down to Gambhir and me to build a platform. I hit a couple of
crisp boundaries and was timing the ball well, but just when I thought the ball had stopped swinging, I
was tempted to play a drive outside the off stump. That ball from Malinga swung and I edged it to the
wicketkeeper and was out for 18. It was disappointing, and I won’t forget the walk back to the dressing
room.
We were in a potentially dangerous situation when Virat Kohli arrived at the crease to join
Gambhir. Virat had started the World Cup with a hundred against Bangladesh and now he finished off
with a key innings in the final. The importance of his contribution is not always acknowledged, but his
35 was part of a key partnership, as both Gautam and Virat managed to score at a brisk pace and so the
asking rate was never out of reach. Once Virat was out, Dhoni promoted himself up the order to
negotiate the Sri Lankan off-spinners, Muralitharan, Randiv and Dilshan. It was the Gambhir–Dhoni
partnership of 109 that won us the World Cup. Both played exceptionally well under intense pressure.
I have to confess that I did not actually see what millions of Indians watched with ecstasy and
delight that night. I did not see my ultimate dream being fulfilled, the moment I had waited to savour
since making my international debut in November 1989. The reason was that when Mahendra Singh
Dhoni hit the winning six at the Wankhede Stadium, I was with Virender Sehwag in the dressing room
praying. I wasn’t asking God to help us win. All I wanted was that God should do what was best for us,
for Indian cricket and for the Indian cricket team. I had turned superstitious on the night and made
Viru sit near me in one position. Neither of us ventured out till Dhoni’s shot had crossed the boundary.
A little earlier, when it seemed that an Indian win was on the cards, Viru had wanted to go out of the
dressing room to celebrate. I advised him not to till the match was finally over. I said to him that he
could watch the moment a hundred times on television if he wanted to, but for the time being he
should just sit where he was and pray. It was only after Dhoni’s shot had finally crossed the boundary
that I went out.
Many people have asked me what I felt at that particular moment. Frankly, at first it was difficult to
take in that we had won the World Cup. It was almost as if there was still a match left in the
tournament. But when I ran onto the ground and embraced an emotional Yuvi, it was impossible to
control my emotions. It was one of those life-changing moments and we wanted to live each and every
second of it. While some players shouted and some cried, others were keen to go ahead with the
victory lap in front of an ecstatic Wankhede crowd.
Virat and Yusuf Pathan lifted me onto their shoulders and someone gave me an Indian flag to wave.
Being carried by my team-mates, waving the tricolour at my home ground, having won the World Cup
– what more could I ask for? Life, to be honest, seemed complete. It was the greatest moment of my

cricketing journey. Amidst all the euphoria, I remember telling Yusuf Pathan not to drop me. At this
he said, ‘Gir jayenge par aapko niche nahi aane denge.’ (We may fall down but we will not let you
come down.)
It felt astonishing. It was a kind of satisfaction I had never experienced before. Cricket’s greatest
prize was finally ours. On our victory lap, I waved to the section of the crowd where I thought my
children Sara and Arjun were sitting. I waved to them, hoping they would see me do so and come
down. Luckily, they saw me wave and soon joined me in the middle. To be with my family while
celebrating the greatest sporting moment of my life was special.
Anjali was not at the ground. She had stuck to her superstition of not coming to the stadium and she
left home for the Wankhede only after we had won. She had a funny experience while driving to the
ground. It was one of those nights when anything goes. Men and women were jumping on top of cars
to celebrate and no one was objecting. The country had never seen anything like it. Just as Anjali was
taking the turn to the Wankhede, a section of the crowd tried to get on top of her car to dance. At this
point a couple of boys spotted her inside and said, ‘Arre yeh unka gaadi hai, unko jaane do. Unke
jaane ke bad humlog nachenge.’ (Hey, it’s their [the Tendulkars’] car; let her go. We will dance after
the car has dropped her off.) And they did exactly that. After Anjali was dropped at the main gate, they
climbed on top of the car to dance, creating many dents, which we were happy to see as they brought
back fond memories!
Something else that made the World Cup triumph really special was the fact that many of my teammates dedicated the achievement to me. I felt overwhelmed. Once we had finished with the awards
ceremony and the lap of honour, the scene of action moved to our dressing room. I opened the first
bottle of champagne and subsequently made a point of getting it signed by all my team-mates. It now
has pride of place in the cellar at my house.
We tried to make the most of the moment in as many different ways as possible. We took countless
photographs. First it was the players, then we took some with Gary, who had just served out his last
match as India coach. Paddy Upton and Mike Horn, both important members of our support unit, soon
joined in and it seemed toally acceptable for adults to behave like children.
As my team-mates were posing with the trophy one by one, I remember wandering out of the
dressing room to soak up the atmosphere. It seemed that not a single soul had left the ground. People
were busy capturing every possible angle on their mobile phones. I saw Sudhir Gautam, now a
familiar face in India as the man who paints his body with the tricolour and paints my surname and
number ‘10’ on it, blowing his conch at full blast. The noise from his conch and the sound of the
firecrackers blended together to create quite an atmosphere. It felt surreal.
I waved at Sudhir Gautam to come and join us inside the dressing room. He was startled to see me
do so, to say the least. For him it was totally unexpected. It was already a night to remember for us;
his was about to become even more memorable. I asked the security personnel to allow him into the
dressing room and passed him the trophy to hold. He was overwhelmed. I felt a deep sense of
satisfaction at being able to make him so happy. He had travelled with us all the way through the
World Cup and it was our way of showing him and the rest of our fans that we cared. I only wish I
could have let every supporter at the Wankhede pose with the trophy.
The players’ families soon joined in the celebrations and I remember trying to explain to Arjun and
Sara the significance of the World Cup for a cricketer. I told them it was the pinnacle and could never
be surpassed. Almost two hours after the victory, we finally left for the hotel. The normally short
journey from the stadium to the hotel was one of the slowest but also one of the best of my life. While
I had not seen a soul on my way to the ground in the morning, on the way back there was a sea of

humanity and the journey took almost an hour.
Marine Drive was quite a sight. Although I remember dancing and celebrating as a kid after India’s
first World Cup win in 1983, the memory is a bit of a blur. This was our moment. It was liberation. I
had finally scaled cricket’s Everest and each and every soul on the streets of Mumbai was celebrating.
We had brought joy to their faces and that’s all we could have asked for as Indian cricketers.

A night to remember
The entrance to the Taj Mahal Palace hotel had been cordoned off and the lobby was packed with
people. When we entered we were presented with a bottle of champagne and a special cake, which I
cut before heading up to our rooms on the sixth floor. The second round of celebrations was about to
begin.

In the confines of my room, Anjali and I poured each other a drink and let our hair down. We
plucked flowers out of the bouquets that were piled everywhere and put them behind our ears and
started dancing to the music. This was the night of a World Cup triumph, so why should we restrain
ourselves? In an instant all that time away from my family, missing out on seeing my children grow
up, seemed worthwhile. Their father had finally become part of a World Cup-winning team,
something he had strived for all his life.
The party went on into the early hours of the morning. With loud music blaring out, the doors to all
the players’ rooms were wide open. Anyone could come in and have a drink and celebrate. In one
memorable moment Virat, Bhajji and Yuvi went down on their knees and sang ‘ Tujme rabh dikhta hai
yaara mai kya karu’ (What to do, my friend, in you we see God himself!) from the film Rab Ne Bana
Di Jodi and managed to seriously embarrass me.
At around 3 a.m., we were called to go up and join in a special celebration put together by the team

management. A couple of hours later, I finally went back to my room to get some sleep. This time I
bolted my door, knowing that otherwise some of my team-mates were bound to crash in, as the party
was still in full swing.
At 7 a.m. I heard Zaheer Khan and Ashish Nehra banging on my door, wanting to share a drink. I
just smiled to myself and went back to sleep.

A happy homecoming
The day after the final went by in a rush. After fulfilling the ICC’s requirements of a few photo shoots
and meeting our president, Mrs Pratibha Patil, at Raj Bhavan, I finally made it home in the evening. It
was a deeply emotional experience, made more memorable by my friends and neighbours, who
welcomed me to our building by playing the dhol (drums) and letting off firecrackers. Every time I
did something worthwhile in my career my friends and neighbours wanted to celebrate the
homecoming, and normally I would ask Anjali to persuade them not to because I felt embarrassed by
such celebrations – but the World Cup was an exception!
When my mother was performing aarti (a flame ritual for good luck) and putting the tika (vermilion
blessing) on my forehead (a family ritual in most Maharashtrian families), it seemed that this time I
had come back to her having achieved something substantial. I felt as if I had performed my duties as
a son and deserved her welcome. My family was delighted with the achievement and I felt a sense of
genuine pride at having given them such joy.
There were countless bouquets of flowers waiting for me. Abhishek and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan,
two of India’s best-known Bollywood stars, dropped by to congratulate me and we happily relived the
final all over again.
Looking back on it now, it still feels like a dream. Beating Australia, Pakistan and Sri Lanka in the
course of one week to win the World Cup in front of huge Indian crowds just feels unreal. The
television audience for our semi-final match against Pakistan, I was told, was the highest ever
recorded in India’s sporting history. I must confess that I continue to get goose bumps every time I
think about that week.
On a personal note, I was pleased to have scored a total of 482 runs, the highest for India and the
second highest in the tournament, at an average of 54 with two hundreds. I felt that I had proved to
myself that after twenty-two years of examination at the very highest level, I was still good enough to
carry on competing with the very best, that the hunger and the passion were still very much alive.
A number of my friends have asked me why I didn’t retire from one-day cricket after winning the
World Cup, as the summit had been scaled and there was nothing left for me to achieve. They may
well have a point. It could indeed have been a grand exit. Emotions were running high and the timing
could not have been better. But to be honest, such a thought never occurred to me. I wanted to
remember the World Cup as a happy moment, and announcing my retirement straight after winning
the trophy would have shifted the focus from the cup triumph to my retirement.
The Indian cricket team had stuck together through difficult times to make the world stage their
own. Each player had made sacrifices and each one deserved to enjoy the moment. Cricket is a team
sport and I feel immensely proud to have been part of the World Cup-winning team.
Finally, I had always wanted one memorable send-off from international cricket that I could never
forget in my life. Multiple send-offs can end up diluting the significance of the event and that was not
something I had ever wanted.

India in the 2011 World Cup
1st match, Group B. Bangladesh v India at Dhaka. 19 February 2011
India 370–4 (50/50 ov); Bangladesh 283–9 (50/50 ov)
India won by 87 runs
11th match, Group B. India v England at Bangalore. 27 February 2011
India 338 (49.5/50 ov); England 338–8 (50/50 ov)
Match tied
22nd match, Group B. India v Ireland at Bangalore. 6 March 2011
Ireland 207 (47.5/50 ov); India 210–5 (46/50 ov)
India won by 5 wickets (with 24 balls remaining)
25th match, Group B. India v Netherlands at Delhi. 9 March 2011
Netherlands 189 (46.4/50 ov); India 191–5 (36.3/50 ov)
India won by 5 wickets (with 81 balls remaining)
29th match, Group B. India v South Africa at Nagpur. 12 March 2011
India 296 (48.4/50 ov); South Africa 300–7 (49.4/50 ov)
South Africa won by 3 wickets (with 2 balls remaining)
42nd match, Group B. India v West Indies at Chennai. 20 March 2011
India 268 (49.1/50 ov); West Indies 188 (43/50 ov)
India won by 80 runs
2nd quarter-final. India v Australia at Ahmedabad. 24 March 2011
Australia 260–6 (50/50 ov); India 261–5 (47.4/50 ov)
India won by 5 wickets (with 14 balls remaining)
2nd semi-final. India v Pakistan at Mohali. 30 March 2011
India 260–9 (50/50 ov); Pakistan 231 (49.5/50 ov)
India won by 29 runs
Final. India v Sri Lanka at Mumbai. 2 April 2011
Sri Lanka 274–6 (50/50 ov); India 277–4 (48.2/50 ov)
India won by 6 wickets (with 10 balls remaining)
