LEARNING THE GAME

From a very early age I played tennis-ball cricket with my colony friends. I loved watching cricket on
television and in our games I often tried to emulate the mannerisms of my favourite players, Sunil
Gavaskar and the West Indian legend Viv Richards. But it wasn’t just the batsmen that I studied. I also
loved bowling and tried my hand at different kinds of deliveries – medium pace, off-spin and leg-spin
– all with a tennis ball, of course. I even experimented with tactics like the slower ball and bowling
from wide of the stump. Throughout my career I have actually bowled a lot in the nets. As soon as I’d
finished with my batting I’d pick up a ball and start bowling to whichever batsmen were around at the
time.
The transition from playing with a tennis ball to playing with a cricket ball happened under the
watchful eyes of Ramakant Achrekar, then cricket coach at Shardashram Vidyamandir school.
Achrekar Sir, as I refer to him, started playing cricket at the age of eleven in 1943, which is the age I
was when I went to him for the first time. He played for a number of Mumbai clubs, including the Gul
Mohar Mills and Mumbai Port, and played a first-class match for the State Bank of India against
Hyderabad in 1963. When I was growing up he was undoubtedly one of the most accomplished
coaches in Mumbai.
From his own schooldays at Balmohan Vidyamandir, my brother Ajit knew that compared to other
schools in Mumbai, Shardashram was by far the best organized in its approach to cricket, and that’s
why he took me along to Achrekar Sir’s nets in Shivaji Park to try my luck at being a part of his
summer camp.
Anyone could come for a trial at the camp but then it was up to Sir to decide who to accept. There
were nets for players from all age groups, starting with the sub-junior (Under-15) and junior (Under17) levels. I was eleven years old and trialled at the sub-junior nets to start with. The Mumbai Cricket
Association had an Under-15 team and most candidates from the sub-junior section eventually vied
for a position in that team.
I had never batted in nets before and felt somewhat overawed with so many people around. When I
was asked to bat, I was not at all comfortable. With Sir watching me so closely, I failed to make an
impact. After I had finished batting, Sir called Ajit aside and informed him that I was perhaps too
young to make the camp and suggested that he should bring me back when I was a little older. I wasn’t
party to this conversation and had no idea what was discussed at the time. My induction into the
Mumbai cricket circuit could have ended in failure – but for Ajit’s insistence.
Having seen me play in the colony, Ajit knew I was capable of performing far better than I had in
front of Achrekar Sir. He explained that I was nervous and asked Sir to give me one more opportunity.
However, he suggested that while doing so Sir should pretend to go away and then watch from a
distance. Sir agreed. Before long I was asked to bat again and, without Sir’s trained eyes scrutinizing
me – or so I thought – I felt more at ease and soon started to hit the ball well. This time, Sir agreed to

let me join the camp. I was delighted and I must say it was an opportunity that transformed my life.
Participants in the summer camp had to pay an admission fee of 65 rupees (less than a pound) and a
monthly fee of 10 rupees (10 pence). In my case I don’t remember having to pay the monthly fee after
the first few months. The camp involved a session every morning and evening at Shivaji Park. I would
practise between 7.30 a.m. and 10.30 a.m. before making my way home for lunch, then I’d come back
in the afternoon and train till late evening. The schedule was rigorous and I would be exhausted by the
end of the day. Travelling to Shivaji Park took forty minutes from my house in Bandra and I had to
catch an early-morning bus to make it on time.
For the first few days Ajit accompanied me, to get me used to the routine, but once I was familiar
with the journey, I’d travel to the camp on my own. During the bus journeys he would talk to me about
the nuances of batting, and I always enjoyed these conversations a lot. In fact, the one thing that I have
kept with me all my career is a note that Ajit gave me containing some thoughts about batting. It
served as a very personal coaching manual.
As a child I had only one set of cricket clothes and the routine was to wash them as soon as I’d
returned from the morning session. While I had my lunch, the clothes would dry out in the sun and I
would wear them again in the afternoon. The pattern was repeated in the evening, so that I could use
the same set of clothes the following morning. The system worked well – apart from my pockets.
There was never quite enough time for the pockets to dry out completely and for the entire duration of
the camp I played with wet pockets.

Changing schools
By the middle of the summer camp, Sir had started taking an active interest in my batting and at the
end of the two months informed Ajit that I had the potential to be a good cricketer if I practised all
year round. He had made a few changes to the way I batted and the impact was immediate. I was now
practising with the older boys from the junior section. However, my school – the New English School
in Bandra – did not have cricket facilities and Sir was keen for me to change schools if I wanted to
pursue cricket seriously.
One evening Sir called my father and asked if he would speak to me about changing schools. Ajit
was in the room with my father at the time and they both accepted that it was necessary, if cricket was
to be my priority. However, neither of them ever forced anything on me and when I got home they
asked me what I thought of the suggestion. By that time I had started enjoying my batting and was
keen to play throughout the year. Without any hesitation I agreed to the move. My father sat me down
and explained that while he did not have any objections to me changing schools, I should do so only if
I was really serious about playing cricket. I assured him I was, and so it was agreed that I should move
to Shardashram Vidyamandir, where Achrekar Sir was a cricket coach.
The move meant I lost contact with a lot of my New English school friends, but I soon made new
ones at Shardashram, mostly through cricket. All the cricketers in the school were friends with each
other and even though we were in different divisions and sections, such things hardly mattered. We
played together during lunch breaks and discussed cricket all the time, and Achrekar Sir would coach
us after school. Cricket was fast becoming my first love. All my excess energies were getting
channelled into cricket, which acted as a kind of a safety valve. Everyone at home was very
supportive, but my father always said that all he wanted me to do was give it my best effort without
worrying about the results.
Joining Shardashram undoubtedly helped my cricket a great deal. It allowed me the opportunity to

play competitive matches regularly and my game rapidly improved as a result. There’s nothing like
playing matches to get better, because only in competitive situations are you forced to out-think the
opposition and improvise. Net practice can never be a substitute for matchplay and Achrekar Sir was
an ardent believer in this principle.
I did not excel in my first ever match for my club, the Kamath Memorial Club, run by Achrekar Sir,
which a host of my colony friends came to watch, I was out for a golden duck. I was the star batsman
in the colony and it was natural that my friends would come to see me play. It was embarrassing to be
bowled first ball and I had to make a series of excuses, saying the ball had kept low and the pitch
wasn’t good enough for batting. In the second match I got out for another duck and it was only in our
third game that I managed to score my first run, having survived seven deliveries. I was seriously
relieved to get off the mark. I used to keep a diary at the time that contained all the information from
these games, but unfortunately I don’t have them any more.
My debut for the school wasn’t quite as bad and I managed to score 24 runs in the match, which we
won comfortably. However, I will always remember the game for other reasons, because I learnt a
very important personal lesson. It taught me never to resort to unethical ways and to play the sport
with honesty and integrity at all times. The incident in question involved my first appearance in a
newspaper, which should have been a happy occurrence. The rule in Mumbai at the time was that a
player’s name only appeared in print if he had scored 30 runs. I had made 24, but there were a lot of
extras in the team’s innings and the scorer decided to credit six extras to me, increasing my score to
30. The scorer’s logic was that it didn’t matter because the overall score did not change. I had
consented to this without appreciating what I was getting into. The next morning, when my name duly
appeared in a Mumbai paper, Achrekar Sir was seriously unhappy with what I had done and told me
off for consenting to have runs added to my personal tally when I hadn’t scored them. I acknowledged
my mistake and promised never to allow such a thing to happen again.
The first-match jinx continued in my first season for the Mumbai Under-15 team in Pune in 1985. I
was only twelve then and travelled to Pune with just 95 rupees in my pocket. This was to be
supplemented with the little allowance we were given during the tour, which lasted more than a week.
In my only match for Mumbai I was run out. I was batting with someone from my school who was
older than me and because he was a faster runner he completed the runs quicker and pushed for a third
run that was not on. As a result I was run out and I returned to the pavilion with tears in my eyes.
Thoughtfully, two veteran Mumbai cricketers, Milind Rege and Vasu Paranjpe, consoled me, saying
the run just wasn’t there and I shouldn’t have been called to go for it.
It rained a lot in Pune in the next few days and as it turned out this was my only innings. As a result
I was not picked for the West Zone Under-15 team and was upset because a few of my team-mates
who had not played a single ball had been chosen ahead of me. To add to my distress, I ran out of
money because I spent it all on snacks and fast food – and arrived at Dadar station with no fare for the
bus home. I had to walk back to Shivaji Park to my uncle’s carrying two big bags and cried all the
way. My aunt was very concerned when she saw me and asked what the matter was. I did not tell her
that I hadn’t been selected for the West Zone team and all I said was I was not feeling too well.

My first earnings from cricket
Playing for my school regularly helped me learn the art of scoring big runs and batting for a long time.
During school holidays I played practice matches for my club almost every day. In fact, in my first
year at Shardashram I played fifty-five practice matches during the summer break of sixty days. My

summer sessions used to start at 7.30 a.m. and I’d bat for two hours, split into five net sessions. All of
these sessions were rigorous and required intense concentration. After the morning session, I would go
straight into the practice match, which would end at 4.30 p.m., then my evening session would start at
5 p.m., after only a thirty-minute break. During the break Sir would often give me some money to go
and have a vada pav (a popular Mumbai fast food) or a soft drink as a treat.
Between 5 p.m. and 7 p.m. I’d have five more net sessions, before a final session of fifteen minutes,
when Sir would place a one-rupee coin on top of the stumps and if I managed to avoid getting out, the
coin was mine. In this session every bowler in the camp would come and have a go at me, with some
sixty to seventy boys fielding. Even if the ball was caught 90 yards away, which was a distance bigger
than the boundary length at any school ground in India, I was out. It meant I had to hit every ball along
the ground to survive those intense fifteen minutes. It was a serious challenge but with time I started
enjoying this session the most. Winning the one-rupee coin used to give me immense satisfaction and
taught me how to concentrate even when physically drained.
At the end of it all, Sir would tell me to run two full circuits of Shivaji Park with my pads and
gloves on. That was the last part of my training and I’d be completely exhausted by the end of it all. It
was a routine I would repeat right through during my summer holidays and it helped me to build up
physical and mental stamina.
Occasionally my father came to take me home and I would always ask him to treat me to a special
fruit cocktail at a juice centre near the club. While this regular demand was a little unreasonable,
because at the time I did not realize that my parents also had to take care of the needs of my brothers
and sister, my father would invariably end up giving me what I wanted, just to see me happy.
On other days, when I made my way home from Shivaji Park on my own, I’d often fall asleep on the
bus – if I managed to sit down, that is. Anyone who has been on a Mumbai bus at peak hours will
know just how difficult it is to get a seat. On days when I wasn’t so lucky, it was still a challenge just
to stand with the kitbag, because the bus conductors would inevitably complain about me taking up the
space of another passenger. It could be embarrassing because the conductors were often rude and
would sometimes ask me to buy two tickets. I didn’t have the money for a second ticket and I had to
learn to take these remarks in my stride. Dirty clothes often added to the embarrassment. After I’d
played in them all day, the clothes were usually in quite a smelly state and this was the cause of a lot
of discomfort and guilt on the way home. With time I evolved a way of wrapping the kitbag around
me. Just as the helmet and pads became a part of me while batting, so the kitbag became an extension
of me on the bus.
So when people ask me these days if I have ever been on public transport, I tell them I used to travel
on crowded buses and trains four times a day during my first year at Shardashram. And from a very
young age I used to do it alone. I’d often take the bus or train from Bandra to Churchgate, and it was
all a great learning experience. Within a few months I had made a lot of friends and we had great fun
travelling together to matches.

Moving to Shivaji Park
After a year of commuting between Bandra and school, my family realized that the daily travel was
getting too much. I had to catch a connecting bus midway into the journey and if I missed the
connection I’d be late for school. Also, the one-and-a-half-hour journey would end up exhausting me
and it had started to have an impact on my training time. More worryingly, I had twice fallen sick in
the first year of my daily commute to Shardashram and had also contracted jaundice.

It was decided that I should move in with my uncle and aunt, Suresh and Mangala, because they
lived at Indravadan Society, an apartment block close to Shivaji Park. In the end, I stayed with them
for four years and they were hugely supportive of my endeavours and had a formative role to play as I
grew up. In fact, there were times when I even made my aunt throw balls to me in our living room. I
had bought a couple of golf balls and transformed them into an oval shape with the help of a blade. I
had done this intentionally, so that when my aunt threw one to me, the ball would change direction
after pitching, either coming in or going away. The whole idea behind this was that, while killing time
at home, I would learn to play with soft hands without damaging things in our living room.
Throughout the drill, my aunt would sit on her chair, and after playing the ball I would collect it and
hand it back to her. When my aunt wasn’t around, I would hang up the ball in a sock and hit it with the
edge of my bat. Hitting it with the bat’s full face was much too easy and when I hit it with the edge I
would try to middle it as many times as possible. When it did not hit the middle, it would come back
from different directions (it became an inswinger or an outswinger) and it was fun to negotiate the
challenge. These drills helped my hand–eye coordination and also my awareness of which direction
the bat should come from to meet the ball.
My uncle and aunt’s house was a thirty-minute walk from school. It meant I could get more rest in
the morning and could come home for lunch around 1 p.m. and go back to play a practice game at my
club by early afternoon. Sir would invariably schedule three practice games a week for me and would
ensure that I batted at number four in each one of them. He could do that because it was his club. I
would bat in my favourite position in all the matches I played and if I got out I’d have to change
quickly and go out and field. This was a good incentive to keep batting and not get out at all, as I
didn’t enjoy fielding anything like as much as batting. After the match I’d resume my own training in
the evening before calling it a day at 7.30.
On days when there was a school match, we’d try our best to stretch it to a second day. For example,
if we were set to chase 300 we’d score 260–270 runs on the first day and keep the remaining runs for
the next morning. This would allow us to miss school on the second day, and after quickly wrapping
up the match in the first half an hour, the team would head off to the beach to play cricket. Playing
beach cricket was always a lot of fun and we would all have a great time.
Both my parents would visit me at my uncle and aunt’s almost every day after they finished work.
For my mother in particular it was an arduous journey, since travelling there from her office in Santa
Cruz in peak-hour traffic on public transport was a real challenge back then. The fact that both of them
would happily put in the time after a full day’s work, just so I would not feel neglected, was
remarkable.
In the 1986–87 season I started to make runs consistently and also scored my first hundred. We
were playing Don Bosco School at Shivaji Park and I was not out on 94 at the end of the first day. A
few days before this match I had invited Sir to my house for dinner. Sir, however, said he would come
only when I had scored my first hundred in school cricket. Feeling excited and anxious, I decided to
sleep with my father that night and kept tossing and turning till late. My father tried to comfort me,
saying I should go to sleep and that my body needed rest after batting all day. I couldn’t and only
managed to get a couple of hours’ sleep before waking up very early the next morning.
Sensing my anxiety, my father took me to a Ganapati temple in Bandra to seek the blessings of Lord
Ganesha and only then did I leave for Shivaji Park. On my way I visited another Ganapati temple, the
one I regularly visited before games. There was a water tap inside the temple premises and I regularly
used to drink from it before I went to the ground. I did the same that day and in the very first over hit
two boundaries to reach my hundred. True to his word, Sir came for dinner that night and it was a

deeply satisfying moment.
One of my best early seasons was at Shardashram in 1987–88, when I played in both the Giles Shield
and the Harris Shield. For those unfamiliar with the intricacies of Mumbai cricket, the Giles Shield is
meant for boys under the age of fourteen and Harris Shield for those under sixteen. Looking back, it
seems remarkable that I played in both, but I didn’t think much of it at the time. These tournaments
are acknowledged as breeding grounds for young talent in Mumbai and good performances tend to get
noticed in the city’s cricket circles.
In the Harris Shield that season I scored a record 1,025 runs in five matches and was out only once.
It now seems extraordinary, but my scores in the quarter-final, semi-final and final read 207 not out,
326 not out and 346 not out. What’s more, after scoring 326 not out in the semi-final of the Harris
Shield, I walked right across the Azad maidan (recreation ground) to the other side to play in a Giles
Shield match, in which I made 178 not out, winning us the game.
I started out with a hundred in the first match of the season, scoring 125 before getting out, and it
was a dismissal I have never forgotten. I was out stumped to an off-spinner who was hearing-impaired
and I vividly remember the expression on his face when I was beaten by a beautifully flighted
delivery. But the ball went on to elude the keeper and within a fraction of a second the bowler’s
expression turned from euphoria to despair as he saw the missed stumping opportunity. Yet I did not
go back to the crease and instead started walking back to the pavilion, allowing the wicketkeeper to
complete the stumping. It was the only time I was out in that season’s competition. While I didn’t
consciously mean to show sympathy to the bowler, it was one of those moments that are difficult to
explain. It was not an act of charity exactly. Rather, it was a good ball and I knew I had been
comprehensively beaten. The keeper fumbled the take and the bowler looked distraught at the missed
opportunity. He had done everything for the wicket and deserved the dismissal.
In the semi-final of the Harris Shield against St Xavier’s in February 1988, a three-day game, we were
84–2 when I went in to bat at number four, with Vinod Kambli, an extremely talented youngster in
Mumbai’s cricket circles at the time, already at the crease, having gone in at number three. We
immediately plundered the St Xavier’s attack and never let up all the way through what would become
a record-breaking partnership. With the Azad maidan being an open ground and a very big one, the
opposition had to run long distances to retrieve the ball after a hard-hit boundary and we found
ourselves singing songs and enjoying ourselves in the middle of the pitch. It was our way of switching
off while batting together for long periods. At the end of the day we were both not out, with Vinod on
182 and me on 192, and, needless to say, Shardashram were in a commanding position in the game.
The following morning, we both made our double centuries and then just kept on batting – despite
Achrekar Sir wanting us to declare the innings. At one point he sent our assistant coach to the
boundary to instruct us to declare. We could hear him scream our names and shout instructions, but
we pretended not to hear and tried not to look in his direction. He kept at it for ten minutes before he
realized that it was a futile attempt and returned to the dressing room. We just wanted to carry on
batting and enjoy ourselves in the middle.
At lunch we had reached 748–2, of which I had contributed 326. As soon as we left the field I was
informed by the assistant coach that I was in serious trouble. When I asked why, he told me that
Achrekar Sir had wanted us to declare in the morning and I had disobeyed him by carrying on. Sir was
of the opinion that we had more than enough runs to declare, and if we weren’t able to bowl the
opposition out for less we did not deserve to be in the final. I decided to declare right away to save

myself from Sir’s ire that evening. Vinod asked me not to, however, because he was not out on 349.
He pleaded with me to give him one more ball so that he’d reach 350. I said that it wasn’t my call and
we needed Sir’s permission to continue. So I rang Sir from a public phone next to the ground and the
first question he asked was how many wickets we had managed to take before lunch. That was Sir’s
style. He was well aware that we hadn’t declared and hadn’t taken any wickets, but he wouldn’t say so.
I informed him that we had batted till lunch and that I was about to declare. With Vinod pleading
beside me, I quickly mentioned to Sir that Vinod wanted to speak to him and handed over the phone.
But Vinod was scared of Sir and ended up not saying a word about batting on for another over.
I duly declared the innings and, despite having batted for a day and a half, went on to open the
bowling with the new ball and bowled a lot of overs in the innings. I did not feel the least bit tired; all
the hard work in the summer camps had started to pay off. I started out bowling medium pace, then
changed to off-spin when the ball was semi-old and leg-spin when the ball had lost all of its shine.
Vinod too bowled very well and picked up six wickets as we dismissed St Xavier’s for 154 to make
the final.
That partnership of 664 was the highest in any form of cricket in the world at the time. Coming in
the semi-final of the Harris Shield made it all the more significant in the local cricket community. It
gained us both a lot of recognition. We had become quite a pair and what made batting with Vinod fun
was that I never knew what he’d get up to next. In one match in the same season he actually started
flying a kite while we were batting together. Suddenly I couldn’t see Vinod, because he had walked 20
metres away from the pitch and was holding the string of a kite – right in the middle of the innings! It
was his way of enjoying himself and I knew he’d get a severe reprimand from Sir for doing so.
Sir wasn’t to be seen on that day, however, and Vinod was confident of getting away with it. I
wasn’t so sure. I had a feeling that Sir was watching us from somewhere and would surely pick up the
issue at the end of the day’s play, as was his style. Sir was known to hide behind a tree on occasions to
watch us play, and in fact it rarely happened that he’d miss a game of ours. At the end of the day he
would then give us a ‘demonstration’ session, so called because Sir would demonstrate what we had
done wrong in terms of footwork, stance or stroke selection. Sure enough, at the demonstration session
at the end of that day, I was given a chit to read aloud and the first item was ‘Vinod kite’. Sir, upset at
what Vinod had done, asked him what he thought he was doing flying a kite while batting and warned
him never to do so again. He promised, but with Vinod nothing could be taken for granted.
Having defeated St Xavier’s comprehensively, we were runaway favourites in the final against
Anjuman-I-Islam, which was to be played at the Cricket Club of India, which is India’s equivalent of
the MCC, established in 1933. It was my first competitive game at CCI and a number of Mumbai
cricket luminaries were present to see us bat in the final. They had heard about the world-record
partnership and wanted to see if we were good enough to have a career in cricket. Dilip Vengsarkar,
Sunil Gavaskar and CCI president Raj Singh Dungarpur were in attendance and I did not want to
disappoint them.
On the eve of the final I was given a superb gift by Hemant Kenkre, Sunil Gavaskar’s nephew,
which served as an added incentive to perform well. At the time I did not have good pads to play with
and Sir had a word with Hemant about it. Hemant had with him a set of pads used by Sunil Gavaskar,
the really light ones with blue padding inside, and decided to give them to me. I was delighted and
humbled and went with Ajit to his house to collect my gift.
I felt very proud to wear pads once used by Sunil Gavaskar. I went in to bat thirty minutes before
lunch on the first day of the final and kept batting for close to two days. I was eventually unbeaten on
346 when we were bowled out before tea on the third day. It was a very significant innings in the

context of my career, for shortly afterwards I was included in the list of Probables for the Mumbai
Ranji Trophy team.
In my early days as a cricketer another person who helped me considerably was Hemant
Waingankar. Hemant, a student of my father’s, knew me as a child and has followed my career from
start to finish. It was at Hemant’s initiative that Anil Joshi, Vijay Shirke and Sanju Khamkar of
Sungrace Mafatlal, a well-known Indian company, came forward to support both Vinod and me with
cricket equipment. I am glad that our friendship, which is now close to three decades old, continues
even today.

My Sir
Looking back at these years of cricket, I must say I owe a lot to my coach Ramakant Achrekar – as
well as his assistants, Das Shivalkar and Laxman Chavan. Had it not been for Sir, I would not be the
cricketer I turned out to be. He was a strict disciplinarian and did everything he could for me.
On certain days he would even drive me all the way across Mumbai on his scooter to get me to
matches on time. Even though I loved cricket, there were still occasional days when playing with my
friends at home was such fun that I would conveniently forget I was supposed to go to the nets. If I
didn’t turn up, Achrekar Sir would jump on his scooter and come to find me at Sahitya Sahawas.
Inevitably, I would be outside, engrossed in some game or other with my chums. Sir would spot me in
the melee and virtually drag me to our apartment. I would come up with excuses but he would have
none of it. He would get me to change and put on my shoes and then I’d ride pillion with him as we
headed off to Shivaji Park. On the drive he would tell me, ‘Don’t waste your time playing inane games
with these kids. Cricket is waiting for you at the nets. Practise hard and see what magic can transpire.’
At the time, I hated being dragged off but as I look back I feel sheepish about my actions and can only
admire Achrekar Sir’s farsightedness.
Sir also punished me on one occasion when trying to teach me a very important lesson.
Shardashram English and Shardashram Marathi schools had made it to the finals of the Harris Shield
and the match was to be played at the Wankhede Stadium. I was at that stage a Giles Shield player and
had nothing to do with the Harris Shield. Knowing that I’d want to go and watch the game, Sir had
arranged a practice match for me and warned me not to miss my own match and go off to the
Wankhede. However, I disobeyed and went along to the final, not anticipating that Sir would be there.
He was as angry as I’d ever seen him and he said it wasn’t for me to come and watch other people
play, for if I practised hard enough, one day people from across the world would come and watch me
play.
Achrekar Sir has undoubtedly made a significant contribution to cricket in Mumbai and India. I am
by no means the only pupil of his to go on to represent India; others include Lalchand Rajput, Vinod
Kambli, Pravin Amre, Ajit Agarkar, Sanjay Bangar, Balwinder Sandhu, Chandrakant Pandit, Paras
Mhambrey, Sameer Dighe and Ramesh Powar. Not for one moment has he been interested in financial
gain, however. Quite the opposite, in fact – there were many occasions when he would help out those
who were so poor they could not even afford the few rupees normally charged for his summer school.
Throughout my career, before each tour and each series for India, I would make four visits that were
very important to me: to two temples in Mumbai, the Ganesh temple in Shivaji Park and the
Siddhivinayak temple in Prabhadevi; to my aunt and uncle; and to Achrekar Sir.

My short career as a fast bowler

My first good season for Shardashram earned me a trial place at the MRF Pace Foundation in Chennai
in 1987 under the legendary Australian fast bowler Dennis Lillee, who was head coach there. The
MRF Pace Foundation had been set up with the explicit aim of grooming local fast-bowling talent,
something that we have always lacked in India. Coaches from across India had been asked to name
talented youngsters and my name was suggested by Vasu Paranjpe, veteran Mumbai cricketer and one
of India’s best coaches. Vasu Sir has always been extremely supportive of my efforts and has been a
kind of mentor to me. Though the camp was primarily meant to identify talented fast bowlers, Ajit
advised me to take my full kit to Chennai. The thought was that if I wasn’t selected as a bowler I could
benefit from batting in the nets there. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given my build and height, I didn’t
stand out as a potential international pace bowler and Dennis Lillee jokingly advised me to focus on
my batting instead. As it turned out, I was always a batsman who wanted to learn the art of fast
bowling.

The first break
All the hard work under the watchful supervision of Sir finally paid off when I was picked in the squad
to represent Mumbai in the Ranji Trophy on 14 November 1987. The Ranji Trophy, the premier
domestic competition in India, was started in 1933–34 and named after the famous KS Ranjitsinhji,
Indian cricket’s first global figure, who played for England against Australia in 1896. It is an
important platform and consistent performances in the Ranji Trophy can earn a player a national callup. In the 1980s it was played on a zonal basis. First-class teams from each zone, West, North, South,
East and Central, played each other before the top teams advanced to the knock-out stage.
Despite making the Mumbai squad, I did not make it to the final XI in any of the matches. This
meant I narrowly missed out on playing alongside Sunil Gavaskar, who retired from all forms of
cricket after the 1987 Cricket World Cup, a few months before I made the Ranji squad. When I was
growing up, Mr Gavaskar’s thirty-four centuries for India had always served as a huge inspiration. It
was the ultimate benchmark for a batsman, and not to have played alongside him remains a regret.
However, that season I did get a little taste of the Ranji Trophy, as a substitute fielder – and also of
international cricket, while fielding at the Brabourne Stadium for a Pakistan team against India!
It was a festival match and two Pakistan cricketers, Javed Miandad and leg-spinner Abdul Qadir,
had gone off the field at lunchtime. I was asked to substitute and was deployed at wide long on by
skipper Imran Khan. Within minutes Kapil Dev hit a skier and, despite running in 15 metres, I wasn’t
able to reach the ball. I remember complaining to my friend Marcus Couto that evening on the train
home that I could have taken the catch if I had been positioned at mid on instead of long on. I don’t
know whether Imran Khan remembers the occasion or has any idea that I once fielded for his Pakistan
team.
One incident I remember from my Ranji Trophy debut season took place when we played in Baroda
in one of the West Zone encounters. I was just fourteen then and was sharing a room with Suru Nayak,
a former India international. The team had reached Baroda a few days in advance and on one of the
days we had dinner a little earlier than normal. Afterwards Suru Nayak asked me to go to bed,
suggesting that I should take some rest while the other players went out to offer pujas at the local
temple. I had no reason to disbelieve him and went off to sleep in my room. Only later did I find out
that the other players had gone out partying at night and because I was only fourteen I had been
conveniently left out.
I wasn’t always so well behaved, of course. In 1987 I remember playing for the Mumbai Under-15

team at Cuttack in Eastern India. We were staying in a college dormitory and there were fifteen beds
aligned in a row. Next to the dorm was a balcony and beyond it lay the college sports field. Two of my
friends in the team were Jatin Paranjpe (who went on to play one-day international cricket for India)
and Vinod Kambli, and together we had planned that after lights-out we would sneak around and
gather up all the other players’ shoes, including their spikes. With the dorm pitch-dark, we started
throwing them at Kedar Godbole, one of our hapless team-mates. Other players were also in our line
of fire and before they could figure out what was going on they were hit by a barrage of shoe missiles.
When they started throwing them back at us, we ducked and their shoes flew over our heads and over
the balcony into the adjoining field. Finally, at two in the morning, the whole team was down on the
ground looking for their shoes and chappals!

Ranji Trophy debut
The following year, I was watched closely by Mumbai captain Dilip Vengsarkar in the Cricket Club of
India nets when the Indian team came to play a match against the touring New Zealand team.
Vengsarkar was impressed with the way I played against Kapil Dev and sometime later, on 10
December 1988, when I was fifteen, he told the selectors that I was ready to play for Mumbai against
Gujarat, giving me my first big break. Vengsarkar himself was busy with national duty and I filled in
for him. In my debut match I scored 100 not out and in the process became the youngest Indian to
score a century on his first-class debut. I finished the 1988–89 season as Mumbai’s highest run-scorer
and made half-centuries in six of the seven matches I played. Mumbai lost a hard-fought semi-final
against Delhi and I ended my debut season with a respectable batting average of 64.77. In the semifinal, Madan Lal, former India fast bowler and coach, was playing for Delhi and I remember playing a
straight drive to him that was much talked about that evening. It was a shot that got me noticed,
adding to my stock at the time. Everything about the shot was perfect – balance, head position, timing
– and the ball raced to the boundary.
My performances for Mumbai got me selected for the season-opening Irani Trophy match at the
beginning of November 1989. The Irani Trophy, between the Ranji Trophy champions and the Rest of
India, is a key component of the Indian domestic cricket calendar and is a major opportunity to get
noticed. Playing for the Rest of India, I scored a hundred against Ranji champions Delhi in my first
Irani Trophy game and it was during this match that the Indian touring team for the much-awaited tour
to Pakistan in November–December 1989 was announced.
Before I knew it, at sixteen years of age, I had been picked to play for India.