STANDING UP FOR MYSELF

In July 2001, two months after the Australia series, we played a tri-series against the West Indies and
Zimbabwe at Harare. I had trained hard in the off season and felt in good shape ahead of the series.
For close to two years, between August 1999 and July 2001, I had been injury-free and the off-season
training had definitely helped improve my fitness. I used to run in the mornings and do gym sessions
in the afternoon to strengthen my upper body and I also kept a check on my diet. The discipline had
helped and the 1999 back injury was now just a bad memory.
I started the tournament in red-hot form and scored two fifties and a century in the four pool games,
being dismissed only once. But just as I had started to look forward to the final, I suffered the second
major injury of my career in rather unexpected circumstances.
It happened during the last of our group matches against the West Indies on 4 July 2001. Rahul and
I were batting together and we were cruising to victory. With some 20 runs left to win, I turned a ball
to midwicket and set off for two runs. That’s when I heard something click in my big toe. Immediately
I felt a sense of discomfort and found it difficult to complete the second run. Before the next ball I
walked up to Rahul and said that I had hurt my toe and that the temperature in my foot had suddenly
gone up a few degrees. However, with so few runs needed, I decided to stay in and finish off the game
as quickly as possible, making 122 in the process.
After the match I showed the toe to Andrew Leipus, who had taken over as our physiotherapist, and
the next morning we went for an X-ray. The pain had actually increased in the interim and I was now
struggling to walk properly. On our way to the hospital I asked Andrew not to tell me about the results
of the X-ray, for no matter what, I wanted to play in the final. Soon after the X-ray, Andrew, looking
somewhat helpless, just said to me, ‘You are a crazy man.’
Before the game it was decided that Andrew would strap the toe bent down to prevent any
movement and I took the field against the West Indies in considerable physical discomfort. I had been
in terrific touch throughout the tournament and the thinking was that my batting was more important
for the team than my fielding and bowling. Personally, I felt I would be able to make it through the
game, as it happened to be the final match. After all that effort, however, I proceeded to get out for a
duck and we lost the match. It turned out I had damaged my sesamoid bone, which is the bone at the
connection of the big toe and the first metatarsal.
After returning to India I was prescribed total rest, but after two months I still wasn’t happy with
the way the recovery was going. I could barely walk without discomfort. In desperation I saw a
specialist, who advised me to have surgery. We even fixed a tentative date, but that’s when Anjali
advised me to seek a second opinion. She felt that surgery should always be the last resort and we had
to be sure there was no other way to get the injury treated.
We went to the Bombay hospital and saw one of the most senior doctors around, Dr Dholakia. He
showed me a big fat book on sesamoid bones and informed me that the author of the book, who was

the world expert on sesamoid injuries, wasn’t a hundred per cent certain that surgery was the best way
to treat them. He went on to say that I shouldn’t allow anyone to touch my toe, as it might be
counterproductive. There was the possibility of permanent damage, which might bring my career to an
end, and that was a scary thought. On the very same day Dr Dholakia started looking into where I
could go to get my toe examined by a specialist.
Eventually I found myself at the Rosebank Clinic in Johannesburg, where Dr Mark Ferguson, who
had worked with a lot of sportsmen, advised me to try out a few insoles. Over a week in South Africa I
went from walking for fifteen minutes to close to an hour. Back in Mumbai I continued with the
routine, building up from jogging to running. Running in cricket shoes was a bit of a problem because
of the spikes, so for the next few months I wore shoes with no spikes immediately under my toes. The
injury, it appeared, was finally on the mend.
My first tour after the lay-off, coincidentally perhaps, was to South Africa in October–November
2001. We were playing a tri-series against South Africa and Kenya before going on to play a threeTest series against the South Africans. However, in our very first tour game against the Nicky
Oppenheimer XI on 1 October, the pain in my toe resurfaced. It was a strange sensation and I left the
field to get some treatment.
Luckily for me we were in Randjesfontein, which is not far from Johannesburg, so I set out for the
Rosebank Clinic again. Much to my relief, I was assured there that it wasn’t anything major and that a
slight recurrence of pain was normal with sesamoid bone injuries. They told me that there was no need
to panic. I left the clinic with a sigh of relief and was eager to get back to playing cricket again.
The first match of the tri-series was in Johannesburg on 5 October and I managed to score a hundred
against South Africa. The intensity of the match pushed the thought of the injury out of my mind, but
afterwards I was relieved that I’d been able to bat for so long with very little pain. It was as if I had
started all over again.

India in South Africa, November 2001
Taking on South Africa in their home conditions is always challenging and it was even more so having
just recovered from the toe injury. I had, however, started to feel more confident after a net session at
Bloemfontein, the venue for the first of the three Tests. I distinctly remember that session because
every ball hit the middle of my bat and it seemed to me that I could do no wrong.
The first Test started on 3 November and happily my touch with the bat was still there in the first
innings. I made 155 out of a team total of 379, and it was the first time I played the upper cut over the
slips, a shot I went on to use regularly in the second half of my career. I had come up with the idea of
the shot to counter the South African fast bowler Makhaya Ntini, whose strength was to bring the ball
in to the batsman from short of a length. I knew that if I played the upper cut against Ntini, it would
affect his rhythm, as he was not prepared for this form of counter-attack. The pitch in Bloemfontein
had a lot of bounce and in the absence of a third-man fielder the upper cut was a scoring stroke played
with minimal risk. I followed the ball till late and just helped it on the way over the slip fielders, using
the pace generated by Ntini.
Virender Sehwag, on his debut, also played aggressively and, had we batted a little better in the
second innings, we could have saved the game. Instead, we lost by nine wickets, with Shaun Pollock
taking 6–56. My partnership with Sehwag was our high point and I remember asking him if he was
nervous when he walked out to bat for the first time in a Test. He admitted that he was a little and I
immediately told him that was normal. In fact, it was good to be a little nervous and everyone who

played Test cricket experienced similar nerves. He just needed to play his natural game and the
nervousness would disappear once he’d spent a little time out in the middle. He did so and scored a
fantastic hundred on debut.

Missing the comforts of home
We went to Port Elizabeth for the second Test. Sara and Arjun were both with me and on one evening
before the match I asked the hotel staff to recommend a restaurant where we could go out for a good
family meal. Eating together was the only way I could spend quality time with my children and I
looked forward to these meals at the end of long, hard work days. The hotel staff told me about a diner
that also had a fairly big play area where the children could enjoy themselves and we ended up going
to the same restaurant three days in a row. It was from this restaurant that I picked up the idea of the
play area that I put in my own restaurant when I opened Tendulkar’s in Mumbai in 2004.
Food on tour was always an important consideration for the team and to get the kind of food we
liked in places such as Bulawayo in Zimbabwe and some South African cities could sometimes be a
real problem.
I remember one occasion in Bulawayo when all the players were yearning for home food. We were
tired of eating the same breakfast and lunch in the hotel, and the restaurants were not the best.
Spotting an Indian family that had come to see us play, Sameer Dighe boldly walked up to them and
said that the team was desperate to eat some good Indian food – could they help?
Jhanak bhai, the man in question, was a Gujarati settled in Zimbabwe and he ended up inviting the
team to his home, where we feasted on a home-cooked meal of Gujarati-style dal, rice and ghee. We
all had three spoons of ghee and pigged out on the food in front of us. It soon became a regular thing
and Jhanak bhai and his family fed us many times. Others who have been kind enough to provide us
with good home-cooked food in Zimbabwe and South Africa are Raj and Chester Naik and Jayesh
Desai. They have selflessly helped us whenever we have toured their parts of the world and have made
a major contribution to our well-being. Raj and Chester Naik also took us to play golf and we had
some wonderful dinners together. Invariably Ravi Shastri would join us for these dinners because they
were his friends first. I became good friends with many of them and must say I will always remember
the warmth and affection I received from them and their families.

Unacceptable allegations
We managed a better batting performance in the Port Elizabeth Test, which started on 16 November
2001. Rahul Dravid and Deep Dasgupta, our wicketkeeper, played resolutely on the last day, and we
saved the match comfortably in the end. However, what hit the headlines from that match were the
allegations made against me by the match referee Mike Denness, who also charged five other Indian
players.
The incident occurred on the third day, when I bowled a four-over spell, taking the wicket of
Herschelle Gibbs. I was bowling seam-up and was getting the ball to swing both ways. During this
spell I used my thumb to clean off the grass that was stuck on the seam.
Soon after the end of the day’s play we were informed that the match referee had called six Indian
players for a hearing and that I had been accused of ball tampering. I was shocked, because I had
always played cricket with integrity and honesty and would never do such a thing.
When I met the match referee I informed him that I was merely trying to clean the seam of the ball.

My mistake, which I have no hesitation in owning up to, was that I should have informed the on-field
umpires under Law 42.3 when I was cleaning the seam, but I’m afraid it did not enter my mind in the
intensity of the moment. I asked Mike Denness to consult the on-field umpires, because they had
checked the ball every two or three overs and were in the best position to tell if the ball had been
tampered with. Denness said that there was no need to consult the umpires, presumably because I had
admitted altering the ball by cleaning the seam.
I found this strange, because there was no way Denness could gauge what was going on in the
middle when he was sitting eighty yards away from the pitch. None of the umpires had lodged a
formal complaint against me and it was humiliating to be labelled a cheat. I wasn’t prepared to let it
pass. I informed Mike Denness that I would complain about the allegation to the BCCI and would not
keep quiet about it.
Apart from charging me with ball tampering, Mike Denness handed captain Sourav Ganguly a onematch suspended ban for failing to control the players and banned Virender Sehwag for one match on
a charge of over-appealing. Deep Dasgupta, Harbhajan Singh and Shiv Sunder Das, the opening
batsman, were all handed a one-Test suspended ban and fined 75 per cent of their match fee for the
same offence. The team considered these punishments harsh, especially when none of the South
Africans had been pulled up despite, we felt, appealing just as aggressively. It is a hard game and
sometimes things get heated in the middle. But we didn’t think we deserved the punishments we had
been handed.
We informed the BCCI that the allegations were unsubstantiated and unfair. We were delighted
when the BCCI, led by Jagmohan Dalmiya, stood steadfastly behind us and informed the ICC that the
team had lost faith in the match referee. We also received support in the media; the Indian journalistic
fraternity, at home and on tour, was united behind the team. We were prepared to abandon the tour if
need be, but we weren’t ready to be labelled cheats. It was about honour and there was no way we
would allow a match referee to cast aspersions on our credibility.
Things had come to such a pass at one point that we weren’t sure if the tour would actually carry on.
There were conflicting reports everywhere and the atmosphere was one of mistrust and confusion. The
situation came to a head twenty-four hours before the start of the third Test match, when it was finally
decided by the Indian and South African boards, rather than by the ICC, that Mike Denness should not
officiate in the match. Denis Lindsay, the former South African wicketkeeper, was the replacement,
and the match went ahead, but it was labelled an unofficial Test match by the ICC.
Not everything was right about it after all the acrimony, which I must say was largely unnecessary.
Mike Denness’s decisions had led to a crisis that had ended up dividing the cricket world down the
middle. It was an avoidable incident and one that left everyone bitter in the end.
India in South Africa 2001
1st Test. Bloemfontein. 3–6 November 2001
India 379 (SR Tendulkar 155, V Sehwag 105; S Pollock 4–91, M Hayward 3–70) and 237 (SS Das 62,
V Sehwag 31, SR Tendulkar 15; SM Pollock 6–56)
South Africa 563 (L Klusener 108, HH Gibbs 107, G Kirsten 73, J Kallis 68, ND McKenzie 68; J
Srinath 5–140, A Kumble 3–132) and 54–1
South Africa won by 9 wickets
2nd Test. Port Elizabeth. 16–20 November 2001
South Africa 362 (HH Gibbs 196, MV Boucher 68*; J Srinath 6–76, SR Tendulkar 1–22 ) and 233–5

dec (JH Kallis 89*, SM Pollock 55*; J Srinath 2–28, H Singh 2–79)
India 201 (VVS Laxman 89, SC Ganguly 42, SR Tendulkar 1 ; SM Pollock 5–40) and 206–3 (R
Dravid 87, D Dasgupta 63, SR Tendulkar 22*; M Hayward 2–58)
Match drawn
South Africa won the series 1–0
