CAPTAINCY – THE FIRST STINT

Captaining India is undoubtedly a great honour, and it was a job I felt ready for at that point in my
career. I had captained Mumbai and led them to victory in the Ranji Trophy in 1995–96. In all, I
captained Mumbai in sixteen out of the thirty-eight Ranji Trophy matches I played in, and I continued
to do well as a batsman in these games, scoring at an average of 99.53. I had also captained West Zone
in the Duleep Trophy, so it wasn’t an altogether new experience. Yet captaining India is
fundamentally different, with its own particular challenges.
First, there is the need to cope with the demands of the non-stop media machine. The Indian
captain’s every move is headline news and it was no easy task to protect myself from the constant
media glare. More important, perhaps, was learning how to deal with the selection committee and the
practice of zonal representation associated with it.
In India the committee consists of five selectors, one from each zone: West, North, South, East and
Central. Zonal representation sometimes resulted in selectors pushing players from their particular
zone and in my first stint as captain the team undoubtedly suffered as a consequence. There were
occasions when I wasn’t given the team of my choice and did not get particular players I asked for.
For me, the priority was always the Indian team. For some of the selectors, however, things may have
been different. I felt there were other factors dictating team selection and at times I felt disappointed
after selection committee meetings.

A promising start
My first match as captain was against Australia at the Kotla in New Delhi in October 1996, and we
were keen to bounce back after the series defeat in England in the summer. We also needed to win the
Test to keep our amazing home Test record intact. We managed to do so, with Nayan Mongia, our
wicketkeeper and stand-in opener, scoring a remarkable 152. It wasn’t a bad start as skipper.
Unusually, Australia had travelled all the way to India just to play a single Test, which was intended
to mark the inauguration of the Border–Gavaskar Trophy, named after two of world cricket’s greatest
icons. At least there was a good reason for that one-off game; at other times it was a little difficult to
understand the thinking behind some of our shorter tours. A couple of years earlier, for example, we
went all the way to New Zealand for one Test match and four ODIs, with no practice games, and that
was considered a tour of New Zealand! We also played our fair share of two-Test series over the years
and they are not altogether satisfactory either – you blink four times and a two-Test series is over!
Next on the horizon was a home Test series against South Africa, which was preceded by another
one-day tournament, the Titan Cup, involving India, Australia and South Africa. It was no small
achievement to beat Australia and South Africa, two of the best teams in the world at the time, on our
way to the title. In the final at the Wankhede on 6 November, I scored 67 in our modest 220, with

Jadeja adding 43, and then it was all down to Anil Kumble, who took four wickets as we bowled the
South Africans out for 185, winning the match by 35 runs. It was a very welcome victory after our
disappointing loss to Sri Lanka in the World Cup semi-final and it was particularly satisfying for me,
because I had experimented with something radically different as captain.
After Srinath and Venkatesh Prasad had bowled good first spells and Anil had picked up a couple of
wickets, I had to turn to Robin Singh, our all-rounder, for the fifth bowler’s quota. Robin bowled
medium pace and was extremely accurate. I decided to go with a four–five field. In an ODI, it is very
unusual, with a medium-pacer operating, for there to be only four fielders on the off side and five on
the on. I had no deep point and had fielders at third man, short point, cover and long off. On the on
side I had fielders at fine leg, short square leg, short midwicket, deep square leg and long on. I asked
Robin to bowl stump-to-stump and make sure not a single ball was pitched outside the off stump,
otherwise the South Africans would pick off singles to third man. Three or four singles an over would
really ease the pressure on them in a relatively low-scoring contest. I wasn’t worried about Robin
bowling a leg-stump wide, just as long as he didn’t pitch the ball outside off stump. I was confident
that the South Africans were not prepared for this strategy. Robin did his job well. He bowled his full
quota of ten overs, giving away only 40 runs and also picking up the important wickets of Hansie
Cronje and Daryll Cullinan.
The Test series that followed the Titan Cup was always going to be fiercely competitive. South
Africa were one of the better teams at the time and had fast bowlers of the calibre of Allan Donald and
Fanie de Villiers and batsmen of the class of Cronje, Gary Kirsten, Daryll Cullinan and Jonty Rhodes.
The first match of the series at Ahmedabad started on 20 November 1996 and was a great contest, with
multiple twists and turns. After we were bowled out for a modest 223 in the first innings, South Africa
managed a handy 21-run lead. It was a good lead in the context of what seemed likely to be a lowscoring game and we had to bat well in the second innings to set them a reasonable target. We faltered
and left South Africa needing just 170 to win in a little under two days.
The game wasn’t lost yet, however. There was a lot of wear and tear on the pitch by the end of the
third day and we knew that 170 might prove tricky on that surface. We were playing two leg-spinners
in Anil Kumble and Narendra Hirwani and a left-arm spinner in Sunil Joshi. The South Africans would
undoubtedly expect me to attack them with spinners on a crumbling pitch. Instead, I decided to use
Javagal Srinath, because Sri, with his extra pace, could also get the ball to reverse-swing. Swing at a
good pace is very difficult to deal with and in no time Srinath had given us a dream start, reducing the
South Africans to 0–2.
After his successful short opening burst, I rested Srinath for a while before bringing him back for
another long spell. I kept talking to him to check if he was feeling tired. He was bowling beautifully
and had the batsmen in all sorts of trouble. I put Sunil Joshi on at the other end to keep the batsmen in
check and not concede too many runs. I asked Sunil to pitch the ball in the rough outside the lefthanders’ off stump and keep them tied down to one end. This was to allow Srinath to bowl to the righthanders, as reverse swing was more effective against right-handed batsmen. This move paid real
dividends. Sunil managed to stem the run flow while from the other end Srinath picked up wickets at
regular intervals.
At no time during the chase were South Africa in with a chance. We kept up the pressure and
managed to bowl them out for 105 in just thirty-nine overs, recording a famous victory. It was the
high point of my captaincy; the plan to use Srinath from one end had worked really well. Hansie
Cronje walked up to me after the game and confessed that he had been caught off-guard. He had
expected me to employ spinners and had a strategy in place to negotiate the turning ball on a wearing

pitch. He did not have a plan for Srinath, and by the time he had come to terms with our tactics the
match was over.
The other thing I tried out in that Test match for the first time, something that served India well for
a decade and a half, was to get Rahul Dravid to bat at number three and Sourav Ganguly at five, which
was not an obvious decision at the time. Both had had great starts to their careers in England batting in
other positions. Sourav had scored two consecutive hundreds batting at number three. In his third Test
against Australia, which was the first of my captaincy, he once again batted in that position and scored
66 in the first innings and was unbeaten on 21 in the second. He was full of confidence and was keen
to continue batting at three. Rahul too had scored consecutive fifties in England in his first two Tests
and was looking good at number five. However, I felt that by changing the batting order I could get the
best out of each of them in the long run.
Sourav was a boundary-hitter and liked playing his shots from the start of his innings. He was
flamboyant and more attacking and I felt his style was more suited to number five. Rahul on the other
hand played within himself at the start of his innings and was comfortable leaving a lot of deliveries
outside the off stump. That’s an important ability for a number-three batsman. The two had very
different strengths and I knew that both were terrific players and had the talent to serve India for many
years. With Rahul at three and Sourav at five, I felt the team would have a better balance, especially in
overseas conditions. Though we reverted to Sourav at three and Rahul at five for the deciding third
Test of this series and the first two Tests in South Africa shortly afterwards, we repeated the
experiment in the third and final Test of that series at Johannesburg in January 1997. It worked very
well and became a permanent fixture of India’s batting for over a decade.
In the second Test of the home series at Eden Gardens at the end of November 1996, South Africa
beat us comfortably, with Lance Klusener and Gary Kirsten playing well for the visitors. Klusener
took eight wickets on debut and Gary scored hundreds in both innings. One of South Africa’s most
prolific opening batsmen, Gary had the remarkable ability to pick up singles at will with a nudge into
the gap between midwicket and square leg. This made him an extremely difficult batsman to bowl to.
A fierce competitor, he is someone I had the highest respect for as an opponent.
We went to Kanpur for the third Test with the series level. Azhar was in commanding form in the
second innings, remaining undefeated on 163, and once we had managed to set South Africa a target of
over 450 we knew we were in control. We bowled South Africa out for 180, winning the Test by 280
runs and the series 2–1. To beat Australia and South Africa in my first two series as captain was the
best start I could have hoped for, and when we left for South Africa in December 1996 we were a team
brimming with confidence.

India in South Africa, December 1996–February 1997
The planning for the return series was not the best. We landed in South Africa on 19 December and
played just one practice game before the first Test match in Durban on Boxing Day. On a tour like that
you really need at least two or three practice games and close to two weeks of acclimatization to be
competitive. The conditions are so different from those in India that players have to have that time to
get used to the seam movement and the bounce. Balls that hit the bottom half of the bat in India come
at heights close to the bat handle in South Africa.
We lost the Durban Test miserably, bowled out by the South African fast bowlers for 66 in the
second innings in just thirty-four overs. It was a demoralizing loss and I had never experienced
anything like it before. South Africa proved superior to us in all aspects of the game and we were left

with a huge amount of work to do ahead of the second Test at Cape Town.
To add to my problems, I had injured myself in Durban while bowling and the injury was taking a
few days to heal. It happened when I decided to bowl to Andrew Hudson just before lunch on the first
day. I thought I would run in slowly and bowl him an unexpected bouncer, hoping to induce a top
edge. In doing so, I pulled a muscle in my side. The pain was surprisingly acute and I had to go to the
hospital during the lunch break to have three cortisone injections. Even when I rejoined the team at the
ground I was still extremely sore and found it difficult to run or bend.
The second Test started on 2 January 1997, so there were only a few days for the team to recover
and regroup. It was never going to be enough to cope with a really good South African side. In Allan
Donald and Shaun Pollock, the South Africans had two of the best fast bowlers in the world, and they
complemented each other beautifully in home conditions. While Donald was fast, Pollock could swing
the ball both ways and was a master of his craft. Nevertheless, we did manage to show some signs of
competitiveness in Cape Town and both Azhar and I got hundreds in the first innings.
I went in to bat towards the end of the second day and was unbeaten on one at the end of play, with
the team score on 29–3. The following morning I was practising against throw-downs ahead of the
game and tried shuffling back and across to a few of the balls. It felt really good and I even timed the
balls well. Something in me said that I should employ the back-and-across movement that day. I did
so and found that, even when the bowlers were bowling at close to 150 kph, I still had plenty of time.
Normally I would stand just outside my leg stump while taking guard, but at Cape Town I was
standing a good few inches outside to accommodate the shuffle. I ended up making 169. I always felt
that I needed to be comfortable in my head before I focused on technique. If I wasn’t comfortable to
start with, fretting about technique would not do much for my batting.
The other incident I remember from the Cape Town Test and which I thoroughly enjoyed involved
Allan Donald and the Indian medium-fast bowler Dodda Ganesh. Donald, who was in top form in that
series, had no patience with lower-order batsmen and was frustrated to see Ganesh hanging around. As
Dodda faced his onslaught fearlessly, Allan started mouthing words at him. For three consecutive
deliveries Dodda was all over the place but luckily for him did not lose his wicket. At the end of the
over Allan went up to Dodda and told him what he thought of him in no uncertain terms. Dodda’s face
remained impassive.
I witnessed all this from the non-striker’s end. When Allan came to fetch his cap from the umpire, I
told him, ‘Allan, Dodda only knows a local Indian language called Kannada. I find it difficult enough
to communicate with him myself, so how can he understand your abuse in English? If you want to get
to him, speak to him in Kannada.’ This made Allan even more irritated. He almost snatched his cap
from the umpire and, making wild gestures with his hands, stomped off to his fielding position.
By the end of the Cape Town match the players were much more used to the conditions and this
augured well for us going to Johannesburg for the third Test. We were taking the game very seriously,
even though it was a dead rubber. We played well from the start and Rahul Dravid, batting at number
three for the first time in the series, scored a fantastic hundred. He played the fast bowlers late and
helped us to a position of strength. Sourav too batted extremely well at number five and we scored 410
in our first innings, which put South Africa under pressure for the first time in the series. The bowlers
followed up with a good effort to give us a handy first-innings lead.
In our second innings it was once again Rahul and Sourav who did the business. We could sense
victory and were buoyed by the opportunity. Our bowlers prised out the South African top order fairly
quickly. Even when there was a partnership between Daryll Cullinan and Lance Klusener for the
eighth wicket, we knew we were within striking distance and just needed to keep plugging away.

We finally got our breakthrough, in the form of Klusener, and were just two wickets away from a
hard-earned victory when the skies opened up. It was a torrential downpour and it soon became clear
that we had lost a great opportunity to win a Test match in South Africa.
I was distraught. We had done everything we could to win the match and here we were being
deprived by the rain. I felt cheated by the forces of nature. I went to the umpires as soon as the rain
stopped and said we were ready to play even if the outfield was a little wet, but they were within their
rights to say that they couldn’t permit a restart unless the conditions were fit to play. The Test series
ended 2–0 in favour of South Africa, but that scoreline didn’t reveal just how close we had been to
making it 2–1. It left me disconsolate and in my disappointment I locked myself in the bathroom and
just cried.
The other disappointment in this match was that VVS Laxman, then a youngster, fractured his
finger and was faced with having to go back to India. Distressed, Laxman was sitting in one corner of
the dressing room in tears. I tried to console him, saying that injuries happen, but that he shouldn’t
worry too much about them as he had a long career ahead of him. In hindsight it was a prophetic
statement!

India in the West Indies, March–April 1997
India had not won a series in the Caribbean since 1971 and I looked on this tour as a major opportunity
to leave the disappointment of South Africa behind. The conditions were different again from those in
South Africa, and we needed to adjust quickly. However, our preparations suffered a serious jolt when
Srinath, our leading fast bowler, was ruled out of the tour because he needed shoulder surgery. Abey
Kuruvilla, a tall fast-medium bowler from Mumbai, performed admirably as his replacement, but the
situation illustrates a very serious problem I faced in South Africa and subsequently in the Caribbean.
On tours like that, I believed we really needed three quality fast bowlers but unfortunately I never
had more than two. In South Africa, Abey Kuruvilla was not even part of the squad. Even when I was
desperate to have him, the selectors refused to include him. After making his Ranji Trophy debut in
1991, Abey had played five seasons of first-class cricket by then and would have been a handy bowler
in South Africa. As it was, after good opening spells from both Srinath and Prasad, we failed to sustain
the momentum. In the West Indies, we would once again rue the absence of a quality third seamer.
Despite losing Srinath, we played well enough in the first two Tests in March 1997, at Sabina Park
and Port-of-Spain. Both matches ended in hard-fought draws and for once it seemed that we had
managed to adjust to the conditions, with our batting looking solid against the West Indian pace
quartet of Curtly Ambrose, Mervyn Dillon, Ian Bishop and Franklyn Rose. By the time we went to
Barbados for the third match of the five-Test series on 27 March, I was feeling confident that we could
do something special.
We started well at the Kensington Oval and managed to bowl out the West Indians for under 300,
thanks to some fine bowling from Venkatesh Prasad, with 5–82, and despite a Shivnarine Chanderpaul
century. As I write this, Chanderpaul has now played more than 150 Test matches in his career. He has
been one of the most consistent middle-order batsmen for the West Indies for close to two decades,
which is remarkable. We followed up the bowling with a good batting effort and managed a small
first-innings lead. I scored 92 and was wrongly given out to an Ian Bishop delivery by umpire Lloyd
Barker. Replays showed that Bishop had overstepped by at least four inches and it was a key moment
in the match. As things turned out, Lloyd Barker wasn’t able to officiate for much of the match after
that because – as I was told by the stand-in umpire who replaced him – he had had to go to hospital

with a serious headache and couldn’t focus properly.
In the second innings our bowlers did well to dismiss the West Indies for 140 on the third day of the
match. This time Abey Kuruvilla picked up 5–68 and we needed 120 runs to win, on a pitch that was
increasingly uneven, with plenty of wear and tear for the West Indian fast bowlers to exploit. We
picked up two of those runs without loss in the few overs we had to see out at the end of Sunday’s
play. On that track we knew that scoring would not be easy the next day, but we also felt that one good
partnership should be enough to take us to victory.

A humiliating collapse
Monday 31 March 1997 was a dark day in the history of Indian cricket and definitely the worst of my
captaincy career. And yet it had promised so much. In fact, over dinner at a restaurant in St Lawrence
Gap in Barbados the night before, I remember having a joke with the waiter, who was predicting a
West Indian win. He was confident that Ambrose would bounce India out the next morning. Now, in
the first innings of this match, Franklyn Rose had bowled me a bouncer and I had pulled him into the
stands for six. So I reminded the waiter of the shot and jokingly said to him that if Ambrose tried to
bowl me a bouncer, I would hit him all the way to Antigua. I was so confident of our chances that I
pointed to the fridge and said he should immediately chill a bottle of champagne and I would come
and open it the next day and pour him a glass to celebrate winning the match.
Instead, we collapsed for a miserable 81 all out, handing the West Indies a 38-run victory. Frankly,
there can be no excuses for such a poor batting effort, even though it was a difficult track. I certainly
don’t want to point fingers at anyone for the defeat, as that’s not my way. In any case, I was part of
that team and as captain it was my responsibility to steer us to victory. I did not get the feeling that we
were over-confident, yet none of the batsmen apart from Laxman even reached double figures in the
second innings and it was one of the worst batting displays I have been part of.
I myself got out for just four. In my anxiety to get a feel for the ball I got a tentative edge. I should
either have left the ball alone or tried to counter-attack. The defeat left me totally devastated and I
shut myself in my room for two whole days trying to come to terms with the loss. I still feel the pangs
of that defeat when I look back at the series.

From bad to worse
After eventually losing the five-Test series 0–1, we went on to lose the ODI series as well. The good
start to the tour had given way to a complete lack of application and that proved catastrophic in the
end. The best example of this ineptitude was the third one-day game, at St Vincent, where we needed
47 runs to win off the last ten overs with six wickets in hand. Rahul and Sourav had set up the
platform and we should have strolled to victory. Again and again I instructed the batsmen not to go for
big shots and to play along the ground, saying there was no need for any risk-taking with the asking
rate under five runs an over. However, all our middle- and lower-order batsmen kept playing the ball
in the air. The loss of a few wickets resulted in panic, which in turn led to a number of suicidal runouts. It was infuriating to see the team lose from a winning situation.
At the end of the match I called a team meeting and lost my cool with the boys in the dressing
room. I spoke from my heart and said the performance was unacceptable. I said that losing matches in
which the opposition play better cricket is one thing – I had no problem with such defeats – but losing
a match that we had completely under control suggested there was something seriously wrong with the

team.
I was extremely upset with the way we were playing and both Anil and Srinath came to my room in
the evening to try and calm me down. Anil said that I should not blame myself for the defeats and that
we would learn from the mistakes we had made in South Africa and the West Indies. However, things
were really starting to get on top of me. I hated losing and as captain of the team I felt responsible for
the string of miserable performances. More worryingly, I did not know how I could turn it around, as I
was already trying my absolute best.
Not long after the series was over, I confided in Anjali that I feared there was nothing more that I
could do to stem the tide of defeats. Losing a string of very close matches had left me badly scarred. I
had given it everything and was not sure that I could give even 0.1 per cent more. The fact that we
failed to chase down 120 had nothing to do with lack of talent. It was because we batted horribly on
the day. It was hurting me badly and it took me a long time to come to terms with these failures. I
even contemplated moving away from the sport completely, as it seemed nothing was going my way.
Anjali, as usual, managed to put things in perspective and assured me that things would surely get
better in the months to come. Looking back, it was just frustration getting the better of me.

The final few months
The string of defeats came to a temporary halt when we drew a two-Test series in Sri Lanka in August
1997 and then beat Pakistan 4–1 in the Sahara Cup, a one-day series in Toronto, in September. The
tournament was memorable because Sahara had not only lent their name as sponsors but senior
officials like Abhijit Sarkar were personally there to ensure that everything was in order and players
felt comfortable. This win was all the more satisfying because we played without Srinath, Prasad and
Anil Kumble, and we had a young bowling unit. Sourav Ganguly was the star performer for us in the
series, winning four Man of the Match awards on the trot.
There was one rather strange incident during the second match of this series involving Inzamam-ulHaq. While it appears funny in hindsight, it wasn’t at the time. During one of the drinks breaks when
we were batting, having bowled Pakistan out for 116, one of the Pakistan players who wasn’t playing
in the match took out a bat for Inzamam – to the great surprise of those of us watching from the
dressing room. We initially thought he was taking the bat out to get it autographed; only later did we
realize that Inzamam wanted it in order to charge at a few fans in the crowd who were taunting him
because of his physique!
When we came back from Toronto to Delhi, there were more than 5000 fans to receive us at one
thirty in the morning at Delhi airport. The police were finding it difficult to control the crowd but I
insisted that the team should wave to the fans before we left the airport. It was a grand homecoming.
However, the satisfaction of beating Pakistan was short-lived, because within weeks we had lost a
three-match ODI series in Pakistan.
In the second game, which we won, I remember telling our off-spinner Rajesh Chauhan how to play
Saqlain Mushtaq’s doosra ball. I gave him a mini-lecture for five minutes or so and told him to give
the strike to Robin Singh, who was batting well at the other end. To my surprise, Rajesh ended up
hitting a six in the last over and won us the game! However, we didn’t really celebrate, as there were
armed guards outside our hotel rooms for security reasons, something that made us uncomfortable and
put a dampener on things. The deciding match of the series belonged to Ijaz Ahmed, who smashed our
bowlers to all parts of the park on his way to 139, winning the game for Pakistan comfortably.
When we got back to Delhi this time having lost the series 1–2, the fans who had queued up just

weeks earlier were nowhere to be seen. To cap it all, I also remember that those of us who were flying
on to Mumbai were asked to pay excess baggage. I told my team-mates that we should just pay up and
not argue.
The defeat in Pakistan added to the pressure that was building on me and an incident from the home
Test series against Sri Lanka in November–December 1997 perhaps gives an indication of how I was
feeling at the time. As captain, I was expected to deliver a winning performance in the three-Test
contest. I had not done well as a batsman in the first two Tests, both of which ended in draws. To add
to my misery, the second Test at Nagpur was a washout. A section of the media was having a go at me
before the third Test in Mumbai, which started on 3 December 1997, and a lot was written about my
poor form. It was a crunch situation and I needed to deliver both as batsman and captain.
On the first day I went in to bat with an hour left and was unbeaten on eight at the end of play. I had
not batted at my best but at least I had survived. As the overnight not-out batsman, I needed to rest but
as has often been the case with me, I couldn’t sleep. By 10.30 p.m. I had started to feel very agitated.
To get out of the stifling environment of the hotel, I called my friend Atul Ranade and asked him over.
When he arrived I told him that I wanted to go for a drive and to visit the Shivaji Park temple.
It felt good praying at well past midnight. It gave me a sense of calm again and helped take my
mind off the game. Then we went to the Siddhi Vinayak temple and finally, on our way back to the
hotel, decided to have a milkshake at Haji Ali. Strange as it may sound, Atul and I sat on the roadside
at 1 a.m. drinking milkshake and relaxing. We talked about anything but cricket and I was feeling
much better when I went back to the hotel. I even managed to get some sleep and the following day I
made 148.
Unfortunately it didn’t bring the win I needed, even though at one point we were in a great position.
At a crucial moment in the innings we dropped a catch which would have put them under tremendous
pressure. To add to our frustration, it also started drizzling and the game was stopped. I felt it was a
combination of missed chances and bad luck that cost us the match.
The Sri Lanka series was followed by a four-nation tournament in Sharjah in December 1997. We
played some very poor cricket against England, Pakistan and the West Indies, losing all our matches
and failing to make the final. The match against Pakistan on 14 December highlights how things were
just not going my way. I was batting at number four in this competition, at the selectors’ request.
Sourav and Navjot Sidhu had given us a good start against Pakistan, and when Sidhu got out at 143–2,
I sent in Robin Singh, the all-rounder, to accelerate the innings. It was a strategy I had given
considerable thought to. Manzoor Akhtar, the leg-spinner, was at one end bowling around the wicket
to the right-handed batsmen. The theory was that Robin, a left-hander, would be able to negotiate his
leg-spin better and also hit some big shots. However, Robin got out without scoring after just three
balls from Azhar Mahmood, the medium-pacer, and the experiment proved a disaster.
In the press I was criticized for sending in Robin ahead of me and the move was blamed for our
defeat. A month later, however, in January 1998, Azhar, back as captain, repeated the very same move
in the final of the Silver Jubilee Independence Cup in Dhaka against Pakistan. Robin was sent in at
three to keep up the momentum after Sourav and I had got off to a flier and this time Robin played a
terrific hand, scoring 82 and setting up the run chase. This was arguably a bigger gamble, because he
was pitted against the off-spinner Saqlain Mushtaq and it is no secret that left-handers find it more
difficult against off-spinners. The same experiment was now hailed as a master stroke. Not without
reason is it said that success has many fathers while defeat is an orphan.
The Sharjah losses were followed by a three-match ODI series against Sri Lanka at home. After
we’d taken a 1–0 lead in the series, the second match was a washout and Sri Lanka played well to beat

us in the third game in Goa. At the end of the series I was unceremoniously sacked as skipper. No one
from the BCCI managed to call me or inform me of my removal as captain before someone from the
media called to say I was no longer captain. I was actually with my friends in Sahitya Sahawas. I felt
extremely humiliated to hear this, but the manner in which the whole thing was handled strengthened
my resolve to be a better cricketer in the years to come. I told myself that the BCCI mandarins might
be able to take the captaincy away from me, but no one could do the same as far as my own cricket
was concerned. The sense of ignominy and the pain were still there, however. During my tenure as
captain some of the players used to call me ‘skip’, so when one of the players shouted out ‘skipper’ in
our next engagement in Dhaka, I automatically turned around to answer the call. That’s when it really
hit me that I was no longer the captain of the Indian cricket team. Now I simply had to focus on my
batting and win some matches for the team. So that’s what I did. In fact, not long after this, I was so
focused on doing well that I ended up shouting at someone who has since become a good friend. This
incident, which has caused us both much embarrassment, took place in the second of the three finals
of the Silver Jubilee Independence Cup in Dhaka in 1998. There was a lot of movement in front of and
around the sightscreen and, despite my repeated complaints, things did not improve. I was distracted
and lost my wicket soon after. On my way back to the pavilion I was livid and, when someone came
across to apologize, I just screamed at him, saying Bangladesh did not deserve to host international
cricket if the basic fundamentals were not in place. Only later did I realize that the man I had yelled at
was Ashraful Haq, then president of the Bangladesh Cricket Board and currently chief executive of the
Asian Cricket Council. Ever since, whenever we meet, we start by saying sorry to each other for what
happened!
Australia in India 1996 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
One-off Test. Delhi. 10–13 October 1996
Australia 182 (MJ Slater 44; A Kumble 4–63, AR Kapoor 2–30, SB Joshi 2–36) and 234 (SR Waugh
67*; A Kumble 5–67, BKV Prasad 3–18)
India 361 (NR Mongia 152, SC Ganguly 66, SR Tendulkar 10 ; PR Reiffel 3–35) and 58–3 (SC
Ganguly 21, M Azharuddin 21, SR Tendulkar 0)
India won by 7 wickets
India won the series 1–0
South Africa in India 1996
1st Test. Ahmedabad. 20–23 November 1996
India 223 (SR Tendulkar 42 ; AA Donald 4–37) and 190 (VVS Laxman 51, SR Tendulkar 7 ; AA
Donald 3–32)
South Africa 244 (PS de Villiers 67*; SB Joshi 4–43) and 105 (WJ Cronje 48*; J Srinath 6–21, A
Kumble 3–34)
India won by 64 runs
2nd Test. Kolkata. 27 November–1 December 1996
South Africa 428 (AC Hudson 146, G Kirsten 102; BKV Prasad 6–104) and 367–3 dec (DJ Cullinan
153*, G Kirsten 133)
India 329 (M Azharuddin 109, A Kumble 88, SR Tendulkar 18 ; AA Donald 3–72) and 137 (M
Azharuddin 52, SR Tendulkar 2; L Klusener 8–64)

South Africa won by 329 runs
3rd Test. Kanpur. 8–12 December 1996
India 237 (SR Tendulkar 61, WV Raman 57; PR Adams 6–55) and 400–7 dec (M Azharuddin 163*, R
Dravid 56, SR Tendulkar 36)
South Africa 177 (G Kirsten 43; A Kumble 4–71, J Srinath 3–42) and 180 (WJ Cronje 50; J Srinath 3–
38, SB Joshi 3–66)
India won by 280 runs
India won the series 2–1
India in South Africa 1996–97
1st Test. Durban. 26–28 December 1996
South Africa 235 (AC Hudson 80; BKV Prasad 5–60) and 259 (AM Bacher 55, AC Hudson 52, BM
McMillan 51*; BKV Prasad 5–93)
India 100 (SC Ganguly 16, SR Tendulkar 15 ; AA Donald 5–40, SM Pollock 2–18, BM McMillan 2–
27) and 66 (R Dravid 27*, SR Tendulkar 4; AA Donald 4–14, SM Pollock 3–25, L Klusener 2–16)
South Africa won by 328 runs
2nd Test. Cape Town. 2–6 January 1997
South Africa 529–7 dec (G Kirsten 103, BM McMillan 103*, L Klusener 102*, DJ Cullinan 77; BKV
Prasad 3–114, J Srinath 3–130) and 256–6 dec (BM McMillan 59*, AC Hudson 55, DJ Cullinan 55;
J Srinath 3–78)
India 359 (SR Tendulkar 169 , M Azharuddin 115) and 144 (VVS Laxman 35*, SR Tendulkar 9 ; AA
Donald 3–40)
South Africa won by 282 runs
3rd Test. Johannesburg. 16–20 January 1997
India 410 (R Dravid 148, SC Ganguly 73, SR Tendulkar 35 ; L Klusener 3–75, AA Donald 3–88) and
266–8 dec (R Dravid 81, SC Ganguly 60, NR Mongia 50, SR Tendulkar 9 ; AA Donald 3–38, PR
Adams 3–80)
South Africa 321 (SM Pollock 79, BM McMillan 47; J Srinath 5–104) and 228–8 (DJ Cullinan 122*, L
Klusener 49; A Kumble 3–40)
Match drawn
South Africa won the series 2–0
India in the West Indies 1997
1st Test. Kingston. 6–10 March 1997
West Indies 427 (CL Hooper 129, BC Lara 83, S Chanderpaul 52; A Kumble 5–120) and 241–4 dec
(BC Lara 78, S Chanderpaul 48; A Kumble 3–76)
India 346 (NR Mongia 78, VVS Laxman 64, SR Tendulkar 7 ; FA Rose 6–100) and 99–2 (R Dravid
51*, SR Tendulkar 15*)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Port-of-Spain. 14–18 March 1997

West Indies 296 (RIC Holder 91, S Chanderpaul 42; A Kumble 5–104) and 299–6 (SC Williams 128, S
Chanderpaul 79; SB Joshi 3–57)
India 436 (NS Sidhu 201, SR Tendulkar 88, R Dravid 57; CEL Ambrose 5–87)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Bridgetown. 27–31 March 1997
West Indies 298 (S Chanderpaul 137*, CEL Ambrose 37; BKV Prasad 5–82) and 140 (BC Lara 45; A
Kuruvilla 5–68, BKV Prasad 3–39)
India 319 (SR Tendulkar 92 , R Dravid 78; FA Rose 4–77, IR Bishop 3–70) and 81 (VVS Laxman 19,
SR Tendulkar 4; IR Bishop 4–22, FA Rose 3–19, CEL Ambrose 3–36)
West Indies won by 38 runs
4th Test. St John’s. 4–8 April 1997
West Indies 333 (BC Lara 103, RIC Holder 56; SB Joshi 3–76)
India 212–2 (A Jadeja 96, VVS Laxman 56)
Match drawn
5th Test. Georgetown. 17–21 April 1997
India 355 (R Dravid 92, SR Tendulkar 83; CL Hooper 3–34, FA Rose 3–90)
West Indies 145–3 (S Chanderpaul 58*, SC Williams 44)
Match drawn
West Indies won the series 1–0
India in Sri Lanka 1997
1st Test. Colombo (RPS). 2–6 August 1997
India 537–8 dec (SR Tendulkar 143 , M Azharuddin 126, NS Sidhu 111, R Dravid 69; ST Jayasuriya
3–45)
Sri Lanka 952–6 dec (ST Jayasuriya 340, RS Mahanama 225, PA de Silva 126, A Ranatunga 86,
DPMD Jayawardene 66; SC Ganguly 2–53)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Colombo (SSC). 9–13 August 1997
Sri Lanka 332 (PA de Silva 146, M Muralitharan 39; DS Mohanty 4–78) and 415–7 dec (ST Jayasuriya
199, PA de Silva 120; A Kumble 3–156, A Kuruvilla 2–90)
India 375 (SC Ganguly 147, SR Tendulkar 139 ; M Muralitharan 4–99) and 281–5 (M Azharuddin
108*, SC Ganguly 45, SR Tendulkar 8; M Muralitharan 3–96)
Match drawn
Series drawn 0–0
Sri Lanka in India 1997
1st Test. Mohali. 19–23 November 1997
Sri Lanka 369 (MS Atapattu 108, ST Jayasuriya 53; A Kuruvilla 4–88, J Srinath 4–92) and 251–6 (PA
de Silva 110*; J Srinath 3–75)
India 515–9 dec (NS Sidhu 131, SC Ganguly 109, M Azharuddin 53, SR Tendulkar 23 ; M
Muralitharan 3–174, ST Jayasuriya 2–59)

Match drawn
2nd Test. Nagpur. 26–30 November 1997
India 485 (SC Ganguly 99, R Dravid 92, NS Sidhu 79, A Kumble 78, SR Tendulkar 15; KR
Pushpakumara 5–122)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Mumbai. 3–7 December 1997
India 512 (SC Ganguly 173, SR Tendulkar 148 , R Dravid 93; KR Pushpakumara 3–108, HDPK
Dharmasena 3–144) and 181–9 dec (R Dravid 85, NS Sidhu 43, SR Tendulkar 13 ; HDPK
Dharmasena 5–57)
Sri Lanka 361 (MS Atapattu 98, PA de Silva 66, ST Jayasuriya 50; RK Chauhan 4–48) and 166–7 (ST
Jayasuriya 37, RS Mahanama 35; A Kumble 3–56, RK Chauhan 3–59)
Match drawn
Series drawn 0–0