THE QUEST FOR THE 100TH HUNDRED

India’s first international engagement after the World Cup was a tour of the West Indies in June 2011.
I was allowed to opt out because India had a busy year ahead and I was desperate to spend some time
with my family. I had been playing continuous cricket for eight months and realized that if I travelled
to the West Indies it would mean I had not spent much time with Anjali and the children for close to
twenty months. India had a number of assignments coming up and this was the one tour that coincided
with the kids’ summer holidays. I was on ninety-nine international centuries at the time but it never
occurred to me that I should try and get the 100th ton as quickly as possible. Then again, I never
imagined that I would have to wait for more than a year.

India in England, July–August 2011
I rejoined the team in July 2011 and was looking forward to playing against a resurgent English side in
their home conditions. Under Andrew Strauss they had recently won the Ashes in Australia and were
playing some excellent cricket. However, we were still the number-one Test team and it was expected
to be a keenly contested series. The fact that our recently appointed coach, Duncan Fletcher, was
returning to take on the England team he used to coach with such success also added spice to the
series.
For me personally the tour did not start well. My foot started to trouble me on the first day of the
tour when we played Somerset in a two-day fixture at Taunton. We fielded and by lunch the pain in
my toe was bad enough to make me stay off the field for treatment. When we got to London before the
first Test match at Lord’s, I had a few scans done and it was revealed that the problem was again with
the sesamoid bone. While there was some inflammation, luckily it wasn’t serious enough to keep me
off cricket and I played in all four Tests.
At Lord’s on 21 July 2011 we started reasonably well after winning the toss, with Zaheer picking up
Andrew Strauss early on, but we were thrown off-course when Zaheer pulled a hamstring soon after
lunch. In such situations you can’t do much but rue your luck. The loss of the leader of our attack
undoubtedly affected us for the rest of the series.
I remember that on the very first day I saw Zaheer, way back at the start of his career, I told him he
would always have to take care of his body and bowl right through the year to keep himself fit. His
physique was such that he needed to do more than others to remain in good shape. Back in 2005 I
encouraged him to play county cricket, and when he came back to India after playing his first season
in England, there was no doubt he was a more mature performer. Over the years he turned himself into
a match-winning premier fast bowler.
To add to our concerns, we lost Yuvraj in the second Test when he fractured his finger, then Bhajji
suffered a stomach-muscle tear and Gautam Gambhir fell over and had severe concussion, which

prevented him from opening the batting in the fourth Test. What’s more, we didn’t have Sehwag for
the first two Tests, as he was still recovering from a shoulder operation. I don’t want to take anything
away from England, who played superb cricket throughout the series, but it was a remarkable
sequence of disasters and it wasn’t easy to cope with the loss of so many key players.
One unexpected complication at Lord’s was that I found I had great difficulty picking up the ball
from the new Media Centre End. England had tall fast bowlers in Chris Tremlett and Stuart Broad and
I had serious trouble because the bowler’s hand was sometimes lost against the dark-coloured steps
above the sightscreen. This meant I had much less time to react than usual and I had to play the ball
off the pitch rather than watching the bowler’s wrist. From the Pavilion End I had no problem at all.
After the game I spoke about the problem with the late Christopher Martin-Jenkins, who was then
President of the MCC, and he promised to do something about it for the ODI at Lord’s later in the tour
– but in the end I wasn’t able to play in that game. More recently, when I captained an MCC XI
against Shane Warne’s Rest of the World XI at Lord’s in the Bicentenary Match in July 2014, I raised
the problem again. They couldn’t increase the height of the sightscreen, but I asked them to make the
staircase above it as white as possible, which they did. In the end, I didn’t have any problems because
Peter Siddle was bowling and he’s not as tall as, say, Broad or Tremlett and that makes a huge
difference.
I must also confess that while I love Lord’s, I always found it difficult to cope with the slope that
runs across the ground, no matter how much I tried to work out its effect. I remember facing Chris
Lewis once when he was bowling from the Pavilion End. He tended to bowl inswingers and I thought
I’d worked out that the slope would bring the ball in to me even more, so I played inside the line – and
the ball went the other way and I was bowled!
In 2011, on the evening of the third day of the Lord’s Test, I was laid low by a viral infection. My
friend Atul Bedade, the former India international and someone who has always supported me at
critical times, had come to visit me for the evening, but I realized something was wrong as soon as we
got back to the hotel. I asked for a paracetamol from the physio and took it while ordering an early
dinner in the room. By 8 p.m. we had finished our meal and I suggested to Atul that he should take off,
but Atul didn’t want to leave me in that state and kindly decided to sleep on the sofa, so that he could
make sure I was all right.
By the middle of the night my condition had worsened and the next morning I was in no state to get
up. Atul called Ashish Kaushik, our phsyio, and he advised complete rest. This was the only time in
my career I was not able to join the team on the morning of a match. I slept in my hotel room till well
after lunch and it was only when I checked the score on television that I called our team manager and
told him I was coming to the ground. I wanted to try and play a part in the second innings, as I thought
I was needed.
Although I wasn’t able to contribute much to the team, I forced myself to field towards the end of
the England innings, to make sure I would have an opportunity to bat on day five. At the end of the
day’s play, I was in a really bad state. To make things worse, when I got back to the hotel I found that
the air conditioning in my room had leaked and everything was wet. While I did manage to bat for a
while on day five, I was nowhere near my best and found it difficult to maintain my balance in the
middle.
England ended up winning the first Test comfortably, thanks to centuries from Pietersen and Prior
and five wickets for James Anderson in the second innings. In the second Test at Trent Bridge, starting
on 29 July, we came back strongly and Sreesanth and Ishant Sharma helped reduced England to 124–8
at one point in their first innings, but Swann and Broad managed to bail them out, taking their score to

221. It was still not a threatening total, however, and we passed it with six wickets in hand, only to
lose them all for just twenty runs, with Broad taking six wickets in the innings, and the match slipped
from our grasp.
After failing to win the second Test from a position of strength, things gradually went from bad to
worse. The pain in my foot was not going away, and as a team we were outplayed yet again in the
Third Test, which did not start in the best of circumstances, with riots in Birmingham creating a very
tense atmosphere. The shopping centre next to our hotel was vandalized and there was talk of
cancelling the tour. It was only after we were given an assurance that things were under control that
the match went ahead.
In fact, this was not the only time that off-the-field events threatened to disrupt the tour. Before the
one-day series, a match against Kent in Canterbury caused us all a lot of worry. In the closing stages
of the game we noticed a large number of security personnel hovering near the dressing room. We
were told that a suspect package had been found on the team bus and the bomb squad were on their
way. Then we were asked to go and wait on the field because the dressing room was close to the
danger area. We all waited patiently until we were finally told that we could leave by the back
entrance of the ground. There was yet another bomb scare at night in the shopping arcade next to our
hotel and a number of the players were starting to feel anxious about our security. The following
morning we were told that things were fully under control and eventually the tour continued.
In the third Test at Edgbaston, England won the match with their first-innings total of 710, which
included a career-best 294 from Alastair Cook and 104 from Eoin Morgan. I was pleased to bat well in
the second innings and I don’t think anyone would deny I was unlucky to get out for 40. MS Dhoni had
played a straight drive off Graeme Swann and the ball hit Swann’s hand and ricocheted onto the
stumps at the non-striker’s end, running me out. With nothing going our way, we headed to The Oval
for the fourth and final Test very low on morale. What was worse was that we had also lost our
number-one ranking in the process, having lost three Test matches on the trot.

Stuck on ninety-nine
I had scored my ninety-eighth international hundred on 27 February 2011 while playing England in
our second World Cup game in Bangalore, but there was no mention of the 100th hundred in the media
at that stage. Less than two weeks later, I scored the ninety-ninth against South Africa at Nagpur, but
still no one brought up the 100th. The topic did come up on television when I was in the eighties
against Pakistan in the World Cup semi-final, but that was no more than a passing mention. It was
only after the World Cup win that the media needed a new cause to obsess over and the 100th hundred
fitted the bill: it had never been achieved before, it made for good television and newsprint and it was
a landmark fans could be proud of. It was a recipe for unprecedented frenzy – without always
appreciating the impact it might have on me.
I first became aware of all the fuss when I was on a family holiday in England in June 2011 before
the Test series. I was asked if I had deliberately skipped the West Indies tour to ensure that the 100th
hundred came at Lord’s in the first Test. I did not have a Test hundred at Lord’s (and now never will
have) and this, I was informed, was my way of setting the record straight. Only, it was news to me. I
would, of course, have been delighted to get the hundred at Lord’s, but hundreds simply do not happen
as easily as that.
The obsession soon turned into hysteria. Every time I went in to bat, I was supposed to get to the
landmark hundred. Believe me, I wanted to get it out of the way. I was spending hours at the nets and

felt good about my batting, but gradually the 100th ton was starting to play on my mind.
At The Oval in the fourth and final Test, which started on 18 August, England scored 591 in their
first innings, with 235 from Ian Bell and another century from Pietersen. We were bowled out for 300
in reply and asked to follow on. I was dismissed for 23 in our first innings, trying to play a sweep shot
to Graeme Swann, and was extremely angry at getting out that way. My mood wasn’t helped by the
fact that earlier I had been hit on my left shoulder by a ball from Stuart Broad and scans later revealed
a tear.
I was keen to make amends in the second innings when I went in at the fall of our second wicket
with an hour of play left on day four. There was a patch of rough created by the left-arm seamer RP
Singh outside the right-hander’s off stump and while batting against Graeme Swann I decided to take
an off-stump guard to negate the impact of the rough. The strategy paid off and I was able to negotiate
the last hour with relative ease. Resuming on 35 the next day, I focused on the thought of returning to
the dressing room after batting all day to save the match.
Amit Mishra, our leg-spin googly bowler, was batting with me and we were both conscious that the
first hour on the final day was critical, with the English attack led by James Anderson bowling
superbly in home conditions. Amit, the nightwatchman, was resolute in protecting his wicket and I
walked up to him at the end of every over to tell him that he should bat as if it was our last wicket.
I managed to hit a few good boundaries and began to feel I was getting a grip on proceedings. We
saw off Anderson and the first hour went more or less to plan. Stuart Broad and Swann took over but
we continued our resistance and got to lunch without losing a wicket. We had won the session and
scored 87 runs in the process. I was on 72 and Amit had played superbly for his 57.
On resumption, I kept telling Amit that he should focus on getting another 50 runs. Every run was
getting us closer to the England total. I was on 91 when Amit was finally bowled by Swann for 84. We
were just 29 adrift of the English total and the partnership had put on 144 for the fourth wicket. We
had almost managed to play out the first hour after lunch and there was a good chance of saving the
game if we batted well for three more hours. And that’s when I got out for 91. I was standing well
outside my crease and the ball from Tim Bresnan came back a long way to hit my pads as I tried to
play it to midwicket. While batting, you can usually sense the trajectory of the ball and there was little
doubt in my mind that the drift would have taken the ball past the leg stump, so I was surprised to see
umpire Rod Tucker raise his finger.
A sense of helplessness descended on me. All the good work of the morning had been undone and it
was going to be difficult to save the match with so many overs left in the day. The decision, replays
showed, was not the best; luck, a key ingredient in cricket, had once again deserted me. When I met
umpire Tucker later in the year he jokingly suggested to me that his friends were not happy with the
decision and had given him a lot of grief for it. It was good of him to come and speak to me and we
both decided to forget it and move on.
The Test series was followed by a five-match one-day series and I was looking to carry forward the
form I had shown at The Oval. Just then, my shoulder injury really started to bother me again. Even
when I was resting during the two Twenty20 matches, it showed no signs of settling down and I was
forced to have an ultrasound-guided injection in the shoulder joint. It was in Durham on the eve of the
first ODI that my toe also started to play up again during training. I did everything possible to settle
the pain and took a few anti-inflammatory pills at night, but they didn’t help and I woke the next
morning feeling worse. I was feeling worried when we left the hotel on our way to the ground and as
soon as we reached the stadium I asked Ashish Kaushik to strap my foot. The moment I stepped down
from his physio table onto the hard tiles I suspected I was in trouble. When I tried getting into my

spikes, I knew I couldn’t play. At the end of the second Test match I had not been able to think of
missing a game. Now the pain was such that I could not think of playing a game.
We decided to go to London for a fresh set of scans. I was given two injections in the sole of my
foot and I must say they were two of the most painful injections I have had in my life. The doctors
then informed me that I needed to rest my foot for five to six weeks. I finally started training again on
the eve of the three-Test series against the West Indies at home in November 2011.
As soon as I resumed practice, the clamour for the 100th hundred started again.

West Indies in India, November–December 2011
By November 2011, the pressure had really started to get to me. Every day I was getting a lot of text
messages wishing me well for the century and asking me not to worry. They were sent with the best of
intentions, but unfortunately they made it impossible for me not to think about the landmark all the
time. Everywhere I went people were talking about it – in hotels, restaurants, planes and airport
lounges. While it was touching to see the affection, at times it began to get quite unbearable. It was
difficult to cope with all the words of sympathy and reassurance and the looks on people’s faces day
after day.
While recuperating from the toe injury under the supervision of physio Harshada Rajadhyaksha,
who has helped me for over a decade, I had started to mentally prepare myself for the visit of the West
Indies. It was important for the team to put the England slump behind us, especially as we had another
tough tour of Australia lined up for the end of the year. Preparation was important because the West
Indies attack, with Fidel Edwards, Ravi Rampaul, Kemar Roach and Darren Sammy, was not the
easiest to face, a fact that became all too clear at Delhi in the first Test, which started on 6 November.
Contrary to the general expectation that we would roll the West Indies over, we were bowled out for
209 in our first innings at Delhi and conceded a lead of 95 to the tourists. Though our bowlers did well
to bowl them out for 180 in the second innings, with Ashwin taking six wickets, we were confronted
with a tricky chase of 276 to win the game. I went out to bat with our score at 95–2 and was eventually
out with just 30 runs needed for victory. I had scored 76 and was delighted to have helped us take a 1–
0 lead in the series.
Fans and critics, however, were not quite so pleased. As far as they were concerned, I had fallen
twenty-four runs short and the headline was ‘Sachin fails again’. The hundred had turned into a
fixation and people were starting to calculate my scores backwards from 100. I don’t think it had ever
happened to a cricketer before and deep down it started to get to me. As the wait continued, a section
of the media started making things even more difficult. They suggested that I was only playing to
achieve personal milestones. It was a strange paradox. Here I was in Delhi scoring 76 and helping
India to victory, yet I was criticized for playing for selfish reasons.
Three Indian batsmen made centuries in our only innings in the second Test at Eden Gardens in
Kolkata starting on 14 November, but unfortunately I wasn’t one of them. Laxman was unbeaten on
176, while Rahul made 119 and Dhoni 144 in our total of 631. My contribution was only 38. Our
bowlers then dismissed the West Indies twice to give us a win by an innings and 15 runs.
The final Test in Mumbai started on 22 November and the West Indies dashed our hopes of a 3–0
whitewash by posting 590 in their first innings, with Darren Bravo making 166 and their first six
batsmen all making fifties. At the end of the third day I was not out on 67 in our first innings and
playing well. Could I really make that elusive 100th hundred on my home ground?
On our way to the ground on the morning of the fourth day, the number of outside-broadcast vans

lined up opposite the stadium was staggering and that’s when I realized this was a very different
occasion from normal. Darren Sammy, the West Indies captain, took the second new ball and
immediately there was some movement for both Fidel Edwards and Ravi Rampaul. I was standing
outside the crease to counter the movement and told myself not to chase any balls outside off stump
while the ball was swinging. I started the day well by flicking Rampaul for four in the very first over,
following it up with a punch off Edwards through cover. I then produced an upper cut over slip for six
against Edwards and was just seven short of the hundred.
Just then, I looked at the scoreboard and started to feel distinctly strange. My feet were heavy and it
was as if I had no strength left. I had never felt as nervous in my career, not even when I had been
about to make my first Test hundred in 1990. I walked away towards square leg and took a few deep
breaths. I kept telling myself to concentrate hard and not lose focus. It was a sensation I had never
experienced before.
My ninety-fourth run was a single to deep point. In the next over from Rampaul, I played the last
three balls after Virat had taken a single off the third delivery. The fourth ball was full and I played it
to cover, moving well to the pitch of the ball and negating any possible movement. The next ball
bounced a little but I managed to play it down with soft hands. Rampaul was trying to get the ball to
move away and I needed to be watchful. The last ball of the over came in to me quicker and bounced a
little more than I anticipated and the shot travelled quickly to Sammy at second slip, who held a good
catch. It all happened within a fraction of a second and only when I glanced back did I realize that I
was out.
The realization was exceedingly painful. I had come within one shot of the century. But you can
never take anything for granted in the game, and that’s part of its beauty. I was still dazed as I walked
back to the pavilion, trying to take in the applause of a very appreciative crowd. The wait would have
to continue and the pressure was bound to become even more intense in the days ahead.
After the Test series, I decided to withdraw from the one-day series. There was speculation that it
was because I didn’t want to get the hundred in an ODI against the West Indies, but that had nothing to
do with it. My big toe had started to trouble me again. I was finding it difficult to change direction
while running and simply could not cope with the pressure of one-day cricket. I knew I needed to do
something about it before the next Test series in Australia.

India in Australia, December 2011–February 2012
I left for Australia on 8 December to get acclimatized to the conditions and be fully prepared for the
Boxing Day Test in Melbourne. The injury hadn’t disappeared completely and I went to a podiatrist to
get the toe examined again. When I tried out some new insoles, the experiment actually made things
worse and I had to go back to my old ones, but that was when I came up with the idea of using corn
caps. These were cut in the shape of doughnuts and filled with jelly, and were placed right underneath
the toe to absorb the pressure of the spikes. They seemed to work to a certain extent. The first time we
had to apply the strapping, it took about forty-five minutes, because we were still figuring out exactly
how to do it so that the padding stayed in the same place throughout the day. Within a week it was
taking twenty minutes and soon I was doing the strapping myself in my own room, so that I didn’t
have to start every day in the physio’s room. Every night during Test matches, I would get the tape
ready and cut it to the exact size. That way I got a few extra minutes in the morning and wasn’t so
rushed.
In the Boxing Day Test at the MCG we started extremely well, bowling Australia out for 333 in

their first innings, In our reply, I came in when the score was 97–2 and found that I was moving as
well as I had done in years and I was able to play all my shots. For example, in the first over after tea I
was in complete control against Peter Siddle, the leader of their attack. After hitting the first ball for
six over third man, I flicked him for three runs the very next ball. In the thirty-fifth over of our
innings, I hit him for two consecutive fours, the second of which was a cover drive I particularly
remember. The ball was pitched slightly outside off stump and I sent it racing to the boundary.
I was playing aggressively and followed up the Siddle cover drive with another off Ben Hilfenhaus.
He tried to compensate and bowled a full delivery to me in the same over and I played a straight drive
past mid on for yet another four. I had reached 32 off twenty-nine balls. It was just the kind of start I
wanted and it was time for consolidation. I managed to get to my fifty off just fifty-five deliveries and
the momentum had swung our way.
When I look back at this innings, I have little doubt that I was batting as well as I could have done.
If I had managed to survive the last over of the second day, the entire series might have been different,
but I was out for 73 to a Siddle delivery that moved in late after pitching, forcing me to play away
from my body. My wicket gave the Australians an opening and they did very well to capitalize on the
opportunity on the third morning.
Anjali and the kids were in Melbourne at the time and it would have been fantastic to get the
hundred there after batting so well. Rahul was out in the first over the next morning and Laxman and
Dhoni followed soon after, handing Australia control of the match. I was so disappointed after getting
out that I sought solace in food that night when I went out for dinner with Anjali, the kids and my
mother-in-law. Not only did I end up eating two huge main courses in frustration but, to add to my
woes, I also lost my credit card.
We struck back in the Australian second innings and reduced them to 27–4, with Umesh Yadav
taking three of those wickets. Then Ponting and Michael Hussey came together in what turned out to
be a game-breaking partnership of 115. We had one final opportunity when Hussey was out on the
fourth morning for 89, reducing Australia to 197–9. At that point the lead was less than 250 and we
still had a realistic chance of winning the match. But a 43-run last-wicket partnership between
Hilfenhaus and Pattinson took it out of our reach and Australia went 1–0 up in the series.
The Sydney Test was even more disappointing. The wicket had a lot of grass and Australia won the
toss and decided to bowl, which is unusual for an Australian team at home. They took full advantage
of the conditions and bowled us out for only 191 on the first day. I scored 41 before dragging a James
Pattinson delivery on to my stumps. We did well at the start of the Australian innings and had them at
37–3, but then we lost our way. Batting in much-improved conditions on days two and three, Australia
went on to run up a very big score, with skipper Michael Clarke contributing a triple hundred to their
659, and this left us two whole days to bat to save the match.
Batting for two days was difficult but not impossible. At the end of day three, I was unbeaten on
eight, having faced forty deliveries. I was batting to a plan and was determined to leave everything
outside off stump. It had got a little cloudy in the evening and with Ben Hilfenhaus and Peter Siddle
bowling really well, I was satisfied to survive the last hour so that I could resume the following
morning.
Before I walked out to bat on the fourth day, our masseur Amit Shah wished me luck and I said to
him that he should get ready to keep me going for two days. I knew that if I did so I would be able to
save the game, and if the 100th ton should come along the way, so much the better. Once again I was
batting well and should have gone on, but infuriatingly I got myself out to part-time left-arm spinner
Michael Clarke for 80 to a ball which pitched around off stump on a fourth-day pitch with a few

cracks and, just as I was trying to play forward, kissed the outside edge of my bat and hit Brad Haddin
on his thigh before going to Mike Hussey at slip.
It was a soft dismissal. I had actually told myself to wait an over before starting to attack Clarke,
who was bowling with a semi-defensive field. A very strong wind was blowing and I wanted to wait
for it to die down before I risked stepping out and hitting him over mid off. It was just one of those
moments in the game that you are not able to control, moments that make cricket one of the most
challenging of all sports.
Despite scoring 73, 32, 41 and 80 in the first four innings in Australia, the talk about me ‘failing’
had resumed and the consensus among the critics was that I was getting out because I was thinking too
much about the 100th hundred. Such comments were sometimes hard to take, because for me playing
for my country has always come first. The critics were welcome to give their opinions, but none of
them had ever been in my predicament and it was impossible for them to understand what I was
thinking or feeling.
After Sydney, the series went steadily downhill for us at Perth and Adelaide. We should have played
much better and I must say the eight-Test-match losing streak on foreign soil was very difficult to
come to terms with. Our team had not lived up to its potential and had been outplayed in all
departments. It was a very trying time.
My toe was continuing to pose problems and mentally I was frustrated. It was then that a foot
specialist suggested to me that I should have an operation on both my sesamoid bones. In my
frustration, I almost agreed and was ready to be on crutches for the next four months, but Anjali
dissuaded me from doing so, and in fact spoke to Prof. Cathy Speed in London, who advised that I
should avoid surgery. Anjali then came all the way to Australia for just two days to spend some time
with me because she was worried that I would go ahead with the surgery out of frustration. I am glad I
listened to her and that good sense prevailed.
After the Test series there was widespread speculation that I had made myself available for the
subsequent limited-overs tri-series against Sri Lanka and Australia just so that I could score my 100th
century. Such statements were frustrating because they were simply untrue. One of the main reasons I
played in the series was that MS Dhoni came and said to me, ‘Aap rukh jao. Aap rahoge to achha
hoga. Aap agar sab match na bhi khelte ho phir bhi aap rukh jao.’ (Please stay. It will be good if you
stay. Even if you don’t play all the games, please stay.) Perhaps it’s difficult for some to understand
the obsessive urge to do well for India, but this is what has given my sporting life a purpose.
Despite playing well in patches, however, we didn’t make it to the final of the tri-series. There
seemed to be a cloud of negativity surrounding the game and fans were starting to lose faith in the
team. We needed to get things moving again and the next opportunity to do so was in the Asia Cup in
Bangladesh in March 2012.

Try, try, try again …
I scored only six in our first Asia Cup game, a 50-run victory against Sri Lanka in Dhaka on 13 March
2012, and the ‘Sachin fails again’ cry started up immediately. Fortunately I was not particularly aware
of it at the time, though, as my family and friends did their best to shield me from what appeared in
the press.
Our next match was against Bangladesh on 16 March on a track that was slightly slower than the
one used against Sri Lanka. The ball did not always come on to the bat and it was going to be
important to pace the innings and set a big score for the hosts to chase down. Virat and I rotated the

strike well and the scoring rate hovered just above the five-runs-an-over mark for the most of the
innings. We had set ourselves a target of 280–90 and were on course to achieve it.
As I passed 80, the pressure started to build and I began to feel the burden of the hundred again. I
did my best to put it out of my mind, but it was a truly difficult and frustrating period. I remember an
over against Mashrafe Mortaza during the batting powerplay in which three shots I played should have
gone for four. They were stopped by some really good fielding or they went straight to the fielders. On
another day, I could have taken 12 from the over. On that day, I got nothing.
I had to counter the building pressure and somehow I played a shot for four when I was on 90 that
calmed my nerves a little. Meanwhile Suresh Raina, who had come in to bat after Virat, was finding
the boundary consistently, keeping the scoring rate up. I was now on 94 and, with another single in the
same over, had come the closest to a hundred for a year.
In the forty-first over I took three more singles and was left needing just two more runs. They were
perhaps the two most difficult runs of my career. Despite having scored ninety-nine international
hundreds, I had experienced nothing like it. Determination, anxiety, relief – all of these feelings came
together. I kept telling myself to stay focused and play each ball on merit. It was time to go back to
basics and rely on skills I had practised all my life.
When I got to 99 by driving Shakib-al-Hasan to long off, I told myself that the situation demanded
patience and it was no time for heroics. Shakib was getting the ball to spin and so when I faced him
next I stepped out just a little to smother the turn. As the ball trundled to square leg, I jogged to my
100th international century.
I instantly felt drained. I removed my helmet and pointed to the flag on the front, indicating that I
had done it for India. Then I looked at my bat and asked God why it had taken so long when my
commitment had been steadfast throughout. More than anything, I was relieved. As I patted the
tricolour on my helmet with my bat, I felt a tremendous sense of satisfaction. It gave me a sense of
fulfilment that the first player to achieve the feat of scoring 100 international hundreds was an Indian.
Friends often say to me that my celebrations that day seemed rather muted. I remind them that I had
been like that for over two decades. I have always preferred to be restrained, except on a few rare
occasions. This is not to say I wasn’t proud. Of course I was. When I first played for India against
Pakistan in 1989, I had never imagined I would still be playing for the country in 2012, let alone score
100 centuries.
Unfortunately, we went on to lose the match. Bangladesh played really well to chase down a
challenging score of 289, with Tamim Iqbal, Jahurul Islam and Nasir Hossain all making fifties and
Shakib-Al-Hasan and Mushfiqur Rahim getting very close. I was amazed to hear some people say we
should have got a few more runs to be safe, as 289 wasn’t a bad score on that pitch, considering that
we had restricted a much better Sri Lankan batting line-up to 254 in their run chase in the previous
match on a better batting pitch. Sometimes you have to give the opposition credit and on this occasion
the Bangladeshis played really well.
While we were all disappointed at losing the match, my team-mates were extremely happy for me.
It was gratifying to see such powerful emotion within the team. This is what one plays for, the respect
and affection of one’s team-mates, and I was touched to hear the sentiments expressed in the dressing
room.
After finishing a rather long press conference, it was time to speak to Anjali and the children. They
were holidaying in Goa and were having dinner at Martins, one of my favourite seafood restaurants,
when I first spoke to them. They were extremely happy and relieved at the same time. My family had
also been feeling the effects of the pressure and now they felt a sense of liberation. It was only natural

that I should dedicate the hundred to my brother Ajit, who has spent a life making me the cricketer I
am. My mother was in our house in Mumbai and was extremely thrilled to watch me score the
hundred. I could sense the joy in her voice. Though I was not around to see my mother’s face, I could
picture her and imagine what she must be feeling. Sensing her delight gave me a feeling of
contentment that is difficult to describe. Suffice to say I was a very proud son.
When I got back to India, I was overwhelmed at the reception and wish to put on record my deepest
gratitude to everyone who had prayed for me. The event organized by Mukesh and Nita Ambani, the
owners of the Mumbai Indians, was fantastic, and to hear the legendary Lata Mangeshkar sing for me
was an unbelievable experience. These are moments I will never forget, moments that more than made
up for the year of frustration.

Feeling 50 kilos lighter
We were still involved in the Asia Cup and were due to play Pakistan in Dhaka a couple of days later.
I was suddenly feeling a lot more relaxed and was looking forward to batting in what is always a
special game for an Indian cricketer, wherever it’s played.
When I was interviewed by the former Pakistani captain Ramiz Raja, I suggested to him that I was
feeling 50 kilos lighter. In reality it was a little more. The desperation had vanished and it was time to
enjoy batting again. Life, it seemed, was finally back to normal. A number of journalists asked me
what I was thinking after scoring the 100th ton. I jokingly said to them that I was thinking that I had
scored ninety-nine centuries before but everyone seemed to have forgotten about them when trying to
give me advice about how to bat. Then someone asked me, ‘What were you thinking when you scored
your first Test hundred in 1990?’ I said to him that I was thinking that there were ninety-nine still to
go!
I felt completely different when I went out to open the batting against Pakistan, trying to chase
down a formidable score of 329. We lost Gautam Gambhir in the first over, but Virat and I batted
freely and put together a 133-run stand at almost seven runs an over. We set up the chase and when I
was out for 52, Virat and Rohit finished off the job in style, with Virat ending up with a brilliant 183.
The innings against Pakistan put into perspective how difficult the wait had been and how much
pressure I had been under. Despite trying not to think about the 100th hundred, I hadn’t been able to
escape the tension that had built up. Finally I felt liberated and, more importantly, the media’s
obsession had been satisfied. Maybe now I would be allowed to concentrate on my batting. For the
time being, there was a rare period of calm, and I was desperate to make the most of it.
India in England 2011 – The Pataudi Trophy
1st Test. Lord’s. 21–25 July 2011
England 474–8 dec (KP Pietersen 202*, MJ Prior 71, IJL Trott 70; P Kumar 5–106) and 269–6 dec
(MJ Prior 103*, SCJ Broad 74; I Sharma 4–59)
India 286 (R Dravid 103, A Mukund 49, SR Tendulkar 34 ; SCJ Broad 4–37, CT Tremlett 3–80) and
261 (SK Raina 78, VVS Laxman 56, SR Tendulkar 12; JM Anderson 5–65, SCJ Broad 3–57)
England won by 196 runs
2nd Test. Nottingham. 29 July–1 August 2011
England 221 (SCJ Broad 64; P Kumar 3–45, I Sharma 3–66, S Sreesanth 3–77) and 544 (IR Bell 159,
TT Bresnan 90, MJ Prior 73, EJG Morgan 70, KP Pietersen 63; P Kumar 4–124)

India 288 (R Dravid 117, Yuvraj Singh 62, VVS Laxman 54, SR Tendulkar 16 ; SCJ Broad 6–46) and
158 (SR Tendulkar 56, H Singh 46; TT Bresnan 5–48, JM Anderson 3–51)
England won by 319 runs
3rd Test. Birmingham. 10–13 August 2011
India 224 (MS Dhoni 77, SR Tendulkar 1 ; SCJ Broad 4–53, TT Bresnan 4–62) and 244 (MS Dhoni
74*, SR Tendulkar 40, P Kumar 40; JM Anderson 4–85, SCJ Broad 2–28, GP Swann 2–88)
England 710–7 dec (AN Cook 294, EJG Morgan 104, AJ Strauss 87, KP Pietersen 63, TT Bresnan 53*;
A Mishra 3–150, P Kumar 2–98)
England won by an innings and 242 runs
4th Test. The Oval. 18–22 August 2011
England 591–6 dec (IR Bell 235, KP Pietersen 175, RS Bopara 44; S Sreesanth 3–123, SK Raina 2–58)
India 300 (R Dravid 146*, A Mishra 43, SR Tendulkar 23 ; TT Bresnan 3–54, GP Swann 3–102) and
283 (f/o) (SR Tendulkar 91, A Mishra 84; GP Swann 6–106, SCJ Broad 2–44)
England won by an innings and 8 runs
England won the series 4–0
West Indies in India 2011
1st Test. Delhi. 6–9 November 2011
West Indies 304 (S Chanderpaul 118, KC Brathwaite 63; PP Ojha 6–72, R Ashwin 3–81) and 180 (S
Chanderpaul 47; R Ashwin 6–47, UT Yadav 2–36)
India 209 (V Sehwag 55, R Dravid 54, SR Tendulkar 7 ; DJG Sammy 3–35, R Rampaul 2–44, D
Bishoo 2–55) and 276–5 (SR Tendulkar 76, VVS Laxman 58*, V Sehwag 55; DJG Sammy 2–56)
India won by 5 wickets
2nd Test. Kolkata. 14–17 November 2011
India 631–7 dec (VVS Laxman 176*, MS Dhoni 144, R Dravid 119, G Gambhir 65, SR Tendulkar 38 ;
KAJ Roach 2–106, DJG Sammy 2–132)
West Indies 153 (DM Bravo 30; PP Ojha 4–64, UT Yadav 3–23) and 463 (f/o) (DM Bravo 136, MN
Samuels 84, AB Barath 62, KA Edwards 60, S Chanderpaul 47; UT Yadav 4–80)
India won by an innings and 15 runs
3rd Test. Mumbai. 22–26 November 2011
West Indies 590 (DM Bravo 166, KA Edwards 86, KOA Powell 81, KC Brathwaite 68, AB Barath 62,
MN Samuels 61; R Ashwin 5–156, VR Aaron 3–106) and 134 (DM Bravo 48; PP Ojha 6–47, R
Ashwin 4–34)
India 482 (R Ashwin 103, SR Tendulkar 94 , R Dravid 82, G Gambhir 55, V Kohli 52; MN Samuels
3–74, R Rampaul 3–95) and 242–9 (V Kohli 63, V Sehwag 60, SR Tendulkar 3; R Rampaul 3–56)
Match drawn
India won the series 2–0
India in Australia 2011–12 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Melbourne. 26–29 December 2011
Australia 333 (EJM Cowan 68, RT Ponting 62; Z Khan 4–77 R Ashwin 3–81, UT Yadav 3–106) and
240 (MEK Hussey 89, RT Ponting 60; UT Yadav 4–70, Z Khan 3–53)
India 282 (SR Tendulkar 73 , R Dravid 68, V Sehwag 67; BW Hilfenhaus 5–75, PM Siddle 3–63) and

169 (SR Tendulkar 32; JL Pattinson 4–53, PM Siddle 3–42)
Australia won by 122 runs
2nd Test. Sydney. 3–6 January 2012
India 191 (MS Dhoni 57*, SR Tendulkar 41 ; JL Pattinson 4–43, BW Hilfenhaus 3–51, PM Siddle 3–
55) and 400 (G Gambhir 83, SR Tendulkar 80 , VVS Laxman 66, R Ashwin 62; BW Hilfenhaus 5–
106, PM Siddle 2–88)
Australia 659–4 dec (MJ Clarke 329*, MEK Hussey 150*, RT Ponting 134; Z Khan 3–122)
Australia won by an innings and 68 runs
3rd Test. Perth. 13–15 January 2012
India 161 (V Kohli 44, SR Tendulkar 15 ; BW Hilfenhaus 4–43, PM Siddle 3–42) and 171 (V Kohli
75, R Dravid 47, SR Tendulkar 8; BW Hilfenhaus 4–54, PM Siddle 3–43)
Australia 369 (DA Warner 180, EJM Cowan 74; UT Yadav 5–93)
Australia won by an innings and 37 runs
4th Test. Adelaide. 24–28 January 2012
Australia 604–7 dec (RT Ponting 221, MJ Clarke 210, BJ Haddin 42*; R Ashwin 3–194) and 167–5
dec (RT Ponting 60*; R Ashwin 2–73)
India 272 (V Kohli 116, WP Saha 35, SR Tendulkar 25 ; PM Siddle 5–49, BW Hilfenhaus 3–62) and
201 (V Sehwag 62, SR Tendulkar 13; NM Lyon 4–63, RJ Harris 3–41)
Australia won by 298 runs
Australia won the series 4–0