MY LAST FULL SEASON

With the 100th hundred finally out of the way, I was looking forward to a busy season of Test cricket
at home. For once, we were not touring much and in 2012–13 we were due to host New Zealand,
England and Australia. You don’t often get to play ten uninterrupted Test matches at home. I had
prepared well but must concede things rarely went to plan from a personal point of view. In the leadup to the season I continued to be bothered by the toe injury, so much so that I visited BKS Iyengar,
one of the foremost yoga gurus in the world, together with Zaheer Khan for a day in May 2012, during
the fifth edition of the IPL. I had been introduced to Guruji in 1999 by Kiran More when I was
suffering from the back injury and had spent a week with him in Pune at the time. In June 2012 I
travelled to Germany to the Adidas factory to get some special shoes made and during this visit I was
accompanied by Prof. Cathy Speed, who had travelled from London to be with me.
In August 2012, we won both Tests against New Zealand, with Ravichandran Ashwin and Pragyan
Ojha bowling well and getting us wickets at regular intervals. In each of my three innings in the series,
I got a start before being bowled, which prompted a lot of speculation in the press about my technique
– had my reflexes slowed down and was I the batsman I once was? In my mind, however, there was
nothing seriously wrong with my technique or my approach. One problem, perhaps, was that in the off
season I had trained a lot indoors and had got too used to the high indoor bounce. In Hyderabad in the
first Test, for example, I was dismissed for 19 by a delivery from Trent Boult that I expected to
bounce more.
I travelled to the second Test match in Bangalore determined to play a big innings. However, this
time round I was bowled for 17 by a ball from the right-arm fast bowler Doug Bracewell that didn’t
swing as much as expected and continued going straight. When I went out to bat in the second innings
I tried to play myself in, hoping that spending some time at the crease would help. I managed to hit a
few fours before getting out for 27 to a Tim Southee delivery that swung back in to knock me over.
It was not the best start to the season, but I put it behind me and focused my attention on the
England series that started in November 2012. As part of the preparation I played for Mumbai in a
Ranji Trophy game against Railways on 2 November. In my one innings, I had to battle physical
exhaustion, as I had had serious food poisoning just before the game and was feeling extremely weak;
so much so, in fact, that I asked Rohit Sharma to bat ahead of me. By the time I went in, I had
recovered enough to make 137, which was a very satisfying knock considering how I’d felt a few
hours earlier. Suddenly I was playing my shots and feeling positive again.

England in India, November–December 2012
I thought I started well against England in the first Test at Ahmedabad on 15 November. My body
position and balance were perfect and I was getting into a really good rhythm. From the off, I played

some cracking strokes, including a very pleasing lofted shot against Swann over midwicket. I set out
to bat aggressively and not hold myself back, because that was how I had scored the Ranji Trophy
hundred. Seeing me go over the short midwicket fielder, Swann pushed a man back and I decided to
counter him by going over mid on. The ball had drift, however, and instead of playing it over mid on, I
hit it straight to the midwicket fielder and I was out for 13. I was very angry with myself for not
making the most of my good form.
In the context of the match, my failure in Ahmedabad did not matter in the end, with Sehwag
making 117 and Cheteshwar Pujara going on to score an excellent double century. He paced his
innings beautifully and has the temperament and the patience to be a top-class Test batsman in the
years to come. He has all the shots and is a much-improved player since his debut against Australia in
2010. Pragyan Ojha and Ravi Ashwin then got in on the act and ran through England in both innings.
The second Test started in Mumbai on 23 November and rather unexpectedly England turned things
around on the first day. I had always been worried about the Mumbai match and had shared my
concerns with coach Duncan Fletcher. I felt that the pace and bounce of the Wankhede wicket would
help the England bowlers. England had beaten us at the Wankhede in 2006 and I thought we should
have prepared a good batting wicket instead of a turner.
The inclusion of Monty Panesar in the team was an inspired selection and I got out to him on the
first morning before lunch for eight, to a ball that spun from leg stump to hit the top of my off stump.
Nobody expects the ball to turn square at the Wankhede in the first session of the first day of a Test.
Not only that but, when Monty was bowling, I had chatted with Pujara, who was batting at the other
end, and he said the ball was not turning at all. I had scored thousands of runs playing the shot I tried
against Monty. When there’s not much turn you can just smother the spin and turn a ball pitched on
leg stump to square leg for a single, but the shot isn’t on if there’s vicious turn. It was just my luck
that it was the first delivery that spun square. I was gutted at having failed in front of my home crowd.
Monty had taken Sehwag’s wicket earlier in the innings and triggered a rare batting collapse on
home soil, which handed England control of the match. Only Pujara, who scored a brilliant 135, stood
up against the English spinners, Panesar and Swann, and we squandered the advantage of winning the
toss and batting first.
England then batted excellently, with skipper Alastair Cook and Kevin Pietersen playing extremely
well in difficult batting conditions to set up the game. Cook made 122 and Pietersen an imperious 186.
They were instrumental in giving their team a first-innings lead of 86. Cook showed great patience
and throughout the series played spin better than most visiting batsmen have done in recent times.
In the second innings, I again got out to Monty Panesar. This time the ball came on with the arm
while I played for turn. Gautam Gambhir was batting at the other end and at the end of the day’s play,
he told me that, as I was walking back to the pavilion, Monty had said to Gautam, ‘Ball apne aap
seedha nikal gaya!’ (The delivery went straight on its own!) I was out fair and square, but couldn’t
help feeling unlucky to get out to an arm-ball that wasn’t even intended by the bowler! To add to the
frustration, we lost the match in under four days. Losing at home was not something we were
accustomed to and it came as something of a rude jolt.
I realized that I needed to take my mind off cricket for a while, so I called Yuvi, Zaheer and Bhajji
and suggested that we should watch a movie in the hotel room on reaching Kolkata for the third Test. I
had already seen Barfi! – an award-winning film about a deaf mute – but it was so good that I really
wanted to watch it again. Forty-five minutes into the film Bhajji said, ‘Paaji yeh log kuch bolenge ki
film aise hi chalta rahega?’ (Brother, are they going to say anything or is it going to continue in this
silent vein for the whole movie?) Only Harbhajan could have come out with something like that!

After a string of failures, I decided to change my approach in the third Test in Kolkata, starting on 5
December 2012. I would stop being aggressive and instead play within myself, even though it was a
really good batting pitch. Because of this defensive mind-set I missed out on a number of balls that in
normal circumstances I would have put away for four, but I was mindful that I had done something
similar in Australia in 2003–04 when I had scored a double hundred. This time I managed 76 before
getting out to a good delivery from James Anderson straight after a drinks break. Anderson bowled
beautifully throughout the series and was the central figure in the English attack. He used reverse
swing well and picked up wickets at critical moments.
Yet again we had failed to make the most of our opportunities and we were all out for a modest 316.
England were brilliant in response and Cook again led from the front with a spectacular 190. A skipper
leading from the front is always good for a team and England put us under pressure again with a 207run lead. Our second innings was nothing to write home about and I got out for five, caught at slip off
Graeme Swann. None of the batsmen played to their potential and we lost the Test in four days.
We went to Nagpur for the last Test on 13 December 2012, needing a win to draw the series. Virat
Kohli made a hundred and Dhoni was run out on 99, but my poor series continued as I was bowled by
James Anderson for two in my only innings. It seemed that things were just not going my way and as I
went into bat, I faced two balls from Monty Panesar that spun viciously. Till then the wicket had
appeared flat and even the England players were surprised. That’s what seems to happen when you’re
going through a bad patch. Trott made a hundred in England’s second innings and the game ended in a
draw, meaning that we had lost the series 2–1.
England were easily the better team in the series but I must say I was terribly disappointed with the
way I performed in the six innings I played in those four Test matches. Anjali had actually come to
Nagpur because my frame of mind was not good and when the press saw that she was there, they
assumed that I was going to announce my retirement. Something that helped me regain some
perspective at the time was a conversation with Ravi Shastri. Ravi and I have always been good
friends and in Nagpur we had dinner in my room and he repeatedly told me that I should not start to
doubt myself after a few failures. His confidence in me was reassuring and I greatly appreciated the
gesture.

Time for change
I took some time off after the England series to clear my mind after all the scrutiny and speculation
and to think carefully about my career. I gave retirement some serious thought, but I concluded that I
still had the hunger and runs left in me. I might not have made many runs in the England series, but
the way I was batting had given me enough confidence to carry on.
One-day cricket was another matter, and India were due to play three ODIs against Pakistan at the
end of 2012. I had not played ODI cricket between March and December and I had to ask myself
whether I was realistically going to take part in the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand in 2015.
If not, what goals would I have left in ODI cricket? I realized I had to accept that I was not going to be
around till then. The next question was whether I wanted to play a farewell ODI series against
Pakistan before calling it a day. I decided that it was better to take a break and focus my energies on
the Australia Test series in February–March 2013.
Having informed the BCCI, the chairman of selectors and Duncan Fletcher of my decision to retire
from ODIs, I boarded a flight for Dehradun on my way to Mussoorie, a quiet hill station in the North
Indian state of Uttarakhand that I love to visit. A break in Mussoorie is a great way to escape from city

life and unwind, and that’s what I needed. The news of my retirement had become public while I was
in the air between Mumbai and Delhi and as soon as we landed in Delhi I got a series of messages
from friends and well-wishers. As the same aircraft was continuing on to Dehradun, I told Anjali that I
was going to sit with the captain in the cockpit while the new passengers boarded, as I didn’t feel like
speaking to anyone for the time being.
I also asked Anjali if she would gently break the news of my decision to Arjun, as I was concerned
about how he would take it. Anjali later told me that she would never forget his reaction. He said that
he was sure I still had a lot of cricket left in me and there was no reason for me to retire, but when
Anjali explained to him that the decision was final, he turned his face away and leaned his head on the
window and a tear drop rolled down his cheek. Anjali and I both got very emotional when she told me
this. Sara, being a little older, said that she would miss seeing me play but had full faith in my
decision. My children were growing up fast and it mattered to me that they were both by my side at a
time like this. Whenever they are with me, it always makes a huge difference to my well-being.
Mussoorie was a timely break. There was no one there except family and a few very close friends
and I had some time to myself and a chance to think about my future. The media and fans allowed me
the privacy to do so and while I still followed Mumbai’s progress in the Ranji Trophy, I also managed
to switch off from cricket for a while. I played table tennis, went for long walks and relaxed in the
evenings, and managed to get my sense of optimism back. When I started to feel the urge to resume
training, I knew it was time to return to Mumbai.

Australia in India, February–March 2013
I used to reach the Wankhede Stadium for training at around seven every morning, and for a while I
would be completely alone in the stadium. On some days trainer Rahul Patwardhan would join me.
The early-morning dew coated the lush green outfield and I could feel the dampness on my feet as I
ran, leaving a trail behind me. When I looked up at the empty galleries I knew that this was where I
belonged. This was my refuge.
I would jog and then run for a while and do my fitness drills before the groundsmen arrived. The
Mumbai team would normally turn up around 8.30 a.m., by which time I would be in the dressing
room taking a breather. Then I would train with my team-mates, doing my regular net sessions to
prepare for the Ranji Trophy. In all my years of playing international cricket, I never resorted to short
cuts and there was no question of changing that at the start of 2013.
In the Ranji Trophy we beat Baroda and Services on the way to the final against Saurashtra, which
we won by an innings and 125 runs. Mumbai then took on the Rest of India in the Irani Cup game, in
which I got a hundred. It was an innings that gave me a lot of satisfaction and confidence going into
the Test series.
We started the first of four Tests against Australia on 22 February at the Chepauk in Chennai, one
of my favourite grounds. Australia did well to make 380 in the first innings, with skipper Michael
Clarke contributing a hundred. In reply, we didn’t start well, losing two quick wickets for 12 runs, and
when I walked to the wicket we badly needed a partnership.
James Pattinson was bowling fast and I decided to take the battle to him and play my shots. The
first ball was slightly wide of off stump and I presented the full face of the blade and was happy to see
the ball race past the fielders to the boundary. I repeated the shot to the second ball and the result, to
my delight, was the same. The final ball of the over was short of a length and I moved inside the line
to flick it to fine leg for another four. I had hit three boundaries in four balls and the pressure had

eased. My comeback had started well.
Cheteshwar Pujara, who batted sensibly for his 44, kept me company and I was unbeaten on 71 at
the end of the second day, confident of kicking on and getting a big hundred. However, it didn’t turn
out that way as I was bowled for 81 by the off-spinner Nathan Lyon on the third morning with a ball
that was slightly fuller in length than I expected. I had made up my mind to get to the pitch of the ball
and hit it between midwicket and long on with the turn. It was only when I realized that the length was
full that I quickly changed my shot and that was my downfall.
Thankfully, the dismissal did not affect the team’s momentum, with Virat getting a hundred and
Dhoni a blistering double hundred, one of the best innings I have seen at the Chepauk, to give us a lead
of 192. Our spinners, led by Ashwin, then ran through the Australians in the second innings, leaving us
needing just 50 to win the match. In my second innings, I played the same shot to Nathan Lyon’s first
two balls and on both occasions the ball flew between midwicket and long on for six and we soon
closed out the match.
In the second Test at Hyderabad, starting on 2 March, we played brilliantly to reach 503, with
Murali Vijay scoring 167 and Cheteshwar Pujara making a double century. Australia had managed a
disappointing 237 in their first innings and the second-wicket partnership of 370 between Vijay and
Pujara meant our bowlers had enough runs on the board to bowl the Australians out in the second
innings without us having to bat twice.
I got out to James Pattinson for seven, getting the faintest edge down the leg side. I was cursing my
luck for having got bat on ball, prompting the caught-behind appeal, but was also surprised to see the
umpire, after he had initially given me not out, deciding to check with the third umpire after a
prolonged rethink. In a series in which there was no Decision Review System (DRS) there was no
reason for the umpire to reconsider his decision once he had given me not out. If he had not seen or
heard the nick, that should have been the end of the decision. I do not know what prompted the rethink
and it was strange to see the umpire deciding to check with the TV umpire.
The reason that India has steadfastly refused to use the DRS in bilateral series is because the
technology is inconclusive on occasions. We witnessed how random it could be during our tour of
England in 2011–12, when DRS resulted in a number of wrong decisions. We are not against
technology per se, but we do think that DRS needs to be close to 100 per cent correct before we can
accept it. We feel it is a perfectly reasonable stance and I am sure we will revisit the situation when
the technology has improved. The other point is that we believe that the technology used should be the
same across all countries, because only then can we achieve uniformity in decision-making.
At Hyderabad, we won the match comfortably and were gradually starting to establish a
stranglehold over the series. We had never beaten Australia 4–0 in a Test series, but such a scoreline
was now beginning to seem a distinct possibility.
The third Test started in Mohali on 14 March and the Australians scored a healthy 408 in their first
innings, with Mitchell Starc contributing 99 batting at number nine. Our response was emphatic, with
a 289-run opening partnership between Shikhar Dhawan, playing superbly on debut for his 187, and
Murali Vijay, who got his second consecutive Test hundred. I started my innings well and was feeling
confident when Steve Smith, the part-time leg-spinner, came on to bowl. I had never faced Smith
before and walked up to Vijay to check if the ball was turning. Vijay said that Smith was giving the
ball a rip and I should play for turn. The first ball I faced was the perfect line and length – and it didn’t
turn an inch. I was out caught bat-pad at forward short leg for 37.
On the last day at Mohali, we needed 133 to win and I went in to bat with the score at 70–2, intent
on finishing the game. Australia were keeping things tight and we finally reached a stage when Dhoni

and I were at the crease and we needed 24 off twenty-five balls to win. They had bowled a couple of
tight overs and we needed to play a few shots to ease the pressure. I did exactly that to a delivery from
Mitchell Starc that was angled in to me. I hit it over mid off for a four. In the next over by Peter
Siddle, I missed a ball that came in and hit my pad before rolling off on the off side. I thought the ball
had gone towards point and started running. The ball had actually gone more towards short cover, but I
had committed myself to the single. David Warner came darting in and picked up the ball before
flinging himself on the stumps. I had no chance. It was a spectacular effort from him and I was left to
rue not checking where the ball had travelled. It was disappointing not to stay till the end and close out
the game myself, but Dhoni and Ravindra Jadeja did the job. We were 3–0 up and a whitewash looked
distinctly possible as we headed to Delhi for the fourth and final Test of the series.
At Delhi, one look at the wicket was enough to suggest that it would assist the spinners from day
one. I remember telling Anjali that the match was not likely to last the distance and I might well be
home early. I said the same thing to Ajit, who had come to Delhi to watch the game. Sure enough, the
spinners got into the action very early and it promised to be a low-scoring game. Australia batted first
and scored 262, a reasonable total in the conditions. In reply we made 272, of which I scored 32.
In the second innings, our spinners ran through Australia, with Ravindra Jadeja again picking up a
five-for. Ashwin and Jadeja had bowled well right through the series and Jadeja had even managed to
get the Australian captain Michael Clarke out a number of times, which may have started to play on
Clarke’s mind. Some of the deliveries Jadeja bowled to him in the first three Tests were excellent
(Clarke was injured for the fourth), pitching on leg and spinning right across his bat face to hit the off
stump.
Eventually we cruised to a win, thanks to a courageous knock from Pujara, who batted with a broken
finger and remained unbeaten on 82. It was an act of real courage and will do him a lot of good in the
rest of his career.
It was the first time in our history that we had achieved a 4–0 series win against Australia and the
victory could not have come at a better time for Indian cricket. At one swoop we had managed to erase
the unpleasant memories of losing to England at home and the team had started to come together
again.
From a personal point of view, I had started the series well in Chennai and had looked good in
patches, but I lost my wicket after getting a start on at least three occasions. Unfortunately for me, I
was not able to get a century in the 2012–13 season and it was something I was looking to change at
the start of the following season.
New Zealand in India 2012
1st Test. Hyderabad (Deccan). 23–26 August 2012
India 438 (CA Pujara 159, MS Dhoni 73, V Kohli 58, V Sehwag 47, SR Tendulkar 19; JS Patel 4–100,
TA Boult 3–93)
New Zealand 159 (JEC Franklin 43*; R Ashwin 6–31, PP Ojha 3–44) and 164 (f/o) (KS Williamson
52, BB McCullum 42; R Ashwin 6–54, PP Ojha 3–48)
India won by an innings and 115 runs
2nd Test. Bangalore. 31 August–3 September 2012
New Zealand 365 (LRPL Taylor 113, CFK van Wyk 71, MJ Guptil 53; PP Ojha 5–99) and 248 (JEC
Franklin 41; R Ashwin 5–69, PP Ojha 2–49, UT Yadav 2–68)
India 353 (V Kohli 103, MS Dhoni 62, SK Raina 55, SR Tendulkar 17 ; TG Southee 7–64) and 262–5

(V Kohli 51*, CA Pujara 48, SR Tendulkar 27; JS Patel 3–68)
India won by 5 wickets
India won the series 2–0
England in India 2012
1st Test. Ahmedabad. 15–19 November 2012
India 521–8 dec (CA Pujara 206*, V Sehwag 117, Y Singh 74, SR Tendulkar 13 ; GP Swann 5–144)
and 80–1 (CA Pujara 41*)
England 191 (MJ Prior 48; PP Ojha 5–45, R Ashwin 3–80) and 406 (f/o) (AN Cook 176, MJ Prior 91;
PP Ojha 4–120, UT Yadav 3–70, Z Khan 2–59)
India won by 9 wickets
2nd Test. Mumbai. 23–26 November 2012
India 327 (CA Pujara 135, R Ashwin 68, SR Tendulkar 8 ; MS Panesar 5–129, GP Swann 4–70) and
142 (G Gambhir 65, SR Tendulkar 8; MS Panesar 6–81, GP Swann 4–43)
England 413 (KP Pietersen 186, AN Cook 122; PP Ojha 5–143, H Singh 2–74, R Ashwin 2–145) and
58–0
England won by 10 wickets
3rd Test. Kolkata. 5–9 December 2012
India 316 (SR Tendulkar 76 , G Gambhir 60, MS Dhoni 52; MS Panesar 4–90, JM Anderson 3–89)
and 247 (R Ashwin 91*, V Sehwag 49, SR Tendulkar 5; JM Anderson 3–38, ST Finn 3–45)
England 523 (AN Cook 190, IJL Trott 87, NRD Compton 57, KP Pietersen 54; PP Ohja 4–142, R
Ashwin 3–183) and 41–3 (R Ashwin 2–31)
England won by 7 wickets
4th Test. Nagpur. 13–17 December 2012
England 330 (KP Pietersen 73, JE Root 73, MJ Prior 57, GP Swann 56; PP Chawla 4–69, I Sharma 3–
49) and 352–4 dec (IJL Trott 143, IR Bell 116*; R Ashwin 2–99)
India 326–9 dec (V Kohli 103, MS Dhoni 99, SR Tendulkar 2; JM Anderson 4–81, GP Swann 3–76)
Match drawn
England won the series 2–1
Australia in India 2013 – The Border-Gavaskar Trophy
1st Test. Chennai. 22–26 February 2013
Australia 380 (MJ Clarke 130, MC Henriques 68, DA Warner 59; R Ashwin 7–103) and 241 (MC
Henriques 81*; R Ashwin 5–95, RA Jadeja 3–72)
India 572 (MS Dhoni 224, V Kohli 107, SR Tendulkar 81 ; JL Pattinson 5–96) and 50–2 (V Sehwag
19, SR Tendulkar 13)
India won by 8 wickets
2nd Test. Hyderabad (Deccan). 2–5 March 2013
Australia 237–9 dec (MJ Clarke 91, MS Wade 62; RA Jadeja 3–33, B Kumar 3–53) and 131 (EJM
Cowan 44; R Ashwin 5–63, RA Jadeja 3–33)
India 503 (CA Pujara 204, M Vijay 167, SR Tendulkar 7; GJ Maxwell 4–127, XJ Doherty 3–131)
India won by an innings and 135 runs

3rd Test. Mohali. 14–18 March 2013
Australia 408 (MA Starc 99, SPD Smith 92, EJM Cowan 86, DA Warner 71; I Sharma 3–72, RA
Jadeja 3–77) and 223 (PJ Hughes 69; B Kumar 3–31, RA Jadeja 3–35)
India 499 (S Dhawan 187, M Vijay 153, V Kohli 67*, SR Tendulkar 37 ; PM Siddle 5–71) and 136–4
(V Kohli 34, SR Tendulkar 21)
India won by 6 wickets
4th Test. Delhi. 22–24 March 2013
Australia 262 (P Siddle 51, SPD Smith 46, PJ Hughes 45; R Ashwin 5–57) and 164 (P Siddle 50; RA
Jadeja 5–58, PP Ojha 2–19, R Ashwin 2–55)
India 272 (M Vijay 57, CA Pujara 52, SR Tendulkar 32 ; NM Lyon 7–94) and 158–4 (CA Pujara 82*,
V Kohli 41, SR Tendulkar 1; GJ Maxwell 2–54)
India won by 6 wickets
India won the series 4–0