MY FIRST TOUR

I had always dreamed of playing cricket for India. Getting an opportunity to fulfil my dream at such
an early age was indeed very special. What made it even more significant was that we were playing
Pakistan in Pakistan and their bowling attack included fast bowlers of the quality of Imran Khan,
Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis and Aaqib Javed, not to mention the leg-spinners Mushtaq Ahmed and
Abdul Qadir – quite a test for any debutant.
It was baptism by fire. So much so that after my very first innings in Test cricket, during which I
was all at sea against Wasim and Waqar, I began to doubt my ability to bat and questioned whether I
was ever going to be good enough to play at international level.
Before describing my debut series, I want to go back to that first Irani Trophy game for the Rest of
India against Delhi. I had scored 39 in the first innings before I was bowled by Maninder Singh,
India’s ace left-arm spinner at the time. The disappointment did not last long, however, because it was
that evening when I learned I had been named in the Indian squad for the Pakistan tour. Ecstatic at my
inclusion, I was determined to make a mark in the second innings.
The occasion was particularly special because my brother had come to see me play. In fact, since I
was a minor and could not sign the tour contract, Ajit had to sign it on my behalf. Vasu Paranjpe had
also mentioned to my father that morning that I would surely get a hundred and said that he should
come and watch me bat. My father did just that and, to his satisfaction, what Vasu Sir had predicted
came true. However, the century would not have happened but for the contribution of Gursharan
Singh, the Punjab batsman who later played a Test match for India against New Zealand in 1990.
Gursharan had fractured his finger while batting against the bowling of Atul Wassan, a Delhi fast
bowler who also made his debut for India against New Zealand in 1990. He was sitting in the dressing
room injured and there seemed to be no way he could play a further part in the match. I was batting
well and was unbeaten on 86 when our ninth wicket fell. Knowing that Gursharan couldn’t bat, I
started walking back to the dressing room, assuming it was the end of our innings. Just then I saw
Gursharan walking towards me, ready to bat one-handed.
It was later revealed to me that Raj Singh Dungarpur, then chairman of the national selection
committee, had asked if he would go out and help me get to my hundred. In an exemplary show of
courage, Gursharan had agreed. In fact, when we met at the wicket I felt distinctly embarrassed seeing
him there in such severe pain. I told him that it would be perfectly understandable if we called off the
innings. Showing tremendous grit, he told me, ‘Ab to tera hundred kar ke hi jayenge.’ (I will get back
to the pavilion only after you get your hundred.) He doggedly stuck to his task, and I’m glad to say
that his bravery was respected by the opposition bowlers, who did not resort to bowling bouncers.
It was a favour I would never forget. It was a show of remarkable resilience by Gursharan and I
tried to repay the debt by doing what I could at the time of his benefit match in Delhi in April 2005. I
had promised him that as long as he gave me a few days’ notice, I’d turn up to play, no matter where I

was. I am glad I was able to keep my promise.

India in Pakistan, November–December 1989
Encouraged at having got a hundred against India’s domestic champions, I headed to Pakistan soon
after feeling reasonably confident. Maybe because I was still a teenager, I didn’t feel any extra
pressure about playing against Pakistan. The whole political baggage of India–Pakistan cricket meant
nothing to me. I was simply treating it as my first tour, which was challenge enough. In any case, no
one really expected me to be a part of the playing XI at such a young age, certainly not in any of the
Tests. Some thought I might get a chance in one of the one-day games, depending on the team’s
performance in the series, while others believed I was there only to get a feel of international cricket.
To be honest, all the talk passed me by. I just wanted to do well for India and score a lot of runs.
Other than that, everything else seemed unimportant. That was natural enough, because everything had
happened rather quickly in my life. Just five years after I took to playing competitive cricket, I had
become a part of the Indian squad – it was a pretty quick move from school to international cricket.
On arrival in Pakistan I didn’t sense any tension and went out for regular meals in the evening with
some of the other cricketers. Their friendly approach helped put me at ease and it was not until we
reached Lahore that a curfew was imposed on going out in the evenings. On my travels around India I
had always bought gifts such as sarees for my mother and aunt and shirts for my father and uncle, and
so in the first few days in Pakistan I did the same. This time I bought them some local shoes and
slippers.
There was tension within the squad, however, as a result of a dispute that had blown up before the
tour between the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and the players over the issue of
players’ involvement in a few unsanctioned matches in the United States on the way back from the
West Indies tour in 1988. The matter had gone right up to the Indian Supreme Court and was
eventually settled when the court lifted a ban imposed on the players by the BCCI. The other
controversy that arose on the eve of the tour was over the issue of match fees. It had escalated into a
serious dispute, with the players opting to give up their match fees altogether as a mark of protest.
Fortunately for the junior players in the team, skipper Krishnamachari Srikkanth instructed us to stay
away from the problems and concentrate on the job at hand, which was to evolve a strategy to tackle
Imran, Wasim, Waqar and Abdul Qadir.
I had a good start to the tour and in one of the two games before the first Test, against the Pakistan
Board Patron’s XI in Rawalpindi, scored 47 before getting out to Iqbal Qasim, a left-arm spinner who
played for Pakistan in fifty Tests. It was a decent innings and I received a standing ovation from the
crowd. I began to feel I had a slim chance of getting into the Test team and dared to dream of my first
Test cap. I finally heard the news of my inclusion in the playing XI from skipper Srikkanth on the
night before the first Test in Karachi.
It is very difficult to describe the feeling. I was part of a band of eleven fortunate men who had been
given the duty of representing close to a billion Indians. It was an honour every aspiring cricketer
lives for, to play for his country against the best of world cricket. And with the honour came
responsibility. I was going to be accountable to the cricket fans back home and was expected to give
my best for them. In fact, I could imagine nothing more significant than doing something worthy for
the national team and the passionate Indian cricket fans.
I was sharing a room with Salil Ankola, the fast bowler who has now gone on to become an actor.
Salil was bowling well at the time and was also making his Test debut. Neither of us could sleep the

night before the match. We were both about to start a new chapter and were aware that it was an
opportunity that could change our lives for ever.

First Test, Karachi, 15–20 November 1989
Pakistan won the toss and opted to bat first on a greenish wicket so I didn’t have long to wait to walk
onto the field for the first time as an India player. My life had taken a giant leap and it is a moment I
will always remember. It also happened to be Kapil Dev’s 100th Test match and we were all excited
for him. Only Sunil Gavaskar and Dilip Vengsarkar had achieved the distinction before.
My first day of international cricket wasn’t without drama and one incident in particular left an
unpleasant feeling. In the post-lunch session a bearded man clad in salwar kameez entered the field
and went straight up to Kapil Dev, abusing him for being in Pakistan. Kapil, who was preparing to
bowl at the time, later recounted to us that he asked the fellow to leave him alone and allow him to
continue with the game. After his exchange with Kapil, the intruder then went over to mid off, where
Manoj Prabhakar, our top fast bowler on the tour, was fielding. He abused Prabhakar before moving
on to skipper Srikkanth – and with Srikkanth he got physical. In those days, with the sport far less
commercialized, players could choose what kit to wear. Most of our team preferred T-shirts, but
Srikkanth liked to wear a buttoned shirt and this was torn open in the scuffle.
I was fielding at point and I was scared I would be next and was ready to run to the safe confines of
the dressing room if the intruder came towards me. Up to this point, no security personnel had done
anything to stop the intruder from disrupting things in the middle. It was only when the Indian captain
was being manhandled that security finally came onto the ground to drag the spectator off. It was a
serious security lapse, yet the organizers seemed hardly perturbed. The truth is that it was much more
than a cricket match that was being played between the two teams. The political history of partition
has always cast a pall over India–Pakistan cricket and it was my first taste of this unfortunate reality.
The next day we were even more astonished to find the Pakistan press suggesting that the intruder had
actually been trying to congratulate Kapil Dev on playing his 100th Test match. The issue of
Srikkanth’s torn shirt didn’t merit a mention by the local media.

All at sea
On the second day of the match, Pakistan were all out for 409, with skipper Imran Khan scoring 109
not out. Finally, it was our turn to bat. The pitch was lively and we didn’t get off to a good start. We
were soon reduced to 41–4, with Srikkanth, Navjot Sidhu, Sanjay Manjrekar and Manoj Prabhakar out
cheaply. Wasim and Waqar were bowling really fast and it was a trying time for every Indian
batsman. I hadn’t quite anticipated what awaited me out in the middle when I went out to bat at
number six. There’s no harm in admitting that I was all at sea against Wasim and Waqar in my first
innings in Test cricket. I was trying to be aggressive to almost every ball, as that was how I had
always played the game. I was trying to get on top of the bowlers, but more often than not I was
comprehensively beaten. The pace was far greater than I had ever faced and the skill on display was of
the very highest standard. The guile of both bowlers left me thoroughly confused.
An account of one Wasim over will give an idea of my plight in the middle. I was on strike to him
for the third ball of the over, which turned out to be a vicious bouncer. Having studied Wasim’s
bowling, I was convinced the next ball would be a yorker and was mentally prepared for it. It turned
out to be another bouncer, which I left. While I kept expecting a fiery yorker, balls five and six also

turned out to be bouncers, and at the end of the over I said to myself, ‘Welcome to Test cricket.’ Not
without reason is it acknowledged as the most challenging format of the game.
My stay at the crease was short and not sweet. I had lasted only twenty-four balls, at least half of
which I had missed. I had hit two boundaries but not for a moment had I felt comfortable. It was only
a matter of time before I was dismissed. I was finally bowled for a rather lucky 15 by another
debutant, Waqar Younis, and on my way back to the pavilion my mind was riddled with self-doubt.
It was a very important moment in my career. I had come to the international stage after blazing my
way through domestic cricket. I had managed to score a hundred on debut in the Ranji and Irani
trophies, but here I was on the international stage unable to put bat on ball. I was struggling, plain and
simple. The difference in standard between domestic and international cricket was colossal.
I batted only once in that first Test match, which ended in a draw, and in the following days I
approached our coach, Chandu Borde, and a number of senior team-mates to discuss what I needed to
do to improve. I had a long chat with Ravi Shastri, already an established star at the time, who advised
me to be patient for the first fifteen or twenty minutes, which were bound to be uncomfortable. Ravi
was of the opinion that once I had played out the initial burst from the Pakistani bowlers, things would
turn easier. The key was to spend time in the middle. But would I be given another opportunity to do
so? I could easily have missed out on the second Test, not only because of my low score in the first
but also because of the way I had batted.
It came as a huge relief to see my name in the playing XI for the second Test at Faisalabad.

Second Test, Faisalabad, 23–28 November 1989
I knew it was a chance I could not afford to squander; it would be a big test of my ability and
temperament. What made the task considerably more difficult was that Pakistan won the toss on a
green-top and put India in to bat. The stage was set. All through my career I have relished these
moments of adversity. It is no good just performing on a docile track against weak opposition. A
cricketer gets true satisfaction only if he is able to perform in difficult conditions against the best
bowlers.
Once again we lost early wickets and I went in to bat with four top-order wickets down for 101. This
time around, although it really wasn’t my style then, I forced myself to stay at the wicket for the first
fifteen minutes to get used to the conditions. I have no qualms about confessing that it was difficult.
The bowlers were definitely on top at the start of my innings, but with time things turned easier. I was
able to adjust to the pace and bounce of the wicket, and my confidence was gradually coming back.
I managed to play 172 balls en route to my first half-century in Test cricket and was finally
dismissed by Imran for 59. I was involved in a 143-run partnership with Sanjay Manjrekar and though
I hit only four boundaries, the innings gave me a lot of satisfaction. It also taught me a good lesson:
there was no point in trying to blaze my way through every innings. Most importantly, this knock
convinced me that I could actually cope with international cricket, though I knew I still had a lot to
learn. In the second innings I ran myself out for eight, sacrificing my wicket for Mohammad
Azharuddin, who was nearing a well-deserved hundred. In the end, we managed to thwart a Pakistan
victory. After two Tests the series was still drawn and it was evident that Pakistan were feeling the
pressure. Many had predicted a 4–0 scoreline in their favour and it was starting to play on their minds.

Third Test, Lahore, 1–6 December 1989

From Faisalabad we moved to Lahore for the third Test. Unable to venture out of the hotel in the
evenings, the players and the touring Indian media were feeling a little restless and this called for
some original thinking. For the first and only time in my career the media and the players got together
for what was decreed a ‘Sunday Club’. It was to be an evening of stories, music, food and fun and
everyone had to wear something fancy. It turned out to be a very successful experiment, but sadly it
hasn’t been repeated since. It definitely helped to create a bond between the team and the media, so
necessary during an arduous away tour.
I wore a blue pullover to the Sunday Club and that’s where the often published picture of me with a
thick moustache, Aussie fast bowler Merv Hughes-style, was taken. The food served that evening was
unbelievable. Lahore is a foodie’s delight and I wolfed down all the delectable kebabs on offer and I
loved the haleem (a stew of meat and lentils). In fact, I had a voracious appetite throughout the tour.
My body was still growing and I ate huge amounts. On non-match days I used to eat keema parathas
(mincemeat parathas) and lassi (yogurt drink) for breakfast and by the time I went back to India I had
put on a few kilos and had also grown much stronger.
The Lahore Test was local hero Javed Miandad’s 100th and in a change from the first two Test
matches in Karachi and Faisalabad, we were faced with the flattest of batting decks, which had
obviously been prepared to help Javed score a hundred, which he duly did. Even after five days, the
first innings of both teams had still not been completed.
At the start of my innings in Lahore I misjudged the bounce of a straight delivery from Imran,
which hit me on my biceps. I was furious at allowing myself to be hit on a flat pitch. The point of
impact instantly turned numb and my first instinct was to step out and dispatch the very next ball over
the boundary. However, the lesson learnt at Faisalabad came to my rescue and I reined myself in.
I had worked my way to 41 off ninety balls when I tried to play an on drive to Abdul Qadir and was
bowled. I had been batting well and I regret not going on to play a long innings. It was an opportunity
missed. It has to be said, though, that the match, a tame draw, was not the best advertisement for Test
cricket.

Sweet dreams
The fourth and final Test of the series was at Sialkot and we knew that we’d be given a green-top,
which offered Pakistan’s best chance to take the series. By now they were desperate to win; a draw
would have been considered a series defeat for Imran and his team. When we arrived at Sialkot, I was
invited to the MB Malik bat-manufacturing company. Sialkot has quite a tradition of bat-making in
Pakistan and at the time I didn’t have a contract for my bats and could pick up any bat and play. I went
to the factory with a few of the other players and chose two or three bats for myself.
I was so excited about my new bats that I even dreamed about them one night. Apparently, it was
around midnight and I walked straight out of my room asking for my bats. Maninder Singh and Raman
Lamba saw me advancing down the corridor and said to me, ‘Tere bats to tere pass hi hai. ’ (Your bats
are with you only.) When I didn’t respond, they realized that I was sleepwalking. They helped me back
into the room and put me back to bed. By that stage of the tour, Raman and I had struck up a good
friendship and spent many hours together discussing the nuances of batting. He was fun to be with and
it was absolutely tragic that he died after being struck on his head by a ball while fielding during a
first-class match in Dhaka in 1998.

Fourth Test, Sialkot, 9–14 December 1989

What made the Sialkot Test special was that my brother Ajit had travelled to see me play. It was an
added incentive to do well and both Ajit and I still remember the kindness the locals bestowed on him
the moment they became aware that he was from India and had come to watch cricket.
As expected, the wicket was green, but the December weather was also heavy, resulting in a lot of
early-morning fog. So much so that play never started on time and it ended early each afternoon. This
meant the four Pakistani fast bowlers could come at us all day, hoping to roll us over and secure the
upper hand. In the first innings I played pretty well for my 35 and was feeling good before falling lbw
to Wasim. I wasn’t so uncomfortable at the start of my innings and the initial apprehension was no
longer an issue. I hit some pleasing shots and scored at a good clip in the course of my 51-ball stay at
the wicket.
India managed a 74-run first-innings lead, with Vivek Razdan, a fast bowler who played two Tests
for India, picking up 5–79 in the Pakistan first innings. We had bowled them out for 250 and
understandably Pakistan came back at us hard at the start of our second innings. We lost a cluster of
early wickets and I went in to bat at 38–4, with a day and a half still to go in the match.
Waqar was bowling from one end and it was absolutely essential to survive the initial burst. I had
just scored my first run when Waqar bowled a short delivery, which I expected would rise chin-high. I
misjudged the bounce of the ball. It rose six inches higher than expected and hit me on the flap of my
helmet before deflecting and hitting my nose. At the time I was the only batsman besides Srikkanth
not to wear a grille. It wasn’t an act of bravado; I just wasn’t used to playing with one. Ajit, who was
sitting right in front of the Indian dressing room, later said to me that he had clearly heard the sound
of the ball hitting my helmet and deflecting on to my nose.
My vision was blurred and my head felt heavy. After impact, the ball went towards the slips and my
natural movement was to see where the ball had gone. It was then that I noticed all the blood spattered
on my shirt. As I was trying to recover from the blow, I was amused by Javed Miandad’s comments.
In an attempt to psych me out, he was saying things like ‘Arre tujhe to abhi hospital jana parega; tera
naak tut gaya hai.’ (You may have to go to the hospital; your nose is broken.) To add to my
discomfort, a banner in the stands read, ‘Bachhe ghar ja ke dudh pie kea aa.’ (Kid go home and drink
milk.)
I ignored all this while our team doctor, Vishwas Raut, inspected the injury. He put some ice on my
nose and asked if I wanted to go off. I did not, for I considered it a moment of reckoning. Going off
would suggest I was scared. And truly I wasn’t. It wasn’t the first time I had been hit, though the
impact was much more severe than anything I had suffered before. I decided to carry on and said,
‘Main khelega.’ (I will play.) It was important for my own self-esteem, and by staying in I felt I had
made a statement to the opposition.
Seeing me continue, Imran asked Javed to move away and all the Pakistani players went back to
their respective field positions. Soon after the resumption, I got a full ball from Waqar on my legs and
flicked it to the boundary. I followed it up with a drive on the off side and felt genuinely good about
myself. I had treated the balls on merit and wasn’t just being aggressive to avenge being hit. Soon it
was time for tea and I had an opportunity to regroup. After the break I started to bat really well. I was
feeling confident and was determined not to give my wicket away. Importantly for the team, I
managed to play out the day and we were on course to force a draw.
Shortly after going back to the hotel, however, I felt heavy in the head. We had a team function in
the evening but I asked permission from manager Chandu Borde and went to bed early after taking a
few painkillers and having dinner with Ajit and Navjot Sidhu, which helped me calm down. When I
got up the next morning after a good night’s sleep, I was feeling ready for the challenge of the final

day. We were on 102–4 overnight and needed to spend at least two more hours at the crease to deny
Pakistan any opportunity of winning the Test.
Navjot Sidhu and I held out until I was dismissed by Imran for 57. It was my second half-century in
Test cricket. Denying Pakistan a win on home turf was a big achievement for India, especially with the
kind of bowling attack they had, and it served as a major confidence boost for the team. We were all
elated at the performance.

The Abdul Qadir over
After the Tests, we played a five-match one-day series in which none of the matches was played for
the scheduled fifty overs. While some of them were affected by rain, the third match was abandoned
because of crowd trouble after Pakistan had been reduced to 29–3 by some good swing bowling from
Manoj Prabhakar. The first match was due to be played in Peshawar on 16 December 1989 and had to
be called off at the last moment because of rain. However, a large crowd had braved the inclement
weather and it was finally agreed between both teams that a twenty-over-a-side exhibition game,
perhaps the first ever Twenty20 game, would be played for the sake of the crowd. It was a good call,
as the fans deserved to be given their money’s worth. They are the ones who make the game what it is,
after all, and they are pivotal to its health around the world.
Most people will agree that even an exhibition game between India and Pakistan can’t help being a
serious cricket match. At Peshawar Pakistan had scored 157 in their innings, and when I went in to bat
with three wickets down, the asking rate had climbed to well past 11 runs an over. Srikkanth was
batting with me and suggested we should dig in and get some practice for the following games. I was
determined to go for the bowling and felt we still had a chance to make a match of it if we played our
shots. That’s what I suggested to Srikkanth and while he was a tad surprised, he told me to play the
way I was comfortable with.
Mushtaq Ahmed, an up-and-coming Pakistani leg-spinner at that stage, was bowling and I hit him
for a couple of sixes and a boundary in the first over I faced. While both sixes were hit over long on,
the second went a fair distance and hit the dressing-room window, breaking the glass. The Pakistanis
hadn’t expected me to hit it so far and Abdul Qadir, an experienced old hand at the time, walked up to
me and said, ‘Bachhe ko kyun mar rahe ho; dum hai to mujhe mar ke dikhao.’ (No point in hitting
sixes off a newcomer; if you have the skills, try and hit me.) I said to him that he was a great bowler
and that I was sure he wouldn’t allow me to hit him.
With just two overs left we needed more than 40 runs and Qadir was to bowl the penultimate over.
Our only chance was to attack. I had made up my mind that if the ball was in my zone I’d go for my
shots. As it happened, most of the balls were in my hitting arc and I took 28 off the over. I hit the first
ball for six over long on and followed it up with a four off the third ball. The fourth ball resulted in a
second six, which I hit straight over the bowler’s head. Seeing me hit straight, Qadir bowled the fifth
ball wide outside off stump in an attempt to get me stumped. I had anticipated the move and hit the
ball over long off for the third six of the over. For the last ball he went even further outside off stump
and I stretched out to hit the ball wide over long off, to make it four sixes in the over.
The crowd, which had been confident of a Pakistan victory till an over earlier, was roused by this
unexpected turn of events and started making a lot of noise. There was a sudden increase in energy
levels at the ground. The match was now being played in full seriousness and no one really knew
which team would win. We needed 14 runs off the last over, bowled by Wasim Akram. Eventually we
fell short by three runs. Straight after the match, Abdul Qadir walked up to me in true sportsmanlike

manner and said ‘Bahut ala batting.’ (Very well batted.)
That innings of 53 off eighteen balls at Peshawar had a defining impact on my career. In the eyes of
the public, it had overshadowed my effort at Sialkot, which was far more difficult and far more
significant as far as I was concerned. The Sialkot innings had allowed us to save the Test match and
also the series. But for people at home the innings at Peshawar was the real talking point. It had given
me instant recognition and made me a household name. For the first time I was asked for autographs,
which was a strange feeling. Before we went to Pakistan I had been able to go out with my friends and
have bhel (a type of fast food loved all over Mumbai) and do all those normal things. Afterwards,
when I went out with my friends, people would come up and ask if I was Sachin Tendulkar. And it was
all down to that one innings at Peshawar. While it would have been premature to suggest I had
established myself at international level, it had certainly given me a toehold.
When I got home, I could tell that my parents were proud of my achievements, but there has never
been any over-the-top celebration in my house. While I knew that my father was extremely happy and
satisfied, he wouldn’t ever show off his emotions in an extravagant manner. When I did well, my
mother would always light a diya (a kind of candle) and offer sweets to God, but that’s as far as it
went. Sometimes people are kind enough to compliment me on my off-the-field behaviour more than
my on-field performance. They say that I seem to have managed to keep my feet grounded. If that’s
true, then I have no hesitation in saying that all the credit goes to my family.
Ajit’s presence in Pakistan was a great help and we talked every evening about my game and how I
could improve. While there were many senior team-mates who I could go to, I was most comfortable
discussing things with Ajit, as he knew my game better than anyone. He had watched me grow up as a
cricketer and it was natural that his observations would always be pertinent.
After coming back from Pakistan, I felt much more positive about myself as a cricketer and was
looking forward to India’s next away tour, to New Zealand at the start of 1990. I was pretty confident
of getting picked but was still delighted to see myself in the squad when the touring side was
announced.
India in Pakistan 1989
1st Test. Karachi. 15–20 November 1989
Pakistan 409 (Imran Khan 109*, J Miandad 78, S Mohammad 67; M Prabhakar 5–104, Kapil Dev 4–
69) and 305–5 dec (S Malik 102*, S Mohammad 95; Kapil Dev 3–82)
India 262 (KS More 58*, Kapil Dev 55. SR Tendulkar 15; W Akram 4–83, W Younis 4–80) and 303–
3 (SV Manjrekar 113*, NS Sidhu 85)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Faisalabad. 23–28 November 1989
India 288 (SV Manjrekar 76, SR Tendulkar 59; Imran Khan 4–45) and 398–7 (M Azharuddin 109, SV
Manjrekar 83, NS Sidhu 51, SR Tendulkar 8)
Pakistan 423–9 dec (A Malik 117, S Malik 63, R Raja 58; M Prabhakar 6–132)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Lahore. 1–6 December 1989
India 509 (SV Manjrekar 218, M Azharuddin 77, RJ Shastri 61, SR Tendulkar 41; A Qadir 3–97)
Pakistan 699–5 (S Mohammad 203*, J Miandad 145, A Malik 113)
Match drawn

4th Test. Sialkot. 9–14 December 1989
India 324 (SV Manjrekar 72, M Azharuddin 52, SR Tendulkar 35 ; W Akram 5–101) and 234–7 (NS
Sidhu 97, SR Tendulkar 57; Imran Khan 3–68)
Pakistan 250 (R Raja 56; V Razdan 5–79)
Match drawn
Series drawn 0–0
