NUMBER ONE

Having beaten Australia 2–0 at home in October–November 2008, we were optimistic about the home
series against England in December. Gary Kirsten, our coach, had instilled a sense of confidence in the
players and all we needed to do now was sustain the momentum after the retirements of Anil and
Sourav, two of the best players to represent India.

England in India, December 2008
England’s tour started with a seven-match series of ODIs. I did not play in the first three because I
was suffering from another elbow problem, this time what is known as a ‘golfer’s elbow’. It troubled
me throughout the season, but not enough to miss a Test match, and it actually turned out to be one of
the best seasons of my career. My good form extended into the next season, and I was nominated the
ICC’s Cricketer of the Year for 2009–10.
After making only 11 in my comeback match in Bangalore, I was more satisfied with a fifty in the
fifth game at Cuttack on 26 November, which we won comfortably, taking a 5–0 series lead. Shortly
after the game we heard that some sort of gang war had started in Mumbai. We were deeply perturbed
by what we saw on the news channels in the dressing room. It was obviously much more than a gang
war and the live footage left us shocked. Our thoughts and prayers went out to the people who were
caught up in the catastrophe.
Most of the players watched what was happening on television till late into the night and it became
clear to us that India was essentially under attack. It was the most barbaric of acts and what was
happening in the streets of Mumbai was shocking. These were places that were part of our daily
existence. It was devastating to see flames coming out of the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, one of India’s
iconic landmarks. I anxiously called Anjali to check that she and all our friends and loved ones were
safe.
What made it all even more personal was that, just the day before, Anjali had been in Leopold’s
restaurant, which was one of the prime targets, and had also visited another target, the Oberoi, for
dinner the previous night. She had gone to see a play at the National Centre for the Performing Arts
and ended up having dinner with her friends there. She could so easily have been caught up in the
mayhem.
The terror attack continued the next morning and the pictures were beamed live all day on 27
November 2008. We had a team meeting and were informed that England had decided to call off the
series and had already left for Dubai. It was understandable, because none of us was in a frame of
mind to play cricket. I returned to Mumbai that evening and was met by security personnel at the
airport, who escorted me home. It was unnerving to think that it was all happening so close to where I
lived. I was angry and upset and it was a horrible feeling having to sit back and pray for the ordeal to

end.
A week after the terror attacks, it was announced that England were coming back for a two-Test
series. This was a terrific gesture and each one of us appreciated the efforts of the English to return to
India within two weeks of the carnage. While nothing could compensate for the trauma inflicted by
these terror strikes, a resumption of cricket was a welcome sign for us all.

Cricket for peace
When we assembled in Chennai for the first Test on 11 December we were still finding it difficult to
concentrate on cricket. Our thoughts were with the victims of the attacks and everyone was talking
about those traumatic three days. But we had a Test match on our hands and we felt it was important
for all our fans that we should put in a good peformance in Chennai.
England started well, with captain Andrew Strauss becoming the first England player to make a
century in both innings on the subcontinent and Paul Collingwood also making a century. Unless we
managed to pull things back on the morning of day four, it was going to be difficult to save the match.
Zaheer and Ishant bowled very well in the English second innings but it was Zaheer’s spell of three
wickets in five overs, including the centurion Collingwood, that brought us back into the game. For
the first time we sensed we had the opposition on the back foot and it was now up to the batsmen to
chase down the target of 387. It would not be easy – in fact it would be the highest ever run chase on
Indian soil – but under Gary we had started to believe that anything was possible.
Sehwag set up the match wonderfully by scoring a brilliant counter-attacking 83 on the fourth
evening. It was an innings of outstanding ability. I went in to bat on the morning of the final day and
for the first hour or so just tried to soak up the pressure. Once we had weathered the early storm we
started to look for runs. Every positive stroke put the pressure back on England and slowly but steadily
the balance started to tilt in our favour.
Laxman and I had a good partnership and once Laxman fell, Yuvraj joined me in the middle. I was
determined to bat till the end of the match. Indians love cricket and if, for just a minute or two, a
victory in Chennai could lift their mood after everything that had happened, I would feel humbled.
Yuvraj batted well under pressure, making 85. There was a time in his innings when he attempted to
play the reverse sweep to Monty Panesar and I walked up to him to tell him that all he needed to do
was remain not out and finish the game. I reminded him of the Pakistan game at Chennai in 1999 and
said I had been in a similar position before and remembered well how painful it was to lose from a
winning position. Yuvraj reined himself in and we finally reached our target in the last hour of the
fifth day. I had scored an unbeaten hundred for the team, but it was the extra significance of the game
that made it particularly gratifying. In a first in Indian cricket, even the groundswomen, who hardly
ever came to the foreground, celebrated the victory with great vigour. As we were walking back to the
changing rooms, I was asked who I planned to dedicate the hundred to. I had not thought about it and
was still very much in the moment, but on behalf of the team I dedicated the victory to the victims of
the terrorist attack.

India in New Zealand, one-day series, March 2009
We followed up the victory at Chennai with a well-played draw at Mohali and won the series 1–0.
Back-to-back series wins at home was an excellent way to cap off the year and we were all looking
forward to our next away series in New Zealand.

Beating the Black Caps in New Zealand can be a tricky task, but we knew we had a great
opportunity. We were in good form and seemed to have developed the useful ability to pull ourselves
out of difficult situations; if one person failed, the second would step up.
In the five-match one-day series, we easily won the rain-affected first match, thanks largely to the
batting of Sehwag and Dhoni. The second match was a washout, but in the third match at Christchurch,
one of the smaller grounds, I had reached 163 when I was forced to retire hurt with a strained stomach
muscle in the forty-fifth over.
It was frustrating to have to go off in that kind of form. I like to think I was in with a chance of
scoring a double hundred had I been able to bat on, and I wasn’t alone in thinking that. As soon as I
entered the dressing room, Sehwag walked up to me, saying, ‘Paaji yeh apne kya kar diya. Double
hundred ka chance tha.’ (What have you done, brother? You had a realistic chance of scoring a double
hundred.) I laughed and said to him, ‘Arre main mar hi nahi pa raha hoon, double hundred kaise
banaunga. Pitch achha hain aur hame abhi runs chaiye. Double hundred kabhi na kabhi ho jayga.’ (I
can’t even hit the ball, so how can I score a double hundred? It is a good pitch to bat on and we need
big runs at the moment. I will score a double hundred at some point in the future.’) Sehwag, however,
wouldn’t let up and said, ‘Arre woh toh doosra double hundred hoga, aaj ka to aaj karna chaihiye
tha!’ (When you score a double hundred again it might be the second double hundred. Today you
should have scored the first ever ODI double ton!)
The match was a high-scoring one and, despite setting a target of 392, with Yuvraj Singh and Dhoni
both making half-centuries, we were not safe. New Zealand played well to get to 334, thanks in no
small part to an opening partnership of 166 between Brendon McCullum and Jesse Ryder, and the
aggregate score of 726 in the two innings was the second highest in the history of ODI cricket.
I missed the next match at Hamilton, which we also won thanks to an onslaught from Sehwag that
brought him 125. To celebrate taking a 3–0 lead in the series, Bhajji, Zaheer, Yuvi and I met up in
Bhajji’s room for dinner, which was next to the health club in the hotel. There was a wonderful
outdoor Jacuzzi and it had started drizzling outside, making it a beautiful setting. While my teammates wanted to get into the Jacuzzi, I said I was content to stay where I was. Seeing my reluctance,
the three of them hatched a plot.
We had ordered food in the room and were chatting while we waited for it when they grabbed me
from behind and hurled me into the water. I was screaming at them, saying my watch would get spoilt,
but it made no difference, as they were determined to have fun at my expense. They all followed me
into the Jacuzzi and we started messing around in the water. By now the food had arrived and within
minutes the French fries, sandwiches and ketchup had found their way into the Jacuzzi. It was
certainly an unusual way to celebrate!

India in New Zealand, Test series, March–April 2009
In the first Test at Hamilton, which started on 18 March, New Zealand batted first and made 279, with
Daniel Vettori scoring a hundred. I still jokingly tell our bowlers whenever I see them, ‘ Arre usko
kaise hundred marne diya tha yaar tumlog?’ (How could you allow him to score a hundred?) He did
play well, though, and took some calculated risks that paid off.
When I went in to bat in the afternoon of day two, I couldn’t time the ball to save my life. I just
didn’t feel comfortable, so I decided to change my stance. This was something I used to try from time
to time and it often did the trick. Normally I bat with a side-on stance, but in Hamilton I opened
myself up slightly and also increased the gap between my feet a little. The umpire Simon Taufel
noticed the difference and mentioned to me that I looked a completely different batsman after the
drinks break and asked what I had done to myself. Sometimes such tiny adjustments can make a big
difference.
Towards the end of the first day, the light dropped appreciably and Iain O’Brien, New Zealand’s

best bowler in the series, was bowling from one end. The umpires were reluctant to stop the game,
which I thought was unfair because it was a crucial time in the match and there was no chance of the
light improving. I somehow managed to survive, though, and was unbeaten on 70 at the end of the
second day. The next morning I got off to an aggressive start. My knock of 160 contributed to a
sizeable first-innings lead, alongside fifties from Gambhir, Dravid and Zaheer Khan. Our bowlers, led
by Bhajji with six wickets, delivered once again to set up a very satisfying win.
Unfortunately, I missed the latter parts of the match because I was injured in the very first over of
the New Zealand second innings when I dived forward to take a catch at slip off Zaheer’s bowling. The
edge from Tim McIntosh had come low and as I tried to get my fingers under the ball I damaged the
index finger of my left hand. I had to be taken to hospital to have the injury checked and X-rays
revealed I had a fracture.
There wasn’t much time before the second Test at Napier but the early end of the first one at least
gave me an extra day to recover. To protect the finger, I tried putting three finger caps one on top of
the other and also applied a fibre plaster, which I moulded by putting it in hot water, topped off with a
lot of padding. With all that protection, I had little sense of where my finger actually was, but in the
end I decided I could last a Test as long as I stood in a relatively quiet fielding position.
This time it worked out well and I managed to score runs in both innings of the second Test at
Napier. New Zealand scored 619 in their first innings, with Jesse Ryder following up his 102 in the
first Test with a double century, supported by hundreds from Ross Taylor and Brendon McCullum. We
had to bat out a little more than two days to save the match. We had a brief team meeting ahead of the
second innings and there was a strong belief that we could do it. Gary had a big role to play in this and
exuded a kind of quiet confidence, which in turn had a positive impact on the team.
Gautam Gambhir batted superbly in the second innings and thanks to his magnificent 137 we saved
the match comfortably in the end. He batted for ten and a half hours and played 436 balls in an
exemplary display of patience and character. Laxman also scored a hundred and the draw was a true
reflection of the team’s mind-set at the time: we were relishing the challenges set before us.
In the third Test in Wellington, we scored a reasonable 379, batting first, but then Zaheer Khan and
Harbhajan Singh combined to bowl out New Zealand for 197, giving us a 182-run lead. In our second
innings, a magnificent 167 from Gambhir helped set New Zealand a target of 717.
We picked up four wickets on day four and had the whole of the fifth day to take the remaining six
wickets to wrap up the series 2–0. Zaheer, Ishant and Munaf Patel were bowling extremely well for us,
as they had right through the series. The plan was to bowl short and attack the shoulder/ribcage area in
an attempt to rattle the opposition. It seemed to work and I could sense the discomfort in some of the
New Zealand batsmen.
With the wind behind him, Ishant was unplayable at times. Munaf took on the challenging job of
bowling into the wind and for those who are not aware of the difficulties involved, the wind at
Wellington can reduce your pace by at least 10 kph. Batsmen have to be able to make subtle
adjustments to adapt to conditions like these. One problem with looking into strong winds is that you
can’t keep your eyes open for too long at a stretch. Also, when facing someone bowling with the wind,
your bat speed has to be slightly faster than normal because the ball hurries on quicker than expected.
On the other hand, a batsman can put pressure on someone bowling into the wind because the bat
swing is naturally faster with the wind behind you.
On this occasion, our bowlers made sure the New Zealand batsmen were never at ease and despite
another century from Ross Taylor in the second innings, we were always in control. Jesse Ryder, who
had been their most successful batsman in the series, failed in both innings at Wellington, which

definitely helped our chances. I was given the ball a little before lunch on day five and was pleased to
get the crucial wicket of Brendon McCullum, caught at slip for 6. Then I could tell that James
Franklin, the last recognized batsman, wasn’t picking my googlies and was trying to sweep every ball
to negate the overspin. I asked Dhoni to take the fielder away from point and place two fielders at
short square leg. This would stop Franklin from playing the sweep shot and would force him to cut.
The plan worked and I had Franklin lbw soon after making the field change.
We would have won the match if Ishant had held on to a chance from Iain O’Brien in the deep. The
spilled catch allowed New Zealand a lifeline before the heavens opened after lunch, bringing a
premature end to the match. Close to two sessions of play were lost to rain and we missed out on a
golden opportunity.
An incident from this New Zealand series gives an idea of how much difference local conditions
can make to a team’s chances. It happened at Christchurch during the ODI series when Zaheer was
bowling. He had bowled a good-length ball and the batsman’s attempted front-foot slog over
midwicket turned into a top edge. Zaheer screamed out ‘MINE!’ and carefully positioned himself for
the catch. To his dismay, the wind got hold of the ball and it landed at least fifteen feet away. Later we
all joked with him, saying, ‘So the catch was yours, was it, Zak?’

Aiming for the top
Our rise up the ICC Test rankings had started in England back in 2007. Now, after the successful
series in New Zealand, we had the opportunity to take the number-one position if we beat Sri Lanka at
home in November–December 2009.
The series against Sri Lanka was also special for personal reasons, because I notched up twenty
years in international cricket in November 2009. I celebrated the occasion by speaking to the media
for more than seven hours, giving close to fifty one-on-one interviews. So much for people saying I
did not talk to the media enough! Looking back at how uncomfortable I was at my first press
conference in 1990, I had indeed come a long way.
I remember being confronted with a camera for the first time as an awkward teenager. In my early
TV advertisements, I was not what you might call camera-friendly. I was self-conscious about using
make-up and insisted on being natural, with nothing on my face and nothing done to my hair. It was
only later that I realized that it was just a normal part of working with cameras. Later in my career, I
really enjoyed shooting commercials and there were some incidents that I can never forget.
On one occasion I was at a shoot with one of India’s greatest cinema icons, Amitabh Bachchan, in
the Rajasthan city of Jodhpur. While we were taking a break, I suddenly realized that Arjun, who was
only a toddler then, had finished his meal and was happily wiping his hands on Amitabh Bachchan’s
churidar (the lower garment we wear in India with a kurta). Anjali and I were both mortified, but he
kindly kept telling us that it was perfectly all right and that a child of Arjun’s age hardly knew what he
was doing. While Mr Bachchan was looking at the funnier side of the incident, as parents we were
extremely embarrassed by it. I even said to him that ‘Arjun jabh bada ho jayega to es incident ko yaad
karke sharmaega.’ (When Arjun grows up he will remember what he did and feel seriously
embarrassed.) His conduct during this episode only added to my respect for the great man.
Another commercial I have fond memories of involved another Bollywood legend, Shahrukh Khan.
Shahrukh and I were shooting for Pepsi at Lord’s on the eve of the 1999 World Cup and the plan was
for Shahrukh to pose as me and open the refrigerator in the dressing room to take out a chilled Pepsi.
That’s when I was supposed to confront him for impersonating me. I ended up adding my own ideas to

the commercial and said we should not stop there, but I should take the Pepsi bottle from him and
force him to go out and bat in my place as well. The director loved the idea and the script was changed
on the day.

Sri Lanka don’t make it easy
Before the first Test of the three-match series started in Ahmedabad on 16 November, Anjali had
planned something special for me, to mark my twenty years in international cricket. As a surprise, she
and a few of my closest friends hired a private jet and flew into Ahmedabad on the morning of the
game. I was having breakfast with MS Dhoni and had my back to the restaurant door when I saw in
Dhoni’s eyes that something was going on behind me. Even before I could turn to see what was
happening, Anjali and the gang had reached me. It was totally unexpected and I was deeply touched by
the gesture.
Halfway through the Test, we found ourselves in a spot of bother. Centuries from Dravid and Dhoni
had helped us to a decent first-innings total of 426, but Sri Lanka had scored 760 runs in response,
thanks to hundreds from Dilshan and Prasanna Jayawardene and a double hundred from Mahela
Jayawardene. We now needed to bat for a day and a half to save the game. But our never-say-die spirit
came to the fore again and we batted exceptionally well to draw the match, with the opener Gambhir
setting the foundation with 114.
I also scored a hundred on the last day and it was not a century free of incidents. Once it was
evident to the Sri Lankans that they could no longer win, they set ultra-defensive fields. At one point
Kumar Sangakkara, the Sri Lankan skipper, asked if I really wanted to carry on because there was no
longer a possibility of a result in the match. I said to him bluntly that a Test hundred was a Test
hundred and I would have got there long before if he had set sporting fields. While I had no problem
with him trying to make things difficult for me, there was no reason for me to call it off when there
was time left in the game.
At this, Sangakkara set a 7–2 off-side field and must have asked his left-arm fast bowler
Welegedara to bowl to me a couple of feet outside my off stump with the ball going further away. I
felt the need to improvise and on one occasion moved almost two feet outside the off stump and
flicked Welegedara to square leg for four to get into the nineties. When I eventually reached my
century, I asked Sangakkara if he wanted to continue the game. I was happy to carry on batting, but
then we both decided to call off the game.
There was a similar situation in the same series during the third ODI in Cuttack on 21 December
2009. Chasing the Sri Lankan total of 239, I was in the nineties and Dinesh Karthik was giving me
very good support at the other end. With only a few runs needed to win, Sangakkara decided to place
most of his fielders on the boundary when I was facing, while for Dinesh he would bring the field right
in. To counter the ploy, Dinesh played a number of dot-balls before I intervened and asked him just to
finish the match. The win, I said, was far more important than my hundred. In the end, I remained
unbeaten on 96 as Dinesh hit the winning runs.
I’m also reminded of what the Sri Lankans did against Virender Sehwag on 16 August 2010 during
a one-day international in Dambulla. With Viru on 99 and only one run needed, the off-spinner Suraj
Randiv bowled a big no-ball and even though Viru hit him for six, the runs did not count because
technically the match was over the moment the no-ball was bowled. Viru fell short of the hundred by
one run and the incident created quite a storm in the media at the time.

Number one at last
After the hard-fought draw in the first Test, we routed the Sri Lankans in the next Test at Kanpur,
which started on 24 November 2009. Our first three batsmen, Gautam Gambhir, Virender Sehwag and
Rahul Dravid, all got hundreds and the bowlers backed them up with some disciplined bowling, so that
we won by an innings and 144 runs. The series had been set up beautifully for a grand finale at the CCI
in Mumbai the following week.
At the CCI, Virender Sehwag produced one of the best Test innings I have seen. He played some
breathtaking shots and scored 284 not out in a single day of cricket. He fell the next morning for 293,
narrowly missing out on the third triple ton of his career. The pace at which he scored also allowed our
bowlers plenty of time to bowl out the opposition. In that sort of form, he could demoralize any
bowling attack in the world and in a way he helped change approaches to opening the batting in Test
cricket. Zaheer did the rest of the job in style, picking up a five-for in the Sri Lankan second innings,
and we won the match by an innings and 24 runs. It was a tremendous victory – and it meant that we
were now officially the number-one Test team.
A more personal high point in this match was running out Angelo Mathews for 99 in the Sri Lankan
first innings. He played the ball to fine leg and turned for a second run in a bid to get to his century. I
managed to get to the ball quickly and sent in a flat powerful throw, which landed right on top of the
stumps. All Dhoni had to do was knock off the bails. While celebrating the dismissal I joked with my
team-mates that the old man could still field even after playing international cricket for twenty long
years!
We had played terrific cricket as a team. Each and every player had chipped in and Gary and the
support staff – Paddy Upton, our high-performance and mental-conditioning coach; Ramji Srinivasan,
our fitness trainer; Nitin Patel, our physio; Ramesh Mane and Amit Shah, our masseurs; and
Dhananjay, our computer analyst – had all played important roles in our rise to the top. For me, Test
cricket is the format that matters the most and this was undoubtedly a high point in my career. The
fact that it coincided with my twentieth anniversary in international cricket had made it even more
special.
England in India 2008
1st Test. Chennai. 11–15 December 2008
England 316 (AJ Strauss 123, MJ Prior 53*, AN Cook 52; H Singh 3–96, A Mishra 3–99) and 311–9
dec (AJ Strauss 108, PD Collingwood 108; Z Khan 3–40, I Sharma 3–57)
India 241 (MS Dhoni 53, H Singh 40, SR Tendulkar 37; A Flintoff 3–49, MS Panesar 3–65) and 387–
4 (SR Tendulkar 103*, Y Singh 85, V Sehwag 83, G Gambhir 66)
India won by 6 wickets
2nd Test. Mohali. 19–23 December 2008
India 453 (G Gambhir 179, R Dravid 136, SR Tendulkar 11 ; A Flintoff 3–54, GP Swann 3–122) and
251–7 dec (G Gambhir 97, Y Singh 86, SR Tendulkar 5)
England 302 (KP Pietersen 144, A Flintoff 62, AN Cook 50; H Singh 4–68, Z Khan 3–76) and 64–1
Match drawn
India won the series 1–0

India in New Zealand 2009
1st Test. Hamilton. 18–21 March 2009
New Zealand 279 (DL Vettori 118, JD Ryder 102; I Sharma 4–73, MM Patel 3–60) and 279 (BB
McCullum 84, DR Flynn 67, MJ Guptill 48; H Singh 6–63)
India 520 (SR Tendulkar 160 , G Gambhir 72, R Dravid 66, Z Khan 51*; CS Martin 3–98, IE O’Brien
3–103) and 39–0
India won by 10 wickets
2nd Test. Napier. 26–30 March 2009
New Zealand 619–9 dec (JD Ryder 201, LRPL Taylor 151, BB McCullum 115, DL Vettori 55, JEC
Franklin 52; I Sharma 3–95, Z Khan 3–129)
India 305 (R Dravid 83, VVS Laxman 76, SR Tendulkar 49 ; CS Martin 3–89) and 476–4 (f/o) (G
Gambhir 137, VVS Laxman 124*, SR Tendulkar 64, R Dravid 62, Y Singh 54*)
Match drawn
3rd Test. Wellington. 3–7 April 2009
India 379 (SR Tendulkar 62 , H Singh 60, MS Dhoni 52; CS Martin 4–98) and 434–7 dec (G Gambhir
167, VVS Laxman 61, R Dravid 60, MS Dhoni 56*, SR Tendulkar 9; CS Martin 3–70)
New Zealand 197 (LRPL Taylor 42; Z Khan 5–65, H Singh 3–43) and 281–8 (LRPL Taylor 107, MJ
Guptil 49, JEC Franklin 49; H Singh 4–59, SR Tendulkar 2–45, Z Khan 2–57)
Match drawn
India won the series 1–0
Sri Lanka in India 2009
1st Test. Ahmedabad. 16–20 November 2009
India 426 (R Dravid 177, MS Dhoni 110, Y Singh 68, SR Tendulkar 4 ; UWMBCA Welegedara 4–87,
M Muralitharan 3–97) and 412–4 (G Gambhir 114, SR Tendulkar 100* , V Sehwag 51, VVS
Laxman 51*)
Sri Lanka 760–7 dec (DPMD Jayawardene 275, HAPW Jayawardene 154*, TM Dilshan 112)
Match drawn
2nd Test. Kanpur. 24–27 November 2009
India 642 (G Gambhir 167, R Dravid 144, V Sehwag 131, Y Singh 67, VVS Laxman 63, SR
Tendulkar 40; HMRKB Herath 5–121)
Sri Lanka 229 (DPMD Jayawardene 47, KC Sangakkara 44; S Sreesanth 5–75) and 269 (f/o) (TT
Samaraweera 78*; H Singh 3–98, PP Ojha 2–36)
India won by an innings and 144 runs
3rd Test. Mumbai (BS). 2–6 December 2009
Sri Lanka 393 (TM Dilshan 109, AD Mathews 99, NT Paranavitana 53; H Singh 4–112, PP Ojha 3–
101) and 309 (KC Sangakkara 137, NT Paranavitana 54; Z Khan 5–72)
India 726–9 dec (V Sehwag 293, MS Dhoni 100*, M Vijay 87, R Dravid 74, VVS Laxman 62, SR
Tendulkar 53; M Muralitharan 4–195)
India won by an innings and 24 runs

India won the series 2–0