CHAPTER XIII 


THE ‘SILENT’ YEAR 

I n the silent year there were fifty-two silent Mondays when 
Gandhi did not speak. On those days, he would listen to an 
interviewer and occasionally tear off a corner of a piece of 
paper and pencil a few words in reply. Since this was not the best 
way to conduct a conversation, the weekly day of silence gave him 
some privacy. 

In 1942, I inquired of Gandhi what lay behind his day of 
silence. 

‘It happened when I was being torn to pieces,’ he explained. 
‘I was working very hard, travelling in hot trains, incessantly 
speaking at many meetings and being approached in trains and 
elsewhere by thousands of people who asked questions, made 
pleas and wished to pray with me. I wanted to rest for one day a 
week. So I instituted the day of silence. Later of course I clothed 
it with all kinds of virtues and gave it a spiritual cloak. But the 
motivation was really nothing more than that I wanted to have 
a day off.’ 

He liked to laugh at himself. Questioned further, he would have 
agreed, however, that silence offered an opportunity for spiritual 
exercise. 

Apart from the fifty-two Mondays, the ‘silent’ year was in no 
sense silent. He did not travel, he addressed no mass meetings; 
but he talked, wrote, received visitors and maintained a corres¬ 
pondence with thousands of persons in India and other countries. 

On April 1st, 1926, Lord Irwin (who later became Lord 
Halifax, Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom and British 
Ambassador to Washington) arrived in India to succeed Lord 
Reading as Viceroy. But the fateful change was not mentioned in 
Young India , nor did Gandhi seem to have noted it in any other 
way. He was still a non-co-operator working on the masses instead 
of on the Viceroy. His motto was Swaraj from within. 

One extremely important change, however, was noticeable in 
Gandhi’s attitude: he began to suspect that Britain’s policy 

258 


THE ‘SILENT’ YEAR 


militated against Hindu-Moslem friendship. ‘The government of 
India’, he wrote on August 12th, 1926, ‘is based on distrust. Dis¬ 
trust involves favouritism and favouritism must breed division. 5 
The Government appeared to prefer Moslems. 

Gandhi had thought that Hindu-Moslem amity would bring 
self-rule to India. Now he felt that Hindu-Moslem amity was 
almost impossible while the British, ‘the third party 5 , were there. 

Thus religious peace, the pre-requisite of independence, could 
only follow independence. 

This dilemma notwithstanding, Gandhi remained hopeful: 
‘The unity will come in spite of ourselves . . . Where man’s effort 
may fail God’s will succeed and His government is not based 
upon “divide and rule” policy. 5 Meanwhile, there had been 
bloody fighting between the two religious communities in several 
parts of India. 

Gandhi’s prescription was better treatment, of the Moslem 
minority by the Hindu majority and non-violence by both. 
Hindus violently accused him of being pro-Moslem. 

But the year’s fiercest controversy involved dogs. For months, 
the storm raged about the Mahatma’s head. 

Ambalal Sarabhai, the big textile millowner of Ahmedabad, 
rounded up sixty stray dogs that frequented his large industrial 
properties and had them destroyed. 

Having destroyed the dogs, Sarabhai was disturbed and shared 
his anguish with the Mahatma. ‘What else could be done?’ said 
Gandhi. 

The Ahmedabad Humanitarian Society learned of this conver¬ 
sation and turned on Gandhi. ‘Is that true?’ it demanded in a 
letter sent to the ashram. Did he say, ‘What else could be done? 

. . . And if so, what does it mean? ... 

‘When Hinduism forbids the taking of the life of any living 
being,’ the letter fumed, ‘when it declares it to be a sin, do you 
think it right to kill rabid dogs for the reason that they would 
bite human beings and by biting other dogs make them also rabid?’ 

Gandhi published the letter in Young India under the caption ‘Is 
This Humanity?’ The letter and his reply filled the entire first 
page and half the second page. Yes, it was true. He had said, 
‘What else could be done?’ and having thought it over, ‘I . . . feel 
that my reply was quite proper. . . . 


R 


259 


M.G. 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


‘Imperfect, erring mortals as we are/ he declared in explana¬ 
tion, ‘there is no course open to us but the destruction of rabid 
dogs. At times we may be faced with the unavoidable duty of 
killing a man who is found in the act of killing people. 5 

The next issue of Young India gave its front page to the same 
question under the same caption, ‘Is This Humanity? 5 The first 
article had brought a deluge of ‘angry letters 5 . Worse, people 
came to Gandhi to insult him. ‘At an hour 5 , he wrote, ‘when 
after a hard day’s work I was about to retire to bed, three friends 
invaded me, infringed the religion of non-violence in the name of 
humanity and engaged me in a discussion on it. 5 Gandhi used the 
word ‘friends’ only because he considered everybody a friend. 
One of the ‘friends’ was a Jain and he ‘betrayed anger, bitterness 
and arrogance 5 . 

Gandhi had grown up under the influence of the absolute non¬ 
violence of Jainism. ‘Many take me to be a Jain, 5 Gandhi 
declared. But Mahavira, the founder of Jainism, ‘was an incarna¬ 
tion of compassion, of non-violence. How I wish his votaries were 
votaries also of non-violence 5 . 

Gandhi stuck to his guns. ‘The multiplication of dogs is 5 , he 
wrote, ‘unnecessary. A roving dog without an owner is a danger 
to society and a swarm of them is a menace to its very existence. 5 
If people were really religious, dogs would have owners. ‘There 
is a regular science of dog-keeping in the West. . . We should 
learn it. 5 

The dog mail continued to come; ‘some of the hostile critics 
have transgressed the limits of deco'rum 5 , Gandhi asserted in the 
next Young India which devoted almost three pages to the matter. 
One man had demanded an interview and then, without permis¬ 
sion, published the substance of it in a leaflet which he was 
hawking in the streets. ‘Does he seek to teach me in this manner? 5 
Gandhi wondered. He who is angry is guilty of violence. How 
can such a man teach me non-violence? 

‘Even so, 5 Gandhi continued, ‘the hostile critics are doing me a 
service. They teach me to examine myself. They afford me an 
opportunity to see if I am free from the reaction of anger. And 
when I go to the root of their anger I find nothing but love. 5 How 
did he arrive at that strange conclusion? Because, he said, ‘They 
had attributed to me non-violence as they understand it. Now 

260 


THE ‘SILENT 5 YEAR 


they find me acting in a contrary manner and are angry with me. 

' T do not mind their outburst of anger, 5 he asserted I appreciate 
the motive behind it. I must try to reason with them patiently... 

He reasoned thus: It is a sin to feed stray dogs. ‘It is a false 
sense of compassion. It is an insult to a starving dog to throw a 
crumb at him. Roving dogs do not indicate the civilization or 
compassion of the society, they betray on the contrary the ignor¬ 
ance and lethargy of its members. The lower animals are our 
brethren. I include among them the lion and the tiger. We do 
not know how to live with these carnivorous beasts and poisonous 
reptiles because of our ignorance. When man learns better he 
will learn to befriend even these. Today he does not even know 
how to befriend a man of a different religion or from a different 
country. 5 

Gandhi probably suspected that some of the dog-lovers would 
howl less if sixty Moslems or Englishmen had been killed. 

The humane man, Gandhi wrote, would finance a society to 
keep the stray dogs; or he would harbour some himself. But if the 
State did not care for them and if householders would not keep 
them, the dogs had to be destroyed. ‘The dogs in India 5 , Gandhi 
mourned, ‘are today in as bad a plight as the decrepit animals 
and men in the land. 5 

(Then why not kill the decrepit cows?) 

‘Taking life may be a duty, 5 Gandhi proceeded. ‘Suppose a 
man runs amok and goes furiously about, sword in hand and 
killing any one who comes his way and no one dares to capture 
him alive. Any one who dispatched this lunatiq will earn the 
gratitude of the community. . . .’ 

Many correspondents demanded personal replies and threat¬ 
ened to attack him if they got none. He said he could not answer 
the mountain of letters that had reached him on this subject, but 
he would continue to deal with them in his magazines. Four 
more issues of Young India gave several columns each to the dog 
problem. In one Ahmedabad hospital, Gandhi reported, 1117 
cases of hydrophobia had been treated in 1925 and 990 in 1926. 
Again he urged India to follow the West in this matter; ‘If any 
one thinks that the people in the West are innocent of humanity he 
is sadly mistaken. 5 And then comes a sting: ‘The ideal of humanity 
m the West is perhaps lower, but their practice of it is very much 

261 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


more thorough than ours. We rest content with a lofty ideal and 
are slow or lazy in its practice. We are wrapped in deep darkness, 
as is evident from our paupers, cattle and other animals. They are 
eloquent of our irreligion rather than of religion.’ 

His pro-dog attitude showed he was under Western influence, 
correspondents charged. Patiently he reasoned with the furious. 
He condemned some features of Western civilization and had 
learned from others, he told them. Moreover, opinions should be 
judged by content not by their source. 

‘Letters on this subject are still pouring in,’ Gandhi announced 
in the third month of the controversy, but since their only con¬ 
tribution was venom he ignored them. 

The dog fight established the record for heat in the ‘silent year’. 
But a little calf also precipitated a storm. A young heifer in the 
ashram fell ill. Gandhi tended it and watched it suffer and decided 
it ought to be put to death. Kasturbai objected strenuously. 
Then she must go and nurse the animal, Gandhi suggested. She 
did and the animal’s torment convinced her. In Gandhi’s 
presence, a doctor administered an injection which killed the 
heifer. The protest mail was heavy and fierce. Gandhi insisted 
he had done right. 

Frank sex discussions filled many Letters to the Editor. ‘My 
correspondence with young men on their private conduct’, 
Gandhi wrote, ‘is increasing.’ They asked his advice. 

Taking advantage of relative leisure in the ‘silent year’, Gandhi 
read Havelock Ellis, Forel, Paul Bureau’s Toward Moral Bank¬ 
ruptcy and other European authorities on family and sex. His 
interest in the sex life of Indians always remained high. He 
believed that early and frequent sexual intercourse had a debilitat¬ 
ing effect on Indians; he understood the implications of the rapid 
increase in his country’s population. (In the 1940s, the popula¬ 
tion of India was increasing five million each year.) He wrapped 
this problem too in a spiritual cloak and, taking a leaf out of 
sacred Hindu books, advocated chastity for religious reasons. 
But the biological and economic aspects of the situation did not 
escape him. 

In many articles that came from his pen, or pencil, in ‘silent’ 
1926 and often thereafter, Gandhi consistently opposed the use of 
contraceptives; they were a Western vice. But he did not oppose 

262 


THE ‘SILENT’ YEAR 


birth control. He always advocated birth control. The birth 
control he favoured, however, was through self-control, through 
the power of the mind over the body. ‘Self-control’, he wrote, ‘is 
the surest and only method of regulating the birth rate.’ Without 
such discipline, he contended, man was no better than a brute. 
He maintained that abstinence for ever or for long periods was 
neither physically nor psychologically harmful. Gandhi and his 
closest ashram associates practised Brahmacharya, complete 
continence; people in general, he said, might indulge in sex for 
purposes of procreation, but not to gratify animal passion. He 
denied ‘that sexual indulgence for its own sake is a human 
necessity’. 

A correspondent wrote: ‘In my case, three weeks seem to be the 
utmost period of beneficial abstention. At the end of that period I 
usually feel a heaviness of body, a restlessness both of body and 
mind, leading to bad temper. Relief is obtained either by normal 
coitus or nature herself coming to the rescue by an involuntary 
discharge. Far from feeling weak or nervous, I become the next 
morning calm and light and am able to proceed to my work 
with added gusto.’ Many similar cases were brought to Gandhi’s 
notice. 

Dipping into his personal experience, Gandhi said in reply, 
‘Ability to retain and assimilate the vital liquid is a matter of 
long training.’ Once achieved, it strengthens body and mind. 
The vital liquid, ‘capable of producing such a wonderful being as 
man, cannot but, when properly conserved, be transmuted into 
matchless energy and strength’. 

Realistically, in Harijan magazine of September 14th, 1935, 
Gandhi wrote, ‘Assuming that birth control by artificial aids is 
justifiable under certain conditions, it seems to be utterly im¬ 
practicable of application among the millions.’ India was poor 
and ignorant because she was too poor and ignorant to apply 
birth control by contraceptives. Therefore, Gandhi urged other 
means of reducing the population. Contraceptives led to over- 
indulgence with the result that a ‘society that has already become 
enervated through a variety of causes will become still further 
enervated by the adoption of artificial methods’. 

Gandhi endeavoured to delay the marriage of his own sons. 
Times without number, he attacked the institution of child marri- 

263 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


age: ‘Early marriages are a fruitful source of life, adding to the 
population . . He conceded, of course, that the earth should 
produce enough to support all who are born on it, but, as a reli¬ 
gious man with a strong practical sense, he saw the necessity of 
population limitation. ‘If’, he wrote to Charles Freer Andrews, 
‘I could find a way of stopping procreation in a civil and voluntary 
manner whilst India remains in the present miserable state I 
would do so today.’ The only manner he countenanced was 
mental discipline. To the strong and saintly he proposed lifelong 
Bramacharya; to the mass, he proposed late marriage, in the mid¬ 
twenties if possible and self-control thereafter. In the ashram, the 
minimum marriage age for girls was twenty-one. He recognized 
human frailties but insisted that unspiced food, the right kind of 
clothes, the right kind of work, walking, gymnastics, unspiced 
literature, prayer, pure films (Indian films to this day prohibit 
kissing on the screen) and devotion to God would relieve the 
tension in modern life and conduce to the sexual self-control 
which most persons unthinkingly consider unnatural. Gandhi’s 
writings on these matters, though they appeared in his small- 
circulation Young India and Gujarat Navajivan , were, like almost 
everything he said, reprinted in the entire Indian press. 

A cognate question attracted Gandhi’s special attention during 
the ‘silent’ year: child widows. According to the official British 
census for 1921, which he cited, there were in India 11,892 
widows less than five years old; 85,037 widows between the ages 
of five and ten; and 232,147 widows between ten and fifteen; 
together 329,076 widows under sixteen. 

‘The existence of girl widows’, Gandhi exclaimed, ‘is a blot 
upon Hinduism.’ Parents would marry their baby daughters to 
baby sons of other families, or even to old men and if the husband 
died, either in infancy or of senility, the widow could not, under 
Hindu law, remarry. Defiantly, Gandhi declared, ‘I consider 
remarriage of virgin widows not only desirable but the bounden 
duty of all parents who happen to have such widowed daughters.’ 
Some of these youthful widows were no longer virgins but pros¬ 
titutes. ‘The remedy in anticipation,’ he wrote, ‘is to prevent early 
marriages.’ To those bigoted Hindus who, loyal to every immoral 
custom, defended the proscription against second marriage of 
child widows, Gandhi retorted, ‘They were never married at alt.’ 

264 


THE ‘SILENT’ YEAR 


The wedding of a child is a sacrilege, not a sacred rite. His deepest 
feeling about child widows was expressed in one sweet sentence, 
‘They are strangers to love.’ Chastity had to be the deliberate and 
voluntary act of a mature person, not the imposition of cruel 
parents on children. Gandhi wanted all human beings to know 
love. But a widow, or widower, who had married as an adult 
should not remarry, he said; they had tasted love. This proscrip¬ 
tion constituted another birth-control technique. 

Protection of the cow, protection of Indians in South Africa 
where race hate was again rampant, prohibition and world peace 
also excited Gandhi’s reforming zeal during his Sabbatical year. 

Occasionally, some proverbs dropped from his pen: ‘Any 
secrecy hinders the real spirit of democracy’; ‘If we could erase 
the “Fs” and “Mine’s” from religion, politics, economics, etc., 
we should be free and bring heaven on earth.’ Occasionally, too, 
he made brief excursions into religion, but there was remarkably 
little discussion in print about God, metaphysics and kindred 
topics. One thought he did leave with his readers: ‘Rationalists 
are admirable beings,’ he wrote in an article on the efficacy of 
prayer; ‘rationalism is a hideous monster when it claims for itself 
omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stick and stone believing it to 
be God ... I do not know a single rationalist who has never done 
anything in simple faith . . . But we all know millions of human 
beings living their more or less orderly lives because of their child¬ 
like faith in the Maker of us all. That very faith is a prayer ... I 
plead not for the suppression of reason, but for due recognition 
of that in us which sanctions reason itself.’ 

‘Mankind cannot live by logic alone, but also needs poetry,’ he 
once wrote. Gandhi frequently left the field of sensory perception 
and rational mental processes for that middle zone of faith, in¬ 
stinct, intuition and love, but he never wandered away from it 
into the rarefied realm of mystic messages, miracles, hallucinations, 
prophecy and other unaccountable manifestations of mind and 
body. ‘Whilst he did not rule out the authenticity of supra- 
sensuous phenomena,’ says one of his closest disciples, ‘he very 
strongly disapproved of pursuing them.’ He judged men and 
events by the criteria of cold facts and invited others to judge him 
rationally. He did not wish to influence people by mystic radia- 

265 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

tion. His estimate of himself was severely sober. His work was 
practical and its goal was practical success. He told Muriel Lester, 
an Englishwoman, that he ‘never heard a voice, saw a vision, or 
had some recognized experience of God’. No mystic experience 
had been vouchsafed to him. His guide was reason on the wing 
of faith. 

Gandhi’s reputation abroad was spreading. Romain Rolland, 
the French author, wrote a book about him. Many invitations 
reached him, especially from America, to come on a visit. He 
rejected them. ‘My reason is simple,’ he explained, ‘I have not 
enough self-confidence to warrant my going to America. I have 
no doubt that the movement for non-violence has come to stay. 
I have no doubt whatsoever about its final success. But I cannot 
give an ocular demonstration of the efficacy of non-violence. 
Till then, I feel I must continue to preach from the narrower 
Indian platform.’ 

Two American women, Mrs. Kelly and Mrs. Langeloth, re¬ 
presenting the Fellowship of Faith, the League of Neighbours and 
the Union of East and West, actually came to Sabarmati to 
invite the Mahatma. First they cross-examined him: ‘Is it true 
that you object to railways, steamships and other means of speedy 
locomotion?’ 

‘It is and it is not,’ Gandhi replied patiently, for the thousandth 
time, and urged them to read his Indian Home-Rule. More conversa¬ 
tion of the same kind followed. He was afraid, in the end, that 
they did not understand his attitude to the machine and speed, 
because they had to catch a train and left early. 

Gandhi was in no hurry either personally or politically, and sat 
still for a year. He seemed to enjoy his 1926 moratorium from 
politics. It gave his body time to rest and his spirit a chance to 
roam. He played more with the children. He participated in an 
ashram spinning contest. He and Kasturbai, the oldest members 
of the community, were beaten by the youngest, their grand¬ 
daughter. The announcement evoked great hilarity. 

He cultivated his friends, Rajagopalachari, the lawyer with the 
razor-edge brain; Mahadev Desai, who was a secretary and an 
apostle; and ‘Charlie’ Andrews, two years Gandhi’s junior, whom 
Gandhi called ‘The Good Samaritan’. He ‘is more than a blood 
brother to me’, Gandhi said. ‘I do not think that I can claim a 

266 


THE ‘SILENT’ YEAR 

deeper attachment to anyone than to Mr. Andrews.’ The Hindu 
saint had found no better saint than Andrews. The Christian 
missionary had found no better Christian than Gandhi. Perhaps 
the Indian and Englishman were brothers because they were truly 
religious. Perhaps religion brought them together because 
nationality did not separate them. ‘Each country’, Andrews said, 
speaking of England and India, ‘has become equally dear to me.’ 
Gandhi declared, ‘I would not hurt England or Germany to serve 
India.’ In a letter to Andrews dated Calcutta, December 27th, 
1928, Gandhi wrote, ‘The most forward nationalists in India have 
not been haters of the West or of England or in any other way 
narrow . . . but they have been internationalists under the guise 
of nationalism.’ 

Where nationalism does not divide, religion can make men 
brothers. 


267 


 

