CHAPTER II 


INDIA IN SUSPENSE 

G andhi had been saying that he wanted to live a hundred 
and twenty-five years but without becoming ‘an animated 
corpse, a burden to one’s relations and society’. How would 
he keep physically fit? He first explained how he had kept physic¬ 
ally fit. In 1901 he threw away the medicine bottle and substituted 
nature cures and regular habits of eating, drinking and sleeping. 
More important, he developed ‘detachment of mind’, the key to 
longevity. ‘Everyone,’ Gandhi said, ‘has a right and should 
desire to live 125 years while performing service without an eye 
to result.’ Dedication to service and renunciation of the fruits 
thereof are ‘an ineffable joy’, a ‘nectar’ which sustains life. It 
leaves ‘no room for worry or impatience’. Egoism is the killer; 
unselfishness the life preserver. 

The Mahatma now adopted an additional cause: nature cure. 
He called it his ‘latest born’; the older children — khadi, village 
industries, the development of a national language, food-growing, 
independence for India, freedom for Indians and world peace — 
continued to receive his energetic care. For the new baby, a 
trust was set up with Gandhi as one of three trustees. Dr. Dinshah 
Mehta, Gandhi’s physician, had a nature-cure clinic in the city of 
Poona and it was therefore agreed, as the trust’s first venture, to 
expand the clinic into a nature-cure university. 

But one silent Monday Gandhi abruptly decided to abandon 
the project. It ‘dawned upon me’, he confessed, ‘that I was a fool 
to think that I could ever hope to make an institute for the poor 
in a town’. He had to carry nature cure to the poor and not 
expect the poor to come to him. This. mistake had a moral: 
‘Never take anything for gospel truth even if it comes from a 
Mahatma unless it appeals to both . . . head and heart.’ Gandhi 
disliked automatic obedience. 

He would start nature-cure work in a village; ‘that is real India,’ 
he wrote, ‘my India, for which I live’. He did so immediately. 
He settled down for a short while in Uruli, a village of three 

444 



INDIA IN SUSPENSE 


thousand inhabitants on the Poona-Sholapur railway line with 
plenty of water, a good climate, fruit farms, a telegraph and post 
office, but no telephone. 

The first day, thirty peasants appeared at the nature cure 
centre. Gandhi himself examined six. In each case, he prescribed 
the same thing: the continuous recitation of God’s name, sun 
baths, friction and hip baths,- cow’s milk, buttermilk, fruit juices 
and plenty of water. The reciting of God’s name, however, should 
be more than lip movement; it must absorb the entire being 
throughout the recitation and throughout life. ‘All mental and 
physical ailments,’ Gandhi explained simply, ‘are due to one 
common cause. It is therefore but natural that there should be a 
common remedy.’ Almost everyone is sick in body or mind, he 
said. Repeating ‘Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama’ while 
intensively concentrating on godliness, goodness, service and 
selflessness paves the way for the remedial functions of mudpacks, 
sitz baths and massage. 

Gandhi was himself a proof of the power of mind and mood 
over matter. 

Gandhi was occupied with health throughout his entire adult 
life and indeed in his youth when he nursed his dying father. He 
doctored everyone within reach. Pain in others pained him. He 
was capable of boundless compassion. 

The loving mother fervently yet vainly wishes she could take 
her child’s illness upon herself. Gandhi’s fasts were suffering self- 
inflicted in the hope of alleviating the sufferings of untouchables, 
strikers, Hindus and Moslems. He did penance for those who 
inflicted pain. 

The inner compulsion to relieve misery and assuage pain comes 
very close to being Gandhi’s deepest urge. It is the kin of love, 
the root of non-violence, the spur to service. Gandhi believed his 
mission was to heal. He was India’s doctor. The India of the 
last two years of his life gave him ample work. 

There was famine in the land, food and clothing famine. ‘Grain 
and cloth dealers must not hoard, must not speculate,’ he wrote 
on February 17th, 1946. ‘Food should be grown on all cultivable 
areas wherever water is or is made available . . . All ceremonial 
functions should be stopped. . . .* 

He had been wandering over Bengal, Assam and Madras. In 

445 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


one locality, six hundred thousand people came to a meeting. 
‘Grow More Food 5 was his slogan. ‘Spin,’ he begged. ‘Every 
pint of water, whether from bathing and ablutions or from the 
kitchen should be turned into backyard vegetable beds, 5 he told 
townspeople. ‘Vegetables could be grown in earthen pots and even 
in old discarded tins. 5 

Hunger raised the question of the nation’s high birth rate. ‘Let 
me say, 5 he stated, fihat propagation of the race rabbit-wise must 
undoubtedly be stopped, but not so as to bring greater evils in its 
train. It should be stopped by methods which in themselves 
ennoble the race, 5 by ‘the sovereign remedy of self-control. 5 

Shortages provoked looting of shops and other violent outbursts. 
Heavy rioting took place in Bombay. In Calcutta, Delhi and other 
cities mobs engaged in arson, compelled passers-by to shout slo¬ 
gans, and forced Englishmen to remove their hats. Gandhi 
reprimanded them severely. Indian sailors in the British navy in 
the harbour of Bombay mutinied and were only with difficulty 
persuaded by Congress leaders to desist. 

‘Now that it seems we are coming into our own, 5 Gandhi wrote 
on February ioth, 1946, f indiscipline and hooliganism 5 , which 
were increasing, ‘ought to go, and calmness, rigid discipline, co¬ 
operation and goodwill must take their place ... I hug the hope 5 , 
he continued, ‘that when real responsibility comes to the people 
and the dead weight of a foreign army of occupation is removed, 
we shall be natural, dignified and restrained. . . . 

‘Let me affirm that I love the Englishman as well as the Indian, 5 
he wrote in March. 

Prime Minister Attlee announced that a British Cabinet mission, 
consisting of Lord Pethick-Lawrence, the Secretary of State for 
India; Sir Stafford Gripps, President of the Board of Trade; and 
Albert V. Alexander, First Lord of the Admiralty, were coming 
to India to settle the terms of liberation. ‘Emphatically, 5 Gandhi 
affirmed, ‘it betrays want of foresight to disbelieve British declara¬ 
tions and precipitate a quarrel in anticipation. Is the official 
deputation coming to deceive a great nation? It is neither manly 
nor womanly to think so. 5 

The Cabinet Mission arrived from England in New Delhi on 
March 23rd and immediately began to interview Indian leaders. 
Gandhi came to Delhi to meet the British ministers and ‘at my 

446 


INDIA IN SUSPENSE 


request,’ writes Pethick-Lawrence, ‘in spite of the trying weather 
conditions in Delhi during the ensuing months, he remained in 
touch with us and with the Congress Working Committee during 
the whole progress of the negotiations’. Gandhi stayed in the 
untouchables’ slums where Cripps, Pethick-Lawrence and 
Alexander, as well as many Indians, visited him regularly. Some¬ 
times, too, Gandhi went to 2 Willingdon Crescent, the house 
occupied by the Mission, and on one occasion, by arrangement, he 
encountered Pethick-Lawrence on his evening walk and thus 
avoided the publicity that attended every one of Gandhi’s acts. 

After weeks of goings and comings with no definite result, the 
Cabinet Mission invited the Congress and the Moslem League to 
send four delegates each to a conference in Simla. Gandhi was 
not a delegate but he made himself available in the summer 
capital for consultation. At a subsequent stage Nehru and Jinnah 
wrestled with the issues privately. There was no agreement. The 
two Indian parties did not wish to accept the onus of devising a 
plan or of agreeing with one another. 

Finally, Gandhi told the Cabinet Mission to suggest a plan to 
the Indian parties. 

The Cabinet Mission’s plan, published on May 16th, 1946, was 
Britain’s proposal for the liquidation of British power in India. 
‘Whether you like the Cabinet delegation’s announcement or 
not,’ Gandhi told his prayer meeting that day, ‘it is going to be 
the most momentous one in the history of India and therefore 
requires careful study.’ 

Gandhi pondered the announcement for four days and then 
stated that after ‘searching examination . . . my conviction abides 
that it is the best document the British government could have 
produced in the circumstances’. 

Rejecting a facile and popular Indian charge, Gandhi said in 
Harijan of May 26th, 1946, ‘The Congress and the Moslem League 
did not, could not agree. We would err grievously if at this time we 
foolishly satisfy ourselves that the differences are a British creation.’ 

The British government’s ‘one purpose’, the Mahatma said, 
‘is to end British rule as early as can be’. 

‘Voluminous evidence’, the Cabinet mission’s statement 
declared, ‘has shown an almost universal desire, outside the 
supporters of the Moslem League, for the unity of India.’ 

447 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Nevertheless, ‘We were greatly impressed by the very genuine 
and acute anxiety of the Moslems lest they should find themselves 
subjected to a perpetual Hindu-majority rule. This has become 
so strong and widespread amongst the Moslems that it cannot be 
allayed by mere paper safeguards. If there is to be internal peace 
in India it must be secured by measures which will insure to the 
Moslems a control in all matters vital to their culture, religion and 
economic and other interests.’ 

The Mission therefore examined ‘closely and impartially the 
possibility of a partition of India’. 

What was the result? 

On the basis of statistics given in the statement, the Cabinet 
Mission proved that in the north-western area of Pakistan the non- 
Moslem minority would constitute 37.93 per cent, and in the north¬ 
eastern area it would amount to 48.31 per cent, while twenty 
million Moslems would remain outside Pakistan as a minority in 
the other India. ‘These figures show’, the statement said, ‘that 
the setting up of a separate sovereign State of Pakistan on the 
lines claimed by the Moslem League would not solve the com¬ 
munal minority problem.’ 

The Mission then considered whether a smaller Pakistan, which 
excluded non-Moslem areas, was feasible. ‘Such a Pakistan’, the 
statement noted, ‘is regarded by the Moslem League as quite 
impracticable.’ It would have necessitated the division of the 
Punjab, Bengal and Assam between the two new states, whereas 
Jinnah demanded those three provinces in their entirety. ‘We 
ourselves’, the Ministers affirmed, ‘are also convinced that any 
solution which involves a radical partition of the Punjab and 
Bengal, as this would do, would be contrary to the wishes of a 
very large percentage of the inhabitants of these Provinces. Bengal 
and the Punjab each has its own common language and a long 
history and tradition. Moreover, any division of the Punjab would 
of necessity divide the Sikhs, leaving substantial bodies of Sikhs on 
both sides of the boundary.’ 

The division of India, the Mission said, would weaken the 
country’s defences and violently tear in two its communications 
and transport systems. ‘Finally there is the geographical fact that 
the two halves of the proposed Pakistan State are separated by 
some seven hundred miles and the communications between 

448 


INDIA IN SUSPENSE 

them both in war and peace would be dependent on the goodwill 
of Hindustan. . . . 

‘We are therefore unable to advise the British government’, the 
statement announced, ‘that the power which at present resides in 
British hands should be handed over to two entirely separate 
sovereign States.’ 

Instead, the British Ministers recommended a united India, 
embracing both British India and the native states, with one 
federal government to deal with foreign affairs, defence and 
communications. In the national legislature, a majority of those 
voting and a majority of the Hindus as well as a majority of the 
Moslems voting would be required to decide any major com¬ 
munal or religious issue. 

Newly elected provincial legislatures would elect the members 
of a national Constituent Assembly. It would draft India’s 
constitution. 

Meanwhile, the Cabinet mission announced, Lord Waved would 
proceed with the formation of an interim or provisional government. 

In a peroration, the Cabinet statement declared that the Indian 
people now had ‘the opportunity of complete independence . . . 
in the shortest time and with the least danger of internal disturb¬ 
ance and conflict’. 

That same day, May 16th, 1946, Cripps, Pethick-Lawrence and 
Waved, speaking on the radio, explained and extolled the plan. 
Cripps called attention to the danger of nationwide famine and 
the need of preventing a breakdown of administrative machinery. 
‘Let no one doubt for one moment our intentions,’ he begged. 
Pethick-Lawrence addressed his audience as ‘a great people’. 
This term had political significance, for the Moslem leaders always 
spoke of ‘peoples’. He pleaded with the Moslems to accept the 
plan; it gave them the advantages of a Pakistan without its 
disadvantages. Waved spoke of the necessity of maintaining the 
union of India and closed with a verse from Longfellow: 

Thou too, sail on, O Ship of State, 

Sail on, O Union, strong and great, 

Humanity with ad its fears, 

With ad the hopes of future years 
Is hanging breathless on thy Fate. 

449 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Jinnah criticized the Cabinet Mission on May 21st. He insisted 
that Pakistan was the only solution and deplored the ‘common¬ 
place and exploded arguments aimed at it by Pethick-Lawrence, 
Cripps and Alexander ... It seems’, he charged, ‘that this was 
done by the Mission simply to appease and placate the Congress’. 
Jinnah said he would have preferred a Union with no Union 
legislature and an executive branch with an equal.number of 
Moslems and Hindus. If there was to be a national legislature, it 
too should, he felt, consist of as many representatives from 
Pakistan as from Hindustan; and ‘in regard to any matter of a 
controversial nature’, a three-fourths majority would be necessary 
in the executive and the legislature. All these ideas were ignored 
by the British ministers, he complained. Small wonder. They 
would have made government impossible. 

On June 4th, nevertheless, the Moslem League accepted the 
Cabinet Mission’s plan. 

Everything depended on what the Congress party would do. 

The Congress Working Committee withdrew to Mussoorie, a 
summer resort in the hills, to escape the debilitating heat and 
suffocating dust storms of Delhi, and took Gandhi with them. 

India’s eyes were on Mussoorie. The Working Committee 
deliberated with Gandhi. The meetings were more fateful than 
they knew. 

Foreign correspondents followed Gandhi to Mussoorie. ‘What 
would you do if you were dictator of India for a day?’ one of them 
asked. 

If the journalist had expected Gandhi’s answer to contain some 
hint of the long-delayed Congress decision, he was disappointed. 
‘I would not accept it,’ Gandhi replied, but if he did he would 
spend the day cleaning out the hovels of the Harijans in New 
Delhi and converting the Viceroy’s palace into a hospital. ‘Why 
does the Viceroy need such a big house?’ he exclaimed. 

‘Well, sir,’ the journalist persisted, ‘suppose they continue your 
dictatorship for a second day?’ 

‘The second day,’ Gandhi said with a laugh, ‘would be a pro¬ 
longation of the first.’ This provoked general gaiety among the 
Indians present. 

Still no word of the Congress response to the Cabinet Mission’s 
proposal! 


45° 


INDIA IN SUSPENSE 


On June 8th, refreshed by the pine-scented breezes that blew 
down from the cool, wooded slopes, Gandhi returned in a car to 
New Delhi where the Congress deliberations would be continued. 
Rajagopalachari, no longer a member of the Working Committee 
(nor was Gandhi), had come from Madras to Delhi to urge 
acceptance of the British plan. 

A week passed and still no word from Congress on whether it 
would accept or reject the Cabinet Mission’s proposal. 

On June 16th Lord Wavell announced that Congress and the 
Moslem League had failed to agree on the composition of a 
provisional government and he was therefore appointing fourteen 
Indians to posts in that government. 

Congress now had to answer two questions: to join or not to 
join the provisional government; to enter or not to enter the 
Constituent Assembly and draft a new constitution for a free 
united India. 


FF 


M.G. 


451 


 

