CHAPTER X 


THE LAST ACT 

T h e first day after the fast Gandhi was carried to prayers in 
a chair. In his speech, which was only faintly audible, he 
reported that an official of the Hindu Mahasabha; which 
believed in Hindu supremacy and was the parent of the militant 
anti-Moslem R.S.S., had repudiated the Delhi peace pledge. 
Gandhi said he was sorry. 

The second day he again had to be carried to prayers. In the 
course of his usual remarks, he declared he hoped to recuperate 
rapidly and then go to Pakistan to pursue the mission of peace. 

At question time, a man urged Gandhi to proclaim himself a 
reincarnation of God. ‘Sit down and be quiet/ Gandhi replied 
with a tired smile. 

While Gandhi was speaking, the noise of an explosion was heard. 
‘What is it?’ he asked. ‘I don’t know.’ The audience was agitated. 

i j 

‘Don’t worry about it/ he said. ‘Listen to me.’ 

A hand-made bomb had been thrown at the Mahatma from the 
nearby garden wall. 

The next day Gandhi, having walked to the prayer meeting, 
told the worshippers that congratulations had poured in on him 
for remaining unruffled during the incident. He said he deserved 
no praise; he had thought it was military practice. ‘I would 
deserve praise,’ he asserted, ‘only if I fell as a result of such an 
explosion and yet retained a smile on my face and no malice 
against the doer. No one should look down on the misguided 
youth who had thrown the bomb. He probably looks upon me 
as an enemy of Hinduism.’ 

The young man, Gandhi continued, should realize that ‘those 
who differ with him are not necessarily evil’. He urged the 
supporters of such young people to desist from their activity. 
‘This is not the way to save Hinduism. Hinduism can only be 
saved by my method.’ 

Sikhs visited Gandhi and assured him that the would-be assail¬ 
ant was not a Sikh. ‘What does it matter/ Gandhi asked, ‘whether 

539 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

he was a Sikh or a Hindu or a Moslem? I wish all perpetrators 
well, 5 

An illiterate old woman had grappled with the grenade- 
thrower and held him till the police came. Gandhi commended 
The unlettered sister on her simple bravery 5 . He told the Inspector 
General of Police not to molest the young man. Instead, they 
should try to convert him to right thinking and right doing. Nor 
should the worshippers be angry with the ‘miscreant 5 . ‘You should 
pity him, 5 Gandhi said. 

The young man’s name was Madan Lai. He was a refugee 
from the Punjab, had found shelter in a mosque in Delhi and been 
evicted when the police, under pressure of Gandhi’s wishes, 
commenced clearing Moslem places of worship. 

‘I had seen with my own eyes horrible things in Pakistan, 5 
Madan Lai testified at his trial. ‘I had also been an eye-witness 
to the shooting down of Hindus in Punjab towns and in Delhi by 
troops from the south. 5 

Aroused, Madan Lai had joined a group of men who were 
plotting to kill Gandhi. When the grenade failed to reach its 
target and Madan Lai was arrested, his fellow conspirator, 
Nathuram Vinayak Godse, came to Delhi. Godse, age thirty-five, 
was the editor and publisher of a Hindu Mahasabha weekly in 
Poona, in Tilak’s Maratha country, and he was a high-degree, 
Ghitpawan Brahman. 

Subsequently, Godse, Madan Lai and seven others were tried 
together. The trial lasted more than six months. Among other 
things, Madan Lai said he was angered by the Indian Union’s 
payment of 550,000,000 rupees to Pakistan. This exasperated 

Godse. 

‘I sat brooding intensely on the atrocities perpetrated on 
Hinduism and its dark and deadly future if left to face Islam out¬ 
side and Gandhi inside, 5 Godse testified, ‘and ... I decided all of 
a sudden to take the extreme step against Gandhi. 5 

The success of Gandhi’s last fast especially infuriated Godse. He 
resented the Mahatma’s insistence that refugees be evacuated 
from the mosques. He was bitter because no demands were made 
on the Moslems. 

Godse began hovering around Birla House. He wore a khaki 
jacket. In a pocket of the jacket he kept a small pistol. 

540 


THE LAST ACT 


Gandhi’s prayer meeting on Sunday, January 25th, 1948, had 
an unusually heavy attendance. Gandhi was pleased. He told the 
people that they should bring straw mats or thick khadi to sit on 
because the ground in winter was cold and damp. It gladdened 
his heart, he continued, to be told by Hindu and Moslem friends 
that Delhi had experienced £ a reuniofl of hearts’. In view of this 
improvement, could not every Hindu and Sikh who came to 
prayers bring along ‘at least one Moslem’? To Gandhi this would 
be concrete evidence of brotherhood. 

But Hindus like Madan Lai and Godse and their ideological 
sponsors were incensed by the presence of Moslems at Hindu 
services and the reading of selections from the Koran. Moreover, 
they seemed to hope that the death of Gandhi might be the first 
step towards the violent reunification of India. They wished, by 
removing him, to make the Moslems defenceless, little realizing 
that his assassination would have the opposite effect by showing 
the country how dangerous and undisciplined extreme anti- 
Moslems could be. 

Despite the relaxation that followed his fast, Gandhi knew the 
great difficulties facing the new, inexperienced Government. He 
had lost confidence in the ability of Congress. Much, very much, 
now depended on the two top government leaders: Prime Minister 
Nehru and Deputy Prime Minister Patel. They did not always 
see eye to eye. They were temperamental opposites. There had 
been friction between them. It worried Gandhi. Indeed, things 
had come to such a pass that Gandhi wondered whether Nehru 
and Patel could work together in the Government. Forced to 
make a choice, the Mahatma might have preferred Nehru. He 
appreciated Patel as an old friend and skilled administrator, but 
loved Nehru and was sure of his equal friendship for Hindus and 
Moslems. Patel had been suspected of political pro-Hinduism. 

In the end, Gandhi decided that Nehru and Patel were indis¬ 
pensable to one another. The Government would be seriously 
weakened if it lost either. Gandhi accordingly wrote Nehru a 
note in English saying he and Patel ‘must hold together’ for the 
good of the country. At 4 p.m. on January 30th, Patel came to 
see Gandhi in Birla House to hear the same message. 

At 5.05, Gandhi, troubled because he was late, left Patel and, 
leaning his arms on Abha and Manu, hurried to the prayer 

54i 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


ground. Nathuram Godse was in the front row of the congregation, his hand in his pocket gripping the small pistol. He had no 
personal hatred of Gandhi, Godse said at his trial, at which he was 
sentenced to be hanged: ‘Before I fired the shots I actually wished 
him well and bowed to him in reverence.’ 

In response to Godse’s obeisance and the reverential bows of 
other members of the congregation, Gandhi touched his palms 
together, smiled and blessed them. At that moment, Godse pulled 
the trigger. Gandhi fell, and died murmuring, ‘Oh, God.’ 
