CHAPTER IX 


THE LAST FAST 

R ichard symonds, a British friend who had met 
Gandhi in Bengal while doing relief work there, fell ill with 
L typhoid in New Delhi in November 1947. Gandhi invited 
the patient to Birla House. 

Once the doctor advised brandy for the sick man. The house 
was searched and a bottle of brandy found; on being asked, 
Gandhi, a strict prohibitionist, said he had no objection to 
it being given to Symonds. He took the same attitude subse¬ 
quently when sherry was recommended to Symonds. 

On the approach of Christmas, Gandhi asked a group of 
Indian Christian girls to decorate Symonds’s room with holly and 
gay festoons; on Christmas Eve, at the Mahatma’s suggestion, the 
girls came and sang carols. 

Gandhi spent at least a few minutes and often much longer, 
with the patient each day. His only interference in the cure was 
to urge the application of mud packs to the abdomen. For the 
rest, his chief contribution to the restoration of the Englishman’s 
health was to make him laugh whenever he was with him. 

Symonds had been to Kashmir and wanted to discuss the situa¬ 
tion with Gandhi, but except on the Mahatma’s day of silence he 
never got a chance, for Gandhi entertained Symonds with funny 
stories and jokes from the moment he came into the room till the 
moment he left. The Kashmir problem was too grave for a 
patient. 

Kashmir, including the beautiful Vale of Kashmir, is at the top 
of the world,, in northernmost India. Its Hindu maharaja had 
ruled his 800,000 Hindu subjects and 3,200,000 Moslem subjects 
with equal disregard of their welfare arid freedom. In September 
1947 the Pakistan government abetted incursions into Kashmir 
by the wild warriors of the tribal area between the north-west 
frontier and Afghanistan; subsequently Pakistan regular troops 
invaded Kashmir. Alarmed and helpless, the maharaja asked 
that his state be admitted into the Indian Union. On October 

526 


THE LAST FAST 


29th the accession was officially announced, and the maharaja 
thereupon appointed as his prime minister Sheik Abdulla, a 
Moslem, whom he had held in prison for protracted periods. 
Simultaneously, the New Delhi authorities rushed troops to 
Kashmir by air and road. Without the airlift, Kashmir would 
have been overrun and annexed by Pakistan. Soon Kashmir and 
neighbouring Jammu, likewise the realm of the maharaja, became 
the scene of a small war between India and Pakistan which 
seriously drained the financial resources, patience and military 
establishments of both Dominions. Moslems called it ‘Holy 
War’. 

In a Christmas Day broadcast, Gandhi approved of India’s 
action in sending troops to Kashmir to repel the tribal invaders. 
He condemned suggestions to partition the State between India 
and Pakistan. He regretted the fact that Nehru had submitted 
the dispute to the United Nations. At the U.N., he told Horace 
Alexander, the British pacifist, considerations of international 
‘power politics’ rather than merit would determine the attitude 
of countries towards the Kashmir issue. Gandhi therefore urged 
India and Pakistan to ‘come to an amicable settlement with the 
assistance of impartial Indians’; that, he said, would ‘enable the 
Indian Union’s representation to the U.N. to be withdrawn with 
dignity’. If direct negotiations failed, Gandhi contemplated 
mediation by one or two Englishmen; in his talk with Horace 
Alexander, the Mahatma mentioned Philip Noel-Baker, a member 
of the British Labour government, as an acceptable mediator. He 
also envisaged the possibility of a plebiscite or referendum among 
the inhabitants of the disputed region. 

The Indian government, however, rejected mediation and 
arbitration; bitter U.N. debates continued interminably while 
tempers and military expenditures rose. 

Gandhi always combined high politics with low politics. He 
talked Kashmir with Nehru one day, and the next day he went to 
a village and told the peasants how to mix ‘the excreta of animals 
and human beings’ with rubbish to make ‘valuable manure’. 
They must improve their cattle, he advised further. Hindus com¬ 
plained that Moslems killed cows, Gandhi said, but Hindus killed 
cows ‘by inches through ill treatment’. The villagers’ address to 
him had lauded the virtues of non-violence. ‘But I know how 

527 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


such an address is prepared,* he stated in his reply. ‘Someone 
writes it out and someone else reads it parrotwise and that is the 
end of it.’ Did they practise non-violence? ‘There must be 
consistency between one’s thoughts, words and actions.* 

By this touchstone, Gandhi was great; greater in fact after 
India became independent than before. On the eve of his depar¬ 
ture from India after several months’ sojourn, the Reverend Dr. 
John Haynes Holmes, of the Community Church in New York, 
wrote to Gandhi saying, ‘I count these last months to be the crown 
and climax of your unparalleled career. You were never so great 
as in these dark hours.’ Dr. Holmes had talked with Gandhi and 
knew his mood. ‘Of course,’ he wrote to the Mahatma, ‘you have 
been sad, well-nigh overborne, by the tragedies of recent months, 
but you must never feel that this involves any breakdown of your 
life work.’ 

Gandhi printed the praise in Harijan of January nth, 1948, 
under the caption: ‘Is It Deserved?* His answer was, ‘I wonder 
if the claim can be proved.’ In the same issue of the paper, 
Gandhi printed another letter, from a European friend, who had 
written to comfort him, ‘I for one, and I am sure I speak the heart 
of untold millions,’ the friend declared, ‘feel it my bounden duty 
to express my deepest gratitude to you for giving the whole of 
your life to what you felt to be the one way to salvation for 
mankind’, non-violence. 

‘I must not flatter myself with the belief, nor allow friends like 
you to entertain the belief,’ Gandhi replied, ‘that I have exhibited 
any heroic and demonstrable non-violence in myself. All I can 
claim is that I am sailing in that direction without a moment’s 
stop. . . .’ 

Gandhi’s views on these matters were sober and modest. But 
he was too involved emotionally in his life work to be objective 
about it. He could not see himself in historic perspective. He was 
too disappointed by the failure of others to judge his own 
success correctly. 

Would it be right to judge Christ by his crucifiers and detractors? 

Gandhi was too great to succeed. His goals were too high, his 
followers too human and frail. 

Gandhi did not belong to India alone. His failures in India in 
no wise detract from his message and meaning to the world. He 

528 


THE LAST FAST 


may be very dead in India and very alive outside India. Ultim¬ 
ately he may live there and here. 

It is the manner of Gandhi’s life that matters, not his immediate 
effect on his immediate neighbours. 

Jesus may have thought that God had forsaken Him and Gandhi 
may have thought his people had forsaken him. The verdict of 
history cannot be anticipated by those who make it. 

The stature of a man is in the eye of the beholder. Harassed, 
unhappy, thwarted by those who adored him, Gandhi could not 
have seen what heights he attained in the last months of his life. 
In that period he did something of endless value to any society: 
he gave India a concrete, living demonstration of a different 
and better life. He showed that men could live as brothers and 
that brute man with blood on his hands can respond, however 
briefly, to the touch of the spirit. Without such moments human¬ 
ity would lose faith in itself. For ever after, the community must 
compare that flash of light with the darkness of normal existence. 

The fact that Gandhi’s fast restored Calcutta to its senses and 
peace, the fact that his presence reduced the mass killings in 
Delhi to occasional outbursts, the fact that his fleeting visit to 
Dr. Zakir Hussain’s Okla academy gave it immunity to violence, 
the fact that hardened bandits laid their arms at his feet, the fact 
that Hindus would listen to Koran verses and that Moslems would 
not object to hearing the holy words of Islam from the mouth of a 
Hindu — all this remains to inspire or haunt those whose actions 
would suggest that they have forgotten it. It is the seed of con¬ 
science and the source of hope. 

On January 13th, 1948, Mahatma Gandhi commenced his last 
fast. It engraved an image of goodness on India’s brain. 

The killings in Delhi had ceased. Gandhi’s presence in the city 
had produced its effect. But he was still in ‘agony’. ‘It is intoler¬ 
able to me,’ he said, ‘that a person like Dr. Zakir Hussain, for 
instance, or for that matter Shaheed Suhrawardy [the ex-prime 
minister of Bengal] should not be able to move about in Delhi 
as freely and with as much safety as I myself.’ Gandhi wanted to 
go to Pakistan to help the Hindus and Sikhs there, but how could 
he when the Moslems of Delhi had not obtained full redress? ‘I 
felt helpless,’ he said. ‘I have never put up with helplessness in 
all my life.’ 


529 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

He therefore fasted; it was an ‘all-in fast’, to death. ‘It came 
to me in a flash.’ He had not consulted Nehru or Patel or his 
doctors. To the charge that he had acted impatiently when the 
situation was improving, he replied that he had waited patiently 
since the riots started a year ago; the spirit of inter-religious killing 
was still abroad in the land. ‘It was only when in terms of human 
effort I had exhausted all resources . . . that I put iny head on 
God’s lap . . . God sent me the fast. . . Let our sole prayer be that 
God may vouchsafe me strength of spirit during the fast that fhe 
temptation to live may not lead me into a hasty or premature 
termination of the fast.’ 

The fast, Gandhi declared on the first day, was directed to ‘the 
conscience of all’, to the Hindus and Moslems in the Indian 
Union and to the Moslems of Pakistan. ‘If all or any one of the 
groups respond fully, I know the miracle will be achieved. For 
instance, if the Sikhs respond to my appeal as one man I shall be 
wholly satisfied.’ He would go and live among the Sikhs of the 
Punjab. 

‘We are steadily losing hold on Delhi,’ Gandhi asserted; he 
feared a recrudescence of violence in the capital, and ‘if Delhi 
goes, India goes and with that the last hope of world peace’. 
Hindus had been murdered in Karachi, the capital of Pakistan, 
and elsewhere in the Moslem Dominion. With his fingertips, the 
Mahatma sensed the danger of a new wave of riots. In Delhi 
refugees were ejecting Moslems from their homes, and demands 
had been heard to banish all the Moslem inhabitants of the city. 
‘There is storm within the breast,’ Gandhi said; ‘it may burst 
forth any day.’ 

He had brooded over the situation for three days without telling 
anybody. When at last he decided to fast ‘it made me happy’. He 
felt happy for the first time in months. 

He knew he might die, ‘but death for me would be a glorious 
deliverance rather than that I should be a helpless witness to the 
destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam’. His friends, 
he announced, must not rush to Birla House to try to dissuade 
him. Nor must they be anxious. ‘I am in God’s hands.’ Instead 
of worrying about him they should ‘turn the searchlight inward; 
this is essentially a testing time for all of us’. 

The first day of the fast he walked to the evening prayer meeting 

530 


THE LAST FAST 


and conducted the services as usual. ‘A fast weakens nobody 
during the first twenty-four hours after a meal/ he told the con¬ 
gregation with a smile. A written question passed to him on the 
platform asked who was to blame for the fast. No one, he replied, 
‘but if the Hindus and Sikhs insist on turning out the Moslems of 
Delhi they will betray India and their religions; and it hurts me’. 
Some taunted him, he said, with fasting for the sake of the 
Moslems. They were right. ‘All my life I have stood, as everyone 
should stand, for minorities and those in need.... 

‘I expect a thorough cleansing of hearts,’ he declared. It did not 
matter what the Moslems in Pakistan were doing. Hindus and 
Sikhs should remember Tagore’s favourite song: ‘If no one responds 
to your call, Walk alone, Walk alone.’ 

He would break his fast when Delhi became peaceful ‘in the real 
sense of the term’. 

The second day of the fast the doctors told Gandhi not to go to 
prayers, so he dictated a message to be read to the congregation. 
But then he decided to attend and addressed the worshippers after 
the hymns and holy scriptures had been chanted. He had been 
deluged with messages, he said. The most pleasant was from 
Mrdulla Sarabhai in Lahore, Pakistan. She wired that his Moslem 
friends, including some in the Moslem League and Pakistan 
government were anxious for his safety and asked what they 
should do. 

His answer was: ‘The fast is a process of self-purification and is 
intended to invite all who are in sympathy with the mission of the 
fast to take part in the process of self-purification . . . Supposing 
there is a wave of self-purification throughout both parts of 
India. Pakistan will become pak , pure . . . Such a Pakistan can 
never die. Then, and only then, shall I repent that I ever called 
partition a sin, as I am afraid I must hold today. . . .’ 

As a child, he revealed, after listening to his father’s discussions 
with friends of other communities, he had dreamed of real amity 
between religions. ‘In the evening of my life, I shall jump like a 
child to feel that the dream has been fulfilled.’ Then his wish to 
live 125 years would be revived. 

‘I have not the slightest desire that the fast should be ended as 
soon as possible,’ he assured the congregation. ‘It matters little 
if the ecstatic wishes of a fool like me are never realized and the 
m.g. 531 


LL 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

fast is never broken. I am content to wait as long as it may be 
necessary, but it will hurt me to think that people have acted 

merely to save my life. 5 

In this fast Gandhi did not wish to be examined by the physi¬ 
cians. T have thrown myself on God, 5 he told them. But Dr. 
Gilder, the heart specialist of Bombay, said the doctors wished to 
issue daily bulletins and could not tell the truth unless they 
examined him. That convinced the Mahatma and he relented. 
Dr. Sushila Nayyar told him there were acetone bodies in his 
urine. 

‘That is because I haven’t enough faith, 5 Gandhi said. 

‘But this is a chemical, 5 she protested. 

He looked at her with a faraway look and said, ‘How little 
science knows. There is more in life than science and there is 
more in God than in chemistry. 5 

He could not drink water; it caused nausea. He refused to add 
some drops of citrus juice or honey to the water to prevent 
nausea. The kidneys were functioning poorly. He had lost much 
strength; his weight dropped two pounds each day. 

The third day he submitted to a high colonic irrigation. At 
2.30 in the morning he awoke and asked for a hot bath. In the 
tub he dictated a statement to Pyarelal asking the Indian Union 
government to pay the government of Pakistan 550,000,000 
rupees, or approximately £40,000,000. This was Pakistan’s 
share in the assets of pre-partition India; the New Delhi authori¬ 
ties had delayed payment, and Gandhi was demanding immediate 
transfer of the money. Having dictated the memorandum, he 
felt giddy and Pyarelal lifted him out of the water and sat him in 
a chair. The Mahatma’s weight was down to 107 pounds, his 
blood pressure 140.98. 

The Indian Union government paid out the money. 

That day, Gandhi occupied a cot which stood in an enclosed 
porch at the side of Birla House. Most of the time he lay in a 
crouched position, like an embryo, with his knees pulled up 
towards his stomach and his fists under his chest. The body and 
head were completely covered with a white khadi cloth which 
framed the face. His eyes were closed and he appeared to be 
asleep or half conscious. An endless queue filed past at a distance 
of ten feet. Indians and foreigners in the line were moved to pity 

532 


THE LAST FAST 


as they observed him; many wept and murmured a prayer and 
touched their palms together in a greeting which he did not see. 
Acute pain was written on his face. Yet even in sleep or semi¬ 
consciousness, the suffering seemed to be sublimated; it was 
suffering dulled by the exhilaration of faith, suffering moderated 
by an awareness of service. His inner being knew that he was 
making a contribution to peace and he was therefore at peace 
with himself. 

Before prayers at 5 p.m. he was fully awake but he could not 
walk to the prayer ground and arrangements were made for him 
to speak from his bed into a microphone connected with a loud¬ 
speaker at the prayer ground and with the All-India Radio 
which would broadcast his remarks throughout the country. 

‘Do not bother about what others are doing,’ he said in a weak 
voice. ‘Each of us should turn the searchlight inward and purify 
his or her heart as much as possible. I am convinced that if you 
purify yourselves sufficiently you will help India and shorten the 
period of my fast... You should think how best to improve your¬ 
selves and work for the good of the country . . . No one can escape 
death. Then why be afraid of it? In fact, death is a friend who 
brings deliverance from suffering.’ 

He could speak no further. The rest of his message was read for 
him. Journalists had submitted questions to him and he was 
answering them orally. 

‘Why have you undertaken a fast when there was no dis¬ 
turbance of any kind in any part of the Indian Dominion?’ 

‘What was it if not a disturbing disturbance’, he replied, ‘for a 
crowd to make an organized and a determined effort to take 
forcible possession of Moslem houses? The disturbance was such 
that the police had reluctantly to resort to tear gas and even a 
little shooting, if only overhead, before the crowd dispersed. It 
would have been foolish for me to wait till the last Moslem had 
been turned out of Delhi by subtle, undemonstrative methods 
which I would describe as killing by inches.’ 

The charge had been made that he was fasting against Vallabh- 
bhai Patel, the assistant Prime Minister and Home Minister, 
whom some regarded as anti-Moslem. Gandhi denied it and said 
this seemed like an attempt to create a gulf between him and 
Nehru on the one hand and Patel on the other. 

533 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


The fourth day, Gandhi’s pulse was irregular. He allowed the 
doctors to take an electro-cardiogram and give him another 
irrigation. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad pleaded in vain with the 
Mahatma to drink some water with citrus juice. Gandhi had been 
drinking no water and passing no urine. The physicians warned 
him that even if he survived the fast he would suffer permanent, 
serious injury. Unheeding, he spoke to the prayer meeting by 
microphone from his cot and boasted that his voice was stronger 
than the day before. T have never felt so well on the fourth day 
of a fast,’ he stated. ‘My sole guide, even dictator, is God, the 
Infallible and Omnipotent. If he has any further use for this 
frail body of mine He will keep it in spite of the prognostications 
of medical men and women. I am in His hands. Therefore I hope 
you will believe me when I say that I dread neither death nor 
permanent injury even if I survive. But I do feel that this warning 
of medical friends should, if the country has any use for me, hurry 
the people up to close their ranks.’ 

He insisted on addressing the prayer meeting by microphone 
for two minutes. This was followed by the reading of a statement 
which he had dictated earlier. The government of the Indian 
Union was paying Pakistan 550,000,000 rupees. This, Gandhi, 
hoped, would lead to an honourable settlement of the Kashmir 
question and all outstanding differences between the two 
Dominions. ‘Friendship should replace the present enmity . . . 
What will be Pakistan’s counter gesture?’ 

On January 17th, Gandhi’s weight was stabilized at 107 
pounds. He was accumulating water apparently from the irriga¬ 
tions. He suffered from nausea and was restless. But for hours he 
rested quietly or slept. Nehru came and cried. Gandhi sent 
Pyarelal into the city to ascertain whether it was safe for Moslems 
to return. Hundreds of telegrams arrived from princes, from 
Moslems in Pakistan, from every corner of India. Gandhi felt 
gratified, but his written statement that day was a warning: 
‘Neither the Rajas nor Maharajas nor the Hindus or Sikhs or any 
others will serve themselves or India as a whole if at this, what is 
to me sacred juncture they mislead me with a view to terminating 
my fast. They should know that I never feel so happy as when I 
am fasting for the spirit. This fast has brought me higher happi¬ 
ness than hitherto. No one need disturb this happy state unless 

534 


THE LAST FAST 

he can honestly claim that in his journey he has turned deliberately 
from Satan towards God.’ 

On January 18th, Gandhi felt better. Pie permitted some light 
massage. His weight remained at 107 pounds. 

Ever since n a.m. on the 13th when Gandhi commenced to 
fast, committees representing numerous communities, organiza¬ 
tions and refugee groups in Delhi had been meeting in the house 
of Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the new Congress president, in an effort 
to establish real peace among divergent elements. It was not a 
matter of obtaining signatures to a document. That would not 
satisfy Gandhi. They must make concrete pledges which they 
knew their followers would carry out. If the pledges were broken 
Gandhi could easily and quickly ascertain the fact and then he 
would fast irrevocably to death. Conscious of the responsibility, 
some representatives hesitated and went away to consult their 
conscience and subordinates. 

At last, on the morning of the 18th, the pledge was drafted and 
signed and over a hundred delegates repaired from Prasad’s home 
to Birla House. Nehru and Azad were already there. The Chief 
of Police of Delhi and his deputy were also present; they too had 
signed the pledge. Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs, Christians and Jews 
attended. The Hindu Mahasabha and the R.S.S. were repre¬ 
sented. 

Jarab Zahid Hussain-Saheb, the High Commissioner (Ambas¬ 
sador) of Pakistan in Delhi, was also present. 

Prasad opened the conference with the fasting Mahatma by 
explaining that their pledge included a promise and programme 
for implementation. The undertakings were definite. ‘We take 
the pledge that we shall protect the life, property and faith of the 
Moslems and that the incidents which have taken place in Delhi 
will not happen again.’ 

Gandhi listened and nodded. 

‘We want to assure Gandhiji,’ Point Two, ‘that the annual fair 
at Kwaja Qutab-ud-Din Mazar will be held this year as in 
previous years.’ This was a reference to a fair held regularly at a 
Moslem shrine outside the city. 

The specific nature of this promise seemed to brighten Gandhi 5 

face. 

‘Moslems will be able to move about in Subzimandi, Karol 

535 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Baghj Paharganj and other localities just as they could in the past. 

‘The mosques which have been left by Moslems and which are 
now in the possession of Hindus and Sikhs will be returned. The 
areas which have been set apart for Moslems will not be forcibly 
occupied.’ 

Moslems who had fled could return and conduct their business 
as before. 

‘These things/ they assured him, ‘will be done by our personal 
efforts and not with the help of the police or military.’ 

Prasad accordingly begged the Mahatma to discontinue the 
fast. 

A Hindu representative then reported to Gandhi on the touch¬ 
ing scenes of fraternization that had taken place that morning 
when a procession of 150 Moslem residents of Subzimandi was 
given an ovation and then feted by the Hindus of the locality. 

Gandhi had been kept informed of the deliberations in Rajendra 
Prasad’s house; he had originally formulated several of the points 
which the delegates were presenting to him as adopted. 

Gandhi now addressed the group before him. He was moved, 
he said, by their words. But ‘your guarantee is nothing worth and 
I will feel and you will one day realize that it was a great blunder 
for me to give up the fast if you hold yourself responsible for the 
communal peace of Delhi only.’ The press had reported inter¬ 
religious troubles in Allahabad. Representatives of the Hindu 
Mahasabha and R.S.S., Gandhi continued, were in the room 
and had signed the pledge for Delhi. ‘If they are sincere about 
their professions surely they cannot be indifferent to outbreaks of 
madness in places other than Delhi.’ This was a clear implication 
of the guilt of these two organizations. ‘Delhi,’ Gandhi continued, 
‘is the heart of the Indian Dominion and you are the cream of 
Delhi. If you cannot make the whole of India realize that the 
Hindus, Sikhs and Moslems are all brothers, it will bode ill for the 
future of both Dominions. What will happen to India if they both 
quarrel?’ 

Here Gandhi, overcome with emotion, broke down; tears 
streamed down his hollow cheeks. Onlookers sobbed; many wept. 

When he resumed his voice was too weak to be heard and Dr. 
Sushila Nayyar repeated aloud what he whispered to her. Were 
they deceiving him, Gandhi asked. Were they merely trying to 

53 ^ 


THE LAST FAST 


save his life? Would they guarantee peace in Delhi and release 
him so he could go to Pakistan and plead for peace there? Did 
Moslems regard Hindus as infidels who worshipped idols and who 
should therefore be exterminated? 

Maulana Azad and other Moslem scholars spoke and assured 
Gandhi that this was not the Islamic attitude. Ganesh Dutt, 
speaking for the R.S.S. and the Hindu Mahasabha, pleaded with 
Gandhi to break his fast. The Pakistan Ambassador also addressed 
a few friendly words to the Mahatma. A Sikh representative 
added his pledge. 

Gandhi sat on the cot, silent and sunk in thought. The assembly 
waited. Finally he announced that he would break the fast. Farsi, 
Moslem and Japanese scriptures were read and then the Hindu 
verse: 

Lead me from untruth to truth, 

From darkness to light, 

From death to immortality. 

The girls of Gandhi’s entourage sang a Hindu song and " When 
I survey the Wondrous Gross’, Gandhi’s favourite Christian 

hymn. 

Thereupon, Maulana Azad handed Gandhi a glass filled with 
eight ounces of orange juice which Gandhi slowly drank. 

If the pledge was kept, Gandhi said, it would revive his wish to 
live his full span of life and serve humanity. ‘That span, according 
to learned opinion,’ he declared, ‘is at least 125 years, some say 

133 -’ 

The same afternoon, Gandhi had a talk with Arthur Moore, 
former editor of the British-owned daily Statesman . ‘He was 
lightsome and gay,’ Moore wrote, ‘and his interest while he talked 
with me was not in himself but in me, whom he plied with 
•probing questions.’ 

When he awoke that morning, Nehru had decided to fast until 
evening in sympathy with Gandhi. Then the Prime Minister was 
summoned to Birla House where he witnessed the giving of the 
pledge and the breaking of the fast. ‘See here,’ Nehru said to 
Gandhi in mock censure, ‘I have been fasting; and now this will 
force me to break my fast prematurely. 

Gandhi was pleased. In the afternoon he sent some documents 

537 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


to Nehru with a note saying he hoped he had ended his fast. 
‘May you long remain the jewel of India,’ Gandhi added. Jawahar 
is ‘jewel’ in Hindustani. 

Gandhi told his evening prayer meeting that he interpreted the 
pledge as meaning, ‘Come what may, there will be complete 
friendship between the Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs, Christians and 
Jews, a friendship not to be broken.’ 

Sir Mohamed Zafrullah Khan, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, 
informed the U.N. Security Council at Lake Success that ‘a new 
and tremendous wave of feeling and desire for friendship between 
the two Dominions is sweeping the subcontinent in response to the 
fast’. 

The national boundary between Pakistan and the Indian Union 
is an unhealed cut through the heart of India and friendship is 
difficult to achieve. Nevertheless, Gandhi’s last fast did perform 
the miracle not merely of pacifying Delhi but of putting an end 
to religious riots and violence throughout both Dominions. 

That partial solution of a problem which is world wide stands as 
a monument to the moral force of one man whose desire to serve 
was greater than his attachment to life. Gandhi loved life and 
wanted to live. But through the readiness to die he recovered the 
capacity to serve, and therein lay happiness. In the twelve days 
that followed the fast he was happy and jolly; despondency had 
fled and he was full of plans for further work. He courted death 
and found a new lease on life. 


53 8 


 

