CHAPTER III 


GANDHI REVISITED 

I A R R i v e d at the New Delhi airport on June 25th, 1946, and 
drove to the Imperial Hotel. I was tired from the flight from 
Cairo; 1 needed a bath and shave. But I had an uncontrollable 
impulse to see Gandhi immediately. My first act in India, I felt, 
should be to have a word with Gandhi. So instead of making 
sure I had a room in the hotel, I left my luggage in the lobby 
and took a taxi to Gandhi’s little stone hut in the Harijan 
colony. 

He was at his evening prayer meeting in an open space outside 
the hut. Approximately a thousand persons were at the services. 
Gandhi in loincloth, a moist white pad on his head, his feet on 
his thighs, sat in the centre of a large elevated wooden platform 
with several disciples. His eyes were closed. Occasionally he 
opened them and beat time with his hands to the singing. On 
the ground, in front of the platform, sat the women worshippers; 
behind them the men. The curious stood around on the periphery 
of the congregation. The Indian and foreign correspondents 
were there, also Mrdula Sarabhai, Nehru and Lady Cripps. 

I posted myself at the foot of the three wooden steps where 
Gandhi would descend from the prayer platform. ‘Ah, there you 
are,’ he said; ‘well, I have not grown better-looking in these 
four years.’ 

‘I would not dare to differ with you,’ I replied. He threw back 
his head and laughed. Taking me by the elbow, he walked to¬ 
wards his hut; he asked about my trip, my health and my family. 
Then, probably sensing that I would like to stay for a talk, he 
said, ‘Lady Cripps is here to see me. Will you walk with me to¬ 
morrow morning?’ 

Later that evening I went to the house of Abul Kalam Azad, 
the Congress president, for dinner with him, Nehru, Mr. Asaf Ali 
and other members of the Congress Working Committee. They 
seemed tense, and listened with special attention to the govern¬ 
ment news broadcast. Earlier that day, Congress had finally 

452 


GANDHI REVISITED 


communicated its decisions to the Cabinet Mission and Wavell, 
but no public announcement had yet been made. 

The Working Committee had decided, I learned, to accept the 
British plan for the future constitution of India but not to partici¬ 
pate in the provisional government. 

The next morning I was up early enough to sip a cup of luke¬ 
warm black tea and eat a banana and find a taxi which brought 
me to Gandhi’s hut at 5.30. We walked for half an hour. He 
talked most of the time about the negotiations with the Cabinet 
Mission. 

I lunched with Patel and Rajagopalachari in Birla House, talked 
for an hour in the same mansion with Miss Slade, and spent the 
evening with Patel. 

The following day, June 27th, I went to Gandhi again at 
5.30 a.m. and walked with him for thirty minutes. Sir Stafford 
and Lady Cripps received me at 9.30 for a friendly andjielpful 
interview. I kept the taxi because I had an appointment with 
Jinnah for 1 0.30. 

After going a short distance, the taxi coughed and coughed and 
stood still. The Sikh driver tinkered under the bonnet, but as the 
time of my meeting with Jinnah drew near I became increasingly 
alarmed and finally, after trying in vain to persuade the chauffeur 
of a government car to earn some extra money, hired a tonga. 
Hunger had apparently made the horse unresponsive to whips 
and oaths and I arrived at Jinnah’s house thirty-five minutes late. 
I was admitted into his study after a short wait. I offered profuse 
apologies, explained that my taxi had broken down, that no other 
taxi was available, that the tonga was slow and that I loathed 
being unpunctual. He said frigidly, T trust you are not hurt.’ I 
said it was not that kind of breakdown; the mechanism had simply 
refused to function. He was sympathetic but formal and continued 
to talk about the incident. 

When I could disentangle myself from the discussion of taxi 
and tonga I remarked, Tt seems India is about to become 
independent.’ 

He did not answer. He did not say anything. He pulled in his 
chin, looked sternly at me, stood up, extended his hand and said, 
‘I will have to go now.’ 

I once more apologized for keeping him waiting, I had not 

453 


i 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


reckoned with the taxi difficulty and could I see him another day 
in New Delhi? No, he would be busy. He was going to Bombay 
and I would soon be in Bombay; could I see him there? No, he 
would be too busy. He had by this time brought me to the door. 
I shall never know whether he was offended by my being late or 
by my statement on the imminence of India’s freedom. 

Over the week-end, I absorbed as much as possible about the 
political situation. Patel’s sharp mind was my best help. On 
Monday, July ist, I flew to Bombay and on Tuesday evening I 
commenced a three-day sojourn at Dr. Dinshah Mehta’s nature- 
cure clinic in Poona where Gandhi was staying. Part of the time, 
Nehru was there. 

I travelled with Gandhi to Bombay on July 5th and spent the 
6th and 7th at the sessions of the All-India Congress Committee 
which debated the Working Committee’s decisions on the Cabinet 
Mission plan and listened to the Mahatma on the subject. 

Later that month I toured Maharashtra with Jaiprakash 
Narayan, the Socialist leader, and arrived at Panchgani, in the 
rain-soaked hills, on July 16th, for a forty-eight-hour visit to Gandhi. 

Gandhi did not seem to have aged since 1942; his stride was not 
as long and lusty, but walking did not tire him nor did days of 
interviews. He was in almost constant good humour. 

At the beginning of my first morning stroll with him in New 
Delhi he asked about the rumours of war with Russia. I said 
there was a good deal of talk about war but perhaps it was only 
talk. ‘You should turn your attention to the West,’ I added. 

‘I?’ he replied. ‘I have not convinced India. There is violence 
all around us. I am a spent bullet.’ 

Since the end of the second World War, I suggested, many 
Europeans and Americans were conscious of a spiritual emptiness. 
He might fill a corner of it. India needs material goods and 
perhaps had the illusion that they brought happiness. We had 
the material goods but knew they did not bring happiness. The 
West was groping for a solution. 

‘But I am an Asiatic,’ he commented. ‘A mere Asiatic.’ He 
laughed; then after a pause, ‘Jesus was an Asiatic.’ 

In this, and in subsequent conversations, I thought I detected 
a despondent note with an optimistic undertone: if he lived 125 
years he would have enough time to finish his work, 

454 


GANDHI REVISITED 


It was 8.30 in the evening when I arrived at the stone building 
of the Poona nature-cure clinic. I was shown his room and 
walked in. He was sitting on a pallet; a white shawl enveloped 
him from neck to ankles. He did not look up. When he finished 
writing the postcard, he raised his head and said, ‘Ah.’ I knelt 
in front of him and we shook hands. He had a way, which none 
of his heirs has inherited, of figuratively putting his arms around 
you and making you feel welcome to his house and India. 

‘You have come by the Deccan Queen ,’ he remarked. ‘On that 
train there is no food.’ 

I said I didn’t mind, I had already been promised dinner. ‘The 
weather here seems wonderful,’ I volunteered. ‘You tortured 
yourself in the summer heat of Sevagram,’ where I had seen him 
in 1942. 

‘No,’ he objected, ‘it wasn’t torture. But in New Delhi I would 
melt ice in the bath and sit in it as you did in Sevagram. I was 
even unashamed to receive people in my bath and dictate in the 
bath. Here in Poona the weather is delightful.’ He appeared 
very relaxed. 

Presently, without any question from me, he spoke at length 
about violence. ‘First,’ he said, ‘there is South Africa. A man 
has been killed there in connection with the recent disturbances. 
He was innocent. Also, they have tied Indians to trees and 
whipped them. This is lynch law. And now these riots in Ahmed- 
abad between Hindus and Moslems. The trouble is that one side 
begins stabbing and killing and then the other does likewise. If 
one side did not avenge its deaths the thing would stop. It is the 
same in Palestine. The Jews have a good case. I told Sidney 
Silverman, the British M.P., that the Jews have a good case. If 
the Arabs have a claim to Palestine the Jews have a prior claim, 
because they were there first. Jesus was a Jew. He was the finest 
flower of Judaism. You can see that from the four stories of the 
four apostles. They had untutored minds. They told the truth 
about Jesus. Paul was not a Jew, he was a Greek, he had an 
oratorical mind, a dialectical mind and he distorted Jesus. Jesus 
possessed a great force, the love force, but Christianity became 
disfigured when it went to the West. It became the religion of 
kings.’ 

He reverted to the Jewish question in Hitler Germany.* ‘But I 

455 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


did not intend talking with you tonight,’ he declared, ‘and you 
have not eaten.’ 

I rose to go. ‘Sleep well,’ I said. 

‘I always sleep well. Today was rny day of silence and I slept 
four times. I fell asleep while I was on the rack.’ 

‘During his massage,’ a woman doctor interpreted. 

‘You must get massage here,’ Gandhi urged. 

After dinner, I passed Gandhi’s bed on the open-air stone 
terrace. Two women disciples were massaging his feet and shins. 
His bed w T as a mattress-covered wooden plank with two bricks 
under it to raise the head higher than the feet. A mosquito net 
hung over the bed. Several young women were sitting on the 
mats near him and laughing. He called out to me, ‘I hope you 
will be up in time to have breakfast with me.’ He said first break¬ 
fast was at 4. 

‘I’d rather be excused from that one.’ 

‘Then second breakfast at 5.’ 

I made a face and everybody laughed. 

‘You had better have third breakfast with me at 9,’ he said. 
‘Get up at 6.’ 

I was up at 6.30. When I stepped out into the courtyard, 
Gandhi was chatting with an Indian. He greeted me and we 
started on his morning walk. 

‘You said last night,’ I recalled, ‘that Paul altered the teachings 
of Jesus. Will the people around you do the same?’ 

‘You are not the first to mention this possibility,’ he replied. ‘I 
see through them. Yes, I know they may try to do just that. I 
know India is not with me. I have not convinced enough Indians 
of the wisdom of non-violence.’ 

Again he talked at length about the persecution of coloured 
races in South Africa. He inquired about the treatment of Negroes 
in the United States. ‘A civilization,’ he said, ‘is to be judged by 
its treatment of minorities.’ 

After a massage by a powerful Ceylonese who kneaded the 
muscles till they ached, I felt better and looked into Gandhi’s 
room. It had no door, only a curtain which I pushed aside. He 
noticed me and said, ‘Gome in, you are always welcome.’ He 
was writing an article for Harijan and submitting to questions in 
the vernacular by three Indians. I went in and out until 11 a.m, 

45 6 


GANDHI REVISITED 


Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, a Christian princess who served him as 
first English-language secretary, was reading Reuters news bulle¬ 
tins to him. Now and then he muttered ‘Hm. 5 The South 
African items made him shake his head sadly. ‘President Tru¬ 
man’, a flash radiogram stated, ‘yesterday signed the Indian 
immigration and naturalization bill. 5 Gandhi asked about the 
provisions of the new law. How many Indians would be granted 
citizenship and how many could immigrate? Are Chinese and 
Japanese admitted into the United States? 

‘More than anyone else, 5 I said to Gandhi, ‘the man who is 
responsible for the passage of the bill is the President of the India 
League of America, J. J. Singh. Would you write him a letter? 5 
He promised and gave me the letter a few days later. 

Gulbai, Dr. Mehta’s wife, brought me a heaped bowl of peeled 
and sliced fruit and placed it on the mat. Gandhi had already 
had his third breakfast, so I ate while he talked. He said he was 
trying to create a classless and casteless India. He yearned for the 
day when there would be only one caste and Brahmans would 
marry Harijans. ‘I am a social revolutionist, 5 he asserted. ‘Vio¬ 
lence is bred by inequality, non-violence by equality. 5 Gandhi’s 
religion merged with his sociology. 

I said I knew that the mounting prejudice against coloured 
peoples in South Africa disturbed him; he had fought it for twenty 
years. ‘But I hope, 5 I added, ‘you will do nothing violent in this 
connection. You are. a violent man. 5 He laughed. ‘Some of your 
fasts are violent, 5 I continued. 

‘You want me to confine myself to violent words, 5 he com¬ 
mented. 

‘Yes. 5 

‘I do not know when I am going to fast, 5 he explained. ‘It is 
God who determines that. It comes to me suddenly. But I will 
not act rashly. I have no desire to die. 5 

Sudhir Ghosh, a youthful Cambridge University graduate, 
came in to bid Gandhi goodbye. He was going to England and 
the Mahatma was giving him a letter of introduction to Prime 
Minister Attlee. Gandhi’s go-between with the Cabinet Mission, 
Ghosh had so distinguished himself by his intelligent and gracious 
handling of delicate diplomatic tasks that Gandhi was asking him 
to be his liaison with Attlee, Cripps, Pethick-Lawrence and others 

457 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


in London. Like many a head of state, Gandhi wished to be his 
own ‘foreign minister’. Usually, the official foreign minister 
resents the intrusion. 

That afternoon, before the prayer meeting, an Indian in his 
twenties approached me and said he was the editor of a Hindu 
Mahasabha weekly published in Poona and would I give him a 
message. I said I did not approve of the Hindu Mahasabha any 
more than I approved of the Moslem League; both stood for 
religion in politics. ‘The Hindu Mahasabha,’ I declared with 
some acerbity, ‘stands for Hindu supremacy. Do you like white 
supremacy?’ We parted. 

Hundreds of Poona citizens stood in a field on the other side of 
the clinic’s low fence while Gandhi and his friends conducted the 
services on a wooden platform on this side of the fence. During the 
singing it commenced to rain; worshippers put up their black 
umbrellas. A murmur of protest arose from those in the rear and 
all umbrellas were lowered. Somebody held one over Gandhi. A 
few hundred yards away two Indian teams in white flannels were 
playing cricket. 

Before dinner, Gandhi invited me to walk with him. ‘Surely you 
are not going to walk in the rain,’ I protested lightly. 

‘Come along, old man,’ he said and stretched out his arm. 

I had been given a private room that opened on the terrace 
where Gandhi slept. Late in the evening, when I was about to 
retire, I passed Gandhi’s bed. I greeted him silently with a raised 
hand but he called out, ‘You must sleep well tonight. But we 
will disturb you with our prayers at 4.’ 

‘I hope not,’ I said and approached him. 

He addressed himself to Mrs. Mehta in Hindustani or Gujarati, 
and I thought he was scolding her. ‘We are talking about you 
and you are curious,’ Gandhi remarked. 

‘Somehow I knew it,’ I replied. ‘Now you have made it worse 
by telling me but not disclosing what you were talking about. I 
should offer Satyagraha against you until you tell me.’ 

‘All right,’ he laughed. 

‘I will sit by your bed all night.’ 

‘Come along,’ he said with a lilt. 

‘I will sit here and sing American songs.’ 

‘All right, you will sing me to sleep.’ 

458 


GANDHI REVISITED 


Everybody was enjoying the fun. 

Gandhi’s laughter was physical and mental; it was amusement 
plus agreement or at least amusement plus tolerance. It was the 
laughter of a man who is not afraid to be caught with his visor 
up and his guard down. 

It had grown late and I wished them good night. I talked to 
Mrs. Mehta. Gandhi had scolded her because she served my 
breakfast in his room at 11 instead of 9 and this had held up the 
noonday meal of the others and besides she had given me special 
food; no one should receive privileged treatment. 

I awoke very fit and went to Gandhi’s room. He invited me to 
walk. I requested his views on the next step in the Indian political 
situation. ‘The British,’ he answered with alacrity, ‘must ask 
Congress to form a coalition government. All the minorities will 
co-operate.’ 

‘Would you include members of the Moslem League?’ 

‘Of course’, he replied. ‘Mr. Jinnah can have a highly import¬ 
ant post.’ 

He left me for a while to talk to a young Indian woman. I had 
noticed him walking up and down the terrace with her the day 
before in agitated conversation. Then she had gone away and a 
young mah stepped to Gandhi’s side and they talked together 
for about a quarter of an hour. Pyarelal told me who they were. 
She was an untouchable and limped from an accident. The young 
man, likewise a Harijan, was her husband and he had had a fore¬ 
arm amputated. They were having marital difficulties and Gandhi 
wanted to patch up their relations. 

When we resumed our constitutional, he began a discussion of 
Europe and Russia. I said Moscow had nothing to give the world; 
it had gone nationalistic, imperialistic and Pan-Slav. This could 
not feed the West. The democracies were beginning to realize that 
world peace would only come with internationalism and spiritual 
regeneration. 

‘Why do you want me to go to the West?’ 

‘Not go to the West, but speak to the West.’ 

‘Why does the West need me to tell them that two times two are 
four? If they realize that the way of violence and war is evil 
why am I necessary to point out the obvious truth? Besides, I 
have unfinished work here.’ 


459 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


‘Nevertheless, 5 I said, ‘the West needs you. You are the anti¬ 
thesis to materialism and therefore the antidote to Stalinism and 
statism.* He talked about the increase of the spirit of violence in 
India since 1942. 

Pedestrians gathered to watch Gandhi as we moved to and fro 
on the path that led to the city. There were factories near by and 
occasionally their whistles blew, but he never stopped talking; 
nor did he lift his voice; he talked through the noise. 

I asked whether he had read my book A Week with Gandhi . He 
had, and apart from a few minor errors (I mis-stated Kasturbai’s 
age, for instance) he thought well of it. He had also read my Men 
and Politics ; he read it in his ‘library 5 , as he called the lavatory 
where he kept a shelf of books. 

Nehru arrived at the clinic with Krishna Menon who later 
became Indian High Commissioner in London. ‘Nehru, 5 Gandhi 
said to me, ‘has an oratorical mind. 5 Menon, Nehru, I and several 
others lunched together in the large common dining-room. I was 
served mutton chops. By request, I shared my portion with 
Nehru. 

Gandhi knew that Nehru ate meat and smoked; he did not 
object. But Nehru never smoked in Gandhi’s presence. (Only 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad did, and Gandhi always reminded the 
girls in advance to bring in an ashtray.) Nehru has infinite charm, 
grace, tenderness and talent to express himself in words. Gandhi 
called him an artist. His years at Harrow and Cambridge made 
him very British and other years in prison made him very 
bitter. During his long imprisonment between 1942 and 1945 he 
had grown completely grey and completely bald but no less 
handsome. In his private life and public life he has suffered 
much. His smile, which reveals two rows of fine white teeth, 
melts the heart alike by its cheer and its unintended sadness. 

Gandhi loved Nehru as a son and Nehru loved Gandhi as a 
father. Nehru never hid the deep difference between his outlook 
and Gandhi’s. He spoke and wrote about it frequently. Gandhi 
welcomed the frankness. Their affection for one another did not 
depend on agreement. 

Something far down in Nehru’s psyche rebels against surrender. 
He was repelled by the unquestioning obedience which most 
Indian leaders gave Gandhi. He questioned and argued and 

460 


GANDHI REVISITED 


resisted — and finally surrendered. He fights for the independ¬ 
ence of his personality. He balks against conquest. When he 
submits he does so with meekness and grace. Gandhi knew his 
frailties and he himself has come to recognize his limitations. In 
politics all his life, Nehru never mastered the intricacies of party 
politics as the Mahatma and Patel did. He is the tribune not the 
organizer, a spokesman to the outside, not the manipulator inside. 
He appeals most to intellectuals but not with intellect; his appeal 
is to the heart. In India, that is an asset. He is an aristocrat 
whose love for aristocrats is no impediment to his love of the 
people. One of the world’s foremost statesmen, he is not a 
statesman at all. He is a good person lost among statesmen. The 
people give him adulation; he lends it to those who run the machine 
of government. 

In India Nehru is addicted to gusts of temper and bursts of in¬ 
dignation. On occasions, he bodily assaulted men who aroused 
his indignation. He has endless physical courage. Sometimes, in 
press conferences, he makes unconsidered statements of defiance. 
These may all be strivings towards strength. There can be no 
doubt that it was Gandhi’s vast inner strength and clarity, among 
other things, that so fascinated and captivated Jawaharlal. 

Nehru’s books show beauty of soul, nobility of ideal and ego¬ 
centrism. Gandhi seemed entirely extrovert; he was no burden 
to himself. Nehru must always cope with his own problem. 

In the afternoon of that second day at the nature-cure clinic, 
Nehru sat cross-legged on my bed for an hour while I occupied the 
only chair. He had gone to his beloved native Kashmir on a 
visit; the Maharaja forbade his entry. He grappled with an 
Indian soldier, equipped with bayoneted rifle, who barred his 
way at the frontier post. Now he said, T am convinced that the 
British Agent would not have kept me out of Kashmir while I 
was engaged in the Cabinet Mission negotiations without first 
consulting the Viceroy, and, that being so, it does not appear that 
they are getting ready to leave India.’ 

Krishna Menon shared this scepticism. 

I asked Nehru whether he considered himself a Socialist. T am 
a Socialist but not a Marxist,’ he replied. T am a Socialist but I 
don’t believe in any dogma.’ (In 1948, in New Delhi, he told me 
that as he grew older he judged people ‘more by their personal 

461 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


character than their isms* and that he had moved ‘closer to Christ 
and Buddha, especially Buddha’, and further, therefore, from 
Marx, Lenin and Stalin and closer to Gandhi.) 

Nehru spent several hours of the afternoon alone with Gandhi; 
nobody disturbed them. Late in the afternoon, I went to Gandhi’s 
room and found him spinning. I said I thought he had abandoned 
spinning. ‘No, how could I?’ he asked. ‘There are four hundred 
million Indians. Subtract one hundred million children, waifs 
and others; if the remaining three hundred million would spin an 
hour each day we would have Swaraj.’ 

‘Because of the economic or spiritual effect?’ I asked. 

‘Both,’ he said. ‘If three hundred million people did the same 
thing once a day not because a Hitler ordered it but because they 
were inspired by the same ideal we would have enough unity of 
purpose to achieve independence.’ 

‘When you stop spinning to talk to me you are delaying Swaraj.’ 

‘Yes,’ he agreed, ‘you have postponed Swaraj by six yards.’ 

Prime Minister Kher of Bombay province and Morarji Desai, 
the Home Member of the province, visited Gandhi to report on 
the continuing Ahmedabad intercommunity riots. At nine in the 
evening I accompanied Nehru and Menon to Desai’s residence in 
Poona. Desai blamed Moslems for the disturbances. Shortly 
before midnight, Nehru and Menon took the train to Bombay. 

The next morning Gandhi and about ten companions and I 
walked to the Poona station and boarded the express to Bombay. 
The party had the use of a special third-class carriage with a 
hard wooden bench down the length of each outer wall and 
another down the centre of the carriage. It rained heavily 
throughout the journey, and soon water began to pour from the 
roof and through openings in the window frames and door. 
Large puddles formed bn the floor. At a number of stops en route, 
local Congress leaders boarded the train for conferences with 
Gandhi. Between times, he wrote a brief article for Harijan and 
corrected another article. He looked up at me once and smiled 
and we exchanged a few remarks. When his editorial work was 
finished he stretched out on the wooden'bench and in a moment 
he was sleeping serenely. He slept for about fifteen minutes. 

Gandhi occupied a place near a window. At all stations im¬ 
mense crowds gathered despite the downpour. At one stop, two 

462 


GANDHI REVISITED 


boys, about fourteen years of age, wet to their brown skins, their 
hair dripping, jumped up and down outside Gandhi’s window, 
moved their bent arms up and down and yelled, ‘Gandhiji, 
Gandhiji, Gandhiji.’ He smiled. 

I said, ‘What are you to them?’ 

He put his fists with thumbs upward to his temples and replied, 
‘A man with horns, a spectacle.’ 

Gandhi left the train at a suburban station to avoid the crowd at 
the Bombay terminus. He and the other Congress leaders were 
congregating in Bombay for a meeting of the All-India Congress 
Committee (A.I.C.C.) which would debate the Working Com¬ 
mittee decisions to accept the Cabinet Mission’s long-term plan for 
a constitution but to refuse participation in the interim government. 

The two-day session took place in a hall built like a theatre. 
The floor of the stage was covered with white cotton homespun. 
Leaders clothed in somewhat finer white homespun sat on the 
floor of the stage and leaned on large bolsters placed against the 
scenery. To the left and rear of the centre of the stage was a big 
divan covered with white homespun. It was unoccupied. Nehru, 
in clinging white cotton trousers, a white blouse reaching half 
way down his thighs and an apricot-coloured sleeveless vest, 
presided. He used a microphone erected near his chair. Two 
hundred and fifty-five voting delegates sat in the hall together 
with hundreds of visitors and several score Indian and foreign 
journalists. 

Access to the stage from the well of the theatre was by a short 
flight of wooden steps. A speaker would mount to the top step, 
leave his or her sandals there and walk barefoot to the microphone. 

During the deliberations, a woman came on the stage from 
behind the scenes and put a flat box on the divan. Shortly 
after, Gandhi walked on, sat down on the divan, opened the box 
and started spinning. His entrance was applauded briefly by the 
standing delegates. He acknowledged their welcome with a smile. 
It is considered undignified to make too much noise with hand¬ 
clapping or exclamations. 

The second day, Sunday, July 7th, Gandhi, in loincloth, 
addressed the Committee from a sitting position on the white 
divan. He spoke Hindustani into a microphone but the mechafiism 
was defective and he was barely audible. 

463 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


The speech, delivered extemporaneously, was published ver¬ 
batim in Harijan and all Indian dailies. It consisted of about 
1700 words and he pronounced them slowly, in approximately 
fifteen minutes, as though he were talking to one person in his hut. 

He said: 

T have been told that some of my previous remarks about the 
Cabinet Mission’s proposals have caused a good deal of confusion 
in the public mind. As a Satyagrahi it is always my endeavour 
to speak the whole truth and nothing but the truth. I* never have 
a wish to hide anything from you. I hate mental reservations. 
But language is at best an imperfect medium of expression. No 
man can express fully in words what he feels or thinks. Even 
seers and prophets of old have suffered under that disability. . . . 

‘I did say in one of my speeches at Delhi in regard to the 
Cabinet Mission’s proposals that I saw darkness where I saw light 
before. That darkness has not yet lifted. If possible it has deep¬ 
ened. I could have asked the Working Committee to turn down 
the proposal about the Constituent Assembly if I could see my 
way clearly. You know my relations with the members of the 
Working Committee. Rabu Rajendra Prasad might have been a 
High Court Judge, but he chose instead to act as my interpreter 
and clerk in Champaran. Then there is the Sardar [Patel]. He 
has earned the nickname of being my Yes-man. He does not mind 
it. He even flaunts it as a compliment. He is a stormy petrel. 
Once he used to dress and dine in the Western style. But ever 
since he decided to cast his lot with me my word has been law to 
him. But even he cannot see eye to eye with me in this matter. 
They both tell me that whereas on all previous occasions I was 
able to support my instinct with reason and satisfy their head as 
well as heart, this time I have failed to do so. I told them in 
reply that whilst my own heart was filled with misgivings I could 
not adduce any reason for it or else I would have asked them to 
reject the proposals straightaway. It was my duty to place my 
misgivings before them to put them on their guard. But they 
should examine what I had said in the light of reason and accept 
my point of view only if they were convinced of its correctness.’ 

They were not convinced of its correctness and therefore the 
Working Committee took a middle course by approving the 
provisions for the future constitution of India but holding aloof 

464 


GANDHI REVISITED 


from the interim government. The Socialist fraction of the 
A.I.C.C., and some others, were fighting the Working Committee’s 
compromise. They advocated abstention from the Constituent 
Assembly as well as from the interim government. They wished 
to follow Gandhi’s instinct even though he had not supported it 
with rational argument. 

‘. . . I am surprised that Jaiprakash Narayan said yesterday’ 
Gandhi continued, ‘that it would be dangerous to participate in 
the proposed Constituent Assembly and therefore you should 
reject the Working Committee’s resolution. I was not prepared 
to hear such defeatist language from the lips of a tried fighter 
like Jaiprakash ... A Satyagrahi knows no defeat. 

‘Nor would I expect a Satyagrahi to say that whatever English¬ 
men do is bad. The English are not necessarily bad. There are 
good men and bad men among the English people as among any 
other people. We ourselves are not free from defects. The 
English could not have risen to their present strength if they had 
not some good in them. They have come and exploited India 
because we quarrelled amongst ourselves and allowed ourselves 
to be exploited. In God’s world unmixed evil never prospers. 
God rules even where Satan holds sway because the latter exists 
only on His sufferance.’ Then he talked about non-violence and 
the 1942 civil disobedience movement. 

‘We must have patience and humility and detachment. . . The 
Constituent Assembly is going to be no bed of roses but only a 
bed of thorns. You may not shirk it. . . . 

‘Let us not be cowardly, but approach our task with confidence 
and courage . . . Never mind the darkness that fills my mind. He 
will turn it into light.’ 

Everybody handclapped two or three times. 

The vote was 204 in favour of the Working Committee’s 
compromise and 51 against. The negative poll was considered 
large; it reflected the doubts present in Gandhi’s, Nehru’s, in fact 
most members’ minds about British intentions. After more than, 
a hundred and fifty years of British tutelage and eighty-nine 
years of the British Empire, no Indian could completely divest 
himself of distrust. 

I spent a number of days in the hot, dank Bombay of the mon¬ 
soon summer and then left with Jaiprakash Narayan and his wife 

4h5 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Prabhavati to tour the Maharashtra en route to Gandhi’s new 
Residence in Panchgani. We travelled to Poona by train and 
thence by car. 

The ancient car broke down several miles outside the town and 
we proceeded by a commercial passenger bus. Arrangements had 
been made for Socialist delegations to greet Jaiprakash along the 
road. Wherever they appeared — six times during the journey — 
the bus stopped, Jaiprakash, Prabhavati and I stepped out, the 
local folks made little speeches, each of us received a garland of 
most fragrant blooms placed around the neck and a tightly 
packed bouquet or an armful of bananas to carry. In several 
places, after we had returned to the bus, a woman came in and 
touched our knuckles with a tiny metal hand covered with a 
colourless, perfumed cream. We rode in a cloud of scent. 
Throughout the repeated ceremonies, the passengers in the bus 
and the driver waited patiently without demur. 

Jaiprakash stayed over to address an evening meeting in Satara 
while Prabhavati and I, in a borrowed car, drove over the hills 
and through the mists to Panchgani. We arrived near midnight; 
the town was dark and dead. Stray pedestrians could not tell us 
where Gandhi was stopping. We were compelled to get out of the 
car at every stone summer villa, walk up the steps to the porch 
and see whether anybody was sleeping there. On one porch, we 
saw Gandhi lying among his disciples. 

In the morning Prabhavati put her head on Gandhi’s feet and 
he patted her with sweet affection. About lunchtime, Jaiprakash 
arrived. He and I were the only visitors so I had ample oppor¬ 
tunity for conversation with Gandhi. 

He began by asking me what I had learned. I had noticed a 
sharp cleavage between those who believed in the Constituent 
Assembly and those who did not. 

Gandhi: ‘I do not consider the Constituent Assembly non¬ 
revolutionary. I am convinced that it is a perfect substitute for 
civil disobedience.’ 

L. F.: ‘You think the British are playing the game?’ 

Gandhi: ‘I think the British will play the game this time.’ 

L. F.: ‘You believe they are withdrawing from India?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Yes.’ 

L. F.: ‘I believe it, too, but I cannot convince Jaiprakash. But 

466 


GANDHI REVISITED 

supposing the British do not leave, you will offer your kind of 
protest, not Jaiprakash’s?’ 

Gandhi: ‘No, Jaiprakash will have to join me. I will not pit 
myself against him. In 1942, I said I was sailing out on uncharted 
waters. I will not do it now. I did not know the people then. I 
know now what I can do and what I cannot.’ 

L. F.: ‘You did not know in 1942 that there would be violence?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Correct.’ 

L. F.: ‘So if the Constituent Assembly fails you will not stage a 
civil disobedience campaign?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Not unless the Socialists and the Communists are 
subdued by that time.’ 

L. F.: ‘That is not likely. . . .’ 

Gandhi: ‘I cannot think of civil disobedience when there is so 
much violence in the air in India. Today some Caste Hindus are 
not playing the game by the untouchables.’ 

L. F.: ‘By some Caste Hindus you mean some Congressmen?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Not many Congressmen. But there are some who 
have not banished untouchability from their hearts. That is the 
tragedy . . . The Moslems also feel they arc wronged. In an 
orthodox Hindu house a Moslem will not be permitted to sit on 
the same carpet with a Hindu and have his meal. That is false 
religion. India is falsely religious. It must get true religion.’ 

L. F.: ‘You have not succeeded with Congress?’ 

Gandhi: ‘No, I have not. I have failed. Something, however, 
has been accomplished. The Harijans are admitted to the 
temples in Madura and in many other holy places, and the Caste 
Hindus worship in the same temples.’ 

That Was the end of our morning talk. Gandhi was ‘turning 
the searchlight inward’ and instead of finding fault with others 
the beam helped him to find the faults of Congress and the Hindus. 
Some Hindus did not like it. They preferred to blame Jinnah and 
England. 

In the early afternoon, Jaiprakash had an hour with Gandhi. 
One of the secretaries translated to me part of her notes. 

Jaiprakash: ‘Congress is not organizing the strength of the 
country. Merit does not count in Congress today. Caste and 
family relationships count. This is the main reason we Socialists 
will not go into the Constituent Assembly. We felt that the Work- 

gg m.g. 467 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


ing Committee was overcome by a kind of helplessness. “If we 
do not accept the British proposal what can we do?’ 5 they were 
saying. This is an attitude of weakness. They expect the British 
to devise ways and means of bringing about an agreement be¬ 
tween Congress and the Moslem League. We should have said 
to the British, “You go. We will settle this ourselves!” If the 
British do not like it they can put us in jail.* 

Gandhi: ‘Jail is jail for thieves and bandits. For me it is a 
palace. I was the originator of jail-going even before I read 
Thoreau. Tolstoy wrote that I had discovered something new, he 
wrote it in a Russian daily paper. A Russian woman translated it 
for me. I have fought the government from inside jails. Jail¬ 
going can bring Swaraj if the philosophy behind it is correct. . . 
But today jail-going would be a farce.’ 

Jaiprakash: ‘Today we should send Englishmen to jail.’ 

Gandhi: ‘Why? How? There is no need of it. This is a mere 
figure of speech and should not come from lips like yours. Even 
after violent warfare it would not be necessary. This is how 
Churchill talked of what he would do to Hitler. And witness the 
folly and the wickedness of the trial of the Nazi war criminals. 
Some of those who try the criminals are just as criminal.’ 

Congress had formed the governments of a number of provinces, 
and Jaiprakash and Gandhi saw mounting corruption and 
nepotism there. The Socialists, moreover, together with many 
non-Socialist Congressmen, would have gloried in one last struggle 
to oust the British. They believed freedom is not real unless you 
forcibly expel your master. They suspected that the British 
would, with Moslem League connivance, seek to maintain a foot¬ 
hold in India. Jaiprakash therefore was in an anti-constitutional, 
anti-legal mood, a militant mood, whereas Gandhi, disillusioned 
by the Socialist and other violence in 1942, 1943 and 1944, was 
less militant than ever before in his career. That made his ‘mis¬ 
givings’ about the Cabinet Mission’s plan all the more painful. 
Widespread violence had knocked from his hand the special 
weapon he had forged: civil disobedience. The Constituent 
Assembly, consequently, was his only alternative. 

Gandhi had entered on the road of anguish that led to his 
death. 

Gandhi gave me more than an. hour in the afternoon. He re- 

468 


GANDHI REVISITED 


verted to the Negro question in America. After a while, I said, 
‘Since my arrival in India, I have met some intelligent people. . . .’ 

Gandhi: ‘Ah, have you? Not many.’ 

L. F.: ‘You and two or three others. 5 He laughed. ‘And some 
say Hindu-Moslem relations are better and some say they are 
worse. 5 

Gandhi: ‘JinnaK and other Moslem leaders were once members 
of Congress. They left it because they felt the pinch of Hindu 
patronizing. In the beginning, the leading Congressmen were theo- 
sophists. Mrs. Annie Besant attracted me very much. Theosophy 
is the teaching of Madame Blavatsky. It is Hinduism at its best. 
Theosophy is the brotherhood of man. They took me to Mrs. 
Besant’s [in London]. I was just a student from Bombay. I 
could not understand the British accent. It was an ordeal for me. I 
felt quite unworthy of going to Mrs. Besant. Cultivated Moslems 
joined the theosophists. Later, Congress membership grew and 
with it the Hindu patronizing attitude. The Moslems are religious 
fanatics, but fanaticism cannot be answered with fanaticism. 
Bad manners irritate. Brilliant Moslems in Congress became 
disgusted. They did not find the brotherhood of man among the 
Hindus. They say Islam is the brotherhood of man. As a matter 
of fact, it is the brotherhood of Moslems. Theosophy is the 
brotherhood of man. Hindu separatism has played a part in 
creating the rift between Congress and the League. Jinnah is an 
evil genius. He believes he is a prophet. 5 

L. F.: ‘He is a lawyer. 5 

Gandhi: ‘You do him an injustice. I give you the testimony of 
my eighteen days of talks with him in 1944. He really looks upon 
himself as the saviour of Islam. 5 

L. F.: ‘The Moslems are rich in temperament and spirit. They 
are warm and friendly.' 

Gandhi: ‘Yes. 5 

L. F.: ‘But Jinnah is cold. He is a thin man. He pleads a case, 
he does not preach a cause. 5 

Gandhi: ‘I agree he is a thin man. But I don’t consider him a 
fraud. He has cast a spell over the Moslem, who is a simple- 
minded man. 5 

L. F.: ‘Sometimes I think the Moslem-Hindu question is the 
problem of finding a place for the new Moslem middle class in an 

469 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


underdeveloped India, India is even too underdeveloped to offer 
a place to the poor. Jinnah won over the middle class because he 
helped it to compete with the older entrenched Hindu middle class. 
Now he is bridging the chasm between the landlord and peasant. 
He has done it with Pakistan. 5 

Gandhi: ‘You are right. But Jinnah has not won the peasant. 
He is trying to win him. The peasant has nothing in common 
with the landlord or middle class. Landlords crush the peasants. 
The franchise does not reach the poor. Even the British electorate 
is not informed. 5 

L. F.: T think it is. It is better informed than ever. 5 

Gandhi: Tt is better informed but not well informed. 5 

L. F.: ‘How can Congress, with its Hindu stamp, win the 

Moslems? 5 

Gandhi: ‘In the twinkling of an eye, by giving equality to 
untouchables. Hinduism has to reform itself. I have every hope. 
Improvement is very gradual. . . .’ 

L. F.: ‘I understand there is less contact between Hindus and 
Moslems. 5 

Gandhi: ‘Political contact in the upper stratum is breaking 
down. . . . 5 

L. F.: ‘Jinnah told me in 1942 you did not want independence. 5 

Gandhi: ‘And what do I want? 5 

L. F.: ‘He said you want Hindu rule. 5 

Gandhi: ‘He is utterly wrong. That is absurd. I am a Moslem, 
a Hindu, a Buddhist, a Christian, a Jew, a Parsi. He does not 
know me when he says I want Hindu rule. He is not speaking the 
truth. He is speaking like a pettifogging lawyer. Only a maniac 
resorts to such charges . . . I believe that the Moslem League will 
go into the Assembly. But the Sikhs have refused. They are stiff¬ 
necked like the Jews. 5 

L. F.: ‘You are stiff-necked too. 5 

Gandhi: T? 5 

L. F.: ‘ You are a stiff-necked man. You are stubborn. You 
like everything your way. You are a sweet-tempered dictator. 5 
This aroused general laughter among the secretaries and disciples 
in which Gandhi heartily joined. 

Gandhi: ‘Dictator? I have no power. I have not changed 
Congress. I have a catalogue of grievances against it. 5 

470 


GANDHI REVISITED 

L. F.: ‘What did you learn from your eighteen days with 
Jinnah?’ 

Gandhi: T learned that he was a maniac. A maniac leaves off 
his mania and becomes reasonable at times. I have never regretted 
my talks with him. I have never been too stubborn to learn. 
Every one of my failures has been a stepping stone. I could not 
make any headway with Jinnah because he is a maniac, but many 
Moslems were disgusted with Jinnah for his behaviour during 
the talks.’ 

L. F.: ‘What is the solution?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Jinnah has twenty-five years more to work.’ 

L. F.: ‘He wants to live as long as you do.’ 

Gandhi: ‘Then he must live till I am 125.’ 

L. F.: ‘You had better not die, it would kill him and then you 
would be a murderer.’ (Laughter.) ‘He will die the day after 
you.’ 

Gandhi: ‘Jinnah is incorruptible and brave . . . If Jinnah stays 
out of the Constituent Assembly the British should be firm and let 
us work the plan alone. The British must not yield to Jinnah’s 
force. Churchill did not yield to Hitler.’ 

L. F.: ‘The British do not yield to force but they yield to the 
force of circumstances. . . .’ 

The next morning, I heard Sushila Pie, a schoolteacher who 
had joined Gandhi’s staff, singing in the next room. When she 
came out on to the veranda I asked why she had been singing. 

‘Because I am happy,’ she replied. 

‘And why are you happy?’ 

‘We are happy because we are near Bapu,’ she said. 

Jaiprakash and I were leaving that day for Bombay; Prabhavati 
was staying with Gandhi. She had worked with Gandhi for many 
years. The women in the Mahatma’s entourage — Miss Slade, 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Sushila Nayyar, Prabhavati Narayan 
and others — loved Gandhi and he loved them. It was a father- 
daughter relationship of more than usual warmth and inter¬ 
dependence. Miss Slade became physically ill on a number of 
occasions when she was separated from Bapu or when she was 
worried about his health. Her bond with him was one of the 
remarkable platonic associations of our age. He often said to her, 

47 1 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


‘When this body is no more there will not be separation, but I 
shall be nearer to you. The body is a hindrance.’ 

Rajkumari and Miss Slade would kiss his hand; he would stroke 
their cheeks. He said that he deliberately surrounded himself 
with women to prove that his mastery over ‘lust’ was not achieved 
by avoiding women. But after his ‘lust dream’ in 1936 he took a 
six weeks’ silence and did not put his hand on women’s shoulders. 
He told his women secretaries about that dream before he wrote 
of it in Harijan. He shared his innermost thoughts with them. 

Some of the female disciples were jealous when Gandhi appeared 
to favour one above the other. He was aware of it and tried to 
be impartial. He enjoyed their company and devotion. Whether 
they did not marry because of attachment to him or whether they 
were attached to him because they would not marry it is folly to 
guess. One was married but remained continent. They were all 
valiant Amazons of his causes. 

Tagore, who loved Gandhi, wrote of the Mahatma, ‘He con¬ 
demns sexual life as inconsistent with the moral progress of man 
and has a horror of sex as great as that of the author of The 
Kreutzer Sonata , but, unlike Tolstoy, he betrays no abhorrence of 
the sex that tempts his kind. In fact, his tenderness for woman is 
one of the noblest and most consistent traits of his character and 
he counts among the women of his country some of his best and 
truest comrades in the great movement he is leading.’ 

On July 18th, I had my last talk with the Mahatma. ‘If the 
Working Committee had responded to your “groping in the 
dark”, or your instinct, as you also called it, they would have 
rejected the Cabinet Mission’s plan for the Constituent Assembly?’ 

I began. 

Gandhi: ‘Yes, but I did not let them.’ 

L. F.: ‘You mean you did not insist.’ 

Gandhi: ‘More than that. I prevented them from following my 
instinct unless they felt likewise. It is no use conjecturing what 
would have happened. The fact is, however, that Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad asked me, “Does your instinct go so far that you would 
prevent us from accepting the long-term proposals whether we 
understand you or not?” I said, “No, follow your reason since 
my own reason does not support my instinct. My instinct rebels 
against my reason. I have placed my misgivings before you/ 

472 


1 


GANDHI REVISITED 

because I want to be faithful to you. I myself have not followed 
my instinct unless my reason backed it. 5 ” 

L. F.: ‘But you told me that you follow your instinct when it 
speaks to you on occasions, as, for instance, before certain fasts.’ 

Gandhi: £ Yes, but even in these cases my reason was there before 
the fast began. . . .’ 

L. F.: 'Then why do you inject your instinct into the present 
political situation?’ 

Gandhi: T did not. But I was loyal. I wanted to retain my 
faith in the bona fides of the Cabinet Mission. So I told the 
Cabinet Mission that my instinct had misgivings. “Supposing,” 
I said to myself, “they meant ill; they would be ashamed. They 
will say, ‘He says his instinct tells him this, but we know the 
reason.’ Their guilty conscience would prick them.” ’ 

L. F.: ‘It did not. Does that mean the Cabinet Mission’s 
intentions were honest?’ 

Gandhi: ‘I do not retract anything from the original certificate 
I gave them. . . .’ 

L. F.: ‘You are strongly constitutionalist now because you fear 
violence?’ 

Gandhi: ‘I say we must go into the Assembly and work it. If 
the British are dishonest they will be found out. The loss will not 
be ours but theirs and humanity’s.’ 

L. F.: ‘I think you are afraid of the spirit of the Indian National 
Army and Subhas Chandra Bose [its hero who went to Germany 
and Japan during the second World War]. It is widespread. He 
has captured the imagination of the youth and you are aware of 
it and you fear that mood. The young generation is indocentric.’ 

Gandhi: ‘He has not captured the imagination of the country. 
It is too wide a term, but a section of the youth and of the women 
follow him . . . The Almighty has reserved mildness for India. 
“The mild Hindu” is used as a term of reproach. But I take it as 
a term of honour, just like Churchill’s “Naked Fakir”. I appro¬ 
priated it as a compliment and even wrote about it to Churchill. 
I told Churchill I would love to be a naked fakir but was not one 
as yet.’ 

L. F.: ‘Did he answer?’ 

Gandhi: ‘Yes, he acknowledged my letter through the Viceroy 
in a courteous manner. But to resume . . . The unsophisticated 

473 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


women, untouched and unspoiled by civilization, so-called, are 
with me.’ 

L. F.: ‘But you admire Bose. You believe he is alive. [Fie had 
been reported killed in an aeroplane accident.] 

Gandhi: ‘I do not encourage the Bose legend. I did not agree 
with him. I do not now believe he is alive. Instinct made me 

t 

believe to the contrary at one time, because he had made himself 
into a legendary Robin Hood.’ 

L. F.: ‘My point is this: Bose went to Germany and Japan, both 
fascist countries. If he was pro-fascist you can have no sympathy 
with him. If he was a patriot and believed that India would be 
saved by Germany or Japan, especially in 1944, he was stupid and 
statesmen cannot afford to be stupid. 5 

Gandhi: ‘You have a high opinion of statesmen. Most of them 
are stupid ... I have to work against heavy odds . . . There is an 
active mood of violence that has to be combated and I am doing 
it in my own way. It is my implicit faith that it is a survival which 
will kill itself in time ... It cannot live. It is so contrary to the 
spirit of India. But what is the use of talking? I believe in an 
inscrutable Providence that presides over our destinies — call it 
God or by any name you like.’ 


474 


 

