CHAPTER VII 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 

T h e British had left India. Politically literate, they had read 
the handwriting on the Indian wall: ‘Your day is done. 5 
The handwriting was Gandhi’s. 

By the will of Indians, Lord Mountbatten remained as 
Governor-General of the Indian Union. It had been agreed that 
Mountbatten would also be Governor-General of Pakistan and 
thus a symbol of unity. But Jinnah substituted himself. 

Pakistan bisected India. Pakistan itself was bisected. It 
counted 38,000,000 inhabitants in north-west India and 45,000,000 
in north-east India. Between the two parts lay nearly 800 miles 
of the Indian Union. 

In Moslem Pakistan there were many million Hindus and Sikhs. 
Of the 330,000,000 residents of the Indian Union, some 42,000,000 
were Moslems. 

Five hundred and fifty of the 565 native states quietly acceded 
to the Indian Union. Three joined Pakistan. Most of the mahara¬ 
jas and nawabs became overpaid pensioned puppets. Elephants 
went begging. 

The frontier that divided India in two divided families in two; 
it separated factories from raw materials, crops from markets. 
The army was divided; the treasury was to be divided. The 
non-Moslems of Pakistan were worried about their future. The 
Moslems of the Indian Union were anxious. In each of the new 
Dominions, fighting broke out between ruling majority and 
frightened minority. 

One India could have lived in peace. Vivisection sundered 
vital arteries; out of them flowed human blood and the poison 
of religious hate. 

Calcutta and the western part of Bengal province remained in 
the Indian Union. Eastern Bengal went to Pakistan. Twenty- 
three per cent of the population of Calcutta was Moslem. The 
Hindus and Moslems fought. 

How does a religious riot commence? On April 17th, 1938, 

5 10 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 


three Hindus and a Moslem were sitting on their haunches in the 
Northbrook Gardens in Bombay and playing cards. They had 
been drinking. They quarrelled over the game. ‘Rumours of a 
Hindu-Moslem disturbance 5 , reads an official report, ‘spread in 
the city resulting in panic which was taken advantage of by 
hooligans and stray assaults, stabbing and stone-throwing 
commenced . . . Orders were issued prohibiting the carrying of 
lethal weapons and prescribing the routes for Hindu and Moslem 
funeral processions. Troops were also asked to stand by ... A 
clash that threatened to assume serious proportions was soon 
brought under control. Sporadic assaults, however, continued for 
a few days and altogether there were fourteen deaths and injuries 
to ninety-eight persons. 5 The police arrested 2488 persons. 

That was in the quiet, normal, pre-Pakistan days of 1938. 
With tension at its peak in 1947, especially in a city like Calcutta 
where the inhabitants are squeezed together herring-barrel 
fashion in filthy slums, a little Moslem girl pulling a Hindu girl’s 
hair or a Hindu boy calling a Moslem boy names might precipitate 
a mortal riot. Passion and poverty converted men into tinder. 

On this inflammable material, Gandhi undertook to sprinkle 
the sweet waters of peace. 

Gandhi had arrived in Calcutta on August 9th, 1947. For an 
entire year, ever since Jinnah’s Direct Action Day on August 
16th, 1946, Calcutta had been torn by bloody strife. Gandhi and 
H. S. Suhrawardy, the former prime minister of Bengal, walked 
arm in arm through streets tense with religious frenzy. Suhra¬ 
wardy drove a car with Gandhi as his passenger through riotous 
areas. Violence seemed to melt away wherever they passed. 
Thousands of Moslems and Hindus embraced one another 
shouting ‘Long Live Mahatma Gandhi 5 , ‘Long Live Hindu- 
Moslem unity 5 . Huge crowds fraternized at Gandhi’s daily 
prayer meetings. After August 14th no disturbances were reported 
in Calcutta. Gandhi had calmed the storm. The press paid 
tributes to the magician in loincloth. 

On the night of August 31st Gandhi had gone to bed in the 
Moslem house. At about 10 o’clock he heard angry noises. He 
lay still. Suhrawardy and several female disciples of the Mahatma 
could be heard attempting to pacify some intruders. Then glass 
crashed; window panes had been broken with stones and fists. A 

5 11 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


number of young men entered the house and commenced kicking 
in doors. Gandhi got out of bed and opened the door of his room. 
He was face to face with enraged rioters. He touched his palms 
together in greeting. A brick was thrown at him. It hit a Moslem 
friend standing by his side. One of the rioters swung a lathi stick 
which narrowly missed Gandhi’s head. The Mahatma shook his 
head sorrowfully. The police arrived; the police chief appealed 
to Gandhi to retire to his room. Then the officers hustled the 
intruders out of the house. Outside, tear gas was used to disperse 
an unruly mob of Moslems infuriated by the presence of a band- 
aged Moslem who, they alleged, had been stabbed by Hindus. 

Gandhi decided to fast. 

In a statement to the press on September ist, he said, ‘To put 
in an appearance before a yelling crowd does not always work. It 
certainly did not last night. What my word in person cannot do, 
my fast may. It may touch the hearts of all the warring factions 
in the Punjab if it does in Calcutta. I therefore begin fasting 
from 8.15 tonight to end only if and when sanity returns to 
Calcutta.’ 

It was a fast unto death. Unless sanity returned, the Mahatma 
would die. 

September 2nd, groups and delegations commenced streaming 
to Gandhi’s residence. They would do anything to save his life, 
they said. That was the wrong approach, he explained. His 
fasts were ‘intended to stir the conscience and remove mental 
sluggishness’. Saving his life must be incidental to a change of 
heart. 

Leaders of all communities and many organizations called on 
the Mahatma. He received them all and talked with them. He 
would not desist from the fast until communal harmony had been 
restored. Prominent Moslems and an official of the Pakistan 
Seamen’s Union visited Gandhi and assured him they would work 
to keep the peace. More Moslems came. The fast impressed 
them; it was for their safety and for the rehabilitation of their 
destroyed homes. 

On September 4th, municipal officials reported to Gandhi that 
the city had been absolutely quiet for twenty-four hours. They 
also told him that as proof of their wish for communal peace 500 
policemen of North Calcutta, including the British police officers, 

512 


GANDHI HOES H I S GARDEN 


had commenced a twenty-four-hour sympathy fast while remain¬ 
ing on duty. The leaders of hooligan bands, burly ruffians, came 
and sat at Gandhi’s bedside and wept and promised to refrain 
from their usual depredations. Hindu, Moslem and Christian 
representatives, workers, merchants and shopkeepers gave a 
pledge in Gandhi’s presence that there would be no more trouble 
in Calcutta. He believed them, he said, but this time he wanted 
a written promise. And before they signed the promise they must 
know this: if the promise was broken he would commence e an 
irrevocable fast’ which nothing on earth could stop until he died. 

The city leaders withdrew to deliberate. It was a serious moment 
and they were conscious of the responsibility. They nevertheless 
drafted and signed the pledge. At 9.15 p.m. on September 4th, 
Gandhi drank a glass of sweet lime juice which Suhrawardy 
handed him. He had fasted seventy-three hours. 

From that day, through the many months when the Punjab 
and other provinces shook with religious massacres, Calcutta and 
both parts of Bengal remained riot-free. Bengal remained true to 
its plighted word. 

On September 7th, Gandhi left Calcutta for New Delhi en 
route to the Punjab. Another part of the garden needed hoeing. 

At the station Gandhi was met by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur and others. Gloom covered their faces. 
Riots were raging through Delhi. Sikh and Hindu refugees from 
the fires of the Punjab were flooding the city. They had occupied 
the untouchables’ colony where the Mahatma used to stay. He 
would have to live in the ‘palatial Birla House’, as Gandhi 
called it. 

Gandhi’s room in Birla House was on the ground floor, about a 
foot above the earth. It was approximately 25 feet by 16 feet in 
area and some io feet high. A bathroom adjoined it. When 
Gandhi arrived he had all the furniture removed. Visitors sat on 
the floor and he slept on the terrace outside the room. An 
electric heater and electric lamp were available for use. The 
room was where the prayer meetings were held on the right side 
of the house and furthest from the area of the Birla grounds. 
To go to prayers Gandhi would step down to the earth through a 
high window and then walk under a long row of red sandstone 
pergolas covered with luxurious vines. 

5CS 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


On arriving at the house Gandhi learned that no fresh fruit or 
vegetables were available; vital services had been disrupted by 
the riots in Delhi which, he said, resembled a C city of the dead’. 

With passion and without restraint, Gandhi now* gave himself 
to the task of bringing Delhi to its senses — it and the Punjab. 
Nothing else mattered. In former years, he had permitted doctors 
to measure his blood pressure. Now he said, ‘Leave me alone. I 
must work and do not want to know about my blood pressure.’ 
His circulatory system, the physicians said, had not deteriorated 
in ten years, nor did he have more wrinkles on his face or body. 
A cataract discovered in 1939 by an eye specialist had not pro¬ 
gressed. His ears had become very sensitive to loud noises. He 
slept five to six hours every night and half an hour to an hour 
during the day; he always slept soundly and rarely talked in his 
sleep. On one occasion, he made arm motions during his sleep 
and when he woke, Dr. Nayyar asked him what had happened 
and he said he had dreamt he was scaling a wall. He was always 
fresh and keen in the morning. 

Despite acute distress over the political situation, Gandhi 
continued to take excellent care of his body. He enjoyed lying 
for ten to twenty minutes in a very hot bath at a temperature of 
100 or 101 Fahrenheit. Sometimes it made him giddy. If a 
shower-bath was available he finished with a cold one. 

In these months of hard travel and tremendous mental pressure, 
he ate less. His formula was: Under-eat when overworked. There 
was much work to be done. 

The very first day in Birla House Gandhi visited Dr. Zakir 
Hussain at Okla, a village fourteen miles outside New Delhi. 

Zakir Hussain, a stately scholar with a noble head and charac¬ 
ter, presided over the Jamia Millia Islamia, a Moslem religious 
academy at Okla. Gandhi had collected money for the school. He 
had also appointed Dr. Zakir Hussain chairman of the national 
society for basic education; he did it at a conference where every¬ 
body except Hussain had accepted Gandhi’s ideas on training 
for children. 

The Okla academy, a collection of small, new, clean-looking 
buildings, lies in a region redolent with Moslem tradition and 
rich in ruins of ancient Mogul forts and mosques. But in August 
1947 it found itself engulfed in a sea of angry Hindus and Sikhs 

5i4 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 

to whom everything Moslem, whether man or building, was 
hateful. At night the teachers and students of the academy stood 
guard, expecting an assault. All lights were out. In a circle 
around them they could see Moslem villages in flames and Moslem 
homes burning like torches. Near by is the Jumna River. Night 
after night they could hear Moslems jumping into the river to 
escape their pursuers. But the pursuers would jump in after them 
and then there was a scuffle and splash and the victim would be 
held down till he drowned or gave one last anguished scream as 
the knife cut his throat. Nearer and nearer the ring of attackers 
came. One dark night a taxicab arrived at the Jamia Millia 
grounds; out of it stepped Jawaharlal Nehru. He had driven 
alone through the belt of madmen that circled Delhi in order to 
stay with Dr. Tiussain and his students and protect them if harm 
came. 

The moment Gandhi heard of the danger that threatened the 
Moslem academy he went out in a car and spent an hour with 
Zakir Hussain and talked with the teachers and the boys. His 
presence hallowed the academy; after that it was safe. 

The same day Gandhi visited several refugee camps; he was 
urged to go with an armed guard; the Hindus and Sikhs might 
attack him as pro-Moslem and the Moslems might attack him as 
a Hindu and anybody crazed by deaths or abductions in the 
family might attack him without reason. He went without escort. 

Throwing caution and health considerations to the wind, 
Gandhi now developed inordinate energy, criss-crossing the city 
many times each day to tour riotous areas, visit refugee camps in 
and outside the city and speak several times a day to thousands of 
embittered, uprooted specimens of humanity. T think of the poor 
refugee in Delhi, in both East Punjab [Indian Union] and West 
Punjab [Pakistan] today while it is raining,’ he told his prayer 
meeting on September 20th. ‘I have heard that a convoy of 
Hindus and Sikhs fifty-seven miles long is pouring into the Indian 
Union from West Punjab,’ he said. ‘It makes my brain reel to 
think how this can be. Such a happening is unparalleled in the 
history of the world and it makes me, as it should make you, hang 
my head in shame.’ 

Gandhi was not exaggerating; the fifty-seven-mile long convoy 
was one of several in the Great Migration in which at least 

kk m.g. 515 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

15,000,000 people trekked hundreds of miles not to new homes and 
opportunities but to homelessness, sometimes to death and 
disease. Out of the part of the Punjab assigned to Pakistan, 
moving in the general direction of New Delhi, came millions of 
Hindus and Sikhs fleeing the knives and clubs of Moslems. Out 
of the Indian Union, moving towards Pakistan, came millions of 
Moslems fearing the daggers and lathis of Hindus and Sikhs. 
Police protection had become a thing of the past. Police and 
even military were animated by the same passions as the aggressors 
and often helped them to loot and kill. 

A few tired policemen and groups of young volunteers were all 
that distinguished the ‘convoys’ from disorganized flights of 
panicked people. They fled in their bullock carts or, if they had 
never owned a cart or it was taken from them, they fled on foot, 
whole families, adults carrying children, carrying the sick in 
baskets, carrying the aged on their shoulders. Frequently the 
sick were abandoned and left to die on the dusty road. Cholera, 
smallpox and other diseases scourged the migrant hordes. For 
days and weeks the convoys crawled forward leaving corpses 
behind to mark their route. Vultures hovered over the line of 
march waiting for weary wanderers to drop to the ground. Few 
families had salvaged enough food to support health. If they did 
it was stolen or fought for; the losers starved, the victors existed a 
little longer. Sometimes hostile convoys, advancing in opposite 
directions, camped during the night in the vicinity of one another 
and continued their senseless vendetta. 

The Nehru government set up camps outside Delhi to catch the 
migrants before they entered the city and care for them. But end¬ 
less thousands escaped the cordons. They took what they could 
seize in the town. They slept in doorways and courtyards, on 
pavements, in gutters, on streets. They lay on the asphalt, 
exhausted. Unheeding drivers might run over them. 

The Delhi home of a Moslem gone to Pakistan was considered 
legitimate booty; the refugees occupied it. Moslem stores were 
looted. Where Moslems resisted, riots occurred. Reduced to 
primitive living, the displaced persons yielded to primitive passions. 

In this city of the dead and the mad, Mahatma Gandhi tried to 
spread the gospel of love and peace. Moslems must remain even 
if they were molested, he said; ‘the Hindus and Sikhs who molested 

5 l6 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 


them discredited their religion and did irreparable harm to India’. 
He urged holders of unlicensed arms to surrender them to him; 
‘driblets have been coming to me voluntarily’. 

T must be pardoned for putting first blame on the Hindus and 
Sikhs,’ he told a prayer audience consisting chiefly of Hindus and 
Sikhs. ‘I will not rest till every Moslem in the Indian Union who 
wishes to be a loyal citizen of the Union is back in his home living 
in peace and security and until the Hindus and Sikhs have returned 
to their homes.’ But the Hindus and Sikhs were afraid to return 
to Pakistan, nor did they wish to relinquish the homes of Moslems, 
who had fled to Pakistan and whom Gandhi was inviting to 
return. 

Gandhi had planted himself, alone, athwart a raging torrent. 

He went to a meeting of about five hundred members of the 
Rashtriya Sevak Sangha or R.S.S., a highly disciplined organiza¬ 
tion of young militant Hindus. They were fiercely anti-Moslem, 
and many of them were fiercely opposed to him because he tried 
to protect Moslems. But he told them that they would kill Hin¬ 
duism by their intolerance. If Pakistan was maltreating Hindus 
that was no justification for their maltreating Moslems. ‘There is 
no gain in returning evil for evil.’ He was indeed a friend of the 
Moslems, but also a friend of the Sikhs and Hindus. ‘Both sides 
appear to have gone crazy. The result can be nothing but destruc¬ 
tion and misery’ for both sides. The R.S.S., Gandhi said, was 
‘a well-organized, well-disciplined body. Its strength could be 
used in the interests of India or against it’. Allegations had been 
made against the R.S.S., Gandhi declared; it had been accused 
of fomenting riots and planning assassinations. ‘It is for you to 
show by your uniform behaviour that the allegations are baseless.’ 

After his speech, Gandhi invited questions. One question and 
answer was recorded. 

‘Does Hinduism permit killing an evil-doer?’ 

‘One evil-doer cannot punish another,’ Gandhi replied. ‘To 
punish is the function of the Government, not of the public.’ 

October 2nd, 1947, was the Mahatma’s seventy-eighth birthday. 
Lady Mountbatten and foreign diplomats came to congratulate 
him; sheaves of telegrams were delivered from abroad and all 
parts of India. Many Moslems sent greetings. The rich sent 
money. Refugees sent flowers. ‘Where do congratulations come 

50 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


in?’ Gandhi asked. ‘Would it not be more appropriate to send 
condolences? There is nothing but anguish in my heart. Time 
was whatever I said the masses followed. Today, mine is a lone 
voice ... I have lost all desire to live long, let alone 125 years . . . 
I cannot live while hatred and killing mar the atmosphere ... I 
therefore plead with you to give up the present madness.’ 

He did not feel depressed; he felt helpless. ‘I invoke the aid of 
the all-embracing Power to take me away from this “vale of 
tears” rather than make me a helpless witness of the butchery by 
man become savage ... If He wants me He will keep me on earth 
yet awhile.’ 

He visited refugee camps that were filthy. Refugees who were 
not untouchables refused to clean. He chastised that weakness in 
Hindus. Cold weather was approaching. He appealed for 
blankets, quilts and cotton sheets for the homeless. 

The Punjab is the granary of India. The turmoil in it had 
stamped the harvest into the dust and the Indian Union was 
feeling greater hunger than usual. Gandhi nevertheless opposed 
rationing because it entailed centralization, red tape, speculation 
and corruption. 

Each evening he announced how many blankets he had received. 
Blankets were better than quilts because quilts got wet with dew. 
But quilts, he said, could be covered with old newspapers at night. 

Gandhi hoped to leave for the Punjab. But Delhi was not at 
peace. A Moslem shopkeeper, thinking that things had settled 
down, opened the shutters of his shop. The same instant, a bullet 
killed him. 

One evening Gandhi went to the Delhi Central Jail and con¬ 
ducted a prayer service for three thousand prisoners. ‘I am a 
seasoned ex-prisoner myself,’ he told them with a laugh. 

‘What should jails be like in free India?’ he asked. ‘All criminals 
should be treated as patients and the jails should be hospitals 
admitting this kind of patients for treatment and cure.’ He closed 
by expressing the wish that Hindu, Moslem and Sikh prisoners 
live together in fraternity. 

The news from Calcutta was good. Why, he asked his prayer 
meeting at Birla House, could Delhi not follow the peaceful 
example of Calcutta? 

Each evening Gandhi asked his prayer congregation whether 

5 l8 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 


anybody objected to the reading of some verses from the Koran. 
Usually there were two or three objectors. Then he askfed whether 
the other worshipers would harbour any ill feeling for the objec¬ 
tors. They said they would not. Would the objectors remain 
quiet during the Koran readings? They would. He read the 
verses. This was a lesson in tolerance and discipline. He did not 
expect all to agree. He expected all to remain non-violent despite 
disagreements. 

With the refugees came harrowing tales of savagery. A man 
swung an infant by its foot and bashed its head against a wall. 
Two men took a child by the feet and tore its body in two down 
the middle. A Moslem mob laid siege to a village; after long 
resistance, the Hindu and Sikh men came out and surrendered; 
the women had huddled inside the stockade which enclosed the 
village well. The Moslems were coming to fetch them; a woman 
jumped into the well; another woman jumped after her; in the 
next four minutes, seventy-three women had drowned themselves 
on top of one another in the well. 

These memories bred new atrocities. Assume that some 
Moslems had killed Hindus because they were Hindus and that 
most Moslems condoned those killings. To hate, suspect and wish 
to hurt all Moslems because they were Moslems made the Hindus 
as immoral as the Moslems. (The argument could also be applied 
to Hindu killings of Moslems.) Moreover, if Hindus sought to 
justify their actions by proving that the Moslems had commenced 
the atrocities it merely meant that the Hindus had allowed them¬ 
selves to become as evil as the Moslems whom they abominated 
because of that evil; they had been conquered by the spirit of 
their tormentors. 

Fearing retaliation, Moslems in the Indian Union decided to 
escape to Pakistan. Fearing reprisals, the Hindus and Sikhs in 
Pakistan were trekking to the Indian Union. A vast region was 
churning with hate, murder and migrating millions. In the 
midst of the upheaval stood the little man in the loincloth. A 
reprisal for a reprisal, a death for a death, he was saying, means 
death for India. 

Lady Mountbatten visited a refugee camp; she brought Gandhi 
a message; the refugees wanted to see him. Similar messages 
arrived from other camps, Hindu camps and Moslem camps. He 

5i9 


c 

THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

went as often as he could. Two hundred thousand displaced 
persons were packed into Kurukshetra Gamp in east Punjab and 
more were pouring in each day from west Punjab. Gandhi had a 
session of the Congress Working Committee to attend so he 
addressed the camp by radio on November 12th, 1947: ‘I can 
serve you best by drawing attention to your shortcomings. That 
has been my life’s motto, for therein lies true friendship and my 
service is not only to you or to India; it extends to the world, for I 
know no barriers of race or creed. If you can get rid of your 
failings, you will benefit not only yourself but the whole of 
India. 

‘It hurts me to know that so many of you are without shelter. 
This is a real hardship particularly in the cold weather . . .You 
must help in the maintenance of discipline ... You must take the 
sanitation of the place in your hands. I ask you . . . everyone of 
you, men, women and children to keep Kurukshetra clean . . . 
share your rations, be content with what you get... You must 
live for others and not only for yourselves. Idleness is demoraliz¬ 
ing.’ He urged them to spin. 

Sporadic violence in Delhi continued. In the early disturbances 
137 mosques had been damaged; some had been converted into 
Hindu temples with idols. Gandhi considered ‘such desecration 
a blot on Hinduism and Sikhism’. He went to a Sikh celebration 
attended by 100,000 bearded Sikhs and their families. He 
condemned their violence against Moslems. Sikhs, he said, had 
been drinking and rioting. ‘Keep your hearts clean and you will 
find that all other communities will follow you.’ 

Gandhi also criticized the Indian government. ‘Our statesmen’, 
he wrote in a letter to Madame Edmond Privat, ‘have for over 
two generations declaimed against the heavy expenditures on 
armaments under the British regime, but now that freedom from 
political'serfdom has come, our military expenditure has increased 
and still threatens to increase and of this we are proud. There is 
not a voice raised against it in our legislative chambers.’ He called 
it ‘mad imitation of the tinsel of the West’. But he still hoped that 
India would ‘survive this death dance’ and ‘occupy the moral 
height that should belong to her after the training, however 
imperfect, in non-violence for an unbroken period of thirty-two 
years since 1915’. 


520 


GANDHI HOES HIS GARDEN 


‘When it is relevant,’ Gandhi wrote, ‘truth has to be uttered, 
however unpleasant it may be . . . Misdeeds of the Hindus in the 
Indian Union have to be proclaimed by the Hindus from the house¬ 
top if those of the Moslems in Pakistan are to be arrested or 
stopped.’ As a Hindu he was sternest with Hindus. 


521 


 

