CHAPTER IV 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 

C ongress would not participate in the provisional 
government because Lord Wavell had, on Jinnah’s insist¬ 
ence, refused to allow it to nominate a Moslem for- one of 
the government posts. True, Wavell had stipulated publicly that 
the composition of the interim government would not constitute 
a precedent. Congress feared it would, and refused adamantly 
to recognize Jinnah’s right to veto a Congress Moslem’s appoint¬ 
ment to the Cabinet. 

Wavell accordingly again asked Congress and the League to 
submit lists of its candidates for positions in the Government, but, 
in deference to Congress, stressed that no side could bar the 
nominees of the other. Jinnah thereupon declined the invitation 
to participate in the provisional government. On August 12th, 
1946, Wavell commissioned Nehru to form the government. 
Nehru went to see Jinnah and offered him a choice of places in 
the Government for the Moslem League. Jinnah refused. Nehru 
then organized a government consisting of six Congressmen, of 
whom five were caste Hindus and one a Harijan, and, in addition, 
one Christian, one Sikh, one Parsi and two Moslems who were 
not of the Moslem League. Wavell announced that it was open 
to the Moslem League to name five of its members to the pro¬ 
visional government. Jinnah was not interested. 

The Moslem League declared August 16th 'Direct Action Day’. 
Savage riots lasting four days broke out in Calcutta. 'Official 
estimates’, writes Lord Pethick-Lawrence, 'placed the casualties 
at some five thousand killed and fifteen thousand wounded, and 
unofficial figures were higher still.’ 

Sir Shafaat Ahmed Khan, a Moslem who had resigned from the 
Moslem League to join Nehru’s interim government, was waylaid 
in a lonely spot in Simla at dusk on August 24th and stabbed seven 
times. ‘Obviously political’, high British authorities said of the 
assault. 

On September 2nd, Nehru became Prime Minister of India. 

475 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS. 


‘Our representatives and leaders have broken into the citadel of 
power,’ J. B. Kripalani, the new president of Congress, declared. 

Gandhi was living in the untouchables’ quarter in New Delhi 
on September 2nd. He woke very early that morning and wrote 
a letter to Nehru on the duties of the new Government. This was 
a red-letter day in India’s history, he told his evening prayer 
meeting and he felt grateful to the British but in no mood for 
jubilation. ‘Sooner, rather than later, complete power will be 
in your hands,’ he promised the audience, ‘if Pandit Nehru, your 
uncrowned king and Prime Minister, and his colleagues, did their 
part.’ The Moslems were the brothers of the Hindus even if 
they were not in the Government as yet, Gandhi continued, and a 
brother does not return anger with anger. 

But Jinnah proclaimed September 2nd a day of mourning and 
instructed Moslems to display black flags. The next day in 
Bombay, Jinnah said: ‘The Russians may have more than a 
spectator’s interest in Indian affairs, and they are not very far 
from India either.’ 

Sir Firoz Khan Noon, a big Punjab landowner and a Moslem 
League leader, had spoken in the same vein. ‘If our own course is 
to fight,’ he asserted, ‘and if in that fight we go down, the only 
course for the Moslems is to look to Russia.’ 

Gandhi did not misread these signs. ‘We are not yet in the 
midst of civil war,’ he stated on September 9th, ‘but we are near¬ 
ing it.’ Shootings and stabbings occurred in Bombay throughout 
September. A Moslem black flag was like a red flag to a Hindu. 
Trouble spread to the Punjab. Violence shook Bengal and Bihar. 

The Moslem League announced that it would abstain from the 
national Constituent Assembly. 

Alarmed by the disturbed state of the nation, Wavell redoubled 
his efforts to win Moslem League adherence to the new Govern¬ 
ment. Jinnah finally agreed, and appointed four Moslem League 
members and one untouchable who was an opponent of Gandhi. 
The Moslem League always proclaimed itself a religious body 
representing the Moslems of India. Why then should it have 
appointed an untouchable, a Hindu? Obviously to anpoy 
Congress and the caste Hindus. It was a bad augury for the new 
Government. And, in fact, Nawabzada Liaquat Ali Khan, 
Finance Member and foremost League spokesman in the Govern- 

476 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


ment, announced that he and his colleagues did not recognise the 
Government as a coalition and felt no obligation to co-operate 
with Nehru and the other Congress ministers. The Government 
was a house divided — by religion. 

Every day Gandhi preached against the uninterrupted violence 
between the two communities. ‘Some people even rejoice,’ he 
said, ‘that Hindus are now strong enough to kill in return those 
who tried to kill them. I would far father that Hindus died 
without retaliation. . . .’ 

At the same time he remembered his other causes and stressed 
the need for more khadi production; he protested against maltreat¬ 
ment of Harijans: ‘If there is an epidemic they are beaten and 
cannot draw water from the wells. They live in hovels.’ He 
wanted the Salt Tax completely annulled, but he asked the people 
to be patient in this regard; the new ministers were overwhelmed 
with unaccustomed tasks. 

Most Congress ministers and many of their assistants as well as 
provincial officials came to Gandhi’s hut in the Harijan quarter 
for frequent visits — sometimes daily — to ask his advice and 
approval. Gandhi was ‘super-Prime Minister’. 

He wrote on leprosy and the need of collective prayer, on the 
regime in Indian jails and discrimination in South Africa, on 
lagging food production and the gods in the Hindu pantheon. 
Each day he gave instructions for his meals the next day. When¬ 
ever possible, he made diary entries. ‘It seems to be so very hard’, 
he wrote one night, ‘to maintain detachment of mind in the midst 
of raging fire.’ And he told a friend ‘Why could I not suffer this 
anguish with unruffled calmness of spirit? I am afraid I have not 
the detachment required for living to 125 years.’ 

The raging fire of Hindu-Moslem strife gave him no rest. Yet 
his faith in human beings persisted. ‘In Bombay a Hindu gave 
shelter to a Moslem friend the other day,’ he wrote on October 
15th. ‘This infuriated a Hindu mob who demanded the head of 
the Moslem friend. The Hindu would not surrender his friend. 
So both went down literally in deadly embrace. This was how it 
was described to me authentically. Nor is this the first instance 
of chivalry in the midst of frenzy. During the recent blood bath in 
Calcutta, stories of Moslems having, at the peril of their lives, 
sheltered their Hindu friends and vice versa were recorded. Man- 

477 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


kind would die if there were no exhibition any time and anywhere 
of the divine in man.’ 

Gandhi now went in search of the divine in maddened 
man. 

Widespread Moslem attacks on Hindus had taken place during 
October in the distant Noakhali and Tippera rural areas of east 
Bengal. These seemed to alarm the Mahatma more than urban 
disturbances. Hitherto, inter-religious amity had prevailed in 
India’s villages. If now community hatred invaded the country¬ 
side it might doom the nation to destruction. Gandhi decided to 
go to the scene of the trouble. Unless he could stem the violence 
life would have no attraction for him. Friends tried to dissuade 
him. His health was poor. The Congress members of the Govern¬ 
ment wanted him near by. ‘All I know is that I won’t be at peace 
with myself unless I go there,’ he replied. He wondered whether 
he would accomplish anything. But he had to try. He told 
people not to come to the station to see him off and get his blessing. 
He was in no mood for it. 

They came in hordes. The Government gave him a special 
train (the British had done likewise) because when he went by the 
regular express the crowds that wanted to catch a glimpse of him 
delayed the train for hours and disrupted all traffic schedules. At 
the big cities where the special stopped, vast multitudes be¬ 
leaguered the stations and swarmed over the tracks. They 
mounted the roof of the station, broke glass, windows and wooden 
shutters, and created an ear-splitting din. Several times the 
conductor gave the signal for departure but someone pulled the 
emergency cord and the train stopped with a jerk. At one station 
the railway authorities turned the fire hose on the people but the 
water flooded Gandhi’s compartment. He arrived in Calcutta 
five hours late, tired from the noise and commotion, and sad. 

The day he left New Delhi, thirty-two persons were killed in 
another inter-religious riot in Calcutta; military reinforcements 
rushed to the scene. Police and troops were kept busy night and 
day dispersing bands of hooligans who attacked one another 
with kerosene bombs, bricks and soda-water bottles. The day 
after his arrival in Calcutta, Gandhi paid a brief courtesy call on 
Sir Frederick Burrows, the British governor, and a longer visit 
to Mr. H. S. Suhrawardy, the Moslem prime minister of Bengal 

478 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


province. The next day, October 31st, he again saw Suhrawardy 
and together they drove through deserted streets piled two-feet 
high with uncollected garbage and saw many rows of stores and 
houses gutted in the most recent as well as in the August disturb¬ 
ances. He was overcome, Gandhi said, by ‘a sinking feeling at 
the mass madness that can turn man into less than a brute’. Yet 
he remained an optimist. This could not go on much longer; he 
thought the citizens of Calcutta were already beginning to sicken 
at their own hideous excesses. 

He was going to Noakhali, the rural area where Moslems had 
killed Hindus, forcibly converted Hindus to Islam, ravished Hindu 
women and burned Hindu homes and temples. ‘It was the cry of 
outraged womanhood,’ he told his prayer meeting, ‘that has 
peremptorily called me to Noakhali ... I am not going to leave 
Bengal until the last embers of the trouble are stamped out. I 
may stay on here for a whole year or more. If necessary, I will die 
here. But I will not acquiesce in failure. If the only effect of my 
presence in the flesh is to make people look up to me in hope and 
expectation which I can do nothing to vindicate, it would be far 
better that my eyes were closed in death.’ 

Many members of the congregation wiped tears from their eyes. 

But worse woes were in store for the sorrowing Mahatma. In 
the neighbouring province of Bihar, with a population of 
31,000,000 Hindus and 5,000,000 Moslems, the events in Noakhali 
and Tippera had incensed the majority community; October 25th 
was declared ‘Noakhali Day’. Speeches by Congressmen and 
sensational newspaper headlines whipped the Hindus into 
hysteria and thousands paraded the streets and country lanes 
shouting ‘Blood for blood’. In the next week, ‘the number of 
persons officially verified as killed by rioters’ wrote the Delhi 
correspondent of the London Times , was 4580; Gandhi later put 
the total at more than ten thousand. They were preponderantly 
Moslem. 

The news of the Bihar atrocities reached Gandhi in Calcutta 
and filled him with grief. He addressed a manifesto to the Biharis: 
‘Bihar of my dreams seems to have falsified them . . . The mis¬ 
deeds of the Bihari Hindus may justify Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah’s 
taunt that the Congress is a Hindu organization in spite of its 
boast that it has in its ranks a few Sikhs, Moslems, Christians, 

479 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Parsis and others . . . Let not Bihar, which has done so much to 
raise the prestige of Congress, be the first to dig its grave.’ 

As penance, Gandhi announced, he would keep himself ‘on the 
lowest diet possible’, and this would become ‘a fast unto death if 
the erring Biharis have not turned over a new leaf’. 

Expecting vengeance in Bengal for the horrors of Bihar, 
Nehru and Patel, and Liaquat Ali Khan and Abdur Rab Nishtar, 
two Moslem members of the interim government, hufried by air 
from Delhi to Calcutta. Lord Wavell also came. The sacred 
Islamic festival of the Id impended when Moslems might rise to 
fervour and frenzy. The ministers appealed to the populace to 
remain calm. Soldiers patrolled the city and countryside. 

Nehru and Patel begged Gandhi not to fast unto death; they, 
and the nation, needed him. 

From Calcutta, the four ministers flew to Bihar. Infuriated by 
what he saw and heard, Prime Minister Nehru threatened to bomb 
Bihar from the air if the Hindus did not desist from killings. ‘But 
that was the British way,’ Gandhi commented. ‘By suppressing 
the riots with the aid of the military they would be suppressing 
India’s freedom,’ he said. ‘And yet what was Panditji to do if 
Congress had lost control over the people?’ 

Nehru announced he would remain in Bihar until the province 
became calm. On November 5th, Gandhi sent a letter to him 
there saying, ‘The news from Bihar has shaken me ... If even 
half of what one hears is true, it shows that Bihar has forgotten 
humanity . . . My inner voice tells me, “You may not live to be 
a witness to this senseless slaughter . . . Does it not mean that your 
day is over?” The logic of the argument is driving me irresistibly 
towards a fast.’ 

The Id holiday passed quietly in Calcutta and elsewhere. Re¬ 
assuring messages reached the Mahatma from Bihar. His duty lay 
in Noakhali where frightened Hindus were fleeing before Moslem 
violence. Fear is the enemy of freedom and democracy. Non¬ 
violent bravery is the antidote to violence. He would teach the 
Noakhali Hindus to be brave by being brave with them. Equally 
important, Gandhi wanted to know whether he could influence 
Moslems. If they were not accessible to the spirit of non-violence 
and non-retaliation and brotherhood, how could there be a free, 
united India? 


480 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


‘Supposing someone killed me,’ Gandhi said. ‘You will gain 
nothing by killing someone in retaliation. And if you think over 
it, who can kill Gandhi except Gandhi himself? No one can destroy 
the soul.’ 

Did he think a Moslem in Noakhali might murder him and was 
he afraid that in revenge Hindus would massacre Moslems 

throughout India? 

The impulse to go to Noakhali was irresistible. He abandoned 
the idea of a fast for Bihar. 

Gandhi left Calcutta on the morning of November 6th. Noak¬ 
hali is one of the least accessible areas of India. It lies in the 
water-logged delta of the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers. 
Transport and daily living present gigantic difficulties. Many 
villages can be reached only by small boats. Even the bullock 
cart, symbol of retarded India, cannot traverse the roads of the 
district. Phillips Talbot, correspondent of the Institute of Current 
Affairs of New York, spent four days travelling by rail, steamer, 
bicycle, hand-poled ferry and on foot from Calcutta to a settle¬ 
ment where the Mahatma had pitched his camp. The region, 
forty miles square, is thick with human beings, 2,500,000 of them; 
80 per cent are Moslem. It was rent by civil strife and steeped in 
religious bitterness. Some villages had been laid in ruins. 

Gandhi deliberately accepted the physical and spiritual chal¬ 
lenge presented by this remote region. Month after month he 
persevered. ‘My present mission’, he wrote from Noakhali on 
December 5th, ‘is the most difficult and complicated one of my 
life ... I am prepared for any eventuality. “Do or Die” has to 
be put to the test here. “Do” here means Hindus and Mussulmans 
should learn to live together in peace and amity. Otherwise, I 
should die in the attempt.’ 

Several ministers of the Bengal government and a group of 
Gandhi’s secretaries and assistants had accompanied him to 
Noakhali. He dispersed his disciples among the villages and 
remained alone with Professor Nirmal Bose who was his Bengali 
interpreter, Parasuram, his permanent stenographer, and Manu 
Gandhi. He said he would prepare his own food and do his own 
massage. Friends protested that he needed police protection 
against Moslems; Sushila Nayyar, his doctor, should remain 
near him, they said. No, she and her brother Pyarelal and 

481 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

Sucheta Kripalani and even young Abha, the wife of Kanu 
Gandhi and Kanu himself, each of them must settle alone in a 
village, often a hostile, isolated village and by their example and 
love wean it from the ways of violence. Pyarelal was laid low 
with malaria. He sent a note to Gandhi asking whether Sushila 
could not come to nurse him. ‘Those who go to the villages have 
to go there with a determination to live or die there, 5 Gandhi 
replied. ‘If they must fall ill they have to get well there or die 
there. Then alone could the going have any meaning. In 
practice this means that they must be content with home remedies 
or the therapy of nature’s “five elements”. Dr. Sushila has her 
own village to look to. Her services are not at present meant for 
the members of our party. They are pre-mortgaged to the village 
folk of East Bengal. 5 He was subjecting himself to the same cruel, 
unyielding discipline. 

Gandhi lived in forty-nine villages during his Noakhali pilgrim¬ 
age. He would rise at four in the morning, walk three or four miles 
on bare feet to a village, stay there one or two or three days talking 
and praying incessantly with the inhabitants and then trek to the 
next village. Arrived in a place, he would go to a peasant’s hut, 
preferably a Moslem’s hut, and ask to be taken in with his com¬ 
panions. If rebuffed he would try the next hut. He subsisted on 
local fruits and vegetables and goat’s milk if he could get it. This 
was his life from November 7th, 1946, to March 2nd, 1947. He 
had just passed his seventy-seventh birthday. 

The walking was difficult. Gandhi developed chilblains. But 
he rarely put on sandals. The Noakhali troubles arose because he 
had failed to cure the people by non-violence. This was therefore 
a pilgrimage of penance and in penance the pilgrim wears no 
shoes. Sometimes hostile elements strewed broken glass, brambles 
and filth in his path. He did not blame them; they had been 
misled by their politicians. In many places, walking involved the 
crossing of bridges built over low, marshy land. The bridges stood 
on bamboo stilts often ten or fifteen feet high and consisted of 
four or five bamboo poles about four inches in diameter lashed 
together with jute rope or vines. These crude, shaking structures 
occasionally had one side-rail for support, often not. Once 
Gandhi’s foot slipped and he might have fallen to the muddy 
earth far below, but he nimbly regained his balance. To become 

482 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


proficient and fearless in such crossings he practised, wherever 
he could, on bridges a few inches above the ground. 

Mr. Arthur Henderson told the House of Commons on Novem¬ 
ber 4th, 1946, that the dead in the Noakhali and contiguous Tip- 
pera districts had not yet been counted but ‘will’, according to 
estimates, ‘be low in the three figures category’. The Bengal 
government put the number of casualties at 218; some families, 
however, hid their victims out of fear. Over ten thousand houses 
were looted in the two districts. In Tippera 9895 persons were 
forcibly converted to Islam; in Noakhali inexact data suggested 
that the number of converts was greater. Thousands of Hindu 
women were abducted and married to Moslems against their will. 
Gandhi was deeply depressed by the conversions and abductions. 

To convert Hindu women Moslems broke their bangles and 


removed the ‘happiness mark’ on their foreheads which showed 
they were not widows. Hindu men were compelled to grow 
beards, to twist their loincloths the Moslem instead of the Hindu 
way, and to recite the Koran. Stone idols were smashed and Hindu 
temples desecrated. Worst of all, Hindus were made to slaughter 
their cows if they had any or, in any case, to eat meat. It was 
felt that the Hindu community would not accept back into its 
fold one who had killed a sacred beast or partaken of its flesh. 

In the beginning, several of Gandhi’s associates suggested that 
he should urge Hindus to abandon the affected areas and settle in 
other provinces. He passionately rejected such defeatism. To 
exchange populations would be a recognition of the impossibility 
of keeping India united. Moreover, it would deny a basic tenet of 
Gandhi’s faith: that an affinity exists or can easily be established 
between people who are different or think themselves different. 
Love and tolerance between the unlike are greater virtues than 
between the like. 

After he had studied the problem in Noakhali, Gandhi decided 
it was necessary to choose one Moslem and one Hindu in each 
village who would guarantee the safety of all the inhabitants and 
die, if need be, in their protection. With this in view, he inter¬ 
viewed members of both religious communities. He was once 
sitting on the floor of a hut in the midst of a group of Moslems 
and discoursing on the beauties of non-violence. Sucheta Kri- 
palani passed a note to the Mahatma saying that the man on his 

M.G. 483 


HH 


M.G. 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


right had killed a number of Hindus in the recent riots. Gandhi 
smiled faintly and went on speaking. Unless you hang the 
murderer — and Gandhi did not believe in hanging — you must 
try to cure him with goodness. If you imprison him there will be 
others. Gandhi knew he was dealing with a social disease; the 
liquidation of one or many individuals could not extirpate it. 
The criminals who feared retribution would remain on the high¬ 
way and repeat their crimes. Gandhi therefore forgave them and 
told them so, and told the Hindus to forgive them; indeed he told 
them that he shared their guilt because he had failed to remove 
Hindu-Moslem antagonisms. 

The world is full of such antagonisms and the ordinary indivi¬ 
dual is their victim as well as their agent. ‘But I say unto you, 
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them 
that hate you and pray for them which despitefully use you and 
persecute you . . . For if ye love them which love you, what reward 
have ye?’ Thus Jesus spoke. Thus Gandhi lived. 

Generations back, the ancestors of many Noakhali Moslems to 
whom Gandhi was appealing had been Hindus and were forcibly 
converted to the Koran by the sword. Either they retained part 
of the Hindu temper or the Gandhian method has a universal 
application. To one village, for instance, Gandhi had sent a 
young Moslem disciple, Miss Amtul Salam. She found that 
Moslems continued to mistreat their Hindu neighbours. ‘In the 
Gandhian tradition’, reports Phillips Talbot, ‘she decided not to 
eat until Moslems returned a sacrificial sword which during the 
October upheaval had been looted from a Hindu home. Now, a 
fast concentrates very heavy social pressure on its objects, as 
Indians have long since learned. The sword was never found. 
Possibly it had been dropped into a pond. Whatever had hap¬ 
pened, the nervous Moslem residents were almost ready to agree 
to anything when Gandhi arrived in that village on the twenty- 
fifth day of Miss SalanTs fast. Her doctor reported that life was 
ebbing. After hours of discussion (which . . . Gandhi took as 
seriously as the Cabinet Delegation negotiations) Gandhi per¬ 
suaded the village leaders to sign a pledge that they would never 
molest Hindus again.’ 

The return of the sword would have symbolized amity, Gandhi 
explained. 


484 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


Gandhi and his associates were working against heavy odds. In 
the beginning of his tour, Moslems flocked to his prayer meetings. 
But politicians in Calcutta discouraged this practice. And 
Mohammedan priests inveighed against it. They made the charge 
that the Mahatma was suborning the faithful. Sometimes Gandhi 
would interrupt his services to let the Moslems withdraw tem¬ 
porarily to the fringe of the congregation and turn west to Mecca 
and say their prayers. He had an attraction for Moslems which 
neither political Moslems nor religious Moslems relished. 

Gandhi addressed his meetings in Hindustani. Then an inter¬ 
preter gave the Bengali translation. Gandhi would sit on the 
prayer platform during the translation and make notes of his own 
speech which he would then publish: ‘Some Moslems feared that 
he had come to suppress them. He could assure them that he 
had never suppressed anyone in his life.’ 

‘I have told our people,’ Gandhi said in an interview, ‘not to 
depend on military and police aid. You have to uphold democracy, 
and democracy and dependence on the military and police are 
incompatible.’ He wanted to restore a sense of popular security 
by changing the minds of the people. ‘For me,’ he told a friend, 
‘if this thing is pulled through it will be the crowning act of my 
life ... I don’t want to return from Bengal in a defeatist way. I 
would rather die, if need be, at the hand of an assassin.’ 

At times, his closest co-workers were afraid of what might hap^ 
pen to them alone in remote villages. ‘You are not to rush into 
danger unnecessarily,’ he instructed them, ‘but unflinchingly 
face whatever comes in the natural course.’ 

January 6th was Gandhi’s day of silence and his prayer 
meeting address was read to the congregation while he sat and 
listened and nodded assent. They were in the little village of 
Chandipur and he told them why he was there: ‘I have only one 
object in view and it is a clear one: namely that God should purify 
the hearts of Hindus and Moslems and the two communities 
should be free from suspicion and fear of one another. Please join 
with me in this prayer and say that God is the Lord of us both and 
that He may give us success.’ 

Why did he have to come such a long way to do this? ‘My 
answer is that during my tour I wish to assure the villagers to the 
best of my capacity that I bear not the least ill-will towards any. 

485 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

I can prove this only by living and moving among those who 
mistrust me.’ 

In this village Gandhi received information that Hindus who 
had fled during the riots were beginning to return. On the other 
hand, attendance at prayer meetings was dwindling. ‘But’, 
Gandhi wrote, reporting his own speech, ‘he said that even then 
there would be no reason for him to give up his mission in despair. 
He would then roam from village to village taking his spinning 
wheel. With him it was an act of service to God. 5 

On January 17th the newspapers stated that during the last 
six days Gandhi had been working twenty hours out of every 
twenty-four. He had spent each of those days in a different village 
and the people were flocking to his hut for advice, comfort and 
confessions. 

At Narayanpur village, a Moslem gave him shelter for the night 
and food during the day. Gandhi thanked him publicly. Such 
hospitality was becoming more frequent. 

His Moslem host asked Gandhi why he did not come to an 
understanding with Jinnah instead of subjecting himself to such a 
strenuous pilgrimage. A leader, he replied, was made by his 
followers. The people must make peace among themselves and 
‘then their desire for neighbourly peace would be reflected by 
their leaders ... If a neighbour was ailing would they run to the 
Congress or the League to ask them what should be done?’ 

Would not literacy help, Gandhi was asked. He held that it 
was not enough. The Germans were literate yet they succumbed 
to Hitler. ‘It is not literacy or learning that makes a man,’ Gandhi 
said, ‘but education for real life. What would it matter if they 
knew everything but did not know how to live in brotherliness 
with their neighbours? 5 

‘If the question is between taking one’s own life or that of the 
assailant, which would you advise? 5 

‘I have no doubt in my mind 5 , Gandhi declared, ‘that the first 
should be the choice. 5 

Five thousand persons came to his prayer meeting on January 
22nd in the village of Paniala where, several weeks earlier, a large 
intercommunity dinner had taken place with Hindus, Moslems 
and untouchables sitting shoulder to shoulder. ‘What in your 
opinion is the cause of the communal riots? 5 someone asked. 

486 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


‘The idiocy of both communities,’ he replied. 

The prayer meeting at Muraim on January 24th was the largest 
of the pilgrimage. Gandhi attributed it to the successful fast of 
Miss Amtul Salam, who was a devout Moslem and a member of 
the Mahatma’s ashram. 

‘What should a woman do if she is attacked?’ Gandhi was asked 
at Palla on January 27th. ‘Should she commit suicide?’ 

‘Surrender’ he answered, ‘has no room in my plan of life. A 
woman should most certainly take her own life rather than sur¬ 
render.’ 

Was she to carry poison with her or a knife? 

‘It is not for me to prescribe the means,’ Gandhi said. ‘And 
behind the approval of suicide in such circumstances is the belief 
that one whose mind is prepared for even suicide will have the 
requisite courage for such mental resistance and such internal 
purity that her assailant will be disarmed.’ 

Sometimes economic questions were raised at prayer meetings. 
Did Gandhi think the landowner’s share in crops should be re¬ 
duced from one-half to one-third? 

Yes, he welcomed the move. ‘The land belongs to the Lord of 
us all and therefore to the worker on it. But until that ideal state 
of things came about the movement towards the reduction of the 
landlord’s portion was in the right direction.’ Many of the land¬ 
lords were Hindus, and the riots were partly caused by resentment 
against high rents. 

Dr. Sushila Nayyar was stationed in the village of Changirgaon. 
She wanted to go to the hospital in the Sevagram Ashram which 
she had set up, but the Moslem patients begged her to stay and 
she stayed. She also reported that Moslems were, of their own 
accord, returning some of the loot they took in October. ‘A 
happy omen,’ Gandhi called it. If the infection spread, the 
courts would have less work to do. He aspired to no truce imposed 
by the military; he wanted a change of heart. 

Four young Moslem men came to Gandhi’s hut for an exchange 
of views. Their visit gave him joy; he sought intimate contact 
with the people. He told them, incidentally, that the figures on 
Moslem killings of Hindus in Noakhali had been exaggerated; 
there were not thousands. The Hindus had behaved much worse 
in Bihar. 


487 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


At Srinagar village on February 5th the volunteers had erected 
a platform and canopy. This was a waste of labour and money, 
Gandhi chided them. ‘All I need,’ he told the prayer meeting, 
‘is a raised seat with something clean and soft to rest my fatless 
and muscleless bones.’ Then he laughed and showed his toothless 
gums. 

He lectured next day’s congregation on cleanliness. He liked 
to walk barefoot on the village streets and on the road, but why 
did they spit and clear their noses on them? He sometimes had 
to wear sandals. No doubt, chronic poverty was responsible for 
the prevalence of disease in India, but chronic breach of the laws 
of sanitation was no less responsible, he said. 

The poorer Moslems attended Gandhi’s meetings in larger 
numbers than the rich. Tales reached him that the propertied 
and educated Moslems were threatening the poor with economic 
sanctions. They displayed anti-Gandhi posters. Returning from 
Bishkatali in the Tippera district on February 20th, Gandhi 
walked through beautiful bamboo woods and coconut groves. 
Hanging from trees he saw placards reading, ‘Remember Bihar, 
Leave Tippera Immediately’; ‘Repeatedly you have been warned, 
Yet you insist on roaming from house to house. You must leave 
for you own good’; ‘Go where you are needed. Your hypocrisy 
will not be tolerated. Accept Pakistan.’ 

Yet crowds at meetings grew in size. 

In Raipura, on a Sunday, Gandhi was present at a dinner 
given by Hindu merchants to two thousand persons, including 
caste Hindus, Moslems, Harijans and Christians. The local 
Moslem priest took Gandhi to the village mosque. 

Elsewhere a student asked Gandhi whether it was not true that 
Christianity and Islam were progressive religions and Hinduism 
static or retrogressive. ‘No,’ he replied, ‘I have noticed no 
definite progress in any religion. The world would not be the 
shambles it has become if the religions of the world were pro¬ 
gressive.’ 

‘If there is only one God,’ a questioner said, ‘should there not 
be only one religion?’ 

‘A tree has a million leaves,’ Gandhi replied. ‘There are as 
many religions as there are men and women, but they are all 
rooted in God.’ 


488 


PILGRIM’S PROGRESS 


A written query was handed to the Mahatma: ‘Should religious 
instruction form part of the school curriculum as approved by the 
State? Do you favour separate schools for children belonging to 
different denominations for facility of religious instruction?’ 

Gandhi replied, ‘I do not believe in state religion even though 
the whole community has one religion. State interference will 
probably always be unwelcome. Religion is purely a personal 
matter ... I am also opposed to State aid partly or wholly to 
religious bodies.* For I know that an institution or group which 
does not manage to finance its own religious teaching is a stranger 
to true religion. This does not mean that State schools would not 
give ethical teaching. The fundamental ethics are common to 
all religions. 5 

Moslem critics warned him not to discuss purdah. How dare a 
Hindu tell their women to expose their faces? He nevertheless 
discussed it. Segregation of women was a species of violence and 
led to other forms of compulsion. 

On March 2nd, 1947, Gandhi left Noakhali for Bihar province. 
He promised to return some day. He promised to return because 
his mission had not been completed. He had not established the 
brotherhood of Hindus and Moslems in Noakhali. Relations had 
improved perceptibly but insufficiently. 

Gandhi’s task in Noakhali consisted in restoring inner calm so 
that the refugee Hindus could return and feel safe and so that 
Moslems would not attack them again. The malady was deep; 
the violent eruptions, however, were infrequent and ephemeral. 
Gandhi, therefore, did not despair. He felt that the local com¬ 
munities, undisturbed by outside political propaganda, could live 
in peace. 

The call of Noakhali had been insistent. Gandhi might have 
sent a message from Delhi or preached a sermon. But he was a 
man of action, a Karma yogi. He believed that the difference 
between what we do and what we could do would suffice to solve 
most of the world’s problems. All his life he endeavoured to 
eliminate that difference. He gave his maximum. 


489 


 

