CHAPTER I 


ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE 

O n August 30th, 1944, Wendell Willkie received me in his 
law office overlooking New York harbour. He was a good 
man. His death in September 1944 left America poorer. 
‘The war is about seven-tenths won,’ he said, ‘and the peace is 
about nine-tenths lost.’ He had toured the East and noted the 
perpetuation of old conflicts between Europe and Asia, white 
man and coloured man, free man and colonial slaves. He realized 
that there would either be a new world or a new world war. 

Others too were beginning to see that war with a dictatorship 
creates a moral obligation to expand the area of freedom. 

The nearer England came to victory the clearer it became that 
political changes in India could not be delayed. 

By 1945, India was too restive to hold, and Britain had suffered 
too heavily in the war to contemplate the colossal expenditure of 
men and treasure that would have been required to suppress 
another non-violent contest with Gandhi or a violent contest if 
he lost control. The exhaustion which compelled Britain to cut 
her commitments in Greece, Turkey, the Arab countries and other 
strategic regions after the war was apparent during the war. 

It was especially apparent to Lord Wavell. ‘The Indian 
administration,’ Leopold S. Amery, Secretary of State for India, 
said in the House of Commons on June 14th, 1945, ‘overburdened 
by great tasks laid upon it by the war against Japan and by plan¬ 
ning for the post-war period, is further strained by the political 
tension that exists.’ Wavell directed the Indian administration. 

Wavell was a general and a poet and an unusual person. During 
my first talk with him in New Delhi in 1942, I remarked that he 
looked tired. ‘Yes,’ he agreed, ‘I am tired after three years of 
military defeats and setbacks.’ Then he paid a tribute to Nazi 
Marshal Rommel who administered the defeats. At each sub¬ 
sequent meeting, Wavell brought the conversation around to 
Rommel and praised his genius. 

Wavell had a body like a solid thick tree trunk. His legs were 

437 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


thick and bent outward. His hair was dense and grey-black. All 
the wrinkles and deep lines of his gnarled face seemed to end in 
his blind left eye which was partly open and riveted one’s atten¬ 
tion. Five rows of ribbons made a bright patch on the left breast 
of his khaki uniform. 

He talked philosophy and quoted Matthew Arnold. When I 
walked with him once in the immense garden behind his house in 
New Delhi he reminisced about service in the Caucasus during 
the first World War and sang a verse of ‘Allahverdi’, a popular 
Georgian drinking song. He was informal and friendly and 
did not behave like a commander-in-chief or an imperial 
administrator. 

Wavell’s hero was General Allenby under whom he had fought 
in the first World War. He was writing a long biography of 
Allenby and allowed me to read part of the neatly typed manu¬ 
script tied in red ribbons. The prose was exquisite. The most 
dramatic episode of the book was Allenby’s fierce conflict with 
the British government over the political status of Egypt. Allenby 
was High Commissioner of Egypt after the first World War. 
While serving in that capacity he became convinced that Britain 
should end her protectorate and grant Egypt independence. But 
his pleas from Cairo Tailed to sway the men in Whitehall. He 
accordingly appeared in London to face an all-star Cabinet which 
included Lloyd George, Lord Curzon, Milner and Winston 
Churchill, all of them opponents of Egyptian independence 
and ‘the most determined’, Wavell wrote, ‘had been Winston 
Churchill’. Allenby’s arguments did not move the ministers. He 
threatened to resign. He was the conqueror of Jerusalem, the 
man who broke the back of the Turks in the war, and had a strong 
hold, consequently, on the loyalty and imagination of the British 
people. Lloyd George did not want to risk an open break with 
Allenby and capitulated. 

I wrote to Wavell, ‘Lloyd George, Curzon and Churchill 
probably adduced as plausible objections to the independence of 
Egypt as those one can hear today in British circles in New Delhi 
against the independence of India, yet Allenby stood his ground 
and won. You are convinced that he was right and the Cabinet 
wrong. Governments are often wrong. The whole history of 
Europe between 1919 and 1939 is a record of wrong policies. 

438 


ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE 


There is little in the recent acts of British Cabinets to suggest that 
London’s present attitude to India is a pillar of wisdom.’ 

Wavell was then Commander-in-Chief and he limited himself 
to military affairs. In 1944, however, Churchill appointed him 
Viceroy. 

Wavell went to London in March 1945. 

An editorial in The Times of March 20th, 1945, summarizing 
numerous letters in its correspondence columns and its own views, 
said, ‘There is a general conviction that it is for this country to 
resume the political initiative . . . First, it is proposed that Britain 
should now begin a gradual remodelling of the structure, staffing 
and procedure of the governmental machine in preparation for 
the complete transfer of power to Indian hands; and, secondly, 
that the persistence of the antagonisms now sundering the parties 
and interests of India constitute a reproach to British as well as 
Indian statesmanship. . . .’ 

British opinion, even conservative opinion, was deserting 
Churchill’s intransigent stand on India. 

Wavell stayed in London for nearly two months. Prophets were 
predicting a Labour party triumph in the impending British 
general election. Policy abroad usually reflects politics at home. 
And Wavell still had four years as Viceroy. 

In April 1945, on the eve of the San Francisco Conference to 
draft the charter of the United Nations, Indian and foreign cor¬ 
respondents sought a statement from Mahatma Gandhi. ‘India’s 
nationalism spells internationalism,’ he declared. 

‘There will be no peace for the Allies or the world,’ he asserted, 
‘unless they shed their belief in the efficacy of war and its accom¬ 
panying terrible deception and fraud, and are determined to 
hammer out a real peace based on the freedom and equality of all 
races and nations . . . Freedom of India will demonstrate to all 
the exploited races of the earth that their freedom is near and that 
in no case will they henceforth be exploited. 

‘Peace,’ Gandhi added, ‘must be just. In order to be that it 
must neither be punitive nor vindictive. Germany and Japan 
should not be humiliated. The strong are never vindictive. There¬ 
fore the fruits of peace must be shared equally. The effort then 
will be to turn them into friends. The Allies can prove their 
democracy by no other means.’ 

439 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


But lie feared that behind the San Francisco Conference ‘lurk 
the mistrust and fear which breed war’. 

Gandhi saw that freedom was the twin of peace, and fearlessness 
the parent of both. Who could doubt that India would be free 
before i960 and most of south-east Asia as well? Who could 
doubt that until they were free they could make the West’s life a 
nightmare and Europe’s recovery impossible? To prevent another 
war the victors would have to remove the ills which conduce to 
the ‘rotten world’ of which Sumner Welles had spoken. 

These ideas were beginning to shape Britain’s attitude towards 
India. 

Government policy is like a ticker tape; the old message is still 
visible when the first words of the new message appear. A 
country can have two conflicting policies or parts of two conflicting 
policies. Actually there is no such thing as a government; there 
are many men and women in a government and some may pull in 
one direction and some in another. 

Wavell brought back to New Delhi the British government’s 
approval of a new plan for India which he broadcast on June 
14th. The same day he released Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the 
president of the Congress party, Jawaharlal Nehru and other 
leaders who had been in prison since the morning of August 9th, 
1942. He also summoned India’s outstanding politicians to Simla, 
the summer capital, for June 25th. 

Congress leaders showed no bitterness about their long im¬ 
prisonment without trial. They agreed to come. Jinnah attended 
as president of the Moslem League and Liaquat Ali Khan as 
secretary of the League. Khizr Hyat Khan and Kwaja Sir Nazi- 
muddin were invited in their capacity of former prime ministers 
of their provinces. In addition, Master Tara Singh represented 
the Sikhs and Mr. Sivaraj the Harijans. Gandhi was not a 
delegate but he went to Simla and remained throughout the 
discussions. 

According to the Wavell plan the Viceroy and the Commander- 
in-Chief would be the only Englishmen in the Viceroy’s Executive 
Council. All the others would be Indians. Indians would thus 
take charge of foreign affairs, finance, police, etc. 

The Viceroy would appoint the Indian members of his Council 
but he undertook to do so from lists of names submitted by the 

440 


ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE 


several parties. The Viceroy would still have the right to veto the 
decisions of the Council, but he promised publicly that the veto 
power ‘will of course not be exercised unreasonably’. Most 
political Indians took him at his word, for if he abused the veto 
the Indians could withdraw from the Council and forbid any of 
their party members to succeed them; that would have put an 
end to the Wavell plan and to government with popular support. 

The Simla conference nevertheless failed. Wavell placed the 
blame on Jinnah. 

The plan provided for ‘equal proportions of Moslems and 
Caste Hindus’ in the Viceroy’s Council. The Congress objected. 
Congress was a much larger organization than the Moslem League. 
The whole history of Congress was a battle against differentiating 
between caste and outcast Hindus. So eager was Congress for a 
settlement, however, that it accepted the formula. 

Wavell, who worked indefatigably at Simla, then asked the 
party leaders for their lists. All complied except Jinnah. ‘I 
therefore,’ Wavell said in a public statement, ‘made my provisional 
selections, including certain Moslem League names . . . When I 
explained my solution to Mr. Jinnah, he told me that it was not 
acceptable to the Moslem League, and he was so decided that I 
felt it would be useless to continue the discussions.’ 

Jinnah torpedoed the Simla conference for one discernible 
reason: he insisted that all Moslems in the Viceroy’s Council 
must be designated by him as the leader of the Moslems of India. 

The Moslem League had gained strength during the war and 
won most elections against Moslem candidates who were not in 
the League. But neither Wavell nor Gandhi, who made Congress 
policy behind the Simla scenes, could admit Jinnah’s claim to 
represent Moslem India. There were many Moslems in Congress; 
President Azad was a Moslem and Congress wanted him in the 
Viceroy’s Council. Khizr Hyat Khan, former premier of the 
Punjab, was anti-Jinnah and anti-Pakistan; so were other out¬ 
standing Moslems. 

Moreover, Congress would have been untrue to its secular 
nature and to Gandhi’s principles if it had accepted the role of a 
purely Hindu organization. Congress aspired to be a national 
not a religious body; it could not allow itself to be identified with 
one religious community. 


441 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


On this rock, the Simla conference foundered. The British 
authorities in India, or Britain, were not ready to act without 
Jinnah’s co-operation. 

During the Simla conference, the war in Europe had come to 
an end. On July 26th, the Labour party decisively defeated the 
Conservatives; Clement R. Attlee replaced Winston Churchill 
as Prime Minister. 

On August 14th Japan’s surrender was accepted by the Powers. 

The British Labour government immediately announced that 
it sought ‘an early realization of self-government in India’ and 
summoned Wavell to Whitehall. Their conclusions were an¬ 
nounced by Attlee in London and Wavell in New Delhi on 
September 19th, 1945. 

Elections to the central and provincial legislatures were the 
first step. Then Wavell would renew his efforts to form an Execu¬ 
tive Council supported by the main Indian parties and to restore 
popular government in the provinces. Guided by the results at 
the polls, he would convene an assembly to draft a constitution 
for a united India. 

The All-India Congress Committee, habitually distrustful, 
considered the proposals ‘vague, inadequate and unsatisfactory’. 
But the Government was conciliatory; more Congress prisoners 
were released; three high officers of the Indian National Army 
who had deserted in Malaya and Burma and joined the Japanese 
were brought to trial in Delhi Fort, defended by Nehru and other 
lawyers, sentenced to life imprisonment and then set free. 

All parties agreed to contest the elections. 

Congress won the overwhelming majority of the non-Moslem 
seats in the legislatures, the Moslem League the overwhelming 
majority of the Moslem seats. 

The deadlock remained unbroken. 

In December. 1945, Wavell, speaking in Calcutta, appealed to 
the Indian people to avoid strife and violence when they stood 
at the gate of political and economic opportunity’. 

Gandhi was in Calcutta, too. He spent many hours with Richard 
Casey, the Australian who served as British Governor of Bengal. 
He also spent an hour with the Viceroy. As he left the Viceroy’s 
house in Calcutta a vast multitude blocked the road and would not 
allow his car to advance until he had spoken. He stood up in the 

442 


ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE 


car and said, ‘India has attained her great position in the East 
because of her message of peace. 5 Thereupon the crowd opened 
a corridor for him so that he could drive to his ashram eight miles 
outside the city. Along the entire route, Indians touched the dust 
of the road before and after he passed. 

The same day, Jinnah made a statement in Bombay. ‘We could 
settle the Indian problem in ten minutes, 5 he declared, "if Mr. 
Gandhi would say, “I agree that there should be Pakistan; I 
agree that one-fourth of India, composed of six provinces — Sind, 
Baluchistan, the Punjab, the North-west Frontier Province, 
Bengal and Assam — with their present boundaries, constitute the 
Pakistan state. 55 5 

But Gandhi could not say that and did not say it; he regarded 
the vivisection of India as ‘blasphemy 5 . 


443 


 

