    
       I
 
   
    I
A   A
I
A  
TO Gen. J. J. HARDIN, SPRINGFIELD, Jany. 19, 1845.
DEAR GENERAL:
I do not wish to join in your proposal of a new plan for
the selection of a Whig candidate for Congress because:
1st. I am entirely satisﬁed with the old system under which
you and Baker were successively nominated and elected to
Congress; and because the Whigs of the district are well
acquainted with the system, and, so far as I know or
believe, are well satisﬁed with it. If the old system be
thought to be vague, as to all the delegates of the county
voting the same way, or as to instructions to them as to
whom they are to vote for, or as to ﬁlling vacancies, I am
willing to join in a provision to make these matters certain.
2d. As to your proposals that a poll shall be opened in
every precinct, and that the whole shall take place on the
same day, I do not personally object. They seem to me to be
not unfair; and I forbear to join in proposing them only
because I choose to leave the decision in each county to the
Whigs of the county, to be made as their own judgment and
convenience may dictate.
3d. As to your proposed stipulation that all the
candidates shall remain in their own counties, and restrain
their friends in the same it seems to me that on reﬂection
 you will see the fact of your having been in Congress has,
in various ways, so spread your name in the district as to
give you a decided advantage in such a stipulation. I
appreciate your desire to keep down excitement; and I
promise you to “keep cool” under all circumstances.
4th. I have already said I am satisﬁed with the old system
under which such good men have triumphed and that I
desire no departure from its principles. But if there must be
a departure from it, I shall insist upon a more accurate and
just apportionment of delegates, or representative votes, to
the constituent body, than exists by the old, and which you
propose to retain in your new plan. If we take the entire
population of the counties as shown by the late census, we
shall see by the old plan, and by your proposed new plan,
Morgan County, with a population 16,541, has but ....... 8
votes While Sangamon with 18,697 — 2156 greater has but
....... 8 “
So Scott with 6553 has ................................. 4 “
While Tazewell with 7615 1062 greater has but .......... 4 “
So Mason with 3135 has ................................. 1 vote
While Logan with 3907, 772 greater, has but ............ 1 “
And so on in a less degree the matter runs through all
the counties, being not only wrong in principle, but the
advantage of it being all manifestly in your favor with one
slight exception, in the comparison of two counties not here
mentioned.
Again, if we take the Whig votes of the counties as shown
by the late Presidential election as a basis, the thing is still
worse.
 It seems to me most obvious that the old system needs
adjustment in nothing so much as in this; and still, by your
proposal, no notice is taken of it. I have always been in the
habit of acceding to almost any proposal that a friend
would make and I am truly sorry that I cannot in this. I
perhaps ought to mention that some friends at diﬀerent
places are endeavoring to secure the honor of the sitting of
the convention at their towns respectively, and I fear that
they would not feel much complimented if we shall make a
bargain that it should sit nowhere.
Yours as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
 
I  IA
 
SPRINGFIELD, March 1, 1845.
FRIEND WILLIAMS: The Supreme Court adjourned this
morning for the term. Your cases of Reinhardt vs. Schuyler,
Bunce vs. Schuyler, Dickhut vs. Dunell, and Sullivan vs.
Andrews are continued. Hinman vs. Pope I wrote you
concerning some time ago. McNutt et al. vs. Bean and
Thompson is reversed and remanded.
Fitzpatrick vs. Brady et al. is reversed and remanded
with leave to complainant to amend his bill so as to show
the real consideration given for the land.
Bunce against Graves the court conﬁrmed, wherefore, in
accordance with your directions, I moved to have the case
remanded to enable you to take a new trial in the court
below. The court allowed the motion; of which I am glad,
and I guess you are.
This, I believe, is all as to court business. The canal men
have got their measure through the Legislature pretty
much or quite in the shape they desired. Nothing else now.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
 A 
 I I
 
  
 
TO WILLIAMSON DURLEY.
SPRINGFIELD, OCTOBER 3, 1845
When I saw you at home, it was agreed that I should
write to you and your brother Madison. Until I then saw
you I was not aware of your being what is generally called
an abolitionist, or, as you call yourself, a Liberty man,
though I well knew there were many such in your country.
I was glad to hear that you intended to attempt to bring
about, at the next election in Putnam, a Union of the Whigs
proper and such of the Liberty men as are Whigs in
principle on all questions save only that of slavery. So far as
I can perceive, by such union neither party need yield
anything on the point in diﬀerence between them. If the
Whig abolitionists of New York had voted with us last fall,
Mr. Clay would now be President, Whig principles in the
ascendant, and Texas not annexed; whereas, by the
division, all that either had at stake in the contest was lost.
And, indeed, it was extremely probable, beforehand, that
such would be the result. As I always understood, the
Liberty men deprecated the annexation of Texas extremely;
and this being so, why they should refuse to cast their votes
[so] as to prevent it, even to me seemed wonderful. What
was their process of reasoning, I can only judge from what
 a single one of them told me. It was this: “We are not to do
evil that good may come.” This general proposition is
doubtless correct; but did it apply? If by your votes you
could have prevented the extension, etc., of slavery would
it not have been good, and not evil, so to have used your
votes, even though it involved the casting of them for a
slaveholder? By the fruit the tree is to be known. An evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit. If the fruit of electing
Mr. Clay would have been to prevent the extension of
slavery, could the act of electing have been evil?
But I will not argue further. I perhaps ought to say that
individually I never was much interested in the Texas
question. I never could see much good to come of
annexation, inasmuch as they were already a free
republican people on our own model. On the other hand, I
never could very clearly see how the annexation would
augment the evil of slavery. It always seemed to me that
slaves would be taken there in about equal numbers, with
or without annexation. And if more were taken because of
annexation, still there would be just so many the fewer left
where they were taken from. It is possibly true, to some
extent, that, with annexation, some slaves may be sent to
Texas and continued in slavery that otherwise might have
been liberated. To whatever extent this may be true, I think
annexation an evil. I hold it to be a paramount duty of us in
the free States, due to the Union of the States, and perhaps
to liberty itself (paradox though it may seem), to let the
slavery of the other States alone; while, on the other hand,
I hold it to be equally clear that we should never knowingly
 lend ourselves, directly or indirectly, to prevent that slavery
from dying a natural death — to ﬁnd new places for it to
live in when it can no longer exist in the old. Of course I am
not now considering what would be our duty in cases of
insurrection among the slaves. To recur to the Texas
question, I understand the Liberty men to have viewed
annexation as a much greater evil than ever I did; and I
would like to convince you, if I could, that they could have
prevented it, if they had chosen. I intend this letter for you
and Madison together; and if you and he or either shall
think ﬁt to drop me a line, I shall be pleased.
Yours with respect, A. LINCOLN.
