    
   I    
     
    
 I
  
   
TO WILLIAM H. HERNDON.
WASHINGTON, JANUARY 8, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Your letter of December 27 was
received a day or two ago. I am much obliged to you for the
trouble you have taken, and promise to take in my little
business there. As to speech making, by way of getting the
hang of the House I made a little speech two or three days
ago on a post-oﬀice question of no general interest. I ﬁnd
speaking here and elsewhere about the same thing. I was
about as badly scared, and no worse as I am when I speak
in court. I expect to make one within a week or two, in
which I hope to succeed well enough to wish you to see it.
It is very pleasant to learn from you that there are some
who desire that I should be reelected. I most heartily thank
them for their kind partiality; and I can say, as Mr. Clay said
of the annexation of Texas, that “personally I would not
object” to a reelection, although I thought at the time, and
still think, it would be quite as well for me to return to the
law at the end of a single term. I made the declaration that
I would not be a candidate again, more from a wish to deal
fairly with others, to keep peace among our friends, and to
keep the district from going to the enemy, than for any
cause personal to myself; so that if it should so happen that
 nobody else wishes to be elected, I could not refuse the
people the right of sending me again. But to enter myself as
a competitor of others, or to authorize any one so to enter
me is what my word and honor forbid.
I got some letters intimating a probability of so much
diﬀiculty amongst our friends as to lose us the district; but
I remember such letters were written to Baker when my
own case was under consideration, and I trust there is no
more ground for such apprehension now than there was
then. Remember I am always glad to receive a letter from
you.
Most truly your friend, A. LINCOLN.
      H 
 
   A A I
 
  
A  
 
  I 
SPEECH IN THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES,
JANUARY 12, 1848.
MR CHAIRMAN: — Some if not all the gentlemen on the
other side of the House who have addressed the committee
within the last two days have spoken rather complainingly,
if I have rightly understood them, of the vote given a week
or ten days ago declaring that the war with Mexico was
unnecessarily and unconstitutionally commenced by the
President. I admit that such a vote should not be given in
mere party wantonness, and that the one given is justly
censurable if it have no other or better foundation. I am
one of those who joined in that vote; and I did so under my
best impression of the truth of the case. How I got this
impression, and how it may possibly be remedied, I will
now try to show. When the war began, it was my opinion
that all those who because of knowing too little, or because
of knowing too much, could not conscientiously approve the
conduct of the President in the beginning of it should
nevertheless, as good citizens and patriots, remain silent on
that point, at least till the war should be ended. Some
leading Democrats, including ex-President Van Buren, have
taken this same view, as I understand them; and I adhered
 to it and acted upon it, until since I took my seat here; and I
think I should still adhere to it were it not that the
President and his friends will not allow it to be so. Besides
the continual eﬀort of the President to argue every silent
vote given for supplies into an indorsement of the justice
and wisdom of his conduct; besides that singularly candid
paragraph in his late message in which he tells us that
Congress with great unanimity had declared that “by the
act of the Republic of Mexico, a state of war exists between
that government and the United States,” when the same
journals that informed him of this also informed him that
when that declaration stood disconnected from the
question of supplies sixty-seven in the House, and not
fourteen merely, voted against it; besides this open attempt
to prove by telling the truth what he could not prove by
telling the whole truth-demanding of all who will not
submit to be misrepresented, in justice to themselves, to
speak out, besides all this, one of my colleagues [Mr.
Richardson] at a very early day in the session brought in a
set of resolutions expressly indorsing the original justice of
the war on the part of the President. Upon these
resolutions when they shall be put on their passage I shall
be compelled to vote; so that I cannot be silent if I would.
Seeing this, I went about preparing myself to give the vote
understandingly when it should come. I carefully examined
the President’s message, to ascertain what he himself had
said and proved upon the point. The result of this
examination was to make the impression that, taking for
true all the President states as facts, he falls far short of
 proving his justiﬁcation; and that the President would have
gone further with his proof if it had not been for the small
matter that the truth would not permit him. Under the
impression thus made I gave the vote before mentioned. I
propose now to give concisely the process of the
examination I made, and how I reached the conclusion I
did. The President, in his ﬁrst war message of May, 1846,
declares that the soil was ours on which hostilities were
commenced by Mexico, and he repeats that declaration
almost in the same language in each successive annual
message, thus showing that he deems that point a highly
essential one. In the importance of that point I entirely
agree with the President. To my judgment it is the very
point upon which he should be justiﬁed, or condemned. In
his message of December, 1846, it seems to have occurred
to him, as is certainly true, that title-ownership-to soil or
anything else is not a simple fact, but is a conclusion
following on one or more simple facts; and that it was
incumbent upon him to present the facts from which he
concluded the soil was ours on which the ﬁrst blood of the
war was shed.
Accordingly, a little below the middle of page twelve in
the message last referred to, he enters upon that task;
forming an issue and introducing testimony, extending the
whole to a little below the middle of page fourteen. Now, I
propose to try to show that the whole of this — issue and
evidence — is from beginning to end the sheerest
deception. The issue, as he presents it, is in these words:
“But there are those who, conceding all this to be true,
 assume the ground that the true western boundary of Texas
is the Nueces, instead of the Rio Grande; and that,
therefore, in marching our army to the east bank of the
latter river, we passed the Texas line and invaded the
territory of Mexico.” Now this issue is made up of two
aﬀirmatives and no negative. The main deception of it is
that it assumes as true that one river or the other is
necessarily the boundary; and cheats the superﬁcial thinker
entirely out of the idea that possibly the boundary is
somewhere between the two, and not actually at either. A
further deception is that it will let in evidence which a true
issue would exclude. A true issue made by the President
would be about as follows: “I say the soil was ours, on
which the ﬁrst blood was shed; there are those who say it
was not.”
I now proceed to examine the President’s evidence as
applicable to such an issue. When that evidence is
analyzed, it is all included in the following propositions: (1)
That the Rio Grande was the western boundary of
Louisiana as we purchased it of France in 1803.
(2) That the Republic of Texas always claimed the Rio
Grande as her eastern boundary.
(3) That by various acts she had claimed it on paper.
(4) That Santa Anna in his treaty with Texas recognized
the Rio Grande as her boundary.
(5) That Texas before, and the United States after,
annexation had exercised jurisdiction beyond the Nueces —
between the two rivers.
 (6) That our Congress understood the boundary of Texas
to extend beyond the Nueces.
Now for each of these in its turn. His ﬁrst item is that the
Rio Grande was the western boundary of Louisiana, as we
purchased it of France in 1803; and seeming to expect this
to be disputed, he argues over the amount of nearly a page
to prove it true, at the end of which he lets us know that by
the treaty of 1803 we sold to Spain the whole country from
the Rio Grande eastward to the Sabine. Now, admitting for
the present that the Rio Grande was the boundary of
Louisiana, what under heaven had that to do with the
present boundary between us and Mexico? How, Mr.
Chairman, the line that once divided your land from mine
can still be the boundary between us after I have sold my
land to you is to me beyond all comprehension. And how
any man, with an honest purpose only of proving the truth,
could ever have thought of introducing such a fact to prove
such an issue is equally incomprehensible. His next piece of
evidence is that “the Republic of Texas always claimed this
river [Rio Grande] as her western boundary.” That is not
true, in fact. Texas has claimed it, but she has not always
claimed it. There is at least one distinguished exception.
Her State constitution the republic’s most solemn and well-
considered act, that which may, without impropriety, be
called her last will and testament, revoking all others-
makes no such claim. But suppose she had always claimed
it. Has not Mexico always claimed the contrary? So that
there is but claim against claim, leaving nothing proved
until we get back of the claims and ﬁnd which has the
 better foundation. Though not in the order in which the
President presents his evidence, I now consider that class
of his statements which are in substance nothing more than
that Texas has, by various acts of her Convention and
Congress, claimed the Rio Grande as her boundary, on
paper. I mean here what he says about the ﬁxing of the Rio
Grande as her boundary in her old constitution (not her
State constitution), about forming Congressional districts,
counties, etc. Now all of this is but naked claim; and what I
have already said about claims is strictly applicable to this.
If I should claim your land by word of mouth, that certainly
would not make it mine; and if I were to claim it by a deed
which I had made myself, and with which you had had
nothing to do, the claim would be quite the same in
substance — or rather, in utter nothingness. I next consider
the President’s statement that Santa Anna in his treaty with
Texas recognized the Rio Grande as the western boundary
of Texas. Besides the position so often taken, that Santa
Anna while a prisoner of war, a captive, could not bind
Mexico by a treaty, which I deem conclusive — besides this,
I wish to say something in relation to this treaty, so called
by the President, with Santa Anna. If any man would like to
be amused by a sight of that little thing which the President
calls by that big name, he can have it by turning to Niles’s
Register, vol. 1, . And if any one should suppose that Niles’s
Register is a curious repository of so mighty a document as
a solemn treaty between nations, I can only say that I
learned to a tolerable degree of certainty, by inquiry at the
State Department, that the President himself never saw it
 anywhere else. By the way, I believe I should not err if I
were to declare that during the ﬁrst ten years of the
existence of that document it was never by anybody called
a treaty — that it was never so called till the President, in
his extremity, attempted by so calling it to wring something
from it in justiﬁcation of himself in connection with the
Mexican War. It has none of the distinguishing features of a
treaty. It does not call itself a treaty. Santa Anna does not
therein assume to bind Mexico; he assumes only to act as
the President — Commander-in-Chief of the Mexican army
and navy; stipulates that the then present hostilities should
cease, and that he would not himself take up arms, nor
inﬂuence the Mexican people to take up arms, against
Texas during the existence of the war of independence. He
did not recognize the independence of Texas; he did not
assume to put an end to the war, but clearly indicated his
expectation of its continuance; he did not say one word
about boundary, and, most probably, never thought of it. It
is stipulated therein that the Mexican forces should
evacuate the territory of Texas, passing to the other side of
the Rio Grande; and in another article it is stipulated that,
to prevent collisions between the armies, the Texas army
should not approach nearer than within ﬁve leagues — of
what is not said, but clearly, from the object stated, it is of
the Rio Grande. Now, if this is a treaty recognizing the Rio
Grande as the boundary of Texas, it contains the singular
feature of stipulating that Texas shall not go within ﬁve
leagues of her own boundary.
 Next comes the evidence of Texas before annexation, and
the United States afterwards, exercising jurisdiction
beyond the Nueces and between the two rivers. This actual
exercise of jurisdiction is the very class or quality of
evidence we want. It is excellent so far as it goes; but does
it go far enough? He tells us it went beyond the Nueces,
but he does not tell us it went to the Rio Grande. He tells us
jurisdiction was exercised between the two rivers, but he
does not tell us it was exercised over all the territory
between them. Some simple-minded people think it is
possible to cross one river and go beyond it without going
all the way to the next, that jurisdiction may be exercised
between two rivers without covering all the country
between them. I know a man, not very unlike myself, who
exercises jurisdiction over a piece of land between the
Wabash and the Mississippi; and yet so far is this from
being all there is between those rivers that it is just one
hundred and ﬁfty-two feet long by ﬁfty feet wide, and no
part of it much within a hundred miles of either. He has a
neighbor between him and the Mississippi — that is, just
across the street, in that direction — whom I am sure he
could neither persuade nor force to give up his habitation;
but which nevertheless he could certainly annex, if it were
to be done by merely standing on his own side of the street
and claiming it, or even sitting down and writing a deed for
it.
But next the President tells us the Congress of the
United States understood the State of Texas they admitted
into the Union to extend beyond the Nueces. Well, I
 suppose they did. I certainly so understood it. But how far
beyond? That Congress did not understand it to extend
clear to the Rio Grande is quite certain, by the fact of their
joint resolutions for admission expressly leaving all
questions of boundary to future adjustment. And it may be
added that Texas herself is proven to have had the same
understanding of it that our Congress had, by the fact of
the exact conformity of her new constitution to those
resolutions.
I am now through the whole of the President’s evidence;
and it is a singular fact that if any one should declare the
President sent the army into the midst of a settlement of
Mexican people who had never submitted, by consent or by
force, to the authority of Texas or of the United States, and
that there and thereby the ﬁrst blood of the war was shed,
there is not one word in all the which would either admit or
deny the declaration. This strange omission it does seem to
me could not have occurred but by design. My way of living
leads me to be about the courts of justice; and there I have
sometimes seen a good lawyer, struggling for his client’s
neck in a desperate case, employing every artiﬁce to work
round, befog, and cover up with many words some point
arising in the case which he dared not admit and yet could
not deny. Party bias may help to make it appear so, but with
all the allowance I can make for such bias, it still does
appear to me that just such, and from just such necessity, is
the President’s struggle in this case.
Sometime 
after 
my 
colleague 
[Mr. 
Richardson]
introduced the resolutions I have mentioned, I introduced a
 preamble, resolution, and interrogations, intended to draw
the President out, if possible, on this hitherto untrodden
ground. To show their relevancy, I propose to state my
understanding of the true rule for ascertaining the
boundary between Texas and Mexico. It is that wherever
Texas was exercising jurisdiction was hers; and wherever
Mexico was exercising jurisdiction was hers; and that
whatever separated the actual exercise of jurisdiction of
the one from that of the other was the true boundary
between them. If, as is probably true, Texas was exercising
jurisdiction along the western bank of the Nueces, and
Mexico was exercising it along the eastern bank of the Rio
Grande, then neither river was the boundary: but the
uninhabited country between the two was. The extent of
our territory in that region depended not on any treaty-
ﬁxed boundary (for no treaty had attempted it), but on
revolution. Any people anywhere being inclined and having
the power have the right to rise up and shake oﬀ the
existing government, and form a new one that suits them
better. This is a most valuable, a most sacred right — a
right which we hope and believe is to liberate the world.
Nor is this right conﬁned to cases in which the whole
people of an existing government may choose to exercise it.
Any portion of such people that can may revolutionize and
make their own of so much of the territory as they inhabit.
More than this, a majority of any portion of such people
may revolutionize, putting down a minority, intermingled
with or near about them, who may oppose this movement.
Such minority was precisely the case of the Tories of our
 own revolution. It is a quality of revolutions not to go by old
lines or old laws, but to break up both, and make new ones.
As to the country now in question, we bought it of France
in 1803, and sold it to Spain in 1819, according to the
President’s statements. After this, all Mexico, including
Texas, revolutionized against Spain; and still later Texas
revolutionized against Mexico. In my view, just so far as she
carried her resolution by obtaining the actual, willing or
unwilling, submission of the people, so far the country was
hers, and no farther. Now, sir, for the purpose of obtaining
the very best evidence as to whether Texas had actually
carried her revolution to the place where the hostilities of
the present war commenced, let the President answer the
interrogatories I proposed, as before mentioned, or some
other similar ones. Let him answer fully, fairly, and
candidly. Let him answer with facts and not with
arguments. Let him remember he sits where Washington
sat, and so remembering, let him answer as Washington
would answer. As a nation should not, and the Almighty will
not, be evaded, so let him attempt no evasion — no
equivocation. And if, so answering, he can show that the
soil was ours where the ﬁrst blood of the war was shed, —
that it was not within an inhabited country, or, if within
such, that the inhabitants had submitted themselves to the
civil authority of Texas or of the United States, and that the
same is true of the site of Fort Brown, then I am with him
for his justiﬁcation. In that case I shall be most happy to
reverse the vote I gave the other day. I have a selﬁsh
motive for desiring that the President may do this — I
 expect to gain some votes, in connection with the war,
which, without his so doing, will be of doubtful propriety in
my own judgment, but which will be free from the doubt if
he does so. But if he can not or will not do this, — if on any
pretence or no pretence he shall refuse or omit it then I
shall be fully convinced of what I more than suspect
already that he is deeply conscious of being in the wrong;
that he feels the blood of this war, like the blood of Abel, is
crying to heaven against him; that originally having some
strong motive — what, I will not stop now to give my
opinion concerning to involve the two countries in a war,
and trusting to escape scrutiny by ﬁxing the public gaze
upon the exceeding brightness of military glory, — that
attractive rainbow that rises in showers of blood, that
serpent’s eye that charms to destroy, — he plunged into it,
and was swept on and on till, disappointed in his
calculation of the ease with which Mexico might be
subdued, he now ﬁnds himself he knows not where. How
like the half insane mumbling of a fever dream is the whole
war part of his late message! At one time telling us that
Mexico has nothing whatever that we can get — but
territory; at another showing us how we can support the
war by levying contributions on Mexico. At one time urging
the national honor, the security of the future, the
prevention of foreign interference, and even the good of
Mexico herself as among the objects of the war; at another
telling us that “to reject indemnity, by refusing to accept a
cession of territory, would be to abandon all our just
demands, and to wage the war, bearing all its expenses,
 without a purpose or deﬁnite object.” So then this national
honor, security of the future, and everything but territorial
indemnity 
may 
be 
considered 
the 
no-purposes 
and
indeﬁnite objects of the war! But, having it now settled that
territorial indemnity is the only object, we are urged to
seize, by legislation here, all that he was content to take a
few months ago, and the whole province of Lower
California to boot, and to still carry on the war to take all
we are ﬁghting for, and still ﬁght on. Again, the President is
resolved under all circumstances to have full territorial
indemnity for the expenses of the war; but he forgets to tell
us how we are to get the excess after those expenses shall
have surpassed the value of the whole of the Mexican
territory. So again, he insists that the separate national
existence of Mexico shall be maintained; but he does not
tell us how this can be done, after we shall have taken all
her territory. Lest the questions I have suggested be
considered speculative merely, let me be indulged a
moment in trying to show they are not. The war has gone
on some twenty months; for the expenses of which,
together with an inconsiderable old score, the President
now claims about one half of the Mexican territory, and that
by far the better half, so far as concerns our ability to make
anything out of it. It is comparatively uninhabited; so that
we could establish land-oﬀices in it, and raise some money
in that way. But the other half is already inhabited, as I
understand it, tolerably densely for the nature of the
country, and all its lands, or all that are valuable, already
appropriated as private property. How then are we to make
 anything out of these lands with this encumbrance on
them? or how remove the encumbrance? I suppose no one
would say we should kill the people, or drive them out, or
make slaves of them, or conﬁscate their property. How,
then, can we make much out of this part of the territory? If
the prosecution of the war has in expenses already equalled
the better half of the country, how long its future
prosecution will be in equalling the less valuable half is not
a speculative, but a practical, question, pressing closely
upon us. And yet it is a question which the President seems
never to have thought of. As to the mode of terminating the
war and securing peace, the President is equally wandering
and indeﬁnite. First, it is to be done by a more vigorous
prosecution of the war in the vital parts of the enemy’s
country; and after apparently talking himself tired on this
point, the President drops down into a half-despairing tone,
and tells us that “with a people distracted and divided by
contending factions, and a government subject to constant
changes by successive revolutions, the continued success of
our arms may fail to secure a satisfactory peace.” Then he
suggests the propriety of wheedling the Mexican people to
desert the counsels of their own leaders, and, trusting in
our protestations, to set up a government from which we
can secure a satisfactory peace; telling us that “this may
become the only mode of obtaining such a peace.” But soon
he falls into doubt of this too; and then drops back on to the
already 
half-abandoned 
ground 
of 
“more 
vigorous
prosecution.” All this shows that the President is in nowise
satisﬁed with his own positions. First he takes up one, and
 in attempting to argue us into it he argues himself out of it,
then seizes another and goes through the same process,
and then, confused at being able to think of nothing new, he
snatches up the old one again, which he has some time
before cast oﬀ. His mind, taxed beyond its power, is
running hither and thither, like some tortured creature on a
burning surface, ﬁnding no position on which it can settle
down and be at ease.
Again, it is a singular omission in this message that it
nowhere intimates when the President expects the war to
terminate. At its beginning, General Scott was by this same
President driven into disfavor if not disgrace, for intimating
that peace could not be conquered in less than three or
four months. But now, at the end of about twenty months,
during which time our arms have given us the most
splendid successes, every department and every part, land
and water, oﬀicers and privates, regulars and volunteers,
doing all that men could do, and hundreds of things which
it had ever before been thought men could not do — after
all this, this same President gives a long message, without
showing us that as to the end he himself has even an
imaginary conception. As I have before said, he knows not
where he is. He is a bewildered, confounded, and miserably
perplexed man. God grant he may be able to show there is
not something about his conscience more painful than his
mental perplexity.
The following is a copy of the so-called “treaty” referred
to in the speech: “Articles of Agreement entered into
between his Excellency David G. Burnet, President of the
 Republic of Texas, of the one part, and his Excellency
General Santa Anna, President-General-in-Chief of the
Mexican army, of the other part:
“Article I. General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna agrees
that he will not take up arms, nor will he exercise his
inﬂuence to cause them to be taken up, against the people
of Texas during the present war of independence.
“Article II. All hostilities between the Mexican and Texan
troops will cease immediately, both by land and water.
“Article III. The Mexican troops will evacuate the
territory of Texas, passing to the other side of the Rio
Grande Del Norte.
“Article IV. The Mexican army, in its retreat, shall not
take the property of any person without his consent and
just indemniﬁcation, using only such articles as may be
necessary for its subsistence, in cases when the owner may
not be present, and remitting to the commander of the
army of Texas, or to the commissioners to be appointed for
the adjustment of such matters, an account of the value of
the property consumed, the place where taken, and the
name of the owner, if it can be ascertained.
“Article V. That all private property, including cattle,
horses, negro slaves, or indentured persons, of whatever
denomination, that may have been captured by any portion
 of the Mexican army, or may have taken refuge in the said
army, since the commencement of the late invasion, shall
be restored to the commander of the Texan army, or to such
other persons as may be appointed by the Government of
Texas to receive them.
“Article VI. The troops of both armies will refrain from
coming in contact with each other; and to this end the
commander of the army of Texas will be careful not to
approach within a shorter distance than ﬁve leagues.
“Article VII. The Mexican army shall not make any other
delay on its march than that which is necessary to take up
their hospitals, baggage, etc., and to cross the rivers; any
delay not necessary to these purposes to be considered an
infraction of this agreement.
“Article 
VIII. 
By 
an 
express, 
to 
be 
immediately
despatched, this agreement shall be sent to General
Vincente Filisola and to General T. J. Rusk, commander of
the Texan army, in order that they may be apprised of its
stipulations; 
and 
to 
this 
end 
they 
will 
exchange
engagements to comply with the same.
“Article I . That all Texan prisoners now in the
possession of the Mexican army, or its authorities, be
forthwith released, and furnished with free passports to
return to their homes; in consideration of which a
corresponding number of Mexican prisoners, rank and ﬁle,
 now in possession of the Government of Texas shall be
immediately released; the remainder of the Mexican
prisoners 
that 
continue 
in 
the 
possession 
of 
the
Government of Texas to be treated with due humanity, —
any extraordinary comforts that may be furnished them to
be at the charge of the Government of Mexico.
“Article  . General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna will be
sent to Vera Cruz as soon as it shall be deemed proper.
“The contracting parties sign this instrument for the
abovementioned purposes, in duplicate, at the port of
Velasco, this fourteenth day of May, 1836.
“DAVID G. BURNET, President,
“JAS. COLLINGSWORTH, Secretary of State,
“ANTONIO LOPEZ DE SANTA ANNA,
“B. HARDIMAN, Secretary of the Treasury,
“P. W. GRAYSON, Attorney-General.”
    
   I
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
 A
 A           .
MR. LINCOLN, FROM the Committee on the Post-oﬀice and
Post Roads, made the following report:
The Committee on the Post-oﬀice and Post Roads, to
whom was referred the petition of Messrs. Saltmarsh and
Fuller, report: That, as proved to their satisfaction, the mail
routes from Milledgeville to Athens, and from Warrenton to
Decatur, in the State of Georgia (numbered 2366 and
2380), were let to Reeside and Avery at  1300 per annum
for the former and  1500 for the latter, for the term of four
years, to commence on the ﬁrst day of January, 1835; that,
previous to the time for commencing the service, Reeside
sold his interest therein to Avery; that on the 5th of May,
1835, Avery sold the whole to these petitioners, Saltmarsh
and Fuller, to take eﬀect from the beginning, January a
1835; that at this time, the Assistant Postmaster-General,
being called on for that purpose, consented to the transfer
of the contracts from Reeside and Avery to these
petitioners, and promised to have proper entries of the
transfer made on the books of the department, which,
however, was neglected to be done; that the petitioners,
supposing all was right, in good faith commenced the
transportation of the mail on these routes, and after
diﬀiculty arose, still trusting that all would be made right,
 continued the service till December a 1837; that they
performed the service to the entire satisfaction of the
department, and have never been paid anything for it
except   —— ; that the diﬀiculty occurred as follows:
Mr. Barry was Postmaster-General at the times of making
the contracts and the attempted transfer of them; Mr.
Kendall 
succeeded 
Mr. 
Barry, 
and 
ﬁnding 
Reeside
apparently in debt to the department, and these contracts
still standing in the names of Reeside and Avery, refused to
pay for the services under them, otherwise than by credits
to 
Reeside; 
afterward, 
however, 
he 
divided 
the
compensation, still crediting one half to Reeside, and
directing the other to be paid to the order of Avery, who
disclaimed all right to it. After discontinuing the service,
these petitioners, supposing they might have legal redress
against Avery, brought suit against him in New Orleans; in
which suit they failed, on the ground that Avery had
complied with his contract, having done so much toward
the transfer as they had accepted and been satisﬁed with.
Still later the department sued Reeside on his supposed
indebtedness, and by a verdict of the jury it was
determined that the department was indebted to him in a
sum much beyond all the credits given him on the account
above stated. Under these circumstances, the committee
consider the petitioners clearly entitled to relief, and they
report a bill accordingly; lest, however, there should be
some mistake as to the amount which they have already
received, we so frame it as that, by adjustment at the
department, they may be paid so much as remains unpaid
 for services actually performed by them not charging them
with the credits given to Reeside. The committee think it
not improbable that the petitioners purchased the right of
Avery to be paid for the service from the 1st of January, till
their purchase on May 11, 1835; but, the evidence on this
point being very vague, they forbear to report in favor of
allowing it.
  
 
I  IA
 H. H  
 
   
A  
 
WASHINGTON, January 19, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Inclosed you ﬁnd a letter of Louis W.
Chandler. What is wanted is that you shall ascertain
whether the claim upon the note described has received
any dividend in the Probate Court of Christian County,
where the estate of Mr. Overbon Williams has been
administered on. If nothing is paid on it, withdraw the note
and send it to me, so that Chandler can see the indorser of
it. At all events write me all about it, till I can somehow get
it oﬀ my hands. I have already been bored more than
enough about it; not the least of which annoyance is his
cursed, unreadable, and ungodly handwriting.
I have made a speech, a copy of which I will send you by
next mail.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   
A 
I
      H 
 
  I A
 
A
TO WILLIAM H. HERNDON.
WASHINGTON, FEBRUARY 1, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Your letter of the 19th ultimo was
received last night, and for which I am much obliged. The
only thing in it that I wish to talk to you at once about is
that because of my vote for Ashmun’s amendment you fear
that you and I disagree about the war. I regret this, not
because of any fear we shall remain disagreed after you
have read this letter, but because if you misunderstand I
fear other good friends may also. That vote aﬀirms that the
war was unnecessarily and unconstitutionally commenced
by the President; and I will stake my life that if you had
been in my place you would have voted just as I did. Would
you have voted what you felt and knew to be a lie? I know
you would not. Would you have gone out of the House —
skulked the vote? I expect not. If you had skulked one vote,
you would have had to skulk many more before the end of
the session. Richardson’s resolutions, introduced before I
made any move or gave any vote upon the subject, make
the direct question of the justice of the war; so that no man
can be silent if he would. You are compelled to speak; and
your only alternative is to tell the truth or a lie. I cannot
doubt which you would do.
 This vote has nothing to do in determining my votes on
the questions of supplies. I have always intended, and still
intend, to vote supplies; perhaps not in the precise form
recommended by the President, but in a better form for all
purposes, except Locofoco party purposes. It is in this
particular you seem mistaken. The Locos are untiring in
their eﬀorts to make the impression that all who vote
supplies or take part in the war do of necessity approve the
President’s conduct in the beginning of it; but the Whigs
have from the beginning made and kept the distinction
between the two. In the very ﬁrst act nearly all the Whigs
voted against the preamble declaring that war existed by
the act of Mexico; and yet nearly all of them voted for the
supplies. As to the Whig men who have participated in the
war, so far as they have spoken in my hearing they do not
hesitate to denounce as unjust the President’s conduct in
the beginning of the war. They do not suppose that such
denunciation is directed by undying hatred to him, as The
Register would have it believed. There are two such Whigs
on this ﬂoor (Colonel Haskell and Major James) The former
fought as a colonel by the side of Colonel Baker at Cerro
Gordo, and stands side by side with me in the vote that you
seem dissatisﬁed with. The latter, the history of whose
capture with Cassius Clay you well know, had not arrived
here when that vote was given; but, as I understand, he
stands ready to give just such a vote whenever an occasion
shall present. Baker, too, who is now here, says the truth is
undoubtedly that way; and whenever he shall speak out, he
will say so. Colonel Doniphan, too, the favorite Whig of
 Missouri, and who overran all Northern Mexico, on his
return home in a public speech at St. Louis condemned the
administration in relation to the war. If I remember, G. T. M.
Davis, who has been through almost the whole war,
declares in favor of Mr. Clay; from which I infer that he
adopts the sentiments of Mr. Clay, generally at least. On the
other hand, I have heard of but one Whig who has been to
the war attempting to justify the President’s conduct. That
one was Captain Bishop, editor of the Charleston Courier,
and a very clever fellow. I do not mean this letter for the
public, but for you. Before it reaches you, you will have
seen and read my pamphlet speech, and perhaps been
scared anew by it. After you get over your scare, read it
over again, sentence by sentence, and tell me honestly
what you think of it. I condensed all I could for fear of
being cut oﬀ by the hour rule, and when I got through I had
spoken but forty-ﬁve minutes.
Yours forever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I  IA
 H. H  
.
WASHINGTON, February 2, 1848
DEAR WILLIAM: — I just take my pen to say that Mr.
Stephens, of Georgia, a little, slim, pale-faced, consumptive
man, with a voice like Logan’s, has just concluded the very
best speech of an hour’s length I ever heard. My old
withered dry eyes are full of tears yet.
If he writes it out anything like he delivered it, our
people shall see a good many copies of it.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   H  
  I A
 
A
TO WILLIAM H. HERNDON.
WASHINGTON, FEBRUARY 15, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Your letter of the 29th January was
received last night. Being exclusively a constitutional
argument, I wish to submit some reﬂections upon it in the
same spirit of kindness that I know actuates you. Let me
ﬁrst state what I understand to be your position. It is that if
it shall become necessary to repel invasion, the President
may, without violation of the Constitution, cross the line
and invade the territory of another country, and that
whether such necessity exists in any given case the
President is the sole judge.
Before going further consider well whether this is or is
not your position. If it is, it is a position that neither the
President himself, nor any friend of his, so far as I know,
has ever taken. Their only positions are — ﬁrst, that the soil
was ours when the hostilities commenced; and second, that
whether it was rightfully ours or not, Congress had
annexed it, and the President for that reason was bound to
defend it; both of which are as clearly proved to be false in
fact as you can prove that your house is mine. The soil was
not ours, and Congress did not annex or attempt to annex
it. But to return to your position. Allow the President to
 invade a neighboring nation whenever he shall deem it
necessary to repel an invasion, and you allow him to do so
whenever he may choose to say he deems it necessary for
such purpose, and you allow him to make war at pleasure.
Study to see if you can ﬁx any limit to his power in this
respect, after having given him so much as you propose. If
to-day he should choose to say he thinks it necessary to
invade Canada to prevent the British from invading us, how
could you stop him? You may say to him,— “I see no
probability of the British invading us”; but he will say to
you, “Be silent: I see it, if you don’t.”
The provision of the Constitution giving the war making
power to Congress was dictated, as I understand it, by the
following reasons: kings had always been involving and
impoverishing their people in wars, pretending generally, if
not always, that the good of the people was the object. This
our convention understood to be the most oppressive of all
kingly oppressions, and they resolved to so frame the
Constitution that no one man should hold the power of
bringing this oppression upon us. But your view destroys
the whole matter, and places our President where kings
have always stood. Write soon again.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
    
   I
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
MARCH 9, 1848.
MR. LINCOLN, FROM the Committee on the Postoﬀice and
Post Roads, made the following report:
The Committee on the Post-oﬀice and Post Roads, to
whom was referred the resolution of the House of
Representatives entitled “An Act authorizing postmasters at
county seats of justice to receive subscriptions for
newspapers and periodicals, to be paid through the agency
of the Post-oﬀice Department, and for other purposes,” beg
leave to submit the following report:
The committee have reason to believe that a general
wish pervades the community at large that some such
facility as the proposed measure should be granted by
express law, for subscribing, through the agency of the
Post-oﬀice Department, to newspapers and periodicals
which diﬀuse daily, weekly, or monthly intelligence of
passing events. Compliance with this general wish is
deemed 
to 
be 
in 
accordance 
with 
our 
republican
institutions, which can be best sustained by the diﬀusion of
knowledge and the due encouragement of a universal,
national spirit of inquiry and discussion of public events
through the medium of the public press. The committee,
however, has not been insensible to its duty of guarding the
 Post-oﬀice Department against injurious sacriﬁces for the
accomplishment of this object, whereby its ordinary
eﬀicacy might be impaired or embarrassed. It has therefore
been a subject of much consideration; but it is now
conﬁdently 
hoped 
that 
the 
bill 
herewith 
submitted
eﬀectually obviates all objections which might exist with
regard to a less matured proposition.
The committee learned, upon inquiry, that the Post-oﬀice
Department, in view of meeting the general wish on this
subject, made the experiment through one if its own
internal regulations, when the new postage system went
into operation on the ﬁrst of July, 1845, and that it was
continued until the thirtieth of September, 1847. But this
experiment, 
for 
reasons 
hereafter 
stated, 
proved
unsatisfactory, and it was discontinued by order of the
Postmaster-General. As far as the committee can at present
ascertain, the following seem to have been the principal
grounds of dissatisfaction in this experiment:
(1) The legal responsibility of postmasters receiving
newspaper subscriptions, or of their sureties, was not
deﬁned.
(2) The authority was open to all postmasters instead of
being limited to those of speciﬁc oﬀices.
(3) The consequence of this extension of authority was
that, in innumerable instances, the money, without the
previous knowledge or control of the oﬀicers of the
department who are responsible for the good management
of its ﬁnances, was deposited in oﬀices where it was
improper such funds should be placed; and the repayment
 was ordered, not by the ﬁnancial oﬀicers, but by the
postmasters, at points where it was inconvenient to the
department so to disburse its funds.
(4) The inconvenience of accumulating uncertain and
ﬂuctuating sums at small oﬀices was felt seriously in
consequent overpayments to contractors on their quarterly
collecting orders; and, in case of private mail routes, in
litigation concerning the misapplication of such funds to
the special service of supplying mails.
(5) The accumulation of such funds on draft oﬀices could
not be known to the ﬁnancial clerks of the department in
time to control it, and too often this rendered uncertain all
their calculations of funds in hand.
(6) The orders of payment were for the most part issued
upon the principal oﬀices, such as New York, Philadelphia,
Boston, Baltimore, etc., where the large oﬀices of
publishers 
are 
located, 
causing 
an 
illimitable 
and
uncontrollable drain of the department funds from those
points where it was essential to husband them for its own
regular disbursements. In Philadelphia alone this drain
averaged  5000 per quarter; and in other cities of the
seaboard it was proportionate.
(7) The embarrassment of the department was increased
by 
the 
illimitable, 
uncontrollable, 
and 
irresponsible
scattering of its funds from concentrated points suitable for
its distributions, to remote, unsafe, and inconvenient
oﬀices, where they could not be again made available till
collected by special agents, or were transferred at
 considerable expense into the principal disbursing oﬀices
again.
(8) There was a vast increase of duties thrown upon the
limited force before necessary to conduct the business of
the department; and from the delay of obtaining vouchers
impediments arose to the speedy settlement of accounts
with 
present 
or 
retired 
post-masters, 
causing
postponements which endangered the liability of sureties
under the act of limitations, and causing much danger of an
increase of such cases.
(9) The most responsible postmasters (at the large
oﬀices) were ordered by the least responsible (at small
oﬀices) to make payments upon their vouchers, without
having the means of ascertaining whether these vouchers
were genuine or forged, or if genuine, whether the signers
were in or out of oﬀice, or solvent or defaulters.
(10) The transaction of this business for subscribers and
publishers at the public expense, an the embarrassment,
inconvenience, and delay of the department’s own business
occasioned by it, were not justiﬁed by any suﬀicient
remuneration of revenue to sustain the department, as
required in every other respect with regard to its agency.
The committee, in view of these objections, has been
solicitous to frame a bill which would not be obnoxious to
them in principle or in practical eﬀect.
It is conﬁdently believed that by limiting the oﬀices for
receiving subscriptions to less than one tenth of the
number authorized by the experiment already tried, and
designating the county seat in each county for the purpose,
 the control of the department will be rendered satisfactory;
particularly as it will be in the power of the Auditor, who is
the oﬀicer required by law to check the accounts, to
approve or disapprove of the deposits, and to sanction not
only the payments, but to point out the place of payment. If
these payments should cause a drain on the principal
oﬀices of the seaboard, it will be compensated by the
accumulation of funds at county seats, where the
contractors on those routes can be paid to that extent by
the department’s drafts, with more local convenience to
themselves than by drafts on the seaboard oﬀices.
The legal responsibility for these deposits is deﬁned, and
the accumulation of funds at the point of deposit, and the
repayment at points drawn upon, being known to and
controlled by the Auditor, will not occasion any such
embarrassments as were before felt; the record kept by the
Auditor on the passing of the certiﬁcates through his hands
will enable him to settle accounts without the delay
occasioned by vouchers being withheld; all doubt or
uncertainty as to the genuineness of certiﬁcates, or the
propriety of their issue, will be removed by the Auditor’s
examination and approval; and there can be no risk of loss
of funds by transmission, as the certiﬁcate will not be
payable till sanctioned by the Auditor, and after his
sanction the payor need not pay it unless it is presented by
the publisher or his known clerk or agent.
The main principle of equivalent for the agency of the
department is secured by the postage required to be paid
 upon the transmission of the certiﬁcates, augmenting
adequately the post-oﬀice revenue.
The committee, conceiving that in this report all the
diﬀiculties of the subject have been fully and fairly stated,
and that these diﬀiculties have been obviated by the plan
proposed in the accompanying bill, and believing that the
measure will satisfactorily meet the wants and wishes of a
very large portion of the community, beg leave to
recommend its adoption.
    
   I
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
MARCH 9, 1848.
MR. LINCOLN, FROM the Committee on the Postoﬀice and
Post Roads, made the following report:
The Committee on the Post-oﬀice and Post Roads, to
whom was referred the petition of H. M. Barney,
postmaster at Brimﬁeld, Peoria County, Illinois, report: That
they have been satisﬁed by evidence, that on the 15th of
December, 1847, said petitioner had his store, with some
ﬁfteen hundred dollars’ worth of goods, together with all
the papers of the post-oﬀice, entirely destroyed by ﬁre; and
that the specie funds of the oﬀice were melted down,
partially lost and partially destroyed; that this large
individual loss entirely precludes the idea of embezzlement;
that the balances due the department of former quarters
had been only about twenty-ﬁve dollars; and that owing to
the destruction of papers, the exact amount due for the
quarter ending December 31, 1847, cannot be ascertained.
They therefore report a joint resolution, releasing said
petitioner from paying anything for the quarter last
mentioned.
   
A    I
  H  
I  
   A    H
   
       
 A I     
A  H         .
THE BILL FOR raising additional military force for limited
time, etc., was reported from Committee on judiciary;
similar bills had been reported from Committee on, Public
Lands and Military Committee.
Mr. Lincoln said if there was a general desire on the part
of the House to pass the bill now he should be glad to have
it done — concurring, as he did generally, with the
gentleman 
from 
Arkansas 
[Mr. 
Johnson] 
that 
the
postponement might jeopard the safety of the proposition.
If, however, a reference was to be made, he wished to make
a very few remarks in relation to the several subjects
desired by the gentlemen to be embraced in amendments
to the ninth section of the act of the last session of
Congress. The ﬁrst amendment desired by members of this
House had for its only object to give bounty lands to such
persons as had served for a time as privates, but had never
been discharged as such, because promoted to oﬀice. That
subject, and no other, was embraced in this bill. There were
some others who desired, while they were legislating on
this subject, that they should also give bounty lands to the
volunteers of the War of 1812. His friend from Maryland
said there were no such men. He [Mr. L.] did not say there
were many, but he was very conﬁdent there were some. His
 friend from Kentucky near him, [Mr. Gaines] told him he
himself was one.
There was still another proposition touching this matter;
that was, that persons entitled to bounty lands should by
law be entitled to locate these lands in parcels, and not be
required to locate them in one body, as was provided by the
existing law.
Now he had carefully drawn up a bill embracing these
three separate propositions, which he intended to propose
as a substitute for all these bills in the House, or in
Committee of the Whole on the State of the Union, at some
suitable time. If there was a disposition on the part of the
House to act at once on this separate proposition, he
repeated that, with the gentlemen from Arkansas, he
should prefer it lest they should lose all. But if there was to
be a reference, he desired to introduce his bill embracing
the three propositions, thus enabling the committee and
the House to act at the same time, whether favorably or
unfavorably, upon all. He inquired whether an amendment
was now in order.
The Speaker replied in the negative.
  
 A  HI A 
 
I  IA
 .
WASHINGTON, April 30, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAMS: — I have not seen in the papers any
evidence of a movement to send a delegate from your
circuit to the June convention. I wish to say that I think it
all-important that a delegate should be sent. Mr. Clay’s
chance for an election is just no chance at all. He might get
New York, and that would have elected in 1844, but it will
not now, because he must now, at the least, lose Tennessee,
which he had then, and in addition the ﬁfteen new votes of
Florida, Texas, Iowa, and Wisconsin. I know our good friend
Browning is a great admirer of Mr. Clay, and I therefore
fear he is favoring his nomination. If he is, ask him to
discard feeling, and try if he can possibly, as a matter of
judgment, count the votes necessary to elect him.
In my judgment we can elect nobody but General Taylor;
and we cannot elect him without a nomination. Therefore
don’t fail to send a delegate.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   
A    I
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
MAY 11, 1848.
A BILL FOR the admission of Wisconsin into the Union had
been passed.
Mr. Lincoln moved to reconsider the vote by which the
bill was passed. He stated to the House that he had made
this motion for the purpose of obtaining an opportunity to
say a few words in relation to a point raised in the course of
the debate on this bill, which he would now proceed to
make if in order. The point in the case to which he referred
arose on the amendment that was submitted by the
gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Collamer] in Committee of
the Whole on the State of the Union, and which was
afterward renewed in the House, in relation to the question
whether the reserved sections, which, by some bills
heretofore passed, by which an appropriation of land had
been made to Wisconsin, had been enhanced in value,
should be reduced to the minimum price of the public
lands. The question of the reduction in value of those
sections was to him at this time a matter very nearly of
indiﬀerence. He was inclined to desire that Wisconsin
should be obliged by having it reduced. But the gentleman
from Indiana [Mr. C. B. Smith], the chairman of the
Committee 
on 
Territories, 
yesterday 
associated 
that
 question with the general question, which is now to some
extent agitated in Congress, of making appropriations of
alternate sections of land to aid the States in making
internal improvements, and enhancing the price of the
sections reserved, and the gentleman from Indiana took
ground against that policy. He did not make any special
argument in favor of Wisconsin, but he took ground
generally against the policy of giving alternate sections of
land, and enhancing the price of the reserved sections.
Now he [Mr. Lincoln] did not at this time take the ﬂoor for
the purpose of attempting to make an argument on the
general subject. He rose simply to protest against the
doctrine which the gentleman from Indiana had avowed in
the course of what he [Mr. Lincoln] could not but consider
an unsound argument.
It might, however, be true, for anything he knew, that the
gentleman from Indiana might convince him that his
argument was sound; but he [Mr. Lincoln] feared that
gentleman would not be able to convince a majority in
Congress that it was sound. It was true the question
appeared in a diﬀerent aspect to persons in consequence of
a diﬀerence in the point from which they looked at it. It did
not look to persons residing east of the mountains as it did
to those who lived among the public lands. But, for his part,
he would state that if Congress would make a donation of
alternate sections of public land for the purpose of internal
improvements in his State, and forbid the reserved sections
being sold at  1.25, he should be glad to see the
appropriation made; though he should prefer it if the
 reserved sections were not enhanced in price. He repeated,
he should be glad to have such appropriations made, even
though the reserved sections should be enhanced in price.
He did not wish to be understood as concurring in any
intimation that they would refuse to receive such an
appropriation of alternate sections of land because a
condition enhancing the price of the reserved sections
should be attached thereto. He believed his position would
now be understood: if not, he feared he should not be able
to make himself understood.
But, before he took his seat, he would remark that the
Senate during the present session had passed a bill making
appropriations of land on that principle for the beneﬁt of
the State in which he resided the State of Illinois. The
alternate sections were to be given for the purpose of
constructing roads, and the reserved sections were to be
enhanced in value in consequence. When that bill came
here for the action of this House — it had been received,
and was now before the Committee on Public Lands — he
desired much to see it passed as it was, if it could be put in
no more favorable form for the State of Illinois. When it
should be before this House, if any member from a section
of the Union in which these lands did not lie, whose interest
might be less than that which he felt, should propose a
reduction of the price of the reserved sections to  1.25, he
should be much obliged; but he did not think it would be
well for those who came from the section of the Union in
which the lands lay to do so. — He wished it, then, to be
understood that he did not join in the warfare against the
 principle which had engaged the minds of some members
of Congress who were favorable to the improvements in the
western country. There was a good deal of force, he
admitted, in what fell from the chairman of the Committee
on Territories. It might be that there was no precise justice
in raising the price of the reserved sections to  2.50 per
acre. It might be proper that the price should be enhanced
to some extent, though not to double the usual price; but he
should be glad to have such an appropriation with the
reserved sections at  2.50; he should be better pleased to
have the price of those sections at something less; and he
should be still better pleased to have them without any
enhancement at all.
There was one portion of the argument of the gentleman
from Indiana, the chairman of the Committee on Territories
[Mr. Smith], which he wished to take occasion to say that
he did not view as unsound. He alluded to the statement
that the General Government was interested in these
internal improvements being made, inasmuch as they
increased the value of the lands that were unsold, and they
enabled the government to sell the lands which could not
be sold without them. Thus, then, the government gained
by internal improvements as well as by the general good
which the people derived from them, and it might be,
therefore, that the lands should not be sold for more than
 1.50 instead of the price being doubled. He, however,
merely mentioned this in passing, for he only rose to state,
as the principle of giving these lands for the purposes
which he had mentioned had been laid hold of and
 considered favorably, and as there were some gentlemen
who had constitutional scruples about giving money for
these purchases who would not hesitate to give land, that
he was not willing to have it understood that he was one of
those who made war against that principle. This was all he
desired to say, and having accomplished the object with
which he rose, he withdrew his motion to reconsider.
   A  
    
I
A I
TO E. B. WASHBURNE.
WASHINGTON, APRIL 30,1848.
DEAR WASHBURNE: I have this moment received your
very short note asking me if old Taylor is to be used up, and
who will be the nominee. My hope of Taylor’s nomination is
as high — a little higher than it was when you left. Still, the
case is by no means out of doubt. Mr. Clay’s letter has not
advanced his interests any here. Several who were against
Taylor, but not for anybody particularly, before, are since
taking ground, some for Scott and some for McLean. Who
will be nominated neither I nor any one else can tell. Now,
let me pray to you in turn. My prayer is that you let nothing
discourage or baﬄe you, but that, in spite of every
diﬀiculty, you send us a good Taylor delegate from your
circuit. Make Baker, who is now with you, I suppose, help
about it. He is a good hand to raise a breeze.
General Ashley, in the Senate from Arkansas, died
yesterday. Nothing else new beyond what you see in the
papers.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN
    
   
  
  I A
 
A   
 I I
TO REV. J. M. PECK
WASHINGTON, MAY 21, 1848. DEAR SIR: ....Not in view
of all the facts. There are facts which you have kept out of
view. It is a fact that the United States army in marching to
the 
Rio 
Grande 
marched 
into 
a 
peaceful 
Mexican
settlement, and frightened the inhabitants away from their
homes and their growing crops. It is a fact that Fort Brown,
opposite Matamoras, was built by that army within a
Mexican cotton-ﬁeld, on which at the time the army
reached it a young cotton crop was growing, and which
crop was wholly destroyed and the ﬁeld itself greatly and
permanently injured by ditches, embankments, and the
like. It is a fact that when the Mexicans captured Captain
Thornton and his command, they found and captured them
within another Mexican ﬁeld.
Now I wish to bring these facts to your notice, and to
ascertain what is the result of your reﬂections upon them.
If you deny that they are facts, I think I can furnish proofs
which shall convince you that you are mistaken. If you
admit that they are facts, then I shall be obliged for a
reference to any law of language, law of States, law of
nations, law of morals, law of religions, any law, human or
 divine, in which an authority can be found for saying those
facts constitute “no aggression.”
Possibly you consider those acts too small for notice.
Would you venture to so consider them had they been
committed by any nation on earth against the humblest of
our people? I know you would not. Then I ask, is the
precept “Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them” obsolete? of no force? of no
application?
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   A HA    A  
  
I
A I
TO ARCHIBALD WILLIAMS.
WASHINGTON, JUNE 12, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAMS: — On my return from Philadelphia,
where I had been attending the nomination of “Old Rough,”
(Zachary Taylor) I found your letter in a mass of others
which had accumulated in my absence. By many, and often,
it had been said they would not abide the nomination of
Taylor; but since the deed has been done, they are fast
falling in, and in my opinion we shall have a most
overwhelming, glorious triumph. One unmistakable sign is
that all the odds and ends are with us — Barnburners,
Native Americans, Tyler men, disappointed oﬀice-seeking
Locofocos, and the Lord knows what. This is important, if in
nothing else, in showing which way the wind blows. Some
of the sanguine men have set down all the States as certain
for Taylor but Illinois, and it as doubtful. Cannot something
be done even in Illinois? Taylor’s nomination takes the
Locos on the blind side. It turns the war thunder against
them. The war is now to them the gallows of Haman, which
they built for us, and on which they are doomed to be
hanged themselves.
Excuse this short letter. I have so many to write that I
cannot devote much time to any one.
 Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
      H I
  H  H
   
         
 A I   
JUNE 20, 1848.
IN COMMITTEE OF the Whole on the State of the Union, on
the Civil and Diplomatic Appropriation Bill:
Mr. CHAIRMAN: — I wish at all times in no way to
practise any fraud upon the House or the committee, and I
also desire to do nothing which may be very disagreeable
to any of the members. I therefore state in advance that my
object in taking the ﬂoor is to make a speech on the general
subject of internal improvements; and if I am out of order
in doing so, I give the chair an opportunity of so deciding,
and I will take my seat.
The Chair: I will not undertake to anticipate what the
gentleman 
may 
say 
on 
the 
subject 
of 
internal
improvements. He will, therefore, proceed in his remarks,
and if any question of order shall be made, the chair will
then decide it.
Mr. Lincoln: At an early day of this session the President
sent us what may properly be called an internal
improvement 
veto 
message. 
The 
late 
Democratic
convention, which sat at Baltimore, and which nominated
General Cass for the Presidency, adopted a set of
resolutions, now called the Democratic platform, among
which is one in these words:
 “That the Constitution does not confer upon the General
Government the power to commence and carry on a
general system of internal improvements.”
General Cass, in his letter accepting the nomination,
holds this language:
“I have carefully read the resolutions of the Democratic
national convention, laying down the platform of our
political faith, and I adhere to them as ﬁrmly as I approve
them cordially.”
These things, taken together, show that the question of
internal improvements is now more distinctly made — has
become more intense — than at any former period. The
veto message and the Baltimore resolution I understand to
be, in substance, the same thing; the latter being the more
general statement, of which the former is the ampliﬁcation
the bill of particulars. While I know there are many
Democrats, on this ﬂoor and elsewhere, who disapprove
that message, I understand that all who voted for General
Cass will thereafter be counted as having approved it, as
having indorsed all its doctrines.
I suppose all, or nearly all, the Democrats will vote for
him. Many of them will do so not because they like his
position on this question, but because they prefer him,
being wrong on this, to another whom they consider farther
wrong on other questions. In this way the internal
improvement Democrats are to be, by a sort of forced
consent, carried over and arrayed against themselves on
this measure of policy. General Cass, once elected, will not
trouble himself to make a constitutional argument, or
 perhaps any argument at all, when he shall veto a river or
harbor bill; he will consider it a suﬀicient answer to all
Democratic murmurs to point to Mr. Polk’s message, and to
the Democratic platform. This being the case, the question
of improvements is verging to a ﬁnal crisis; and the friends
of this policy must now battle, and battle manfully, or
surrender all. In this view, humble as I am, I wish to review,
and contest as well as I may, the general positions of this
veto message. When I say general positions, I mean to
exclude from consideration so much as relates to the
present embarrassed state of the treasury in consequence
of the Mexican War.
Those general positions are: that internal improvements
ought not to be made by the General Government — First.
Because they would overwhelm the treasury Second.
Because, while their burdens would be general, their
beneﬁts would be local and partial, involving an obnoxious
inequality; 
and 
Third. 
Because 
they 
would 
be
unconstitutional. Fourth. Because the States may do
enough by the levy and collection of tonnage duties; or if
not — Fifth. That the Constitution may be amended. “Do
nothing at all, lest you do something wrong,” is the sum of
these positions is the sum of this message. And this, with
the exception of what is said about constitutionality,
applying as forcibly to what is said about making
improvements by State authority as by the national
authority; so that we must abandon the improvements of
the country altogether, by any and every authority, or we
 must resist and repudiate the doctrines of this message.
Let us attempt the latter.
The 
ﬁrst 
position 
is, 
that 
a 
system 
of 
internal
improvements would overwhelm the treasury. That in such
a system there is a tendency to undue expansion, is not to
be denied. Such tendency is founded in the nature of the
subject. A member of Congress will prefer voting for a bill
which contains an appropriation for his district, to voting
for one which does not; and when a bill shall be expanded
till every district shall be provided for, that it will be too
greatly expanded is obvious. But is this any more true in
Congress than in a State Legislature? If a member of
Congress must have an appropriation for his district, so a
member of a Legislature must have one for his county. And
if one will overwhelm the national treasury, so the other
will overwhelm the State treasury. Go where we will, the
diﬀiculty is the same. Allow it to drive us from the halls of
Congress, and it will, just as easily, drive us from the State
Legislatures. Let us, then, grapple with it, and test its
strength. Let us, judging of the future by the past, ascertain
whether there may not be, in the discretion of Congress, a
suﬀicient power to limit and restrain this expansive
tendency within reasonable and proper bounds. The
President himself values the evidence of the past. He tells
us that at a certain point of our history more than two
hundred millions of dollars had been applied for to make
improvements; and this he does to prove that the treasury
would be overwhelmed by such a system. Why did he not
tell us how much was granted? Would not that have been
 better evidence? Let us turn to it, and see what it proves. In
the message the President tells us that “during the four
succeeding years embraced by the administration of
President Adams, the power not only to appropriate money,
but to apply it, under the direction and authority of the
General Government, as well to the construction of roads
as to the improvement of harbors and rivers, was fully
asserted and exercised.” This, then, was the period of
greatest enormity. These, if any, must have been the days of
the two hundred millions. And how much do you suppose
was really expended for improvements during that four
years? Two hundred millions? One hundred? Fifty? Ten?
Five? No, sir; less than two millions. As shown by authentic
documents, the expenditures on improvements during
1825, 1826, 1827, and 1828 amounted to one million eight
hundred and seventy-nine thousand six hundred and
twenty-seven dollars and one cent. These four years were
the period of Mr. Adams’s administration, nearly and
substantially. This fact shows that when the power to make
improvements “was fully asserted and exercised,” the
Congress did keep within reasonable limits; and what has
been done, it seems to me, can be done again.
Now for the second portion of the message — namely,
that the burdens of improvements would be general, while
their beneﬁts would be local and partial, involving an
obnoxious inequality. That there is some degree of truth in
this position, I shall not deny. No commercial object of
government patronage can be so exclusively general as to
not be of some peculiar local advantage. The navy, as I
 understand it, was established, and is maintained at a great
annual expense, partly to be ready for war when war shall
come, and partly also, and perhaps chieﬂy, for the
protection of our commerce on the high seas. This latter
object is, for all I can see, in principle the same as internal
improvements. The driving a pirate from the track of
commerce on the broad ocean, and the removing of a snag
from its more narrow path in the Mississippi River, cannot,
I think, be distinguished in principle. Each is done to save
life and property, and for nothing else.
The navy, then, is the most general in its beneﬁts of all
this class of objects; and yet even the navy is of some
peculiar advantage to Charleston, Baltimore, Philadelphia,
New York, and Boston, beyond what it is to the interior
towns of Illinois. The next most general object I can think of
would be improvements on the Mississippi River and its
tributaries. They touch thirteen of our States-Pennsylvania,
Virginia, 
Kentucky, 
Tennessee, 
Mississippi, 
Louisiana,
Arkansas, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Wisconsin, and
Iowa. Now I suppose it will not be denied that these
thirteen States are a little more interested in improvements
on that great river than are the remaining seventeen. These
instances of the navy and the Mississippi River show clearly
that there is something of local advantage in the most
general objects. But the converse is also true. Nothing is so
local as to not be of some general beneﬁt. Take, for
instance, the Illinois and Michigan Canal. Considered apart
from its eﬀects, it is perfectly local. Every inch of it is
within the State of Illinois. That canal was ﬁrst opened for
 business last April. In a very few days we were all gratiﬁed
to learn, among other things, that sugar had been carried
from New Orleans through this canal to Buﬀalo in New
York. This sugar took this route, doubtless, because it was
cheaper than the old route. Supposing beneﬁt of the
reduction in the cost of carriage to be shared between
seller and the buyer, result is that the New Orleans
merchant sold his sugar a little dearer, and the people of
Buﬀalo sweetened their coﬀee a little cheaper, than before,
— a beneﬁt resulting from the canal, not to Illinois, where
the canal is, but to Louisiana and New York, where it is not.
In other transactions Illinois will, of course, have her share,
and perhaps the larger share too, of the beneﬁts of the
canal; but this instance of the sugar clearly shows that the
beneﬁts of an improvement are by no means conﬁned to
the particular locality of the improvement itself. The just
conclusion from all this is that if the nation refuse to make
improvements of the more general kind because their
beneﬁts may be somewhat local, a State may for the same
reason refuse to make an improvement of a local kind
because its beneﬁts may be somewhat general. A State may
well say to the nation, “If you will do nothing for me, I will
do nothing for you.” Thus it is seen that if this argument of
“inequality” 
is 
suﬀicient 
anywhere, 
it 
is 
suﬀicient
everywhere, and puts an end to improvements altogether. I
hope and believe that if both the nation and the States
would, in good faith, in their respective spheres do what
they could in the way of improvements, what of inequality
might be produced in one place might be compensated in
 another, and the sum of the whole might not be very
unequal.
But suppose, after all, there should be some degree of
inequality. Inequality is certainly never to be embraced for
its own sake; but is every good thing to be discarded which
may be inseparably connected with some degree of it? If so,
we must discard all government. This Capitol is built at the
public expense, for the public beneﬁt; but does any one
doubt that it is of some peculiar local advantage to the
property-holders and business people of Washington? Shall
we remove it for this reason? And if so, where shall we set
it down, and be free from the diﬀiculty? To make sure of
our object, shall we locate it nowhere, and have Congress
hereafter to hold its sessions, as the loafer lodged, “in spots
about”? I make no allusion to the present President when I
say there are few stronger cases in this world of “burden to
the many and beneﬁt to the few,” of “inequality,” than the
Presidency itself is by some thought to be. An honest
laborer digs coal at about seventy cents a day, while the
President digs abstractions at about seventy dollars a day.
The coal is clearly worth more than the abstractions, and
yet what a monstrous inequality in the prices! Does the
President, 
for 
this 
reason, 
propose 
to 
abolish 
the
Presidency? He does not, and he ought not. The true rule,
in determining to embrace or reject anything, is not
whether it have any evil in it, but whether it have more of
evil than of good. There are few things wholly evil or wholly
good. Almost everything, especially of government policy, is
an inseparable compound of the two; so that our best
 judgment 
of 
the 
preponderance 
between 
them 
is
continually demanded. On this principle the President, his
friends, and the world generally act on most subjects. Why
not apply it, then, upon this question? Why, as to
improvements, magnify the evil, and stoutly refuse to see
any good in them?
Mr. Chairman, on the third position of the message the
constitutional question — I have not much to say. Being the
man I am, and speaking, where I do, I feel that in any
attempt at an original constitutional argument I should not
be and ought not to be listened to patiently. The ablest and
the best of men have gone over the whole ground long ago.
I shall attempt but little more than a brief notice of what
some of them have said. In relation to Mr. Jeﬀerson’s views,
I read from Mr. Polk’s veto message:
“President Jeﬀerson, in his message to Congress in 1806,
recommended an amendment of the Constitution, with a
view to apply an anticipated surplus in the treasury ‘to the
great purposes of the public education, roads, rivers,
canals, and such other objects of public improvement as it
may be thought proper to add to the constitutional
enumeration of the federal powers’; and he adds: ‘I suppose
an amendment to the Constitution, by consent of the
States, necessary, because the objects now recommended
are not among those enumerated in the Constitution, and to
which it permits the public moneys to be applied.’ In 1825,
he repeated in his published letters the opinion that no
such power has been conferred upon Congress.”
 I introduce this not to controvert just now the
constitutional opinion, but to show that, on the question of
expediency, Mr. Jeﬀerson’s opinion was against the present
President; that this opinion of Mr. Jeﬀerson, in one branch
at least, is in the hands of Mr. Polk like McFingal’s gun—
“bears wide and kicks the owner over.”
But to the constitutional question. In 1826 Chancellor
Kent ﬁrst published his Commentaries on American law. He
devoted a portion of one of the lectures to the question of
the authority of Congress to appropriate public moneys for
internal improvements. He mentions that the subject had
never been brought under judicial consideration, and
proceeds to give a brief summary of the discussion it had
undergone between the legislative and executive branches
of the government. He shows that the legislative branch
had usually been for, and the executive against, the power,
till the period of Mr. J.Q. Adams’s administration, at which
point he considers the executive inﬂuence as withdrawn
from opposition, and added to the support of the power. In
1844 the chancellor published a new edition of his
Commentaries, in which he adds some notes of what had
transpired on the question since 1826. I have not time to
read the original text on the notes; but the whole may be
found on page 267, and the two or three following pages, of
the ﬁrst volume of the edition of 1844. As to what
Chancellor Kent seems to consider the sum of the whole, I
read from one of the notes:
“Mr. 
Justice 
Story, 
in 
his 
Commentaries 
on 
the
Constitution of the United States, Vol. II., p-440, and again
 p-538, has stated at large the arguments for and against
the proposition that Congress have a constitutional
authority to lay taxes and to apply the power to regulate
commerce as a means directly to encourage and protect
domestic manufactures; and without giving any opinion of
his own on the contested doctrine, he has left the reader to
draw his own conclusions. I should think, however, from the
arguments as stated, that every mind which has taken no
part in the discussion, and felt no prejudice or territorial
bias on either side of the question, would deem the
arguments in favor of the Congressional power vastly
superior.”
It will be seen that in this extract the power to make
improvements is not directly mentioned; but by examining
the context, both of Kent and Story, it will be seen that the
power mentioned in the extract and the power to make
improvements are regarded as identical. It is not to be
denied that many great and good men have been against
the power; but it is insisted that quite as many, as great and
as good, have been for it; and it is shown that, on a full
survey of the whole, Chancellor Kent was of opinion that
the arguments of the latter were vastly superior. This is but
the opinion of a man; but who was that man? He was one of
the ablest and most learned lawyers of his age, or of any
age. It is no disparagement to Mr. Polk, nor indeed to any
one who devotes much time to politics, to be placed far
behind Chancellor Kent as a lawyer. His attitude was most
favorable to correct conclusions. He wrote coolly, and in
retirement. He was struggling to rear a durable monument
 of fame; and he well knew that truth and thoroughly sound
reasoning were the only sure foundations. Can the party
opinion of a party President on a law question, as this
purely is, be at all compared or set in opposition to that of
such a man, in such an attitude, as Chancellor Kent? This
constitutional question will probably never be better settled
than it is, until it shall pass under judicial consideration;
but I do think no man who is clear on the questions of
expediency need feel his conscience much pricked upon
this.
Mr. Chairman, the President seems to think that enough
may be done, in the way of improvements, by means of
tonnage duties under State authority, with the consent of
the General Government. Now I suppose this matter of
tonnage duties is well enough in its own sphere. I suppose
it may be eﬀicient, and perhaps suﬀicient, to make slight
improvements and repairs in harbors already in use and not
much out of repair. But if I have any correct general idea of
it, it must be wholly ineﬀicient for any general beneﬁcent
purposes of improvement. I know very little, or rather
nothing at all, of the practical matter of levying and
collecting tonnage duties; but I suppose one of its
principles must be to lay a duty for the improvement of any
particular harbor upon the tonnage coming into that
harbor; to do otherwise — to collect money in one harbor,
to be expended on improvements in another — would be an
extremely aggravated form of that inequality which the
President so much deprecates. If I be right in this, how
could we make any entirely new improvement by means of
 tonnage duties? How make a road, a canal, or clear a
greatly obstructed river? The idea that we could involves
the same absurdity as the Irish bull about the new boots. “I
shall niver git ’em on,” says Patrick, “till I wear ’em a day
or two, and stretch ’em a little.” We shall never make a
canal by tonnage duties until it shall already have been
made awhile, so the tonnage can get into it.
After all, the President concludes that possibly there may
be some great objects of improvement which cannot be
eﬀected by tonnage duties, and which it therefore may be
expedient for the General Government to take in hand.
Accordingly he suggests, in case any such be discovered,
the propriety of amending the Constitution. Amend it for
what? If, like Mr. Jeﬀerson, the President thought
improvements expedient, but not constitutional, it would be
natural enough for him to recommend such an amendment.
But hear what he says in this very message:
“In view of these portentous consequences, I cannot but
think that this course of legislation should be arrested,
even were there nothing to forbid it in the fundamental
laws of our Union.”
For what, then, would he have the Constitution
amended? With him it is a proposition to remove one
impediment merely to be met by others which, in his
opinion, cannot be removed, to enable Congress to do
what, in his opinion, they ought not to do if they could.
Here Mr. Meade of Virginia inquired if Mr. Lincoln
understood the President to be opposed, on grounds of
expediency, to any and every improvement.
 Mr. Lincoln answered: In the very part of his message of
which I am speaking, I understand him as giving some
vague expression in favor of some possible objects of
improvement; but in doing so I understand him to be
directly on the teeth of his own arguments in other parts of
it. Neither the President nor any one can possibly specify
an improvement which shall not be clearly liable to one or
another of the objections he has urged on the score of
expediency. I have shown, and might show again, that no
work — no object — can be so general as to dispense its
beneﬁts with precise equality; and this inequality is chief
among the “portentous consequences” for which he
declares that improvements should be arrested. No, sir.
When the President intimates that something in the way of
improvements may properly be done by the General
Government, he is shrinking from the conclusions to which
his own arguments would force him. He feels that the
improvements of this broad and goodly land are a mighty
interest; and he is unwilling to confess to the people, or
perhaps to himself, that he has built an argument which,
when pressed to its conclusions, entirely annihilates this
interest.
I have already said that no one who is satisﬁed of the
expediency of making improvements needs be much uneasy
in his conscience about its constitutionality. I wish now to
submit a few remarks on the general proposition of
amending the Constitution. As a general rule, I think we
would much better let it alone. No slight occasion should
tempt us to touch it. Better not take the ﬁrst step, which
 may lead to a habit of altering it. Better, rather, habituate
ourselves to think of it as unalterable. It can scarcely be
made better than it is. New provisions would introduce new
diﬀiculties, and thus create and increase appetite for
further change. No, sir; let it stand as it is. New hands have
never touched it. The men who made it have done their
work, and have passed away. Who shall improve on what
they did?
Mr. Chairman, for the purpose of reviewing this message
in the least possible time, as well as for the sake of
distinctness, I have analyzed its arguments as well as I
could, and reduced them to the propositions I have stated. I
have now examined them in detail. I wish to detain the
committee only a little while longer with some general
remarks upon the subject of improvements. That the
subject is a diﬀicult one, cannot be denied. Still it is no
more diﬀicult in Congress than in the State Legislatures, in
the counties, or in the smallest municipal districts which
anywhere exist. All can recur to instances of this diﬀiculty
in the case of county roads, bridges, and the like. One man
is oﬀended because a road passes over his land, and
another is oﬀended because it does not pass over his; one is
dissatisﬁed because the bridge for which he is taxed
crosses the river on a diﬀerent road from that which leads
from his house to town; another cannot bear that the
county should be got in debt for these same roads and
bridges; while not a few struggle hard to have roads
located over their lands, and then stoutly refuse to let them
be opened until they are ﬁrst paid the damages. Even
 between the diﬀerent wards and streets of towns and cities
we ﬁnd this same wrangling and diﬀiculty. Now these are
no other than the very diﬀiculties against which, and out of
which, 
the 
President 
constructs 
his 
objections 
of
“inequality,” “speculation,” and “crushing the treasury.”
There is but a single alternative about them: they are
suﬀicient, or they are not. If suﬀicient, they are suﬀicient
out of Congress as well as in it, and there is the end. We
must reject them as insuﬀicient, or lie down and do nothing
by any authority. Then, diﬀiculty though there be, let us
meet and encounter it. “Attempt the end, and never stand
to doubt; nothing so hard, but search will ﬁnd it out.”
Determine that the thing can and shall be done, and then
we shall ﬁnd the way. The tendency to undue expansion is
unquestionably the chief diﬀiculty.
How to do something, and still not do too much, is the
desideratum. Let each contribute his mite in the way of
suggestion. The late Silas Wright, in a letter to the Chicago
convention, contributed his, which was worth something;
and I now contribute mine, which may be worth nothing. At
all events, it will mislead nobody, and therefore will do no
harm. I would not borrow money. I am against an
overwhelming, crushing system. Suppose that, at each
session, Congress shall ﬁrst determine how much money
can, for that year, be spared for improvements; then
apportion that sum to the most important objects. So far all
is easy; but how shall we determine which are the most
important? On this question comes the collision of
interests. I shall be slow to acknowledge that your harbor
 or your river is more important than mine, and vice versa.
To clear this diﬀiculty, let us have that same statistical
information which the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Vinton]
suggested at the beginning of this session. In that
information we shall have a stern, unbending basis of facts
— a basis in no wise subject to whim, caprice, or local
interest. The prelimited amount of means will save us from
doing too much, and the statistics will save us from doing
what we do in wrong places. Adopt and adhere to this
course, and, it seems to me, the diﬀiculty is cleared.
One of the gentlemen from South Carolina [Mr. Rhett]
very much deprecates these statistics. He particularly
objects, as I understand him, to counting all the pigs and
chickens in the land. I do not perceive much force in the
objection. It is true that if everything be enumerated, a
portion of such statistics may not be very useful to this
object. Such products of the country as are to be consumed
where they are produced need no roads or rivers, no means
of transportation, and have no very proper connection with
this subject. The surplus — that which is produced in one
place to be consumed in another; the capacity of each
locality for producing a greater surplus; the natural means
of transportation, and their susceptibility of improvement;
the hindrances, delays, and losses of life and property
during transportation, and the causes of each, would be
among the most valuable statistics in this connection. From
these it would readily appear where a given amount of
expenditure would do the most good. These statistics might
be equally accessible, as they would be equally useful, to
 both the nation and the States. In this way, and by these
means, let the nation take hold of the larger works, and the
States the smaller ones; and thus, working in a meeting
direction, discreetly, but steadily and ﬁrmly, what is made
unequal in one place may be equalized in another,
extravagance avoided, and the whole country put on that
career of prosperity which shall correspond with its extent
of territory, its natural resources, and the intelligence and
enterprise of its people.
   
  
I I    
   
  
 I I IA
TO WILLIAM H. HERNDON.
WASHINGTON, JUNE 22, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: — Last night I was attending a sort of
caucus of the Whig members, held in relation to the coming
Presidential election. The whole ﬁeld of the nation was
scanned, and all is high hope and conﬁdence. Illinois is
expected to better her condition in this race. Under these
circumstances, judge how heartrending it was to come to
my room and ﬁnd and read your discouraging letter of the
15th. We have made no gains, but have lost “H. R.
Robinson, Turner, Campbell, and four or ﬁve more.” Tell
Arney to reconsider, if he would be saved. Baker and I used
to do something, but I think you attach more importance to
our absence than is just. There is another cause. In 1840,
for instance, we had two senators and ﬁve representatives
in Sangamon; now we have part of one senator and two
representatives. With quite one third more people than we
had then, we have only half the sort of oﬀices which are
sought by men of the speaking sort of talent. This, I think,
is the chief cause. Now, as to the young men. You must not
wait to be brought forward by the older men. For instance,
do you suppose that I should ever have got into notice if I
had waited to be hunted up and pushed forward by older
 men? You young men get together and form a “Rough and
Ready Club,” and have regular meetings and speeches.
Take in everybody you can get. Harrison Grimsley, L. A.
Enos, Lee Kimball, and C. W. Matheny will do to begin the
thing; but as you go along gather up all the shrewd, wild
boys about town, whether just of age, or a little under age,
Chris. Logan, Reddick Ridgely, Lewis Zwizler, and hundreds
such. Let every one play the part he can play best, — some
speak, some sing, and all “holler.” Your meetings will be of
evenings; the older men, and the women, will go to hear
you; so that it will not only contribute to the election of
“Old Zach,” but will be an interesting pastime, and
improving to the intellectual faculties of all engaged. Don’t
fail to do this.
You ask me to send you all the speeches made about “Old
Zach,” the war, etc. Now this makes me a little impatient. I
have regularly sent you the Congressional Globe and
Appendix, and you cannot have examined them, or you
would have discovered that they contain every speech
made by every man in both houses of Congress, on every
subject, during the session. Can I send any more? Can I
send speeches that nobody has made? Thinking it would be
most natural that the newspapers would feel interested to
give at least some of the speeches to their readers, I at the
beginning of the session made arrangements to have one
copy of the Globe and Appendix regularly sent to each
Whig paper of the district. And yet, with the exception of
my own little speech, which was published in two only of
the then ﬁve, now four, Whig papers, I do not remember
 having seen a single speech, or even extract from one, in
any single one of those papers. With equal and full means
on both sides, I will venture that the State Register has
thrown before its readers more of Locofoco speeches in a
month than all the Whig papers of the district have done of
Whig speeches during the session.
If you wish a full understanding of the war, I repeat what
I believe I said to you in a letter once before, that the
whole, or nearly so, is to be found in the speech of Dixon of
Connecticut. This I sent you in pamphlet as well as in the
Globe. Examine and study every sentence of that speech
thoroughly, and you will understand the whole subject. You
ask how Congress came to declare that war had existed by
the act of Mexico. Is it possible you don’t understand that
yet? You have at least twenty speeches in your possession
that fully explain it. I will, however, try it once more. The
news reached Washington of the commencement of
hostilities on the Rio Grande, and of the great peril of
General Taylor’s army. Everybody, Whigs and Democrats,
was for sending them aid, in men and money. It was
necessary to pass a bill for this. The Locos had a majority in
both houses, and they brought in a bill with a preamble
saying: Whereas, War exists by the act of Mexico, therefore
we send General Taylor money. The Whigs moved to strike
out the preamble, so that they could vote to send the men
and money, without saying anything about how the war
commenced; but being in the minority, they were voted
down, and the preamble was retained. Then, on the
passage of the bill, the question came upon them, Shall we
 vote for preamble and bill together, or against both
together? They did not want to vote against sending help to
General Taylor, and therefore they voted for both together.
Is there any diﬀiculty in understanding this? Even my little
speech shows how this was; and if you will go to the library,
you may get the Journal of 1845-46, in which you will ﬁnd
the whole for yourself.
We have nothing published yet with special reference to
the Taylor race; but we soon will have, and then I will send
them to everybody. I made an internal-improvement speech
day before yesterday, which I shall send home as soon as I
can get it written out and printed, — and which I suppose
nobody will read.
Your friend as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  A A   
   
  I
 
     
  I 
I
IA
REMARKS IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, JUNE
28, 1848.
DISCUSSION AS TO salary of judge of western Virginia: —
Wishing to increase it from  1800 to  2500.
Mr. Lincoln said he felt unwilling to be either unjust or
ungenerous, and he wanted to understand the real case of
this judicial oﬀicer. The gentleman from Virginia had stated
that he had to hold eleven courts. Now everybody knew
that it was not the habit of the district judges of the United
States in other States to hold anything like that number of
courts; and he therefore took it for granted that this must
happen under a peculiar law which required that large
number of courts to be holden every year; and these laws,
he further supposed, were passed at the request of the
people of that judicial district. It came, then, to this: that
the people in the western district of Virginia had got eleven
courts to be held among them in one year, for their own
accommodation; and being thus better accommodated than
neighbors elsewhere, they wanted their judge to be a little
better paid. In Illinois there had been until the present
season but one district court held in the year. There were
now to be two. Could it be that the western district of
 Virginia furnished more business for a judge than the whole
State of Illinois?
 A I
A   A
JULY, 1848, 
[FRAGMENT]
The question of a national bank is at rest. Were I
President, I should not urge its reagitation upon Congress;
but should Congress see ﬁt to pass an act to establish such
an institution, I should not arrest it by the veto, unless I
should consider it subject to some constitutional objection
from which I believe the two former banks to have been
free.
  
  .s. 
 
 
  
 I I A    A 
 
TO W. H. HERNDON.
WASHINGTON, JULY 10, 1848.
DEAR WILLIAM: Your letter covering the newspaper
slips was received last night. The subject of that letter is
exceedingly painful to me, and I cannot but think there is
some mistake in your impression of the motives of the old
men. I suppose I am now one of the old men; and I declare
on my veracity, which I think is good with you, that nothing
could aﬀord me more satisfaction than to learn that you
and others of my young friends at home were doing battle
in the contest and endearing themselves to the people and
taking a stand far above any I have ever been able to reach
in their admiration. I cannot conceive that other men feel
diﬀerently. Of course I cannot demonstrate what I say; but I
was young once, and I am sure I was never ungenerously
thrust back. I hardly know what to say. The way for a young
man to rise is to improve himself every way he can, never
suspecting that anybody wishes to hinder him. Allow me to
assure you that suspicion and jealousy never did help any
man in any situation. There may sometimes be ungenerous
attempts to keep a young man down; and they will succeed,
too, if he allows his mind to be diverted from its true
channel to brood over the attempted injury. Cast about and
 see if this feeling has not injured every person you have
ever known to fall into it.
Now, in what I have said I am sure you will suspect
nothing but sincere friendship. I would save you from a
fatal error. You have been a studious young man. You are
far better informed on almost all subjects than I ever have
been. You cannot fail in any laudable object unless you
allow your mind to be improperly directed. I have some the
advantage of you in the world’s experience, merely by
being older; and it is this that induces me to advise. You
still seem to be a little mistaken about the Congressional
Globe and Appendix. They contain all of the speeches that
are published in any way. My speech and Dayton’s speech
which you say you got in pamphlet form are both word for
word in the Appendix. I repeat again, all are there.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  A   A  
  A
  H     
SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, JULY 27,
1848.
MR. SPEAKER, OUR Democratic friends seem to be in a
great distress because they think our candidate for the
Presidency don’t suit us. Most of them cannot ﬁnd out that
General Taylor has any principles at all; some, however,
have discovered that he has one, but that one is entirely
wrong. This one principle is his position on the veto power.
The gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Stanton] who has just
taken his seat, indeed, has said there is very little, if any,
diﬀerence on this question between General Taylor and all
the Presidents; and he seems to think it suﬀicient
detraction from General Taylor’s position on it that it has
nothing new in it. But all others whom I have heard speak
assail it furiously. A new member from Kentucky [Mr.
Clark], of very considerable ability, was in particular
concerned about it. He thought it altogether novel and
unprecedented for a President or a Presidential candidate
to think of approving bills whose constitutionality may not
be entirely clear to his own mind. He thinks the ark of our
safety is gone unless Presidents shall always veto such bills
as in their judgment may be of doubtful constitutionality.
However clear Congress may be on their authority to pass
 any particular act, the gentleman from Kentucky thinks the
President must veto it if he has doubts about it. Now I have
neither time nor inclination to argue with the gentleman on
the veto power as an original question; but I wish to show
that General Taylor, and not he, agrees with the earlier
statesmen on this question. When the bill chartering the
ﬁrst Bank of the United States passed Congress, its
constitutionality was questioned. Mr. Madison, then in the
House of Representatives, as well as others, had opposed it
on that ground. General Washington, as President, was
called on to approve or reject it. He sought and obtained on
the constitutionality question the separate written opinions
of Jeﬀerson, Hamilton, and Edmund Randolph, — they then
being respectively Secretary of State, Secretary of the
Treasury, and Attorney general. Hamilton’s opinion was for
the power; while Randolph’s and Jeﬀerson’s were both
against it. Mr. Jeﬀerson, after giving his opinion deciding
only against the constitutionality of the bill, closes his letter
with the paragraph which I now read:
“It 
must 
be 
admitted, 
however, 
that 
unless 
the
President’s mind, on a view of everything which is urged
for and against this bill, is tolerably clear that it is
unauthorized by the Constitution, — if the pro and con
hang so even as to balance his judgment, a just respect for
the wisdom of the legislature would naturally decide the
balance in favor of their opinion. It is chieﬂy for cases
where they are clearly misled by error, ambition, or
interest, that the Constitution has placed a check in the
negative of the President.
 “THOMAS JEFFERSON.
“February 15, 1791.”
General Taylor’s opinion, as expressed in his Allison
letter, is as I now read:
“The power given by the veto is a high conservative
power; but, in my opinion, should never be exercised
except in cases of clear violation of the Constitution, or
manifest haste and want of consideration by Congress.”
It is here seen that, in Mr. Jeﬀerson’s opinion, if on the
constitutionality of any given bill the President doubts, he
is not to veto it, as the gentleman from Kentucky would
have him do, but is to defer to Congress and approve it.
And if we compare the opinion of Jeﬀerson and Taylor, as
expressed in these paragraphs, we shall ﬁnd them more
exactly alike than we can often ﬁnd any two expressions
having 
any 
literal 
diﬀerence. 
None 
but 
interested
faultﬁnders, I think, can discover any substantial variation.
But gentlemen on the other side are unanimously agreed
that General Taylor has no other principles. They are in
utter darkness as to his opinions on any of the questions of
policy which occupy the public attention. But is there any
doubt as to what he will do on the prominent questions if
elected? Not the least. It is not possible to know what he
will or would do in every imaginable case, because many
questions have passed away, and others doubtless will arise
which none of us have yet thought of; but on the prominent
questions of currency, tariﬀ, internal improvements, and
Wilmot Proviso, General Taylor’s course is at least as well
deﬁned as is General Cass’s. Why, in their eagerness to get
 at General Taylor, several Democratic members here have
desired to know whether, in case of his election, a bankrupt
law is to be established. Can they tell us General Cass’s
opinion on this question?
[Some member answered, “He is against it.”]
Aye, how do you know he is? There is nothing about it in
the platform, nor elsewhere, that I have seen. If the
gentleman knows of anything which I do not know he can
show it. But to return. General Taylor, in his Allison letter,
says:
“Upon the subject of the tariﬀ, the currency, the
improvement of our great highways, rivers, lakes, and
harbors, the will of the people, as expressed through their
representatives in Congress, ought to be respected and
carried out by the executive.”
Now this is the whole matter. In substance, it is this: The
people say to General Taylor, “If you are elected, shall we
have a national bank?” He answers, “Your will, gentlemen,
not mine.” “What about the tariﬀ?” “Say yourselves.” “Shall
our rivers and harbors be improved?” “Just as you please. If
you desire a bank, an alteration of the tariﬀ, internal
improvements, any or all, I will not hinder you. If you do
not desire them, I will not attempt to force them on you.
Send up your members of Congress from the various
districts, with opinions according to your own, and if they
are for these measures, or any of them, I shall have nothing
to oppose; if they are not for them, I shall not, by any
appliances whatever, attempt to dragoon them into their
adoption.”
 Now can there be any diﬀiculty in understanding this? To
you Democrats it may not seem like principle; but surely
you cannot fail to perceive the position plainly enough. The
distinction between it and the position of your candidate is
broad and obvious, and I admit you have a clear right to
show it is wrong if you can; but you have no right to
pretend you cannot see it at all. We see it, and to us it
appears like principle, and the best sort of principle at that
— the principle of allowing the people to do as they please
with their own business. My friend from Indiana (C. B.
Smith) has aptly asked, “Are you willing to trust the
people?” Some of you answered substantially, “We are
willing to trust the people; but the President is as much the
representative of the people as Congress.” In a certain
sense, and to a certain extent, he is the representative of
the people. He is elected by them, as well as Congress is;
but can he, in the nature of things know the wants of the
people as well as three hundred other men, coming from all
the various localities of the nation? If so, where is the
propriety of having a Congress? That the Constitution gives
the President a negative on legislation, all know; but that
this negative should be so combined with platforms and
other appliances as to enable him, and in fact almost
compel him, to take the whole of legislation into his own
hands, is what we object to, is what General Taylor objects
to, and is what constitutes the broad distinction between
you and us. To thus transfer legislation is clearly to take it
from those who understand with minuteness the interests
of the people, and give it to one who does not and cannot so
 well understand it. I understand your idea that if a
Presidential candidate avow his opinion upon a given
question, or rather upon all questions, and the people, with
full knowledge of this, elect him, they thereby distinctly
approve all those opinions. By means of it, measures are
adopted or rejected contrary to the wishes of the whole of
one party, and often nearly half of the other. Three, four, or
half a dozen questions are prominent at a given time; the
party selects its candidate, and he takes his position on
each of these questions. On all but one his positions have
already been indorsed at former elections, and his party
fully committed to them; but that one is new, and a large
portion of them are against it. But what are they to do? The
whole was strung together; and they must take all, or reject
all. They cannot take what they like, and leave the rest.
What they are already committed to being the majority,
they shut their eyes, and gulp the whole. Next election, still
another is introduced in the same way. If we run our eyes
along the line of the past, we shall see that almost if not
quite all the articles of the present Democratic creed have
been at ﬁrst forced upon the party in this very way. And just
now, and just so, opposition to internal improvements is to
be established if General Cass shall be elected. Almost half
the Democrats here are for improvements; but they will
vote for Cass, and if he succeeds, their vote will have aided
in closing the doors against improvements. Now this is a
process which we think is wrong. We prefer a candidate
who, like General Taylor, will allow the people to have their
own way, regardless of his private opinions; and I should
 think the internal-improvement Democrats, at least, ought
to prefer such a candidate. He would force nothing on them
which they don’t want, and he would allow them to have
improvements which their own candidate, if elected, will
not.
Mr. Speaker, I have said General Taylor’s position is as
well deﬁned as is that of General Cass. In saying this, I
admit I do not certainly know what he would do on the
Wilmot Proviso. I am a Northern man or rather a Western
Free-State man, with a constituency I believe to be, and
with personal feelings I know to be, against the extension
of slavery. As such, and with what information I have, I
hope and believe General Taylor, if elected, would not veto
the proviso. But I do not know it. Yet if I knew he would, I
still would vote for him. I should do so because, in my
judgment, his election alone can defeat General Cass; and
because, should slavery thereby go to the territory we now
have, just so much will certainly happen by the election of
Cass, and in addition a course of policy leading to new
wars, new acquisitions of territory and still further
extensions of slavery. One of the two is to be President.
Which is preferable?
But there is as much doubt of Cass on improvements as
there is of Taylor on the proviso. I have no doubt myself of
General Cass on this question; but I know the Democrats
diﬀer among themselves as to his position. My internal-
improvement colleague [Mr. Wentworth] stated on this ﬂoor
the other day that he was satisﬁed Cass was for
improvements, because he had voted for all the bills that he
 [Mr. Wentworth] had. So far so good. But Mr. Polk vetoed
some of these very bills. The Baltimore convention passed a
set of resolutions, among other things, approving these
vetoes, and General Cass declares, in his letter accepting
the 
nomination, 
that 
he 
has 
carefully 
read 
these
resolutions, and that he adheres to them as ﬁrmly as he
approves them cordially. In other words, General Cass
voted for the bills, and thinks the President did right to
veto them; and his friends here are amiable enough to
consider him as being on one side or the other, just as one
or the other may correspond with their own respective
inclinations. My colleague admits that the platform
declares against the constitutionality of a general system of
improvements, 
and 
that 
General 
Cass 
indorses 
the
platform; but he still thinks General Cass is in favor of some
sort of improvements. Well, what are they? As he is against
general objects, those he is for must be particular and
local. Now this is taking the subject precisely by the wrong
end. Particularity expending the money of the whole people
for an object which will beneﬁt only a portion of them — is
the greatest real objection to improvements, and has been
so held by General Jackson, Mr. Polk, and all others, I
believe, till now. But now, behold, the objects most general
— nearest free from this objection — are to be rejected,
while those most liable to it are to be embraced. To return:
I cannot help believing that General Cass, when he wrote
his letter of acceptance, well understood he was to be
claimed by the advocates of both sides of this question, and
that he then closed the door against all further expressions
 of opinion purposely to retain the beneﬁts of that double
position. His subsequent equivocation at Cleveland, to my
mind, proves such to have been the case.
One word more, and I shall have done with this branch of
the subject. You Democrats, and your candidate, in the
main are in favor of laying down in advance a platform — a
set of party positions — as a unit, and then of forcing the
people, by every sort of appliance, to ratify them, however
unpalatable some of them may be. We and our candidate
are in favor of making Presidential elections and the
legislation of the country distinct matters; so that the
people can elect whom they please, and afterward legislate
just as they please, without any hindrance, save only so
much as may guard against infractions of the Constitution,
undue haste, and want of consideration. The diﬀerence
between us is clear as noonday. That we are right we
cannot doubt. We hold the true Republican position. In
leaving the people’s business in their hands, we cannot be
wrong. We are willing, and even anxious, to go to the
people on this issue.
But I suppose I cannot reasonably hope to convince you
that we have any principles. The most I can expect is to
assure you that we think we have and are quite contented
with them. The other day one of the gentlemen from
Georgia [Mr. Iverson], an eloquent man, and a man of
learning, so far as I can judge, not being learned myself,
came down upon us astonishingly. He spoke in what the
‘Baltimore American’ calls the “scathing and withering
style.” At the end of his second severe ﬂash I was struck
 blind, and found myself feeling with my ﬁngers for an
assurance of my continued existence. A little of the bone
was left, and I gradually revived. He eulogized Mr. Clay in
high and beautiful terms, and then declared that we had
deserted all our principles, and had turned Henry Clay out,
like an old horse, to root. This is terribly severe. It cannot
be answered by argument — at least I cannot so answer it.
I merely wish to ask the gentleman if the Whigs are the
only party he can think of who sometimes turn old horses
out to root. Is not a certain Martin Van Buren an old horse
which your own party have turned out to root? and is he
not rooting a little to your discomfort about now? But in not
nominating Mr. Clay we deserted our principles, you say.
Ah! In what? Tell us, ye men of principle, what principle we
violated. We say you did violate principle in discarding Van
Buren, and we can tell you how. You violated the primary,
the cardinal, the one great living principle of all democratic
representative government — the principle that the
representative is bound to carry out the known will of his
constituents. A large majority of the Baltimore convention
of 1844 were, by their constituents, instructed to procure
Van Buren ‘s nomination if they could. In violation — in
utter glaring contempt of this, you rejected him; rejected
him, as the gentleman from New York [Mr. Birdsall] the
other day expressly admitted, for availability — that same
“general availability” which you charge upon us, and daily
chew over here, as something exceedingly odious and
unprincipled. But the gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Iverson]
gave us a second speech yesterday, all well considered and
 put down in writing, in which Van Buren was scathed and
withered a “few” for his present position and movements. I
cannot remember the gentleman’s precise language; but I
do remember he put Van Buren down, down, till he got him
where he was ﬁnally to “stink” and “rot.”
Mr. Speaker, it is no business or inclination of mine to
defend Martin Van Buren in the war of extermination now
waging between him and his old admirers. I say, “Devil take
the hindmost” — and the foremost. But there is no
mistaking the origin of the breach; and if the curse of
“stinking” and “rotting” is to fall on the ﬁrst and greatest
violators of principle in the matter, I disinterestedly suggest
that the gentleman from Georgia and his present co-
workers are bound to take it upon themselves. But the
gentleman from Georgia further says we have deserted all
our principles, and taken shelter under General Taylor’s
military coat-tail, and he seems to think this is exceedingly
degrading. Well, as his faith is, so be it unto him. But can
he remember no other military coat-tail under which a
certain other party have been sheltering for near a quarter
of a century? Has he no acquaintance with the ample
military coat tail of General Jackson? Does he not know that
his own party have run the ﬁve last Presidential races
under that coat-tail, and that they are now running the
sixth under the same cover? Yes, sir, that coat-tail was used
not only for General Jackson himself, but has been clung to,
with the grip of death, by every Democratic candidate
since. You have never ventured, and dare not now venture,
from under it. Your campaign papers have constantly been
 “Old Hickories,” with rude likenesses of the old general
upon them; hickory poles and hickory brooms your never-
ending emblems; Mr. Polk himself was “Young Hickory,” or
something so; and even now your campaign paper here is
proclaiming that Cass and Butler are of the true “Hickory
stripe.” Now, sir, you dare not give it up. Like a horde of
hungry ticks you have stuck to the tail of the Hermitage
Lion to the end of his life; and you are still sticking to it,
and drawing a loathsome sustenance from it, after he is
dead. A fellow once advertised that he had made a
discovery by which he could make a new man out of an old
one, and have enough of the stuﬀ left to make a little yellow
dog. Just such a discovery has General Jackson’s popularity
been to you. You not only twice made President of him out
of it, but you have had enough of the stuﬀ left to make
Presidents of several comparatively small men since; and it
is your chief reliance now to make still another.
Mr. Speaker, old horses and military coat-tails, or tails of
any sort, are not ﬁgures of speech such as I would be the
ﬁrst to introduce into discussions here; but as the
gentleman from Georgia has thought ﬁt to introduce them,
he and you are welcome to all you have made, or can make
by them. If you have any more old horses, trot them out;
any more tails, just cock them and come at us. I repeat, I
would not introduce this mode of discussion here; but I
wish gentlemen on the other side to understand that the
use of degrading ﬁgures is a game at which they may not
ﬁnd themselves able to take all the winnings.
[“We give it up!”]
 Aye, you give it up, and well you may; but for a very
diﬀerent reason from that which you would have us
understand. The point — the power to hurt — of all ﬁgures
consists in the truthfulness of their application; and,
understanding this, you may well give it up. They are
weapons which hit you, but miss us.
But in my hurry I was very near closing this subject of
military tails before I was done with it. There is one entire
article of the sort I have not discussed yet, — I mean the
military tail you Democrats are now engaged in dovetailing
into the great Michigander [Cass]. Yes, sir; all his
biographies (and they are legion) have him in hand, tying
him to a military tail, like so many mischievous boys tying a
dog to a bladder of beans. True, the material they have is
very limited, but they drive at it might and main. He
invaded Canada without resistance, and he outvaded it
without pursuit. As he did both under orders, I suppose
there was to him neither credit nor discredit in them; but
they constitute a large part of the tail. He was not at Hull’s
surrender, but he was close by; he was volunteer aid to
General Harrison on the day of the battle of the Thames;
and as you said in 1840 Harrison was picking huckleberries
two miles oﬀ while the battle was fought, I suppose it is a
just conclusion with you to say Cass was aiding Harrison to
pick huckleberries. This is about all, except the mooted
question of the broken sword. Some authors say he broke
it, some say he threw it away, and some others, who ought
to know, say nothing about it. Perhaps it would be a fair
 historical compromise to say, if he did not break it, he did
not do anything else with it.
By the way, Mr. Speaker, did you know I am a military
hero? Yes, sir; in the days of the Black Hawk war I fought,
bled, and came away. Speaking of General Cass’s career
reminds me of my own. I was not at Stiliman’s defeat, but I
was about as near it as Cass was to Hull’s surrender; and,
like him, I saw the place very soon afterward. It is quite
certain I did not break my sword, for I had none to break;
but I bent a musket pretty badly on one occasion. If Cass
broke his sword, the idea is he broke it in desperation; I
bent the musket by accident. If General Cass went in
advance of me in picking huckleberries, I guess I surpassed
him in charges upon the wild onions. If he saw any live,
ﬁghting Indians, it was more than I did; but I had a good
many bloody struggles with the mosquitoes, and although I
never fainted from the loss of blood, I can truly say I was
often very hungry. Mr. Speaker, if I should ever conclude to
doﬀ whatever our Democratic friends may suppose there is
of black-cockade federalism about me, and therefore they
shall take me up as their candidate for the Presidency, I
protest they shall not make fun of me, as they have of
General Cass, by attempting to write me into a military
hero.
While I have General Cass in hand, I wish to say a word
about his political principles. As a specimen, I take the
record of his progress in the Wilmot Proviso. In the
Washington Union of March 2, 1847, there is a report of a
speech of General Cass, made the day before in the Senate,
 on the Wilmot Proviso, during the delivery of which Mr.
Miller of New Jersey is reported to have interrupted him as
follows, to wit:
“Mr. Miller expressed his great surprise at the change in
the sentiments of the Senator from Michigan, who had
been regarded as the great champion of freedom in the
Northwest, of which he was a distinguished ornament. Last
year the Senator from Michigan was understood to be
decidedly in favor of the Wilmot Proviso; and as no reason
had been stated for the change, he [Mr. Miller] could not
refrain from the expression of his extreme surprise.”
To this General Cass is reported to have replied as
follows, to wit:
“Mr. Cass said that the course of the Senator from New
Jersey was most extraordinary. Last year he [Mr. Cass]
should have voted for the proposition, had it come up. But
circumstances had altogether changed. The honorable
Senator then read several passages from the remarks, as
given above, which he had committed to writing, in order to
refute such a charge as that of the Senator from New
Jersey.”
In the “remarks above reduced to writing” is one
numbered four, as follows, to wit:
“Fourth. Legislation now would be wholly inoperative,
because no territory hereafter to be acquired can be
governed without an act of Congress providing for its
government; and such an act, on its passage, would open
the whole subject, and leave the Congress called on to pass
 it free to exercise its own discretion, entirely uncontrolled
by any declaration found on the statute-book.”
In Niles’s Register, vol. lxxiii., , there is a letter of
General Cass to —— — Nicholson, of Nashville, Tennessee,
dated December 24, 1847, from which the following are
correct extracts:
“The Wilmot Proviso has been before the country some
time. It has been repeatedly discussed in Congress and by
the public press. I am strongly impressed with the opinion
that a great change has been going on in the public mind
upon this subject, — in my own as well as others’, — and
that doubts are resolving themselves into convictions that
the principle it involves should be kept out of the national
legislature, and left to the people of the confederacy in
their respective local governments.... Brieﬂy, then, I am
opposed to the exercise of any jurisdiction by Congress
over this matter; and I am in favor of leaving the people of
any territory which may be hereafter acquired the right to
regulate it themselves, under the general principles of the
Constitution. Because— ‘First. I do not see in the
Constitution any grant of the requisite power to Congress;
and I am not disposed to extend a doubtful precedent
beyond its necessity, — the establishment of territorial
governments when needed, — leaving to the inhabitants all
the right compatible with the relations they bear to the
confederation.”
These extracts show that in 1846 General Cass was for
the proviso at once; that in March, 1847, he was still for it,
but not just then; and that in December, 1847, he was
 against it altogether. This is a true index to the whole man.
When the question was raised in 1846, he was in a
blustering hurry to take ground for it. He sought to be in
advance, and to avoid the uninteresting position of a mere
follower; but soon he began to see glimpses of the great
Democratic ox-goad waving in his face, and to hear
indistinctly a voice saying, “Back! Back, sir! Back a little!”
He shakes his head, and bats his eyes, and blunders back to
his position of March, 1847; but still the goad waves, and
the voice grows more distinct and sharper still, “Back, sir!
Back, I say! Further back!” — and back he goes to the
position of December, 1847, at which the goad is still, and
the voice soothingly says, “So! Stand at that!”
Have no fears, gentlemen, of your candidate. He exactly
suits you, and we congratulate you upon it. However much
you may be distressed about our candidate, you have all
cause to be contented and happy with your own. If elected,
he may not maintain all or even any of his positions
previously taken; but he will be sure to do whatever the
party exigency for the time being may require; and that is
precisely what you want. He and Van Buren are the same
“manner of men”; and, like Van Buren, he will never desert
you till you ﬁrst desert him.
Mr. Speaker, I adopt the suggestion of a friend, that
General Cass is a general of splendidly successful charges
— charges, to be sure, not upon the public enemy, but upon
the public treasury. He was Governor of Michigan territory,
and ex-oﬀicio Superintendent of Indian Aﬀairs, from the 9th
of October, 1813, till the 31st of July, 1831 — a period of
 seventeen years, nine months, and twenty-two days. During
this period he received from the United States treasury, for
personal services and personal expenses, the aggregate
sum of ninety-six thousand and twenty eight dollars, being
an average of fourteen dollars and seventy-nine cents per
day for every day of the time. This large sum was reached
by assuming that he was doing service at several diﬀerent
places, and in several diﬀerent capacities in the same
place, all at the same time. By a correct analysis of his
accounts during that period, the following propositions may
be deduced:
First. He was paid in three diﬀerent capacities during the
whole of the time: that is to say — (1) As governor a salary
at the rate per year of  2000. (2) As estimated for oﬀice
rent, clerk hire, fuel, etc., in superintendence of Indian
aﬀairs in Michigan, at the rate per year of  1500. (3) As
compensation and expenses for various miscellaneous
items of Indian service out of Michigan, an average per
year of  625.
Second. During part of the time — that is, from the 9th of
October, 1813, to the 29th of May, 1822 he was paid in four
diﬀerent capacities; that is to say, the three as above, and,
in addition thereto, the commutation of ten rations per day,
amounting per year to  730.
Third. During another part of the time — that is, from the
beginning of 1822 to the 31st of July, ‘83 he was also paid
in four diﬀerent capacities; that is to say, the ﬁrst three, as
above (the rations being dropped after the 29th of May,
1822), and, in addition thereto, for superintending Indian
 Agencies at Piqua, Ohio; Fort Wayne, Indiana; and Chicago,
Illinois, at the rate per year of  1500. It should be observed
here that the last item, commencing at the beginning of
1822, and the item of rations, ending on the 29th of May,
1822, lap on each other during so much of the time as lies
between those two dates.
Fourth. Still another part of the time — that is, from the
31st of October, 1821, to the 29th of May, 1822 — he was
paid in six diﬀerent capacities; that is to say, the three ﬁrst,
as above; the item of rations, as above; and, in addition
thereto, another item of ten rations per day while at
Washington settling his accounts, being at the rate per year
of  730; and also an allowance for expenses traveling to
and from Washington, and while there, of  1022, being at
the rate per year of  1793.
Fifth. And yet during the little portion of the time which
lies between the 1st of January, 1822, and the 29th of May,
1822, he was paid in seven diﬀerent capacities; that is to
say, the six last mentioned, and also, at the rate of  1500
per year, for the Piqua, Fort Wayne, and Chicago service, as
mentioned above.
These accounts have already been discussed some here;
but when we are amongst them, as when we are in the
Patent Oﬀice, we must peep about a good deal before we
can see all the curiosities. I shall not be tedious with them.
As to the large item of  1500 per year — amounting in the
aggregate to  26,715 for oﬀice rent, clerk hire, fuel, etc., I
barely wish to remark that, so far as I can discover in the
public documents, there is no evidence, by word or
 inference, either from any disinterested witness or of
General Cass himself, that he ever rented or kept a
separate oﬀice, ever hired or kept a clerk, or even used any
extra amount of fuel, etc., in consequence of his Indian
services. Indeed, General Cass’s entire silence in regard to
these items, in his two long letters urging his claims upon
the government, is, to my mind, almost conclusive that no
such claims had any real existence.
But I have introduced General Cass’s accounts here
chieﬂy to show the wonderful physical capacities of the
man. They show that he not only did the labor of several
men at the same time, but that he often did it at several
places, many hundreds of miles apart, at the same time.
And at eating, too, his capacities are shown to be quite as
wonderful. From October, 1821, to May, 1822, he eat ten
rations a day in Michigan, ten rations a day here in
Washington, and near ﬁve dollars’ worth a day on the road
between the two places! And then there is an important
discovery in his example — the art of being paid for what
one eats, instead of having to pay for it. Hereafter if any
nice young man should owe a bill which he cannot pay in
any other way, he can just board it out. Mr. Speaker, we
have all heard of the animal standing in doubt between two
stacks of hay and starving to death. The like of that would
never happen to General Cass. Place the stacks a thousand
miles apart, he would stand stock-still midway between
them, and eat them both at once, and the green grass along
the line would be apt to suﬀer some, too, at the same time.
By all means make him President, gentlemen. He will feed
 you bounteously — if — if there is any left after he shall
have helped himself.
But, as General Taylor is, par excellence, the hero of the
Mexican War, and as you Democrats say we Whigs have
always opposed the war, you think it must be very awkward
and embarrassing for us to go for General Taylor. The
declaration that we have always opposed the war is true or
false, according as one may understand the term “oppose
the war.” If to say “the war was unnecessarily and
unconstitutionally 
commenced 
by 
the 
President” 
by
opposing the war, then the Whigs have very generally
opposed it. Whenever they have spoken at all, they have
said this; and they have said it on what has appeared good
reason to them. The marching an army into the midst of a
peaceful Mexican settlement, frightening the inhabitants
away, leaving their growing crops and other property to
destruction, to you may appear a perfectly amiable,
peaceful, unprovoking procedure; but it does not appear so
to us. So to call such an act, to us appears no other than a
naked, impudent absurdity, and we speak of it accordingly.
But if, when the war had begun, and had become the cause
of the country, the giving of our money and our blood, in
common with yours, was support of the war, then it is not
true that we have always opposed the war. With few
individual exceptions, you have constantly had our votes
here for all the necessary supplies. And, more than this,
you have had the services, the blood, and the lives of our
political brethren in every trial and on every ﬁeld. The
beardless boy and the mature man, the humble and the
 distinguished — you have had them. Through suﬀering and
death, by disease and in battle they have endured and
fought and fell with you. Clay and Webster each gave a son,
never to be returned. From the State of my own residence,
besides other worthy but less known Whig names, we sent
Marshall, Morrison, Baker, and Hardin; they all fought, and
one fell, and in the fall of that one we lost our best Whig
man. Nor were the Whigs few in number, or laggard in the
day of danger. In that fearful, bloody, breathless struggle at
Buena Vista, where each man’s hard task was to beat back
ﬁve foes or die himself, of the ﬁve high oﬀicers who
perished, four were Whigs.
In speaking of this, I mean no odious comparison
between the lion-hearted Whigs and the Democrats who
fought there. On other occasions, and among the lower
oﬀicers and privates on that occasion, I doubt not the
proportion was diﬀerent. I wish to do justice to all. I think
of all those brave men as Americans, in whose proud fame,
as an American, I too have a share. Many of them, Whigs
and Democrats are my constituents and personal friends;
and I thank them, — more than thank them, — one and all,
for the high imperishable honor they have conferred on our
common State.
But the distinction between the cause of the President in
beginning the war, and the cause of the country after it was
begun, is a distinction which you cannot perceive. To you
the President and the country seem to be all one. You are
interested to see no distinction between them; and I
venture to suggest that probably your interest blinds you a
 little. We see the distinction, as we think, clearly enough;
and our friends who have fought in the war have no
diﬀiculty in seeing it also. What those who have fallen
would say, were they alive and here, of course we can never
know; but with those who have returned there is no
diﬀiculty. Colonel Haskell and Major Gaines, members
here, both fought in the war, and both of them underwent
extraordinary perils and hardships; still they, like all other
Whigs here, vote, on the record, that the war was
unnecessarily and unconstitutionally commenced by the
President. And even General Taylor himself, the noblest
Roman of them all, has declared that as a citizen, and
particularly as a soldier, it is suﬀicient for him to know that
his country is at war with a foreign nation, to do all in his
power to bring it to a speedy and honorable termination by
the most vigorous and energetic operations, without
inquiry about its justice, or anything else connected with it.
Mr. Speaker, let our Democratic friends be comforted
with the assurance that we are content with our position,
content with our company, and content with our candidate;
and that although they, in their generous sympathy, think
we ought to be miserable, we really are not, and that they
may dismiss the great anxiety they have on our account.
Mr. Speaker, I see I have but three minutes left, and this
forces me to throw out one whole branch of my subject. A
single word on still another. The Democrats are keen
enough to frequently remind us that we have some
dissensions in our ranks. Our good friend from Baltimore
immediately before me [Mr. McLane] expressed some doubt
 the other day as to which branch of our party General
Taylor would ultimately fall into the hands of. That was a
new idea to me. I knew we had dissenters, but I did not
know they were trying to get our candidate away from us. I
would like to say a word to our dissenters, but I have not
the time. Some such we certainly have; have you none,
gentlemen Democrats? Is it all union and harmony in your
ranks? no bickerings? no divisions? If there be doubt as to
which of our divisions will get our candidate, is there no
doubt as to which of your candidates will get your party? I
have heard some things from New York; and if they are
true, one might well say of your party there, as a drunken
fellow once said when he heard the reading of an
indictment for hog-stealing. The clerk read on till he got to
and through the words, “did steal, take, and carry away ten
boars, ten sows, ten shoats, and ten pigs,” at which he
exclaimed, “Well, by golly, that is the most equally divided
gang of hogs I ever did hear of!” If there is any other gang
of hogs more equally divided than the Democrats of New
York are about this time, I have not heard of it.
      H 
  I    
 A  
         
A  .  
    .         .
(From the Boston Advertiser.)
MR. KELLOGG THEN introduced to the meeting the Hon.
Abram Lincoln, Whig member of Congress from Illinois, a
representative of free soil.
Mr. Lincoln has a very tall and thin ﬁgure, with an
intellectual face, showing a searching mind, and a cool
judgment. He spoke in a clear and cool and very eloquent
manner, for an hour and a half, carrying the audience with
him in his able arguments and brilliant illustrations — only
interrupted by warm and frequent applause. He began by
expressing a real feeling of modesty in addressing an
audience “this side of the mountains,” a part of the country
where, in the opinion of the people of his section,
everybody was supposed to be instructed and wise. But he
had devoted his attention to the question of the coming
Presidential election, and was not unwilling to exchange
with all whom he might the ideas to which he had arrived.
He then began to show the fallacy of some of the
arguments against Gen. Taylor, making his chief theme the
fashionable statement of all those who oppose him (“the old
Locofocos as well as the new”) that he has no principles,
and that the Whig party have abandoned their principles by
 adopting him as their candidate. He maintained that Gen.
Taylor occupied a high and unexceptionable Whig ground,
and took for his ﬁrst instance and proof of this the
statement in the Allison letter — with regard to the bank,
tariﬀ, rivers and harbors, etc. — that the will of the people
should produce its own results, without executive inﬂuence.
The principle that the people should do what — under the
Constitution — as they please, is a Whig principle. All that
Gen. Taylor is not only to consent to, but appeal to the
people to judge and act for themselves. And this was no
new doctrine for Whigs. It was the “platform” on which
they had fought all their battles, the resistance of executive
inﬂuence, and the principle of enabling the people to frame
the government according to their will. Gen. Taylor
consents to be the candidate, and to assist the people to do
what they think to be their duty, and think to be best in
their national aﬀairs, but because he don’t want to tell
what we ought to do, he is accused of having no principles.
The Whigs here maintained for years that neither the
inﬂuence, the duress, or the prohibition of the executive
should control the legitimately expressed will of the people;
and now that, on that very ground, Gen. Taylor says that he
should use the power given him by the people to do, to the
best of his judgment, the will of the people, he is accused of
want of principle, and of inconsistency in position.
Mr. Lincoln proceeded to examine the absurdity of an
attempt to make a platform or creed for a national party, to
all parts of which all must consent and agree, when it was
clearly the intention and the true philosophy of our
 government, that in Congress all opinions and principles
should be represented, and that when the wisdom of all had
been compared and united, the will of the majority should
be carried out. On this ground he conceived (and the
audience seemed to go with him) that Gen. Taylor held
correct, sound republican principles.
Mr. Lincoln then passed to the subject of slavery in the
States, saying that the people of Illinois agreed entirely
with the people of Massachusetts on this subject, except
perhaps that they did not keep so constantly thinking about
it. All agreed that slavery was an evil, but that we were not
responsible for it and cannot aﬀect it in States of this Union
where we do not live. But the question of the extension of
slavery to new territories of this country is a part of our
responsibility and care, and is under our control. In
opposition to this Mr. L. believed that the self-named “Free
Soil” party was far behind the Whigs. Both parties opposed
the extension. As he understood it the new party had no
principle except this opposition. If their platform held any
other, it was in such a general way that it was like the pair
of pantaloons the Yankee pedlar oﬀered for sale, “large
enough for any man, small enough for any boy.” They
therefore had taken a position calculated to break down
their single important declared object. They were working
for the election of either Gen. Cass or Gen. Taylor. The
speaker then went on to show, clearly and eloquently, the
danger of extension of slavery, likely to result from the
election of Gen. Cass. To unite with those who annexed the
new territory to prevent the extension of slavery in that
 territory seemed to him to be in the highest degree absurd
and ridiculous. Suppose these gentlemen succeed in
electing Mr. Van Buren, they had no speciﬁc means to
prevent the extension of slavery to New Mexico and
California, and Gen. Taylor, he conﬁdently believed, would
not encourage it, and would not prohibit its restriction. But
if Gen. Cass was elected, he felt certain that the plans of
farther extension of territory would be encouraged, and
those of the extension of slavery would meet no check. The
“Free Soil” mart in claiming that name indirectly attempts
a deception, by implying that Whigs were not Free Soil
men. Declaring that they would “do their duty and leave
the consequences to God” merely gave an excuse for taking
a course they were not able to maintain by a fair and full
argument. To make this declaration did not show what their
duty was. If it did we should have no use for judgment, we
might as well be made without intellect; and when divine or
human law does not clearly point out what is our duty, we
have no means of ﬁnding out what it is but by using our
most intelligent judgment of the consequences. If there
were divine law or human law for voting for Martin Van
Buren, or if a fair examination of the consequences and just
reasoning would show that voting for him would bring
about the ends they pretended to wish — then he would
give up the argument. But since there was no ﬁxed law on
the subject, and since the whole probable result of their
action would be an assistance in electing Gen. Cass, he
must say that they were behind the Whigs in their advocacy
of the freedom of the soil.
 Mr. Lincoln proceeded to rally the Buﬀalo convention for
forbearing to say anything — after all the previous
declarations of those members who were formerly Whigs —
on the subject of the Mexican War, because the Van Burens
had been known to have supported it. He declared that of
all the parties asking the conﬁdence of the country, this
new one had less of principle than any other.
He wondered whether it was still the opinion of these
Free Soil gentlemen, as declared in the “whereas” at
Buﬀalo, that the Whig and Democratic parties were both
entirely dissolved and absorbed into their own body. Had
the Vermont election given them any light? They had
calculated on making as great an impression in that State
as in any part of the Union, and there their attempts had
been wholly ineﬀectual. Their failure was a greater success
than they would ﬁnd in any other part of the Union.
Mr. Lincoln went on to say that he honestly believed that
all those who wished to keep up the character of the Union;
who did not believe in enlarging our ﬁeld, but in keeping
our fences where they are and cultivating our present
possessions, making it a garden, improving the morals and
education of the people, devoting the administrations to
this purpose; all real Whigs, friends of good honest
government — the race was ours. He had opportunities of
hearing from almost every part of the Union from reliable
sources and had not heard of a county in which we had not
received accessions from other parties. If the true Whigs
come forward and join these new friends, they need not
have a doubt. We had a candidate whose personal
 character and principles he had already described, whom
he could not eulogize if he would. Gen. Taylor had been
constantly, perseveringly, quietly standing up, doing his
duty and asking no praise or reward for it. He was and
must be just the man to whom the interests, principles, and
prosperity of the country might be safely intrusted. He had
never failed in anything he had undertaken, although many
of his duties had been considered almost impossible.
Mr. Lincoln then went into a terse though rapid review of
the origin of the Mexican War and the connection of the
administration and General Taylor with it, from which he
deduced a strong appeal to the Whigs present to do their
duty in the support of General Taylor, and closed with the
warmest aspirations for and conﬁdence in a deserved
success.
At the close of his truly masterly and convincing speech,
the audience gave three enthusiastic cheers for Illinois, and
three more for the eloquent Whig member from the State.
 HI   A H       
     
  
 
TO THOMAS LINCOLN
WASHINGTON, DEC. 24, 1848.
MY DEAR FATHER: — Your letter of the 7th was received
night before last. I very cheerfully send you the twenty
dollars, which sum you say is necessary to save your land
from sale. It is singular that you should have forgotten a
judgment against you; and it is more singular that the
plaintiﬀ should have let you forget it so long; particularly as
I suppose you always had property enough to satisfy a
judgment of that amount. Before you pay it, it would be
well to be sure you have not paid, or at least, that you
cannot prove you have paid it.
Give my love to mother and all the connections.
Aﬀectionately your son, A. LINCOLN.
