    
   
     
  A  AI 
A   A 
TO R. P. MORGAN
SPRINGFIELD, FEBRUARY 13, 1856.
R. P. MORGAN, ESQ.: Says Tom to John, “Here’s your old
rotten wheelbarrow. I’ve broke it usin’ on it. I wish you
would mend it, ‘case I shall want to borrow it this
arternoon.” Acting on this as a precedent, I say, “Here’s
your old ‘chalked hat, — I wish you would take it and send
me a new one, ‘case I shall want to use it the ﬁrst of
March.”
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
(A ‘chalked hat’ was the common term, at that time, for a
railroad pass.)
      H 
  I    
    
    H   I  
   
  I A
   A    
  
 I
OF ILLINOIS, HELD AT BLOOMINGTON, ON MAY 29,
1856.
[FROM THE REPORT by William C. Whitney.]
(Mr. Whitney’s notes were made at the time, but not
written out until 1896. He does not claim that the speech,
as here reported, is literally correct only that he has
followed the argument, and that in many cases the
sentences are as Mr. Lincoln spoke them.)
Mr. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN: I was over at [Cries
of “Platform!” “Take the platform!”] — I say, that while I
was at Danville Court, some of our friends of Anti-Nebraska
got together in Springﬁeld and elected me as one delegate
to represent old Sangamon with them in this convention,
and I am here certainly as a sympathizer in this movement
and by virtue of that meeting and selection. But we can
hardly be called delegates strictly, inasmuch as, properly
speaking, we represent nobody but ourselves. I think it
altogether fair to say that we have no Anti-Nebraska party
in Sangamon, although there is a good deal of Anti-
Nebraska feeling there; but I say for myself, and I think I
may speak also for my colleagues, that we who are here
fully approve of the platform and of all that has been done
 [A voice, “Yes!”], and even if we are not regularly
delegates, it will be right for me to answer your call to
speak. I suppose we truly stand for the public sentiment of
Sangamon on the great question of the repeal, although we
do not yet represent many numbers who have taken a
distinct position on the question.
We are in a trying time — it ranges above mere party —
and this movement to call a halt and turn our steps
backward needs all the help and good counsels it can get;
for unless popular opinion makes itself very strongly felt,
and a change is made in our present course, blood will ﬂow
on account of Nebraska, and brother’s hands will be raised
against brother!
[The last sentence was uttered in such an earnest,
impressive, if not, indeed, tragic, manner, as to make a cold
chill creep over me. Others gave a similar experience.]
I have listened with great interest to the earnest appeal
made to Illinois men by the gentleman from Lawrence
[James S. Emery] who has just addressed us so eloquently
and forcibly. I was deeply moved by his statement of the
wrongs done to free-State men out there. I think it just to
say that all true men North should sympathize with them,
and ought to be willing to do any possible and needful thing
to right their wrongs. But we must not promise what we
ought not, lest we be called on to perform what we cannot;
we must be calm and moderate, and consider the whole
diﬀiculty, and determine what is possible and just. We must
not be led by excitement and passion to do that which our
sober judgments would not approve in our cooler moments.
 We have higher aims; we will have more serious business
than to dally with temporary measures.
We are here to stand ﬁrmly for a principle — to stand
ﬁrmly for a right. We know that great political and moral
wrongs are done, and outrages committed, and we
denounce those wrongs and outrages, although we cannot,
at present, do much more. But we desire to reach out
beyond those personal outrages and establish a rule that
will apply to all, and so prevent any future outrages.
We have seen to-day that every shade of popular opinion
is represented here, with Freedom, or rather Free Soil, as
the basis. We have come together as in some sort
representatives of popular opinion against the extension of
slavery into territory now free in fact as well as by law, and
the pledged word of the statesmen of the nation who are
now no more. We come — we are here assembled together
— to protest as well as we can against a great wrong, and
to take measures, as well as we now can, to make that
wrong right; to place the nation, as far as it may be
possible now, as it was before the repeal of the Missouri
Compromise; and the plain way to do this is to restore the
Compromise, and to demand and determine that Kansas
shall be free! [Immense applause.] While we aﬀirm, and
reaﬀirm, if necessary, our devotion to the principles of the
Declaration of Independence, let our practical work here be
limited to the above. We know that there is not a perfect
agreement of sentiment here on the public questions which
might be rightfully considered in this convention, and that
the indignation which we all must feel cannot be helped;
 but all of us must give up something for the good of the
cause. There is one desire which is uppermost in the mind,
one wish common to us all, to which no dissent will be
made; and I counsel you earnestly to bury all resentment,
to sink all personal feeling, make all things work to a
common purpose in which we are united and agreed about,
and which all present will agree is absolutely necessary —
which must be done by any rightful mode if there be such:
Slavery must be kept out of Kansas! [Applause.] The test —
the pinch — is right there. If we lose Kansas to freedom, an
example will be set which will prove fatal to freedom in the
end. We, therefore, in the language of the Bible, must “lay
the axe to the root of the tree.” Temporizing will not do
longer; now is the time for decision — for ﬁrm, persistent,
resolute action. [Applause.]
The Nebraska Bill, or rather Nebraska law, is not one of
wholesome legislation, but was and is an act of legislative
usurpation, whose result, if not indeed intention, is to make
slavery national; and unless headed oﬀ in some eﬀective
way, we are in a fair way to see this land of boasted
freedom converted into a land of slavery in fact.
[Sensation.] Just open your two eyes, and see if this be not
so. I need do no more than state, to command universal
approval, that almost the entire North, as well as a large
following in the border States, is radically opposed to the
planting of slavery in free territory. Probably in a popular
vote throughout the nation nine tenths of the voters in the
free States, and at least one-half in the border States, if
they could express their sentiments freely, would vote NO
 on such an issue; and it is safe to say that two thirds of the
votes of the entire nation would be opposed to it. And yet,
in spite of this overbalancing of sentiment in this free
country, we are in a fair way to see Kansas present itself for
admission as a slave State. Indeed, it is a felony, by the
local law of Kansas, to deny that slavery exists there even
now. By every principle of law, a negro in Kansas is free; yet
the bogus Legislature makes it an infamous crime to tell
him that he is free!
Statutes of Kansas, 1555, chapter 151, Sec. 12: If any
free person, by speaking or by writing, assert or maintain
that persons have not the right to hold slaves in this
Territory, or shall introduce into this Territory, print,
publish, write, circulate . . . any book, paper, magazine,
pamphlet, or circular containing any denial of the right of
persons to hold slaves in this Territory such person shall be
deemed guilty of felony, and punished by imprisonment at
hard labor for a term of not less than two years. Sec. 13.
No person who is conscientiously opposed to holding
slaves, or who does not admit the right to hold slaves in
this Territory, shall sit as a juror on the trial of any
prosecution for any violation of any Sections of this Act.
The party lash and the fear of ridicule will overawe
justice and liberty; for it is a singular fact, but none the less
a fact, and well known by the most common experience,
that men will do things under the terror of the party lash
that they would not on any account or for any consideration
do otherwise; while men who will march up to the mouth of
a loaded cannon without shrinking will run from the
 terrible name of “Abolitionist,” even when pronounced by a
worthless creature whom they, with good reason, despise.
For instance — to press this point a little — Judge Douglas
introduced his Nebraska Bill in January; and we had an
extra session of our Legislature in the succeeding February,
in which were seventy-ﬁve Democrats; and at a party
caucus, fully attended, there were just three votes, out of
the whole seventy-ﬁve, for the measure. But in a few days
orders came on from Washington, commanding them to
approve the measure; the party lash was applied, and it
was brought up again in caucus, and passed by a large
majority. The masses were against it, but party necessity
carried it; and it was passed through the lower house of
Congress against the will of the people, for the same
reason. Here is where the greatest danger lies that, while
we profess to be a government of law and reason, law will
give way to violence on demand of this awful and crushing
power. Like the great Juggernaut — I think that is the name
— the great idol, it crushes everything that comes in its
way, and makes a [?] — or, as I read once, in a blackletter
law book, “a slave is a human being who is legally not a
person but a thing.” And if the safeguards to liberty are
broken down, as is now attempted, when they have made
things of all the free negroes, how long, think you, before
they will begin to make things of poor white men?
[Applause.] Be not deceived. Revolutions do not go
backward. The founder of the Democratic party declared
that all men were created equal. His successor in the
leadership has written the word “white” before men,
 making it read “all white men are created equal.” Pray, will
or may not the Know-Nothings, if they should get in power,
add the word “Protestant,” making it read “all Protestant
white men...?”
Meanwhile the hapless negro is the fruitful subject of
reprisals in other quarters. John Pettit, whom Tom Benton
paid his respects to, you will recollect, calls the immortal
Declaration “a self-evident lie”; while at the birthplace of
freedom — in the shadow of Bunker Hill and of the “cradle
of liberty,” at the home of the Adamses and Warren and
Otis — Choate, from our side of the house, dares to fritter
away the birthday promise of liberty by proclaiming the
Declaration to be “a string of glittering generalities”; and
the Southern Whigs, working hand in hand with proslavery
Democrats, are making Choate’s theories practical. Thomas
Jeﬀerson, a slaveholder, mindful of the moral element in
slavery, solemnly declared that he trembled for his country
when he remembered that God is just; while Judge Douglas,
with an insigniﬁcant wave of the hand, “don’t care whether
slavery is voted up or voted down.” Now, if slavery is right,
or even negative, he has a right to treat it in this triﬂing
manner. But if it is a moral and political wrong, as all
Christendom considers it to be, how can he answer to God
for this attempt to spread and fortify it? [Applause.]
But no man, and Judge Douglas no more than any other,
can maintain a negative, or merely neutral, position on this
question; and, accordingly, he avows that the Union was
made by white men and for white men and their
descendants. As matter of fact, the ﬁrst branch of the
 proposition is historically true; the government was made
by white men, and they were and are the superior race.
This I admit. But the corner-stone of the government, so to
speak, was the declaration that “all men are created
equal,” and all entitled to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.” [Applause.]
And not only so, but the framers of the Constitution were
particular to keep out of that instrument the word “slave,”
the reason being that slavery would ultimately come to an
end, and they did not wish to have any reminder that in this
free country human beings were ever prostituted to slavery.
[Applause.] Nor is it any argument that we are superior and
the negro inferior — that he has but one talent while we
have ten. Let the negro possess the little he has in
independence; if he has but one talent, he should be
permitted to keep the little he has. [Applause:] But slavery
will endure no test of reason or logic; and yet its advocates,
like Douglas, use a sort of bastard logic, or noisy
assumption it might better be termed, like the above, in
order to prepare the mind for the gradual, but none the
less certain, encroachments of the Moloch of slavery upon
the fair domain of freedom. But however much you may
argue upon it, or smother it in soft phrase, slavery can only
be maintained by force — by violence. The repeal of the
Missouri Compromise was by violence. It was a violation of
both law and the sacred obligations of honor, to overthrow
and trample under foot a solemn compromise, obtained by
the fearful loss to freedom of one of the fairest of our
Western 
domains. 
Congress 
violated 
the 
will 
and
 conﬁdence of its constituents in voting for the bill; and
while public sentiment, as shown by the elections of 1854,
demanded the restoration of this compromise, Congress
violated its trust by refusing simply because it had the
force of numbers to hold on to it. And murderous violence
is being used now, in order to force slavery on to Kansas;
for it cannot be done in any other way. [Sensation.]
The necessary result was to establish the rule of violence
— force, instead of the rule of law and reason; to
perpetuate and spread slavery, and in time to make it
general. We see it at both ends of the line. In Washington,
on the very spot where the outrage was started, the
fearless Sumner is beaten to insensibility, and is now slowly
dying; while senators who claim to be gentlemen and
Christians stood by, countenancing the act, and even
applauding it afterward in their places in the Senate. Even
Douglas, our man, saw it all and was within helping
distance, yet let the murderous blows fall unopposed. Then,
at the other end of the line, at the very time Sumner was
being murdered, Lawrence was being destroyed for the
crime of freedom. It was the most prominent stronghold of
liberty in Kansas, and must give way to the all-dominating
power of slavery. Only two days ago, Judge Trumbull found
it necessary to propose a bill in the Senate to prevent a
general civil war and to restore peace in Kansas.
We live in the midst of alarms; anxiety beclouds the
future; we expect some new disaster with each newspaper
we read. Are we in a healthful political state? Are not the
 tendencies plain? Do not the signs of the times point plainly
the way in which we are going? [Sensation.]
In the early days of the Constitution slavery was
recognized, by South and North alike, as an evil, and the
division of sentiment about it was not controlled by
geographical lines or considerations of climate, but by
moral and philanthropic views. Petitions for the abolition of
slavery were presented to the very ﬁrst Congress by
Virginia and Massachusetts alike. To show the harmony
which prevailed, I will state that a fugitive slave law was
passed in 1793, with no dissenting voice in the Senate, and
but seven dissenting votes in the House. It was, however, a
wise law, moderate, and, under the Constitution, a just one.
Twenty-ﬁve years later, a more stringent law was proposed
and defeated; and thirty-ﬁve years after that, the present
law, drafted by Mason of Virginia, was passed by Northern
votes. I am not, just now, complaining of this law, but I am
trying to show how the current sets; for the proposed law
of 1817 was far less oﬀensive than the present one. In 1774
the 
Continental 
Congress 
pledged 
itself, 
without 
a
dissenting vote, to wholly discontinue the slave trade, and
to neither purchase nor import any slave; and less than
three months before the passage of the Declaration of
Independence, the same Congress which adopted that
declaration unanimously resolved “that no slave be
imported into any of the thirteen United Colonies.” [Great
applause.]
On the second day of July, 1776, the draft of a
Declaration of Independence was reported to Congress by
 the committee, and in it the slave trade was characterized
as “an execrable commerce,” as “a piratical warfare,” as
the “opprobrium of inﬁdel powers,” and as “a cruel war
against human nature.” [Applause.] All agreed on this
except South Carolina and Georgia, and in order to
preserve harmony, and from the necessity of the case, these
expressions were omitted. Indeed, abolition societies
existed as far south as Virginia; and it is a well-known fact
that Washington, Jeﬀerson, Madison, Lee, Henry, Mason,
and Pendleton were qualiﬁed abolitionists, and much more
radical on that subject than we of the Whig and Democratic
parties claim to be to-day. On March 1, 1784, Virginia
ceded to the confederation all its lands lying northwest of
the Ohio River. Jeﬀerson, Chase of Maryland, and Howell of
Rhode Island, as a committee on that and territory
thereafter to be ceded, reported that no slavery should
exist after the year 1800. Had this report been adopted, not
only the Northwest, but Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and
Mississippi also would have been free; but it required the
assent of nine States to ratify it. North Carolina was
divided, and thus its vote was lost; and Delaware, Georgia,
and New Jersey refused to vote. In point of fact, as it was, it
was assented to by six States. Three years later on a square
vote to exclude slavery from the Northwest, only one vote,
and that from New York, was against it. And yet, thirty-
seven years later, ﬁve thousand citizens of Illinois, out of a
voting mass of less than twelve thousand, deliberately, after
a long and heated contest, voted to introduce slavery in
Illinois; and, to-day, a large party in the free State of Illinois
 are willing to vote to fasten the shackles of slavery on the
fair domain of Kansas, notwithstanding it received the
dowry of freedom long before its birth as a political
community. I repeat, therefore, the question: Is it not plain
in what direction we are tending? [Sensation.] In the
colonial time, Mason, Pendleton, and Jeﬀerson were as
hostile to slavery in Virginia as Otis, Ames, and the
Adamses were in Massachusetts; and Virginia made as
earnest an eﬀort to get rid of it as old Massachusetts did.
But circumstances were against them and they failed; but
not that the good will of its leading men was lacking. Yet
within less than ﬁfty years Virginia changed its tune, and
made negro-breeding for the cotton and sugar States one of
its leading industries. [Laughter and applause.]
In the Constitutional Convention, George Mason of
Virginia made a more violent abolition speech than my
friends Lovejoy or Codding would desire to make here to-
day — a speech which could not be safely repeated
anywhere on Southern soil in this enlightened year. But,
while there were some diﬀerences of opinion on this
subject even then, discussion was allowed; but as you see
by the Kansas slave code, which, as you know, is the
Missouri slave code, merely ferried across the river, it is a
felony to even express an opinion hostile to that foul blot in
the 
land 
of 
Washington 
and 
the 
Declaration 
of
Independence. [Sensation.]
In Kentucky — my State — in 1849, on a test vote, the
mighty inﬂuence of Henry Clay and many other good then
there could not get a symptom of expression in favor of
 gradual emancipation on a plain issue of marching toward
the light of civilization with Ohio and Illinois; but the State
of Boone and Hardin and Henry Clay, with a nigger under
each arm, took the black trail toward the deadly swamps of
barbarism. Is there — can there be — any doubt about this
thing? And is there any doubt that we must all lay aside our
prejudices and march, shoulder to shoulder, in the great
army of Freedom? [Applause.]
Every Fourth of July our young orators all proclaim this
to be “the land of the free and the home of the brave!” Well,
now, when you orators get that oﬀ next year, and, may be,
this very year, how would you like some old grizzled farmer
to get up in the grove and deny it? [Laughter.] How would
you like that? But suppose Kansas comes in as a slave
State, and all the “border ruﬀians” have barbecues about it,
and free-State men come trailing back to the dishonored
North, like whipped dogs with their tails between their
legs, it is — ain’t it? — evident that this is no more the
“land of the free”; and if we let it go so, we won’t dare to
say “home of the brave” out loud. [Sensation and
confusion.]
Can any man doubt that, even in spite of the people’s
will, slavery will triumph through violence, unless that will
be made manifest and enforced? Even Governor Reeder
claimed at the outset that the contest in Kansas was to be
fair, but he got his eyes open at last; and I believe that, as a
result of this moral and physical violence, Kansas will soon
apply for admission as a slave State. And yet we can’t
mistake that the people don’t want it so, and that it is a
 land which is free both by natural and political law. No law,
is free law! Such is the understanding of all Christendom.
In the Somerset case, decided nearly a century ago, the
great Lord Mansﬁeld held that slavery was of such a nature
that it must take its rise in positive (as distinguished from
natural) law; and that in no country or age could it be
traced back to any other source. Will some one please tell
me where is the positive law that establishes slavery in
Kansas? [A voice: “The bogus laws.”] Aye, the bogus laws!
And, on the same principle, a gang of Missouri horse-
thieves could come into Illinois and declare horse-stealing
to be legal [Laughter], and it would be just as legal as
slavery is in Kansas. But by express statute, in the land of
Washington and Jeﬀerson, we may soon be brought face to
face with the discreditable fact of showing to the world by
our acts that we prefer slavery to freedom — darkness to
light! [Sensation.]
It is, I believe, a principle in law that when one party to a
contract violates it so grossly as to chieﬂy destroy the
object for which it is made, the other party may rescind it. I
will ask Browning if that ain’t good law. [Voices: “Yes!”]
Well, now if that be right, I go for rescinding the whole,
entire Missouri Compromise and thus turning Missouri into
a free State; and I should like to know the diﬀerence —
should like for any one to point out the diﬀerence —
between our making a free State of Missouri and their
making a slave State of Kansas. [Great applause.] There
ain’t one bit of diﬀerence, except that our way would be a
great mercy to humanity. But I have never said, and the
 Whig party has never said, and those who oppose the
Nebraska Bill do not as a body say, that they have any
intention of interfering with slavery in the slave States. Our
platform says just the contrary. We allow slavery to exist in
the slave States, not because slavery is right or good, but
from the necessities of our Union. We grant a fugitive slave
law because it is so “nominated in the bond”; because our
fathers so stipulated — had to — and we are bound to carry
out this agreement. But they did not agree to introduce
slavery in regions where it did not previously exist. On the
contrary, they said by their example and teachings that
they did not deem it expedient — did n’t consider it right —
to do so; and it is wise and right to do just as they did about
it. [Voices: “Good!”] And that it what we propose — not to
interfere with slavery where it exists (we have never tried
to do it), and to give them a reasonable and eﬀicient
fugitive slave law. [A voice: “No!”] I say YES! [Applause.] It
was part of the bargain, and I ‘m for living up to it; but I go
no further; I’m not bound to do more, and I won’t agree any
further. [Great applause.]
We, here in Illinois, should feel especially proud of the
provision of the Missouri Compromise excluding slavery
from what is now Kansas; for an Illinois man, Jesse B.
Thomas, was its father. Henry Clay, who is credited with the
authorship of the Compromise in general terms, did not
even vote for that provision, but only advocated the
ultimate admission by a second compromise; and Thomas
was, beyond all controversy, the real author of the “slavery
restriction” branch of the Compromise. To show the
 generosity of the Northern members toward the Southern
side: on a test vote to exclude slavery from Missouri, ninety
voted not to exclude, and eighty-seven to exclude, every
vote from the slave States being ranged with the former
and fourteen votes from the free States, of whom seven
were from New England alone; while on a vote to exclude
slavery from what is now Kansas, the vote was one hundred
and thirty-four for, to forty-two against. The scheme, as a
whole, was, of course, a Southern triumph. It is idle to
contend 
otherwise, 
as 
is 
now 
being 
done 
by 
the
Nebraskites; it was so shown by the votes and quite as
emphatically by the expressions of representative men. Mr.
Lowndes of South Carolina was never known to commit a
political mistake; his was the great judgment of that
section; and he declared that this measure “would restore
tranquillity to the country — a result demanded by every
consideration of discretion, of moderation, of wisdom, and
of virtue.” When the measure came before President
Monroe for his approval, he put to each member of his
cabinet this question: “Has Congress the constitutional
power to prohibit slavery in a Territory?” And John C.
Calhoun and William H. Crawford from the South, equally
with John Quincy Adams, Benjamin Rush, and Smith
Thompson from the North, alike answered, “Yes!” without
qualiﬁcation or equivocation; and this measure, of so great
consequence to the South, was passed; and Missouri was,
by means of it, ﬁnally enabled to knock at the door of the
Republic for an open passage to its brood of slaves. And, in
spite of this, Freedom’s share is about to be taken by
 violence — by the force of misrepresentative votes, not
called for by the popular will. What name can I, in common
decency, give to this wicked transaction? [Sensation.]
But even then the contest was not over; for when the
Missouri constitution came before Congress for its
approval, it forbade any free negro or mulatto from
entering the State. In short, our Illinois “black laws” were
hidden away in their constitution [Laughter], and the
controversy was thus revived. Then it was that Mr. Clay’s
talents shone out conspicuously, and the controversy that
shook the union to its foundation was ﬁnally settled to the
satisfaction of the conservative parties on both sides of the
line, though not to the extremists on either, and Missouri
was admitted by the small majority of six in the lower
House. How great a majority, do you think, would have
been given had Kansas also been secured for slavery? [A
voice: “A majority the other way.”] “A majority the other
way,” is answered. Do you think it would have been safe for
a Northern man to have confronted his constituents after
having voted to consign both Missouri and Kansas to
hopeless slavery? And yet this man Douglas, who
misrepresents his constituents and who has exerted his
highest talents in that direction, will be carried in triumph
through the State and hailed with honor while applauding
that act. [Three groans for “Dug!”] And this shows whither
we are tending. This thing of slavery is more powerful than
its supporters — even than the high priests that minister at
its altar. It debauches even our greatest men. It gathers
strength, like a rolling snowball, by its own infamy.
 Monstrous crimes are committed in its name by persons
collectively which they would not dare to commit as
individuals. Its aggressions and encroachments almost
surpass belief. In a despotism, one might not wonder to see
slavery advance steadily and remorselessly into new
dominions; but is it not wonderful, is it not even alarming,
to see its steady advance in a land dedicated to the
proposition that “all men are created equal”? [Sensation.]
It yields nothing itself; it keeps all it has, and gets all it
can besides. It really came dangerously near securing
Illinois in 1824; it did get Missouri in 1821. The ﬁrst
proposition was to admit what is now Arkansas and
Missouri as one slave State. But the territory was divided
and Arkansas came in, without serious question, as a slave
State; and afterwards Missouri, not, as a sort of equality,
free, but also as a slave State. Then we had Florida and
Texas; and now Kansas is about to be forced into the dismal
procession. [Sensation.] And so it is wherever you look. We
have not forgotten — it is but six years since — how
dangerously near California came to being a slave State.
Texas is a slave State, and four other slave States may be
carved from its vast domain. And yet, in the year 1829,
slavery was abolished throughout that vast region by a
royal decree of the then sovereign of Mexico. Will you
please tell me by what right slavery exists in Texas to-day?
By the same right as, and no higher or greater than, slavery
is seeking dominion in Kansas: by political force —
peaceful, if that will suﬀice; by the torch (as in Kansas) and
the bludgeon (as in the Senate chamber), if required. And
 so history repeats itself; and even as slavery has kept its
course by craft, intimidation, and violence in the past, so it
will persist, in my judgment, until met and dominated by
the will of a people bent on its restriction.
We have, this very afternoon, heard bitter denunciations
of Brooks in Washington, and Titus, Stringfellow, Atchison,
Jones, and Shannon in Kansas — the battle-ground of
slavery. I certainly am not going to advocate or shield them;
but they and their acts are but the necessary outcome of
the Nebraska law. We should reserve our highest censure
for the authors of the mischief, and not for the catspaws
which they use. I believe it was Shakespeare who said,
“Where the oﬀence lies, there let the axe fall”; and, in my
opinion, this man Douglas and the Northern men in
Congress who advocate “Nebraska” are more guilty than a
thousand 
Joneses 
and 
Stringfellows, 
with 
all 
their
murderous practices, can be. [Applause.]
We have made a good beginning here to-day. As our
Methodist friends would say, “I feel it is good to be here.”
While extremists may ﬁnd some fault with the moderation
of our platform, they should recollect that “the battle is not
always to the strong, nor the race to the swift.” In grave
emergencies, 
moderation 
is 
generally 
safer 
than
radicalism; and as this struggle is likely to be long and
earnest, we must not, by our action, repel any who are in
sympathy with us in the main, but rather win all that we
can to our standard. We must not belittle nor overlook the
facts of our condition — that we are new and comparatively
weak, while our enemies are entrenched and relatively
 strong. They have the administration and the political
power; and, right or wrong, at present they have the
numbers. Our friends who urge an appeal to arms with so
much force and eloquence should recollect that the
government is arrayed against us, and that the numbers
are now arrayed against us as well; or, to state it nearer to
the truth, they are not yet expressly and aﬀirmatively for
us; and we should repel friends rather than gain them by
anything savoring of revolutionary methods. As it now
stands, we must appeal to the sober sense and patriotism of
the people. We will make converts day by day; we will grow
strong by calmness and moderation; we will grow strong by
the violence and injustice of our adversaries. And, unless
truth be a mockery and justice a hollow lie, we will be in
the majority after a while, and then the revolution which
we will accomplish will be none the less radical from being
the result of paciﬁc measures. The battle of freedom is to
be fought out on principle. Slavery is a violation of the
eternal right. We have temporized with it from the
necessities of our condition; but as sure as God reigns and
school children read, THAT BLACK FOUL LIE CAN NEVER
BE CONSECRATED INTO GOD’S HALLOWED TRUTH!
[Immense applause lasting some time.]
One of our greatest diﬀiculties is, that men who know
that slavery is a detestable crime and ruinous to the nation
are compelled, by our peculiar condition and other
circumstances, to advocate it concretely, though damning it
in the raw. Henry Clay was a brilliant example of this
tendency; others of our purest statesmen are compelled to
 do so; and thus slavery secures actual support from those
who detest it at heart. Yet Henry Clay perfected and forced
through the compromise which secured to slavery a great
State as well as a political advantage. Not that he hated
slavery less, but that he loved the whole Union more. As
long as slavery proﬁted by his great compromise, the hosts
of proslavery could not suﬀiciently cover him with praise;
but now that this compromise stands in their way —
“....they never mention him,
His name is never heard:
Their lips are now forbid to speak
That once familiar word.”
They have slaughtered one of his most cherished
measures, and his ghost would arise to rebuke them. [Great
applause.]
Now, let us harmonize, my friends, and appeal to the
moderation and patriotism of the people: to the sober
second thought; to the awakened public conscience. The
repeal of the sacred Missouri Compromise has installed the
weapons of violence: the bludgeon, the incendiary torch,
the death-dealing riﬂe, the bristling cannon — the weapons
of kingcraft, of the inquisition, of ignorance, of barbarism,
of oppression. We see its fruits in the dying bed of the
heroic Sumner; in the ruins of the “Free State” hotel; in the
smoking embers of the Herald of Freedom; in the free-State
Governor of Kansas chained to a stake on freedom’s soil
like a horse-thief, for the crime of freedom. [Applause.] We
see it in Christian statesmen, and Christian newspapers,
and Christian pulpits applauding the cowardly act of a low
 bully, WHO CRAWLED UPON HIS VICTIM BEHIND HIS
BACK AND DEALT THE DEADLY BLOW. [Sensation and
applause.] We note our political demoralization in the
catch-words that are coming into such common use; on the
one hand, “freedom-shriekers,” and sometimes “freedom-
screechers” [Laughter], and, on the other hand, “border-
ruﬀians,” and that fully deserved. And the signiﬁcance of
catch-words cannot pass unheeded, for they constitute a
sign of the times. Everything in this world “jibes” in with
everything else, and all the fruits of this Nebraska Bill are
like the poisoned source from which they come. I will not
say that we may not sooner or later be compelled to meet
force by force; but the time has not yet come, and, if we are
true to ourselves, may never come. Do not mistake that the
ballot is stronger than the bullet. Therefore let the legions
of slavery use bullets; but let us wait patiently till
November and ﬁre ballots at them in return; and by that
peaceful 
policy 
I 
believe 
we 
shall 
ultimately 
win.
[Applause.]
It was by that policy that here in Illinois the early fathers
fought the good ﬁght and gained the victory. In 1824 the
free men of our State, led by Governor Coles (who was a
native of Maryland and President Madison’s private
secretary), determined that those beautiful groves should
never re-echo the dirge of one who has no title to himself.
By their resolute determination, the winds that sweep
across our broad prairies shall never cool the parched
brow, nor shall the unfettered streams that bring joy and
gladness to our free soil water the tired feet, of a slave; but
 so long as those heavenly breezes and sparkling streams
bless the land, or the groves and their fragrance or memory
remain, the humanity to which they minister SHALL BE
FOREVER FREE! [Great applause] Palmer, Yates, Williams,
Browning, and some more in this convention came from
Kentucky to Illinois (instead of going to Missouri), not only
to better their conditions, but also to get away from slavery.
They have said so to me, and it is understood among us
Kentuckians that we don’t like it one bit. Now, can we,
mindful of the blessings of liberty which the early men of
Illinois left to us, refuse a like privilege to the free men who
seek to plant Freedom’s banner on our Western outposts?
[“No!” “No!”] Should we not stand by our neighbors who
seek to better their conditions in Kansas and Nebraska?
[“Yes!” “Yes!”] Can we as Christian men, and strong and
free ourselves, wield the sledge or hold the iron which is to
manacle anew an already oppressed race? [“No!” “No!”]
“Woe unto them,” it is written, “that decree unrighteous
decrees and that write grievousness which they have
prescribed.” Can we aﬀord to sin any more deeply against
human liberty? [“No!” “No!”]
One great trouble in the matter is, that slavery is an
insidious and crafty power, and gains equally by open
violence of the brutal as well as by sly management of the
peaceful. Even after the Ordinance of 1787, the settlers in
Indiana and Illinois (it was all one government then) tried
to get Congress to allow slavery temporarily, and petitions
to that end were sent from Kaskaskia, and General
Harrison, the Governor, urged it from Vincennes, the
 capital. If that had succeeded, good-bye to liberty here. But
John Randolph of Virginia made a vigorous report against
it; and although they persevered so well as to get three
favorable reports for it, yet the United States Senate, with
the aid of some slave States, ﬁnally squelched if for good.
[Applause.] And that is why this hall is to-day a temple for
free men instead of a negro livery-stable. [Great applause
and laughter.] Once let slavery get planted in a locality, by
ever so weak or doubtful a title, and in ever so small
numbers, and it is like the Canada thistle or Bermuda grass
— you can’t root it out. You yourself may detest slavery; but
your neighbor has ﬁve or six slaves, and he is an excellent
neighbor, or your son has married his daughter, and they
beg you to help save their property, and you vote against
your interests and principle to accommodate a neighbor,
hoping that your vote will be on the losing side. And others
do the same; and in those ways slavery gets a sure
foothold. And when that is done the whole mighty Union —
the force of the nation — is committed to its support. And
that very process is working in Kansas to-day. And you must
recollect that the slave property is worth a billion of
dollars; while free-State men must work for sentiment
alone. Then there are “blue lodges” — as they call them —
everywhere doing their secret and deadly work.
It is a very strange thing, and not solvable by any moral
law that I know of, that if a man loses his horse, the whole
country will turn out to help hang the thief; but if a man but
a shade or two darker than I am is himself stolen, the same
crowd will hang one who aids in restoring him to liberty.
 Such are the inconsistencies of slavery, where a horse is
more sacred than a man; and the essence of squatter or
popular sovereignty — I don’t care how you call it — is that
if one man chooses to make a slave of another, no third man
shall be allowed to object. And if you can do this in free
Kansas, and it is allowed to stand, the next thing you will
see is shiploads of negroes from Africa at the wharf at
Charleston, for one thing is as truly lawful as the other; and
these are the bastard notions we have got to stamp out,
else they will stamp us out. [Sensation and applause.]
Two years ago, at Springﬁeld, Judge Douglas avowed
that Illinois came into the Union as a slave State, and that
slavery was weeded out by the operation of his great,
patent, everlasting principle of “popular sovereignty.”
[Laughter.] Well, now, that argument must be answered, for
it has a little grain of truth at the bottom. I do not mean
that it is true in essence, as he would have us believe. It
could not be essentially true if the Ordinance of ‘87 was
valid. But, in point of fact, there were some degraded
beings called slaves in Kaskaskia and the other French
settlements when our ﬁrst State constitution was adopted;
that is a fact, and I don’t deny it. Slaves were brought here
as early as 1720, and were kept here in spite of the
Ordinance of 1787 against it. But slavery did not thrive
here. On the contrary, under the inﬂuence of the ordinance
the number decreased ﬁfty-one from 1810 to 1820; while
under the inﬂuence of squatter sovereignty, right across
the river in Missouri, they increased seven thousand two
hundred and eleven in the same time; and slavery ﬁnally
 faded out in Illinois, under the inﬂuence of the law of
freedom, while it grew stronger and stronger in Missouri,
under the law or practice of “popular sovereignty.” In point
of fact there were but one hundred and seventeen slaves in
Illinois one year after its admission, or one to every four
hundred and seventy of its population; or, to state it in
another way, if Illinois was a slave State in 1820, so were
New York and New Jersey much greater slave States from
having 
had 
greater 
numbers, 
slavery 
having 
been
established there in very early times. But there is this vital
diﬀerence between all these States and the Judge’s Kansas
experiment: that they sought to disestablish slavery which
had been already established, while the Judge seeks, so far
as he can, to disestablish freedom, which had been
established there by the Missouri Compromise. [Voices:
“Good!”]
The Union is under-going a fearful strain; but it is a stout
old ship, and has weathered many a hard blow, and “the
stars in their courses,” aye, an invisible Power, greater than
the puny eﬀorts of men, will ﬁght for us. But we ourselves
must not decline the burden of responsibility, nor take
counsel of unworthy passions. Whatever duty urges us to
do or to omit must be done or omitted; and the
recklessness with which our adversaries break the laws, or
counsel their violation, should aﬀord no example for us.
Therefore, let us revere the Declaration of Independence;
let us continue to obey the Constitution and the laws; let us
keep step to the music of the Union. Let us draw a cordon,
so to speak, around the slave States, and the hateful
 institution, like a reptile poisoning itself, will perish by its
own infamy. [Applause.]
But we cannot be free men if this is, by our national
choice, to be a land of slavery. Those who deny freedom to
others deserve it not for themselves; and, under the rule of
a just God, cannot long retain it.[Loud applause.]
Did you ever, my friends, seriously reﬂect upon the speed
with which we are tending downwards? Within the memory
of men now present the leading statesman of Virginia could
make genuine, red-hot abolitionist speeches in old Virginia!
and, as I have said, now even in “free Kansas” it is a crime
to declare that it is “free Kansas.” The very sentiments that
I and others have just uttered would entitle us, and each of
us, to the ignominy and seclusion of a dungeon; and yet I
suppose that, like Paul, we were “free born.” But if this
thing is allowed to continue, it will be but one step further
to impress the same rule in Illinois. [Sensation.]
The conclusion of all is, that we must restore the
Missouri Compromise. We must highly resolve that Kansas
must be free! [Great applause.] We must reinstate the
birthday promise of the Republic; we must reaﬀirm the
Declaration of Independence; we must make good in
essence as well as in form Madison’s avowal that “the word
slave ought not to appear in the Constitution”; and we must
even go further, and decree that only local law, and not that
time-honored instrument, shall shelter a slaveholder. We
must make this a land of liberty in fact, as it is in name. But
in seeking to attain these results — so indispensable if the
liberty which is our pride and boast shall endure — we will
 be loyal to the Constitution and to the “ﬂag of our Union,”
and no matter what our grievance — even though Kansas
shall come in as a slave State; and no matter what theirs —
even if we shall restore the compromise — WE WILL SAY
TO THE SOUTHERN DISUNIONISTS, WE WON’T GO OUT
OF THE UNION, AND YOU SHAN’T!
[This was the climax; the audience rose to its feet en
masse, applauded, stamped, waved handkerchiefs, threw
hats in the air, and ran riot for several minutes. The arch-
enchanter 
who 
wrought 
this 
transformation 
looked,
meanwhile, like the personiﬁcation of political justice.]
But let us, meanwhile, appeal to the sense and patriotism
of the people, and not to their prejudices; let us spread the
ﬂoods of enthusiasm here aroused all over these vast
prairies, so suggestive of freedom. Let us commence by
electing the gallant soldier Governor (Colonel) Bissell who
stood for the honor of our State alike on the plains and
amidst the chaparral of Mexico and on the ﬂoor of
Congress, while he deﬁed the Southern Hotspur; and that
will have a greater moral eﬀect than all the border ruﬀians
can accomplish in all their raids on Kansas. There is both a
power and a magic in popular opinion. To that let us now
appeal; and while, in all probability, no resort to force will
be needed, our moderation and forbearance will stand US
in good stead when, if ever, WE MUST MAKE AN APPEAL
TO BATTLE AND TO THE GOD OF HOSTS! [Immense
applause and a rush for the orator.]
One can realize with this ability to move people’s minds
that the Southern Conspiracy were right to hate this man.
 He, better than any at the time was able to uncover their
stratagems 
and 
tear 
down 
their 
sophisms 
and
contradictions.
  
 I I A   
     
 
 
TO W. C. WHITNEY.
SPRINGFIELD, JULY 9, 1856.
DEAR WHITNEY: — I now expect to go to Chicago on the
15th, and I probably shall remain there or thereabouts for
about two weeks.
It turned me blind when I ﬁrst heard Swett was beaten
and Lovejoy nominated; but, after much reﬂection, I really
believe it is best to let it stand. This, of course, I wish to be
conﬁdential.
Lamon did get your deeds. I went with him to the oﬀice,
got them, and put them in his hands myself.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
    A    A
 AI
  
TO WILLIAM GRIMES.
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, JULY 12, 1856
Your’s of the 29th of June was duly received. I did not
answer it because it plagued me. This morning I received
another from Judd and Peck, written by consultation with
you. Now let me tell you why I am plagued: 1. I can hardly
spare the time.
2. I am superstitious. I have scarcely known a party
preceding an election to call in help from the neighboring
States but they lost the State. Last fall, our friends had
Wade, of Ohio, and others, in Maine; and they lost the
State. Last spring our adversaries had New Hampshire full
of South Carolinians, and they lost the State. And so,
generally, it seems to stir up more enemies than friends.
Have the enemy called in any foreign help? If they have a
foreign champion there I should have no objection to drive
a nail in his track. I shall reach Chicago on the night of the
15th, to attend to a little business in court. Consider the
things I have suggested, and write me at Chicago.
Especially write me whether Browning consents to visit
you.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
    
  I A
  A
 AI
      H
FRAGMENT OF SPEECH AT GALENA, ILLINOIS, IN THE
FREMONT CAMPAIGN,
AUGUST 1, 1856.
You further charge us with being disunionists. If you
mean that it is our aim to dissolve the Union, I for myself
answer that it is untrue; for those who act with me I answer
that it is untrue. Have you heard us assert that as our aim?
Do you really believe that such is our aim? Do you ﬁnd it in
our platform, our speeches, our conventions, or anywhere?
If not, withdraw the charge.
But you may say that, though it is not our aim, it will be
the result if we succeed, and that we are therefore
disunionists in fact. This is a grave charge you make
against us, and we certainly have a right to demand that
you specify in what way we are to dissolve the Union. How
are we to eﬀect this?
The only speciﬁcation oﬀered is volunteered by Mr.
Fillmore in his Albany speech. His charge is that if we elect
a President and Vice-President both from the free States, it
will dissolve the Union. This is open folly. The Constitution
provides that the President and Vice-President of the
United States shall be of diﬀerent States, but says nothing
as to the latitude and longitude of those States. In 1828
 Andrew Jackson, of Tennessee, and John C. Calhoun, of
South Carolina, were elected President and Vice-President,
both from slave States; but no one thought of dissolving the
Union then on that account. In 1840 Harrison, of Ohio, and
Tyler, of Virginia, were elected. In 1841 Harrison died and
John Tyler succeeded to the Presidency, and William R.
King, of Alabama, was elected acting Vice-President by the
Senate; but no one supposed that the Union was in danger.
In fact, at the very time Mr. Fillmore uttered this idle
charge, the state of things in the United States disproved it.
Mr. Pierce, of New Hampshire, and Mr. Bright, of Indiana,
both from free States, are President and Vice-President,
and the Union stands and will stand. You do not pretend
that it ought to dissolve the Union, and the facts show that
it won’t; therefore the charge may be dismissed without
further consideration.
No other speciﬁcation is made, and the only one that
could be made is that the restoration of the restriction of
1820, making the United States territory free territory,
would dissolve the Union. Gentlemen, it will require a
decided majority to pass such an act. We, the majority,
being able constitutionally to do all that we purpose, would
have no desire to dissolve the Union. Do you say that such
restriction of slavery would be unconstitutional, and that
some of the States would not submit to its enforcement? I
grant you that an unconstitutional act is not a law; but I do
not ask and will not take your construction of the
Constitution. The Supreme Court of the United States is the
tribunal to decide such a question, and we will submit to its
 decisions; and if you do also, there will be an end of the
matter. Will you? If not, who are the disunionists — you or
we? We, the majority, would not strive to dissolve the
Union; and if any attempt is made, it must be by you, who
so loudly stigmatize us as disunionists. But the Union, in
any event, will not be dissolved. We don’t want to dissolve
it, and if you attempt it we won’t let you. With the purse
and sword, the army and navy and treasury, in our hands
and at our command, you could not do it. This government
would be very weak indeed if a majority with a disciplined
army and navy and a well-ﬁlled treasury could not preserve
itself when attacked by an unarmed, undisciplined,
unorganized minority. All this talk about the dissolution of
the Union is humbug, nothing but folly. We do not want to
dissolve the Union; you shall not.
   H  
A
   
   HI 
  A  I 
TO JOHN BENNETT.
SPRINGFIELD, AUG. 4, 1856
DEAR SIR: — I understand you are a Fillmore man. If, as
between Fremont and Buchanan, you really prefer the
election of Buchanan, then burn this without reading a line
further. But if you would like to defeat Buchanan and his
gang, allow me a word with you: Does any one pretend that
Fillmore can carry the vote of this State? I have not heard a
single man pretend so. Every vote taken from Fremont and
given to Fillmore is just so much in favor of Buchanan. The
Buchanan men see this; and hence their great anxiety in
favor of the Fillmore movement. They know where the shoe
pinches. They now greatly prefer having a man of your
character go for Fillmore than for Buchanan because they
expect several to go with you, who would go for Fremont if
you were to go directly for Buchanan.
I think I now understand the relative strength of the
three parties in this State as well as any one man does, and
my opinion is that to-day Buchanan has alone 85,000,
Fremont 78,000, and Fillmore 21,000.
This gives B. the State by 7000 and leaves him in the
minority of the whole 14,000.
 Fremont and Fillmore men being united on Bissell, as
they already are, he cannot be beaten. This is not a long
letter, but it contains the whole story.
Yours as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  
        . 
 
I .
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 19, 1856.
DEAR DUBOIS: YOUR letter on the same sheet with Mr.
Miller’s is just received. I have been absent four days. I do
not know when your court sits.
Trumbull has written the committee here to have a set of
appointments 
made 
for 
him 
commencing 
here 
in
Springﬁeld, on the 11th of Sept., and to extend throughout
the south half of the State. When he goes to Lawrenceville,
as he will, I will strain every nerve to be with you and him.
More than that I cannot promise now.
Yours as truly as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 HA  I 
 
A    .
[Conﬁdential]
SPRINGFIELD, SEPTEMBER 8, 1856.
DEAR SIR: — I understand you are a Fillmore man. Let
me prove to you that every vote withheld from Fremont and
given to Fillmore in this State actually lessens Fillmore’s
chance of being President. Suppose Buchanan gets all the
slave States and Pennsylvania, and any other one State
besides; then he is elected, no matter who gets all the rest.
But suppose Fillmore gets the two slave States of Maryland
and Kentucky; then Buchanan is not elected; Fillmore goes
into the House of Representatives, and may be made
President by a compromise. But suppose, again, Fillmore’s
friends throw away a few thousand votes on him in Indiana
and Illinois; it will inevitably give these States to Buchanan,
which will more than compensate him for the loss of
Maryland and Kentucky, will elect him, and leave Fillmore
no chance in the House of Representatives or out of it.
This is as plain as adding up the weight of three small
hogs. As Mr. Fillmore has no possible chance to carry
Illinois for himself, it is plainly to his interest to let Fremont
take it, and thus keep it out of the hands of Buchanan. Be
not deceived. Buchanan is the hard horse to beat in this
race. Let him have Illinois, and nothing can beat him; and
 he will get Illinois if men persist in throwing away votes
upon Mr. Fillmore. Does some one persuade you that Mr.
Fillmore can carry Illinois? Nonsense! There are over
seventy newspapers in Illinois opposing Buchanan, only
three or four of which support Mr. Fillmore, all the rest
going for Fremont. Are not these newspapers a fair index of
the proportion of the votes? If not, tell me why.
Again, of these three or four Fillmore newspapers, two,
at least, are supported in part by the Buchanan men, as I
understand. Do not they know where the shoe pinches?
They know the Fillmore movement helps them, and
therefore they help it. Do think these things over, and then
act according to your judgment.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 .  .  
A .
Sept. 14, 1856.
DR. R. BOAL, Lacon, Ill.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 8th inviting me to be with
[you] at Lacon on the 30th is received. I feel that I owe you
and our friends of Marshall a good deal, and I will come if I
can; and if I do not get there, it will be because I shall think
my eﬀorts are now needed farther south.
Present my regards to Mrs. Boal, and believe [me], as
ever, Your friend, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H 
   
  
    
  A I
   I
A.
SPRINGFIELD, Sept. 14, 1856.
DEAR SIR: — Yours, inviting me to attend a mass-
meeting on the 23d inst., is received. It would be very
pleasant to strike hands with the Fremonters of Iowa, who
have led the van so splendidly, in this grand charge which
we hope and believe will end in a most glorious victory. All
thanks, all honor to Iowa! But Iowa is out of all danger, and
it is no time for us, when the battle still rages, to pay
holiday visits to Iowa. I am sure you will excuse me for
remaining in Illinois, where much hard work is still to be
done.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A      H  
 
  A I   I  
   
 
 HA
A
FRAGMENT OF SPEECH AT A REPUBLICAN BANQUET IN
CHICAGO, DECEMBER 10, 1856.
WE HAVE ANOTHER annual Presidential message. Like a
rejected lover making merry at the wedding of his rival, the
President 
felicitates 
himself 
hugely 
over 
the 
late
Presidential election. He considers the result a signal
triumph of good principles and good men, and a very
pointed rebuke of bad ones. He says the people did it. He
forgets that the “people,” as he complacently calls only
those who voted for Buchanan, are in a minority of the
whole people by about four hundred thousand votes — one
full tenth of all the votes. Remembering this, he might
perceive that the “rebuke” may not be quite as durable as
he seems to think — that the majority may not choose to
remain permanently rebuked by that minority.
The President thinks the great body of us Fremonters,
being ardently attached to liberty, in the abstract, were
duped by a few wicked and designing men. There is a slight
diﬀerence of opinion on this. We think he, being ardently
attached to the hope of a second term, in the concrete, was
duped by men who had liberty every way. He is the cat’s-
paw. By much dragging of chestnuts from the ﬁre for others
 to eat, his claws are burnt oﬀ to the gristle, and he is
thrown aside as unﬁt for further use. As the fool said of
King Lear, when his daughters had turned him out of doors,
“He ‘s a shelled peascod” (“That ‘s a sheal’d peascod”).
So far as the President charges us “with a desire to
change the domestic institutions of existing States,” and of
“doing everything in our power to deprive the Constitution
and the laws of moral authority,” for the whole party on
belief, and for myself on knowledge, I pronounce the
charge an unmixed and unmitigated falsehood.
Our government rests in public opinion. Whoever can
change 
public 
opinion 
can 
change 
the 
government
practically just so much. Public opinion, on any subject,
always has a “central idea,” from which all its minor
thoughts radiate. That “central idea” in our political public
opinion at the beginning was, and until recently has
continued to be, “the equality of men.” And although it has
always submitted patiently to whatever of inequality there
seemed to be as matter of actual necessity, its constant
working has been a steady progress toward the practical
equality of all men. The late Presidential election was a
struggle by one party to discard that central idea and to
substitute for it the opposite idea that slavery is right in the
abstract, the workings of which as a central idea may be
the perpetuity of human slavery and its extension to all
countries and colors. Less than a year ago the Richmond
Enquirer, an avowed advocate of slavery, regardless of
color, in order to favor his views, invented the phrase
“State equality,” and now the President, in his message,
 adopts the Enquirer’s catch-phrase, telling us the people
“have asserted the constitutional equality of each and all of
the States of the Union as States.” The President ﬂatters
himself 
that 
the 
new 
central 
idea 
is 
completely
inaugurated; and so indeed it is, so far as the mere fact of a
Presidential election can inaugurate it. To us it is left to
know that the majority of the people have not yet declared
for it, and to hope that they never will.
All of us who did not vote for Mr. Buchanan, taken
together, are a majority of four hundred thousand. But in
the late contest we were divided between Fremont and
Fillmore. Can we not come together for the future? Let
every one who really believes and is resolved that free
society is not and shall not be a failure, and who can
conscientiously declare that in the last contest he has done
only what he thought best — let every such one have
charity to believe that every other one can say as much.
Thus let bygones be bygones; let past diﬀerences as
nothing be; and with steady eye on the real issue let us
reinaugurate the good old “central idea” of the republic.
We can do it. The human heart is with us; God is with us.
We shall again be able, not to declare that “all States as
States are equal,” nor yet that “all citizens as citizens are
equal,” but to renew the broader, better declaration,
including both these and much more, that “all men are
created equal.”
  
 
 .  .  
A .
SPRINGFIELD, Dec. 25, 1856.
DEAR SIR:-W HEN I was at Chicago two weeks ago I saw
Mr. Arnold, and from a remark of his I inferred he was
thinking of the speakership, though I think he was not
anxious about it. He seemed most anxious for harmony
generally, and particularly that the contested seats from
Peoria and McDonough might be rightly determined. Since
I came home I had a talk with Cullom, one of our American
representatives here, and he says he is for you for Speaker
and also that he thinks all the Americans will be for you,
unless it be Gorin, of Macon, of whom he cannot speak. If
you would like to be Speaker go right up and see Arnold.
He is talented, a practised debater, and, I think, would do
himself more credit on the ﬂoor than in the Speaker’s seat.
Go and see him; and if you think ﬁt, show him this letter.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
