    
 A
 H    
 I I A   A  
A
        
 
TO EDWARD G. MINER.
SPRINGFIELD, FEB.19, 1858.
MY DEAR SIR: Mr. G. A. Sutton is an applicant for
superintendent of the addition of the Insane Asylum, and I
understand it partly depends on you whether he gets it.
Sutton is my fellow-townsman and friend, and I therefore
wish to say for him that he is a man of sterling integrity and
as a master mechanic and builder not surpassed by any in
our city, or any I have known anywhere, as far as I can
judge. I hope you will consider me as being really
interested for Mr. Sutton and not as writing merely to
relieve myself of importunity. Please show this to Col.
William Ross and let him consider it as much intended for
him as for yourself.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 I I A   
I A I
TO W. H. LAMON, ESQ.
SPRINGFIELD, JUNE 11, 1858
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 9th written at Joliet is just
received. Two or three days ago I learned that McLean had
appointed delegates in favor of Lovejoy, and thenceforward
I have considered his renomination a ﬁxed fact. My opinion
— if my opinion is of any consequence in this case, in which
it is no business of mine to interfere — remains unchanged,
that running an independent candidate against Lovejoy will
not do; that it will result in nothing but disaster all round.
In the ﬁrst place, whosoever so runs will be beaten and will
be spotted for life; in the second place, while the race is in
progress, he will be under the strongest temptation to
trade with the Democrats, and to favor the election of
certain of their friends to the Legislature; thirdly, I shall be
held responsible for it, and Republican members of the
Legislature who are partial to Lovejoy will for that purpose
oppose us; and lastly, it will in the end lose us the district
altogether. There is no safe way but a convention; and if in
that convention, upon a common platform which all are
willing to stand upon, one who has been known as an
abolitionist, but who is now occupying none but common
 ground, can get the majority of the votes to which all look
for an election, there is no safe way but to submit.
As to the inclination of some Republicans to favor
Douglas, that is one of the chances I have to run, and which
I intend to run with patience.
I write in the court room. Court has opened, and I must
close.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   I   A
 
 I
 A H 
JUNE 15, 1858.
THE COMPILER OF the Dictionary of Congress states that
while preparing that work for publication, in 1858, he sent
to Mr. Lincoln the usual request for a sketch of his life, and
received the following reply: Born February 12, 1809, in
Hardin County, Kentucky.
Education, defective.
Profession, a lawyer.
Have been a captain of volunteers in Black Hawk war.
Postmaster at a very small oﬀice.
Four times a member of the Illinois Legislature and was a
member of the lower house of Congress.
Yours, etc.,
A. LINCOLN.
