    
  I     HI 
TO JOSHUA F. SPEED. SPRINGFIELD, May 18, 1843.
DEAR SPEED: — Yours of the 9th instant is duly
received, which I do not meet as a “bore,” but as a most
welcome visitor. I will answer the business part of it ﬁrst.
In relation to our Congress matter here, you were right
in supposing I would support the nominee. Neither Baker
nor I, however, is the man, but Hardin, so far as I can judge
from present appearances. We shall have no split or trouble
about the matter; all will be harmony. In relation to the
“coming events” about which Butler wrote you, I had not
heard one word before I got your letter; but I have so much
conﬁdence in the judgment of Butler on such a subject that
I incline to think there may be some reality in it. What day
does Butler appoint? By the way, how do “events” of the
same sort come on in your family? Are you possessing
houses and lands, and oxen and asses, and men-servants
and maid-servants, and begetting sons and daughters? We
are not keeping house, but boarding at the Globe Tavern,
which is very well kept now by a widow lady of the name of
Beck. Our room (the same that Dr. Wallace occupied there)
and boarding only costs us four dollars a week. Ann Todd
was married something more than a year since to a fellow
by the name of Campbell, and who, Mary says, is pretty
 much of a “dunce,” though he has a little money and
property. They live in Boonville, Missouri, and have not
been heard from lately enough for me to say anything
about her health. I reckon it will scarcely be in our power
to visit Kentucky this year. Besides poverty and the
necessity of attending to business, those “coming events,” I
suspect, would be somewhat in the way. I most heartily
wish you and your Fanny would not fail to come. Just let us
know the time, and we will have a room provided for you at
our house, and all be merry together for a while. Be sure to
give my respects to your mother and family; assure her that
if ever I come near her, I will not fail to call and see her.
Mary joins in sending love to your Fanny and you.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
