    
  
   
    I
A    
    
A 
TO E. B. WASHBURNE.
SPRINGFIELD, FEBRUARY 9, 1855 MY DEAR SIR:
I began with 44 votes, Shields 41, and Trumbull 5, — yet
Trumbull was elected. In fact 47 diﬀerent members voted
for me, — getting three new ones on the second ballot, and
losing four old ones. How came my 47 to yield to
Trumbull’s 5? It was Governor Matteson’s work. He has
been secretly a candidate ever since (before, even) the fall
election.
All the members round about the canal were Anti-
Nebraska, but were nevertheless nearly all Democrats and
old personal friends of his. His plan was to privately
impress them with the belief that he was as good Anti-
Nebraska as any one else — at least could be secured to be
so by instructions, which could be easily passed.
The Nebraska men, of course, were not for Matteson; but
when they found they could elect no avowed Nebraska
man, they tardily determined to let him get whomever of
our men he could, by whatever means he could, and ask
him no questions.
The Nebraska men were very conﬁdent of the election of
Matteson, though denying that he was a candidate, and we
very much believing also that they would elect him. But
 they wanted ﬁrst to make a show of good faith to Shields by
voting for him a few times, and our secret Matteson men
also wanted to make a show of good faith by voting with us
a few times. So we led oﬀ. On the seventh ballot, I think,
the signal was given to the Nebraska men to turn to
Matteson, which they acted on to a man, with one
exception. . . Next ballot the remaining Nebraska man and
one pretended Anti went over to him, giving him 46. The
next still another, giving him 47, wanting only three of an
election. In the meantime our friends, with a view of
detaining our expected bolters, had been turning from me
to Trumbull till he had risen to 35 and I had been reduced
to 15. These would never desert me except by my direction;
but I became satisﬁed that if we could prevent Matteson’s
election one or two ballots more, we could not possibly do
so a single ballot after my friends should begin to return to
me from Trumbull. So I determined to strike at once, and
accordingly advised my remaining friends to go for him,
which they did and elected him on the tenth ballot.
Such is the way the thing was done. I think you would
have done the same under the circumstances.
I could have headed oﬀ every combination and been
elected, had it not been for Matteson’s double game — and
his defeat now gives me more pleasure than my own gives
me pain. On the whole, it is perhaps as well for our general
cause that Trumbull is elected. The Nebraska men confess
that they hate it worse than anything that could have
happened. It is a great consolation to see them worse
whipped than I am.
 Yours forever,
A. LINCOLN.
    
 
  
  A
   
    I
TO SANFORD, PORTER, AND STRIKER, NEW YORK.
SPRINGFIELD, MARCH 10, 1855
GENTLEMEN: — Yours of the 5th is received, as also was
that of 15th Dec, last, inclosing bond of Clift to Pray. When
I received the bond I was dabbling in politics, and of course
neglecting business. Having since been beaten out I have
gone to work again.
As I do not practice in Rushville, I to-day open a
correspondence 
with 
Henry 
E. 
Dummer, 
Esq., 
of
Beardstown, Ill., with the view of getting the job into his
hands. He is a good man if he will undertake it.
Write me whether I shall do this or return the bond to
you.
Yours respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. H.   
I
.
SPRINGFIELD, March 23, 1855.
HON. O. H. BROWNING.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your letter to Judge Logan has been
shown to us by him; and, with his consent, we answer it.
When it became probable that there would be a vacancy on
the Supreme Bench, public opinion, on this side of the river,
seemed to be universally directed to Logan as the proper
man to ﬁll it. I mean public opinion on our side in politics,
with very small manifestation in any diﬀerent direction by
the other side. The result is, that he has been a good deal
pressed to allow his name to be used, and he has consented
to it, provided it can be done with perfect cordiality and
good feeling on the part of all our own friends. We, the
undersigned, are very anxious for it; and the more so now
that he has been urged, until his mind is turned upon the
matter. We, therefore are very glad of your letter, with the
information it brings us, mixed only with a regret that we
can not elect Logan and Walker both. We shall be glad, if
you will hoist Logan’s name, in your Quincy papers.
Very truly your friends,
A. LINCOLN, B. S. EWARDS, JOHN T. STUART.
  
 H.  . 
HI 
  .
SPRINGFIELD, June 7, 1855.
H. C. WHITNEY, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your note containing election news is
received; and for which I thank you. It is all of no use,
however. Logan is worse beaten than any other man ever
was since elections were invented — beaten more than
twelve hundred in this county. It is conceded on all hands
that the Prohibitory law is also beaten.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A   
   A       I 
TO JOSHUA. F. SPEED.
SPRINGFIELD, AUGUST 24, 1855
DEAR SPEED: — You know what a poor correspondent I
am. Ever since I received your very agreeable letter of the
22d of May, I have been intending to write you an answer
to it. You suggest that in political action, now, you and I
would diﬀer. I suppose we would; not quite as much,
however, as you may think. You know I dislike slavery, and
you fully admit the abstract wrong of it. So far there is no
cause of diﬀerence. But you say that sooner than yield your
legal right to the slave, especially at the bidding of those
who are not themselves interested, you would see the
Union dissolved. I am not aware that any one is bidding you
yield that right; very certainly I am not. I leave that matter
entirely to yourself. I also acknowledge your rights and my
obligations under the Constitution in regard to your slaves.
I confess I hate to see the poor creatures hunted down and
caught and carried back to their stripes and unrequited
toil; but I bite my lips and keep quiet. In 1841 you and I had
together a tedious low-water trip on a steamboat from
Louisville to St. Louis. You may remember, as I well do, that
from Louisville to the mouth of the Ohio there were on
board ten or a dozen slaves shackled together with irons.
 That sight was a continued torment to me, and I see
something like it every time I touch the Ohio or any other
slave border. It is not fair for you to assume that I have no
interest in a thing which has, and continually exercises, the
power of making me miserable. You ought rather to
appreciate how much the great body of the Northern
people do crucify their feelings, in order to maintain their
loyalty to the Constitution and the Union. I do oppose the
extension of slavery because my judgment and feeling so
prompt me, and I am under no obligations to the contrary.
If for this you and I must diﬀer, diﬀer we must. You say, if
you were President, you would send an army and hang the
leaders of the Missouri outrages upon the Kansas elections;
still, if Kansas fairly votes herself a slave State she must be
admitted or the Union must be dissolved. But how if she
votes herself a slave State unfairly, that is, by the very
means for which you say you would hang men? Must she
still be admitted, or the Union dissolved? That will be the
phase of the question when it ﬁrst becomes a practical one.
In your assumption that there may be a fair decision of the
slavery question in Kansas, I plainly see you and I would
diﬀer about the Nebraska law. I look upon that enactment
not as a law, but as a violence from the beginning. It was
conceived in violence, is maintained in violence, and is
being executed in violence. I say it was conceived in
violence, 
because 
the 
destruction 
of 
the 
Missouri
Compromise, under the circumstances, was nothing less
than violence. It was passed in violence because it could
not have passed at all but for the votes of many members in
 violence of the known will of their constituents. It is
maintained in violence, because the elections since clearly
demand its repeal; and the demand is openly disregarded.
You say men ought to be hung for the way they are
executing the law; I say the way it is being executed is
quite as good as any of its antecedents. It is being executed
in the precise way which was intended from the ﬁrst, else
why does no Nebraska man express astonishment or
condemnation? Poor Reeder is the only public man who has
been silly enough to believe that anything like fairness was
ever intended, and he has been bravely undeceived.
That Kansas will form a slave constitution, and with it
will ask to be admitted into the Union, I take to be already
a settled question, and so settled by the very means you so
pointedly condemn. By every principle of law ever held by
any court North or South, every negro taken to Kansas is
free; yet, in utter disregard of this, — in the spirit of
violence merely, — that beautiful Legislature gravely passes
a law to hang any man who shall venture to inform a negro
of his legal rights. This is the subject and real object of the
law. If, like Haman, they should hang upon the gallows of
their own building, I shall not be among the mourners for
their fate. In my humble sphere, I shall advocate the
restoration of the Missouri Compromise so long as Kansas
remains a Territory, and when, by all these foul means, it
seeks to come into the Union as a slave State, I shall
oppose it. I am very loath in any case to withhold my assent
to the enjoyment of property acquired or located in good
faith; but I do not admit that good faith in taking a negro to
 Kansas to be held in slavery is a probability with any man.
Any man who has sense enough to be the controller of his
own property has too much sense to misunderstand the
outrageous character of the whole Nebraska business. But I
digress. In my opposition to the admission of Kansas I shall
have some company, but we may be beaten. If we are, I
shall not on that account attempt to dissolve the Union. I
think it probable, however, we shall be beaten. Standing as
a unit among yourselves, You can, directly and indirectly,
bribe enough of our men to carry the day, as you could on
the open proposition to establish a monarchy. Get hold of
some man in the North whose position and ability is such
that he can make the support of your measure, whatever it
may be, a Democratic party necessity, and the thing is
done. Apropos of this, let me tell you an anecdote. Douglas
introduced the Nebraska Bill in January. In February
afterward there was a called session of the Illinois
Legislature. Of the one hundred members composing the
two branches of that body, about seventy were Democrats.
These latter held a caucus in which the Nebraska Bill was
talked of, if not formally discussed. It was thereby
discovered that just three, and no more, were in favor of
the measure. In a day or two Douglas’s orders came on to
have resolutions passed approving the bill; and they were
passed by large majorities!!!! The truth of this is vouched
for by a bolting Democratic member. The masses, too,
Democratic as well as Whig, were even nearer unanimous
against it; but, as soon as the party necessity of supporting
 it became apparent, the way the Democrats began to see
the wisdom and justice of it was perfectly astonishing.
You say that if Kansas fairly votes herself a free State, as
a Christian you will rejoice at it. All decent slaveholders
talk that way, and I do not doubt their candor. But they
never vote that way. Although in a private letter or
conversation you will express your preference that Kansas
shall be free, you would vote for no man for Congress who
would say the same thing publicly. No such man could be
elected from any district in a slave State. You think
Stringfellow and company ought to be hung; and yet at the
next Presidential election you will vote for the exact type
and representative of Stringfellow. The slave-breeders and
slave-traders are a small, odious, and detested class among
you; and yet in politics they dictate the course of all of you,
and are as completely your masters as you are the master
of your own negroes. You inquire where I now stand. That
is a disputed point. I think I am a Whig; but others say
there are no Whigs, and that I am an Abolitionist. When I
was at Washington, I voted for the Wilmot Proviso as good
as forty times; and I never heard of any one attempting to
un-Whig me for that. I now do no more than oppose the
extension of slavery. I am not a Know-Nothing; that is
certain. How could I be? How can any one who abhors the
oppression of negroes be in favor of degrading classes of
white people? Our progress in degeneracy appears to me to
be pretty rapid. As a nation we began by declaring that “all
men are created equal.” We now practically read it “all men
are created equal, except negroes.” When the Know-
 Nothings get control, it will read “all men are created
equal, except negroes and foreigners and Catholics.” When
it comes to this, I shall prefer emigrating to some country
where they make no pretense of loving liberty, — to Russia,
for instance, where despotism can be taken pure, and
without the base alloy of hypocrisy.
Mary will probably pass a day or two in Louisville in
October. My kindest regards to Mrs. Speed. On the leading
subject of this letter I have more of her sympathy than I
have of yours; and yet let me say I am,
Your friend forever,
A. LINCOLN.
