    
          
  A
I   
 
   
  
  
H
 
.  
H
  
.
January 2, 1851
DEAR JOHNSTON: — Your request for eighty dollars I
do not think it best to comply with now. At the various
times when I have helped you a little you have said to me,
“We can get along very well now”; but in a very short time I
ﬁnd you in the same diﬀiculty again. Now, this can only
happen by some defect in your conduct. What that defect
is, I think I know. You are not lazy, and still you are an idler.
I doubt whether, since I saw you, you have done a good
whole day’s work in any one day. You do not very much
dislike to work, and still you do not work much merely
because it does not seem to you that you could get much
for it. This habit of uselessly wasting time is the whole
diﬀiculty; it is vastly important to you, and still more so to
your children, that you should break the habit. It is more
important to them, because they have longer to live, and
can keep out of an idle habit before they are in it, easier
than they can get out after they are in.
You are now in need of some money; and what I propose
is, that you shall go to work, “tooth and nail,” for somebody
who will give you money for it. Let father and your boys
take charge of your things at home, prepare for a crop, and
make the crop, and you go to work for the best money
 wages, or in discharge of any debt you owe, that you can
get; and, to secure you a fair reward for your labor, I now
promise you, that for every dollar you will, between this
and the ﬁrst of May, get for your own labor, either in money
or as your own indebtedness, I will then give you one other
dollar. By this, if you hire yourself at ten dollars a month,
from me you will get ten more, making twenty dollars a
month for your work. In this I do not mean you shall go oﬀ
to St. Louis, or the lead mines, or the gold mines in
California, but I mean for you to go at it for the best wages
you can get close to home in Coles County. Now, if you will
do this, you will be soon out of debt, and, what is better,
you will have a habit that will keep you from getting in debt
again. But, if I should now clear you out of debt, next year
you would be just as deep in as ever. You say you would
almost give your place in heaven for seventy or eighty
dollars. Then you value your place in heaven very cheap,
for I am sure you can, with the oﬀer I make, get the seventy
or eighty dollars for four or ﬁve months’ work. You say if I
will furnish you the money you will deed me the land, and,
if you don’t pay the money back, you will deliver
possession. Nonsense! If you can’t now live with the land,
how will you then live without it? You have always been
kind to me, and I do not mean to be unkind to you. On the
contrary, if you will but follow my advice, you will ﬁnd it
worth more than eighty times eighty dollars to you.
Aﬀectionately your brother, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . H
  .
SPRINGFIELD, Jan. 11, 1851.
C. HOYT, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Our case is decided against us. The
decision was announced this morning. Very sorry, but there
is no help. The history of the case since it came here is this.
On Friday morning last, Mr. Joy ﬁled his papers, and
entered his motion for a mandamus, and urged me to take
up the motion as soon as possible. I already had the points
and authority sent me by you and by Mr. Goodrich, but had
not studied them. I began preparing as fast as possible.
The evening of the same day I was again urged to take
up the case. I refused on the ground that I was not ready,
and on which plea I also got oﬀ over Saturday. But on
Monday (the 14th) I had to go into it. We occupied the
whole day, I using the large part. I made every point and
used every authority sent me by yourself and by Mr.
Goodrich; and in addition all the points I could think of and
all the authorities I could ﬁnd myself. When I closed the
argument on my part, a large package was handed me,
which proved to be the plat you sent me.
The court received it of me, but it was not diﬀerent from
the plat already on the record. I do not think I could ever
have argued the case better than I did. I did nothing else,
 but prepare to argue and argue this case, from Friday
morning till Monday evening. Very sorry for the result; but I
do not think it could have been prevented.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
 
.  
H
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, January 12, 1851
DEAR BROTHER: — On the day before yesterday I
received a letter from Harriet, written at Greenup. She says
she has just returned from your house, and that father is
very low and will hardly recover. She also says you have
written me two letters, and that, although you do not
expect me to come now, you wonder that I do not write.
I received both your letters, and although I have not
answered them it is not because I have forgotten them, or
been uninterested about them, but because it appeared to
me that I could write nothing which would do any good. You
already know I desire that neither father nor mother shall
be in want of any comfort, either in health or sickness,
while they live; and I feel sure you have not failed to use my
name, if necessary, to procure a doctor, or anything else for
father in his present sickness. My business is such that I
could hardly leave home now, if it was not as it is, that my
own wife is sick abed. (It is a case of baby-sickness, and I
suppose is not dangerous.) I sincerely hope father may
recover his health, but at all events, tell him to remember
to call upon and conﬁde in our great and good and merciful
Maker, who will not turn away from him in any extremity.
He notes the fall of a sparrow, and numbers the hairs of our
 heads, and He will not forget the dying man who puts his
trust in Him. Say to him that if we could meet now it is
doubtful whether it would not be more painful than
pleasant, but that if it be his lot to go now, he will soon
have a joyous meeting with many loved ones gone before,
and where the rest of us, through the help of God, hope ere
long to join them.
Write to me again when you receive this.
Aﬀectionately, A. LINCOLN.
    I I
 
   HA   
  
   
 H A 
I  
TO THE JUDGE OF THE SANGAMON COUNTY COURT,
MAY 13, 1851. TO THE HONORABLE, THE JUDGE OF
THE COUNTY COURT IN AND FOR THE COUNTY OF
SANGAMON AND STATE OF ILLINOIS:
Your Petitioner, Joshua Gipson, respectfully represents
that on or about the 21st day of December, 1850, a
judgment was rendered against your Petitioner for costs, by
J. C. Spugg, one of the Justices of the Peace in and for said
County of Sangamon, in a suit wherein your Petitioner was
plaintiﬀ and James L. and C. B. Gerard were defendants;
that said judgment was not the result of negligence on the
part of your Petitioner; that said judgment, in his opinion, is
unjust and erroneous in this, that the defendants were at
that time and are indebted to this Petitioner in the full
amount of the principal and interest of the note sued on,
the principal being, as aﬀiant remembers and believes,
thirty-one dollars and eighty two cents; and that, as aﬀiant
is informed and believes, the defendants succeeded in the
trial of said cause by proving old claims against your
petitioner, in set-oﬀ against said note, which claims had
been settled, adjusted and paid before said note was
executed. Your Petitioner further states that the reasons of
his not being present at said trial, as he was not, and of its
 not being in his power to take an appeal in the ordinary
way, as it was not, were that your Petitioner then resided in
Edgar County about one hundred and twenty miles from
where defendants resided; that a very short time before the
suit was commenced your Petitioner was in Sangamon
County for the purpose of collecting debts due him, and
with the rest, the note in question, which note had then
been given more than a year, that your Petitioner then saw
the defendant J. L. Gerard who is the principal in said note,
and solicited payment of the same; that said defendant then
made no pretense that he did not owe the same, but on the
contrary expressly promised that he would come into
Springﬁeld, in a very few days and either pay the money, or
give a new note, payable by the then next Christmas; that
your Petitioner accordingly left said note with said J. C.
Spugg, with directions to give defendant full time to pay
the money or give the new note as above, and if he did
neither to sue; and then aﬀiant came home to Edgar
County, not having the slightest suspicion that if suit should
be brought, the defendants would make any defense
whatever; and your Petitioner never did in any way learn
that said suit had been commenced until more than twenty
days after it had been decided against him. He therefore
prays for a writ of Certiorari.
HIS
JOSHUA x GIPSON
MARK
  
  . 
.  
H
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 31, 1851
DEAR BROTHER: INCLOSED is the deed for the land. We
are all well, and have nothing in the way of news. We have
had no Cholera here for about two weeks.
Give my love to all, and especially to Mother.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
.  
H
  
.
SHELBYVILLE, Nov. 4, 1851
DEAR BROTHER: When I came into Charleston day
before yesterday I learned that you are anxious to sell the
land where you live, and move to Missouri. I have been
thinking of this ever since, and cannot but think such a
notion is utterly foolish. What can you do in Missouri better
than here? Is the land richer? Can you there, any more than
here, raise corn and wheat and oats without work? Will
anybody there, any more than here, do your work for you?
If you intend to go to work, there is no better place than
right where you are; if you do not intend to go to work you
cannot get along anywhere. Squirming and crawling about
from place to place can do no good. You have raised no
crop this year, and what you really want is to sell the land,
get the money and spend it. Part with the land you have,
and, my life upon it, you will never after own a spot big
enough to bury you in. Half you will get for the land you
spend in moving to Missouri, and the other half you will eat
and drink and wear out, and no foot of land will be bought.
Now I feel it is my duty to have no hand in such a piece of
foolery. I feel that it is so even on your own account, and
particularly on Mother’s account. The eastern forty acres I
intend to keep for Mother while she lives; if you will not
 cultivate it, it will rent for enough to support her; at least it
will rent for something. Her dower in the other two forties
she can let you have, and no thanks to me.
Now do not misunderstand this letter. I do not write it in
any unkindness. I write it in order, if possible, to get you to
face the truth, which truth is, you are destitute because you
have idled away all your time. Your thousand pretenses for
not getting along better are all nonsense; they deceive
nobody but yourself. Go to work is the only cure for your
case.
A word for Mother: Chapman tells me he wants you to go
and live with him. If I were you I would try it awhile. If you
get tired of it (as I think you will not) you can return to your
own home. Chapman feels very kindly to you; and I have no
doubt he will make your situation very pleasant.
Sincerely yours, A. LINCOLN.
  .       
DEAR MOTHER: 
CHAPMAN TELLS ME he wants you to go and live with him. If
I were you I would try it awhile. If you get tired of it (as I
think you will not) you can return to your own home.
Chapman feels very kindly to you; and I have no doubt he
will make your situation very pleasant.
Sincerely your son, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
 
.  
H
  
.
SHELBYVILLE, November 9, 1851
DEAR BROTHER: — When I wrote you before, I had not
received your letter. I still think as I did, but if the land can
be sold so that I get three hundred dollars to put to interest
for Mother, I will not object, if she does not. But before I
will make a deed, the money must be had, or secured
beyond all doubt, at ten per cent.
As to Abram, I do not want him, on my own account; but I
understand he wants to live with me, so that he can go to
school and get a fair start in the world, which I very much
wish him to have. When I reach home, if I can make it
convenient to take, I will take him, provided there is no
mistake between us as to the object and terms of my taking
him. In haste, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
 
.  
H
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, November 25, 1851.
DEAR BROTHER: — Your letter of the 22d is just
received. Your proposal about selling the east forty acres of
land is all that I want or could claim for myself; but I am
not satisﬁed with it on Mother’s account — I want her to
have her living, and I feel that it is my duty, to some extent,
to see that she is not wronged. She had a right of dower
(that is, the use of one-third for life) in the other two
forties; but, it seems, she has already let you take that,
hook and line. She now has the use of the whole of the east
forty, as long as she lives; and if it be sold, of course she is
entitled to the interest on all the money it brings, as long as
she lives; but you propose to sell it for three hundred
dollars, take one hundred away with you, and leave her two
hundred at 8 per cent., making her the enormous sum of 16
dollars a year. Now, if you are satisﬁed with treating her in
that way, I am not. It is true that you are to have that forty
for two hundred dollars, at Mother’s death, but you are not
to have it before. I am conﬁdent that land can be made to
produce for Mother at least  30 a year, and I can not, to
oblige any living person, consent that she shall be put on an
allowance of sixteen dollars a year.
Yours, etc., A. LINCOLN.
