Immersion in Politics
The Independent began its career with severe criticism of the Rowiatt Bills, wherebythe Government of India established summary procedures for dealing with political agitation; and Jawaharlal did not rule out the possibility of his arrest. ‘That too would be preferable to the present state of doubt and despair.’1 This did not happen. Jawaharlal was one of the signatories of the satyagraha vow, formulated by Gandhi, pledging refusal to obey cer tin laws, and, a mem¬ ber of the committee formed at Allahabad to organize satyagraha in that dis¬ trict and to get in touch with other districts to constitute a provincial com¬ mittee.2 After the massacre at Amritsar, he assisted the Congress Inquiry Committee, and visited Amritsar and the Punjab to take depositions and collect material for the speeches in the Assembly of his father and Pandit Malaviya, a moderate Congress leader, about the actual firing, the atrocities under martial law and the ‘general misbehaviour of tommies’.3 He also helped in relief work, though the Government believed that any distinction between such humanitarian effort and political agitation was fanciful.4 The Allahabad Seva Samiti, or relief organization, raised over a lakh5 of rupees for the work and Jawaharlal took some volunteers with him to the Punjab to help in organ¬ izing such relief.6 A chance encounter with General Dyer on atrain led to a classic piece of description:
1 To Padmaja Naidu, 22 February 1919. *Tba Leader, 3 April 1919- Satyagraha, or ’truth-force', was Gandhi's name for his technique of passive resistance. *Notes on the Occurrence in the Punjab, April-June 1919. S.W., vol. 1, pp. 130-40. At Amritsar, General Dyer, dealing with civil disorder, had opened fire without warning on a large crowd that had inadequate means of dispersal, ordered that Indians could only crawl on their stomachs along a street in which an English woman had been attacked and had some persons whom he suspected of defiance of this order summarily whipped. 4 Report on the political and economic situation in the Punjab for the fortnight ending 15 Sep¬ tember 1919. Hook Dept. Political Deposit, October 1919- Proceeding 59. * A lakh is one hundred thousand. •Note of the U.P. Criminal Investigation Dept., 18 December 1919. HomeDept. Pol. A., June 1921, Proceedings 248-62.
35
36
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
The compartment I entered was almost full and all the berths except one upper one, were occupied by sleeping passengers. I took the vacant upper berth. In the morning I discovered that all my fellow-passengers were military officers. They conversed with each other in loud voices which I could not help overhearing. One of them was holding fbrth in an aggressive and triumphant tone and soon I discovered that he was Dyer, the hero of Jallianwala Bagh,1 and he was describing his Amritsar ex¬ periences. He pointed out how he had the whole town at his mercy and he had felt like reducing the rebellious city to a heap of ashes, but he took pity on it and refrained. He was evidently coming back from Lahore after giving his evidence before the Hunter Committee of Enquiry. I was greatly shocked to hear his conversation and to observe his callous manner. He descended at Delhi station in pyjamas with bright pink stripes, and a dressing-gown.2
Jawaharlal wrote to the press in rather stilted language in defence of Malaviya and Motilal when the Punjab Government accused them of not substantiating their charge that some police officers had taken bribes. ‘It would be weariness to the flesh to controvert all the misstatements which Mr. Thompson managed to compress in his (wo speeches in Council.’3 Jawa¬ harlal met the Deputy Commissioner of Amritsar on 5 September on his father’s behalf and said the data in Motilal’s possession regarding police bribery would be disclosed on condition that those who had provided the evidence would be publicly assured immunity; but the Punjab Government were willing to give no more than private assurances. Jawaharlal also challenged the official figure that only 291 persons had been killed in the Jallianwala Bagh. A few days later Jawaharlal wrote another letter to the press pointing out that the ‘crawling order’ was not, as Gandhi had suggested, a ‘hands and knees’ order; people had in fact been made to crawl ‘on their bellies after the manner of snakes and worms’.4
Later that month, at the U.P. Political Conference at Saharanpur, Jawahar¬ lal moved the resolution protesting against the appointment of the official Hunter Commission and urging that it be replaced by an independent Royal Commission. If the Hunter Commission were to continue, at least one mem¬ ber of the Congress Committee should be co-opted to it, as the Indian members of the Hunter Commission had no local knowledge. Full opportunity should also be given to the people to present their case and counsel should appear on both sides. Instead of the Commission selecting whom it would hear, counsel should have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine, for it was the
‘The garden et Amritsar which was the scene of the firing,
*Autobiography, pp. 43*4.
^Letter to the editor, 28 September 1919. The Bombay Chronicla, 2 October 1919.
41 October 1919. The Bombay Chronicle, 6 October 1919.
IMMERSION IN POLITICS
37
Government which wason trial. If these facilities were not granted, the Hunter Commission should -be boycotted.1
Yet, as in the case of Mahatma Gandhi and many others in India, it was not the happenings at Amritsar and the attitude of Dyer at the time and later before the official commission of inquiry which upset Jawaharlal as much as the re¬ action in England to these events. 'This cold-blooded approval of that deed’, he wrote many years later,2 ‘shocked me greatly. It seemed absolutely immoral, indecent; to use public school language, it was the height of bad form. I realized then, more vividly than I had ever done before, how brutal and immoral impe¬ rialism was and how it had eaten into the souls of the British upper classes.’ Till now he had been in the stream of Indian moderate tradition, expecting favours from the benign British rulers; and his conversion was part of the general realization that freedom could never be a gift but only the achievement of struggle and resistance.
In February 1920 Jawaharlal participated in the Allahabad district confer¬ ence at Bahadurganj, and in July he was elected vice-president of the Allahabad district congress committee. Meantime, Gandhi had taken up the cause of the Khilafat. To men like Jawaharlal, while active opposition to Government was welcome, such a prime facie religious issue did not fit in with their secular political attitude. So attempts were made in The Independent to provide political arguments for supporting the Khilafat movement. It was contended that the Caliph had been set aside because Britain and the other European powers wished to divide the Turkish Empire amongst themselves and the Khilafat movement was part of the political struggle for the freedom of Asia. The agitation in Allahabad city itself was intense. There was considerable fraternizing between Hindus and Muslims,3 and the U.P. Government reported that ‘the extremists appear to have got most of the city on their side.’4
,Motilal, however, disliked greatly the idea of boycott of the Councils and, not expecting that the Congress would accept this programme of Gandhi for non-co-operation, planned the election campaign in the United Provinces for the Congress against the Moderates. Jawaharlal helped in drafting the elec¬ tion manifesto,3 and Motilal was seriously considering the choice of a suitable constituency for his son. 'You ought to select a constituency from which you are sure to be returned. I am more keen on your going into the Council than mine [«c].’6 He finally decided on Fatehpur and was disappointed that Jawa¬ harlal turned it down, preferring to follow Gandhi’s lead. ‘So far as your follow¬ ing the request of Gandhiji is concerned, there is nothing to be said. That is
1 The'Leader, 22 October 1919 end The Independent, 24 October 1919.
2 Article on the Quetta earthquake written in August 1933 and reprinted in India and the World (London, 1936), p. 147.
1 The Independent, 12 October 1919.
41 December 1919. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, June 1920, no. 44.
* See Motilal to Gandhi, 23 April 1920. Gandhi papers. Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, Serial No. 7163.
4 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 13 June 1920.
38
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
more or less a matter of sentiment of a kind which does not enter into my composition.’1
On 22 August the U.P. Congress Committee met at Motilal’s residence and resolved, with not more than two or three members voting against, that the usual methods of agitation hitherto followed were wholly insufficient to meet the intolerable situation created by official policy in regard to the Punjab and the Khilafat questions, and whole-heartedly recommended the principle of non-co-operation with the Government 'at the greatest sacrifice possible’. As regards the steps to be taken in the first stage of non-co-operation, it was decided after prolonged discussion to suggest the renunciation of titles, arbitra¬ tion instead of recourse to law courts, the promotion of national education by establishment of national schools and colleges and gradual withdrawal of students from Government institutions, resignation from all honorary non¬ elective posts in public bodies, refusal to buy government loans and attend official functions and boycott of British goods. The Committee then considered the boycott of councils. Jawaharlal pointed out that this could not mean enter¬ ing the councils even to obstruct but refusal either to participate in elections or to attend the councils after the elections. He expressed his own preference for boycott of even the elections, but finally the Committee recommended, by a narrow majority of about two, the boycott of councils, thus leaving open the question of participation in elections.
Jawaharlal was satisfied. ‘The real question of principle, to my mind, was that we should not enter the Councils and take the oath of allegiance. The rest was a matter of tactics.’ But he regretted that the Committee had not gone further along the lines laid down by Gandhi and advocated total renunciation of legal practice, immediate withdrawal from educational institutions, and rejection even of elective places in official bodies. ‘I am an ardent believer in non-co-operation with all that it implies and I am firmly convinced that non- co-operation and no other course will bring us victory. That victory will not come in aday or ayear, butcome it will and must, ruat coelum. ’2 Later, a special session of the Congress decided by an overwhelming majority in favour of complete boycott of the councils and called on voters to abstain from voting.
Motilal fell into line with no great enthusiasm. He knew that his destiny and that of his son were scrambled together, but he did not always relish it. Austerity and puritanism did not come naturally to him, and watching Jawa¬ harlal embrace Gandhian rigours caused him intense pain. ‘This is a time’, he remarked with tears when he saw Jawaharlal boarding a third-class railway compartment, ‘when he should be enjoying himself, but he has given up every¬ thing >nd has become a sadbuHe gave up his legal practice at a time when his services were in demand in various parts of the country, and he was con¬ cerned about the future. ‘Have you had any time to attend to the poor cows in
Anand Bhavan. Not that they are redly cows but have been reduced to the
*
* Idem, 3 July 1920.
3 Letter to the editor, 1 September 1920. Tb» Ltod*r, 4 September 1920.
* Rajendra Prasad’* article in S.P. and P. ChaMani (eds.). Motikl Ntbm (Delhi, 1961), p. 7.
IMMERSION IN POLITICS }9
position of cows by nothing short of culpable negligence on your part and mine — I mean your mother, your wife, your child and your sisters? I do not know with what grace and reason we can claim to be working for the good of the masses — the country at large — when we fail egregiously to minister to the most urgent requirements of our own flesh and blood and those whose flesh and blood we are/1 The closing down of The Independent the next year became inevitable, and savings had to be counted.
To live on public charity does not appeal to me even in the best interests of the motherland. I can easily kick away the lakhs and lakhs put before me but will die a thousand deaths before I come to the stage where 1 have to be supported by others. I am willing to undergo any sacrifice to be able to live within our means — but we must have some means within which to live. . . You can easily understand how I feel with all these matters troubling me and with the prospect of a beggarship after turning away from me a stream of gold flowing at my very feet.2
When Jawaharlal sought permission to transfer his warbonds worth Rs. 10,000 to the Tilak Swaraj fund and meantime announced it as an'anonymous dona¬ tion in The Independent, Motilal in great irritation replied that he was plan¬ ning to resume practice. ,
i
t
Swaraj or no swaraj the one thing which I will not willingly permit is the possibility of any child or grandchild of mine having to depend for main¬ tenance on any other person in the world however near or dear, or that of their being a charge on the nation. If to avoid this it is necessary to make more money I would resume my practice today in spite of all that has happened ... I do not think that a man who is capable of starving his own children can be of much good to the nation.
And he added brutally, stressing that it was his affluence that made possible Jawaharlal’s political involvement: ‘You cannot have it both ways: Insist on my having no money and yet expect me to pay you money/3
These financial worries, however, Jawaharlal left to his father. Gandhi had at last given India a lead in action, and Jawaharlal was enthusiastic. His main preoccupation was the task of organizing non-co-operation in the U.P., and he was soon among its recognized leaders. To introduce some discipline into the movement, he organized drill for the volunteers and had plans for linking upthe various local organizations. He was elected President of the Etah district Congress conference; and though the Government banned the procession and sought to‘prevent the conference, Jawaharlal was welcomed by large crowds
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 16 September 1920.
2 Idem, 19 September 1920.
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 June 1921.
40 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
at every wayside station and he delivered his address as scheduled.1 No report of his speech exists, but the general tenor of his advocacy can be gleaned from a speech he delivered to students at Allahabad a few weeks later. It was not, he said, a time to weigh losses and gains; to enter the movement with a mathe¬ matical mind would only be to hinder it. The existing system had Jp be destroy¬ ed; there was no middle course left; oik was with either the pountiy or its enemies, either with Gandhi or with the Government. If on account of their lack of enthusiasm the cause was defeated, future generations would curse them.2
The hold which Gandhi had acquired on Jawaharlal and which he was never to lose is, at first view, incongruous. Gandhi was Christ-like in his seizure of men; but his conversion of Jawaharlal is capable of rational explanation. What appealed to the younger manwas Gandhi’s strength, his rock-like commitment to India's freedom, the way in which he had perfected his character and person¬ ality so as to make himself an effective instrument of political change in India — ’Indian leadership, Indian style’. He was.above all a man of action, of enor¬ mous restlessness and energy, with a will to power and a touch of ruthlessness. He functioned with a shrewd grasp of whatever context he found himself in, and was a saint who placed his halo at the service of his secular aspirations. He repeatedly stressed that God appears not in person but in action. Throughout his life he functioned primarily in politics; and if, curious about his body and his spirit, he experimented constantly, he acknowledged that it was from 'experiments in the spiritual field that I derived such power as I possess for working in the political field’.
’ It was this primacy of action, and successful action at that, that throughout Gandhi’s life retained Jawaharlal ultimately in thrall. At this time he was quite captivated and, along with Gandhi’s political leadership, willingly accepted all his other teachings. As the years passed, Jawaharlal realized that Gandhi had no use for systematic thinking on economic problems and that, while he had secured a hold on the masses by living and working among them and being ab¬ sorbed by them, he made no effort to inspire and rouse then^on anything other than political and social reform movements. But still he clung to Gandhi; and this one-to-one relationship, in which Gandhi specialized, was based on the call to battle with alien rule which Gandhi gave.
Jawaharlal’s first direct dash with the Government, however, came about in an entirely fortuitousway and had nothing to do with Gandhi. In the summer of 1920, he had taken the family up to Mussoorie, a hill station, and was spend¬ ing hiS time teaching his wife and sisters when, as he wrote to his father,3 great¬ ness was thrust on him by the Government. An Afghan delegation was staying at the same hotel and the authorities well knew that Jawaharlal had, during the period of over a fortnight when he was there, not seen anything of them.
1 The Independent, 1 October 1920.
t Ibid.. 14 November 1920. %
314 M«y 1920. S.W., vol. 1, p. 161.
IMMERSION IN POLITICS
41
Yet suddenly the local superintendent of police called on him and asked him either to furnish a positive undertaking not to get into touch with the Afghan delegation or to leave Mussoorie on his own. The police official was, in fact, carrying out a decision of the Government of India. Alarmed by the rumours in the Punjab that the Afghan delegation had come to India to support the Khilafat movement with which the Anilr was believed to be in full sympathy, suspecting even men like Rajagopalachari, an extremely conservative follower ofGandhi, of pro-Bolshevik sympathies and of clandestine contacts with emigri Indians in Afghanistan and the Soviet Union,1 and disturbed by the police report that Indian malcontents were flocking to Mussoorie, the Home Depart¬ ment drew up a list of twenty-three persons who should be excluded from Mussoorie.2 Jawaharlal’s name was on this list, and it was then realized that he was already in Mussoorie. The police at once jumped to the conclusion that the purpose of his visit was to secure an interview with the Afghans. Hence the sudden visit of the police officer.
Jawaharlal, faced with this unnecessary provocation, refused to bind him¬ self not to meet the Afghans or to leave Mussoorie on his own. However, he departed after an expulsion order had been served on him. He made no effort to resist expulsion, nor, on his return to the plains, did he seek to break the order and return to Mussoorie — inaction which pleased his father.
We have in all conscience suffered enough during the last six months and I would not court further trouble by a provocative act. The consequ¬ ences are so obvious both from the public and private points of view that it is hardly necessary to discuss them. It will mean the final break up of the family and the upsetting of all private, public and professional work. One thing will lead to another and something is sure to turn up which will compel me to follow you to the jail or something similar. I would leave well alone. We have certainly scored so far and should wait for further developments.3
It is hard to believe that the Jawaharlal of later years would have so mildly complied with such an ‘insensate’4order and been satisfied with a mere refusal to give an undertaking. Even at this time, when there was a deterioration in his mother’s health, he might have returned to Mussoorie in defiance of the order and courted arrest, had not the U.P. Government, genteel as ever, with¬ drawn the order in view, as they said, of the health of the ladies of the family.
> Weekly Reports of the Special Bureau of Information, 1920, cited in Z. Imam, Colonialism in East-West Rotations (New Delhi, 1969), p. 70?
fJVote of the Home Dept.; C.I.D. report from Mussoorie, 28 April; Home Secretary to Chief Secretary U.P., telegram 1 May 1920. Home Dept. Pol. B. Confidential, June 1920, nos. 165-6.
*Motilal to Jawaharlal, 3 June 1920. J. Nehru, A Bunch of Old lattors (Delhi, 1958), p. 12.