Post-War Prelude
Thoughthe leadersof the Congress were aware, thanks to aleakage from official sources,1 that the Government planned to arrest them immediately upon the passage of the resolution in Bombay, they made no arrangements for the func¬ tioning of the Congress after they had been removed from the scene. Gandhi was thinking vaguely in terms of a one-day general strike as a first step, and it was suggested that to avoid weakening of the war effort any such hartal should not apply to government offices and factories;2 but no decision was taken. It was almost as if the Working Committee wished to escape to prison and to avoid decision at what Jawaharlal described as ‘the zero hour of the world'. Leaderless and unorganized, the sympathizers of the Congress rose in revolt in various parts of the country. The events of 1942 showed the depth of the national will. Communications, particularly in the United Provinces and Bihar, were cut and the war effort seriously impeded. The Government struck hard to crush this resistance. In August and September, 57 Vi battalions were employed in this activity, and there werekillings in Bihar and eastern U.P. on a scale greater than even that in the Punjab in 1919.3 In other parts of the country also there were instances of military and police savagery. The Whipping Act was revived and over 5,000 persons detained without trial. Even suspected sympathizing with the Congress was dealt with ruthlessly. Considered as the most serious threat to the rajsince the revolt of 1858, it was handled with the same severity. Efforts were made to establish the responsibility of the Congress and, in particular, of Gandhi for these disturbances, and considerable publicity material-along these lines was issued. In fact, nothing could be proved. Hallett thought there had been a preconcerted central plan and oral instructions, and the intelligence system had definitely failed in not finding out the Congress plan*of campaign.4
tF. G. Hutchins, Spontaneous Revolution (Delhi, 1971), pp. 269-70.
* Confidential note (in Hindi) for Working Committee, 4 August 1942. The authorship of the note is not dear.
*D. A. Low, Uon Rampant (London, 1973), p. 164.
* Hallett to Linlithgow, 9 September 1942, Hallett collection, LO.L. Mss. Eur. E.251, No. 38.
%
300
POST-WAR PRELUDE 301
But if nothing was found it was because there was nothing to find. Linlithgow himself acknowledged this in private.
My own judgement is that few things are more important in this country than that we should show to India, and to the world, that Congress was responsible for the rebellion. The weight of evidence is steadily growing, though it is true that we have not yet got the link between the campaign of violence and the Working Committee — though we have very nearly got it in the case of Patel. What I do feel is that the outside world is not getting the facts, and that it is essential that we should take steps to publicize the best case we can put together . . -1
Neither the lack of firm proof nor the denials of Gandhi and Azad 2 curbed the Government’s smear campaign.
By October 1943 the back of the popular revolt had been broken. Gandhi wasreleased thenextsummerongrounds of health; but Jawaharlal and the other members of the Working Committee were kept in custody, as Amery had sug* gested on the morrow of their arrest,3 till the end of the war. Meantime, the Britishconsolidated their positionin India. Amery thought in racist terms which would have done credit to Goebbels and Rosenberg.
If India is to be really capable of holding its own in the future without direct British control from outside, I am not sure that it will not need an increasing infusion of stronger Nordic blood, whether by settlement or intermarriage or otherwise. Possibly it has been a real mistake of ours in the past not to encourage Indian Princes to marry English wives for a succession of generations and so breed a more virile type of native ruler. Perhaps all that may yet come about.4
This was too much even for Linlithgow, who preferred to ensure British rule for very many years to come by strengthening the Muslim League. Attempts within that party to weaken Jinnah's leadership continued to be discouraged. In 1941 the Viceroy directed the Governor of the Punjab to dissuade Sikandar Hyat Khan from resigning from the League, and rejected Zafrulla Khan’s advice to split the League by appointing to the Executive Council Muslims who were unacceptable to Jinnah.5 With this support, and with the Congress out
1Linlithgow to Hallett, 24 January 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 106, quoted in Transfer of Power, vol. 3. (H.M.S.O., 1971), p. 347n.
1 For example Gandhi to Linlithgow, 29 January 1943, Transfer of Power, vol. 3, pp. 538-9; Azad to Linlithgow, 13 February 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 125.
’ToLinlithgow,' 10 August 1942, TransferofPower, vol.2, p. 632.
4Ameryto Linlithgow, 1 October 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 12.
’Linlithgow to Amery, 1 March and 15 May 1941, Linlithgow papers, vol. 10. Zafrulla Khan was at that time amemberof the Viceroy'scouncil.
302
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
of the way from 1942, Jinnah strengthened both his stature within the League and the League’s command of the Muslim masses. He was helped too by Raja- gopalachari, who canvassed for an agreement between the Congress and the League, and by Gandhi, who, after his release, gave Jinnah recognition by deal¬ ing with himon equal terms. Their talkscame to nothing but enhanced Jinnah’s status. *
Moredisturbing than the shortsightedness of these Congress leaders was the attitude of the Communist Party. After having supported the war effort from 1941 in defiance of the nationalist tide, it was now willing to concede Pakistan. In contrast to Jawaharlal’s interpretationof the growing influence of the League as a reflection of the backwardness of the Muslim masses and their acceptance of feudal leadership, the Communists regarded the communal problem as one of multi-national consciousness. It was to them in essence a problem of the innumerable nationalities of India coming to life ’with the further course of bourgeois development’, and they discerned a democratic core in the demand for Pakistan.1
Jawaharlal and his companions, therefore, after they emerged from prison in June 1945, were naturally in a bitter mood. India had for nearly three years lain under virtually military rule. Collaborators, loyalist, communal and left- wing, had had their heyday at the expense of the national movement. Deep famine in Bengal had been regarded as low priority. Wavell, who had succeeded Linlithgow as Viceroy in October 1943, himself noted that the British Govern¬ ment’s attitude to India was ‘negligent, hostile and contemptuous to a degree I had not anticipated’.2 Lord Mountbatten, in command in South-East Asia, diverted 10 per cent of the shipping at his disposal for import of foodgrains into India, but Churchill, who seemed to regard famine relief as ‘appeasement’ of the Congress, vetoed this, and reduced his shipping by 10 per cent. Mountbatten on his own transferred 10 per cent of his reduced shipping to food imports.* Corruption and blackmarketing ravaged the land. All this infuriated Jawahar¬ lal, and his speeches and interviews on release reflect this. India was to him comparable to the European countries freed from Nazi rule, with resistance movements emerging to the surface.4 Though the Congress had not organized the 1942 rebellion, it delighted him that the people had not miserably submitted to repression but had, on their own, struck back. He demanded stern action against blackmarketeers and trials in open court of those guilty of atrocities against the people.5 A statement of October 1945 charging members of the Executive Council with corruption and bribery led the Government of India
‘See G. Adhikari, Pakistan and Indian National Unity (Bombay, 1942).
‘Entry lor 20 October 1944, Wavell, Tba Viceroy's Journal, ed. P. Moon (Oxford, 1973), p 93-
’Wavell, op. cit., p. 89; Mountbatten's interview with the author, 28 May 1970.
4Interview to the United Press of America, 21 June, The Hindustan Times, 23 June 1943.
’Pressconference, 23 June, The Hindustan Times, 24 June 1943.
POST-WAR PRELUDE 303
to considerhis prosecution, and only the cautionoi their legal adviser prevented them.1 Thiswas after Attlee had taken office as Prime Minister; but Jawaharlal would not have been surprised at the Government of India paying no heed to the proclaimed objectives of the Labour Party’s India policy. In 1942 the war against the Congress had been accepted by almost the entire British nation, and Jawaharlal saw nothing to choose between the Churchill Government and its successor.
In ourownday that curious group which has no fixed standards or princi¬ ples or much knowledge of the outside world, the leaders of the British Labour Party, have usually been the staunchest supporters of the exist¬ ing order in India. Sometimes a vague sense of uneasiness fills them at a seeming contradiction between their domestic and colonial policy, between their professions and practice, but, considering themselves above all as practical men of common sense, they sternly repress all these stirrings of conscience.2 *
Cripps in particular he could not forgive, and a welcoming cable went un¬ answered.
Gandhi was at ihis time thinking in terms of another campaign of civil disobedience. 3 However, the Working Committee decided to permit its re¬ presentatives to attend the conference summoned by Wavell at Simla to consider the formation of an interim government. Jawaharlal was not one of the invitees but was present at Simla, a town which he hated for its atmosphere of official¬ dom, for part of the time; and there is a perceptive account of him at Viceregal Lodge.
I felt he was gnawing some sorrow inside him. He seemed to me a seeking soul, happy to follow a track if he could conscientiously do so; and now by fate,orourunamiability perhaps, is made to oppose so that our unpleasant¬ ness and all must make it worse. He never relaxed the defensive for a minute.4
The outcome of the conference confirmed Jawaharlal’s suspicions of British motives, for Wavell acted as a total partisan of the Muslim League. The Congress, though it disliked the parity proposed by the Viceroy between the ‘Caste Hindus’ and the Muslims, accepted it as a temporary formula for the formation of an interim government at the Centre. So it submitted a panel of fifteen names, consisting of both Congressmen and non-Congressmen and
1 Home Dept. File 33/26/45 - PoU (I). 2 The Discovery oflnate, p. 293. * J. B. Kripalani, Gandhi His Life and Thought (New Delhi, 1970), p. 224 4 Freya Stark, Dust in the Lion's Paw (London, 1961), p. 248
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
504
including three members of the League, from whom the Viceroy could make his selection for membership of his Executive Council. But the Congress could not expect fair play from Wavell, who never concealed his leanings towards the League. As he later told A. V. Alexander, he ‘had no conscious feeling that he had been partisan in favour of the Muslim League, but 1 could understand that as he had been Commander-in-Chief in India in 1942, he was bound to remem¬ ber that whilst the Muslim League were not politically active in his support, they did not, as the Congress Party had, organise the sabotage and destruction of his communications whilst he was trying to keep the Japs out of India. Con¬ gress had in fact acted as our enemies.’1 So in the summer of 1945, when the immediate fortunes of the League were unpromising and it could not control the ministries in any of the provinces where Muslims were in a majority — the Punjab, NWFP, Sind, Bengal and Assam — Wavell assisted the League by the first of his many acts of partiality. He not only conceded parity between ‘Caste Hindus’ and Muslims and between the Congress and the League but, going back on his word to Gandhi,2 agreed not to select a Muslim belonging to the Con¬ gress. His offer to Jinnah was that, of the five Muslims chosen, four should be from the League and one from the Punjab Unionist Party.3 This was virtual refusal to regard the Congress as a non-Hindu, secular organization, and ac¬ ceptance of Jinnah’s contention that it was as much a communal party as the League. But Wavell was unwilling to let down the loyalist Muslims outside the League and particularly those who had helped so greatly in the recruitment of soldiers in the Punjab.
However, this was not acceptable to Jinnah, who insisted that all Muslim
members should belong to the League and that, in an Executive Council so
formed, the Muslim members should have a veto on all important decisions.
These were demands which even Wavell could not accept; and, had he chosen,
he could at this stage have deflated the League to manageable proportions.
Jinnah was aware of this. ‘I am at the end of my tether’, he told the Viceroy; 4
‘I ask you not to wreck the League.’ Wavell, instead of seizing this occasion to
restore Indian politics to an even keel, enabled Jinnah to gain the full advantage
of his obduracy by promptly abandoning his own proposals and dissolving the
Conference. The offer of the Congress to join the Executive Council while
leaving it open to the League to come in later5 was ignored. Nothing could have
made clearer that it was Jinnah’s wishes that mattered above all else.
The League derived the fullest benefit of this in the elections for the central
and provincial assemblies that were held at the end of the year. The Congress
«
|>1 Alexander's diary of his visit to India, entry for 26 June 1946. A. V. Alexander papers, Chur¬ chill College Library, Cambridge.
2WaveH’s account of interview with Gandhi, 24 June 1945, Wavell, op. cit., p. 145.
1V. P. Menon, The Transfer of Power in India (paperback, Madras, 1968), p. 206i Wavell, op. cit, p. 154.
* Viceroy’s account of interview with Jinnah, 9 July 1945, Wavell, op. cit., pp. 152-3.
* Jawaharlal’s interview to the press. 11 July, The Hindustan Times, 12 July 1945.
POST*WAR PRELUDE
305
was ill prepared for these elections. Its popularity among the masseswas greater than ever, but its party machinery was out of gear, many of its supporters among the narrow electorate—about 30 per cent of the adult population—had not been registered, and its leaders at every level were tired, unenthusiastic and pulling in contrary directions. Jawaharlal did a little campaigning, but nothing like his effort of ten years before. The contrast with the vigour and dash of 1936-7 was complete. Indeed, the elections of 1945 were in a sense unreal, for they could not reflect the despair and intense dislike of the Government among the people. On the other hand, the League improved its position as a result of the assiduous nursing of the separate electorates in the years when the Congress was outlawed, the ill-timed tactics of Rajagopalachari and Gandhi, the partisanship of Linlithgow and Wavell, and the support of the Communist Party. It was the last which distressed Jawaharlal the most.
You must realise that it pains me to see the gulf that has arisen between the Congress and Communists in India. That gulf at present is wide and deep and has all the passions of three years behind it. That has nothing to do with communism and socialism, in favour of which there is con¬ siderable though rather vague sentiment. Still less has it to do with Russia for which there is great admiration, though no doubt tempered in many places by certain fears of present and future Soviet policy. The gulf has arisen because of internal policy in India and the fact that the Communists ran down popular leaders in India and, at a time when there was bitter conflict between nationalism and the imperialist structure, they appeared before the people as acting on the side of the latter. Whatever the inner motives and reasons, this public reaction is easy to understand. Politically the fact that has gone most against them and aroused the greatest resent¬ ment is their attitude on the communal question. They have become full- blooded supporters of Jinnah’s demands (unspecified and vague as they are) and in the name of Congress-League unity they demand a complete surrender by Congress to Jinnah. I have nodoubt that they have worsened the communal problem by their attitude. Communists who have joined the Muslim League appear to be more rabid Leaguers than others. All this has been greatly resented. J hope that changed circumstances will gradually tone down these differences.1
In the provinces where Muslims formed a majority, the League did not secure a majority of votes. For instance, its vote in the Punjab was 46.56 per cent* in Sind 45*75 per cent, and in the NWFP 37* 19 per cent. But the seats gained by
1 Jawaharlal to Palme Dutt from Gulmarg, 12 August 1945, Palme Dutt papers. There Is no copy of this hand-written letter in the Nehru papers and 1 am grateful to Mr Palme Dutt for per¬ mission to consult his file.
306
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
the League were far more than were warranted by its vote. Except in the NWFP,
where the Congress had a dear majority of 30 seats, including X9 Muslim seats, and the League only 17, the League secured all or most of the reserved Muslim seats. In the central assembly too it won every Muslim constituency with 86*6 per cent of the vote. Particularly striking was its success in provinces like Bombay and Madras, which till now had been relatively free of the com¬ munal fever but where now the League captured all the reserved seats. But it suffered from a tactical disadvantage in that in no province with a Muslim majority was it able to form a ministry with unquestioned backing in the assembly. In Assam, as in the NWFP, it was a Congress ministry which was sworn in; in the Punjab a coalition of Congress, the Unionists and the Akalis took office; in Bengal, the League ministry was dependent on European support; and in Sind the League was outnumbered by the Congress and its sympathizers and formed the government only because the Governor, with unconcealed partiality, called upon it to do so.
Yet the League had cause to rejoice. It had demonstrated that it had a con¬ siderable following, especially in the urban areas. However unpractical the concept of partition and imprecise the notion of Pakistan, they had struck a response in the minds of many middle-class Muslims. Jawaharlal was still of the view that the League had not gathered real strength and was the creation of the wishful thinking of elderly British governors. When a test came, all Muslims would come flocking back to the Congress. ‘We will all march together and ask for independence together and there will be a united India and there will be no problem at all.n There could be no solution of the communal prob¬ lem so long as the British were in India; but once alien authority and inter¬ vention were excluded circumstances would force an agreement, because the only other alternative was large-scale fighting. But this was an ideal which neither the British nor the Muslim League would help to realize; and the Con¬ gress had to take into account the fact of the League’s electoral gains and work out its ideas of a constitutional settlement on this basis. There was no time any longer for ‘mass contacts’; nor, even if feasible, would the Government of India provide scope for them. Even before the elections. Wavell had been anxious not to rule out partition. He asked Attlee to alter a sentence, in his broadcast of 19 September 1945, which read'‘to work out a constitution which majority and minority communities will accept’ into ‘to join in a settlement which majority and minority communities . .. ’ Attlee refused.2 But the results of the elections greatly strengthened the arguments for pandering to the League. Therefore, while insisting on the departure of the British and the summoning of a constituent assembly for free India, the Congress reluctantly recognized the right of any area to secede provided this was the clearly established will of
1 Mr Woodrow Wyatt’s account of a conversation with Jawaharlal in January 1946, recorded in his oral testimony, N. M. M.L.
2Sec correspondence between Prime Minister and Viceroy in Attlee papers. University College Library, Oxford, Box 18. *
POST-WAR PRELUDE
307
the inhabitants of that area and it did not result in the compulsion of any group qr community in that area. Jawaharlal hoped that, grafted the right to secede, the Muslims would not exercise it but rather use it to shed their fears.1 Given a sense of freedom, the Muslim masses, at any rate, would realize the absurdity of Pakistan. A plebiscite should be held after British authority-was withdrawn from India and the Muslims would either not want to secede or, if they did, would quickly retract their decision.2 But, especially after the elections, this was a forlorn thought. It is possible that to Jinnah himself Pakistan had never been more than a battle-cry. Henever expected the British to leave3 and exploit¬ ed the demand for a separate state to secure leverage against the Congress. But his followers, eager for power and excited by the prospect of a new state of their own, believed that it might now be theirs for the repeated asking and, far from subduing their demand, inflamed opinion in its favour. It was not possible to have a sovereign Pakistan which consisted of more than a part of the Punjab and a part of Bengal, and even this seemed to be ruled out by the demands of defence. So an independent Pakistan appeared a.fantasy; but the problem, as Jawaharlal reluctantly acknowledged, was one not so much of logical analysis as of psychological appreciation.4 By the spring of 1946, with the Government of India encouraging the League and the Congress reconciled to the principle of secession, the frost had settled on all hopes of a free and united India.
So, with the emphasis now on tactics, pace and procedure rather than on principles, events gathered momentum. The air was full of hate and passion, negotiations were the continuation of civil war by other means, and killing- and rioting became the accepted instruments of political manoeuvre. It was a sad finale to a nationalist movement which had prided itself on its methods of peaceful struggle, and there was probably a touch of escapism in Jawaharlal’s concentration at this time on two other issues outside the mainstream: the Indian National Army (I.N.A.) and relations with the neighbouring countries of Asia.
The stoiy of the I.N.A. has been told often and at length. About 20,000 Indian officers and men taken prisoner by the Japanese had responded to Subhas Bose’s call to form an army to wage war, alongside the Japanese, in the cause of India’s freedom. When the war ended, Bose had died in an aircraft accident, and the British intended to treat the captured I.N.A. men as guilty of treason. Jawaharlal himself had no doubt that the action of these men had been an error of judgment. Freedom could not be secured with the assistance of any foreign nation, and certainly not Japan, which had an inglorious record of aggressive imperialism. However, the soldiers of the I.N.A., some of whom he.
1Seehisdraftnotewritten atGulmarg, 17 August 1945. * Interviews to the press, The Hindustan Timer, 4 and 7 April 1946. * Even in January 1946, Liaqat Alt Khan told the Viceroy that the British would have to stay in India for many-years, and the Muslims were not at all anxious that they should go. Wavell, op. cit., pp. 206-7. 4 Jawaharlal to Stafford Cripps, 27 January 1946.
308
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
met, seemed to him the pick of the Indian army, who had, for the most part, been inspired by the noblest motives. They had done the wrong thing for the right reason, and it was absurd for the British to charge them as traitors. There is always a case to be made for not putting on trial soldiers who collaborate with the enemy,1 and the case is even stronger when the soldiers are colonial re¬ cruits, the best of whom believe that they have been given an opportunity to fight for national freedom. When, in an insensate mood, explicable only by. the mental decadence which comes over an imperial government in its last throes, the Government ofIndia decided to stage a public trial, at the Red Fort in Delhi, ofthreel.N.A. officers, Indian publicopinion was deeply stirred to an extent that surprised even Jawaharlal. It dramatized the old contest, England v. India, and all the major political parties, including the League, expressed themselves on the side of the National Army. Even serving soldiers of the Indian Army felt a wave of interest and sympathy.2 As General Tuker wrote soon after, the I.N.A. affair, at its most acute, was ‘threatening to tumble down the whole edifice of the Indian Army’.3 Jawaharlal organized relief for the I.N.A. men and their dependants, harried eminent men and women who did not normally take an interest in politics to express their concern, set up an I.N.A. Defence Commit¬ tee of lawyers and himself put on once more, after over twenty-five years, his barrister’s gown and appeared in court.
The other issue, always important to Jawaharlal and in which his interest had not been dimmed by the years of isolation in prison and the tragic situation in his own country, was the condition of Asia. With the defeat of Japan, the pressure on China had been relieved; and in the civil war which followed, Jawaharlal, despite old friendships, strictly refrained from taking sides. Of more direct concern was the question whether the old imperialist powers — the British in Burma and Malaya, the Dutch in Indonesia and the French in Indo-China — would be able to restore their former dominance. This was a general problem and Jawaharlal was keen that the Asian countries should help each other. He welcomed the idea of an Asian conference suggested by Aung San of Burma,4 and was infuriated by the British use of Indian troops to support the French and the Dutch. Even worse was the attitude of the United States, which apparently, for its own purposes, was underwriting European imperial-
*Cf. Mr Bernard Levin on American collaborators in Vietnam: ‘What, after all, will be gained by putting the alleged collaboratorson trial and, if 'hey are convicted, punishing them? Hie demands of strict justice will have been met; those who suffered will be able to see that those who evaded theirown share of the suffering have not been allowed to get away with it; and a warning will have been given to any who might be inclined to do the same in future. I have to fay that it is not an impressive list. . . And it surely is possible, and it is even more surely right, to avoid the recri¬ minations and the shame, the anguish and the echoes, that such trials as are envisaged will cause.' The Times, 31 May 1973.
JSee Sir Claude Auchinleck, C-in-C, to Wavell, 26 November 1945, J. Connell, AuehinUck (London, 1959), p. 806.
* Francis Tuker, While Memory Serves (London, 1950), p. 43.
4Letter from Aung San, 13 December 1945, and Jawaharlal’s telegram, 26 December, and reply to Aung San, 27 December 1945. *
POST WAR PRELUDE
309
ism in Asia. This could only ensure a continuing revolt of millions with a passion which even the atom bomb could not suppress, and end in a third world war.1
Jawaharlal himself wished to visit Burma, Malaya and Indonesia, to meet the nationalist leaders of these, countries, plan co-operative endeavour and inquire into the conditions of the Indians settled there. During the years of war these communities had been cut off from India; and now many of their leaders connectedwiththeIndianIndependenceLeague and the I.N.A. had been thrown into prison. The Indian Congress had wished to send its representatives to these countries to make a first-hand report but the Government refused permission. The authorities in Burma and Java refused to let Jawaharlal visit these coun¬ tries. The British Military Administration in Malaya was willing to receive him, but even this permission was couched in humiliating terms. Jawaharlal was told that there would be
no objection to your entry into Malaya provided that your visit concerns the relief of distress among Indians and is not for political purposes. The British Military Administration desire you to be informed that an official organisation for dealing with distress among all races in Malaya has been set up and state that you will be expected to co-ordinate your efforts with those of the Military Administration. They also wish you to know that transport facilities in Malaya at present are such that they will be unable to provide you with a car during your visit.2
Jawaharlal, as was to be expected, refused to go merely to function according to the will of the Military Administration. His main purpose was to alleviate the distress and sense of fear among the Indians in Malaya, and he was not prepared to abandon it if the authorities regarded it as political.9 At this stage Lord Mountbatten, the Supreme Allied Commander stationed at Singapore, intervened. Cancelling the previous directive, he arranged for all facilities for Jawaharlal’s visit, and requested him to call on him at Singapore before starting his tour of Malaya.4 Jawaharlal agreed, while making it clear that his stay and programme in Malaya would be organized by his Indian hosts. He refused to oblige the Government of India and ask the Indian community not to arrange a guard of honour of former I.N.A. soldiers on his arrival at Singapore, and went no further than suggesting that there be no procession or strikes of workers during his visit.9
1 Statement to the press, 15 October, The Hindustan Timas, 16 October 1945; and presidential address to the All-India States Peoples Conference, 31 December 1945, National Herald,
1 January 1946.
*1 etter from Secretary, External Affairs Department, to Jawaharlal, 25 January 1946.
*Jawaharlal to Secretary, External Affairs Department, 31 January 1946.
♦Secretary, Commonwealth Relations Department,to Jawaharlal, 28 February 1946.
> Sri Prakass's telegram to Jawaharlal, 13 March 1946; Jawaharlal's telegrams to Sri Praicasa and N. Raghavan, 14 March 1946.
310
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
On arrival at Singapore, Jawaharlal met Mountbatten, who, with anticipa¬ tion and a sense of drama, had arranged for Jawaharlal’s reception at the airport withall the courtesies due to aprime minister-designate. He received Jawaharlal at Government House and drove with him to a canteen for Indian soldiers, where Jawaharlal had his first encounter, a startling and unexpected one, with Lady Mountbatten.
We arrived at the canteen and 1 met Lady Mountbatten there. We then moved in from the porch or portico to a room inside. Just then there was a wild rush of Indian soldiers, presumably wanting to see me. When we reached the room inside, Edwina Mountbatten was nowhere to be seen.
I think I got up on a chair to have a look around. Soon Lady Mountbatten crawled out of the milling crowd. She had evidently been knocked down by the soldiers rushing in. That was an unusual introduction for us.1
Therewas at Singapore a small memorial to the I.N.A., built in a prominent place by the I.N.A. personnel. This had been repeatedly destroyed by the British authorities and repeatedly rebuilt. Mountbatten was anxious that Jawaharlal should not visit this memorial, not merely because it would give recognition to the I.N.A., but also for fear that a big function which attracted large crowds might give rise to a certain resentment among the Chinese and others. It has been suggested that Jawaharlal was so bewitched by Mountbatten on his first meeting that he abandoned his principles and his integrity and did not lay a wreath at the memorial.2 In fact, Jawaharlal did not agree with Mountbatten thattheChinesewould be annoyed by any tribute he paid to the I.N.A. Indeed, he had been pleasantly surprised to find that there had been some underground contacts between the Chinese resistance movement and the I.N.A. during the war years, the Chinese having recognized that the Indians, like themselves, were working for national freedom and co-operation with the Japanese was only incidental.3 The only concession Jawaharlal made to Mountbatten was to avoid a public function. But he visited the memorial quietly and without announcement and platted some flowers there,4 and this was immediately known to the local population.
Mountbatten’sother requestwas that when Jawaharlal addressed the I.N.A. personnel, who were about 3,000, tH&y should not paradef as a regular army in uniform and with badges of rank, and die general public should not be present. Jawaharlal replied that nothing could be done about uniforms, as often this was
t
1Jawaharlal to Dorothy Norman, 12 October 1963. D. Norman, Nabru: Tba First Sixty Yaars (London, 1963), vol. 2, p. 221. 1Mountbatten, RafUctions on tbo Transfer ofPowar and Jawaharlal Nabru (Cambridge, 1968), p. 3; Hodaon, op. dt., p. 203. ^Statement to the press on return to India, 30 March, National Harold, 31 March 1946. 4 Jawaharlal's report toPresidentAiCConviajt to Malaya, 28Marcb 1946.
POST-WAR PRELUDE
31J
the only set of clothes these men possessed. As for badges, generally they would not be worn but if they were, no objection could be taken. The function would also, as far as possible, be kept private though it was not practical wholly to prevent others from coming. In fact, as almost all the former members of the Indian army had been repatriated to India, only the civilian personnel of the I.N.A. were present and the problem of badgesdid not arise; but considerable numbers of the general public did attend.
In his tour of Malaya, Jawaharlal was accompanied by two senior n ilitary officers attached to him by Mountbatten. Jawaharlal was not particularly anxious to have them but did not wish to appear discourteous by objecting to their presence. He told the local Indian population, who were attached to India and anxious to retain their Indian nationality, that those who had made their permanent residence in Malaya should adopt Malayan nationality, till, as Jawaharlal optimistically hoped, the time came when there would be a common nationality for India and all these regions of South-East Asia. His own visit, he felt, had had a good effect in cheering up the Indian community, improving their organization, drawing the Malayans, Indians and Chinese closer, toning down any political action that might be envisaged against Indians and opening up scope for an improvement of their economic prospects.
Back in India after an enforced night’s halt in Rangoon, so that the weather thwarted the British and enabled him to meet Aung San, Jawaharlal was plunged back into discussion as to the political future. The ’stay-put attitude’1 of the British Government, their refusal to come to terms with the demand of the Congress for independence by relying on the intransigence of Jinnah, and the League in turn assuming that intransigence was justified by the per¬ manence of British rule in India — all these calculations had been blown sky- high by the rumblings within the military base of imperialism. Early in 1946, theR.A.F. mutinied at several stationsinIndiaand refused toobey ordersbecause of their grievances about such matters as rate of demobilization and pay; and this was followed by a hunger-strike of some members of the R.I.A.F. More serious was the naval mutiny in Bombay. On 19 February, about 3,000 ratings in the Royal Indian Navy hoisted the national flag on their ships and marched through the streets of Bombay. The result was that many industrial workers went on strike in sympathy. There was exchange of fire between British troops and the mutineers and disturbances which, according to the official report, were without parallel in the history of Bombay city.2 While the Communists ami the Congress Socialists encouraged the mutineers to keep up their resis¬ tance, Patel and the 'old guard’ of the Congress at Bombay, acting in concert with the Government, sought to persuade the sailors to lay down arms. Jawa¬ harlal came to Bombay. Patel was thought to be none too pleased about this,
jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 2 December 1943.
’Report of Home Dept. Bombay Govt., 6 March 1946. Home Dept. PoL 18/2/46-Pol. (I) of 1946.
312
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
but the Government lifted the ban on meetings to enable Patel and Jawaharlal to condemn the outbreak of mob violence. Both leaders, though with differing emphasis, urged the ratings to call off the mutiny, if only because they could not possibly hope to succeed; and within a week it was all over.1
Short-lived as were the mutinies of 1946, they finally convinced the British Government that the spring of the empire was broken. Satyagraha^may have harried the British conscience, the Labour Government may have believed as an article of faith that the British should withdraw from India, but it was the non-political events of early 1946 that made clear that the end of the raj was near. It was the irreversible loss of imperial power that provided the rationale for the decision of Attlee's Government to send out a special mission of three Cabinet Ministers to seek an agreement on the constitutional issue. How closely this decision to send a Mission was tied up with problems of military capacity and defence is shown by the fact that, at a meeting of the Prime Min¬ ister with the Cabinet Mission before its departure for India, it was resolved to make it a condition precedent to independence that India should, in addi¬ tion to undertaking her own defence, assist in the defence of the 'South East Asia area’.2 But the occasion when this point could be put to Indian politicians never arose.
iPatel