In Nabha Jail
Jawaharlal was now, therefore, a free nian, relieved of the tussles within the party which had filled him with such distaste. As irksome to him as the lack of discipline of the no-changers was the resistance of the Swarajists to working through the Congress machinery. 'Are you going to keep the Congress intact or let it go to pieces?*1 At the Congress session in Delhi iq September the no¬ changers conceded defeat by agreeing to the entry into Councils of such Con¬ gressmen ‘as have no religious or other conscientious objection’ to it; but Jawa¬ harlal took little part in arriving sfi this decision. His attention was given wholly to such opportunities for ‘cold-blooded action’2 as came his way. ‘I am weary’, he wrote to a friend in August,^ ‘and sick at heart. Nagpur has been a most painful experience for me. I came here with the intention of wandering about in the interior for a while away from the haunts of man.’ Strengthening of the party organization and extension of its network, the training and discipline of volunteers and the creation in the country of a general atmosphere of resistance and of indifference to the Government—these were to him the important tasks. He recognized that mass civil disobedience was out of the question for the time being, but Ik helped to organize the satyagraba campaign that developed in Nagpurover the refusal of the district magistrate to allow a Congress procession to carry the national flag. Volunteer squads from different parts of the country were sent to reinforce the local workers till the authorities gave way and permit¬ ted a Congress procession with the flag to pass. Again in need of some issue to occupy him, Jawaharlal went to Nabha for a first-hand view of the Akali agitation.
The Sikhs had for long been a group favoured by the British Government. They were encouraged to remain a separate community and not to merge in the general Hindu fold. Sikh soldiers were required to keep the five distinctive symbols, and the premium placed on Sikh recruitment led many Hindus to
1 Report in Tb* Bombay Cbronielt, 10 July 1923. 2 Interview in Aaj, 19 June 1923. * To Mahadeva Desai.
74
IN NABHA JAIL 75
become Sikhs.1 The 1919 reforms extended separate representation to Sikhs. However, at the end of the First World War, certain sections of the Sikh com¬ munity wished to reform the management of the Sikh temples {gurdwaras), which were believed to have become ‘dens of drunken vice and debauchery’,2 and the reformers sought to takeover the shrines. The Punjab Government saw in this Akali movement a threat to law and order, and the resistance that the Akalis encountered led to their efforts developing into a widespread mass move¬ ment. A plan for religious reform had been converted, despite itself, into a political campaign. A semi-military organization, the Akali Dal, was formed, not merely to evict the corrupt managers of the Sikh shrines but also to accept the challenge of the Government.
It was natural that the Akali movement should, at this stage, evoke the in¬ terest of the National Congress. This was not because, as Sir Malcolm Hailey later suggested, the Congress had always been looking for a party of physical force to replace their own ‘somewhat backboneless agitation’, and it would be a godsend to them to secure the Akalis ‘as a kind of spearhead to their very wobbly staff’.3 Rather, influenced by Gandhi’s leadership of the non-co-operation cam¬ paign, the Sikhs had pledged themselves to non-violence; and they abode by their pledge despite severe provocation. In February 1921, the authorities of Nankana, the shrine at Guru Nanak’s birthplace, were alleged to have poured oil on about two hundred Sikh pilgrims and burned them alive, and officials near by had not intervened. But this did not stop the volunteers of the Akali Dal from proceeding to this and other shrines in protest at mismanagement. In 1922 a jatha (squad) of 100 Sikh dissenters proceeded daily to the Guru-ka-bagh temple, there to be beaten up by the police; and this continued for about three weeks, resulting in about 2,000 Sikhs being beaten without their attempting to defend themselves. Thereafter the police, tired of lathi charges, summarily arrested the volunteers, and in time about 6,000 found themselves in jail.
So, whatever the original motivation, the Akalis were now acting in the spirit of the Congress campaign, and the Congress in turn took an interest in them. The movement was of special interest to Jawaharlal, for he attached importance to discipline, and was impressed by the organization of the Akali Dal, which maintained order among its recruits and provided for the upkeep of the families of those injured or arrested. He attended conferences, at Lahore and Amritsar in June and July 1923, of Congress, Khilafat and Sikh League workers, and urged them not tobe distracted by such sterile issues as communal representation on district boards and municipalities. The Congress regarded the principle as essentially evil, and local bodies were not of any importance;
i'll was almost a daily^occurrence for—say—Ram Chand to enter our office and leave it as Ram Singh—Sikh recruit.’ H, L O. Garrett in Census Report of 1921, quoted in 8. R. Nayar, Minority Polities in tbs Punjab (Princeton, 1966), p. 65.
*Sardar Didar Singh's telegram to Ramsay MacDonald, 15 February 1924. AfCC File 4( 11/1924, N.M.M.L.
’Hailey to E Howard, 15 July 1924. Hailey Papers, LO.L Mss. Eur. E 220, vof. 6.
76 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
but if agreement could be reached on the basis of such a principle in the Punjab, the Congress might be prepared to approve it so as to enable the immediate suc¬ cess of the struggle against the bureaucracy.1 And in September, when in Delhi for the special Congress session, Jawaharlal heard that Sikh jathas were daily proceeding to Nabha state, the deposition of whose maharaja in July for mal¬ administration was strongly resented by the Sikhs; and he decided to go there to see for himself the Akalis in action.
On the night of the 19th September, Jawaharlal, with two companions, Gidwani and Santanam, left Delhi for Muktesar, an Akali centre, and after ad¬ dressing a meeting there on the 20th, commending the Akali struggle,2 he entered Nabha state on the morning of the 21st, along with a Sikhjatha, at Jaito. There he and his two friends sat down under a tree to watch proceedings and intended to return to Delhi by the evening train. Wilson Johnston, the British official who was serving as the administrator of the state, on hearing that Jawaharlal had set out for Nabha, had obtained the permission of the Viceroy and the Home Member to serve an order on Jawaharlal at the frontier of Nabha state forbidding him to enter the state for two months;3 but he had not anti¬ cipated that Jawaharlal would come by road on horseback. The result was that Jawaharlal was well within the state before the order was served on him not to enter Nabha on the ground that he and some of his companions were members of the AICC and their presence was likely to lead to a disturbance of the peace. Jawaharlal replied that he had already entered Nabha and could not vanish into thin air, but that he had no intention of leaving the state; and he and his two friends, on whom an oral order had been served, sat down in a rest-house near by. A prohibitory order incapable of enforcement was ipso facto invalid, and an oral order was of no worth at all; but clearly the Nabha Government, even though now headed by a British official, attached no importance to legality. Although the presence of Jawaharlal had led to no disturbance, he and his companions were arrested, handcuffed and chained together, and marched to the railway station. They were brought by the night train, in a crowded third-class compartment, to Nabhatown, and the chains and handcuffs were only removed twenty hours after, by noon the next day, after they were locked up in Nabha jail.
The conditions in this jail were, even by official admission, ‘horrible’;4 and Wilson Johnston reported that though the jail department left much to be desired any immediate improvement was out of the question as the Akali agita¬ tionwaskeeping their hands full.3 Theprisoners were prevented from seeing or communicating with persons outside, denied all books and papers, and for two days not even allowed to bathe or change. Their trial was held in camera by a
1 Report of Jawaharlal’s speech in The Tribune, 4 July 1923. a Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File I.K.W. aSee Home Dept. Pol. File 401 of 1924.
4 Note of Special Commissioner on conditions in Nabha jails, 14 June 19®3. Home Dept Pol. File 401 of 1924.
» 24 September 1923. Ibid.
IN NABHA JAIL
77
magistratewho knew no English and openly referred every issue for decision to WilsonJohnston. Thelatterhad by now realized that, even in Nabha, Jawaharlal could not be convicted for entering the state before he had been prohibited from doing so, and decided to alter the charge to one of being in the company of an Akalijatha and therefore of being a member of an unlawful assembly.1 On the 24th fresh proceedings were casually started before another magistrate, and Jawaharlal and the others were charged with being members of the jatha and forcibly resisting dispersal. The straight thing to do’, wrote Jawaharlal in his draft statement2 which waslater revised by his father and these sentences excis¬ ed, ’is to run me in for sedition and I shall gladly and joyfully admit the charge. But the ways of the Nabha administration are not straight. They are crooked.’
As soon as Motilal heard of his son’s arrest he left for Nabha and informed the Viceroy that his sole object was to see Jawaharlal. He had so far taken no part in the Akali agitation and expected that there would be no interference in the exercise of his ‘natural right’.3 The Administrator of Nabha gave orders forbidding Motilal’s entry but was overruled by the Government of India, who ordered that Motilal should be permitted to enter Nabha provided he undertook not to engage in political activities in the state and to leave it immediately after his interview with his son.4 Even this was an indefensible attitude and demon¬ strates that Wilson Johnston was not wholly responsible for all the arbitrary actions of the Nabha administration. Motilal naturally refused to give any such undertakings and, on being ordered to leave the state, did so without meeting Jawaharlal. Wilson Johnston described Motilal’s reaction as one of ‘veiled insolence’, but the Secretary of State, Lord Olivier, later remarked that this was what any self-respecting professional man in his position in any other civilized country would have done.3 In fact, the Governmentof India realized immediate¬ ly that they had overreached themselves, and modified the conditions; Motilal was now required not to engage in any political activity in Nabha and to leave immediately after the conclusion of the trial.6 This was still much to demand, but so intense was Motilal’s anxiety, especially as he had heard of the unhealthy conditions in Nabhajail, that he agreed to abide by these restrictions and return ed to Nabha.
Onthe 27th Motilal saw his son in jail. The interview, lasting over two hours, was not a success. The officials at Nabha flattered themselves that both father and son looked dejected because Motilal had concluded that Jawaharlal’s action had put him legally in the wrong and there was little hope of his escaping convic¬ tion.2 In fact, the reasons for the unsatisfactory nature of the interview were
> Administrator Nabhastateto Agent, Governor-General Punjab, 22 September 1923. Ibid. a25 September 1923.
iThe Bombay Cbropiete, 24 September 1923.
*Telegram of Administrator, 23 September and telegram of Home Dept., 24 September, Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401.
’ToReading, 20March and 26 June 1924. Reading Papers, vol. 7.
6The Bombay Chronicla, 27 September 1923.
7 Administrator to Agent, Gov.-Gen. Punjab, 27 September 1923. Home Dept. Pol. Hie 401 of 1924.
78
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
very different. Jawaharlal had shown his irritation at his father’s intervention, and this had deeply upset Motilal. So Motilal left Nabha.
I was pained to tind that instead of affording you any relief my visit of yesterday only had the effect of disturbing the even tenor of your happy jail life. After much anxious thinking I have come to the conclusion that I can do no good either to you or to myself by repeating my visits. I can stand with a clear conscience before God and man for what I have done so far after your arrest but as you think differently it is no use trying to make opposites meet.. . please do not bother about me at all. I am as happy outside the jail as you are in it... I do not wish you to have the impression that you have.offended me in the least. I believe honestly that the position has been forced upon us both by circumstances over which neither has any control.1
Jawaharlal was now deeply sorry. *1 confess that the idea of causing you any pain is most distressful to me and I am haunted by the thought. It is a dearly cherished desire of mine to serve you and to lighten if possible the heavy bur* den you carry.’2 But he was quite reconciled to a term in Nabha jail. ‘It will be a new experience and in this blase' world, it is something to have a new experience.’3 However, Motilal sent his son, through his secretary, a drasti¬ cally altered statement to be read by him in court. Jawaharlal had written an emotionally worded text, criticizing the Nabha administration and eulogizing the Akali movement. "
I rejoice that I am being tried for a cause which the Sikhs have made their own. I was in jail when the Guru-Ka-Bagh struggle was gallantly fought and won by the Sikhs. I marvelled at the courage and sacrifice of the Akalis and wished that I could be given an opportunity of showing my deep admiration of them by some form of service. That opportunity has now been given to me and I earnestly hope that I shall prove worthy of their high tradition and fair courage. Sat Sri Aka/.4
Motilal replaced these paragraphs with a closely argued statement written with the cold pen of a lawyer, and it was this which Jawaharlal read.
Meantime, the case dragged on. The Government of India directed that sentence should be passed on Jawaharlal but it should be announced at the same time that the Nabha Government had suspended its execution without
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 28 September 1923.
2Jawaharlal to Motilal from Nabha jail, 30 September 1923.
Jawaharlal to Kapil Deva Malaviya and Mahadeva Desai, undated but clearly written from Nabha jail.
4 Draft statement, 23 September 1923. Sat Sri Akai is a Sikh form of greeting, meaning “True is the Immortal God.”
IN NABHA JAIL 79
condition, and Jawaharlal should be expelled from the state. This would meet the probable contingency of the convicted persons declining to accept any conditions; but if they returned to the state the suspension would be cancelled. This did not please Wilson Johnston, who wished Jawaharlal to serve his sentence, and argued that mere expulsion would severely shake the con¬ fidence of loyalists by establishing that there was one law for Akalis and another for Congressmen. But the Government of India believed that such discrimination would in itself be of advantage in that it would loosen the alliance between the Akalis and the Congress.1 So Jawaharlal and his two com¬ panions were each sentenced to 30 months’ rigorous imprisonment; but these sentences were suspended and they were ordered to leave the state and not to return. They all left Nabha the same night.
It was not, however, disclosed that the sentences would be operative if they returned to Nabha; and Jawaharlal had no reason to believe that the suspen¬ sion was conditional. So he later challenged the statement of the Adminis¬ trator that if they had refused to leave they .would have had to undergo the sentence, and he added the hope that if it.was necessary in the interests of their cause to return to Nabha, he and his’companions would do so.2 In fact, the next year, when Gidwani returned to Nabha he was thrown into prison, and Jawaharlal challenged the Administrator to let him have a copy of the suspen¬ sion order and to inform him as to whether he too would be arrested if he returned to Nabha.3 The Administrator replied that the sentence had only been suspended and not remitted, to which Jawaharlal retorted that the suspension had been unconditional.4
As Jawaharlal recognized years later in his Autobiography, probably the bold step to have taken, especially as Gidwani had been imprisoned again, would have been for him to return to Nabha. 'As often with us all, discretion was preferred to valour.’3 On his return to Allahabad, where he received a hero’s welcome, he had developed typhoid with high fever and confessed that he had not felt quite so feeble physically for a long time.6 Gandhi dissuaded him from returning to Nabha,7 and his father too made sure that he did not involve himself in Nabha affairs again. He would not even permit Jawaharlal to meet the Maharaja of Nabha. ’Having once burnt your fingers over Nabha
‘Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 23 September 1923; Administrator Nabha to Agent to Gov.-Gen., 23 September 1923; Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 26 September 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401.
2Jawaharial’s letter in The Tribune, 11 October 1923.
J Jawaharlal's letters to the Administrator, 24 May and 19 June 1924, reprinted in The Leader, 29 May and 23 June 1924, respectively.
4 Administrator Nabha to Jawaharlal, 23 June, and his reply, reproduced in The Leader, 27 July 1924.
>p. 116.
• To Sri Prakasa, 7 October 1923.
i i Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 6 September 1924, Collected Works, vol. 25 (Delhi, 1967) p. 98; Jawa- harlal's speech at Allahabad, 20 September 1924.
80 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
I do not wish you to take any more risks.'1 So the Government of India, who had encouraged the Administrator of Nabha to act arbitrarily, were not embar¬ rassed by any further challenge. Both the Secretary of State2 and Lord Curzon, who was by no means dominated by a commitment to the rule of law and spoke for the opposition in the House of Lords, felt that the situation had not been handled quite so well as it possibly might have been. But the Government were enabled to congratulate themselves on an easy if undeserved victory. ‘There is no doubt that Nehru and his son were substantially defeated over the Nabha affair and they know this full well.'3
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 29 August 1923. . 2 Olivier to Reading, 20 March 1924. Reading papers, vol. 7. * Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 9 October 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401.