Marking Time
Back in India, Jawaharlal slipped without resistance into the vacuous, para¬ sitic life of upper-middle-class Indian society in Allahabad. He joined his father’s chambers and Motilal saw to it that work came his way. ‘An over- zealous client sent a money order for Rs.500 to you as your fee and it has been redirected to Mussoorie. The first fee your father got was Rs. 5 (five only). You are evidently a hundred times better than your father. I wish I were my son instead of being myself. Rao Maharajsingh has several cases pending in the High Court and I do not know In which of them he intends to retain you. But the money is yours . . .’1 Clearly, though the father’s pride forbade him to recognize it, Jawaharlal was being paid handsomely to keep Motilal happy. Jawaharlal toiled fairly hard and had the advantages of his father’s sponsor¬ ship and of social contacts with judges, eminent lawyers like Sapru and Rash Behari Ghose and the leading landlords and industrialists of the U. P. But he could whip up no enthusiasm for the law, was shy of speaking, and found the work tedious.’Reading books written by great lawyers’, he wrote long after, ‘is apt to make one think of big and intricate cases. But the average lot of the lawyer, especially a junior one, is to deal with petty and rather dull cases.’2 So it is doubtful whether, even if politics had not seduced him, he would have developed into one of the leading lawyers of the U.P. or India. It is more likely, as he himself thought, that if he had continued at the Bar he would have led a comfortable existence and retired as a judge, ‘highly respectable and solemn looking’,3 but probably of no great distinction.
Apart from professional work, Jawaharlal continued in Allahabad the life of a man-about-town which he had led in his last years in London. He enjoyed the lavish entertainments of his father; and there are, in addition, reports of his own late-night parties and revels. The casual sympathy with Extremist
'Motilal to Jawaharlal, 21 October 1912.
1To Harsha Hutheesing, 26 August 1959. Nehru papers.
* * The Mind of a Judge', Modern Review, September 1935. reprinted in India end the World (London, 1936), pp. 130-45.
29
30
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
politics which he had shown in Cambridge did not inhibit him from participat¬ ing in the formal rounds of Anglo-Indian society. He left his cards at the homes of English judges and officials, and they in turn called on him, ‘Called on 8 English families’, runs the entry in his pocket diary for 27 March 1916, and again three days later/Called on 9 English families’. *
However, the great event of that year was his marriage on 8 February 1916. This question had been worrying Motilal and his wife ever since their son went to Harrow. For even though their son was then only a boy of fifteen, Motilal was concerned lest Jawaharl&l begin to show interest in women, particularly in view of the entanglement of one of his friends. Writing, as he said, not as a father but as his dearest friend, Motilal invited confidences, warned against passing passions, and condemned the concept of love at first sight.1
Motilal had nocause for worry. His son, apart from showing little interest in women, declared that he had never been in favour of marrying a European and had, during his years in England, seen no reason to change his opinion.2 He sometimes gave expression to idealized views about marriage.
Would you like me to marry a girl whom I may not like for the rest of my life and who may not like me? Rather than marry in that way, I would greatly prefer to remain unmarried. After all, I have to spend my whole life with my wife. Is it surprising, then, if I wish to marry a girl whom I like? I am not obliged to like a girl of a good family, nor is it to be taken for granted that every educated girl would come up to my expectations.
I accept that any girl selected by you and father would be good in all res¬ pects, but still, I may not be able to get along well with her. In my opin¬ ion, unless there is a’degree of mutual understanding, marriage should not take place. I think it is unjust and cruel that a life should be wasted merely in producing children.3
But there is, in the number of letters he wrote on this subject, little evi¬ dence of a desire in his own life for an intense and romantic experience. Once, while still at Harrow, he evinced an upsurge of restlessness which qurte sur¬ prised his father.
The sooner it is done the better it will be. I.am in no hurry to get married or even engaged but it is most tiring and annoying not to know what is going to happen. If no one had ever mentioned anything about my marri¬ age I would have been quite contented and happy, but now that all this fuss and trouble has been taken I cannot rest till something is done.4
But in fact it was irritation rather than impatience. Jawaharlal was tired of
1 Letters to Jawaharlal, 1 March 1906 and 1 September 1910. rJawaharlal to his father, 30 September 1910. *
i Letter to his mother, 14 March 1912 (Original in Hindi). S.W., vol. 1, p. 97.
4 Letter to his father; 21 December 1906.
MARKING TIME
31
the subject and wished to be done with it. With an odd detachment he wanted his father to settle his engagement so that there need be no further discussion.
This suited Motilal, who took, as of natural right and with Jawaharlal’s consent, the decisions in this as in all other major matters in his son’s life. 'It is all right my boy. You may leave your future happiness in my hands and rest assured that to secure that is the one object of my ambition.’1 Hie conditions of Indian life, he assured Jawaharlal, were so different to those prevailing in Europe and elsewhere that Jawaharlal’s happiness could not be secured by leaving him to act independently of his parents.2 There were only two points which Jawaharlal suggested rather weakly: that he need not necessarily marry within the Kashmiri community, and that the engagement need not be fixed while he was still in England and had hardly had the chance to know the girl.
1 hope’, he hastened to add,3 ‘you will take my objections into consideration before arriving at a decision, which of course lies with you.’ But Kashmiri Pandits, even those who had migrated to Allahabad, had a strong sense of exclusiveness,4 and in this respect Motilal was no more immune than the rest. So he preferred a Kashmiri if he could find a suitable one and he surveyed the Kashmiri girls everywhere, even those settled in Madras, for one who was neither an illiterate beauty nor a plain blue-stocking, but combined good looks with education. 'I asked Jawahar if he preferred books to looks or vice versa. His answer was that I might as well ask if he preferred a nose to eyes — they were both necessary.’5 There was no obvious ‘Blue Bird’ to be found who would not require a special course of preparation and instruction before she fully qualified to be Jawaharlal’s wife; but Motilal could see no far superior person outside the community either, and this strengthened his feeling akin to prejudice against it.6 However, the lack of an obvious candidate enabled Motilal to yield to his son’s second suggestion, that he should see the girl before the final selection.
After years of search, in 1912, just before Jawaharlal’s return to India, Motilal chose Kamala Kaul, a young girl of thirteen belonging to a Kashmiri Brahmin middle-class family who rah a flour mill in Delhi. Jawaharlal, being nearly ten years older, thought she was too young for him. Nor did he think he could marry her for another six to seven years, till she was at least eighteen or nineteen. But this did not worry him as he was not, as he observed, ‘in a matrimonial state of mind at present';7 and it suited Motilal as it provided time to mould the young girl into a proper wife for Jawaharlal. She had been educated at home and spoke Hindi and Urdu; and after the engagement she
* Motilal to Jawaharlal, 21 February 1907.
2 Idem, 9 December 1910.
1 Letter to his father, 7 October 1910.
*C(. Urtnila Haksar, writing ofthe late 'twenties: 'For the first time, in Allahabad 1 became aware of the fact that we ware Kashmiris andjthat it set us apart from the rest of Indians in the country. “We" were Kashmiris whereas everyone else was “they"/ Op- c«t., PP- 44-5.
’Motilal to his brother, 11 February (1911?)- Motilal Nehru papers.
* Letters to Jawaharlal, 1 September and 28 October 1910.
. ’Letter to his father, 26 April 1912.
32
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
was brought to Allahabad for training in deportment. When she was seventeen the marriage was celebrated in Delhi on a munificent scale, with special trains carrying the guests to the ‘Nehru marriage camp’.
That summer Jawaharlal spent in Kashmir. He went in pursuit of bear and shot one as well as a large number of pigeons and marmots. He also had his second brush with death. Trekking up to the top of the ZojiTa, a very stiff climb of about three and a half miles, he then attempted to go over the Amar- nath shoulder into the head of the valley above the cave. From Matayan he and his friends moved to Gumba and went up to the Gumba ravine and glacier. After climbing a veiy steep gradient for miles, they arrived at the top of the glacier and then set off, at about 17,000 feet, in bad weather, to cross a large ice-field covered with fresh snow. Trying to hop across a crevasse, Jawaharlal slipped and fell in, and was pulled out by the rope. As there were many other such crevasses and it was still snowing, the party turned back.1
Along with high life and shikar, there was the usual ostentatious public service. For three or four years Jawaharlal served as one of the provincial secretaries of the St John Ambulance Association. He was also one of the joint secretaries of the U.P. South Africa Committee for the collection of funds for Gandhi’s passive resisters in South Africa, but this was not an dnti-Government activity, for the Governmentof India had frequently expressed their support for the Indian community in South Africa. He was willing to join the Indian Defence Force, constituted on the lines of the territorial army, and encourage other young Indians to do the same. It was decided to constitute a strong and representative committee in Allahabad for this purpose, and an invitation to all who were interested was published in the local newspapers.2
Within a week, however, the situation underwent a marked change. For many years the Indian national movement had been at a low ebb. The Congress was controlled by the Moderates who were satisfied with the annual adoption of academic resolutions. Jawaharlal and others like him in the U.P. had no great interest in such activity nor were they drawn into Extremist agitation. Tilak and Mrs Besant, failing to secure the re-admission of the Extremists into the Gongress, had set up Home Rule Leagues. Mrs Besant’s plan was to agitate on the lines of British radical movements in the nineteenth century, and in April 1915 she had presided over the U.P. Provincial Conference.3 Jawaharlal had taken no interest in this. His first public speech was on 20 June 1916, to protest against the Press Act and the demand from Mrs Besant of security under that Act,4 but this intervention would seem to have been
1 Diary entries from 24 August to 7 September 1916; letter to S. S. Khera, 1 July 1938, Nehru papers.'
2 Notice signed amorfe others by Motilal, Jawaharlal and T.B. Sapru, 13 June 1917, The Leader, 22 June 1917.
JSeeH.F. Owen, ‘The Home Rule Leagues 1913-18’, in D.A. Low (ed.), Soundings in Modern South Asian History (London, 1968), pp. 139-93.
4 Report in The Leader, 23 June 1916. „
MARKING time 33
more out of personal loyalty to Mrs Besant, whom he had known from his child¬ hood, than from any strong feelings about the freedom of the press. It was no sparkling performance, and all that his father could say, after reading the report in the press, was that the speech, though not very informative, had the rare merit of being free from commonplaces, which was the besetting sin of all Indian speakers, at least in the U. P.1 Hehadnot been anything more than a silent spectator at the Lucknow Congress in December 1916. But what Mrs Besant and Tilak had failed to achieve on their own was accomplished by the Government.
The Home Rule Leagues of Mrs Besant were intended to be primarily educative — to argue the case for Home Rule, hold classes and seminars, cir¬ culate literature, collect funds and organize social work. But the Government teared Mrs Besant’s influence. She was first expelled from Bombay and then from the Central Provinces and finally, in June 1917, interned at a hill station by the Madras Government. This panicky step caused resentment throughout India; and among those roused to annoyance was Jawaharlal. He was, at long last, beginning,to find his role. The meeting for considering the expansion of the Indian Defence Force was promptly cancelled;2 and Jawaharlal withdrew his own application for enlistment. A Home Rule League was formed in the U. P. with Motilal as president and Jawaharlal as one of the joint secretaries. The internment of Mrs Besant seemed to him a sign of the madness which had befallen the bureaucracy and presaged its fall. ‘Home Rule has come and we have but to take it if we stand up like men and falter not.’ Mere protest meetings and representations were the politics of cowards and opium-eaters: what was now needed was non-co-operation with the Government till they re¬ versed their folly.5
Such vehemence showed that despite the superficiality of his yay of living, his spirit was not dead and he was keen on action. He had been greatly moved by Roger Casement’s speech at his trial. ‘It seemed he said years later,4 to point out exactly how a subject nation should feel. In August 1917, when Motilal called on the British public, ‘the sole tribunal appointed by Providence’, to mediate between the Indian people and the bureaucracy, someone from the audience shouted ‘Question’. Motilal lost his temper and challenged the heckler tocomeout in the open. There was complete silence.5 What is of inter¬ est is that wenowknow that the timid heckler was Jawaharlal.6 But what action should be taken, what form non-co-operation should be given, was not clear to him. He had no startling ideas of his own. Neither the Anglo-Saxon approach
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 June 1916.
2 Letter to the editor, 20 June 1917, The Leader, 22 June 1917.
* Letter to the editor. The Leader, 21 June 1917.
4B. Inglis, Roger Casement (London, 1973), p. 346.
5 Account at Kapil Deva Malaviya, Pandit Motilal Nehru, cited in B.R. Nando, The Nehrus (London, 1962), P. 139.
6 Eye-witness account of Sochidanonda Sinha in his article on Motilal Nehru. Sachidananda Sinha papers at Patna.
34
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
of Mrs Besant nor the orthodox extremism of Tilak had any great appeal for him, and, while he spoke in terms of Home Rulers capturing the Congress,1 he had given no thought as to what should be done once that organization had been takenover. In fact his mind, for lack of anything better, fell into Moderate grooves, and he objected to the refusal by the Government to permit deputa¬ tions to proceed to England to plead the cause of Home Rule 2 At this time, unlike the year before, it was Motilal who was the stauncher revolutionaiy, and he pointed out to Jawaharlal that the work which lay before them in India was far more important than anything that deputations could achieve in England.3
So Jawaharlal, even in his late twenties, was a man who had yet to know his mind, discontented with his lot of comfort and affluence, dissatisfied with merely helping to run The Independent, the newspaper started by his father in February 1919 to give voice in the U. P. to the viewpoint of the Congress, and groping for some form of action which would provide mental and emotional satisfaction. When, therefore, the call of Gandhi came he could respond to it not merely at a political but at a human level. Long after, looking back on these fallow years, he remarked that it was the acceptance of Gandhi’s leader¬ ship, and the civil disobedience and jail-going which had followed, that had made a man of him.4 Life now had meaning in the service of a cause.
1 See his letter to A.M. Khwaja, 12 December 1917. 2 Resolution moved by Jawaharlal at the U.P. Political Conference, TJ* laarfsr, 16 October 1918. J Motilal to Jawaharlal, 16 February 1919. 4 Narendra Deva, ‘Favourite of Fortune', in Ntbnt Abbkumden Grtntb (New Delhi, 1949), p. 108.