The Interim Government
Seemingly satisfied with the response of the Congress, the Cabinet Mission left on 29 June, leaving it to the Viceroy to negotiate the formation of an in¬ terim government on the basis of the acceptance of the Mission Plan by both the major parties. Soon after, Jawaharlal was elected in succession to Azad as president of the Congress. Azad’s handling of the Congress case in the dis¬ cussions with the Cabinet Mission had merited no confidence, and there was general agreement that Jawaharlal shquld take over. Hindsight has led to much significance being read into his election, it being seen as part of the Gandhian technique to ease Jawaharlal into the prime ministership which was looming ahead and deprive Patel of what was his by virtue of his control of the party machine. But at that time no one saw it in that light. In the summet of 1946 the presidency of the Congress seemed to bestow immediate respon¬ sibility rather than imminent office.
The newpresident summoned ameeting oftheAICCin Bombay and secured its approval of the conduct by its leaders of the negotiations with the British Government. Both there and at a press conference a few days later, Jawaharlal reiterated, in sharp and emphatic terms, the Working Committee’s interpre¬ tation of the Cabinet Mission Plan. ‘We are not bound by a single thing except that we have decided to go into the Constituent Assembly.’1 What he meant was that the Constituent Assembly would be a sovereign body with whose procedures and decisions, once the. Assembly had been elected, the British Government could not interfere. The Assembly would meet in sections but itdid notfollow thattherewouldbegrouping.
Obviously, Section A will decide against grouping. Speaking in bet¬ ting language, there was a 4 to 1 chance of the NWFP deciding against grouping. Then Group B collapses. It is highly likely that Assam will decide against grouping with Bengal, although I would not like to say what the initial decision may be, since it is evenly balanced. But 1 can say
'Speech at the AICC 7 July, Tba Bombay Cbroniclt, 8 July 1946.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT
327
with every assurance and conviction that there is going to be finally no grouping there, because Assam will not tolerate it under any circum¬ stances whatever. Thus you see this grouping business approached from any point of view does not get on at all.1
These statements were seized upon by Jinnah to withdraw the League’s acceptance of the Cabinet Mission Plan. He had never been happy about this commitment2 from which he had failed to draw all'the advantage he had ex¬ pected; and he now charged the Congress with having circumscribed its own acceptance with so many conditions that it released him from his own pledge. The fact that, for once in its negative history, the League had bound itself to co-operate had roused such astonishment and expectation that Jawaharlal has been roundly castigated for helping Jinnah bade to his normal, obstruc¬ tive road. ’Now happened’, wrote Azad in his memoirs,5 ‘one of those unfortu¬ nate events which changed the course of history ... he [Jawaharlal] is at times apt to be carried away by his feelings. Not only so, but sometimes he is so impressed by theoretical considerations that he is apt to underestimate the realities of a situation.’ More telling are Patel's^views, expressed even at the time. Writing on the day Jinnah announced his withdrawal, Patel criticized Jawaharlal for often acting
with childlike innocence, which puts us all in great difficulties quite unexpectedly... acts of emotional insanity and it puts tremendous strain on us to set matters right. His mind has been exhausted by overwork and strain. He feels lonely and he acts emotionally and we have to bear with him in the drcumstances. Opposition sometimes drives him mad, as he is impatient.4
«
However, it is unfair to blame Jawaharlal merely because Jinnah used this as the chaqce to break out of the cage of acceptance. Jawaharlal was not acting in a mood of pique. To make clear that these were not casual statements, he reiterated his views in the following weeks.5 His utterances were deliberate and in line with Congress policy. Jawaharlal and the Congress believed that the League derived its main sustenance from the support of the British and without this, whatever its successeson the elections, its tissue would weaken. That support had been withdrawn by the Cabinet Mission and Jinnah was
1 Interview to tk press, 10 July, Notional Harold, 11 July 1946.
*k is wM that Jinnah began to fret within hours of living his acceptance. M.A.H. bpahani, Qaida-Azam Jinnah as Iknaui him (Karachi, 1967), p. 209.
>Axad, op. tit., pp. 138 and 143.
4To D. P. Mishra, 29 July 1946, Sardor Petal's Correspondence, 1943-30 voL 3 (Ahmadabad, 1972)»pp- 153-4
’Speed) at Delhi, 21 July, interview at Lahore, 30 July, and speech at Allahabad, 1 August, The Hindustan Times, 22 July, 31 July and 3 August 1946, respectively.
328
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
aware of it. The important thing now was to make it dear to the British that the Congress intended India to conduct hersdf as a fully independent sovereign state. Fair treatment to the minorities was the obligation of a free India and not enforceable by the British. Jawaharlal’s speech at the AICC and his state¬ ment at the press conference conveyed this message. When, after the press conference, one of those present said to him, ‘You have changed the entire basts of the agreement with England*, he smiled and replied, ‘I am fully aware of that.*1 His reference to groupings and sections contained nothing new. The Congress, said Jawaharlal, would go into sections but groupings were optional; and this was in accordance with the Plan. The difficulty was created by the Mission’s unwarranted and clandestine assurance to Jinnah that a majorityvote in a section would ensure compulsory groupings, and Jawaharlal’s assertion that a sovereign Constituent Assembly would settle its own pro¬ cedures dealt with this commitment effectively even if unknowirigly. That the Congress accepted the Cabinet Mission Plan in accordance with its own interpretation had been repeatedly asserted by the Working Committee both before and after Jawaharlal’s statements in Bombay in July. The Muslim League too had done the same and proclaimed that it accepted the Plan so as to be in a better position to work for a full Pakistan. It can, of course, be argued that, once the League was committed to the Plan, it would have been wise tactics for the Congress to adopt a low posture and give Jinnah no opportunity to withdraw from the Constituent Assembly. But it is difficult to-see the Plan as a conversion of Jinnah which had been set at naught by Jawaharlal. As Jawaharlal said later while commenting on Azad’s book, this was to think toomuchin individual terms and not in terms of the historical forces at work.2 Pakistan was not made inevitable by two statements of Jawaharlal. They, at the most, provided Jinnah with an opening.
From Bombay Jawaharlal set off again for Kashmir. This visit, unlike the previousone, passed off quietly. Patel and Azad persuaded the Viceroy to secure the lifting of the ban on the entry of Jawaharlal, who promised not to raise any major issues or address any public meetings.3 He attended Abdullah’s trial and had fourlong private interviews with him, butwas unable to meet the Maharaja who pleaded illness.4 Jawaharlal’s honour was now satisfied, and Kashmir faded, for the' time at any rate, into the background. As president of the Congress, all-India issuesdemanded hisprime attention. On his way to Srinagar he had met Wavell in Delhi, and this seems to have been one of the rare occa¬ sionswhen the Viceroy and Jawaharlal attained a measure of rapport. Jawahar¬ lal said he did not wish to insist on any general inquiry into tne conduct of
1 Louis Fischer's introduction to the American edition of Asad's book 11960k P- xvii.
2Statement at press conference, 7 February 1939, Tb* Hindu, 8 February 1939.
2 Patel to Wavell, 8 July, and Azad to Wavell, 9 July 1946. Got. Gen. Sectt File 293(4X5/43; Wavell toJawaharlal, 17 Julyand Jawaharlal toPatel, 20July 1946.
4Jawaharlal's note on Kashmir, 12 August 1946.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 329
officials in 1942 and after, and would be satisfied with the retirement of some individuals. Wavell responded by offering, if the demand for a general inquiry were dropped, to direct Governors to discuss individual cases where there was well-substantiated evidence. Jawaharlal wrote on these lines to the premiers of Congress provinces, and the Government, which read these letters in the mail, was satisfied.1
Jawaharlal raised various other matters — the Governor's partisanship in Sind, the participation of Europeans in elections to the Constituent Assembly, judicial appointments in the U.P., the future of the Sikhs — and found the Viceroy willing to listen, discuss and explain.2 Wavell, on his part, secured from Jawaharlal a public appeal to the employees of the postal department to call off their strike.3 On the major constitutional issues also they seem to have reached some understanding; for the same day Jawaharlal wrote to the Premier of Assam not to confuse sections with groups and boycott the former, and the Viceroy wrote to Jawaharlal and Jinnah offering to form an interimgovernment consisting of six Congress (including one Scheduled Caste representative), five League and three minority representatives.
Jinnah replied on 31 July, two days after the League had revoked its accept¬ ance of the Mission Plan, rejecting the offer of five seats in the interim govern¬ ment. The Congress too had been unwilling to join until the status and powers of the interim government had been clarified and 'independence in action’ assured.4 Wavell had regarded this as practically amounting to an ultimatum, almost a declaration of war, and prepared for a show-down with the Congress; but he was curbed by the Cabinet.3 Now the vehemence of Jinnah’s attitude and the League’s threat of direct action made both the British and the Congress more anxious to push ahead. The Viceroy invited Jawaharlal as president of the Congress to submit proposals for the formation of an interim government, repeated his assurance that he would act constitutionally and asked Jawaharlal to consider an approach to Jinnah before submitting his proposals to the Viceroy.6 The Congress accepted this offer but insisted on a public announce¬ ment of the Viceroy’s invitation before they sought Jinnah's co-operation, ‘We shall welcome that co-operation but, if this is denied us, we shall be prepared to go ahead without it.’7
Such an announcement was made, and thereafter, armed with a resolution of the Working Committee that it accepted the Mission Plan in its entirety but
1Wavdl's note of interview with Jawaharlal, 22 July 1946, Viceroy's Sectt. File 1252(2) GG/1943; Jawaharlal to Congress premiers, 22 July 1946, AICC File 71/1946-47.
2See Jawaharlafs letters to Pant, Azad and Patel, 22 July 1946.
*Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 July, and JawaharlaTs statement to the press, 23 July, The Hindustan Times, 24 July 1946.
4Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 July 1946.
JWavell, op. dt., p. 322.
•Wavell to Jawaharlal, 6 August 1946.
’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 10 August 1946.
330
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
with its own interpretations to resolve the internal inconsistencies and fill the omissions, Jawaharlal met Jinnah. The talks failed as expected, for Jinnah would obviously not accept from the Congress what he had refused from the British. But it really seemed as if the British would ignore the League and work with the Congress on the basis, as Attlee had once suggested, that they could not allow a minority to place a veto on the advance of a majority, ‘I have just’, wrote Cripps to Rajagopalachari, had the news of Jinnah’s speech and action and 1 hope that his “bark will prove worse than his bite’’. Whether we shall now get the Constituent Assembly going or not I don’t know, but I very much hope so and I trust his withdrawal, if it takes place, will not lead to any stopping of the work by others. I still hope of course that the Muslims may join in when it comes to the time.’1
The Government’s alliance with the Congress, however, went against Wavell’s grain, and the killings in Calcutta in mid-August saw him scurrying back to the policy of appeasement of the League. Jinnah had fixed 16 August •as the day for direct action, and H. S. Suhrawardy, the chief minister at the head of a League ministry in Bengal, declared it a public holiday in the province. Armed Muslim communal groups in Calcutta looted and murdered while the administration watched and the Governor took no action to call in the army. It was only after three days, when the Hindus and Sikhs took the law into their own hands and indulged in savage reprisals, that the army took charge; and even then the Bengal Government remained inactive. As the British com¬ mander observed later, ‘Neither, then [in August 1946], nor afterwards, did one member of that Government give me any real assistance in bringing order out of disorder.’2 The obvious answer was to dismiss the ministry,-and indeed Cripps had promised the Congress that this would be done in any such con¬ tingency as this.3 But Wavell’s reaction was the opposite. He told Jawaharlal, whowas for firm action against gangsterism, that he wished to send for Jinnah, and it was only the threat of the Congress to refuse to form an interim govern¬ ment if he did so that led him to desist.4 Jawaharlal wanted a ministry of 15 — five ‘Caste Hindus’, five Muslims, one Scheduled Caste and four minority representatives — but as Wavell insisted on the number being 14, the Anglo- Indian representative was dropped.3
Jawaharlalinsisted that this ministiy should function as a strong and stable government and not merely as a stop-gap arrangement till the League was will¬ ing to join. The Congress was anxious to have a coalition but this could not
mean a surrender to the League. Jinnah could nominate his five representatives
«
'Cripps to Rajagopalachari, quoted in the latter's letter to Patel, 14 August 1946, Sadar Patti’s Correspondence, vol. 3, p. 38.
2 Sir Roy Bucher to Jawaharlal, 13 November 1934, Nehru papers.
3See Patel to Cripps, 19 October 1946, Sardar Patel's Correspondence, vol, 3, pp. 131-2.
^Jawaharlal to Cripps, 18 August, and to Wavell, 19 August 1946; Wavell to Jawaharlal,*
19 August 1946.
’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 20 August, and Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 August 1946.
the INTERIM (X>VB|tNMBNT
331
but not interfere with the nominations of the Congress, including a nationalist Muslim. Jawaharlal repeated that the only proper approach was to make rWt
on their owneven if this co-operation were denied. *
Calcutta has been a horrible shock to you and to all of us. And yet may 1 say that it has a personal significance for us which it cannot have even for you. Our friends ahd relatives are involved in these bloody murders, and our children and dear ones may have to face the assassin’s knife at any time. It is this grim reality that we face. We shall face it of course without shouting, but we are not going to shake hands with murder or allow it to determine the country’s policy. We shall still continue to reason with Hindu and Muslim and Sikh and others and try to win them over to the path of friendly co-operation, for there is no other way for the advance¬ ment of India. But we do not believe that co-operation will come out of appeasement of wrongdoing.1
Such firmness cowed the Viceroy for the time being. He announced the list of ministers and, in a broadcast, associated himself with the offer of the Congress to refer to the Federal Court all questions of interpretation of the Cabinet Mission Plan. But a visit to Calcutta and talks with a representative of the League revived Wavell’s persistent desire to do all he could to bring the League into the interim government. He sent for Gandhi and Jawaharlal, presented them with a draft committing the Congress to groups as well as sec¬ tions, and said he would not convene the Constituent Assembly unless the Congress made this declaration. He now brushed aside the suggestion of refer¬ ence to the Federal Court by asserting that the problem was not a legal but a practical one. But the Working Committee rejected what seemed to it a new effort at blackmail and Gandhi had the matter referred to London.2
Wavell had meantime to go ahead with the reconstitution of the Govern¬ ment, and on 2 September what the Congress liked to regard as the provisional national government was sworn in. Jawaharlal was vice-president of the executive council and held the portfolios of external affairs and Commonwealth relations. Now at last he seemed to have come to the end of a long and irregular road and to be able to move away from conflict and struggle to constructive effort. 'Too long have we been passive spectators of events, the playthings of others. The initiative comes to our people now and we shall make the history of our choiqp.# Jawaharlal organized his team to work as a Cabinet represen¬ tative of the people. Rajagopalachari was pulled up for informing not Jawahar-
'Jiwihirlil's personal letter to Wavell, 22 August 1946.
2Letters of Jawaharlal andGandhitoWavell, 28 August 1946; Wavell to Jawaharlal, 29 August and Jawaharlal’s reply, 29 August 1946.
*JawaharlaTs broadcast, 7 September, Nation*! Harold, 8 -September 1946,
382
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
lal but the Viceroy of the date of his taking up his portfolio.1 Wavell had to agree not to receive secretaries of departments, as was the custom till now, and to deal only with the membersof his council. The Viceroy’s efforts to administer those departments whose members could not join at once were firmly resisted; and so was the Political Department’s attempt to supervise the visits of Jawa- harlal and his colleagues to the Princely States.2 The members met informally every evening without Wavell to take decisions on major issues and agreed on no account to refer any matter to the Viceroy. When the British Government, in consultation with the Viceroy before Baldev Singh had taken over as defence minister, took steps to retain British troops in India while Indian troops were being demobilized, Jawaharlal, who came to know of it by seeing a chance telegram, sharply objected. This might have blown up into a crisis, for Wavell held that the question of stationing British troops affected vitally his responsibi¬ lity to the British Parliament; but a way out was found by asking Baldev Singh to look into the matter with the help of the Commander-in-Chief.3
More serious points of friction between the Viceroy and the interim govern¬ ment were the conduct of the Governors and the League ministries in Sind and Bengal. In the former province the Governor used every method to thwart the Congress and keep the League in office, while in Bengal the Suhrawardy Government, with the passive acquiescence of the Governor, behaved ‘essen¬ tially like the Hitler government in Germany during its early years . . . People who come from Bengal remind me forcibly of the refugees from the Hitler terror. I have never seen anything exactly like this in India before.’4 The authorities of both provinces were supported by the Viceroy and the British Government, and Wavell prevented the intervention of the central government on the ground that it could not interfere with provincial autonomy which fell within the personal purview of the Governor-General.5 Jawaharlal demanded that his government’s views be forwarded to the Secretary of State and sharply rebutted Wavell’s feeble efforts at defending the action of the Governor of Sind. ‘If what I consider a racket and a public scandal has your approval, then it is obvious that our standards and sense of values differ considerably. It would also appear that our objectives are different.’6 As for Bengal, violence was spreading in the districts with the government unable or unwilling to control it.
Indeed I have come seriously to think whether it serves any useful pur¬ pose for me to be in the Interim Government if an important part of
'Jawaharlal to Rajagopalachari, 30 August, and Rajagopalachari’s reply, 3 September 1946.
3Wavell toJawaharlal, 3 September, Jawaharlal’s two letters to Wavell, 4 September and Wavell to Jawaharlal, 3 September 1946.
^Jawaharlal to Wavell, 18 September, and Wavell’s reply, 19 September 1946.
‘Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 6 October 1946.
5Wavell to Jawaharlal 8 September 1946 ‘Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 September 1946.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT
333
India sinks to barbarism or something much worse ... What is the good of our forming the Interim Government of India if all that we can do is to watch helplessly and do nothing else when thousands of people are being butchered and subjected to infinitely worse treatment?1
The case of the NWFP was entirely different. Here the Congress Party had a clear majority; and of the total Muslim votes cast in the elections, the Con¬ gress and Nationalist Muslim candidates had secured 208,896 and the League candidates 147,880. But so long as the Frontier Province, of which only about 3 per cent of the population was non-Muslim, was outside the League’s control, Jinnah could not claim to be the unqualified representative of Muslim India, and Pakistan could be no more than a dream. So British officials set themselves to destroy the popularity of the Congress and rectify ‘the bastard situation'.2 Theirfirstopportunitycame when Jawaharlal decided to visit the NWFP. Tribal relations formed a part of his portfolio and he was anxious to make a first-hand appraisal. It was also obviously important for the leading figure of the Congress to undertake a flag march, as it were, and across terrain which had cast its spell over Jawaharlal. He was, as he told the Governor, Sir Olaf Caroe, himself regarded by many of his friends as being more than half a Pathan by nature. Caroe came to Delhi to dissuade Jawaharlal from visiting the province till after the League had joined the interim government, but Jawaharlal refused to post¬ pone his visit, and toured the province and the tribal areas in the middle of October. The League organized demonstrations against him and sent the Mulla of Manki for this purpose into tribal territory. Such activities directed against the Vice-President of the Viceroy’s Council should obviously have been taken serious note of; but Caroe was unwilling to restrain the Mulla and his men. His justification makes curious reading, i think that in the circum¬ stances, and given the fact that Nehru’s tour was obviously intended to push the Congress cause, it would have been wrong to put active restraint against the League’s propagandists going into tribal territory, and an attempt to do so would certainly have led to disturbances.’3 The result was that throughout his tour Jawaharlal faced hostile receptions and stone-throwing, which Caroe had no doubt had been organized by the League. Bruised, but fortunate not to have been killed, Jawaharlal completed his programme with courage. But the officials had succeeded in exploiting this visit to begin the weakening of Con¬ gress authority in the NWFP. As Caroe reported later, tongue in cheek,
Most of our troubles were started when Nehru took tribal affairs under his wing and followed this up with his ill-starred visit. Before that time
'Jawaharlal to Wavell, 13 October 1946.
2The phrase is Lord Ismay's. A. Campbell Johnson, Mission with Movntbatton (London, 1931), p. 54.
’Caroe to Wavell, 23 October 1946, Caroe papers.
334
JAWAHARLAL'NEHRU
the Province was going along very nicely all things considered, but it was an impossible thing to do to bring these tribals under a Pandit. Practically all our frictions and tensions date from that time.1
There was no cause for surprise in this curbing by Wavell and his governors of the functioning of what was virtually a Congress government St the centre. ‘Almost everywhere in India it has been obvious that governors and others favour the Muslim League as against the Congress. Some of them do it in¬ advertently and almost unconsciously; others do it deliberately and obviously and sometimes even twist the law to this end.'2 Alongside this hampering of the Congress, frantic efforts continued to bring the League into the interim government. In this the Viceroy now had the full support of the Cabinet in London. Cripps urged the Congress to go as far as it could in conciliating the League.
You know how earnestly — even if mistakenly sometimes — I have worked for Indian independence which I now see on the eve of accom¬ plishment if only Congress can have the statesmanship and magnani¬ mity to act the part of the strong man and givte way to the weak. The possibility is in your hands and unborn generations will hail the act of Congress now as the great decisive gesture for Indian freedom and self-government.
It is not I am sure a question of hard bargaining now — that will get us nowhere, it is a question of supreme statesmanship and only you can solve the problem at this stage.
Jawaharlal — with all my heart and mind I beg and pray that you may be guided to right action in this difficult moment.3
Wavell, working on the premiss that the convening of the Constituent Assembly was the prerogative of the Viceroy and not of the Government of India, was unwilling to take action until agreement had been reached with Jinnah on both the long-term plan and a coalition government.4 Now, once again, was revealed the pertinence of Jawaharlal’s statements at Bombay in July on the sovereign nature of the Constituent Assembly and therefore the minimum amount of extraneous action in its procedures. The Viceroy started discussions with Jinnah who, having no wish to be left out of office, was willing to respond. The only point on which he now insisted was that the Congress should not nominate a Muslim in the government, and Wavell appealed to Gandhi and Jawaharlal to waive its right to do so for the sake of a settlement.
‘Caroe to Mountbatten, 23 June 1947, Caroe papers.
2 Jawaharlal to Caroe, 16 November 1946.
JCripps to Jawaharlal, 16 September 1946.
Wavell to Jawaharlal, 13 September 1946.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT
335
To this appeal was added a threat that if the Congress declined, the Viceroy doubted if he could allow the interim government to continue as it was.1 Pethick-Lawrence backed up Wavell and added that the League would have to be brought into the Constituent Assembly if that body was to be of any use.2
Resentful though they were of these pressure tactics, the leaders of the Congress realized that there would be some advantages in bringing in the League. If this were effected in such a way as to bind the League to a proper working of both a coalition government and the Constituent Assembly, it might lighten the tension in the country and put events back on an even keel. So Jawaharlal called on Jinnah on 5 October, and found him considerably toned down. Though Jawaharlal repudiated a formula unthinkingly accepted by Gandhi that the League had an unquestionable right to represent all the Muslims, Jinnah did not break off the discussions. Rather, he assured Jawa¬ harlal that he would never side with the British and would in no event permit the Viceroy to function as an umpire in any coalition government. In return Jawaharlal offered to have any fresh appointments of minority representatives considered by the whole Cabinet, to refer major communal issues, if necessary, to arbitration and, instead of rotating the Vice-Presidentship, to create an additional vice-chairmanship of the Cabinet co-ordination committee.5 These concessions seemed to satisfy Jinnah; but within hours he reverted to his usual attitude of refusing to reach any agreement with the Congress and relying on the British. He insisted on Gandhi’s formula and the exclusion of any Nationalist Muslim from the Government. The Congress replied thaf it could go no further than what had been offered by Jawaharlal, who added that he could never be a party to disowning the Muslims in the Congress. This was to him a personal as well as a national question of honour.4 But discussions with Jinnah were resumed by Wavell. He accepted Jinnah’s nomination of five members including one person belonging to the Scheduled Castes, but without securing a precise commitment on the part of the League to the Cabinet Mission Plan, a renunciation of the League’s policy of direct action and a pledge to co-operate in the Government. Indeed the deliberate choice (apart from Liaqat Ali Khan) of second-rate diehard members of his party, and of a Harijan who represented nobody, established beyond any doubt that Jinnah’s sole aim was to share power and disrupt the interim government. But so eager was Wavell to destroy the control by the Congress of immediate authority that he brought the League in, despite Jawaharlal's repeated pro¬ tests,5 unconditionally. It was among the most serious of Wavell’s many disservices to India.
'Gandhi to Wavell, 27 September 1946. *
1 Krishna Menon to Jawaharlal, 26 September 1946.
^Jawaharlal'snotesof conversationswith Jinnah. 5 October, and letter to jinnah, 6 October 1946.
4}awaharUl to the Newab of Bhopal, 10 October 1946
’See Jawaharlal's letters to Wavell, 13, 14. 15 and 23 October 1946.
336
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Once the League had agreed to join the Government, Wavell asked the Congress to hand over either external affairs or home or defence. When the Congress refused to transfer any of these portfolios and offered only finance and commerce, the Viceroy decided that the home portfolio should be taken away from Patel andgiven to the League. At this all the members of the interim government decided to resign,1 and the crisis was only solved by the League agreeing to take finance. On this basis the five nominees of the League were sworn in on 26 October.
The working of the Congress-League government must be unique in the annals of modern administration. Each group met separately before a Cabinet meeting and there functioned in opposition to the other. This suited Wavell. He forgot the specific assurance he had given to the Congress that he would prevent any attempt to make the interim government a battleground of communal politics instead of an instrument for administering India.2 He encouraged the League in its obstructive attitude by referring every major issue to the two sides for opinion rather than insisting on the government functioning as a team, and himself acted as umpire.
Jawaharlal’s handling of external relations became one of the chief targets of the League’s attack. As the first step in building up an independent foreign policy unaligned to any Power, Jawaharlal had preferred to develop informal contacts rather than utilize British diplomatic representation. Acting as Jawaharlal’s personal envoy, Krishna Menon met Molotov, conveyed the new government’s earnest desire for friendly relations with the Soviet Union and sought assistance in foodgrains.3 He also, stepping beyond his brief, spoke to Molotov about the possibility of Soviet military experts visiting India. This upset not only the Foreign Office and the Indian external affairs department but also some of Jawaharlal’s colleagues in the Congress; and Krishna Menon received the first of, over the years, very many mildly worded cautions from his chief.
I want to make it clear that I have complete faith in you and I am quite sure that whatever step you will take will be taken after full consideration and with a view not to create any difficulties. So far as I am concerned, that is all right. But other people, who do not know you well, have also to be taken into consideration and hence I have suggested to you that you might bear these people also in mind.4
When the League came into the government, Jawaharlal had'to abandon his ideas of sending Menon to Moscow or appointing him as high commissioner
jawaharlal to Wavell, 24 October 1946.
3 See his own report of his interview with Patel, 12 June 1946, Wavell, op. dt., p. 291. 3JawSharlal’s letters to Molotov, 21 September and to Krishna Menon, 25 September; note to the Viceroy, 24 September 1946.
4To Krishna Menon, 13 October 1946. ^
THElNTBIttMOOV«Bf>ttaENT.,
337
in London, for that post was technically attached to the commerce department administered by one of the representatives of the League. Menon to asked to«*Vwttt Indian delegation to the United Nations. When the Leaane
sought representation on that delegation, Jawaharlal replied that it l«e to alter the composition. However, the League, with facilities pro- vided by the Viceroy and the India Office, sens two representatives to the United States where they denounced the Congress, the Indian delegation to the United Nations and the working of the interim government. In the Cabinet and outside, the League expressed no views on foreign policy but merely repudiated Jawaharlal’s efforts and appointments and demanded the creation of Pakistan; and Wavell repeatedly called upon Jawaharlal to discuss even matters pertaining to his own department with Liaqat Ali Khan.
More vital, of course, were developments in the various parts of India which were aptly described as being in a state of spontaneous combustion. ‘Murder stalks the streets and the most amazing cruelties are indulged in by both the individual and the mob. It is extraordinary how our peaceful population has become militant and bloodthirsty. Riot is not the word for it — it isjust a sadistic desire to kill. ’1 Newsof the slaughter of Hindus in Bengal percolated to Bihar and roused the local peasants to attack the Muslims. Gandhi and Jawaharlal urged the'Congress ministry to deal sternly with the guilty, and in this received the firm support of the Viceroy and the League, whose concern for the sanctity of provincial autonomy was presumably reserved only for Bengal and Sind. Jawaharlal and one of the League ministers in the central government toured Bihar and helped to bring the province under control. The army was called in, and rioting crowds dispersed by fire and, on a few occasions, by aerial bombing. Such firm and decisive action was possible only because of Jawaharlal’s initiative.
His intervention, however, was in his personal capacity. The interim govern¬ ment itself could do, and did, little. It was riven by dispute and powerless in action. Matters came to a head on the question of convening the Constituent Assembly. It was scheduled to meet in December but the Viceroy and his advisers, ‘functioning more and more openly as if they were allied with the Muslim League,’2 wished to postpone it on the ground that the League had not yet accepted the long-term plan rather than to press Jinnah to reach an early decision.3 Jawaharlal insisted that as the League was making clear that itwould not accept the Plan it should not continue in the interim government.4 Attlee now decided to intervene and wanted the Congress, the League and the Sikhs to depute their representatives to London. The Congress declined togo as thiswas tantamount to reopening the whole question; nor did Jawahar¬ lal have much confidence in Attlee, who, as reported by Krishna Menon, not
jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 11 November 1946.
2Idem, 17 November 1946
1jawaharlal to P.S.V., 13 and 16 November and P.S.V.'s reply, 16 November 1946.
4Jawaharlal to Wavell, 21 November 1946.
338
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
only had shown ‘nowarmth at all for the new government or for you personally’ but had made ‘no response to the message of goodwill’ and evinced ’certainly no anxiety or desire to be fraternal!’1 But Attlee now sent a personal message urging Jawaharlal to come and assuring him that there was no intention to abandon the Plan or the Constituent Assembly, and the Congress authorized Jawaharlal to go, if only because persistence in refusal would have been dis¬ courteous.
The talks in London in December confirmed the misgivings of the Con¬ gress and served to strengthen Jinnah’s position. The British Government declared that, according to the Cabinet Plan, decisions in the sections would be by a simple majority vote. They urged the Congress to accept this view and suggested, as a sop, that it could be referred, along with other questions of interpretation, to the Federal Court by the Constituent Assembly. Jinnah was delighted. He had, with the help of the British, recovered much ground. The League had, after an initial setback, moved into the government and brought administration to a standstill without any commitment on the Mission Plan; and now the Congress was being pressed to abandon its position and accept an unfavourable interpretation of the Plan so that the League could be cajoled into attending the Constituent Assembly. Pakistan seemed to be in sight, and to make it a large and powerful state he sought the collaboration of the Sikhs. At a private session with Baldev Singh, the Sikh representative at the talks in London, he offered the Sikhs any guarantees they might require. ‘Baldev Singh, you see this match-box. Even if Pakistan of this size is offered to me I will gladly accept it, but it is here that I need your collaboration. If you persuade the Sikhs to join hands with the Muslim League we will have a glorious Pakistan, the gates of which will be near about Delhi if not in Delhi itself.’2
The Constituent Assembly met as scheduled, on 9 December, but adjourned repeatedly without taking any controversial decisions or breaking up into sections so as to enable the League to make up its mind. To provide Jinnah with no substantial argument for declining to join, the Congress, while voicing its disapproval of the manner in which the British Cabinet had elaborated its Plan to suit the League, accepted this interpretation and gave up its proposal of a reference to the Federal Court. All that it now stipulated was that there should be no compulsion of a province and the rights of the Sikhs should not be jeopardized. If such compulsion were attempted, a province or a part of a province should have the right to take whatever action was required to give" effect to the wishes of the people concerned.9 But Jinnah was still in a grand¬ iose mood. The Working Committee of the League declined to reconsider its decision, and asked the British Government to declare that the Cabinet Mis¬ sion Plan had failed and to dissolve the Constituent Assembly.4
‘Krishna Menon to Jawaharlal, 18 October 1946.
* Baldev Singh to Jawaharlal, 19 September 1933, Nehru papers.
* Resolution of the A1CC, 6 January 1947. «
4 Resolution of the Muslim League, 29 January 1947.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 339
340
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
So, by the end of January 1947, it became clear that no further negotiations and compromises were possible, and the effortsof the Congress in this direction had only resulted in confusing its followers and dividing its leadership. With the League adamant and the Princes taking their cue from it and avoiding a decision on joining the Constituent Assembly, with the virus#of communal rioting spreading across the face of northern India and the interim government helpless ,.therewas no*purpose in still hoping and discussing.The.League resolution was about as bad as it could be. Perhaps there was a virtue in it for it makes the position quite clear.11 The Congress took the stand that the League, having rejected the Plan, should be told to leave the interim government. They had merely used it as a forum to harass the Congrpss and, with the Viceroy’s assistance, raised the communal issue at every step. Even the appointments of ambassadors had been held up because they had wanted every second post togo to nominees of the League irrespective of merit, and Wavell had supported them by suggesting that all appointments in India and abroad should be con¬ sidered by Cabinetcommittees.2 Thiswas hardly the atmosphere for the further¬ ance of Jawaharlal’s many ideas, such as the development of a'foreign policy which would show the world that the new India had iron in it and was not to be patronized or trifled with, the building up of the defence forces without any foreign element, the promotion of scientific research, the renewal of planning and the rapid industrialization of the country.
On 5 February, nine members of the interim government — all except the five nominees of the League — wrote a joint letter to the Viceroy that in their opinion the League could not continue in the government. Jawaharlal followed this up eight days later by stating that if a quick decision were not given he and his colleagues would leave the government. The League,pf course, had no intention of resigning and Wavell, instead of pointing out to Jinnah that he was having the best of both worlds, still wished to press the Congress for further — and futile — concessions. But the British Government’s decision was different. Attlee announced that the British would withdraw from India not later than June 1948, handing over, if there were no government esta¬ blished by a fully representative assembly, to the central government or in some areas to existing provincial governments. He added that Wavell would be replaced by Mountbatten.
Jawaharlal and the Congress welcomed this statement because, despite the clear hint that a Constituent Assembly without the representatives of the League would not be recognized, it seemed to show a way out qf the deadlock so created. That Assembly Gould continue to function for the areas represented in it and without the limitations imposed by the Mission Plan. The statement also implied a partition of the Punjab and Bengal, because eastern Punjab and
jawaharlal to Gandhi, 9 February 1947.
jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 and 31 January 1947.
THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT
341
western Bengal were represented in the Assembly and had no intention of being cut off from the Indian Union. 'The truncated Pakistan that remains will hardlv be a gift worth having.’1 Economically and for defence it seemed im¬ practicable and Jinnah might well prefer joining the Indian Union on special terms. So the Working Committee passed resolutions along these lines and invited the League to a joint consideration of these issues. The Congress also decided not to press for the resignation of the League's nominees in the central government till the general situation had been clarified; and Jawaharlal made a personal approach to Uaqat Ali Khan. The British are fading out of the. picture and the burdenof this decision must reston allof us here. It seems desir¬ able that we should face this situation squarely and not speak to each other from a distance.*2 But the League did not respond to these gestures. Liaqat Ali Khan made no response to Jawaharlal’s informal approach but introduced a wide-ranging budget without full discussions with his colleagues or even Jawaharlal on at least the general nature of his proposals.
The League was also not prepared to discuss constitutional developments with the Congress even on the basis of partition. Jinnah embarked on a cruise in the Arabian Sea, while his henchmen continued to clamour for direct action, brought down the ministry in the Punjab and fomented an agitation in the Frontier Province. Jawaharlal decided to visit these provinces, but while at Lahore received a message from Wavell requesting him to proceed no further. This injunction he attributed to Sir Olaf Caroe and demanded his removal. 'Am I to be prevented from performing my duty and shouldering the responsi¬ bility which has been cast upon me, because someone does not like me or does not approve of my going to the Frontier? ... It is an extraordinary position. Almost anyone can go to Peshawar but I must not do so, even for a brief and informal visit.’3 But no action was taken on his demand for Caroe’s dismissal before Wavell's departure a few days later.