The Cabinet Mission
On 24 March 1946 the Cabinet Mission arrived in Delhi. It was not a happy team. Crippswaseasily the ablestof the three, had long experience of the Indian problem and a commitment to the future, while Pethick-Lawrence, though old, was, as even Wavell described him, ‘a sort of saint’1 with a sentimental attach¬ ment to India. But the third member, A. V. Alexander, found himself in deep waters. He was basically imperialistic in outlook, detested the idea of losing India, and was irritated by the feeling that he was being ignored by Cripps and not taken seriously by the Indian public. In consequence, he tended to oppose his two colleagues and to support Wavell, whose anti-Congress attitude had become even more pronounced after the Simla Conference. The Viceroy had expected the Congress to launch another mass struggle and had prepared for its violent suppression. He disliked and distrusted Gandhi who was beyond his comprehension; he could not help liking Jawaharlal, but could find no level of understanding.
At the start, the Mission found that the leaders of the Muslim League, while insisting on the creation of Pakistan, had no clear idea as to what this involved. M. A. Ispahan! and the Raja of Mahmudabad, who were the first to meet the Mission, broke down under Cripps s cross-examination and could not explain how they could dowithout acentral government for at least a small list of reserv¬ ed subjects such as external affairs, defence, communications and customs. Two days later Jinnah himself was unable to give a precise answer as to what he meant by Pakistan;3 and all that his supporters in Bombay, U.P., C.P., and Madras — provinces where Muslimswere in a minority — could say in favour of Pakistanwasthat theywould then be treated better in India because of Hindu fearof reprisalson Hindu minorities in Pakistan.4 The Mission, therefore, was
* Chips, the diaries of Sir Henry Chsnnon (Penguin edition, 1970), entry on 3 September 1943, p. 302.
2Alexander diary, 2 April 1946.
»Ibid., 4 April 1946.
4Hnd., 8 April 1946.
313
314
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
not impressed by Jinnah’s repeated assertions in public that there could be no compromise on the fundamentals of a sovereign Pakistan. They confronted him with the alternatives of a sovereign Pakistan with a reduced area or a non-sover¬ eign federation of six provinces within the Indian Union; and even Alexander, friendly to the League’s viewpoint, noticed that Jinnah’s reaction was evasive.
I have never seen a man with such a mind twisting and turning to avoid as far as possible direct answers. I came to the conclusion that he is play¬ ing this game, which is one of life and death for millions of people, very largely from the point of view of scoring a triumph in a legal negotiation by first making large demands and secondly insisting that he should make no offer reducing that demand but should wait for the other side always to say how much they would advance towards granting that demand.1
However, if Jinnah and his followers were hazy in outlook, the leaders of the Congress declined to face up to the issue. The Mission invited Gandhi to come up from Poona to meet them, and asked the Congress to depute its repre¬ sentatives. Azad, as president, proposed to see them alone and convene the Working Committee only if he considered it necessary. This dismayed Patel, who felt that Gandhi was out of touch with Congress policy and Azad could not be trusted to convey Congress opinion. So hope was placed in Jawaharlal, just back from Malaya. 1am afraid that things will go wrong if you do not find some way to meet at least Cripps in time and set the train on rails;’2
Jawaharlal’s own mind was clear on the objective. The basis of negotiations with the Cabinet Mission should be the independence of India. These talks were not a continuation of those with Cripps in April 1942, nor would the Congress accept Dominion Status with power to secede later. The exact relationship be¬ tween India and Britain could be left over for future settlement, but it should be clearly understoodthat all such problemscould only be considered on the present basisof independence. ’In effect the British Government should pass some kind of an Act of Abdication.’ The final authority to determine the constitution would be a Constituent Assembly, composed of delegates elected by the provin¬ cial assemblies according to proportional representation. If any province refused to participate or to elect delegates, it could be by-passed and left out for the time being; there should be no compulsion. This Constituent Assembly would draft an all-India constitution, but such questions as Pakistan would be settled either by the consent of the parties or by a plebiscite, on a precise and defined issue, of all the inhabitants of the area concerned. ‘It should be made deafthat the ques¬ tion of Pakistan (whatever predsely it might signify) will not be dedded by a mere majority of votes in the Constituent Assembly. ’ But time was the essence
i Ibid., 16 April 1946.
*Patel *o Jawaharlal, 21 March 1946.
THE CABINET MISSION 313
of the whole problem, and there should be no delay in convening a Constituent Assembly and forming a provisional Central Government acting freely as a Cabinet with noobstruction from the Viceroyor the India Office. The Progress should not get entangled in long discussions about details.1
When Gandhi met the Mission he pressed, as a test of its sincerity, for the release of all political prisoners and the immediate repeal of the salt tax, and suggested that Jinnah be invited to form an' interim government.2 Such sugges¬ tions which had no practical bearing on the immediate issue were regarded as characteristic of Gandhi; but more surprisingly, Rajagopalachari urged the Mission to insist on the adoption of democratic constitutions by the Indian States and advised the British Government not to impose a settlement on the Indian parties but to refer the issue of Pakistan to an international arbitration committee on which the Soviet Union was represented.9 Neither Gandhi nor Rajagopalachari claimed to speak for the Congress; but even Azad, in his talk* with the Mission, laid emphasis not on constitution-making but on the transfer of real power to an interim government.4
This refusal on the part of the Congress to discuss any long-term plan was probably deliberate. Immediately after the elections, Rajagopalachari had sug¬ gested that it would be wise to devolve the initiative to the provinces. A resolu¬ tion should be tabled in each of the eleven provincial as-*»mhlj»s that the province was willing to join an Indian federation on certain basic principles and aminimum federal list. Thepositive answerofthe NWFPand Assamwould unsettle the League’s position; and if Bengal also agreed, that would finish the battle.9 Jawaharlal’smindwasworkingonthe same lines. Hehad advised Cripps that both the Constituent Assembly and the provisional Central Government should be formed in accordance with the suggestions of the elected Provincial. Governments.6 He now instructed the Congress premiers to get together and appoint a small committee of constitutional experts to draft the general princi¬ ples of a permanent constitution. The same, or another, committee should consider the general problem of realignment of provincial boundaries. By separating from the Punjab the areas where the Hindus and Sikhs were in a majority and divesting Bengal of Burdwan and parts of the Presidency division, four provinces would be created — NWFP, West Punjab, Sind and East Bengal — where Muslims would be in a definite majority; and this might placate Muslim opinion to a considerable extent.7
1 J«w«htrial’s confidential note on impending conversations with Cabinet Mission, 13 March 1946.
1 Alexander diary, 3 April 1946.
> Ibid., 12 April 1946.
* Ibid., 17 April 1946.
* Rajagopalachari to Jawahtrial, 26 February 1946.
* 27 January 1946.
7 Jawahariai's note of instructions to Congreas leaders in provinces, written sometime in April 1946.
316
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
With the two main parties unable or unwilling to make constructive sugges¬ tions on the future of India, the Cabinet Mission put forward proposals of its own. The scheme of Cripps to ask the Muslim members of the assemblies of Sind, NWFP, Punjab and Bengal to vote on separation was rejected by both- Jinnah and Jawaharlal. However, on 26 April, Jinnah expressed a preference for a three-tier federal union rather than a sovereign Pakistan with a reduced area;1 and Azad repeatedly hinted at the possibility of some provinces coming together for certain subjects provided the compulsory link with the centre was not severed.2 This encouraged the Mission to formulate a plan suggesting the establishment of a Union Government dealing with foreign affairs, defence and communications; two groups of provinces, one predominantly Hindu and the other predominantly Muslim, which would deal with all other subjects which the provinces desired should be dealt with in common; and the vesting of all residuary powers in the provinces.3 To consider this plan, a conference of the leaders of the two parties was convened at Simla. When Dr Ambedkar, the leader of the Scheduled Castes Federation, which had, in the elections, won only 2 6ut of 151 seats, objected to his exclusion, Alexander advised him to become a Christian.4 However, the Cabinet Mission left a memorandum to be passed on to the Constituent Assembly without disclosing its origin, suggesting that of the six Scheduled Castes representatives, two should be drawn from Ambedkar’s organization.3
The conference did not get off to a good start. Jinnah, while still harping on Pakistan — ‘surely the poor Mohammedans were entitled to one quarter of India’6 — attended. Heshook handswith Jawaharlal and Patel but turned scorn¬ fully away from the preferred hands of Azad and Abdul Gaffar Khan. However, prospects soon brightened. It was implicit in Jinnah’s arguments that he was not thinking in terms of a sovereign state. He recognized that the Union execu¬ tive could deal with most matters referred to it though he felt there was no need for a Union legislature; and he inquired whether the constitution of the Union would be permanent or provision would be made for revision after a set period. Even before the conference met, the Congress had objected to compulsory groupings or sub-federations, and felt it would be wholly wrong to compel a province to function against its own wish.7 There were Congress ministries in Assam and NWFP and the Congress could not possibly agree to the one being linked to Bengal and the other to the Punjab and Sind. This would virtually mean abandoning their supporters and handing these provinces over
* Alexander diary, 26 April 1946.
* Menon, op. cit., pp. 238 and 254. *
i Pethick-Lawrence to Azad and Jinnah, 27 April 1946, Papers relating to the Cabinet Mission to India (New Delhi, 1946), p. 9.
* Alexander diary, 15 April 1946.
* Not* of India Office, 24 October 1946, Attlee papers, Box 4.
•To Alexander, 29 April 1946, Alexander diary.
7 Azad to Fethick-Lawrence, 28 April 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 9-10.
THE CABINET MISSION
317
to the League. But at the conference, Jawaharlal pledged the Congress not to* exercise compulsion on the units to stay in an alMndia federation. Jinnah stated that if the Congress would accept the groups, the League would accept the Union. Jawaharlal said that while his position came near to that of Jinnah, any Union would be futile without a legislature and the provinces must decide for themselves about groupings; and to this Jinnah replied that he had fought for freedom equally with Jawaharlal and would be very glad to sit with him to discuss matters.
Encouraged by this, the Cabinet Mission drew up on 8 May ‘Suggested Points for Agreement’ between the two parties. There should be an all-India government and legislature, both composed of equal proportions from the Muslim-majority and Hindu-majority provinces, and dealing with foreign affairs, defence, communications and fundamental rights. Residuary powers would vest with the provinces. ‘Groups of provinces may be formed’, and such groups could determine the provincial subjects they desired to take in common and set up their own executives and legislatures. Any province could after ten years call for a reconsideration of the terms of the constitutions of the Union and the groups. The Constituent Assembly would be elected by the provincial assemblies. The Assembly ‘will divide into three sections’, representing the Hindu-majority provinces, the Muslim-majority provinces and the States. The first two sections would meet separately to decide the provincial constitutions for theirgroup, and if they wished, a group constitution; and thereafter it would be open to any province to change its group or remain outside any group. The three sections would then rejoin to draft a Union constitution, but every major point affecting the communal issue would require a majority of each of the two communities.
That the Mission no longer insisted on groupings was clear. The Consti¬ tuent Assembly should divide into sections, but provinces might form groups. The Viceroy recognized this concession to the Congress.1 Jinnah, too, under¬ stood this clearly and promptly protested. ‘In the new “suggestions” the question of grouping of provinces is left exactly as the Congress spokesmen desired in the course of discussions that have taken place hitherto, and is totally different from your original formula.’2 Pethick-Lawrence rejected this interpretation, and contended that the Mission had done no more than slightly simplify the original formula as a reasonable compromise.9 This was quibbling; in fact the Mission, eager for agreement, made concessions to the Congress while pre¬ tending to the League that they had not. This equivocation only served to build up trouble for the future.
*‘I went to bed unhappy all the same. I sympathise with the Muslims rather than with Congress, and I am not convinced that our document is quite fair to them.’ Diary entry, 7 May 19*46, Wavell, op. cit, pp. 260-61.
TJinnah to Pethick-Lawrence, 8 May 1946, Paptrs rtlating to CaMwst Mission, pp. 13-16. *Pethkfc-Lawrence to jinnah, 9 May 1946, ibid., pp. 16-17.
318 J^AHAMLAL NEHRU
The Congress, of course, reiterated its position. All groupings should be optional, and this subject should be left open to decision by the Constituent Assembly. Constitution-making should begin with the Federal Union. If an agreement with the League favourable to the growth of a free and united India could not be achieved, an interim government should be formed at once and matters in dispute referred to an independent tribunal.1 Immediately, Jawahar- lal suggested an umpire, and he and Jinnah retired to consider the proposal. Cripps was enthusiastic.
I felt inordinately proud of my friendship with you yesterday afternoon and Ido congratulate you and your colleagues upon their most statesman¬ like attitude. I pray that success may come to your labours and that you two may be hailed as the Saviours of India as indeed you will be if you succeed in coming to an agreement.2
The Congress prepared a list of possible umpires who were neither English nor Indian, and Cripps made various proposals: the selection of an Indian umpire by two arbitrators, of whom each side would nominate one, or requests to the United States, Canada, Australia, Eire, Sweden, China, the Soviet Union, the South American states, the Hague Court or the United Nations. But Jinnah soon denied that he had ever agreed to the principle of arbitration.3
After this, the two sides again reverted to rigid positions. Jinnah declared that the question of partition had been settled by the Muslim vote at the elec¬ tions, but he was willing to agree to the sovereigntyof Pakistan being ‘delegated’ to a Union for three subjects provided that sovereignty was recognized in the form of a group. Even communications were now limited to those necessary for defence. To this Jawaharlal retorted that the Congress and the League were completely opposed to each other on the question of partition, and it was essen¬ tial to have a strong centre with control of many more subjects than the three basic ones. Alexander and Wavell were in sympathy with Jinnah, but to prevent public knowledge of the differences of opinion within the Mission, Pethick- Lawrence and Cripps vetoed Alexander’s suggestion that he see Jawaharlal alone.4 But even Alexander was compelled to recognize the^next day, when the Congress formulated its position in writing, that it was nearer to a settlement than might have been imagined. While favouring a Centre with wide powers, the Congress accepted without qualification the Mission’s suggestion that ‘groups of provinces may be formed and such groups may determine the pro¬ vincial subjects which they desire to take in common.’3
1 Azad to Pethick-Lawrence, 8 May 1946, ibid., pp. 17-19.
*Cripps to Jawaharlal, 10 May 1946, with the enclosed note.
^Jawaharlal-Jinnah correspondence, 10 and 11 May 1946, Papers nIdling to Cabinot Mission, pp. 19-20.
‘Alexander diary, 11 May 1946.
3Congress proposals 12 May 1946, Papors minting to Cobinot Mission, 21-2; Alexander diary, 12 May a946.
Theconierenc^tawwtt,c»v&4nuke no hirthet $rogttss, and the Mission deriheh lo vsswft \\x 2WTV Mtex o\ftasitti\g tlhe Cabinet's approval, delay in
securing which had even led Pethick-Lawrence to consider resignation,1 the Mission published its plan on 16 May. Partition, on the basis of either a large or a small Pakistan, was rejected. The Indian Union would deal with foreign affairs, defence and communications and have the powers necessary to raise the finances for these subjects. Theidea ofparity at the centre was dropped, but any major communal issue in the central legislature would require a majority of each community as well as an over-all majority. All other subjects and powers would vest in the provinces, which would be free to form groups, and each group could determine the provincial subjects to be taken in common. Any province could by a majority vote of its assembly tall for a reconsideration of the Union andgroupconstitutions periodically after ten years. The Constituent Assembly would be elected by the provincial assemblies, with each province being allotted a number of seats proportional to its population and this number divided between the communitieson the basis of their population. The members so elected ‘will divide up into three sections’ — Section A comprising Madras, Bombay, U.P., Bihar, C.P. and Orissa; Section B Punjab, NWFP and Sind; and Section C Bengal and Assam. Each section would draw up provincial constitu¬ tions and, if desired, a group constitution. Any province could elect to come out of any group in which it had been placed after the first general elections under the new constitution. The framing of the constitution would obviously take time; but an interim government having the support of the major political parties and in which all the portfolios were held by Indians would be set immediately.2
The Mission Plan was intended as a compromise, yielding some points to the Congress and some to the League in the hope that both would accept the whole even if not wholly satisfied. The idea of Pakistan as a sovereign state was rejected; and at the level of the Indian Union there was to be no weightage for the Muslims. Even in the elections to the Constituent Assembly the Muslims werenottohave, as at the time, more seats than their numberswarranted. These were all concessions to the Congress. However, to make the Plan palatable to the League, Sections B and C, comprising the five Muslim-majority provinces, were created in the Constituent Assembly. But there was one major internal contradiction in the Mission Plan, which was to lead to disaster and which Cripps, at any rate, could not have failed to notice. Grouping of provinces was optional, but^meeting of members of the Constituent Assembly by sections was compulsory. If a section met and decided on a group constitution, a pro¬ vince could opt out of the group only after the first general elections under the new constitution. In other words, grouping would in practice not be voluntary at all — unless the clause on optional grouping overrode that on compulsory
‘Alexander diary, 13 May 1946.
*For full text of Cabinet Mission Pin, see M. Gwyer and A. Appadorai, Sptscbts and Doem- msmtson tb*Indian Constitution, 1921-47 (Lqndon, 1957), vol. 2, pp. 577-84.
(mty ofactions. In fact, tecaose ofta tourneeg/fat Ayeh Qtiaa
Mission to the league, of which the Congress was unaware,l that decisions in sections would be by a majority vote of the representatives of the provinces, it was the optional grouping clause which would be set aside; for the represen¬ tatives of NWFP in Section B and of Assam in Section C would always be in a minority. The Congress was, at the time and later, criticized for being ‘legalistic’ and raising such issues as the binding nature of the document, the priority of clauses and the interpretation of the Plan. But it was to the Congress a matter of urgent practical importance, for the NWFP in Section B had no desire to find itself forced into a group with other provinces in that section even for ten years, nor did Assam wish to be coupled with Bengal.
Gandhi’s interpretation was that the Plan was a recommendation to the Constituent Assembly which could vary, reject or improve upon it. No province could be forced to belong to a group.2 Azad also wrote to the Mission on the samelinesand said that the Congress would try toget the Constituent Assembly, which would be a sovereign body, to remove the defects in the Mission Plan. The only limitation which the Congress recognized was that decisions on 'certain major communal issues should be by a majority of each of the two communities.3 Alexander and Wavell concluded that Gandhi was playing a deep game and that the real object of the Congress was to capture the interimgovemment, eliminate British influence and then suppress the Muslims and displace the Princes before any constitution was drafted. The British, said Alexander in his most pompous manner, had not been stampeded at Dunkirk and should not be stampeded now.4 He and the Viceroy prevailed on Pethick- Lawrence not to permit Cripps to see Gandhi alone and without notes being, taken. But the Mission had to clarify its understanding of its Plan. So Pethick- Lawrence wrote to Azad that grouping was an essential feature of the scheme and it could only be modified by agreement between the two parties. As for the Constituent Assembly, there would be no interference with its discretion once it was formed and working on the basis of the various statements being made.3 In other words, the sovereignty of the Constituent Assembly would be limited by the terms of reference under the Plan.
All this was dispiriting to Jawaharlal. Hopes of a settlement, on the basis of independence not in the future but at once, had been bogged down jn a morass of interpretation. Despite everything, the old spirit and the old approach of the British did not appear to have greatly changed. Even while the Cabinet Mission was negotiating in India, the officials decided to institute fresh trials of INA officers.
1 Menon, op. at., p. 311. 2 19 May 1946, Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 7, p. 117. * Azad to Pethick-Lawrence, 20 May 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 33*4. 4 Alexander diary, 20 May 1946. »Pethick-Lawrence to Azad, 22 May 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, p. 34.
TljB CABINET MISSION jji
The dvil and military authorities of the Government of India function ,
Jin a mysterious way. This, I suppose, is their method of preparing India
for the freedom to come. Whatever they may have in their minds they succeed remarkably well in irritating public opinion and making a dif¬ ficult situation even worse.1
In fact, the trials were soon abandoned, and Jawaharlal wrote a personal letter of thanks to the Commander-in-Qlief.2 But this was indicative of foresight in General Auchinleck rather than of a general change in the official outlook. In the formation of an interim government, the Viceroy laid emphasis on the British Parliament's ultimate responsibility and the Governor-General's pre¬ rogatives, and references to independence were linked with legal difficulties.3 Wavell made no secret of his suspicion of the Congress, and thought that it intended to secure control of the centre and eliminate British influence in order to deal with the Muslims and the Princes with a high hand.4 ‘Don’t lose heart', Pethick-Lawrence wrote to Jawaharlal,3 ‘ir. the independent India to come out of the Constituent Assembly. I feel so muchdepends on your courage in helping to bring it to birth and in guiding its destinies when it is born.’ But whatever the long-term prospects, the attitudes of the Viceroy and the Government of India discouraged immediate confidence.
There was also the whole problem of the Indian States, of special interest to Jawaharlal in his capacity, at this time, as president pf the All-India States People's Conference. It was difficult to believe that the widespread instances of repression in 'the States could occur without the support of the Political Department, for the maharajas and the nawabs were but shadows cast by the Paramount Power. Jawaharlal was for a friendly approach, urging the rulers to abandon autocracy and, where the lack of viability of their principalities was obvious, to merge them in the neighbouring province. There would then be left about twenty large States, autonomous units in the federation and with democratic governments under Princely figureheads.6
However, these sawdust autocrats, confident still of the support of the British, paid no heed. Reports continued to pour in from the various States of unwarranted firing, summary arrests, ill-treatment of prisoners and banning of popular organizations. These gave a touch of unreality to negotiations for British withdrawal from India. When Jawaharlal defied a ban oh his entry into Faridkot State, the local authoritiesquickly reached a settlement. But soon after,
1Jawaharlal’s statement to the press, 24 April, National Harald, 25 April 1946.
>4 May 1946, Connell, op. tit., pp. 817-19.
’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 21 May, Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 May, and Jawaharlal to Wavell, 25 May 1946.
4Viceroy's'Note for talk with Pandit Nehru’, 26 May 1946, Wavell, op. tit., pp. 278-9. ’Pethidt-Lawience’s confidential and personal letter to Jawaharlal, 26 May 1946. 6Jawaharial’s presidential address to the All-India States People’s Conference, 31 December 1943.
322
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
a crisis developed in Kashmir. There a strong, non-communal, political orga¬ nization, the National Conference, had been built up by Sheikh Abdullah and other leaders, who, though Muslim by faith, shunned the Muslim League and were members of the Congress. Even the Political Department had to recognize that during the years 1937 to 1943 Sheikh Abdullah had broadened out his policy into one of sympathy with the Indian nationalist movement and gained the support not only of a large number of the Muslim working-dass element but also of nationalist-minded Hindus and Sikhs in Kashmir.1 That, in a state with a Muslim majority and a Hindu ruler, popular feeling should lean towards the Congress greatly irritated Jinnah, and he persistently urged the Viceroy to appoint a‘strong Muslim’ — i.e. a communally minded Muslim — and, failing that, an Englishman, as prime minister of Kashmir.2 The Political Department had no liking for the National Conference, but was unwilling to upset the Maharaja by insisting on a Muslim prime minister. They left it to himto deal with the National Conference, which, though no revolutionary body, irked the ruler by its very presence and made demands for responsible government and civil liberties. After the failure of secret attempts in March 1946 to merge the National Conference in the communal Muslim Conference and associate the whole with the Muslim League, the Kashmir Government arrested Sheikh Abdullah and the other leaders of the National Conference. This repressive action was specially provocative to Jawaharlal, for at the time of his arrest Sheikh Abdullah was on his way to Delhi to meet Jawaharlal at the latter’s re¬ quest. The Kashmir Government, complained Jawaharlal, seemed to be ‘bent on breaking and crushing the spirit of the people and are using their army as if they were occupying recently conquered enemy territory’.* His first impulse was to leave Simla for Kashmir to support his friends, but he curbed himself so as to give the Viceroy a chance to intervene and not to worsen the situation by disobeying any restraining orderwhich might be served on him. But he made it clear that if there were no improvement in the situation, he would not, what¬ ever his other engagements, be able to keep away from Kashmir.
By the middle of June, Jawaharlal felt he had waited long enough and decided toenterthe State, alongwithsomelawyers, to assist in SheikhAbdullah’s defence. ‘For my part I am not in the habit of giving up a cause I have espoused or a comrade when he is in trouble.’4 On 13 June he informed the Maharaja that he would be arriving in the State four days later. Wavell asked Azad to dissuadeJawaharlal and himselfurged himtodesist — but in vain. The Viceroy then informed the Kashmir Government that any untoward incident involving
i
*A record of recent political events and tendencies in Kashmir prepared by the Political Depart¬ ment, 17 June 1947, Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 293(4) — G/ 43.
2See Jinnah to Linlithgow, 23 August and 20 September 1943, end to Wavell, 27 September 1943. Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 293(2) - G/ 43.
’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 May 1946.
* Statement to the press, 12 June 1946.'
323
THE CABINET MISSION
jgvahafltl during the next ten dsys would se highly embarrassing for all-India reasons, and suggested that the trial of Sheikh Abdullah be postponed, in which case Jawaharial too might postpone his visit. But the Kashmir authorities refused and prepared to arrest Jawaharial on the border. The Maharaja offered to abdicate and his prime minister to resign if the Government of India com¬ pelled them to take no action against Jawaharial, and Wavell and the Political Department hastened to reply that no such pressure was being applied.1 On the other hand, they informed the Cabinet Mission that in this very awkward and embarrassing situation there was nothing to be done but let events take their course. There could be no more striking testimony to the fact that misrule in the Indian States was made possible only by the permissive attitude of the Government of India and that the latter were willing to sacrifice all Indian interests to this.
Jawaharial abided by his programme, and, on 19 June, was stopped by the Kashmir authorities at the State border. They served an externment order and organized black flag demonstrations. Jawaharial was in a high rage. He con¬ demned the extreme discourtesy shown him and the Congress organiza¬ tion and expressed scorn for the Maharaja’s official and military minions. He waited for five hours to give the State government time to reverse their orders and then informed the magistrate that hewascrossing intoKashmir.
During the past twenty-five years I have never obeyed a single order of the British Government in India or any Maharaja which came in my way . . . When once a course of action is taken Jawaharial never goes back, he goes forward; if you think otherwise then you don’t know Jawa¬ harial. No power on earth can prevent me from going anywhere in India unless I am arrested or forcibly removed.2
On stepping across the border, Jawaharial was arrested. The offer of the Kashmir Government to hand him over to the British Indian authorities was rejected by the Viceroy and the Political Department, who had no wish to be openly involved. The Government of India did nothing to prevent this episode jeopardizing the Cabinet Mission’s negotiations, nor did the Secretary of State and his colleagues exercise their authority to reprimand the Kashmir Govern¬ ment. In the event, it was the adjournment of the trial of Sheikh Abdullah and the insistence of the Working Committee which led Jawaharial to return to Delhi on the dear understanding that he would be back in Kashmir.
Meanwhile, the discussions on the Mission Plan had continued. The ques¬ tion of the formation of an interim government mainly concerned the Viceroy, who by now had irritated not merely Cripps but even Pethick-Lawrence by his
'Pol. Dept’s telegram to Resident Kashmir, 18 June, Resident's telegram to Pol. Dept., 19 June and Pol. Dept’s telegram, 19 June 1946. Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 295<4) — G/ 43.
*Note on Jawaharlal’s visit to Kashmir, 1946, prepared by his assistant.
MAXIM NBHrij
VIA
attempts to control the letter's interviews.' Azad had the impression that the Viceroy had promised to /unct/on as a constitutional beau of State. Wsvell denied this but appealed to the Congress to place its trust in him rather than worry about assurances. In fact, he made it clear to the Mission that he would ra:her resign than function as a figurehead. He told Alexander that ‘with all the private interviews which had been going on, Sir Stafford Cripps in particular might have committed himself more specifically than the Viceroy would desire, and that of course if he was to be expected to carry on he must have some powers and that in certain circumstances he would of course have to ask them to get somebody else.’2
As for the composition of the interim government, in his talks with Jinnah, Wavell committed himself to Congress-League parity and also not just to ‘Caste- Hindu’-Muslim parity as in 1945 but to Hindu-Muslim parity. Nor was the Viceroy now thinking of including Muslims other than die nominees of the League. Both at Simla in May, and again in Delhi on 3 June, he informed Jinnah that the interim government would consist of 12 members — 5 Con¬ gress, 5 League, one Sikh and one Indian Christian or Anglo-Indian.* The Congress rejected this and insisted on 8 Hindus, including a non-Congressman, end 5 Muslims, including a non-member of the League. Despite the protests of Alexander, who even threatened to leave for London the next day if any member of the Mission saw Gandhi alone,4 Pethick-Lawrence met Gandhi, who gave the friendly advice that each side be asked to submit a list and the Mission select one of the lists.
The Viceroy now suggested a formula of 6 Congress (including a Scheduled Caste representative), 5 League and 2 minority representatives. Rajagopalachari told the Mission on 15 June that the limit of Congress concession would be 7 Congress Hindus (including a Scheduled Caste representative), 5 Muslims and 2 minorities. Cripps was for accepting this but Wavell and Alexander insisted that the ‘Caste-Hindu’-Muslim parity should be maintained. So on 16 June the Mission announced a list of 14 names — 6 Congress Hindus (including a Sche¬ duled Caste representative), 5 Muslim Leaguers and 3 minority representatives.
In case either party or both refused, the Viceroy would fdrm an interim govern¬ ment representative of those who had accepted the Mission Plan.
On 6 June the Muslim League had announced its acceptance of the Plan 'inasmuch as the basis and the foundation of Pakistan are inherent in the Mission’s plan by virtue of the compulsory grouping'. Now it was for the Mission to win over the Congress. Wavell informed Azad that grouping was
1Alexander diary, 3 June 1946.
* Ibid.
* Jinnah to Wavell, 8 June 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 37-8. Wavell later realized that he might have erred in beginning with this formula, and also in not pressing Jinnah to agree to the appointment of a Congress Muslim. See his retrospect of the Cabinet Mission’s work, written on 1 July 1946, Wavell, op. dt., p. 313.
4Alexander diary, 11 June 1946.
THE cabinet mission
325
not compiisor), and it was lot the representatives of provinces -m sections to decide whether or not they wished to form groups.1 Some days Mer, Gandhi was given a more specific assurance, when he raised the question of Assam, that grouping was not an essential part of the scheme.2 The Con¬ gress was, therefore, justified in adhering to its own interpretation of the Plan, and was now more concerned with the inclusion of a Congress Muslim in the interim government. The Mission, misled by Azad and Rajagqpalachari into believing that the Congress would not insist on this, blamed Gandhi for this development and rejected the demand. Jinnah now expected to be invited to join the interim government. Indeed, he had told Cripps of his specific desire to hold the defence portfolio.5 Any hope that Jinnah’s acceptance of a portfolio without securing a full commitment to Pakistan might prove a turning-point was diverted by the reluctance of Cripps to allow the League alone to enter the government; Cripps had seen the danger of the latter policy, and he wanted the Mission, in these circumstances, to ask Jinnah on what conditions he would join. Wavell and Alexander objected, for — knowing Jinnah — they knew that this would be tantamount to inviting him to put forward unacceptable condi¬ tions. Cripps replied that if that happened a fresh approach should be made to the Congress, and he was prepared to resign if his suggestion were rejected without consulting the Cabinet. Cripps prevailed to the extent that the League was not invited to join the government: but on the other hand Alexander and Wavell vetoed Pethick-Lawrence’s willingness to accommodate the Congress on the question of including a non-League Muslim. Wavell also, in a letter to Jinnah, tacitly conceded the latter’s request that the Scheduled Castes be treated as one of the minorities in the selection of whose representatives the League should be consulted. This seems to have been done by the Viceroy on his own. initiative, but it served to alter his earlier formula of 6 Congress (including a Scheduled Caste representative) and 5 League into ‘Caste-Hindu-Muslim parity of 5-5. Even more important to Gandhi, it gave recognition to the claim that the Scheduled Castes formed a minority and were not Hindus. The sub¬ stance of this letter to Jinnah leaked to the press, and had to be released.4 When read along*with WaveU’s letter to Azad that the Congress would not be allowed to nominate a Muslim, it is not surprising that the Congress replied by refusing to join the interim government, while continuing to accept the long¬ term proposals as the Congress understood them.9
Wavell to Azad, 15 June, Papers relating to Cabin** Mission, p. 42.
*See Wavell** diary entry lor 24 June, and his note of 25 June 1946, Wavell, op. cit., p. 303 and appendix VH, respectively.
* Alexander diary, 12 June 1946.
♦WaveUto Jinnah, 20 June 1946, Papars relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 46-7.
WavelltoAzad, 22June, andAzadto Wavell, 23 June, and Congress resolution, 25 June 1946, ibid., pp. 48-52.