In and Out of Prison
Clearly, therefore, this was going to be a long spell in jail for Jawaharlal and now, for the first time, prison life began to tell on him. He had trouble with his teeth, and his general condition was poor. He began to run a temperature in the evenings, but for months the jail superintendent would neither try to diagnose the cause nor permit examination by other doctors. Ultimately, after Jawaharlal’s transfer to another jail, Dr Bidhan Roy and Dr Ansari were permitted to see him and it was found to be a recurrence of pleurisy on the right side. Gradually Jawaharlal shook it off, but meanwhile had to forgo his running and exercises and even walks, and content himself with sunbaths.
His living conditions too were, at the start, such as made for relative dis¬ comfort. He was first placed in Naini jail, and then, after a few weeks, trans¬ ferred to Bareilly where both environment and men were vile. His barracks were at least six feet below ground level, which meant that the surrounding walls were over twenty-four feet. ‘The wall which faces me’, he wrote to his daughter,1 ‘must bear some relation, in height at least, to the Great Wall of China!’ Further, for the first time since Nabha, not only the ward but the bar¬ racks also were locked at night. The fortnightly interview with his family was spoilt by the close supervision of not only the jailor, but of a policeman who took notes. His companions also, with the exception of Govind Vallabh Pant, irritated him. So generally Jawaharlal fretted. ‘On the whole I have not been able to settle down this time as I have done in the past. Perhaps a slight touch of ill-health — perhaps my transfer — perhaps my missing my old compan¬ ions — perhaps a certain want of satisfaction with things, and happenings in general — perhaps so many other things!’2
This malaise was worsened by other events. In April his mother was beaten in a lathi charge and badly injured. The old lady was full of courage and spirit. ‘I am proud to have been beaten with sticks for the cause of my mother¬ land . . . While being beaten I thought of you and your father and did not utter
1 Letter, 26 March 1932, Glimpses of World History (Bombay, 1967), p. 58.
1 Diary Aitry, 4 March 1932.
172
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
173
a sigh... The mother of a brave son is also somewhat like him. It was only a lathi — had it been a gun I would have bared my chest.’1 But it added to the intense despair of Jawaharlal. Then, because, at an interview in jail with Ranjit Pandit, Indira had shown him a school report of his children, the jailor insulted Jawaharlal’s mother and wife who were also present, and the Government ordered that they could not interview Jawaharlal for a month. This roused Jawaharlal to bitter anger, and he declined to have any interviews even after the month was over; for on no account, as he put it, was he prepared to take the slightest risk of further insult to his mother and wife.2 It was not till early in 1933, after a break of eight months, that he began, on Gandhi’s persuasion, to see visitors again.
The self-denial of interviews, whi>h formed the sole relief in the boredom of prison, robbed life of the excitement of anticipation.
Thedays and the weeks and the months pass by one after the other, merg¬ ing into each other, and there is little to distinguish one from the other. And the past looks like a blurred picture with nothing standing out. Yesterday takes one back to the day of one’s arrest, for in between is a blank with little to impress the mind. It is the life of a vegetable rooted to one place, growing there without comment or argument, silent, motion¬ less. And sometimes the activities of the outside world appear strange and a little bewildering to one in prison; they seem distant and unreal — a phantom show. Sowedevelop two natures, the active and the passive, two ways of living, two personalities, like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.3
In June 1932 Jawaharlal was transferred to Dehra Dunjail. Here the climate was pleasant and the jail buildings not severe. The superintendent, an Irishman whose name deserves to be remembered, Captain Falvey, had been a pupil of de Valera, and he did what he could to alleviate conditions. Jawaharlal was even permitted to take his walks outside theprison gates. But all this could not dimin¬ ish the inner turmoil. Indeed, on hearing of the savage treatment df political prisoners in other jails in the United Provinces, Jawaharlal felt ashamed of the better conditions of his own prison life, and he invited the Government to give him the same treatment as the others.4
Jawaharlalwasconcerned, too, about hiswife and mother roughing it out on their own and his two sisters languishing in jail; but it was the thought of his growing daughter that frequently came strongly to him and filled his mind. It wasbecause letters toher brought her image close tohim that he continued writ¬ ing his neat little essays, taking herstage by stage through the human past, even thoughtheycouldnot be sent to her and had to bekept aside for a later date.
1 Letter (in Hindi) to Jawaharlal, 16 April 1932. •
* To the Superintendent, District Jail, Dehra Dun, 11 July 1932.
’Letter to Indira, New Year's Day 1933, GUmptss, p. 491.
4 Letter to the Superintendent, District Jail, Dehra Dun, 16 November 1932,
174 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Jawaharlal was no professional scholar writing within a clearly defined and balanced framework. Taking, as he described it, centuries at a stride and seeing continents at a glance, he rushed past what he found dull and lingered at points wherehis interest was aroused. Hewas, for instance, fascinated by the greatmen of history — and not necessarily the men of virtue and idealism. Genghis Khan and Napoleon take up as much space as Asoka, Leonardo or Lenin, Strength, even in cruelty, commanded his attention. This was to be expected of someone who was never happier than when under the influence of stronger characters. But it was also the product of a temporary sense of loss. Jawaharlal himself throve on action, and, forced in jail to .action, he glamorized the vigorous performances of others whatever their results.
In the preface written on 1 January 1934, he commented that ‘even as I was writing theletters myoutlook on life changed gradually. Today if I had to rewrite them, I would write differently or with a different emphasis. ’ He would probably have qualified the ultimate belief that history tells of growth and progress and of the possibility of an infinite advance for man.
History is not pleasant. Man, in spite of his great and vaunted progress, is still a very unpleasant and selfish animal. And yet perhaps it is possible to see the silver lining of progress right through the long and dismal record of selfishness and quarrelsomeness and inhumanity of man.1
He might have toned down too his glorification of certain individuals. But otherwise he retained all his life the half-liberal, half-Marxist view of history which holds the book together. The story of man was one connected whole, and the only history that could be properly written was the history of the world. It was the product not of individuals or national peculiarities but of world forces, and developments in different countries told basically the same tale. Even the ‘superficial sketches’ which he had ‘joined together by a thin thread’2 and which dealt mostly with Europe and Asia were intended to establish that history was notwhat was achieved by leadersorgovernments but what happened to peoples, and this was the result of the interplay of ideas, economic interests and social relations. Though he made no deep analysis, he broadly believed that the class which controlled the means of production was the class that ruled, and that the history of man was the history of class conflicts and social struggles. To grasp this was to secure the ability both to understand the past and to face the future with confidence and to be prepared for effective action.
The intellectual acceptance of history as the result of impersonal world forces for which no individual could be blamed or applauded, led Jawaharlal to criticize the imperialist system rather than the British and to strive to consider even issues pertaining to India impartially as a scientist examining facts. Jawa¬ harlal codld not jump out of his skin. He was a sensitive Asian nationalist, and
1 Letter, 1 January 1933, Glimpses, p. 491. a Lettey 9 August 1933, Glimpses, p. 985.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
175
hard as he tried to be fair to the British, a certain impression of ‘nagging* crept in,1 especially when he was dealing with matters that had nothing to do with India. But he was wary of nationalism as ‘an unreliable friend and an nnsafp historian’,2 and dwelt on the shortcomings of his own people as much as those of their rulers. He had, since his return from Europe in 1927, shown an acute distaste for institutional worship. Hecontinued to admire thegreat Hindu scrip¬ tures. The Bbagavad Gita was ‘that jewel of a poem’; and as for the Ramayana and the Mababbarata — ‘Who but the greatest of men could have written them?’3 But they impressed him more as literature and historical testimony than as revelation. Hedisliked temple-going, was scornful of ritual and regarded prayers as morbid. But, writing in the early ’thirties when the memory of the Kanpur riots in which his friend Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi had lost his life was still fresh, he was particularly concerned with the savagery committed in the name of religion. It was important to release India from the chains of the com¬ plex ideology ofcustom, convention and superstition. He was at pains to tell his fellow-countrymen that Islam did not believe in religious persecution and a man like Mahmud of Ghazni, whom most Indians regarded as an arch-iconoclast, was in fact no more than a successful soldier. He had come to India to conquer and loot, and would have done so whatever religion he had belonged to. The best of Indian culture was a synthesis; this had badly frayed and should be rebuilt on the securer foundations offreedom and social equality and in consonance with a better world order.
WhenJawaharlal was too tired to write, there were always books. Fortunately there was no restriction this time on the number he could read and keep, and hewas also allowed newspapers and journals without restriction. So apart from The Statesman and the Pioneer, he read the Living Age, the Manchester Guar¬ dian Weekly, theNewLeader, theNew Republic, theModem Review, theNew Statesman, theNation and the Spectator; and his reading lists show that he was as well read and up-to-date as any leisurely person of cultivated tastes in London orNew York. For the authors include Toynbee, Maurice Dobb, Leonard Woolf, Tawney, Laski, Louis Fischer, Julian Huxley and H. G. Wells as well as Sven Hedin, Tagore, CharlesMorgan, Maurois, Lowes Dickinson and L.A.G. Strong. They not only, as Jawaharlal said, saved him from tedium and depression; they also kept him intellectually sensitive and vigorous.
So Jawaharlal settled down to jail routine and was irritated by talk of the release of all political prisoners. He even turned roundly on a fellow-prisoner who talked ofparole for medical treatment. ‘I have almost brought myself to the frame of mind when a ten year sentence of imprisonment will make little dif¬ ference! Life outside under present circumstances has little attraction, so why should jail frighten?’4 The occasional nostalgia for la douceur du vtvre —
1E. Thompson's letter to Jawaharlal, 3 May 1937 A Bunch of Oid Letters, pp. 733-40. 2 Letter, 14 December 1932, Glimpses, p. 437. * Lettersfrom e Father to his Daughter (1972 ed.K p- 80. 4 Jail diary, 10 March 1933.
176
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
pleasant surroundings, good friends, agreeable women, interesting conversa¬ tion — was quickly smothered by the distaste for the bickerings in the family and the petty rivalries in the Congress and its downhill slide and, above all, by the growing alienation from Gandhi and his methods. The problem of the Harijans and the question of their entry into temples engrossed*Gandhi to the extent that he pushed the main issueof British rule to the background. Gandhi’s fast in 1932 in protest against the Communal Award treating the Scheduled Castes as a separate community for purposes of elections was a sharp shock. The thought that Gandhi might die, and for such a minor reason, and that the onlyremaining protective forcein his life might be removed, knocked Jawaharlal for a time off balance. ‘My little world in which he has occupied such a big place, shakes and totters, and there seems to be darkness and emptiness everywhere ... Shall I not see him again? And whom shall I go to when I am in doubt and require wise counsel, or am afflicted and in sorrow and need loving comfort?’1 He wept, with mixed anguish of anger and love for a man who could precipitate such a crisis so wantonly, and with bitterness towards a people who could let their heroes risk death in such a way. Gandhi, amid his own travail, sensed this reaction and sent Jawaharlal a reassuring telegram which helped, along with the news of the fast having been broken, to restore Jawaharlal’s stability. How¬ ever, the whole episode drove him further on his inner resources. His existence was based wholly on mind, emotion and memory. Sitting alone for hours that seemed unimaginably long, he was frequently immersed in nostalgia. His father he missed deeply and, as his mind went back to him again and again, he felt shelterless.
If father had been alive! How my mind wanders unconsciously and dwells onhimandhowempty I feel at the thought that he is not there. For months and years we lived far from each other — when I was in Europe — but it did not matter so much. Always one had the feeling that he was there and one could always go to him for help and counsel. Now there is an emptiness...2
And in another moving and candid entry he reveals how close to the surface was this ache for his father:
I was reading the newspaper — There was an account of a ceremony of unveiling a bust or statue of father’s at the Hindu Boarding House in Allahabad. Hirday Nath Kunzru did the unveiling. I glanced casually at what he said, but I did not see anything. To my surprise, and quite un¬ awares, my eyes were full of tears.3 1 Letter. 15 September 1932, Glimpsts, pp. 337*8. 3 Diery entry, 4 March 1932. * Diary entry, 18 August 1932.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
177
The next year, Gandhi undertook a purificatory fast and again plunged Jawa* harlal, along with millions of his countrymen, into an emotional crisis. Gandhi realized this from afar, and wrote a chatty letter which was meant to soothe. The two telegrams Jawaharlal sent in reply indicate his bewilderment and dread of personal loss. ‘What’, wired Jawaharlal in his first mood of petulance, ‘can I say about matters I do not understand. I feel lost in strange country where you are only familiar landmark and I try to grope my way in dark but 1 stumble. What¬ ever happens my love and thoughts will be with you.' But as the hours passed, he felt that he owed Gandhi a morecheerful message, and that evening he wired again: ‘Now that you are launched onyour great enterprise may I send you again love and greetings and assure you that I feel more clearly now that whatever happens it is well and whatever happens you win.’1
At the commencement of the fast the Government released Gandhi, who suspended civil disobedience for six weeks. This was a shock to Jawaharlal, but his mind, still numbed by the fearof Gandhi’s death, accepted it. However, once the ordeal was over, Jawaharlal was able to see Gandhi with a much clearer vision than at any time before or since. For a short while the blinkers fell. He realized that Gandhi’s attitudewas sheer revivalism against which cool thinking had no chance. Gandhi's political actions were often guided by an unerring in¬ stinct, and, fortified by this, he did not encourage others to think. He himself, as he frequently asserted with pride, was satisfied with the next step and had given no precise thought to the long-term objective. The emphasis on God and faith, the acceptance of the existing social order, the stress on compromise, the reliance on lieutenants who were proclaimed reactionaries — all these jarred on Jawaharlal, and his love for Gandhi could not conceal from him that he was drifting further and further away from his leader. ‘I am getting more and more certain that there can be no further political co-operation between Bapu and me. At least not of the kind that has existed. We had better go our different ways. My way will keep me in jail. That is dull work and depressing, but perhaps it is as well.’2 Obviously a stiff battle between rival loyalties awaited him outside, and, not relishing this prospect, he did not look forward to his release. But coincidentally, just as he had finished the last of his letters to his daughter, he was transferred to Naini jail and, aweek later, on 30 August, twelve days before hewas due to beoutofprison, he was released. His mother was seriously ill, the province wasquiet, the Congress, with Gandhi’s assistance, had seemed to have succeeded in tying itself into knots, and Jawaharlal himself was (erroneously) believed bytheGovernment to be in favour ofgiving upcivil disobedience. From his letters, read by the censors, it was gathered that he had no dear plan as to what he intended to do, and the world history he was writing was expected to keep him busy for some time. So, all points considered, the U.P. Government
‘Telegrams, 8 May 1933.
*Diary entry, 18 July 1933.
178
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
(in Hailey’s absence, since he was in London) felt it could take the risk of releas¬ ing him; and the Government of India approved.1
Jawaharlal’s comment, on emerging from jail, that he attached little impor¬ tance to theswadeshi and Harijan movements, the reports of his talks with his colleagues in the U.P. and his statements to the press that India*S primary prob¬ lem was economic and a new structure of society was inevitable raised expecta¬ tions that he would formally break away from Gandhi and the old Congress and form a new party with independence as its goal.2 There was certainly little in common between the public attitudes of Jawaharlal and of Gandhi. The younger man, while in jail, had made a wide study of international affairs, and saw India as a part of the pattern of world forces — the failure of capitalism, the rise of Nazism, the growth of dictatorial tendencies even in England 3 and the United States, and the shaping struggle between fascism and communism. There was, as Jawaharlal saw it, an inevitable, universal swing, not necessarily to the Soviet model but towards the general lines of the Soviet conception. Fundamentally the choice before the world was between some form of communism and some form of fascism, and he was all for the former. There was no middle road; one had to choose between the two, and Jawaharlal unhesitatingly chose the com¬ munist ideal. From this time dates the intense dislike of fascism, which was never to leave him, and the conviction that, while communism would have to adapt itself to changing conditions and different countries, its basic ideology, general oudook and scientific interpretation of history were sound. The affinity to the left, born of the visit to Europe in the ’twenties and nourished by reading, wasconfirmed by the rival philosophies that had spawned in Italy and Germany.4
In India, the effort of the British to protect not merely their own vested in¬ terestsbutalso thoseoftheir allies, thezamindars, the princes and the capitalists, had not to Jawaharlal a chance of success because it went against the broad eco¬ nomic forces determining the future of the world. But nationalists, on their part, could not possibly hope to confine themselves to a replacement of foreign by home interests and seek to avoid the disturbance of class divisions and the social status quo. A socialist state was a concomitant of independence, and if an Indian Government took the place of the British and kept all the vested interests intact, this would not even be the shadow of freedom. The Gongress, as the spearhead of the Indian nationalist movement, needed anew ideology which was
1 Mieville, P. S. V., to Hailey, 29 June 1933, Blunt, Finance Member, to Hailey, 13 August 1933, Nawab of Chhatari, acting Governor, to Hailey, 26 August 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26. 2 Statement at Kanpur, 1 September, The Leader, 3 September 1933; interview in the Pioneer 1 September 1933; statement to the press, 4 September, The Ladder, 6 Septeember 1933; report of Banaras correspondent, 11 September, Th* Leader, 13 September 1933. * Jawaharlal was apparently not alone in thinking this. ‘I believe’, wrote Hoare to Willingdon of Winston Churchill, 'that at the back of his mind he thinks that he will not only smash the Govern¬ ment but that England is going Fascist and that he, hr someone like him, will eventually be able to rule Inlia as Mussolini governs North Africa.’ 6 April 1933, Tempiewood papers, vol. 3- 4T* J. T. Gwynn, 2 November and 27 December 1933; statement dll the press, 17 December 1933.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON 179
oriented to economic priorities and world conditions. This was an urgent task, for the impoverished peasants, whose drill-sergeant was hunger, were being driven to seek immediate relief.
Roast lamb and mint sauce may be a tasty dish for those who eat it, but the poor lamb is not likely to appreciate the force of the best of arguments which point out the beauty of sacrifice for the good of the elect and the joys of close communion, even though dead, with mint sauce.1
There had to be a fundamental change of regime, politically, economically and socially, and the three were inextricably linked. British imperial rule had to be destroyed, the autocracy of the Indian states had to be ended, the whole land system had to be changed, industry brought under public control and all wealth shared. Each was a part of a total problem.
These ideas were all far removed from the outlook of Gandhi, who was seek¬ ing to renew peace negotiations with the British and to convert his countrymen, through fasts, to better social behaviour. His were the politics of intuition, requiring no argument or logic; Jawaharlal followed the path of reason, applying the laws of history and change. The break seemed inevitable, and as Jawaharlal went to Poona to confront his leader, also just released from prison, even he probably prepared himself for it. But he could not forget that, intermeshed as was the crisis, the most important front was the political one; and till the British had been expelled there could be little advance towards socialism. To combat economic wretchedness with the State power obstructing them was a hopeless waste of energy. But in this political struggle, Gandhi’s leadership, however wayward, still seemed indispensable; and Congress was still the most militant organization in India. He himself was the quintessential upper-class figure, and even his radicalism, modelled on European example, seemed at times to him no more than a product of his deep-seated class sense, a de haul en bas posture. So both leader and party were necessary to him, and it was not just the springs of personal loyalty and affection which proved once again too deep to permit release. Jawaharlal. face to face with Gandhi after two years, publicly affirmed his continuing acceptance of Gandhi’s leadership, and letters were exchanged in which Jawaharlal stated his position in terms which were easy for Gandhi to approve. The objective of independence included full control of the army and of foreign relations as well as financial and economic control, vested interests had to be ‘devested’ as gently and as rapidly as possible, the Round Table Con¬ ference was a futile effort, and the problem of Indian freedom could not be separated from vital international issues. Indeed, the clash of viewpoint was reduced almost to the ridiculous by Jawaharlal laying emphasis on his divergence from Gandhi on such paltry issues as to whether individual civil disobedience
'Whither India? These three articles, written in October 1933, provide the clearest exposition of Jawaharlal's views at this time.
180
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
was different in kind from mass civil disobedience, and secrecy in action was never desirable; and Gandhi closed the discussion by declaring that the differ¬ ences were only temperamental and confusion had been created by Jawaharlal's tendency to be repetitive.1 A few months later, Gandhi confidently gave Jawaharlal ‘power of attorney’ to state the policy of the Congress and was frank in his justification.
1 do not think that Jawaharlal's own views are yet sufficiently crystallized to make any fundamental departure from Congress policy likely. He is a firm believer in socialism, but his ideas on how best the socialist principles can be applied to Indian conditions are still in the melting pot. His com¬ munist views need not, therefore, frighten anyone.2
This failure to break with Gandhi was, of course, a disappointment to Jawa- harlal's radical supporters, and when he followed up his correspondence with Gandhi by stating that hewas perfectly happy with theway in which the struggle was being conducted and saw no need tosummon a meeting of the AICC,3 even his friends were driven to protest. For all his rhetoric he had no new policy and, seemingly, no use for democracy either, for he refused to consult othef Congressmen.
The fact is that Pandit Jawaharlal and his friends are themselves com¬ pletely out of touch with the realities of the situation. Alternatively, we should have to suppose that they are purposely deluding themselves into the belief that the present policy has succeeded, which, of course, is un¬ thinkable ... No useful purpose is served by putting before Indians a radical economic policy, without telling them how to implement it.. .
If Pandit Jawaharlal, in the face of the present appalling situation, has nothing better to offer us but the repetition of old shibboleths and the as¬ sertion that he, and he alone, is in touch with Congressmen and the masses it is dear that the reins of leadership, however regretfully, will have to be taken up by others, who will restore the Congress to its pristine power as the premier political influence in the country.4
WhatJawaharlal’s critics had failed to understandwas that once he had dedd- ed not to break with Gandhi and the Congress, it was out of character for him to lead a rebellion from within. However sharp his expression of disagreement in private conversation, to the outside world he was determined to accept Con-
1 Jawaharlal'sstatement tothe press, 11 September, Tba Laadtr,16 September 1933; Jawaharlal's letter, 13 September and Gandhi’s reply, 14 September 1933.
2 Interview in the Madras Mail, 22 December 1933.
* Interview in Tba Bomba,y CbronicU, 18 September 1933.
* Editorial, ‘Save, the Congress’, in Tba Bombay Cbronieta, 19 September 1933.
IN ANb OUT OF PRISON
181
gress policy and decisions and interpret them in as favourable a manner as pos¬ sible. 1 His loyalty might at some time snap; but while it lasted it was firm. Ups and downs were inevitable in a broad national movement and the lull to which he was now committed could best be used in hard thinking about methods and objectives. It was idle to expect the Congress as constituted to become a full- fledged socialist organization, but there was every hope of its becoming more and more socialistic. ‘I do not see why I should walk out of the Congress leaving the field clear to the social reactionaries. Therefore, I think it is up to us to re¬ main there and try to force the pace, thereby either converting others or making them depart.’A time might come, sooner rather than later, when the new ideas might cause a split in the Congress; but till then advantage should be taken of the national movement and it should be pushed as far as it could go. The Con¬ gress should be led out of the backwaters of pure politics by socialist elements who, rather than forming independent and sterile study centres, could exploit the Congress programme of mass action. For although ideologically backward, the Congress was still the most advanced revolutionary organization in the country and what was required was to give it a new orientation rather than to abandon it. Separate organizations for promoting the interests of workers or peasants were desirable, but not political organizations counter or parallel to the Congress. ‘There is a great talk of the socialist party or the like but I am convinced that much of this talk is merely meant to cover ineffective action and also as a means of self-aggrandisement.’ 2
The plan to give Congressmen courses of instruction in ideology assumed that he would remain out of jail, and about this Jawaharlal was rightly not opti¬ mistic. Within a week of his release he was expecting to return. Prison was a part of the day’s work, and he would clearly be back soon ‘to muse on the earthly paradise and the various bars, of iron and of the spirit, which prevent us from reaching it’.3 In fact, as time passed, he longed for prison. Life outside, in an atmosphere of repression, was suffocating. Conditions, in some places like Bengal, were more humiliating than elsewhere, but in fact all Indians were caught and being crushed in the mill. Indeed, suggested Jawaharlal, it would be simpler, instead of a variety ofordinances and orders and rules, to have a com¬ prehensive enactment abolishing all schools and colleges and suppressing all newspapers and books, and layingdown that every Indian must consider himself in prison (‘C Class), salute the Union Jack every morning and sing the British national anthem at divine service twice a day; ‘and the afternoons might be profitably devoted to listening to an inspiring address on the virtues of British rule’.4
iSee, for example, letter to Kapil Dave Maiaviya, 10 September 1933.
*To Abdur Rahim, 30 October and C. Mascarenas, 10 November 1933; to M. R. t/jfuoi, 19 December 1933, Maharashtra Government file of intercepted letters.
»To Aldous Huxley, 3 September 1933.
^ — natural and political*, statement to the press, 31 January 1934.
182 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
So throughout the country the choice was becoming clear, and it was not possibletooptout. ‘lam quite clear as to what I should do and this gives me peace of mind. 1 have been perfectly prepared to go back to prison' from the day of my discharge. Now, Iam not only prepared but Iam eager to do so. My instinct tells me that I must take a step forward and instinct in this matter is a safe guide for me.'1 The seizure of his shares worth about Rs 20,000 by the Government rid him of what he regarded as a liability and he followed it up by selling the family jewellery at a nominal price. Jawaharlal, unlike Gandhi, was encumbered by complex thought, but in the matter of worldly goods he was becoming as much of a political ascetic.
But while he was out, he sought to keep up the struggle, even if at a lower pitch, for the only alternative was a compromise wkh imperialism, and this was unacceptable not only to him personally but manifestly to the Indian people. Travelling round the country, Jawaharlal was convinced that never, at any rate since 1857, had there been such extraordinary bitterness against the Govern¬ ment and such a passionate desire tc be rid of it.2 So he concentrated on the sustenance of the struggle, and declined to be distracted by such side shows as village uplift and the Harijan movement. ‘This kind of safe and pious activity can well be left to old ladies.’3 It was a question not merely of time and energy butof creating a psychological atmosphere. The national fight had to continue, and it would be strengthened by making it a social and economic fight for the masses and purging it of Hindu and Muslim communalism.
Jawaharlal had till now deliberately ignored thegrowth of the communal evil in Indian politics in the hope that public attention could be diverted from it by emphasis on the positive aspects of the national struggle. Hunger, poverty and exploitation had nothing to do with religion. But the time now appeared to have come for a frontal attack on communalism as a cover for political reaction.4 In language which even Gandhi regarded as too fierce,5 he condemned the Hindu Mahasabha for its reactionary and anti-national policy of co-operation with the Governmentand supportof vested interests.6 The Hindu communalists wanted no basic change of the political and economic structure, and sought official favours to augment theirownposition. This criticism applied equally, of course, to Muslim communal organizations, and Jawaharlal recognized that they were as anti-national and reactionary in every sense of the word.7 But he rebuked them in milderterms. Fearwas justified, or at least understandable, in a minority community which was economically and educationally backward; and commu¬ nalism bomof fear had to be exorcized and not just brushed aside. ‘Honest com-
1 To Sri Prakass, 11 January 1934, Sri Prakasa papers. N.M.M.L.
* To H. K. Hales, M. P., 9 November 1933.
9 Statement to the press, 12 January 1934.
* Interview in The Leader, 21 November 1933; toS. A. Bielvi, 3 December 1933-
* To Jawaharlal, 27 November 1933. a
* Speech at Banaras, 13 Novem|>er, The Hindu, 14 November 1933; statement at Allahabad. 22 November, The Tribune, 24 November 1933.
7 Interview in the Pioneer, 18 November 1933.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON 183
munalism is fear; false communalism is political reaction.’ In Jawaharlal’s understanding, there were shades of both in Muslim communalism. Moreover, while the Congress had drawn into its ranks most of the vital elements of Hindu society, the communalists were the dominant and politically clamorous group among the Muslims. No other organization had so far arisen which could suc¬ cessfully challenge their claim to speak for the Muslims, and their aggressively communal character gave them an advantage over the large number of nation¬ alist Muslims in the Congress.1
Obviously Jawaharlal had no illusions about organizations which worked under theleadership of so feudal and reactionary a figure as the Aga Khan. Their activities at the Round Table Conference, where they stymied all efforts by Gandhi to confront the British Government with an agreed solution on the com¬ munal problem, were but the latest testimony to their narrow upper-class base and commitment to subordinate collaboration with the Imperial power. The only way to ascertain the wishes of the Muslims was to ask them to elect re¬ presentatives to a Constituent Assembly on the widest possible franchise but, if necessary, on the basis of separate electorates. Then economic demands would undoubtedly get their rightful priority and the communal problem would be found to be an insubstantial ghost. But, in the meantime, in what could be interpreted as an apologia for Muslim communalism, he came close to recogniz¬ ing the hold of communal parties on the Muslim community and justifying their attitudes. He always, like Gandhi, took the line that it was for the Hindus, as the majority community, to make concessions while the communal problem lasted. This in itself, despite the call to magnanimity, assumes a communal approach, however subconscious. The argument is based on the belief that the majority community is a privileged one, and the minority community has reason to be communal. It was true that Jawaharlal had not carefully probed this issue, and was irritated by the Mahasabha’s criticisms of Gandhi and the Congress and its open wooing of the Government. But even so, the implication that there was something to choose between Hindu and Muslim communalism was dangerous in its possibilities.
However, all these public activities were not to be for long. The Government were as anxious as Jawaharlal to get him back in prison as soon as possible. They saw in the conversations with Gandhi not the dialogue between master and disciple, which it Was, but a Machiavellian attempt to organize forces to greater effect against the British. Gandhi, it was believed, would tour the country, ostensibly to promote his Harijan schemes but really to sow the seed of further activities in regard to civil disobedience, while Jawaharlal, whose socialism had become ‘redder’, would seek to strengthen peasant support, particularly in the United Provinces, with a programme of expropriation of the landlords. ‘The one real danger that we have at the present moment in regard to our political future’, reported the Viceroy, ‘is the fear lest Jawaharlal Nehru should start a
1 Interview, 29 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 2 December 1933.
184 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
secretivepropaganda in the villageson purely socialistic and communistic lines, for this might be a very troublesome thing to deal with. ’ The U.P. Government had little doubt that Jawaharlal’s main object was to organize the masses and ‘inoculate them with the virus of Communism*. The result would be^ according to the Director of the Intelligence Bureau, that for the next civil disobedience campaign Gandhi would have raised a huge Harijan army and Jawaharlal a host of stalwart agriculturists.1 The Bengal Government went further, and publicly stated that Jawaharlal was carrying on his revolutionary agitation under the guise of anti-untouchability activities and with the money collected for Harijan work.2
All this was beside the mark, for Gandhi made it clear that only those Con¬ gressmen whoweretoo weak to court arrest or had lost faith in civil disobedience should join the Harijan movement, and forbade its use to strengthen the poli¬ tical activities of the Congress or its hold on the people. As for Gandhi and Jawaharlal acting in concert, Andrews called on the Home Member and assured him that Gandhi was not in sympathy with Jawaharlal’s views.3 Regarding the allegation aboutJawaharlal’s duplicity, he, a year later, while in England, sharply protested,and the Bengal Government were forced, with ‘an ignominious crawl’,4 to withdraw it. ‘British officialdom in India’, commented the Manches¬ ter Guardian,5 ‘seems to be suffering from a bad attack of stupidity . . . The charge to anyone who knew anything of Nehru was ridiculous; one might as easily imagine Savonarola robbing a till.’ But talk about a two-pronged offen¬ sive by the Congress was wishful, for it justified the attitude of unqualified hostility to the party which the Government had adopted since 1932 and had no desire to change.6
Jawaharlal’s activities in particular were made to sound dangerous enough to require his speedy return to prison. All Local Governments were authorized to arrest him if opportunity arose not on some minor issue but on a serious charge which would involve a substantial sentence.7 ‘My one hope is that Jawaharlal is such a temperamental person that he may go off the deep end before long and we shall be able to get him back into jail, which is really the safest place for a person with his political views.’8 What worried the Govern-
‘Willingdon to Hoare, 18, 24 and 29 September 1933, Templewood papers, vol. 6; Hailey to Chhatari, 26 September and to Clay, 29 September 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26; notes of Home Department in Home Dept. Pol. File ^/8/33; note of D.I.B., 16 February 1934, Home Dept. Pol. File 4/4/34. Appendix to Notes I, India and Communism (compiled in the I.B. 1933), pp. 218-19.
2 Bengal Administration Report for 1934-5.
3Haig’s record of interview with Andrews, 26 October 1933, Home Dept. Pol. File 169 of 1933.
♦Ellen Wilkinson to Jawaharlal, January 1936.
* 9 January 1936.
‘Haig's «iote, 15 November 1933. Home Dept. Pol. File 169 of 1933.
7Home Secretary to all Local Governments, 26 September 1933, reprinted in Tba Civil Dis obtdianct Movement 1930-1934 (Govt, of India confidential publication, 1936), pp. 88-9.
■ •Wiliyigdon to Hoare, 29 September 1933, Templewood papers,* vol. 6.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
185
ment now was not so much Jawaharlal’s efforts in the rural areas as the impact of his writings and speeches on the lower middle classes. These were in grave economic distress and might well respond to his call for a new revolutionary ideology. ‘You can never tell how far an emotional people will be captured by programmes of this nature; your own De Valera seems to me a man some¬ what like J. L. N. I certainly see no other leader at the moment who is likely to have an equal following, for the rest of India will never follow a Bengali.’1 If he broke the Congress and led a movement of his own it would be serious enough; but even more menacing was the possibility that, as Gandhi had hinted,2 he might cease to stress his leanings towards communism and merely call upon the Congress to give attention to economic problems. His open renunciation of the no-rent campaign3 suggested that this was likely; and this spurred the Government to action. 'Honestly, I think he is much better put out of the way, and I only hope that the Courts will convict him and give him a satisfactory sentence.’4 In December the Chief Commissioner of Delhi was asked to consider if Jawaharlal could be arrested for a speech denouncing British exploitation and the feudal autocracy of the Princes. But, while the Delhi authorities agreed that the speech was most objectionable, they had no great hopes of a successful prosecution.3 All Local Governments were then ordered once again to examine Jawaharlal’s speeches carefully with a view to prosecution on some serious charge involving a substantial sentence of imprisonment. 6 The speech to the Trade Union Congress at Kanpur in December calling for the overthrow of British imperialism seemed to the Home and Law Members to be as strong a case as they were ever likely to get, and the U.P. Government were pressed to prosecute. ‘The Government of India regard him as by far the most dangerous element at large in India, and their view is that the time has come, in accordance with their general policy of taking steps at an early stage to prevent attempts to work up mass agitation, to take action against him.’7 Hailey, however, though he was keenly aware of Jawaharlal’s growing influence, was hesitant to act, and ultimately it was the Bengal Government which agreed to bell the cat. On his visit to Calcutta in January, Jawaharlal had in forthright terms condemned the vulgarity of imperialism and stressed that there was no half-way house between nationalism and imperialism. He had also sharply rebuked the terrorists for adopting a futile and out-of-date policy. But the Government had no use for such an ally against terrorism. Jawaharlal was arrested at Allahabad on 12
to J. T. Gwynn,6 November 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26.
3 Gandhi’s interview In Madras Mail, 22 December 1933: see also Hailey to Irwin, 19 January 1934, Hailey papers, vol. 27.
»Statement at Allahabad, 26 December, Tba Tribuna, 29 December 1933.
« Willlngdon to Hoare, 30 January 1934, Templewood papers, vol. 7.
> Notes of Home Secretary and Home Member, 13 December 1933 and letter of thief Com¬ missioner, 18December 1933. Home Dept. Pol. 4/1/34.
* Home Secretary to all Loral Governments, 22 December 1933, ibid.
7 Home Secretary to Chief Secretary U. P.. 19 January and Home Member to Governor U. P.
21 January 1934, ibid. %
186
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February and brought down to Calcutta, tried for sedition and sentenced on 16 February to two years' simple imprisonment.
individuals’, said Jawaharlal in court before he was silenced, ‘sometimes misbehave in this imperfect world of ours; so also officials and those in power. Crowds and mobs of people also lose control of themselves sometimes and misbehave. That is regrettable. But it is a terrible thing when an organized Government begins to behave like an excited mob; when brutal and vengeful and uncivilized behaviour becomes the normal temper of a Government.’ Undoubtedly the Government of India at this time, believing that it had the Congress by the throat, was out for a kill. Repression and savagery were un¬ abashed and believed to be successful. As the one man among the leaders who was neither cowed nor shaken in nerve was jawaharlal, the authorities stalked him till they once more had him behind bars. Back for a Test cure’ in his ‘other home’,1 this time the central jail at Alipore in Calcutta, he reverted to the routine of prison life and adjusted himself to living in a small cell and bare barrack yard, with a clerk sentenced for embezzlement as his only com¬ panion. The days pass, and so do the nights, and so we carry on. How soon one gets used to a particular mode of life!’2 The Bengal authorities did not encourage reading and writing, and for some time, after he had exhausted the novels in the prison library, the only book Jawaharlal had was a German grammar. This was later set right. But he never settled down in Alipore and was relieved when, early in May, he was transferred to the familiar barrack in Dehra Dun jail.
Throughout these months, the news from outside was depressing. The ill-health of his mother and wife was a constant source of worry; and political news was no more cheerful. Gandhi's statement in April withdrawing civil disobedience was a heavy blow. ‘It marks an epoch not only in our freedom struggle but in my personal life. After 15 years I go my way, perhaps a solitary way leading not far. But meanwhile there is prison and its lonely existence.’3 An undated, incomplete note obviously written at this time indicates that Jawaharlal was being driven once more to the recognition that he had come to a parting of the ways. There was hardly any common ground between him¬ self and Gandhi, and he had been wrong in subordinating their differences in a larger loyalty to the cause of national freedom. ‘Our objectives are different, our ideals are different, our spiritual outlook is different and our methods are likely to be different.’ The Congress was now aggressively anti-socialist and, in its acceptance of constitutionalism, politically more backward than it had been even in the heyday of the Swarajist party. Gandhi’s statement withdrawing civil disobedience, the reasons given and the general outlook displayed ‘seemed to me to be an insult to the nation, to the Congress and
to any person with a grain of intelligence. I felt with a stab of pain that the !•
1 See telegrams toGandhi and to hi* daughter, 13 February 1934. %
*To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 1 March 1934.
9 Diarf entry, 13 April 1934.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
187
cords of allegiance that had bound me to him for many years had snapped.' The concentration on non-political issues and the personal and self-created entanglements which led Gandhi to desert his comrades in the mMdle of the struggle were amazingly casual and likely to be fatal to the movement.
In August, when Kamala’s condition took a turn for the worse, the U. P. Government let Jawaharlal out of prison, and he took this opportunity, in what even Willingdon, who had seen a copy made by the police, described as ‘this very humandocument',1 to pour out his heart to Gandhi. The abandon¬ ment of civil disobedience had been bad enough, but the reasons given by Gandhi and his suggestions for future work had astonished him.
I Had a sudden and intense feeling that something broke inside me, a bond that I had valued very greatly had snapped. I felt terribly lonely in this wide world. I have always felt a little lonely almost from childhood up. But a few bonds strengthened me, a few strong supports held me up. That loneliness never went, but it was lessened. But now I felt absolutely alone, left high and dryon a desert island.
The decisions that followed the termination of civil disobedience, such as the approval of the formation of a parliamentary oarty and the contesting of elections, had been shock after shock, allowing his mind and feelings no peace or rest and making prison life a greater ordeal for his nerves than at any time before. What was happening was not a setback, common enough in all great struggles, but a spiritual defeat and surrender of ideals. The Congress had become a caucus where opportunism flourished and the Working Committee's resolution condemning socialism showed such astounding ignorance of even the elements of the subject that it was painful to read it and realize that it might be read outside India. ‘It seemed that the overmastering desire of the Committee was somehow to assure various vested interests even at the risk of talking nonsense.12
Apart from this private letter, which Gandhi did not take seriously,3 Jawa¬ harlal responded to the Government’s gesture and took care to keep away from political activity. However much he might have sympathized in private with the criticism nude by his follower, Rah Ahmad Kidwai, of the Congress leadership, he publicly dissociated himself from it. The proclaimed socialists in the Congress, who in May, as a counter-blast to the milk-and-water pro¬ grammes of the parent body, had formed the Congress Socialist Party, had not concealed that they sought and drew inspiration from him. They believed that they were echoing his ideas in hailing the Congress as potentially the
1 ToHowe, 24 September 1934, Templewood papers, vol. 7.
2To Gandhi, 13 August 1934. The resolution had denounced confiscation and claj» war as contrary to the creed of non-violence and committed the Congress to no more than a ‘wiser and juster use of private property' and ‘a healthier relationship between capital and laboRr'.
J'Jawabarial's explosion is not so dangerous ss it sounds. He only exercised his right to let off steam. 1 believe he is now quiet,* Gandhi to Patel, 19 August 1934, quoted in K. Dwarfcadaa, Indio r Fight for Froodam (Bombay, 1966), p. 444. 4
188
JAWAHARLAL NRHRU
greatest revolutionary force in the country and seeking to combine the national struggle with socialism.1 The decision to keep the Socialist Party within the Congress was also modelled on Jawaharlal’s precedent of the Independence for India League. Yet Jawaharlal refused, while out of prison, tcf give them any encouragement.2 He shared the socialist outlook; but there was no truth in the claim5 that he was fully in agreement with the decision to form the party. He considered the step premature and likely to divert attention from the immediate issue of political independence. The socialists had no support among the people, and it was more important to push the Congress as a whole, however slowly, towards acceptance of economic objectives than to nurture the doctrinaire views of a handful of individuals. Jawaharlal had a radical rather than an ideological mind. The precedent of the Independence for India League was not a happy one. It can be argued that Jawaharlal was giving up too easily, that while he had a socialist vision derived from Europe he lacked the stamina to formulate specific programmes suited to India and promote the strenuous work of forming cadres and establishing an organization — in other words, that he lacked a 'revolutionary perspective’.4 Such criticism is balanced by the fact that, however disappointed with Gandhi and the Con¬ gress, Jawaharlal was still certain of their indispensability in the struggle to expel the British; nor could he regard the motley crowd of Marxists, Fabians, Gandhians and orthodox Hindus who led the Congress Socialist Party with anything but ‘amused contempt’.3
The U.P. authorities, however, feared that the Socialist Party, which was the ’greatest menace to peace in the rural areas’, had about fifteen centres in the province, very few of which were really active; but they would all receive a tre¬ mendous fillip when Jawaharlal came out of jail.6 The Government of India feared the release, especiallyon the eveof the elections to the Central Assembly, of the one person they had cause to worry about and of whom they had made a bogy man — ‘the high priestof Communism’.7 So it was made clear that no re¬ mission of his sentence could be considered,8 and after eleven days, when his wife’s health slightly improved, he was taken back to prison. But this time he
1Acharya Narendra Deva’i presidential address at the first session of The Socialist Party Con¬ ference, reprinted in Socialism and the NotionalRevolution (Bombay, 1946), pp. 5-29.
2To Sampurnanand, 22 August 1934, Sampurnanand papers, National Archives of India.
» Jsyaprakash Narayan to Rajendra Prasad, 25 July 1934,#U.P. CI.D. File PPF-J 25.
* SuhhasBose, TbtIndian Struggle (Calcutta, 1964), p.'336.
’Sampurnanand, Memories end Reflections (Bombay, 1962), p. 72. It might be added that M. N. Roy was also against the formation of a separate socialist party within the Congress because it would exclude the left wing from leadership and continue the dominance of the conservative elements in the party.
•Noteof the U.P. CLD. on revolutionary affairs in the province 1934, U.P, CI.D. File No. PPF N.26.
2 See.U.P. Government's publicity pamphlet 'Communistic Likes and Dislikes’, Home Dept. Pol. File 7/13/34.
'Answer of Secretary of State in House of Commons, 16 July 1934. Hoar! had wished to say that* could be no remission 'at the present time' but deleted die proviso at the instance of the Government of India, HomeDept. Pol. File 27/19/34.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON
189
was lodged in Naini jail, and allowed out once or twice a week to see Kamala. Then, in October, when she was moved to a sanatorium at Bhowali, Jawaharlal was transferred to the nearby jail at Almora.
Theillnessof his wife pushed all else to the background. Over the years their relationship had matured from indifference to a deep attachment. Often in jail his mind wandered to her, and he sat waiting for her letters and looking forward to her interviews. ‘Felt greatly cheered’, runs a characteristic diary entry, ‘at seeing her. I am much too fond of her!'1 Now, with her at death’s door, he be¬ came a bundle of nerves, and more to take his mind off the crisis than anything else, he set to work feverishly drafting the work which was to be his greatest literary achievement. He began in June 1934 the writing of his life story and finished it on 14 February 1933. So a massive manuscript of 976 pages was dashed off in less than nine months. First called In and Out of Prison, it was later published with the bare title, An Autobiography.
Tagore, Andrews, Sapru and a host of lesser men, as well as the nationalist press as a whole, and Attlee, Lansbury and other leaders of the Labour Party in Britain, none of whom had any sympathy with Jawaharlal’s political views, pleaded for magnanimity and a full release. But to set him free in India seemed to the Government of Indiaout of the question, for they saw no reason to believe that Jawaharlal would ‘behave well’, that is, refrain from political activity. Jawa¬ harlal himself was too proud a man and too committed a nationalist to ask for special favours. Even when let out of prison in August, he had declined to give any undertaking to the Government. 2 Now, while thanking the U.P. Govern¬ ment for the various courtesies being shown to him, he asked for no more.
Quite frankly I fed that the U.P. Government has gone very much out of its way to meet an individual case and I am somewhat embarrassed by this special consideration. It would be wrong and absurd to expect the Government to vary State policy because of individual cases. Personal reasons cannot and should not interfere with principles and larger issues.
I have myself endeavoured to act in that way, and if I may say so without impropriety, I thoroughly appreciate that Government cannot do so. 3
When an advocate of Allahabad petitioned the High Court for his rdease and followed it up with a memorial to (he Government, Jawaharlal promptly repu¬ diated this unauthorized intervention in his personal affairs. He had told Kamala in August that he might be released in December, after the elections.4 Disappointed in that, he counted the days and weeks till the end of his sentence but sought no concessions.
* 9 April 1934.
> Letter to District Magistrate, 12 August 1934.
* Tojagdish Prasad, HomeMember, U. P., 3 November 1934.
4 Diary entry, 30 April 1935.
190
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
icj. *~Uc v*'4*- ^
<w_ ««•» “»4r ■**-/
I
a-*v^ ^
SJL~M£. ~r£+'-* •
Part of a page from Jawaharlal’s prison diary
The treatment at Bhowali did Kama!a little good and it was decided that she should go to Europe. For the first time, Jawaharlal had to worry about money. He had an annual income, derived from book royalties and such shares as were still left to him, of about nine thousand rupees, and with this he had to run a large establishment at Anand Bhawan, pay heavy medical bills and arrange for the passages by sea and the stay in Europe.1 It was probably at this time that a member of the Birla family, the wealthy financiers, hearing of his difficulties, offered to pay him a fairly substantial monthly allowance, such as they provided to many leading Congressmen; but Jawaharlal expressed his surprise at the suggestion and sharply declined the offer.2 He mustered such savings as he had and made the arrangements, and Kamala sailed, with Indira and a doctor in at¬ tendance, in May. The Government of India were unwilling to remit Jawa¬ harlal’s sentence on condition that he left India with his wife for Switzerland, for that in itself would encourage the socialist wing in the Congress and dispirit officials and loyalists.3 The hope was that, with the official retirement of Gandhi from the Congress in September, the party would become moderate and constitutional under the leadership of Patel and Rajagopalachari. For this the socialists would have to be kept under, and nothing would facilitate this more than the retention of Jawaharlal in prison.4
In a way, this was not unacceptable. Kamala was anxious to brave the jour¬ ney, not only for a change of climate and in hopes of a cure, but because dose proximity to Jawaharlal was at this time jarring on the nerves of both. Mutual dependence caused its own frictions. In 1933, while on a visit to Jawaharlal in Dehra Dun jail, Kamala had called on a Bengali lady sanyasinL They had not
1 See note on income and expenditure, 14May 1939.
* Letter to U. N. Dhebar, 7 June 1937, Nehru papers.
* Telegram to Secretary of State, 10 November 1934, Home Dept. Pol. File 38/7/34.
4 See Wjjllingdon to Hoaie, 22 October 1934 and 3 May 1933, TempJewood papers, volumes 7 and 8, respectively.
IN AND OUT OF PRISON 191
talked much, but Kamala felt a profound sense of peace. She later visited this lady several times and her influence grew.1 Jawaharlal pretended not to mind, but such a development was alien to his own nature; and he also resented the intrusion of another.
What a child K is! That irritates me often enough and yet I think that is partly her charm. How my moods change when I think of her. How much she means to me and yet how little she fits in or tries to tit in with my ideas. That is really the irritating part, that she does not try, and so she drifts apart.2
With Kamala and his daughter in Europe, Jawaharlal felt lonelier than ever in jail. He had now no major writing task to divert his mind, and though he set himself to writing articles in English and Hindi and reading a large variety of books, these could not subdue his emotional tension. He became a prey to nightmares and tears and, what was so rare with him, began to lose his very interest in life. All these years, his dedication to India’s freedom had kept him going even when his personal affairs had been a shambles. As he had once told a senior British official in the halcyon 'twenties, his only ambition had been to be buried in the foundations of free India.3 But now he despaired even of that. The Congress had become a cautious, almost loyalist body, more frightened of communism and a class struggle than inimical to the British; Subhas Bose, in exile abroad, fancied himself as a future fascist dictator, and Gandhi gave all his attention to such problems as the relative merits of cows milk and buffalo s milk. ‘Even Bapu) wrote Jawaharlal perceptively in his diary, ‘he is either a non-co-operator or a full-blooded co-operator. The fire or a sofa — though a sofa is hardly the correct place for him. He can think only in extremes — either extreme eroticism or asceticism. Was it not Aldous Huxley who said that the ascetic was the counterpart of Eton Juan?’ .4 Nor did the masses of India, indulg¬ ing in wild communal rioting, seem to deserve better. ‘What a disgusting, sav¬ age people we are. Politics, progress, socialism, communism, science — where are they before this black religious savagery?’5 There were very few oases of intellect and character in the arid waste of Indian humanity, and doubts arose in his mind as to whether anything could be done with this material. To crown it all, the news from Europe of Kamala was depressing. She had stood well a complicatedoperation in Berlin for the removal of lung adhesions but, far from
* Draft Second Volume of Autobiography (hereafter DSVA) written in Dehra Dun jail 1941. This draft was later rejected by him as not suited for publication; but parts of it were incorporated in The Discovery of India.
2Diary entry, 19 March 1935.
s Sir William Duke to Motilal, quoted in Motilal to Jawaharlal, 18 March 1928, Motilal Nehru papers.
* 30 April 1933.
’Diary entry, 17 April 1935.
192
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
recuperating, was losing heart. ‘She is slipping away and the thought of it is unbearable, hellish.’1 A verse jotted down in his diary2 sums up his heartbreak and loneliness:
Sad winds where your voice was; Tears, tears where my heart was; And ever with me Child, ever with me Silence where hope was.
1 Diary