Out of Tune with the Congress
Again, Jawaharlal loyally accepted the decision. ‘Every decision of the Working Committee is the right one. Just as the King can do no wrong, the Working Committee also can do no wrong.’1 Acceptance of office, he announced, seem¬ ingly more to convince himself than others, did not mean acceptance of the slave constitution, but was primarily a means to fight the imposition of federa¬ tion. If they remembered this, the risk of getting involved in petty, reformist activitieswould be lessened. So, to be loyal to the spirit underlying the decision, Congressmen should not lose their sense of perspective and should carry on their work outside the legislatures with even greater energy.2 But such loyalty could not conceal that in his heart Jawaharlal hated it all. The Congress had moved away from almost everything that it had stood for in his eyes, and had become a responsivist, constitutional organization, avid for the minor loaves and fishes of office. So Jawaharlal virtually went into retreat. Though still the president of the party, hedid not serveon the parliamentary board which sought to guide and co-ordinate the working of the ministries. He took no serious interest in the composition of the Governments, noteven that in his home state, the United Provinces. It is necessary to state this, because years later the charge was made by Maulana Azad that the leaders of the Muslim League in the U.P. had agreed toco-operate with the Congress in return for twoseats in the Cabinet, but Jawaharlal had whittled down the number to one and thereby destroyed the agreement reached by Azad. ‘Jawaharlal’s action gave the Muslim League in the U.P. anew leaseoflife. All students of Indian politics know that it was from the U.P. that the League was reorganized. Mr Jinnah took full advantage of the situation and snuted an offensive which ultimately led to Pakistan.’3
Such severe criticism from so authoritative a quarter cannot lightly be set aside. Even if Jawaharlal had been responsible for the decision to exclude the representatives of the League in 1937, it is obviously too superficial to trace
1 Message to the Associated Press, Tba Bombay Cbroniclt/ 8 July 1917.
3 The Decision to Accept Office', 10 and 20 July 1937 Eigbtaan Months in India, pp. 248*34.
* Mauvna Azad, India Wins Freedom (Calcutta, 1967 edition), pp. 143-3.
222
223
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
i
the growing influence of Muslim oommunalism to one such single event. But did Jawaharlal in fact decide in this manner? Azad’s memoirs, prepared under his instructions by Humayun Kabir, were published in January 1939 after his death. The manuscript was shown to Jawaharlal, who asked Kabir not to make any changes.1 Healso referred to the criticism at a press conference but in very general terms, merely remarking that Azad had thought too much sometimes in individual terms and not in termsofthe historical forces at work.2 His loyalty to the memory of an old colleague was too strong to permit him to rebut the charge in detail. The result has been the entrenchment of a myth, and its frequent repetition even in scholarly accounts of this period.
However, the facts are very different. When Jinnah took up again in 1936 the leadership of the Muslim League, he was still a nationalist who had no wish to support, or rely on, foreign rule. Indeed his aloofness, brittle ability and anti¬ imperial attitude made him as disliked by the British as any Congressman. ‘Of all the Indians I have met’, Hoare wrote to Willingdon, ‘I think I have dis¬ liked Jinnah the most. Throughout the Round Table discussions he invariably behaved like a snake, and no one seemed to trust him. I greatly hope that he is not getting a following among the Muslims.’3 But Jinnah had no use for mass politics. His idea was to revert to the pre-Gandhian period and to form once more an alliance of elite politicians acting together to wrest concessions from the British. He had been the chief architect of the Lucknow Pact of 1916 be¬ tween the Congress and the League,4 and his hope now was for another similar understanding. He therefore secured the election as president of the League not of a loyalist contender but of Sir Wazir Hasan, a retired judge of Lucknow whose family had close links with the Congress leadership in the U.P. The election manifesto of the League drafted by Jinnah was very similar to that of the Congress, and in the Leagueparliamentary board there were representatives of Muslim organizations, such as the Jamiat-ul-Ulema, which supported the Congress. In all his speeches in 1936 Jinnah stressed his nationalism and com¬ mitment to freedom;3 and in August he and Jawaharlal spoke from the same platform at the All-India Students Conference in an atmosphere of personal cordiality.
Yet Jinnah’s tactics had never a chanceof success. The Congress, and Indian politics as a whole, had moved far since the nascent days of 1916. The premiss of the Lucknow Pact, that the Congress and the League were two communal
1 Letter to Humayun Kabir, 1 April 1958, Nehru papers.
* Report of press conference, Tba Hindu, 8 February 1959.
* 5 April 1934, Templewood papers, vol. 4.
4 H. F. Owen, ‘Negotiating the Lucknow Pact’, Journal ofAsian Studios, May 1.972, pp. 561 *87.
* Forexample: ‘Whatever 1 have done, let me assureyou there has been nochange in me, not the
slightest, since theday when I joined the Indian National Congress. It may be I have been wrong on someoccasions. But it has never been done in a partisan spirit. My sole and only object has been the welfare ofmycountry. I assure you that India's interest is and will be sacred to me and nothing will make me budge an inch from that position.' Speech-at Lahore, reported in the Civil andMilitary Gaxotta, 3 March 1936. I
224 JAWAHARLAl NEHRU
parties with political objectives and that they could form an equal partnership, was long dead. Certainly the Congress, which had mobilized the masses in a series of campaigns and established itself as a broad nationalist front, could not now be expected to agree that it was primarily a Hindu organization and would notseek toenlist the Muslimand other religious minorities in India. ToJawahar- lal in particular, critical of vested interests and emphasizing the basic problems of poverty and hunger from which the vast majority of the Indian people, what¬ ever their religion, suffered, the religious Elitism of Jinnah appeared medieval and obscurantist. Throughout the early months of 1937 he and Jinnah attacked each other in the press. When Jawaharlal stated that there were only two forces which mattered in India, British imperialism and nationalism represented by the Congress, Jinnah replied that there was a third party, the Muslims. Jawahar¬ lal brushed this aside as communalism raised to the «th power. Muslims could not be regarded as ‘a nation apart*; and the Muslim League represented a small group functioning in the higher regions of the upper middle classes and having no contacts with the Muslim masses and few even with the Muslim lower middle dass. The controversy soon descended to verbal slanging. Jinnah spoke of the Peter Pan who refused to grow up, ‘the busybody President’ who seemed ‘to carry the responsibility of the whole world on his shoulders and must poke his nose in everything except his own business’.1 On his part, Jawaharlal de¬ clared that there were Muslims in the Congress ‘who could provide inspiration to a thousand Jinnahs’.2 He had no use for secret pacts with anybody, much less with Jinnah.3 It is at this time that Jinnah seems to have developed a particular allergy to Jawaharlal, his exuberance and his socialist ideas. He even appealed over Jawaharlal’s head to Gandhi for an understanding on Hindu-Muslim relations, but was firmly rebuffed. 4
The election results had their own lessons for both Jawaharlal and Jinnah. While the Congress had done spectacularly well in the general constituencies, in the482 seats reserved for Muslims it had put up only 38 candidates and won in 26. In eight provinces it had not put up candidates for these special seats at all, and most of its victories in such constituencies were in the NWFP, where AbdulGaffarKhan hadgiven theCongress adecisive hold.Ontheotherhand, the Muslim League had not contested all these 482 seats, and had won only 109 of them. It could not gain a majority even in the Muslim-majority provinces of the Punjab and Bengal. In the former, it was the Unionist Party, dominated by landlords, which won a majority, while in Bengal the single largest parties were the Congress and the peasants’ party led by Fazlul Haq. To Jawaharlal this suggested that the Congress had not done enough work among the Muslims, and that in the new‘mass contact’programme a special effort should be made to reach theMuslims. Therewas a widespread anti-imperialist spirit in the country
1 The Bombay Chronicle, 19 January and 26 July 1937. * Ibid.. 10 February 1937. * Ibid.//16 February 1937. 4 Gandhi's letter to Jinnah, 22 May 1937, cited by Jinnah, The BombayChronicle, 26 July 1937.
24 With Gandhi, 1938

27 Speaking on ‘Aid to Spain’ in Trafalgar Square, 1938
28 Jawaharlal and Krishna Menon with General Lister, at Lister’s headquarters in Spain, 1938

OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
225
and, apart from a microscopic handful at the top who were fearful of social changes, the Indian people as a whole were with the Congress. The party had therefore erred in not setting up more Muslim candidates. Theyounger genera¬ tion of Muslims and the Muslim peasants and workers were getting out of the rut of communalism and thinking along economic lines, and the Congress should set about organizing this latent support. ‘The Congress is supreme to¬ day so far as the masses and the lower middle classes are concerned. Even the Muslim masses look up to it for relief. It has hardly ever been in such a strong position.’1 The elections had gone some way to lay the ghost of communalism, and the Congress should follow this up by working among the Muslim intelli¬ gentsiaand masses and rid India of communalism in every shape and form. Each provincial Congress committee should set up a special committee to increase contacts with Muslims and enrol more Muslim members. The central office of the Congress would also set up a separate department for this purpose. Notices should be issued in Urdu as well as in other local languages and wide circulation should be given to a new Congress journal being published in that language.2 .Gandhi disapproved of this ‘mass contact’ programme and preferred to proceed cautiously through constructive work among the Muslim masses by both Hindu andMuslim workers, but the Working Committee preferred Jawaharlal’s scheme. For it recognized that the Gandhian constructive programme no longer evoked enthusiasm, ami Muslims had absolutely no trust in Gandhi and con¬ sidered him their enemy.3
Jinnah’s diagnosis was very similar, but the lesson he drew was the opposite. The Muslim League had made a mistake in not organizing itself better for the elections and contesting all the seats reserved for the Muslim electorate. The Congress was becoming increasingly a mass party and striking out in new direc¬ tions. Were its approaches to the Muslim masses to prove effective, Jinnah and the League would be left high and dry. So, if the Congress were to take him seriously, it would be necessary to strengthen thecommunal feelings among the Muslims. The only possible answer to the Congress ‘mass contact’ programme was to make the Muslims submerge their economic interests in religious zeal. Then the Congress would be forced to deal with the League. The hold of Islam on the Muslim masses should be strengthened to provide the sanction for the demand of the Muslim upper and middle classes for jobs and security.
It is against this general background that developments in the U.P. fall into place. In the elections, the chief opponent of the Congress was not the Muslim League but the National Agriculturist Party, an organization of landlords pro¬ moted by the Government to challenge the influence which the Congress had gained over the tenants.4 The British attached greater importance to this party
1 Jawaharlal to Stafford Cripps, 22 February 1937.
* Circulars to provincial Congress committeer 31 March and 10 July 1937.
* Proceedings of the Working Committee, April 1937, A1CC File 42 of 1936.
«P.D. Reeves, ‘Landlords and PartyPolitics in the United Provinces, 1934-7’, in Low, fundings in Modern South Asian History, pp. 261-82.
226
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
than to the Muslim League and did not hesitate to coerce Muslim talukdars to transfer their allegiance from Jinnah, ‘the arch enemy of the British raj’, to loyalists like the Nawab of Chhatari.1 So the Congress and the League reached an informal, unspoken understanding in this province and avoided a conflict as much as possible. The question of Hindu-Muslim relations and ofthe recog¬ nition ofMuslims as a separate third party, raised by Jinnah on an all-India level, did not apply in the U.P. Here the ipain issue was authority, landlordism and reaction on the one hand and tenant right on the other. In this contest, the Congress and the League made a joint effort to defeat the Government and their puppets. The parliamentary board of the League in the U.P. was an odd assort¬ ment of reactionaries, leaders of the Jamiat who supported the Congress, ex- Congressmen with personal affiliations to the Nehru family like Chaudhuri Khaliquzzaman, and many with no fixed attachments. The most energetic campaigner for the League was a leader of tht Jamiat, Maulana Husain Ahmad, who was very close to the Congress. Some candidates of the League would probably have stood as Congressmen if requested, and during his election tours Jawaharlal supported the League candidates if they were not obvious reaction¬ aries and the Congress was not contesting the seats.
After the elections, the various elements in the parliamentary board of the League fell out. When in March the Congress refused to take office and a loyalist ‘interim’ ministry was set up by the Government, Khaliquzzaman was asked to join it but refused.2 However, another member of the League joined, and, though he was expelled from the board, some other members, including Maulana Husain Ahmad, resigned. At this stage Govind Ballabh Pant and Mohanlal Saxena, leading members of the U.P. Congress, not expecting their own party to take office in the near future, approached Khaliquzzaman to reinforce his decision not to join the ‘interim’ government and pressed him to return to the Congress.3 It is possible, though they did not admit this, that they went even further and offered to form a pact with the League. The atmosphere then, born of a collective triumph over the Government and the latter’s efforts to thwart the decision of the elections, was conducive to this. Jawaharlal got wind of these overtures and warned Pant against any such agreement. 'I am personally convinced that any kind of pact or coalition between us and the Muslim League will be highly injurious. It will mean many other things also which are equally undesirable.’4 It is worth adding that Azad, who was staying with Jawaharlal at this time, wasequally opposed to any such pact.3
Faced with this reprimand, the U.P. Congress abandoned any idea it might
iThe Raja of Mahmudabad’s account of his interview with the governor of U.P. in 1936, ‘Some Memories', in C. H. Philips and M. D. Wainwright (eds.), Tba Partition of India (London, 1970), p. 384.
2C. Khaliquzzaman, Pathway to Pakistan (Lahore, 1961), pp. 134-3.
1 Pant to Jawaharlal, 2 April 1937 **
4 Jawaharlal to Pant, 30 March 1937.
’Jawaharlal to Abdul Walli, 30 March 1937.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 227
have had of a pact with the League; but relations between the two parties con¬ tinued to be cordial. In a vacancy which arose in a Muslim constituency which had been held by the League, the board of that party in the U.P., despite Jinnah’s announcement that it should be retained by the League and. warning the Con¬ gress not to claim it,1 decided to leave it to a leading Congressman, Rafi Ahmad Kidwai. Jinnah himself, however, was in favour of a coalition with the Con¬ gress, or, as he termed it, ‘a united front’. Now that the Congress was willing to accept office if it were satisfied on certain points, there seemed to him to be no substantial difference between the two parties. He was right to the extent that the Congress no longer even claimed to be a revolutionary organization and there was no difference on that score between it and the League. But the main hitch still remained, that any coalition with the League implied the Congress accepting a Hindu orientation and renouncing the right to speak for all Indians. For fear that Khaliquzzaman might go further than a coalition and agree to merge the League in the Congress, Jinnah came to Lucknow and authorized the continuance of negotiations on the basis of the maintenance of separate identities.2 But this the Congress was not prepared to grant. When, towards the end of June, it became clear that the Congress would take office, Khaliquz¬ zaman and Nawab Ismail Khan again suggested a coalition. Khaliquzzaman seems to have gone even further and informed Azad that the League would accept any terms provided he and Ismail Khan were included in the Ministry.3 Jawaharlal was not enthusiastic, for a Congress ministry should undertake land reforms and he did not wish this to be precluded by any agreement with the League, which was influenced by zamindari interests. But Azad was attracted by the possibility of the League ceasing in the U.P. to exist as a separate group. He was in charge of the negotiations, being authorized by the Working Com¬ mittee to deal both with Congress affairs in the U.P. and Bihar and with Muslim representation in all the provincial ministries. He consulted Jawaharlal, Pant, Kripalani and Narendra Deva and it was decided to offer ministerships to Khaliquzzaman and Nawab Ismail Khan in return for acceptance of the Con¬ gress programme and the winding up of the Muslim League group and the U.P. parliamentary board. All Muslim League legislators should become full members of the Congress party and abide by its discipline; no Muslim League candidates should be set up in by-elections, and they should resign their offices or vacate their seats whenever the Congress decided to do so.4
These were stringent conditions which, if accepted, would have seriously
1 The Bombay Chronicle, 19 March 1937.
2 Z. H. Zaidi, ‘Aspects of Muslim League Policy 1937-47', The Partition ofIndia, p. 256.
2 Jawaharlal to Rajendra Prasad, 21 July 1937. In Khaliquzzaman's account of his meeting with Azad, he states that discussion centred only on two points: whether the League would resign office along with the Congress if at any time the Congress resigned (to which he agreed), and whether he would agree to another Muslim in place of Nawab Ismail Khan (which he refused) Pathway to Pakistan, p. 160.
4 Jawaharlal to Rajendra Prasad, 21 July 1937; Khaliquzzaman, op. eit., p. 161.
228
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
weakened the Muslim League in the U.P., although Khaliquzzaman and others were not asked to sever all connection with the parent Muslim League or speci¬ fically to take the Congress pledge. Khaliquzzaman agi'eed to all conditions except two: the winding up of the parliamentary board and tfle injunction against contesting by-elections. He himself was willing to accept even these but was not authorized to do so. However, he added, this might happen in any case. In fact, so eager was he to reach an agreement and take office that he offered to call a special meeting of the executive committee of the U.P. Muslim League to consider the question of by-elections. He also suggested that members of the League be given freedom of vote on communal matters. But Azad and Jawahar- lal insisted on full acceptance of the original conditions, and the negotiations brokedown. Neither at the time, noreven later during his life did Azad voice any regrets, either to Jawaharlal or in public.1
This account makes dear that while Jawaharlal was never happy about these opportunist, unprincipled bargainings with the League which had now, in the U.P., become a narrow upper-class organization, he had allowed Azad, Pant and Rafi Kidwai to do what they thought best. Certainly the discussions had not brokendown on the question ofone or two representatives of the League in the ministry, nor had Jawaharlal decided unilaterally that it should be one and not two. Whether, if the negotiations had succeeded, the country and the Congress would have benefited in the long run is debatable. Any agreement would in effect have accepted that politics were a matter of alliances between upper-class groups, betrayed all Muslims who thought in non-communal terms and abandoned the economic programme on which Jawaharlal had been laying so much stress. No such agreement could have endured, for the League had no long-term economic or social objectives. The only incentive where its leaders were concerned was the hope of office, and once this was»fulfilled the cracks were bound to widen. Indeed, the negotiations were throughout hollow and unreal, for alongside the parleys of Azad and Khaliquzzaman a by-election was being fought in a Muslim constituency where the new strategy of Jinnah was finding full play. Both the Congress and the League set up candidates, convert¬ ing it into a test election. Jawaharlal himself spent two full days in the consti¬ tuency, speaking as usual of economic and national interests, while the League raised the cry of ‘Islam in danger’. Jinnah issued an appeal in the name of Allah and the Koran, and Maulana Shaukat Ali spoke of civil war and called on the voters ’to crush the swollen head of Jawaharlal’.2 Morey and bearded maulanas were in great demand. * Supporters of the League gave large donations to mos-
1 In fact, he seems to have expressed his satisfaction. Edward Thompson reported a conversa¬ tion in October 1939: ‘We will not have in the Cabinet* said one leader who had a lot to say in what happened (and he was a Moslem), 'a man who was our comrade for twenty years and then ratted because he thought we were going to be beaten!' Enlist India for Fretdom (London, 1940), p.56 The reference is clearly to Azad speaking about Khaliquzzaman.
2 Fida Sherwani to Jawaharlal, 30 June 1937. *
* Assistant Secretary U.P.P.C.C. to Rafi Kidwai, 6 July 1937, A1CC File G. 61/1937.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 229
quesandmadrasas, while the ‘interim*government assisted the League by arrest¬ ing Muslim workers of the Congress, i The League’s candidate washelped by the fact that he was a Malkani Rajput (a sect of Rajputs converted to Islam), and the caste panchayat decided to penalize any member who voted against him. This, along with the bigotry that had been aroused, ensured the defeat of the Congress candidate. It was the beginning of a new phase of Indian politics, in which communal rancour was to spread and embitter all relations. F(?r the first time in his career, Jawaharlal was the object of a hostile demonstration. On his way to a meeting in the constituency, his car was pelted with stones.2 In these circumstances, little importance can be attached to the talks with Khaliquzzaman, and no weighty consequences followed their failure.
A few months after the formation of the first Congress ministries, the party also took office in Assam and the North-West Frontier, and all these ministries functioned for over two years. The eight ministries had to their credit consider¬ able achievements. Conciliation machinery was established in labour disputes, though in Bombay the effect was nullified by banning strikes and obstructing the growth of a genuine labour movement by the encouragement of unions promoted by employers and of occupational unions. In a few districts prohibi¬ tion was introduced, there was some improvement in the condition of Harijans, mass literacy campaigns were promoted, and steps were taken to spread primary education. The sight of men and women in khadi exercising authority also served to lift the morale not just of the party but of ordinary people. This was a particularly exhilarating experience in the North-West Frontier, home of the conservative Pathan, with its large Muslim majority, and which the British had for so long sought to seal off. But, on the whole, the record of the Congress ministries was, as Jawaharlal realized soon enough, static if not counter¬ revolutionary.3 The worst cases were Bombay and Madras. There was no question now of taking office to combat the new Act;4 the ministers worked in close co-operation with the Governors, and in carrying out minor reforms forgot the major issues. Soon after they took office, Jawaharlal, as Congress president, directed them to release all political prisoners.3 Govind BaUabh Pant’s first act on taking charge in the U.P. was to sit down at his office table to write the order for their discharge. But K.M. Munshi, the Home Minister of Bombay, ‘if anything more royalist than the king,’6 ignored this directive. Keen to detain communist and left-wing leaders, he asked a surprised Viceroy toputthe C.I.D. of Bengal in touch with hisown C.I.D. todeal with communists in and around Bombay.7 When Jawaharlal rebuked Munshi for his zeal in this
1 Jawaharlal's statement to the press, 10 July, The Bombay Chronicle, 11 July 1937.
* The Bombay Chronicle, 14 July 1937.
» To Govind Bailabh Pant, 25 November 1937. A Bunch of Old Utters, pp. 256-7.
* K. M. Munshi, Pilgrimage to Freedom (Bombay, 1967), vol. 1, p. 44.
* President’s circular to Congress committees, 16.July 1937.
* Note of R. M. Maxwell, Home Secretary, on Home Ministers Conference, 31 May 1939, forwarded to Governors by Viceroy, 15 June 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 16.
7 Linlithgow to Zetland, 16 December 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14.
230
JAWAHARLAL NEHJtU
matter _ ‘You have already become a police officer’1 - Munshi appealed to the higher authority of Gandhi and continued as before. Jawaharla! protested in the Working Committee that Congress ministers appeared more concerned about the effect their actions would have upon the British Government than upon their own people;2 but his arguments had no effect. The reliance which B.G. 'Kher, the Chief Minister, and Munshi placed on the Viceroy and fhe Governor, and the full reports they provided to the British of discussions and differences within the Congress, encouraged Linlithgow to promote the resti¬ veness of the Bombay ministry against central control. ‘My advice to you, for what it is worth,’ he wrote to Lord Brabourne, the Governor,3 ‘would be, here as elsewhere, to play for time and to miss no chance of impressing Kher and his colleagues with a sense of their own importance and of the necessity for standing on their own feet. This sort of pressure from the Centre cannot last for ever.’ But Kher and Munshi were basically weak men who, however much they might ignore Jawaharlal, did not dare to defy Patel, who was responsible in the Working Committee for Bombay. If they were able to adhere to a right- wing -policy;, it was because this suited Patel.
Tn Madras, however, Rajagopalachari was a law unto himself. He was too senior in the Congress hierarchy and too close to Gandhi to be answerable to anybody. He combined a contempt for his colleagues in the ministry and the WorkingCommitteewith an undue deference to the British Governor — a man of very average ability — and senior British officials. The result was ‘a negation and a reversal of fundamental Congress principles and policy’.4 * Rajagopalachari ordered the police to shadow Congressmen, arrested Congress socialists, con¬ tinued the ban on the Independence pledge and demanded security from a socialist journal. When these matters were considered in the Working Com¬ mittee, Rajagopalachari stayed away and left it to Gandhi to defeat Jawaharlal’s proposal that the Congress ministries should secure the Committee’s approval before initiating such arrests and prosecutions. He invoked the Criminal Law Amendment Act, which the Congress had sharply denounced in earlier years, against anti-Hindi pickets; strong action, he told Erskine, paid in India and the British had been far too weak during the civil disobedience campaigns. * Heintrigued with the Governor against his own party to prevent the formation of an Andhra province,6 and when he took a month’s leave requested the Qovemor to take over much of his work as he trusted Erskine more than any of his colleagues.7 He wished to recommend some of his supporters for knight-
1 Pilgrimage to Frtedom, vol. 1, p. 49. 2 Proceedings of the Working Committee, 14 tol7 August 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936. * 23 August 1937, Brabourne papers. I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F 97, vol. 8. 4 Jawaharlal to P. Subbarayan, 21 November 1937. * Erskine toBrabourne, 23 June 1938, Erskine papers, vol. 13. * Erskine to Linlithgow, 4 April 1938, Erskine paper's, vol. 13. 1 Erskine to Linlithgow, 24 April 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 13.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
231
hoods and other titles,1 and was ‘out-heroding Herod as a defender of the rights of the Services’.2 Asked at a press conference about a proposed Coronation durbar, Jawaharlal replied that if the Government wished to avoid a clash between the Congress ministers and the Governors, the best way they could do it was to keep the King in England.3 A few weeks later, Rajagopalachari assured the British that there would be no Congress boycott of a durbar or disturbance of any kind.4 The conduct of Rajagopalachari, in short, was the epitome of all that Jawaharlal had feared would be the result of office accept¬ ance. ‘In fact,’ summed up Erskine, a diehard Tory himself, ‘he is even too much of a Tory for me, for though I may want to go back twenty years, he wishes to go back two thousand and to run India as it was run in the time of King Asoka.’3
Jawaharlal’s general attitude, to the great disappointment of the left wing,6 was to stand up loyally for the ministries in public and protect them from petty and petulant criticism; *we cannot agitate against ourselves.’7 But though he tried consistently to develop an atmosphere of friendliness towards the min¬ istries, he made it clear to them privately how much, he disapproved of their conformism.8 ‘It is all very well to prevent one’s enemies getting dug in but the alternative of getting buried oneself is equally unpleasant.*9 In the U.P. it¬ self he assisted Pant in dealing with labour troubles in Kanpur, controlling the students and facing the criticism of the provincial Congress committee that Pant was becoming ‘a second Chhatari’10 So vigorous was his support that both Gandhi and the British toyed with the hope of his taking over from Pant as chief minister. This only shows how little they had understood his mind and sentiment. The whole atmosphere in India was alien to him — the semi-loyalist activities of the ministries, the quarrels for jobs, the refusal to handle agrarian problems boldly, the suggestion that British troops might be
1 Lumley, Governorof Bombay, to Erskine, 4 October 1938, reporting Kher’s account of conver¬ sation with Rajagopalachari, Erskine papers, vol. 20.
* Brabourne, acting Viceroy, to Erskine, 2 July 1938, Erskine papers, vol. 13-
* The Bombay Cbronicla, 13 August 1937.
* Erskine to Linlithgow, 25 September 1937, sent by Linlithgow to Zetland, 30 September 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14.
» Erskine to Sir Geoffrey Bracken, 30 January 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 21.
41should confess moreover that his role in future cannot be of any decisive revolutionary impor¬ tance. Things are moving too fast for him and you should not be surprised if within a year or two instead of a United front we in India prepare for a civil war and like so many liberal intellectuals Nehru disappears from the scene. For die present, however, even parlour socialists have a contri¬ bution to make. I may add in passing that Nehru is easily one of the finest types of a gentleman one meets in any part of the world. He means well and wants to help us all.’ K. M. Ashraf to Phyllis Kemp, 9 August 1938, U.P. Govt. C.I.D. File P/M-83.
7 NoteonTheAlCC and Congress Ministries, 4 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 11 Novem¬ ber 1937.
4 See, for example, his letters to Rajagopalachari, 1 October and 4 November, to Subbarayan, 21 November and to Pant, 25 November 1937.
4To Edward Thompson, 11 November 1937.
to Report of the Governor, Sir Harry Haig, of conversation with Vijayalakshmi Pandit in letter toLinlithgow, 23 November 1938, Haig papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F115, vol. 7.
232
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
necessary for the maintenance of internal security,1 the justification by Con¬ gress members of the Central Assembly of the dispatch of Indian troops to China.2 His main objection to federation as envisaged in the Act of 1935 was the inclusion of the feudal and autocratic elements in the Indian States, and he wished the Congress to support the popular movements in the States. But Gandhi himself objected to this and pulled up Jawaharlal in public for permit¬ ting a resolution in theAICCcriticizing theGovernment in Mysore. Jawaharlal drafted a sharp rejoinder but refrained from publishing it. All this, however, jarred. So he virtually opted out of the day-to-day activities of domestic politics and was happier visiting the remote areas of Assam or the Frontier Province, writing a long tract on the language problem or indulging in a narcissist jeu d’esprit: an anonymous attack on the latent dictatorial tendencies in himself.3 ‘This is’, he wrote to a friend urging him to prolong his stay in Europe,4 ‘a dull country.’
Jawaharlal was more at ease and fully integrated in dealing with develop¬ ments outside India. The growing tension in the world sharpened his views. Fascism and imperialism were blood brothers and the freedom struggle in India was part of the general confrontation in the world. Freedom, like peace, was indivisible. ‘The frontiers of our struggle lie not only in our own country but in Spain and China also.’3 Even in the stress of the election campaign he did not forsake the international aspect of the Indian problem. In the final analysis, it did not matter much where fate had pitched one’s tent. His own lot was cast in India, and he could work most effectively there; but he always thought in terms of the larger world issues, tried to fit India into them and taught his audiences to do the same. Such interest and commitment would also enable the Indian people to play a part, however small, in international affairs and give them a voice in the councils of the world. When Italy attacked Ethiopia, he called for demonstrations throughout the country as an expres¬ sion of sympathy and solidarity with the Ethiopians. The people of India could give no substantial assistance, but they should at least express their determina¬ tion to stand together with victims of, imperialism elsewhere, especially as the British were making dear their support of Mussolini.6 Similarly, with all his sympathy for the Jews, he believed that the Arabs were fighting British imperialism in Palestine. The Jews should not rely on British support but reach an agreement with the Arabs to safeguard their position in an indepen¬ dent Arab countiy. To Jawaharlal the British appeared to be exploiting the differences between Jews and Arabs in thesame manner as they were promoting
1 See Jawaharlal's letter to Asaf All, 3 August 1937.
Statement to the press, 23 August 1937; Jawaharlal to Bhulabhai Desai, 12 September 1937.
*‘The Rashtrapati' by ChanaJcya, Modtm Rtvhw. November 1937.
4 To Jal Naoroji, 30 August 1937.
’Article in NationalHarold, 24 January 1939. This newspaper was started try Jawaharlal at Lucknow in the summer of 1938.
‘Statements to the press, 3 and 8 May, and speech at Allahabad, 9 May 1936.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 233
communal tension in India.1 But imperialism had to be challenged wherever it appeared, and Jawaharlal organized a boycott of Japanese goods, a China relief fund and a medical unit for service in that country.
However, it was the Spanish Civil War which dominated his attention. He felt, like every other sensitive liberal of the time, a personal commitment in this fighting. ‘From day to day I watch with almost painful anguish the developmentof the trouble in Spain.’2 For to him it was a battle not just between the Spanish Government and some rebel generals or even between fascism and democracy in Europe; the conflict was a much wider one, between the forces of progress and of reaction throughout the world, and the result would be of enormous consequence to men and women everywhere. The gates of Madrid had become ‘the symbols of human liberty’,3 and Jawaharlal orga¬ nized the collection of funds for the dispatch from India of foodgrains and an ambulance unit.
With this deep involvement in world issues, it was natural for Jawaharlal to think of a trip abroad in the summer of 1938. His mother had died, after a long illness, in January 1938; and, with his daughter at Oxford, he had no strong domestic attachment to hold him to India. The national movement was in reverse gear and at Haripura Subhas Bose had taken over the Congress presidency. Jawaharlal was pressed hard to become the general secretary but refused. He had even wished to step out of the Working Committee. He had been prevailed upon not to do so, but his interest was elsewhere, and in June, gleefully turning his back on India, he sailed for what to him were the vital centres of activity in Europe. ‘It is a curious puzzling world but I get on with it to some extent because I like unusual things happening and rather enjoy taking part in them.’4
His own attitudes to the European crisis were clear. He felt that the dicta¬ tors would have to be halted in their aggression and a world war was in¬ evitable; but on no account would India help in such a war even against the fascist powers. The policy of appeasement was less of a surprise to him than to his-friends abroad, for India saw more of the imperialist than of the democratic face of the British Government. Though baffled and concerned, like any other left-wing sympathizer, by the trials in Russia,5 he declined to lend his name to an appeal for an inquiry. He had close links in Britain with Stafford Cripps and his Socialist League and the Left Book Club and approved of their program¬ me of popular fronts and an alliance with Russia. Collective security was the answer, though, presumably as a sop to the method of non-violence which he supported in India, he declared that it was quite possible to control the aggres-
1 Statement to the press, 21 September and speech at Allahabad, 27 September 1936; letter to * A. E. Shohet, 26 August 1937. 3 To Ernst Toller, 10 August 1936. 1 Statement to the press, 20 February 1937. 4 To Rabindranath Tagore, 2 June 1938. * See letters to Krishna Menon, 22 May and 11 November 1937.
234
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
sors by economic sanctions alone.1 When, in February 1937, at the Left Book Club rally for world peace and against fascism at the Albert Hall, Victor Gollancz read out an unexpected telegram from Jawaharlal as a message from the people of India, there was deafening and repeated applause.2 ^Though the Indian Government banned the entry of Left Book Cub books into India, a few managed to get through and were eagerly read. Jawaharlal thought of circumventing this ban by reprinting some of the books in India, but nothing came of the idea.3 In the circumstances, it is incredible, if characteristic, to find Lord Lothian, who had corresponded at length with Jawaharlal and review* ed the Autobiography, writing to the Aga Khan in the summer of 1937 that Germany should be appeased; for otherwise Germany would try to make alliances with Italy and Japan directed against the Empire. ‘That will exactly suit Jawaharlal Nehru.’4 But no man of normal intelligence could have had any doubt as to Jawaharlal’s total commitment to the fight against fascism. For him the Left meant the struggle for freedom in India, a commitment to the traditions and aspirations of his own people, resistance to Nazism and fascism and a faith in the Russian revolution despite all its crimes and inade¬ quacies. He was anti-totalitarian as well as anti-fascist and hoped to blend civil liberties and the parliamentary system with economic progress such as Russia had achieved.
En route to Europe Jawaharlal met Nahas Pasha and the leaders of the Wafd party at Alexandria, and then, on landing in Italy, set off immediately on the pilgrimage to Spain as the guest of the Republican Government. He spent five days at Barcelona on the eve of the Battle of the Ebro. He had his first experience of air raids, visited the front and was captivated by the charm and self-confidence of General Lister. Success, he thought, was bound to attend the armies of the Republic, created in the stress of war, with their informality, comradeship and dedication. They would triumph over the professionals and experts of the rebel troops, despite German ami Italian support and superiority in heavy armaments and aircraft, if only the British and French Governments did not deny the Republic food and munitions. An afternoon with the British and American battalions of the International Brigade filled him with longing to join them: ‘something in me wanted to stay on this inhospitable looking hill-side which sheltered so much human courage, so much of what was worth while in life.’3 Meetings with President Azana, Alvarez del Vayo, the Foreign
1 Foreword to Foreign Policies ofthe Indian National Congress andthe British Labour Party, by R. M. Lohia (AICC, 1938).
2 V. Gollancz to Jawaharlal, 8 February 1937,A Bunch ofOldLetters, p. 215; John Lewis, The Left Book Club (London, 1970), p. 40.
3 Lewis, op. cit., p. 73; correspondence between Mahmuduzzafar, secretary to Jawaharlal, and Gollancz, Home Dept. Pol. File 4/13/38.
4 Lothian to the Aga Khan, 19 May 1937, Lothian papers, Edinburgh. I owe this reference to
Mr Martin Gilbert. ^
* Article in the NationalHerald, 7 July 1939, reprinted in China, Spam andthe War (Allahabad, 1940), p. 78.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
235
Minister, and ‘La Pasionaria’ rounded off the trip. Influenced by his own atti¬ tude in India, he was unhappy that the political revolution was being merged with drastic efforts at social change;1 but this did not cloud his ardent desite that the Republican government should win. Jawaharlal returned from Spain convinced that the chief responsibility for the course of the war lay not with the rebels or even with the dictators but with the British Government, the French being completely under British influence.2 As Zetland ruefully re ported after talking to him on the subject, ‘when I referred to the trouble there as a civil war he dissented and rather suggested that he regarded Franco as being supported almost entirely by foreign countries and having little Spanish following. He clearly takes a very biased view of the present situation in Europe and I do not think that any amount of reasoning would cause him to change his view.’3
In England this time, Jawaharlal was, thanks to the Autobiography and the success of the Congress in the elections, an even better-known figure than before. He attributed the greater interest in him to the importance that attach¬ ed to what India might do in a world crisis; she had a tremendous nuisance value.4 But the fact was that he now commanded greater stature in the world. He was accepted as the true representative of the Indian people and he moved in the mainstream of world opinion. He spoke at the Albert Hall and at Trafalgar Square under the auspices of the ‘Aid to Spain’ committee, and at a Left Book Club rally organized especially in his honour. There were lunches at the New Statesman (where Attlee was present but unnoticed)3 and at the House of Commons, long conversations with Robert Vansittart and Tom Jones, and an afternoon with the Webbs.
As a contrast6 Nehru, the leader of the Indian Congress and his lovely daughter spent some hours here on Saturday with Ponsonby 7 to meet them. I had read and admired his autobiography and welcomed him warmly. He is the last word of aristocratic refinement and culture dedi¬ cated to the salvation of the underdog whether in race or class; but I doubt whether he has the hard stuff of a revolutionary leader. He is in theory a communist; but doubts the possibility of the complicated Soviet organi¬ zation among the mixed races of the Indian continent. ‘Between two worlds, one dead and one powerless to be born’ is a quotation which he recognized but did not agree with. He believes with fervour that a united
1 Lord Brockway's oral testimony, 24 July 1967, N.M.M.L.
* Thisaccountof JawahariaTs visit to Spain is basedon his confidential note written for the Work¬ ing Committee, and the articles written a year later and reprinted in China, Spain and the War.
» Zetland to Braboume, acting Viceroy, 5 July 1938, Zetland papers, vol. 10.
* Note to the Working Committee, 30 July 1938.
* Kingsley Martin, Editor (London, 1968), p. 10.
* To a visiting American professor.
v Arthur, first Lord Ponsonby, Minister in the Labour governments and a specialist jn foreign affairs.
236
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
India can be born, is, in fact being born, largely owing to the teaching of Gandhi — whose power as a saint and a missionary he realizes and admires — but whose economic proposals he dismisses as romantic rem¬ nants of the past. Nehru is convinced that the freedom of the individual, as manifested in the presence of opportunity to live the good life, can¬ not be secured without the organization of the principal services and main industries deliberately for communal consumption and without the profit-making motive. Today the Indian people are too primitive for Soviet Communism. But they have been roused, not only by internal conditions of India but by the horror of the invasion of China by Japan and by their sympathy with other oppressed races.1
And recalling this meeting over two years later, Beatrice Webb recorded that they had been ‘struck more by his charm than by his force — he seemed too ultra refined to influence English official or politician! He is a subtle thinker; an agnostic, in respect of man’s relation to the universe and, through the study of the capitalist system, a convert to communism for India and in the western world . . .’2
Jawaharlal also met the executives of the' Labour Party, the Communist Party and the National Council for Gvil Liberties. He even spent a weekend with Lothian and the ‘Qiveden Set’, and listened in silence to a tirade against socialism by Nancy Astor. George Padmore saw him to explain the problems of Africa. Jewish leaders called on him and put forward their side of the case, and Jawaharlal arranged for the settling in India of some Jewish refugees from Germany. The principal difficulty was the attitude of the Government of India, which insisted on guarantees of employment for life, which no provincial government or industrial firm was in a position to give.
This time Jawaharlal, unlike on his previous visit to Britain, was willing to meet figures in the Government. Apart from talks with Halifax and Zetland, he met Linlithgow, then on leave in England. The Viceroy had, especially after the acceptanceofoffice by the Congress, been anxious to meet him, and Gandhi had tried to arrange it. But Jawaharlal had had no wish to have any contact with the leading instrument of British imperialism in India, especially at a time whenprisoners in theAndamanIslands wereon hunger-strike.3 Now the strike was over and Jawaharlal saw no objection to talking to the Viceroy on leave outside India. The conversation was general and there was no detailed discussion of Indian politics.4 But as Jawaharlal recorded later, he told
1 Entry for 3 July 1938, Beatrice Webb's diaries. Passfield papers, London School of Economics Library, vol. 52, pp. 78-9.
2 24 September 1940. Beatrice Webb's diaries, vol. 34, pp. 173-6.
* Viceroy’s report on interview with Gandhi, 4 August 1937, Haig papers, vol. 13s Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 4 August 1937, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 240; proceedings of the Working Com¬ mittee, 14-17 August 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936; Linlithgow to Zetland, 4 February 1938, Zetland papers, vol. 15.
4 Glendevon, The Viceroy at Bay (London, 1971), p. 101; Jawaharlal's note for the Working , Committee, 30 July 1938.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 237
Linlithgow then ‘that 1 gave England at the outside ten years before India was independent. I was not so far out.’1 All that the Viceroy could retort, as they parted, was that a wide gap separated them and they would look at each other across it.2
From London Jawaharlal went to Paris to address an international confer¬ ence on the bombing of civilian populations. Speaking after Lord Cecil, who had referred to the recent visit to France of the King and Queen of England, Jawaharlal said he spoke not in the name of kings or queens or princes but on behalf of hundreds of millions of down-trodden Indians. Fascism was a recent growth in the west, but they in India had known it for long under the different name of imperialism. If the aggressors of the day had to be checked, the aggres¬ sors of yesterday had also to be called to account. They were all deeply moved by the aerial bombing in Spain and China, but this was really no different from the British bombing on the North-West Frontier.3
The organizers of the conference forbade ‘La Pasionaria’ from speaking on the ground that she was a communist. When the delegates insisted on hearing her, the chairman adjourned the meeting. Ellen Wilkinson reconvened the meeting unofficially and called on ‘La Pasionaria’ to speak. She took the floor but two attendants seized her and carried her off behind the platform.
Then Nehru walked on. Nobody would dare touch him. He was oriental dignity itself, olive-skin face, dream eyes, thin grey hair. But he was angry. Viscount Cecil wished to demonstrate that the Communists did not dominate the peace movement. Nehru wished to assert the right of free speech for Communists fighting Fascism . . . Nehru is not a Com¬ munist but in my many years in Russia and Europe I have rarely seen a truer revolutionary.4
The Nazi Government made informal approaches to Jawaharlal in the hope of inducing him to visit Germany as their guest.5 In fact, Jawaharlal spent two days in Munich but as a private tourist and declined to meet any Nazi officials. He then went on to Prague, met Dr Ripka, the communist leader dementis and, accompanied by Werzel Jaksch of the German Social Democrat Party, visited the border areas. All his sympathies were with the Czech Government in their resistance to Hitler; and the encouragement given to him by the British Government, with its own class sympathies and leaning towards fascism, nauseated Jawaharlal. ‘The perfect description has been given by someone. It was the rape of Czechoslovakia by Germany with England and France hold-
1 Note written on 24 October 1955, Nehru papers. * Jawaharlal to J. B. Kripalani, 27 July 1938. * Report in The Bombay Chronicle, 8 August 1938. 4 Louis Fischer, Man and Politics (London, 1941), pp. 506-7. * Message ofGerman Consul in Bombay conveyed through Shankar Rao Deo, see Jawaharlal to Shankar RaoDeo, 26May 1938; J. G. Studnitz, German newspaper correspondent, to Jawaharlaf, 25 June and 5 September 1938.
238 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ing her forcibly down!’1 Jawaharlal made it clear that when war came, as it' was bound to, the Indian people would not allow the British Government, whom they utterly distrusted, to take any decision for them. India would will¬ ingly throw her entire weight on the side ofdemocracy and freedom; but Britain should first establish her bonafides by eliminating empire from India.2 To add weight to his opinion, he urged the Working Committee to pass a resolution condemning Nazi attempts at aggression and stating emphatically that in event of war India could only be committed by a decision of her people.3
In September, at the height of the crisis, Jawaharlal was at Geneva, and was caught up in the tension. While the League of Nations was meeting peacefully and discussing every question but that of war and peace, the air was full of rumours; and Jawaharlal was swept to and fro, to cafes and press conferences, through the night. ‘Hello Prague? Hello Paris? Hello London? Is it peace or war?’4 Back in London he was fitted with a gas mask which he later presented to the Allahabad municipal museum, heard and was sickened by Neville Cham¬ berlain’s broadcast, and was present in the House of Commons to hear Cham¬ berlain announce that he was flying the next day to meet Hitler and Mussolini at Munich. Jawaharlal shared the general relief that war had been postponed. But he had no illusions about the attitude of the British Government, their anxiety to abandon Czechoslovakia and isolate Russia, their fear not of defeat but of victory, for that would have been a victory of real democracy. The weak¬ ness of England and France was their imperialism, and so the ending of impe¬ rialism was necessary even from the wider international viewpoint. Collective security could not function effectively so long as it had an imperialist base; and this made the freedom of India a vital factor in world politics.
Unable to secure in time a visa to visit Russia, which might have enabled him to fulfil an old desire to take the overland route via the Central Asian republics, Jawaharlal returned to India by the end of the year, and was drawn again into domestic politics. No one in Britain, even when discussing India, had referred to Hindu-Muslim relations or regarded it as of great importance. But in India it could not be ignored. The refusal of the Congress to form coali- " tions with the League seemed to Jinnah to be a betrayal born of arrogance, and since then his policy had been clear. Acceptance of office by the Congress made it an easy target. He attacked it as a Hindu fascist body which was out, with the assistance of a few Muslim ‘traitors’, to destroy the Muslim minority. When Jawaharlal and other Congress leaders asked him repeatedly to specify in¬ stances, Jinnah, now fast beginning to show the mastery of obstructive tactics and skill in avoidance which were to dominate Indian politics for the next ten
1 Article in National Herald, 3 October 1938. 2 Letter to the Manchester Guardian, 8 September 1938. J ToJ.B. Kripalani, Secretary, AICC, 30August 1938; note for Working Committee, 7 September 1938; cable to Kripalani, 26 September 1938. * 4 Article dated 21 September 1938 in the National Herald, reproduced in China, Spain and the War, p. 102.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
239
years, steadily refused. He talked of the suppression of Urdu although Urdu was not the language only of the Muslims and Jawaharlal had clearly reiterated the Congress policy of developing Hindustani in both Urdu and Devanagari scripts as the national language.1 Heobjected to the singing of Bande Mataram, ignoring the facts that that song had long rid itself of its Hindu antecedents and that the Congress, on Gandhi’s initiative, had decided that only the first two stanzas, which had no religious overtones, should be sung at public gather¬ ings. 2 But otherwise Jinnah would mention no particular grievances. It would indeed have been difficult for him to do so; for, as even the British Viceroy and Governors conceded, the Congress ministries took special care to avoid harm¬ ing Muslim interests. The documentary record of complaints published later by the League carried little conviction and explains why the League would not agree to the Congress proposal for an impartial inquiry. Sir Sikandar Hyat Khan, the premier of the Punjab and the most cool-headed of the League leaders, later toned down the charge of ‘atrocities’ committed by Congress governments to high-handedness of the majority community in some Congress provinces.3 When Linlithgow informed Jinnah that he had examined the position and could find no specific instances of oppression, all that Jinnah could say in reply was that the Hindus had ‘a subtle intention’ of undermining the Muslim posi¬ tion. 4 But this did not mean that Jinnah’s effort to create a legend of the Muslim community being trampled on by the Hindus was a failure. As the majority of Indians happened to be Hindu by religion, it was an easy slide from the fact of Congress ministries representing majority opinion to the suggestion of these ministries representing Hindu majority opinion. That the Congress was in office put it on the defensive, and the League’s successful myth-making was not the least of the unhappy consequences of office acceptance. Jinnah went round the country denouncing the Congress as anti-Islamic and promoted a drive to build up the organization of the League at the provincial and district level. The League was as committed on paper as the Congress to economic and social reforms and proclaimed the objective of full independence in the form of a federation of free democratic states. But the decision to convert the League into a mass party and the resentment of the ‘mass contact’ campaign of the Congress did not mean the overthrow of the League’s reliance on the upper classes. Indeed, the tenancy reforms proposed by the Congress brought many Muslim talukdars in the U.P. from the National Agriculturist Party into the League, and in the Punjab the link between the League and the Unionist Party was facilitated by support to rich agricultural producers.5 ‘What’, Sikandar
lTbe Question of Language, August 1937, 2 Statement of the Working Committee, 28 October, The Bombay Chronicle, 30 October 1937. 3 Letter to Jawaharlal, 14 February 1939. 4 Glendevon, op. cit., p. 137. * For Jinnah's assurances to Muslim landlords in the Punjab, see K.B, Sayeed, Pakistan,The Formative Phase (London, 1968), p. 93.
240 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Hyat Khan said to Jawaharlal sometime in 1938, 'have I got in common with Jinnah? Nothing except’ (pointing dramatically at Jawaharlal) 'common opposition to you!’1
Jinnah, in fact, was prepared to useevery influence and interest to strengthen Muslim communalism, He frightened the wealthy by prophesying that one result of Congress policy would be class bitterness.2 On the other hand, he encouraged Fazlul Haq of Bengal to support the peasants of that province against the zamindars not on an economic but on a communal basis; and Fazlul Haq agreed to this after failing to secure a coalition with the Congress. Jinnah also made overtures to the British, warning them that if they did not devote more attention to the Muslims there was a real risk that these would be driven into the arms of the Congress. However, if the British ‘protected’ the Muslims in the Congress provinces, the Muslims in return would ‘protect’ the British at the Centre.3 But at this period the British were having a semi-honeymoon with the right wing of the Congress, and paid little heed to Jinnah. Linlithgow, in particular, had a poor opinion of Jinnah as a leader. 4 * Jawaharlal’s talks in London with Zetland and Linlithgow made the League suspicious,3 and in desperation Jinnah sent A. R. Siddiqi and Khaliquzzaman to Europe in 1939 to contact the German and Italian Governments.6
The Government of India ignored these efforts and set aside the Muslim mood of frustration to be exploited in any change of circumstance. But the Congress was baffled. Jawaharlal was willing to go so far as to consider, in any scheme of provincial redistribution, the grant to important groups and minor¬ ities of territories within which they could feel that they had full opportunities of self-development, without which a creative life was hardly possible.7 He disliked the term ‘communal provinces’ but his scheme contained the germ of territorial redistribution on the basis of religion. But to concede Jinnah’s main demands, that the Congress should not approach the Muslim masses but should recognize the League as representative of Muslim opinion, was unthinkable. However, so long as the Congress was in office it could not ignore even uncor¬ roborated allegations of partisanship. One way out of this dilemma was to ap¬ proach the Muslim peasantry over the heads of the leaders of the League with a programmeof economic change; but here Jawaharlal found that, with the Con¬ gress ministries not proceeding fast enough, the communal approach, however
1 DSVA, p. 164. * Presidential address at the Lucknow session of the Muslim League, October 1937. * Reports of Jinnah's interviews, with Linlithgow in Linlithgow to Zetland, 9 September 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14, and with Brabourne in Brabourne to Zetland, 19 August 1938, Braboume papers, vol. 61. 4 See. for example, Linlithgow to Haig, 17 April 1939, Haig papers, vol. 3. ’ Brabourne to Zetland, 21 July 1938, Zetland papers, vol. 16. 4 Linlithgow to Zetland, 12 April 1939 and Zetland to Linlithgow 2 May 1939, Zetland papers, vols. 17 and 11, respectively. ^ 7 See his draft concluding chapter written on 23 August 1937 for K.T. Shah’s book Federal Government.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE'CONGRESS
241
‘hysterical’ and ‘medievalist’,1 was successfully hampering efforts to draw the Muslim masses into the Congress. The other alternative was to take advantage of the League’s decision to widen its base and precipitate a conflict between the reactioriaiy outlook of its leaders and the needs of the Muslim masses. So Jawaharlal encouraged the holding of Muslim mass meetings demanding debt relief and abolition of the talukdari system in the interests of the Muslim kisans.2 But these were long-term projects which hardly gathered any momen¬ tum in the context of extreme communal propaganda and violence. The League, which was promoting this activity, understandably rejected all suggestions by the Congress for consultation to promote communal harmony. The British police and magistrates also often did little to curb religious riots in order presumably to discredit the Congress ministries. If this were their objective they gained considerable success, for Hindu-Muslim rioting strengthened the anti-Congress feeling among the Muslim masses. Jawaharlal realized what this might finally mean.
Asyou know Iamoverwhelmed with this sense of impending catastrophe.
I find that few persons even among our leading politicians have this sense of tension and this premonition of approaching disaster. I fear we are rapidly heading for what might be called civil war in the real sense of thewordin India. Our future conflicts are nevergoing to beon the straight issue of Indian nationalism versus British imperialism. British impe¬ rialism in future is certainly going to play an important part in opposing us. But it will do so more from behind the scenes exploiting all manner of other groups to this end. 3
Weakened by office and punched continuously by an enemy on whom it could get no hold, the Congress was now stricken by in-fighting at its highest level. Subhas Bose had, through long years of prison and exile, earned the suc¬ cession to Jawaharlal as president of the Congress in 1938. But, during his year of office, he took hardly any interest in problems of organization and gave no clear lead in many matters that came up before the Working Committee. More important, he could- not get on with Gandhi. This was not just difference of viewpoint. Jawaharlal differed with Gandhi just as much, but ‘we know that neither of us can do without the other, for there is a heart union between us which no intellectual differences can break’.4 With Bose there was no such affinity, and when he announced early in 1939 that he would seek re-election, Gandhi encouraged the right wing of the Congress to set up its own candidate. But Bose won decisively and Gandhi acknowledged it to be his own defeat. However, thiswasonly thebeginning of the crisis. With his re-election Bose
jawaharlal’s comments on the Muslim League session October 1937, Tb* Bombay Cbroniela, 19 October 1937.
jawaharlal's letter to Siddiq Ahmed Siddiqui, 8 September 1937. 1 JTo Sri Prakass, 13 August 1939.
4Gandhi in May 1939, quoted in Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 3, p. 93.
242 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
believed that his hour as a charismatic leader had arrived. Impatient, wilful and endlessly ambitious, he decided to press home his victory. He ignored the fact that many local and regional factors for which he could take no credit had played a part in the election. He stressed only that there was widespread dissatisfaction with the older leaders and believed that he had been chosen to replace them. Incapable of the wider view, he tended to see most events in relation to his own career. A dedicated yet egotistic, complicated, ill-fated being, he lived out the fantasy of his life which ended in premature death; and there was something almost natural and inevitable in his loss of life in an air accident. The elements of tragedy were never absent from Bose’s destiny.
Now, in 1939, riding on the crest of a wave, Bose launched a fierce struggle of will. He insinuated that the ‘old guard’ were conspiring with the Govern¬ ment to establish federation, announced that the ‘Right’ and the ‘Left’ were in confrontation and demanded the immediate issue of an ultimatum to the Government and the launching of a struggle. This was heady stuff. But Bose, though an instinctive fighter, had no ring-craft and he had underestimated Gandhi and his followers. They welcomed a break, and brought it about in their own way. Realizing that, despite Bose’s electoral victory, the majority in the Congress still preferred Gandhi’s leadership with its moderation, twelve leading supporters of Gandhi resigned from the Working Committee and then carried a resolution at the Congress session in Tripuri that Bose should nomi-. nate the new Committee in consultation with Gandhi and accept his advice. Gandhi, however, declined to co-operate, with the result that Bose had to resign the presidency. Then followed, step by step, his ostracism, his setting up of a new party, and his lone path, away from the Congress, during the war.
In all this, Jawahadal’s attitude was individualistic and unwelcome to both sides. He disapproved of the manner in which Bose was being hounded out after winning an election, but he could not bring himself to support Bose. So he declined to sign the letter of resignation of the twelve members of the Work¬ ing Committee, but resigned on his own. Although some of his statements tended to be critical of Bose, at Tripuri he remained almost silent, tried in private discussions to patch up a compromise and urged Bose not to resign. When Bose insisted, Jawaharlal, while making clear his dislike of Bose’s action, declined to serve in the reconstituted Working Committee till the outbreak of war changed the situation. Such ambivalence Bose could not understand and this, more than the direct offensive of Gandhi and the others which drove him out of the fold, he found most difficult to forgive. ‘Nobody has done more harm to me personally, ami to our cause in this crisis, than Pandit Nehru. If he had been with us, we would have had a majority. Even his neutrality would have probably giVea$£&™ijority. But he was with the Old Guard at Tripuri. His open propaganda against me also has done me more harm than the activities of the twelve stalwarts. What a pity l’1 m
‘Hose to his nephew, 17 April 1939, quoted in N.G. Jog, In Freedom 's Quest (Delhi, 1969), p. 158.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 249
To suggest that Jawaharlal had allowed Bose to be destroyed is, of course, to exaggerate absurdly. Bose had really destroyed himself. The logic of his attitude demanded his expulsion from the movement, and there was-no way back. But Jawaharlal’s seemingly erratic attitude certainly cries out for expla¬ nation. Some have hinted the simple, personal, petty answer of consistent opportunism. Jawaharlal, said Rajagopalachari long after these events,1 had always been a worshipper of success. Applying this yardstick his behaviour in this crisis is easily understood; for Bose was a born loser. In Gandhian India, leadership could come only bygift, never by seizure. So Jawaharlal, it is alleged, preferred to remain in the Congress and by Gandhi’s side, a ‘safe’ militant who occupied as much of the central ground as possible while he awaited his destiny. Happy on the inside track, he allowed his only rival, on the outer rails, to be pushed off the course.
This explanation is too easy. Personalizing clouds and distorts the issues. The quarrel between Bose and Gandhi was not, as Bose sought to make out,2 a straight fight between the Left and the Right. He hid been tardy in condemn¬ ing Germany, Italy and Japan, had in December 1938 met the German Consul. in Bombay,3 had criticized Jawaharlal for supporting all lost causes such as China and Spain and was not enthusiastic about welcoming Jewish refugees from Europe. While his willingness to exploit the world situation to India’s benefit was not wrong in itself, he had, despite long years in Europe, no acute international sense. In India, while clamouring for struggle with the British and condemning office acceptance, he attempted to establish a coalition ministry in Bengal and sought the Governor’s assistance in this.4 This again could taf justified on pragmatic grounds as strengthening the prospects of a satyagrahlk campaign,3 but it weakened Bose’s ideological crusade. In fact, Jawaharlal was right in suspecting aweakness in commitment to anything broader than natitsgg; alism; nor could one have confidence in Bose’s judgment even in this narro^ field. He viewed most problems in too finite, clear-cut and limited a way. TM& distrust on Jawaharlal’s part of Bose’s approach strengthened the temptip^ mental dissimilarity which undoubtedly existed. The autobiographies of a* two men, published within a few months of each other, drive home the contsipf Bose’s book 6 lacks the intellectual grace and stature of Jawaharlal’s; the idfcaS are jejune and the prose without flavour. The book also shows a matter-of-fact
•See N. Majumdar, ‘C.R. The Unfinished Century’, The Statesman, 27 December 1972.
’Curiously, this idea is still prevalent, even among left-wing writers. Hiren Mukerjee describes Jawaharlal’s failuretoheal the breach as ‘a major blemish on Jawaharlal's record’ andthinks history might have been different and brighter if Jawaharlal and Bose had, at this stage, together led left- wing forces. [The Gentle Colossus, Calcutta, 1964, p. 80). Mohit Sen regards it as a tragedy that the 'left nationalists’, Jawaharlal and Bose, could not unite. (The Indian Revolution, New Delhi, 1970, p. 35.
*1 owe this information to Dr M. Hauner who has found evidence in Nazi records.
4Brabourne to Linlithgow, 19 December 1938, Brabourne papers, vd. 56.
’Bose to Gandhi, 21 December 1938.
*Tbe Indian Struggle (London, 1935).
244
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
mind, and a muscular, sanguinary temperament, totally different to Jawahar- lal’s highly strung personality, plagued by introspection.
Jawaharlal, therefore, could not be expected to side with Bose when battle was joined. He was particularly put off by the fact that Bose had#desired re- election and had induced even Rabindranath Tagore to lobby for him.1 Bose’s eagerness, after the election, to precipitate a conflict also repelled him. With the world on the brink of war and a crisis in India impending, it was foolish to divide the Congress. The left-wing forces within the Congress were not strong enough to act on their own, and the party still needed Gandhi’s leadership. The socialists and the communists, who at first supported the challenge of Bose, were soon disheartened to find themselves in alliance with adventurist ele¬ ments out for selfish advantage; and Bose himself reduced the differences to a conspiracy against Bengal. ’For the moment Subhas has become a kind of a symbol of Bengal and it is quite impossible to argue with or about symbols.’2 Jawaharlal, with his image of the Congress as a broad anti-imperialist front, had never been in favour of homogeneous committees in a sectarian sense; his idea of the Working Committee was of men with different views working to¬ gether with mutual confidence. So he resented Bose’s aspersions against his colleagues, but he also disliked the efforts to displace Bose, and in consequence refused to attach himself to either side. To the end he stood out of the intrigues of both groups and sought a settlement by dealing with the crisis as differences among' comrades within a movement. He tried to explain to Bose that any rebellion such as his could only be successful if it was rebellion within a dis¬ cipline; and he pleaded with Gandhi to make a friendly approach to Bose.3 But Gandhi was tougher than Jawaharlal and Bose less accommodating.
In this cheerless Atmosphere two developments gave Jawaharlal comfort. The problem of the Indian States had thrust itself into the forefront of Indian politics and the Congress had decided to support the growing movement for civil liberties and responsible government. Gandhi himself went to Rajkot and forced concessions and British intervention by undertaking a fast. Jawaharlal was president for this year of the All-India States Peoples Conference, and he planned to co-ordinate the agitation in the various States and involve the rest of India as well. This should become the major issue in the struggle against the British, transcending the wrangles in the Congress and the controversy with the League, underlining the total unacceptability of federation as envisaged in the Act of 1935 and perhaps even leading to the resignation of the Congress ministries.4 Though he was considerably hampered by Gandhi’s very different
1See A.K. Chanda, Tagore’s secretary, to Jawaharlal, 28 November 1938, A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 299-300; and Jawaharlal to Chanda, 1 December 1938.
2 To Krishna Menon, 4 April 1939.
*For the important letters between Bose, Gandhi and Jawaharlal, see A Bunch of Old Loiters, pp. 307-75; Jawaharlal’sgeneral attitude on the crisis is explained in his articles in National Herald, later reprinted as a pamphlet, Where are we? (April, 1939). %
4 Message to the ‘StatesPeople’, 3 February 1939; speech at Allahabad, 9 February, The Bombay Chronicle, 10and 11 February 1939; presidential addressat theAll-India States PeoplesConference, 13 February 1939.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 243
approach of overtures to the rulers and acceptance of British arbitration, yet this was a field of action which Jawaharlal welcomed.
The second congenial task was national planning. The concept of a planned economy was, even in Europe in the late thirties, still vague and ambiguous. But it was felt that only in Soviet Russia was there national planning in the red sense, with the whole economy geared to the production of plenty for human welfare and not driven by the profit motive or intended for efficiency in war. In other words, planning was a part of socialism.1 Jawaharlal agreed with this. Howevercritical he might be of the political aspectsof the Stalin regime, he had been deeply impressed by the economic progress achieved by the Soviet Union.
The argument about the success or otherwise of the Five Year Plan is rather a pointless one. The answer to it is really the present state of the Soviet Union. And a further answer is the fact that this Plan has im¬ pressed itself on the imagination of the world. Everybody talks of ‘plan¬ ning’ now, and of Five-Year and Ten-Year and Three-Year Plans. The Soviets have put magic into the word.2
He believed that India too had much to learn from the Soviet example. But to apply these lessons in a colonial economy and to consider planning in a country which was not yet free showed a bold and pioneering mind. This was the kind of work, long-term, adventurous and leading to socialism, which excited him. The fact that the Congress was in charge of many provincial administrations, whatever its political drawbacks, could be utilized for planning. Jawaharlal encouraged the Bihar and U.P. Governments, the two ministries with whom he exercised the greatest influence, to recruit experts from Europe and to get in touch with the League of Nations and the International Labour Organisation for the kind of assistance they had given to China.3 Meantime, at a meeting of ministers of industry from the Congress provinces, it was decided to set up a National Planning Committee with Jawaharlal as its chairman. Jawaharlal took up the work with enthusiasm and constituted a committee with not only Congressmen but scientists, economists, businessmen and industrialists as well. The Congress ministries were represented; in addition Punjab, Baroda and Mysore agreed to send representatives, and contacts were established with the departments of the Government of India. Along questionnaire was drafted and widely distributed and nearly thirty sub-committees were constituted to make detailed recommendations on specific subjects.
Jawaharlal’s own contribution, apart from holding the assorted crowd of planners together, was a dear statement of the general objectives of planning in India. To him planning was inevitably connected with a socialist economy within a democratic structure, but he had no wish to frighten away people by stressing the socialist aspect. The Congress had taken up planning because any
'See G.D.H. Cole, Practical Economics (Pelican, May 1937).
2!.etier to Indite, 9 July 1933, Glimpses, p. 887.
*To Syed Mahtnud apd to G. B. Pant, 1 October 1938.
246
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
vital national movement was bound to interest itself in all aspects of national life, but the Congress itself was not committed to socialism. So what Jawahar- lal hoped to do was to lead his party and the Indian middle classes generally to socialism without their knowing it. Any attempt to dispense with*the middle classes and bring about a premature conflict on class lines would lead to chaos and possibly to prolonged inability to build anything. ‘The disruptive forces in the country seem to be growing in strength and it almost seems that we are going the way of China.’1 Jawaharlal had moved even further away from the doctrinal positions of the left wing and preferred a pragmatic, undefined approach.
He was, therefore, deliberately imprecise in formulating the aim of planning. ‘The ideal of the Congress is the establishment of a free and democratic state in India. Such a free democratic state involves an egalitarian society in which equal opportunities are provided for every member for self-expression and self-fulfilment, and an adequate minimum of a civilised standard of life is assured to each member so as to make the attainment of this equal opportunity a reality. This should be the background or foundation of our Plan.’2 A year later he was more forthcoming and acknowledged that the over-all objective was to socialize national life in all its many sectors.3 Advantage could be taken of the Congress resolution of May 1929 that revolutionary changes, economic and social, were essential in India and of the clause in the 1931 resolution on fundamental rights that the state should own or control key industries and services, to start planning in the socialist direction. Private enterprise was not ruled out but it would have to be strictly controlled and co-ordinated to the general plan. The emphasis placed by the Congress on cottage industries did not exclude large-scale industries and any plan should provide for both; and increasingly the Congress would realize the importance of the latter. He rejected the Gandhian viewpoint that machineiy was evil in itself and resigned from the executive committee of the All-India Spinners Association.4 For a country to turn its face against industrialization was to render itself a prey to the industrialized countries. Even the development of cottage industries required the control of political and economic power, and this could not be secured by a people dependent wholly on cottage industries. It was not large scale industry that brought injustice and violence but its misuse by capitalists. Private ownership and the acquisitive society encouraged competitive violence, and when replaced by a socialist society the advantages of large-scale indus¬ trialization and its co-ordination with cottage industries could be realized. The Congress had devoted more attention to small-scale industries not merely because all its members accepted Gandhi’s views on the subject. Large-scale industries were strong enough to look after themselves, and were also often in the grip of foreign vested interests. The cbarka and khaddaryjx the other hand
1To K.T. Shah, Secretary, National Planning Committee, 13 May 1939.
Memorandum to National Planning Committee,.4 June 1939.
* Note to National Planning Committee, 30 August 1940.
4 TJo Shankarlal Banker, 24 February 1940.
OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS
247
created self-reliance and utilized the wasted man-power of India.1 This made sense at a time when the Congress was a party of challenge, but it obviously would have to shift its approaches when it planned for a free India.
The lack of sovereign authority was another road-block which on first sight was insuperable, for planning assumed independence and freedom from im¬ perialist control. Land reforms, for example, were urgently required, but neither peasant proprietorship nor co-operative or collective farming could be introduced so long as British rule prevailed. But while planning, in its full dimension, should be for a free India, steps could be taken immediately to develop national resources, increase the national wealth between two and three times within ten years, raise the standards of the Indian people and prevent the creation of fresh vested interests. This emphasis on concrete sftort-term steps such as improved nutrition, more clothing and better housing for every Indian over the next ten years had the further advantage of by-passing the theoretical and ideological differences among the planners. The immediate national objec¬ tive was stated to be self-sufficiency, planning for which might, apart from other benefits, help to weaken economic imperialism even before the British left India.
The work of the National Planning Committee alarmed not so much the Government of India as the right wing of the Congress itseli The detailed explanations provided by Jawaharlal that planning did not mean the abandon¬ ment of khaddar and the destruction of cottage industries 2 carried hardly any conviction. The agreement which was gradually developing in the Planning Committee in favour of at least state control of industry and agriculture also roused opposition. Gandhi himself called on his followers to stay away from the Planning Committee. ‘I have advised you about Jawaharlal’s invitation.. In my opinion, the whole of his planning is a waste of effort. But he cannot be satisfied with anything that is not big.’3 He also wrote to Jawaharlal to complain.
I have never been able to understand or appreciate the labours of the Committee. I do not know that it is working within the four corners of the* resolution creating the committee. I do not know that the W.C. is being kept informed of its doings. I have not understood the purpose of the numerous subcommittees. It has appeared to me that much money and labour are being wasted on an effort which will bring forth little or no fruit. These are my doubts. I seek light.4
What saved Jawaharlal from having to fight last-ditch actions was the outbreak of war. The fall in imports of textiles and the boycott of goods from both Britain and Japan increased the demand for hand-spun cloth. The war also gave a boost to industrial and other forms of economic development and
‘To Krishna Kripalanl, 29 September 1939.
^Proceedings of the Working Committee reported in The Bombay CbronicU, 28 June 1939.
. *To Amrit Keur, 29 June 1939, quoted in A.H. Hanson, The Process of Planning (Oxford, 1966), p. 28n.
<Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 11 August 1939 A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 378-9.
248
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
made planning seem all the more necessary. ‘If we had not had a planning com¬ mittee already we ought to have formed one.’1 A special sub-committee was created to consider the war situation and its repercussions oh the Indian eco¬ nomy. There was scope now, even from the point of view of war production, for promoting industrial development, while the impact of war or? agriculture emphasized the need for planning and state control on a countrywide scale. The over-production of sugar cane in the U.P., for example, could be dealt with, according to Jawaharlal, on the lines of Roosevelt’s New Deal, by the Government stabilizing prices and buying up surplus stock for distribution gratis to the poor.2 But the Government of India refused to adapt themselves to the changing context. They were still anxious to assist foreign industrial interests and to leave agricultural problems to laissez-faire and cut-throat competition.
By the summer of 1940, despite the tremendous disadvantages of lack of a common viewpoint among the planners, paucity of statistics and other data, and no immediate likelihood of implementation, seventeen sub-committees had presented final or interim reports. These covered not only technical pro¬ grammes of production*but also wider issues of distribution, social justice and social welfare. The sub-committee to which Jawaharlal probably attached the most importance was that on the condition and rights of women. The second stage of planning had now been reached. A comprehensive report, based on the suggestions of the various sub-committees, was taking shape. The Com¬ mittee met daily for a fortnight in May 1940 and again in June, under Jawahar- lal’s presidency and approved the general framework. Though there were various inconsistencies and frequent ambiguities of phrasing, the broad trend was in favour of state ownership or state control or a blend of the two. How¬ ever, political developments now took command. The Congress ministries, which had given the Planning Committee a purchase on the State, were gone. Jawaharlal himself was removed from the scene in October 1940 and the Government refused to permit him to deal with matters concerning the Plan¬ ning Committee while in jail. To keep the concept of planning before the public eye, Jawaharlal suggested publication of the reports of the sub-committees; but some other members of the Committee were not in favour. The matter was referred to Gandhi who vetoed publication. *
Jawaharlal’s contribution to planning before 1947 has, therefore, to be considered a mere torso. Even so, it was path-breaking. The plethora of plans drawn up in various quarters during the war years and the setting up by the Government of India in rivalry of a department of planning with an industria¬ list from Bombay in charge all had their genesis in the work of the National Planning Committee. Jawaharlal had made India plan-conscious.
•Jawaharlal to K.T. Shah, 18 September 1939.
*To Rajendra Prasad, 4 August 1940.
*K.T. Shah to P. Thakurdas, 21 April, A.D. Shroff to K.T. Shah, 23 April, and K.T. Shah to P. Thakurdas, 30 April 1941. Purshotamdas Thakurdas papers, File 220/1938-1949.