The War Crisis
When the war broke out, Jawaharlal was in China. Few people in India had approved of his going at a time when Europe was again approaching a crisis, and he himself had beep reluctant to leave India just then. But all plans had been made and it was difficult to back out. So he went to Kunming, Chungking and Chengtu but, before he could go to the north-west and meet Mao and the com¬ munists, he had to cut short his visit and return hurriedly to India. He liked the Chinese, who struck him ‘as a singularly grown-up people’, and he established a personal friendship with Chiang Kai-shek and his wife. He was much moved by the idea of visiting another Asian country with an old civilization and with which India had had centuries of contact; and as a result of the visit, ‘China has grown very near to me, and all mythoughts are mixed up with her.’1 In the new world order that was emerging, he was determined that India and China should work together; and this idea did not leave him till 1962. In fact, he thought in terms of an eastern federation in which India and China would be the senior partners, and called on his countrymen to plan and work for it.2
However, throughout the fortnight in China, he kept his sense of humour and balance. He did not fail to notice that the Kuomintang was not a very democratic body though it called itself such, and was unfavourably struck by the fact that every time the name of Chiang was mentioned at a public meeting the audience had to stand up in respect.3 But the problems faced by India and China were so similar, since both were striving to build national power in order to gain national freedom, that he left a note with Chiang suggesting closer con- tarts between the two national movements and the development of a common outlook and policy on major international issues.4
On his return from China on 9 September, Jawaharlal found that Gandhi’s immediate reaction to the war had been, apart from abhorrence at the
•To Madame Chiang Kai-shek, 17 December 1940.
* TheEastern Federation’, article in National Harold, 28 October 1940.
*See ‘Diary of a Journey’, reprinted in China, Spain and tha War.
4A note on the development of contacts between India and China, written at Chungking, 29 August 1939.
249
250
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
triumph of violence, a spontaneous support of Britain. He had told the Viceroy that he viewed the war ‘with an English heart’ and, while he could not speak for his colleagues, personally was for full and unquestioning co-operation. At the thought of the possible destruction of the Houses of Parliament and West¬ minster Abbey, he had broken down. ‘I could not’, reported the Viceroy, ‘help myself being profoundly moved by the emotion which he showed during a con¬ siderable part of it [the interview]. . . His whole attitude could not have been better, and in his conversation he showed the same breadth of approach and the same disinclination to trouble about minor or subsidiary issues as I have always noticed in him.’1 In the U.P. the ministers seemed willing to give full co¬ operation in prosecution of the war, while in Madras the Governor had to restrain Rajagopalachari, on the outbreak of hostilities, from detaining all Germans and seizing their bank balances, ‘whereupon he commented that the English seemed to want to wage war according to High Court rules’.2
However, the Congress attitude to the war was formulated not by Gandhi or Rajagopalachari but by Jawaharlal, and his approach was less emotional. This was to be expected and should have been no surprise to the Government. For years Jawaharlal had been stating his viewpoint on the European crisis and by periodica] resolutions had been committing the Congress to it; and the mere involvement of Britain in war was not going to change it. He had been consist¬ ently opposed to fascism and Nazism and believed in some form of collective security to curb their continual aggression. If other Powers co-operated with the Soviet Union, the policy of peace would become unassailable. Neville Cham¬ berlain’s policy of appeasement, therefore, had filled him with disgust, and he held Britain primarily responsible for the collapse of Spain and the destruction of Czechoslovakia. India would be no party to this policy, which was an addi¬ tional and unanswerable argument for complete independence. His writings and speeches to this effect in Britain in 1938 seem to have evoked Winston' Churchill’s approval, for though Jawaharlal did not meet him, Churchill sent him a message of goodwill through a mutual friend a year later, on the eve of Jawaharlal’s departure to China.5
Jawaharlal’s analysis of appeasement was that the British Government were inspired by class interests and were more hostile to Soviet Russia than to Nazi Germany. While Britain had been the leader in introducing political democracy, she was socially backward and the strain of social conflict had been only lessened by the exploitation of her colonies. She was anxious to protect her own empire and for this purpose connived at Nazi aggrandizement. Even when British imperial interests had been threatened by the dictators and there was growing criticism of their foreign policy, the British Government, the most reactionary
‘Glendevon, op. cit., p. 136; Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18; Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol, 5, p. 197.
2Haig’s telegram to Viceroy, 17 September 1939, Haig papers, vol. 7; Erskine's telegram to Viceroy, 3 September 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 17.
*TbaDucov*ry ofIndia, p. 439.
THE WAR CRISIS
231
forgenerations, had continued tosupport Hitler and Mussolini, for their dislike of democracy and socialism was greater even than theirattachment to empire. Even within Britain a fascist outlook was developing, and Jawaharlal believed that Chamberlainwasfollowing the road to internal fascism under cover of war preparations.1 As for the opposition, the Labour Party did not seem to know its own mind and played an ineffective role, the pacifists in their eagerness to avoid war supported Hitler while the Independent Labour Party behaved worst of all and praised Chamberlain as a man of peace.
The hope of the Chamberlain Government of protecting vested interests at home and abroad while Germany fell on Russia had been defeated by Russia's understanding with Germany. Even though Jawaharlal deplored the cynical opportunism which underlay it, he recognized the diplomatic reasons which had led Stalin to veer his policy. But the fact that Britain and Germany were at war with each other while Russia stood apart did not alter Jawaharlal’s general analysis of the situation and strengthened his attitude on non-participation by India. He had no trust in a Britain which still had Neville Chamberlain as Prime Minister. Fascism and imperialism werfe both parts of the same reac¬ tionary complex, and India was opposed to both. Jawaharlal’s views on this point had never been in doubt. In London in 1938, he had emphasized that the Indian people should themselves decide on participation in any war, and so long as they did not have independence they would regard any war in which Britain was involved as an imperialist war and an occasion to intensify their own national struggle. The fact that the British Labour Party found this difficult to understand only showed how a dormant imperialism coloured even its out¬ look.2 He wrote a few months later:
We want to combat Fascism. But we will not permit ourselves to be ex¬ ploited by imperialism, we will not have war imposed upon us by outside authority, we will not sacrifice to preserve the old injustices or to maintain an order that is based on them. We will not and cannot forget our own struggle for freedom for slogans which may souod pleasant to the ear but have little reality behind them or vague promises which have been broken often.3
It was for India to decide whether she would go to war. The Viceroy had now, without consulting representative opinion, taken that decision. But it was
‘See his articles ‘The Hoax’ and ‘England's Dilemma', in the National Herald, 25 October 1938 ai)d 31 May 1939, respectively.
aF.Brodcway, 'A Talk with Jawaharlal Nehru’, TbeNewLeader, 1 July 1938.
* ‘TheChoice Before Us’, article in the Nationalteerald, 5 October 1938.
252
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
absurd for a subject India to fight for the freedom of Poland. If India were to participate enthusiastically in the war, she would have to be granted freedom. One had to be free and democratic to fight for freedom and democracy. If Britain fought for democracy, her first task was to eliminate empire from India. The Indian people would not bargain or seek to take advantage of Britain’srtlifficulty; but whatever they did would have to be in accord with India’s freedom and dignity.
The resolution of the Working Committee was on these lines. On the train to Wardha, Jawaharlal had prepared two drafts, and the Committee accepted a merged version after merely toning down.criticisms of the British and tighten¬ ing the prose. It rejected both Gandhi’s advice that there should be no demand for a statement of war aims and the suggestion of Subhas Bose that civil dis¬ obedience should be launched immediately. While condemning the Nazi attack on Poland, the Committee reaffirmed that India could not associate herself in a war said to be for democratic freedom when that freedom was denied to her and such limited freedom as she possessed had been taken away from her. The word of the British and French Governments, that they were fighting for demo¬ cracy and freedom, was not enough. If Britain fought for democracy, she should necessarily end imperialism in herown possessions and establish full democracy in India. Afree democratic India would gladly associate herself with other free nations for mutual defence against aggression and for economic co-operation. The British Government were, therefore, invited to declare their war aims clearly and state how these would be applied to India and given effect to imme¬ diately, so that India could assume her proper role in the emergence of the new I world order. ;
The author of the resolution, commented Gandhi,1 was an artist, an ardent patriot who was also a humanitarian and an internationalist. Jawaharlal made clear the commitment of the Congress to an anti-fascist position and to national freedom in the larger world context. Theyears of continuing Nazi aggression in Europe were to him the basic cause of the war, and this knowledge was never clouded in his mind by the intensity of his dislike of British imperialism. .Even after the Government had rejected the Congress offer, he rebuked the editor of the National Herald for pro-German headlines and ordered the dismissal of the sub-editor responsible.2 He wrote to Edward Thompson:3
i
Some Congressmen tell you that it is not possible to make India enthu¬ siasticonyour side. But I know that they are wrong — I would guarantee to do it myself. In the last war there was a doubt about your cause, and whenever you had a defeat there was rejoicing in the bazaars. In this war you will no doubt have setbacks, and some of them may be serious, and
«*
tTenduikar, Mahatma, vol. 5, p. 204.
2Private letter to the editor, NationalHarold, 27 October 1999. ’Cited in E. Thompson, Enlist India for Fraadom! p. 48.
THE WAR CRISIS
233
there will be the old temptation to rejoice. But everyone knows your
cause is ‘just’.
However, Jawaharlal was unwilling to be stampeded by sentiment as Gandhi had been. The war was clearly going to be a long one which in time would probably extend beyond Europe and involve the United States. So what was required of the Congress was to state the general attitude not only of the Indian nationalist movement but of all colonial peoples, and wait for the British Government to clarify their cause by appropriate action. His lack of faith in Neville Chamberlain’s Government was, it should be remembered, widely shared in Britain. The Manchester Guardian approved of the resolution. ‘Nehru’, recorded Beatrice Webb in her diary,1 ‘has called the British bluff, the pretence of fighting for political democracy and the rights of man.’ Stafford Cripps urged Jawaharlal not to accept anything short of conclusive action and to see to it that the Congress stood firm as a rock,2 while Attlee counselled the British Cabinet to respond to the demand of the Congress with ‘imaginative insight’.3 Even a considerable number of Conservative back-benchers pressed Zetland to reach an agreement with the Congress.4 But the Viceroy had made up his mind that his present duty was neither to move even at snail’s pace along the path of constitutional progress nor to seek ways of harnessing India's enthu¬ siasm for democratic principles. He had no commitment to the Indian people, and even the tragedy of famine in Bengal caused him no concern. He was now a war Viceroy,9 whose first objective was to make India a safe base for the me¬ chanical prosecution of the war, and to provide men and money. Every decision had to be judged soley by the extent to which it would promote an Allied victory; and Linlithgow lacked the imagination to see that wars are not won by guns and soldiers alone. In this projection the Congress, as guided by ‘a doctrinaire like Nehru with his amateur knowledge of foreign politics and of the inter¬ national stage’/' had no place. On the other hand, more importance should be given to the Muslim League; and the Viceroy thought that this would have the added advantages of appeasing the army, which was largely Muslim, and the tribal elements on the North-West Frontier. Linlithgow decided, therefore, to ignore Jawaharlal and to break with the Congress; ‘the present is probably abetteropportunity than may present itself later’.7 Sikandar Hyat Khan, though nominally a member of the League, had no wish to see Jinnah break up the Unionist Party in the Punjab, which was a party mainly of rural landed interests
15 October 1939, Beatrice Webb diaries, vol. 53. p. 143.
2 Letter to Jawaharlal, 11 October 1939.
9 Zetland to Linlithgow, 16 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11.
4 Idem, 20 December 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11.
» Linlithgow's report of his conversation with W. Phillips, President Roosevelt's personal re¬ presentative, 19 February 1943. Transfer ofPowtr {H.M.S.0.1971) vol. 3, p. 689. a Linlithgow to Zetland, 18 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
7 Idem, 21 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
2*4
}K?9iKHAKiAL NEHRU
economic and not communal considerations. He therefore J L Vlrms that nothing should be done to inflate Jinnah or make him aivisfi&ttfcWlvM ., x n.,t Respite this warning, Linlithgow sent for
more difficult to deal with. • ministries be dismissed.2
Jinnah; and Jinnah asked that the Congress miniMi/co
The Congress, in fact, at this time, despite the insistence m th£ resolution for some action by the Government to establish its bonafides, conveyed to the Viceroy that it would be satisfied with a declaration clearly stating that India would be free to determine her own destinies after the war. Jawaharlal was less impulsive on this occasion than Gandhi; but his preference for the Allies was no weaker. He madedear, even if only indirectly, his anxiety to assist personally to the full in the war effort, and wanted the association of persons like himself, who were representative of public opinion, with some form of a National War Council. If India and Britain waged war together as equal partners, with no formal legal changes, but with Indian leaders being taken into confidence and associated with decisions on such matters as the extent of India’s war effort, the raising of armies and industrial mobilization, this in itself would have removed most of the constitutional difficulties by the time the war had been successfully concluded. But it was hinted that Jawaharlal would not insist on even this.3
Zetland, the Secretary of State, approved of Jawaharlal’s proposals,4 but by then it was too late. Desmond Young, the editor of the Pioneer, had rushed ‘ to Delhi carrying Jawaharlal’s message; Linlithgow was half-convinced but Sir Gilbert Laithwaite, the Viceroy’s private secretary, brushed it off.5 Gandhi himself was told, unbelievably, that the British Government would be most unwilling to define their war aims at this stage and had never committed them¬ selves in the least degree to fighting for democracy.6 Jawaharlal began to lose hope of any reasonable arrangement, and his interview, along with Rajendra Prasad, with the Viceroy on 3 October confirmed his fears. The Viceroy made no secret of his ‘rather negative’ conclusions. The British Government could not ignore the Muslims and the Princes, and could make no specific commit¬ ment about Dominion Status till federation had been introduced. There could be no extensive expansion of the Executive Council or sharing of power with political parties in the central government. All he was prepared to do was to form a group consisting of a few members from the two houses of the central legislature with whom the Government would keep in touch on defence matters.7
1 Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
2Linlithgow's record of interview with Jinnah, 4 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. ’Haig's telegram to Viceroy reporting conversation with Mrs bandit, 19 September, and Des¬ mond Young’s report of conversation with Jawaharlal, 21 September 1939, Haig papers, vol. 7; Viceroy's note on interview, with Gandhi, 26 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
4Zetland to Linlithgow, 9October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11.
1D. Young, TryAnything Twice (London, 19631, pp. 243-6.
6 Viceroy’s note on interview with Gandhi, 26 September 1939, Zetland g|pcrs, vol. 18. 7Jawaharlal’s note on interview with Viceroy, 3’ October 1939.
THE WAR CRISIS
255
Yet Jawaharlal continued to pine for a gesture which would enable India to end a hundred years of hostility to Britain and ‘join in a struggle for freedom’.1 Heeven took the step, unusual for him, considering that he viewed events in an impersonal framework, of making a private appeal to Linlithgow. Ignoring the disappointing trend of his interview with the Viceroy, he acted on Gandhi’s suggestion that he explain developments in the U.P. and used the opportunity to touch on wider issues. ,
This letter, written in the train to Wardha, has grown long. But I want to add a few words to it and to tell you how much I desire that the long conflict of India and England should be ended and that they should cooperate together. I have felt that this war, with all its horrors, has brought this opportunity to our respective countries and it would be sad and tragic if we are unable to take advantage of it. None of us, in India or England, dare remain in the old grooves or think in terms of past con¬ ditions. But events are moving so fast that sometimes I fear that they will overtake our slow moving minds. There are all the elements of a Greek tragedy in the world situation today and we seem to be pushed along inevitably to a predestined end. You told me that I moved too much in the air. Probably you are right. But it is often possible to get a better view of the lie of the land from the heights than from the valleys. And I have wandered sufficiently on the solid earth of India and mixed with the people who labour there to think of India in earthly terms.
May I say how much I appreciate your friendly courtesy to me? It was a pleasure to meet you for a second time, and whenever chance offers an opportunity for this again, I shall avail myself of it. But whether we meet or, as you once said, look at each other from a distance over a gulf that has not been bridged, we shall do so, I earnestly trust, with no trace of unfriendliness, and realizing the difficulties which encompass us and which compel us to pursue different paths.2
The two paragraphs justify full quotation, for they mark the only occasion, at any time from the Amritsar tragedy in April 1919 till Lord Mountbatten’s arrival in India in March 1947, when Jawaharlal broke through to a human level in his dealings with British officials. It is curious that the recipient of such warmth should have been Linlithgow, the least emotional of men, ‘heavy of body and slow of mind, solid as a rock and with almost a rock’s lack of aware¬ ness,’9 as Jawaharlal later bitterly described him. It is not so much that there was in Linlithgow a hidden vein of a finer quality that had struck a chord in Jawaharlal as that Jawaharlal wasdesperately anxious to find away which would
*Mesuge toNows ChronicIt, 5 October 1939.
aTo Linlithgow, 6 October 1939.
*Tb* Discovtry of India, p. 437.
256
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
enable the Congress to co-operate with the Government. So, though all reason weighed against it, he sought to reach out to the Viceroy. Awaiting a response, he pushed through, to the annoyance of the socialists, a resolution at the A1CC meeting, endorsing the stand taken by the Working Committee. India should for the present stand aloof, but if given the opportunity she should jgin the war. It was an imperialist war but might not continue as such; it would certainly create a new world order and if India played her part in the right direction she could influence this change for the better. But if the response were not forth¬ coming, there was no alternative to conflict with the British. ‘The next few weeks will probably make a big difference in India, this way or that.’1
Within not weeks but days, however, there came the stinging British reply. Linlithgow had sent a friendly but non-committal answer to Jawaharlal’s letter,2 and his public statement (eft no doubt that the Government had not revised their policy in the context of the war situation. The Viceroy stressed the differences among the Indian political parties, contended that no precise definition ofwar aims was as yet practicable, and was ready to say no more than that Britain was fighting to resist aggression. As for India’s future, attention was gravely drawn to the preamble of the Act of 1919, to the statement on Dominion Status in 1929 and to the virtues of the Act of 1935. At the end of the war, the British Government would be very willing to enter into consulta¬ tions as to any modifications of that’ Act that might be made with the agree¬ ment of all the vested interests in India; and in the meantime, a consultative group for war activities could be set up.3
ThoughJawaharlal knew that his hope had been faint, yet hisdisappointment was intense. It had been made dear that Britain dung to her imperialism and was fighting to preserve it; and Indians were asked to shed their blood in order to strengthen their shackles. The statement showed the most amaziqg ignor¬ ance of India and of the temperof the Indian people. The Congress in turn could only say ‘an emphatic no’ to this and once more prepare togo into the wilderness. If one door, that of co-operation, was barred to them, they would open other doors.4 * Jawaharlal was for the Congress declining to assist in the war effort and preparing for the resignation or dismissal of the provincial ministries, but the Working Committee went further and directed the Congress ministries to resign as a first step.9 There had never been so much unanimity in all Congress drdes.6 But theGovernmentwere still incapable of grasping the consequences of their mulishness, and sought to evade the conflict by relying on Gandhi’s
1 To Frances Gunther, 13 October 1939. a 15 October 1939. * Speech, 17 October 1929, Indian AnnualRegister, 1939, vol. 2, pp. 384-9. 4TheAnswer', ‘What Britain Fights For’ and Twenty Years*, articles written for the National Harold 17, 18 and 19 October 1939; message to the Nows Chronicle, 18 October 1939. ’Jawaharlal’s draft resolution, 21 October and Working Committee’s resolution, 22 October 1939. 6To Krishna Menon, 21 October 1939. %
30 Jawaharlal with M. A. Jinnah, 1946
31 With Lord Mountbatten in Singapore, 1946

34 With Lord Pethick- Lawreme, 19-16
36 The Constituent Assembly, New Delhi, 8 February 1947: Jawaharlal moves the resolution for an independent sovereign republic
37 Independence Day celebrations below the Red Fort, Delhi, 15 August 19-17
THE WAR CRISIS
257
preference for unconditional co-operation. The subtlety of Gandhi's reactions, and his placing of this offer in the context of total non-violence, were beyond their comprehension. The Congressleaders weresummoned to Delhi again and asked to reach an agreement with the League in the provinces, in which case the Government would be willing to create two or three more seats in the central Executive Council. To ensure that Gandhi accepted and was satisfied with this trivial change, the Government manoeuvred to secure Rajagopala- chari’s presence in Delhi to advise Gandhi.1 But Gandhi, to the surprise of no one except the Government of India, refused to abandon the Working Com¬ mittee, and merely assured the Viceroy that he was anxious to avoid dvil disobedience. The sentence in Rajendra Prasad’s official letter to the Viceroy of 3 November, that till ‘the main and moral issue' about clarification of war aims had been dealt with the Congress could not consider any subsidiary proposal was, in fact, drafted by Gandhi.2
From the start of the war crisis, the Congress had hoped for a joint approach with the League to the British Government. Jinnah had been invited to the meeting of the Working Committee in September, but had declined. However, the Congress thought the idea worth pursuing. The League was also committed to independence, and it was this demand which the Government had spurned. So the Congress might utilize the urgency of the situation to secure priority for the political issue over communal differences. Jawaharlal met Jinnah informally early in October and thought the latter had not been totally immune to this suggestion. To humour Jinnah's vanity, Azad stayed away from the talks with the Viceroy.3 Sikandar Hyat Khan rang up Azad to say that acompro¬ mise might be reached if the Congress recognized the League as an ‘important’ organization even if not the sole organization representing Muslim opinion.4 This was unobjectionable, and made an agreement seem ^possible. The day after Linlithgow’s statement, Jawaharlal wrote a friendly letter to Jinnah, offering to meet him again wherever it suited him to come to doser grips with their differences.
I entirely agree with you that it is a tragedy that the Hindu-Muslim pro¬ blem has not so far been settled in a friendly way. I feel terribly distressed about it and ashamed of myself in so far as 1 have not been able to con¬ tribute anything substantial towards its solution ... With your goodwill and commanding position in the Muslim League that should not be so difficult as people imagine ... The Viceroy’s statement has been asto¬ nishing in its imperialist challenge to all of us I earnestly trust that
‘See Viceroy's telegram to Erskine, 28 October, and Erskine's telegram to Viceroy, 29 October, and telephone message, 51 October 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 17.
•See the draft of the letter in Rajendra Prasad papers, National Archives of India.
•SeeLinlithgow to Zetland, 4October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
^Jawaharlal to RajpAdra Prasad, 17 October 1939.
258
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
you will also express your strong disapproval of the Viceroy’s statement and refuse to co-operate with him on the lines he has suggested. I feel strongly that our dignity and self-respect as Indians have been insulted by the British Government. They take us for granted as hangers-on of their system, to be ordered about when and where they will. *
At the end of the month, Gandhi, Jawaharlal and Rajendra Prasad met Jinnah again. He was assured that the Constituent Assembly would be formed on the widest possible franchise and by agreement on communal representation, and that Assembly would frame full protection for the rights and interests of all minorities. Jawaharlal thought this had satisfied Jinnah. ‘And so the whole fabric of communal disunion as a bar to India’s progress, conjured up by the Viceroy, fades away and vanishes at the touch Of reason and reality.’2 He had found, he said later,3 that he and Jinnah had a great deal in common in regard to the objective and this had brought them much nearer than they had been for years.
These efforts worried the Government, who were relying heavily on the antagonism of the League to the Congress. The nationalist leaven-was bound to work in that body, particularly among its younger members,4 while Jinnah was unpredictable, ‘and I had one or two rather anxious moments during the periodwhen he, Jawaharlal and Gandhi were discussing the situation together’.3 But the Viceroy’s fear was short-lived. A Constituent Assembly elected on adult franchise and framing a constitution after the British had left held fin appeal for Jinnah, because the Muslim masses might well smother communal tendencies even in separate electorates. But Jawaharlal might have been led to believe that in their talks Jinnah had agreed to this, by Jinnah’s lack of real interest in this subject. He was still thinking in terms not of the future but of the immediate present, and trying to force the Congress to form coalition ministries with the League. In the talks, communal matters were only raised by him casually, but he was very keen on the Congress reversing its general policy and becoming again a liberal and moderate party.6 Jawaharlal and the Con* gress may have temporarily forgotten that the League’s chief interest was jobs for the upper classes and felt confident that it would not oppose the freedom movement. But Jinnah's premiss throughout was that no alliance was possible with a politically advanced party. When, therefore, the Congress announced that its ministries would resign, h£ lost interest in these conversations. He had
1Jawaharlal to Jinnah, 18 October 1939.
JThe Right and the Wrong of It’, editorial in the National Herald, written by Jawaharlal,
6 November 1939.
*Statement to the press, 6 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 7 November 1939.
4 Linlithgow to Zetland, 23 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18.
5Idem, 18 November 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. '
•Note on Jinnah’s talks with Viceroy, 13 January 1940, Linlithgow to Zetland, 16 January 1940, Zetland papers, vol. 19; Jawaharlal to Zakir Hussain, 23 NovembeiiN1939.
THE WAR CRISIS
259
no wish to be involved in any agitation which the Congress might launch and was prepared to fall in line with the Government in order to secure concessions from them. To the Congress resolutions in the provincial assemblies on India’s attitude to the war, the members of the League were directed to move amend¬ ments asserting that democracy was unsuited to India. Fazlul Haq, the premier of Bengal, a volatile politician who at this time was passing through a phase of devotion to the League, challenged Jawaharlal to join him in a joint inquiry into atrocities committed by the Congress against the Muslims. Jinnah himself declined to sign a communique, drafted by Jawaharlal, stating that the Congress and the League had much in common on the political issue and the general objective; and, soon after the Congress ministries resigned in the first week of November, he called on all Muslims to celebrate a ‘deliverance day'. The chal¬ lenge of Fazlul Haq, which Jawaharlal had promptly accepted, was conveniently submerged in the demand for a Royal Commission which obviously the Con¬ gress could not accept as it implied acquiescence in British intervention in Indian affairs. Their suggestion of a reference to Sir Maurice Gwyer, the chief Justice of the Federal Court, held to interest for Jinnah.
There was clearly no scope for further talks with Jinnah, and Jawaharlal called them off. Though he had, in the first shock of anger at the British atti¬ tude, made overtures to Jinnah, the failure of these efforts now caused him little concern. The ‘deliverance day' celebrations had been no great success, and the League seemed to be visibly weakening. The Muslim peasantry, particularly in the U. P., and industrial workers did not support it, and Jinnah was relying on the feudal and upper middle classes.1 There was also no room for further negotiations with the Government. Zetland’s reference to the Congress as a Hindu organization which should reach a settlement with the Muslim League put a lid on all talks.2 'Lord Zetland and his Government have put the final seal on this bill of divorce, and the gulf that separates us is wider than the many oceans that intervene between his country and ours.’3 The Congress would go its own way with no turning back or regrets. But that way was not clear. The resignation of the ministries was the beginning of ‘partial non-co-operation’,4 but the next step was uncertain. Gandhi was firm that while the Congress could not co-operate with the British, it should not embarrass them in the prosecution of the war. Gvil disobedience should be begun only when it became inevitable because of some aggressive action by the Govern¬ ment, and the people were strong and prepared for struggle. As it was, in view of the hostility of the League, any such campaign would almost certainly de¬ teriorate into communal rioting. The Working Committee decided that the
•To Stafford Cripps, 17 January 1940.
1Jawaharla! toGandhi, 8November 1939, on Zetland's speech of 2 November.
* Lord Zetland's Apologia’, editorial in the National Harold, written by Jawaharlal, 19 November 1939.
4JawaharlaI toE.M.S. Namboodripad, 22 December 1939.
260
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
policy of non-co-operation should continue till the Government ceased to maintain their imperialist domination in alliance with the reactionary elements in the country. But, after slight wavering, the Committee returned to the Gandhian path. Stress was laid on non-violence and on the constructive pro¬ gramme as the only ways of preparing the country for civil resistance; and the Committee reaffirmed that it was inherent in every form of satyagraha that no effort should be spared to achieve an honourable settlement.1
For the present, wrote Jawaharlal,2 all of us have to go through the valley of the shadow. But in some ways the darkness was much greater for him. He had never been happy about Stalin’s alliance with Hitler, and did not expect it to last long. There had been some justification for it in Russia’s need to pro¬ tect her own interests; it had strengthened Russia’s whip hand in Europe, kept her out of war, and halted Germany’s eastward drive. However, the partition of Poland had been bad enough; and now Russia had gone to war with Finland. This again, as Jawaharlal saw, could be justified as intended to stave off the possibility of Finland being used by other powers as a platform for attacking Russia.3 Nevertheless, he did not conceal that the invasion had been a great shock to him.4 Russia’s strength in the outside world lay in her principles and her idealism. The principles, for all he knew, might still be there, but the ideal¬ ism was wearing thin. Russia, the symbol to all progressive forces of hope and fulfilment, had descended from the pedestal onwhich her ardent champions had placed her, and bartered away her moral prestige and the support of so many of her friends for seeming political advantage. In a signed article, intended to correct the pro-Soviet bias of some editorials in the National Herald, Jawa¬ harlal recounted the gloom which had been cast on him by the purges within Russia and the too facile opportunism of Soviet foreign policy. By lining herself with the aggressor nations, and attacking a small democratic country, she was paying heavily and ’in a coin which cannot be counted, for it is made up of the wishes and ideals of innumerable human beings’. Stalin’s government had dealt themselves a severer blow than any combination of enemies could have.done and in the process injured the cause of socialism itself.3
In these circumstances, Jawaharlal looked to the United States. He had admired Roosevelt’s attitude in the Czech crisis, and what now gave him con¬ fidence was the belief that the burden of the future would ultimately fall on the United States. ‘India is far from America, but more and more our thoughts go to this great democratic country, which seems, almost alone, to keep the torch ofdemocratic freedom alight, in a world given over to imperialism and fascism,
1 Working Committee resolutions, 23 November and 22 December 1939.
2 ToMadame Chiang Kai-shek, 23 December 1939.
*See his editorials in National Harald, ‘What is Stalin aiming at?* and ‘Russ|a and Finland’,
14 November and 3 December 1939, respectively.
* Press conference at Bombay, 13 December, reported in Tba Bombay Chroniclt, 16 December i939. ^
2 ‘What of Russia now?', article written on 16 January 1940 for the National Harald.
THE WAR CRISIS
261
and violence and aggression, and opportunism of the worst type.*1 But Soviet policy and action strengthened his acceptance of the Gandhian method. It was Russia’s failure to keep her means above reproach that had led to the ends being twisted to fit in with these means. This example of violence and oppor¬ tunism distorting objective impressed on him the necessity of relying on non¬ violence and ethical action in achieving a free India. It is difficult otherwise to comprehend his meek acceptance of the constructive programme as the next step to be taken after the abandonment of provincial office. He himself resumed regular spinning after a break of nearly four years.
So, if Jawaharlal had laid down the Congress policy of non-co-operation, it was for Gandhi to implement it. His mind was preparing for a struggle, and he continually laid stress on discipline and non-violence. But he could not see his way ahead. Having said 'nothing doing’,2 the Congress could do little more. There was no question of any compromise or manoeuvring, but there was also no desire to precipitate a conflict. Jawaharlal does not seem to have expected anything much to happen immediately, and was almost in a relaxed mood. He took slow trains as a diversion and was considering a trip in the summer first to Switzerland to see his daughter and then perhaps even to the United States.3
The world is in a curious muddle and we in India are also tied up in many knots. But there is no need to worry overmuch either about our personal affairs or about national affairs. When there is so much that is bad taking,place in the world, we can shoulder our own burdens, which are relatively light, more easily.4
The Government thought they were better placed. They had no intention of breaking the stalemate they had created. But they fancied, perhaps because Gandhi was guiding the Congress again and was reluctant to resort to civil dis¬ obedience, that a settlement on their terms was feasible. Linlithgow felt that despite Jawaharlal’s irreconcilable attitude, the general atmosphere was a good deal more conducive to an agreement than one could have hoped, while Harold Laski, with his access to official quarters, reported that India 'is abrighter spot. I think there is agood chanceof Congress settlingon the basis of Dominion Status at the close of the war plus representation in the Viceroy’s Council now. There is a long story behind this, but I feel better about the Indian pros¬ pect than for years.’5 The Viceroy reverted to his old, foredoomed policy of seeking to detach Gandhi from Jawaharlal. When he saw Gandhi early in
1'India’s Demand and England's Answer’, article written on 6 January 1940 and published in the Atlantic Monthly, April 1940.
’Jawaharlal to the press at Bombay, 10 February,' The Hindustan Tjmas, 11 February 1940.
*ToMadameChiang Kai-shek, 20February 1940.
4To Syed Mahmud, 21 February 1940.
’Linlithgow to Erskine, 22 January 1940, Erskine papers, vol. 16; Laski to Felix Frankfurter, 30 January 1940, Laski papers.
262
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February, he flattered him, declared that Jawaharlal lacked Gandhi’s experi¬ ence, steady vision and control of utterance and said that he could not accept responsibility for his share of any agreement unless he had a firm assurance that Gandhi would direct the Congress.1 This ridiculous attempt at low cunn¬ ing came, of course, to nothing, for beneath Gandhi’s courtesy ancj attachment to Britain lay a steely determination to press for India’s freedom. There was a shift in emphasis, in the resolution of 1 March of the Working Committee, from the importance of preparing for civil disobedience to the inevitability of such action as soon as organization permitted or circumstances demanded it. To avoid any blurring of issues, the paragraph in Jawaharlal’s draft condemn¬ ing Soviet action in Finland was omitted; and Jawaharlal himself seems to have been converted to the view that Russia’s error in attacking Finland should not divert attention from the actions of Britain and France, who were exploiting the Finnish war to weaken Russia, seeking to entangle her in a war in West Asia and converting the war in Europe into a side-show of the real battle against Russia, who was the one irreconcilable opponent of all forms of imperialism.2 The option of restricted or mass civil disobedience, suggested by Jawaharlal, was also deleted by the Committee; and to dispel suggestions that the Congress was prepared to compromise, the Committee reaffirmed that nothing short of complete independence — not even Dominion Status — and a constituent assembly would be acceptable. Only then would a permanent solution of the communal problem be possible, and the difficulty of the States, which was of British creation, disappear. * Gandhi and Jawaharlal favoured the issue of another resolution defining the content of sivaraj — deepening, as it were, the Karachi resolution on fundamental rights. They thought this would strengthen the Congress in the coming struggle; but as Patel, Azad and Rajendra Prasad disapproved, the idea was dropped.
Jawaharlal, with the support of Azad, was for the early, if not immediate, commencement of civil disobedience. The question of preparation did not arise for it was not a matter of taking the offensive but of repelling the Govern¬ ment’s attack. They could not avoid the struggle by. sitting still. In Bengal the press was being stifled by censorship and demands for security, and large numbers of Congress workers were being arrested in various parts of the coun¬ try. The Government seemed to be tiying to see how much goading the Con¬ gress could bear. The possible hostility of the Muslim League should not be a deterrent to mass action. The Pakistan resolution passed by the League was a 'mad scheme’ which could not last a day and was beyond discussion. To con¬ sider it seriously would be to encourage diverse separatist and disruptive forces.
1 Linlithgow to Zetland, 24 January, and note of conversation with Gandhi, 5 February 1940, Zetland papers, vol. 19.
*‘On the Eve of Ramgarh’, editorial written by Jawaharlal for the National Harold, 11 March, and published 14 March 1940.
*Jawaharlal’s twodrafts of 29February 1940, and final resolution of 1 March 1940.
THE WARCRISIS
265
The communal problem was best shelved till the British leh India, because not only would the British base of that problem drop out but, if there were civil war, Jawaharlal could not envisage utilizing British assistance to suppress the Muslims.1
Gandhi was not convinced. He dare not, he said, start civil disobedience, because if he did, disobedience would remain and civil would disappear. Even in the Frontier Province discipline had cracked. The Congress should form satyagraba committees and prepare the people, but there was no hurry to launch the movement. Once it started, the Government would probably take no action and allow the League and other anti-Congress forces to complicate the situa tion. Patel agreed but suggested individual civil disobedience to avoid demora¬ lization, and Gandhi was willing to consider this either on a large scale or restricted to a few or confined only to him.2
Aware of the general trend of these discussions, the Government showed no concern. They did not take the demand for Pakistan seriously, but saw no reason to throw too much cold water on it, for it weakened the position of the Congress. On learning that Sikandar Hyat Khan was trying to get in touch with moderate Congress leaders so as to bring the Congress and the League together, Linlithgow cracked the whip and called him off.3 The widening gulf between the two parties enabled the Government to abandon all efforts to reach a settle¬ ment. Nothing more seemed to be required than preparations to deal firmly and promptly with any form of civil disobedience.4 I am not too keen to start talking’, commented the Viceroy,9 ‘about a period after which British rule will have ceased in India. I suspect that that day is very remote and I feel the least we say about it in all probability the better.’ There could be no more revealing gloss on all the statements made by British authorities over the y$ars on their deter¬ mination to leave India.
In contrast, Jawaharlal thought that the British empire was doomed, and the war had made this more certain than ever. But his enthusiasm for action was now dimmed by his sense of chivalry. Events in Europe took charge of devel¬ opments in India. The Nazi Blitzkrieg brought him in line with Gandhi. He had surmised that the war could not continue for long in its ‘phoney’ phase and the German advance did not rattle him. Rajendra Prasad, the Congress president, and Asaf Ali, a member of the Working Committee, issued hasty
■'Discussions in the Working Committee, 16 to 19 Much 1940, Anand Bhavan papers, and 16 to 19 April 1940, AICC FileG 32 of 1940; Jawaharlal’s speeches at Allahabad, 13 April and at Poona 18 April 1940, The Hindustan Times, 15 and 20 April 1940, respectively.
2Discussions in the Working Committee, op. cit., Jawaharlal’s note of discussions. 15 April 1940, Anand Bhawan papers; Gandhi’s article in Harijan cited in Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 5. p. 341.
»P. Moon, 'May God be with you always', The Round Table, July 1971, p. 418.
4Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 April, 26 April and 3 May 1940, Zetlan^ papers, vol. 19; Zetland's report toWarCabinet, 14 April 1940, Glendevon, op. cit. pp. 168-9.
* To Zetland, 5 April 1940, Zetland papers, vol. 19.
264
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
statements pledging support to the British; but Jawaharlal recognized that from India's viewpoint there had been no real change. Neville Chamberlain's Govern¬ ment had gone, but a Cabinet with Winston Churchill and Leopold Amer> determining Indian policywas not likely to be more sympathetic to the national¬ ist viewpoint;1 nor, despite its earlier attitude, could much be hoped for from the Labour Party. Therefore, while India had no wish to see the triumph of Nazism, she could not be expected to rally to the cause of a tottering imperialism which spoke with arrogance and in terms of domination. To contend that British rule was preferable to that of the Nazis was to accept that Indians were a helpless people whoseonly choice was between masters. The Congress should adhere to its policy and add to its strength by preparing for satyagraha but take no action so long as Britain was in peril.2
It wasdecided, as a demonstration of coolness, not to summon an emergency meeting of the Working Committee; but the policy as formulated by Gandhi and Jawaharlal was stated in a resolution, drafted by Jawaharlal, of the United Provinces Congress committee. As the British Government still thought in terms of empire and the picture of India was still one of British imperialism in action, so, whatever might happen in Europe and however deep the sympathy of India for the victims of aggression, there could be no change in India's atti¬ tude towards Britain.3 But Jawaharlal opposed an amendment that civil dis¬ obedience should be started immediately on the ground that it was not worthy of the Congress to take advantage of Britain’s difficulties.
‘It is heartening’, wrote the Manchester Guardian* ‘at this grave moment to have this knowledge, but since common danger has evoked this response, the Government of India should take advantage of it.’ But the authorities were unequal to this level of honour. Amery wrote of a possible partnership with Jawaharlal. ‘The new War Cabinet seems to be working well and the whole machine has been speeded up beyond recognition. Bevin is itiaking an admirable driver of the working man. I suppose there is no chance of enlisting Nehru as recruiter-in-chief?’3 But his first speech on policy was still in terms of possible revision of the Act of 1935. The Government were incapable of the magnanim¬ ity of the Congress, which with eveiy reverse suffered by the British became moregenerous and accommodating. In June the Working Committee announc¬ ed its disagreement with Gandhi’s faith in non-violence in all circumstances. While the struggle for freedom should remain non-violent, the Committee felt unable to apply the creed to national defence and absolved Gandhi from
‘"Even as late as 1‘MOwhen I ventured to urge on L. S. Amery, who had just become Secretary of State for India, the need, as a pledge of our sincerity, to fix the latest date—one or twoyears after the endofthe war, 1 suggested — for our leaving India, he refused even to discuss it.’Malcolm Darling, Apprentice to Power (London; 1966), p. 128.
* Statement to the press, 10 May, The Hindustan Times, 11 May 1940; letters to Rajendrt Prasad and Maulana Azad, 16 May 1940.
5 Resolution, 19 May 1940, U.P. P.C.C. papers, Lucknow.
<22 May 1940.
*ToLinlithgow, 30May 1940, Linlithgow papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F. 12f, vol. 9.
THE WAR CRISIS
responsibility lot tVic programme and activity of the Congress. In other words, it the British made it possible, the Congress was willing to join in the fight in India's defence. Meeting again in the first week of July, the Working Com¬ mittee went even further. Setting aside on this occasion not only Gandhi but even Jawaharlal, the majority in the Committee did not insist on a declaration about independence by the British but offered to assist in defence if a fully national government were established. Jawaharlal argued that jto reduce acqui¬ sition of power to assumption of office and to seek to worm into it was to move along constitutional lines. Real power was the hold on the people, and this would be lessened by ‘office power’. This form of power, secured on terms dif¬ ferent from those laid down in earlier resolutions, would prove disastrous. But Rajagopalachari, the author of the proposal, wOn over Patel and Azad, and Jawaharlal agreed to abide by it. He was not convinced that this was the best way of serving India, but his concern for Britain swung him into acceptance.1
It had not been easy for Jawaharlal to keep his emotions out of the way, to differentiate persistently between the British people and British imperialism and think clear-sightedly about India’s own problem. He had always seen it in the context of world affairs and argued that an acceptance of India’s freedom was not only right and just in itself but would strengthen the Allied cause immeasurably. Even so, the skittling of the European countries by the German war machine had depressed him intensely. On the fall of France, he wrote one of his most moving articles, looking beyond Petain and Laval to another France:
there must be one, for the heritage of a thousand years does not vanish in a night. That other France will rise again and assert the invincible spirit of freedom which made her great ... let us pay homage to the France of the Revolution, the breaker of the Bastille and of all the bonds that hold the human body and spirit captive.2
And so, though he believed that his colleagues were hustling themselves, he was willing not to assert his dissent. At the Working Committee he had declar¬ ed that, considering the mentality of the British Government, he would wel¬ come chaos if the alternative was association with that Government; but at Poona towards the end of the month, commending the resolution to the AICC, he acknowledged the merit of its offer. ‘It may be that the dancing star of inde¬ pendence may emerge out of chaos, but it may also be that nothing but black clouds may emerge out of chaos.’3
The Congress, having offered a way out of the stalemate without compro¬ mising its basic position, awaited official reaction. The situation was bringing
* Discussions in the Working Committee, July 1940, Anand Bbawan papers. 2Quatorze Julllet’, articlepublished in NationalHerald, 16 July 1940.
3Report in The Hindustan Times, 29July 1940.
: ;.yi:;
J hf$it (id***** cooperation of the
mittcrsm* wutiteigieaMbbare^mmhcascbnm
^7Sm^ap^haristretched the itsotutkm beyondmum*andinter- preted it as anoffer to assist not only in defence but in the wareffort as a whole. But the Government persisted in refusing to accept this opportunity. It was sol, as JawaharJal wrote, to see a greatpeople so blind to everything except the narrow interestsof a class, and risking everything but not taking the step which would put them right with the world and with the historic processes that were marching on with giant strides. Even now the independence of India stuck in the throat of the British Government, and they continued in the old lordly way, threatening their penalties and preaching their homilies.1 They were still plac¬ ing their faith in the League as the propof empire. The section of the Urdu press which was controlled by the League fed the Muslim masses with abusive mis- representation of the Congress.2 Such propaganda was not without effect, enabling the British to rely on the communal problem and charge the Congress with being unrepresentative of total Indian opinion. The response of the Government therefore, when it came at last, was the usual stale anti-climax. They offered to appoint a few ‘representative Indians’ to the Executive Council and set up a War Advisory Council. The future constitution of India should be framed by a small body ‘representative of the principal elements in India’s national life’ — and these elements included the Princes and British com¬ mercial interests; and any decision of that body would be subject to the fulfil¬ ment of Britain’s obligations in India. ‘The whole thing’, commented Jawa- harlal,3 ‘is fantastic and absurd and has not even the merit of decent phraseology about it.’
This ‘offer’, which was made almost simultaneously with the publication of an ordinance banning all volunteer organizations, left no doubt that the British attitude remained unchanged. As a result, the Congress resolutions died a natural death and there was no further need for intellectual debate as to when non-violence was obligatory and when it was not feasible. The Congress had been driven from its moorings by emotional reaction to Britain’s distress and the Nazi victories in Europe, but the British Government restored the old position. The travail of spirit and mental conflict was ended.
There was a fear in some people’s minds that the British Government might be clever enough to take advantage of the situation. But they gave
*'A Crumbling World’ and ‘What of Us?', articles in Notional Harold, 17 and 18 July 1940.
2e. g. Maulvi, an Urdu monthly published from Delhi, wrote (July 1940): ‘Atheists like Pandit lawaharlal Nehru who do not like even to swear in the name of God are placed in the forefront' when the issue is the construction of a slaughter house in Lahore, but when there is.any question relating to a mandir, or the language and customs of the Hindus, the same Pandit reveals him¬ self in his true colours as a staunch Hindu. He can, however, never tolerate that the Muslims shall also remain staunch Muslims. It is people of such low mentality who have disgraced the Congress and whoare responsible for the separation of theMuslims from it.’^
*Press Conference at Bombay21 August, The Hindustan Timas 28 August 1940.
267
THE WAR CRISIS
credit for intelligence where itwas not due ... Nothing is more astonish¬ ing than the ineptitude of the British ruling class in England during the last few years, nothing with one notable exception. That exception is the Government of India.1
s
Despite all the resistance and suspicion that had been built up over a long period, the Congress had sought to work with the British in their crisis of survival; and the offer had been contemptuously rejected. It was ‘the final breaking of such slender bonds as held our minds together, it means the ending of all hope that we shall ever march together’.2
The Congress had, therefore, been pushed back into the mood of civil dis¬ obedience. It accepted again the leadership of Gandhi and prepared for conflict. The Government of India, on their part, decided to strike at once and with the utmost vigour if faced by a challenge from the Congress and to destroy it as a political party. On the very day that the constitutional proposals were announc¬ ed, the Viceroy wrote to the Governors that he felt very strongly that the only possible answer to a ‘declaration of war' by any section of the Congress should be a proclaimed determination to crush that organization as a whole.3 They believed that the Congress was losing its grip and had little support among the Muslims. The British Government agreed that immediate action to paralyse the movement was preferable to a policy of waiting to see how the movement developed and only wished to be consulted before any action was taken.4 The Labour Party, which was now in the coalition government, supported this policy and disapproved of the attitude of the Congress.3
The Government, therefore, went ahead with the arrests of Congressmen and Jawaharlal expected to return at any moment to prison. As he cabled to his daughter in Switzerland,6 an early resumption of the old pilgrimage was likely. He even courted it by wandering about the U.P. in the uniform of a Congress volunteer and advising the volunteer corps to continue its activities. But again Gandhi moved away from a head-on collision, because it was not in his nature to press the British Government at a time when they were themselvesthreaten¬ ed in their hoipe. All that he committed the Congress to was non-violence and a demand for freedom of speech to preach against participation in the war; self-imposed restraint could not be taken to the extent of self-extinction. The demand would be expressed by individual civil disobedience. The first to court arrest by making a public speech against support of the war would be Vinoba Bhave, and the second Jawaharlal.
* ‘India in Travail’, Jawaharlal’s article in NationalHnnU, 9 August 1940.
3'The parting of the ways’, article written by Jawaharlal on 10 August 1940.
* Letter of 8 August 1940, Home Dept. File 6/13/40-Pol. (I); History of the Civil Disobedience Movement 1940-41, Home Dept. File 3/6/42. Pol. II).
♦Viceroy’s telegrant to Secretary of State, 11 September 1940, and Secretary of State’s tele¬ grams. 13 and 17 September 1940. Home Dept. File 3/13/40. Pol. (I).
» Krishna Menon’s telegram to Jawaharlal on interview with Attlee, ibid.
4 10 September 1940.
268
JAWAHAKLALmmv
Even the Government of India could not argue that individual civil dis¬ obedience for asserting the right to free speech could justify drastic action. But they decided to arrest Jawaharlal even before he offered satyagraha. He was thought to begoing faster than Gandhi, and to be one step ahead of him. Gandhi appeared to be determined to carry on with civil disobedience at a lew tempera¬ ture and in very small doses, but Jawaharlal seemed eager to push things to extremes. He had been touring the United Provinces drawing attention once more to agrarian grievances. His arrest might well upset whatever long-term plans Gandhi might have. TheWar Cabinet approved and, on its own, suggested that Jawaharlal be prosecuted on a substantive charge rather than merely kept in detention.1
Jawaharlal himself probably preferred this, for while he loyally accepted Gandhi’s decision about the manner and object of civil disobedience he could not have been greatly excited by individual satyagraha. The issue remained that of India and the war, and the goal was still independence; but the fight was being waged for the moment on a very narrow front. Jawaharlal was in an almost tranquil mood. His life was wrapped up in public affairs, and he had hardly any private life. An attractive personality brought him a large circle of friends and he had, when he cared to make the effort, a ‘knock-down’ charm. But throughout his life none of these friendships, with either men or women, impinged deeply on him; and his was a life of crowded loneliness. He could, as we have seen, be an emotional client; but he would seem to have been normally incapable of an equal relationship. This probably explains why in these years the men whom he allowed to get close to him were those, like Syed Mahmud and Sri Prakasa, who really had nothing to offer. His only deep attachment was to his daughter, and to her he was the ideal of perfection. His name for her, ‘Indu-boy’, makes clear the effort at compensation for lack of a son, and he pro¬ bably thought of her as carrying on his work. But he never forced his affection or his will on her and,'while always willing to give advice when sought, never imposed his directives. So the thought of going under completely or at least for years did not worry him.2 There were, to him, no separate causes left in the world, as all of them ran into one another, but his primary commitment was to India’s freedom and on that he was not prepared to compromise. His speeches to the peasants of his province were clear and calm.
He was evidently moved. There was a sense of vast issues, of great deci¬ sions, of the call which might come to anyone at any moment. The multitude of listeners seemed to be in tune with the speaker'and seemed .to rise above themselves for the moment. There was a hush and a solem¬ nity which pervaded the atmosphere . . . And then he spoke, with a
•Viceroy’s telegrams to Secretary of State 21 and 22 October 1940. Home Dept. Files 3/3/40 ■nd 3/13/40 Pol. (1), respectively; Amsry to Linlithgow, 23 October 1940, Linlithgow papers, vol. 9; Viceroy’s telegram to Governor of U.P , 31 October 1940, Home Dept. File 3/18/40 Pol. (T).
* ToSyed Mahmud, 12 October 1940 and toMrsDorothy Enge, 27 October 1940.
THE WAR CRISIS
269
quiver in his voice, of the dream that had made life worthwhile for him — the dream of the India of tomorrow. He developed this theme and the picture became a living and a glowing one. And then, suddenly, he grew sad. For twenty years and more, he said, he had seen this vision and sought to make it a reality. And yet when he saw the condition of the people round about him, their appalling poverty, their miserable environment, his heart misgave him. Was this all the result they had Obtained after twenty years travail and labour? Then again, he changed his mood and spoke triumphantly of the vast inner changes that had come over the people. They were poor still, and over-burdened with care and sorrow, but they had got rid of the fear that oppressed them and the hopelessness that enveloped their lives from birth to death. That was a mighty change which had brought them near to Swaraj. And now they stood on the threshold of the future, a future which would mean a changed world and a new India. What this new India would be he could not say. That would depend on their stout hearts and strong arms. Fate, Destiny, Karmal We were not going to be their slaves, but we would bend them to our will and make India after the picture in our own hearts.1
Hastening to Wardha to dissuade Gandhi from undertaking a fast unto death in protest against British obduracy,2 Jawaharlal was arrested on 30 October at Gheoki station on his way back to Allahabad and taken to Gorakhpur for trial. He declined to plead, stating merely that it was his particular function and privilege to spread disaffection against the British Government in India.3 But he read a long statement which, over twenty years later, still gave him satisfaction.4 He pointed out that the reports of his speeches at Gorakhpur earlier in the month were scrappy, incomplete and often distorted; but this was not of importance. He stood by the policy of the Congress on the war and had in fact been chosen to give expression to it. It was monstrous that the Indian people should be thrust into a war without their consent; but the Congress had sought a way out which would be honourable to all parties concerned. There were very few persons in India, whether Indians or Englishmen, who had so consistently raised their voices against fascism and Nazism as he had done; but the actions of the British Government compelled the Indian people to resist to the uttermost. They had therefore decided to be no parties to this war ami to declare this to the world.
It is not me that you are seeking to judge and condemn, but rather the hundreds of millions of the people of India, and that is a large task even for a proud Empire. Perhaps it may be that, though I am standing before
’‘Jawaharlal reports himself'. National Hamid, 23 October 1940.
*B. V. Kesfcar. ‘Alone with Gandhiji and Nehru', Illustrated Weakly of India, 30 May. 1971.
5Reportof trial in TbaHindustan Timas, 4 November 1940.
*Seeletter toMrsDorothy Norman, 19 January 1962, Nehru papers.
270
JAWAHAXLALNBmv
you onmytrial, itis the British Empireitselfthatisonits trial before the bar of the world... Individuals count for little, they come and go, as I shall go when my time is up. Seven times I have been tried and convicted by British authority in India, and many years of my life lie buried within prison walls. An eighth time or a ninth, and a few more years, rtlake little difference. But it is no small matter what happens to India and her mil¬ lions of sons and daughters. That is the issue before me, and that ultimate¬ ly is the issue before you, Sir.1
The district judge gave Jawaharlal what was intended to be a deterrent sentence of four years. The savagery surprised Whitehall and New Delhi as well as Sir Maurice Hallett, the Governor at Lucknow; but Hallett vetoed any change in the terms. However, Churchill directed Amery to telegraph at once to the Viceroy expressing the hope that the actual rigour of the sentence would be modified and Jawaharlal not treated like a common criminal.2 Even this hope was unanswered. After a week in Gorakhpur jail, Jawaharlal was moved by stealth and under cover of night, in a railway compartment with shutters down and a car with curtains drawn, to his old quarters in Dehra Dun jail. There he remained, except for a week in Lucknow prison in April 1941, till his release at the end of the year. This time the Government had no intention of easing in any way the harshness of jail life. The Viceroy even reprimanded the superin¬ tendent of police who had arrested Jawaharlal at Cheoki for giving him dinner at his house before having him driven down to Gorakhpur. It was made explicit that no personal friendliness was to be shown or social relations developed.3 In jail he was allowed one weekly newspaper and six books at any one time, and he could have one interview, send one letter without enclosures and receive one every fortnight. There were also many petty harassments. He was not for some time permitted a washerman or a barber, a warder was fined for allowing a prisoner who had been discharged to say good-bye to Jawaharlal, and the prisoner himself was not allowed to collect ten rupees which Jawaharlal had given him for his fare home. Friends from outside were not allowed to send Jawaharlal packed lunches, and he could only receive, fruit if he happened to know the sender. On one occasion, fruit sent by an unknown well-wisher from Rawalpindi was sent back at Jawaharlal’s expense. When Jawaharlal wrote home asking his secretary to make a public announcement that no parcels or letters should be sent to him, this passage was blotted out by the censor. As he was to buy everything he needed through the jail staff (who wpre not known for promptitude) and get nothing from home, he was sometimes short even of toothpaste. He was directed, for the first time in his prison career, to give his thumb impression and he refused. He was, after a while, given all the letters
‘Statement of 4 November 1940, reprinted in J. Nehru, The Unity of India (London, 1941), pp. 395-400.
2Amery to Linlithgow, 14 November 1940, Linlithgow papers, voi. 9. *
> P.S. V. toHomeMember, 19 November 1940, Home Dept. File 3/16/40/Pol. II).
the war crisis
271
received from his daughter abroad, but the others were piled up in the office for weeks before Jawaharlal was told of them and asked to pick one. Permission to deal with the business of the National Planning Committee was refused. Papers pertaining to the Kamala Nehru Memorial Hospital were, after many months, exempted, but this delay had so held up work that Jawaharlal resigned the chairmanship.1 His plan for sorting out his father’s letters was defeated by the authorities insisting that they would first have to go through these letters beforesending them to him; for as they obviously would be unable to understate the significance of these letters, Jawaharlal dropped the proposal. The limit on the number of letters he could write was later withdrawn, but on condition that none of these was published in the press — which was absurd because, apart from Jawaharlal’s known aversion to giving any kind of undertaking, he was obviously in no position to give assurances about the behaviour of the recipients of his letters. In fact, Jawaharlal virtually gave up letter-writing and depended on interviews for keeping in touch with the outside world. Indira, who returned to India in May, took a cottage near Mussoorie; and this in itself made life a little pleasanter for Jawaharlal.
He had sought no favours. On the other hand, after hearing reports of ill- treatment of political prisoners in the camp jail in Lucknow, he wrote to the jail authorities that even the few privileges he was receiving had become hate¬ ful to him and he might defy jail discipline and invite the consequences.2A les¬ ser man might have become personally embittered. But Jawaharlal accepted all this as part of his life and work without worrying about it. A sentence which he jotted down in his notebook at this time and was fond of quoting was that one could enjoy life perfectly only after resolving not to count the cost. What he understood by this was something very close to the teaching of the Gita; one should face the risks and perils of the adventure of life without calculating either what it involved or what might be its results. By enjoyment he meant something much more than a round of eating and sleeping and amusing one¬ self; it was doing what one had to. ’All we can do’, he advised his daughter,3 ’is to face our job and do it as well as we can and to remain tranquil in spite of shock and disaster.’ The certainties of moral and ethical, values which he had built around himself gave him serenity and strength. It is not surprising that though he had long ago moved away from the simple religious faith of the ’twenties and had now no anchorage of scriptural or secular dogma, he carried about with him a tiny edition of the Gita.
In this spirit, as soon as he found himself again in prison, he closed the various drawers of his mind which related to his activities outside and fell into the rhythm of jail life. The purpose was to prepare himself in body and mind
*See letters to the jail superintendent, 2 January, 4 February, 24 February, 19 March, 29 July and 5 August 1941; to thelnspector-General ofPrisons, 16 February and lOMarch 1941; Padmaja Naidu toFrancesGunther, 13 March 1941, HomeDept. File 3/31/40Pol. (1).
aTo the Inspector-General of Prisons, 23 August 1941.
^Letter, 18 November 1940.
272
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
for his work on release and to store energy so that he might be able to squander it later. Spinning, reading, regular exercise and plenty of sleep formed the main planks of his existence. He spent considerable time in cleaning and washing up and even — though food nevergreatly interested him — helped in the cook¬ ing. But the chief physical activity was gardening. On arrival in Dehra Dun, for about a week he did nothing all day long but dig the rather stohy ground.1 He then planted some seedlings but seems to have over-watered them, for the results were not very successful. But he was joined in his cell in January by Ranjit Pandit, who brought a more expert touch to this effort; and soon the barrack garden, despite the high walls and lack of sun, could boast of a few dahlias and sunflowers.
It was not, however, easy to forget about events in the world and only culti¬ vate his garden. Jawaharlal might ignore the unexciting progress of individual civil disobedience, but he could not shut out the war in Europe which was destroying the old order. Especially after the Nazi attack on the Soviet Union, he was infuriated by the British ineptitude which excluded him and his coun¬ trymen from participation in these developments. Though he had almost no private correspondence, he sent what were virtually long articles to British acquaintances, and in these his pent-up bitterness exploded. Aperceptive mind like Beatrice Webb’s, unswayed by passing winds, could grasp the quality of India’s leaders.
What is outstanding in the leadership of Gandhi and Nehru is the keen¬ ness and subtlety of intellect, the depth and refinement of the emotional life of thesetwo men, compared not only to the brutality and ultra coarse¬ ness of Mussolini and Hitler, but even to the conventional outfit, in thought and feeling, of Churchill and Roosevelt.2
But most well-meaning British individuals and groups felt that the Congress had acted in a huff and forgotten the larger issues of the war in a narrow nationalism. They showed no real understanding of the Indian problem, and they certainly had no influence on the policy of their Government. But Jawa- harlal had never been surer of the rightness of any decision and, though he did not share Gandhi’s total pacifism, was entirely at one with him in the political decisions about the war crisis.^
Half-relaxed and half-resentful, determined not to worry and yet driven to exasperation by inactivity in a cataclysmic situation, Jawaharlal frequently set aside the present for thoughts of the future. But even more often his mind wandered back into the past. It was during this spell in jail that he began his
‘See H. C. Bajpai, 'In the same cell with Jawaharlal Nehru', National Harold, 11 December 1940.
7 24 September 1940, Beatrice Webb diaries, vol. 34, p. 176.
* To Col. Wedgwood 23 April and 21 November 1941; to Eleanor Rfcthbone, 22 June and 9November 1941; and to SirGeorge Schuster, 2 December 1941.
THE WAR CRISIS
273
journey into the five thousand years of India’s history. ‘We have undertaken many a voyage in time and space, as well as geographically in the present, for the discovery of India.’1 His election tours had woken him to the myriad aspects of India’s diverse unity; and to this was added an increasing apprecia¬ tion of India’s thought and culture. Earlier he had wanted to change his country and bring her abreast of the twentieth century. This aspiration never left him. But with it was now blended a pride in India’s achievement and a firm sense of his own basic Indian-ness. ‘It is a debt I can never repay; but it is an obli¬ gation that I cannot forget and which I shall seek to discharge to the end of my days.’2
A further element in his mental ferment was the conscious increase in the intellectual influence of Gandhi and Tagore. The horrors of war drove him to a deeper acceptance of non-violence not merely as a political weapon for India but as perhaps the only promise for the future of man. There was a reversion in this respect to his attitude in the early ’twenties. Tagore, who died that August, had been very different from Gandhi, but he had also been basically of India’s soil, the inheritor and expositor of her wisdom. ‘Again I think of the richness of India’s agelong cultural genius which can throw up in the same generation two such master-types, typical of her in every way, yet representing different aspects of her many-sided personality.’3
The result of these varied yet converging impacts could be seen when Jawaharlal, in the latter half of 1941, again took up serious writing. In 1940 he had sent to the American publishers of his Autobiography a hurriedly written postscript, ‘Five Years After’. Now he set out to write a fuller version of a second volume of his autobiography. He drafted a few chapters but rejected them, using some of the material in the long work which he completed when again in prison. But he was more interested in the making of India than in his personal development. Even in his first draft he was often tugged- for long stretches by the pull of the past from an account of himself into flashbacks into India’s histoiy, and the factors which moulded her personality. This tendency became more pronounced in the second, larger effort which was published as The Discovery of India.
Towards the end of the year the Government of India came round to the view that all Congressmen in jail, including Jawaharlal, could be released. Hallett, the Governor of the U.P., opposed Jawaharlal’s release because he thought it would demoralize the civil services and the Muslim League, while Winston Churchill thought any such general release would be ‘surrender at the moment of success’. But the War Cabinet supported the Government of India, with Churchill muttering something to the effect, ‘when you lose India, don’t blame me.’4 So Jawaharlal was out again on 4 December.
*To Col. We4gwood, 23 April 1941.
aTo Eleanor Rathbone, 22 June 1941.
*To Krishna Kripalani, 27 August 1941.
4Gtendevon, op. cit., pp. 208-12.
274
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
His personal mood of bitterness against British policy seemed but a reflec¬ tion of the general hardening of Indian public opinion. There was a widespread conviction that the British were not only alien oppressors but the greatest disruptive force in India and the champion of all reactionary elements. Pro¬ fessor Coupland, visiting India at this time, thought that one particular incident, Churchill’s categorical announcement in September 1941 that the Atlantic Charter would not apply to India, had led to a spreading of a new and uncomfor¬ table suspicion of British intent even beyond nationalist circles.1 On the other hand, the involvement of Russia and the United States and the spread of the war in Asia had altered the nature of the conflict. Jawaharlal had no hesitation in expressing publicly his hope that the progressive forces, as represented by Russia, the United States, Britain and China, would emerge victorious. But the Government of India continued their Rip Van Winkle policy. ‘It is very difficult’, commented Jawaharlal in exasperation, ‘for intelligent people to submit to the decisions of unintelligent people.’2 What was required to enable India to do what it wanted to do, join the war wholeheartedly on the side of the Allies, was ‘a pleasant psychological shock’3 establishing that the old order had changed in India as well; but of any such imaginative action the Government of India were wholly incapable. They were Asia’s men of Vichy, living in the past and looking backwards, clinging to their interests and afraid of the people.
Jawaharlal was, therefore, keen that the Congress should not waver in its refusal to change its policy so long as the British gave no indication of anything more than remote assurances. Just as the British Labour Party had been in favour of the war but had declined to join Chamberlain’s cabinet, so the Con¬ gress, while expressing its support for the Allies, should not offer any positive collaboration. The offers of 1940, to assist in defence on certain conditions, should not be resurrected. ‘I am not a believer in revivalism either in religion or politics.’4 The party should hold together under Gandhi’s leadership and present an unshakeable front to the British while keeping in line with inter¬ national events.9 But at Bardoli in Christmas week Rajagopalachari once again persuaded the Working Committee to set aside Gandhi and ignore Jawaharlal and offer the co-operation of a free India in the defence of the country on a national basis. Civil disobedience seemed to Rajagopalachari to have served its purpose; the people were exhausted and unless Congress did something defi¬ nite in this crisis its cause would suffer. Wisdom lay in making as much political progress as possible during the war.6
Jawaharlal attached hardly any importance to this resolution. As the British showed no sign of responding to the demand of the Congress, this was
1 The Cripps Mission (Oxford, 1942), p. 22.
2 Press conference at Lucknow, The Hindustan Timas, 10 December 1941.
3 Message.to theNews Chronicle, 11 December 1941.
«Statement at Bombay, 17 December, The Hindustan Times, 18 December 1941.
’To Sampurnanand, 14 December 1941.
6Jawaharlal’s notes of Working Committee meetings, 22 to 24 December 1941.
THE WAR CRISIS
273
a mere theoretical exercise. No compromise was possible between imperialism and nationalism, and Rajagopalachari’s persistent suggestions of a settlement only added to the confusion. Gandhi, unwilling even to consider freedom at the cost of non-violence, formally withdrew from the organization. But he commended the resolution to the AICC and utilized the occasion to designate Jawaharlal formally as his chosen successor.
Somebody suggested that Pandit Jawaharlal and I were estranged. It will require much more than differences of opinion to estrange us. We have had differences from the moment we became co-workers, and yet I have said for some years and say now that not Rajaji [Rajagopalacharil but Jawaharlal will be my successor. He says that he does not understand my language, and that he speaks a language foreign to me. This may or may not be true. But language is no bar to a union of hearts. And I know this—that when I am gone he will speak my language.1