Escape into Administration
Free again after a fortnight in jail, but now a sick man, Jawaharlal could do little more for a while than write speeches. In his presidential address to the U.P. provincial conference in October, which was read in his absence, he deplored the loss of the faith and confidence which had inspired the Congress in 1920 and 1921. ‘We did not sit down to debate and argue, we knew we were right and we marched on from victory to victory. We felt the truth in us and every fibre of our being thrilled at the idea of our fighting for the right, and fighting in a manner unique and glorious.’ But now pro-changer and no¬ changer ‘went for each other, and the average no-changer was not behind the pro-changer in forgetting the basic lesson of non-violence and charity and in imputing the basest of motives to persons of a different way of thinking.’ These two viewpoints being fundamentally different, there could be no real or stable compromise between them; and the result was that a noble movement had been converted into two caucuses, concerned only with securing support against each other.
The Congress session at Delhi, said Jawaharlal, had marked a retreat from direct action. But non-violent non-co-operation could not die, and it was the duty of those like him to fight on while the main army rested or was engaged in peaceful pursuits. Till the time came for launching another mighty cam¬ paign of civil disobedience, they should keep the practice and ideal of direct action and peaceful revolution before the people. He was still very much a Gandhian.
I believe that the salvation of India, and indeed of the rest of the world, will come through non-violent non-cooperation. Violence has had a long enough career in the world, it has been weighed repeatedly and found wanting. The present condition of Europe is eloquent testimony of the inefficacy of violence to settle anything. I believe that violence in Europe will go from excess to excess arid will perish in the flames it has itself kindled and be reduced to ashes.
81
82
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Bolshevism and Fascism were the ways of the West; they were really alike and represented different phases of insensate violence and intolerance. 'The choice for us is between Lenin and Mussolini on the one side and Gandhi on the other. Can there be any doubt as to who represents the soul of India today?’ Non-violence was not weakness but required courage; better theJhonest man of evil and violence than the non-violent coward. However, no circumstance could justify terrorism or secret violence, the dagger of the. assassin or the stab in the dark.
Besides extolling non-violence Jawaharlal expounded in Gandhian terms the merits of non-co-operation.
Evil flourishes only because we tolerate it and assist in it. The most des¬ potic and tyrannical government can only carry on because the people it misgoverns themselves submit to it. England holds India in bondage because Indians co-operate with Englishmen and thereby strengthen British rule. Withdraw that co-operation and the fabric of foreign rule collapses.
Political freedom was bound to come before long, if not entirely through their strength then through the weakness of Europe and England. Europe was in the melting pot, and England, with all her seeming might, could not but be affected by the collapse of the continent. But by then, feared Jawaharlal, once again reflecting an unqualifiedly Gandhian viewpoint, India, instead of being a shining example to the rest of the world, might have become but a cheap and inefficient replica of the countries of the West. ‘Let us take the longer view from now and try to avoid this, and build up a great and strong India worthy of the great leader whom God has blessed us with.
Two months later, at the Kakinada session of the Congress, he again emphasized, in Gandhian terms, that there was not really much in common between Indian volunteers and any Western counterparts, and an Indian volunteer organization must have non-violence as its basic principle. What India needed was non-violent, disciplined soldiers. ‘We meet as soldiers of freedom and must be men of action rather than of words.’ They should have little to do with the wordy warfare that was going on and devote themselves to training as many as possible for effective action; for without such training strength would be wasted and courage bear little fruit. But much as Jawaharlal desired action, he never doubted that such action should be controlled and encompassed by the Gandhian doctrine. Indeed, there was frequently a clear suggestion in his speeches that the sterile debate in the Congress had only been made possible by the absence of Gandhi in jail. To Jawaharlal non-violent non-co-operation was a positive programme, and its exponent above all a man of action.
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 83
Jawaharlal himself, however, could at this stage engage in no thrilling action and had to consume his energies in a variety of administrative duties. *1 am developing into a kind of Pooh-Bah.’1 He was already president of the Allahabad town Congress committee and heavily involved in provincial Con¬ gress work, and at Kakinada the President. Maulana Mohamed Ali, insisted on Jawaharlal becoming one of the general secretaries of the Congress. This added considerably to Jawaharlal’s work, he being the most active of'the three secretaries. He tried to introduce method and procedure into Congress admi¬ nistration, which had till then been rather ad hoc and haphazard. This meant that he had to give considerable attention to matters of detail. He also checked the office accounts carefully, demanded that everyone, from the President downwards, should submit detailed accounts, and issued regular statements on Congress finances. He kept in touch with committees abroad — in Britain, Japan and the United States - that sought affiliation to the Congress. He toured the province widely on a fund-collecting mission for the U.P. Congress which, in January 1924, had only twenty rupees in the bank.2
Because of the direct interest which Jawaharlal had shown in the Akali campaign and his excursion to Nabha, the Congress had appointed him one of the liaison officers to keep in touch with, the defiant Sikhs; and as general secretary it wgs his responsibility to implement the Congress resolution to render all possible assistance, including the dispatch of men and money. An Akali Sahayak (assistance) Bureau was set up at Amritsar, and though Jawaharlal was in no position to act on Rajagopalachari’s suggestion3 that he should take charge of this office, he kept in close touch with Gidwani, who was appointed to this post, and, after Gidwani’s arrest, with his successor, K.M. Panikkar. The Congress had little money to provide, and Jawaharlal thought that the best assistance it could render was to perfect its own organiza¬ tion and throw in its whole weight at the moment of crisis, and till then to give full publicity to Akali activities, keeping the political side of it and the side affecting other communities well in the forefront.4 Jawaharlal felt that the Congress could also help in rallying Hindus and Muslims behind the cam¬ paign, which should be regarded as part of the general movement for freedom. Shaukat Ali, for example, had pledged the full support of the Muslims. ‘To the Akalis I will declare that the warfare they have engaged in is like the Khilafat question taken up by the Muslims and the Swaraj problem by the Hindus ... So long as this war shall last Hindus and Mussalmans will be ready to parti¬ cipate in it in lakhs and lakhs.’3 But the Sikhs themselves did not seem anxious
•To A.M. Khwaja, 6 June 1923. S.W., vol. 1, p. 359.
2JawaharlaI to A.T. Gidwani, 25 January 1924, AICC Fite 4(1) of 1924.
3See Jawaharlal to Rajagopalachari, 12 March 1924. AICC Fite 4(1) KW(II) of 1924. 4To Gidwani, 25 January 1924; to Panikkar, 27 March 1924, AICC Fite 4 of 1924.
5 Speech at a. public meeting in Delhi, 27 February 1924.
84 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
to receive such support even from the Hindus, let alone the Muslims, or from the Congress.1 Clearly their hope now was to secure concessions from the Government, as in fact they did in 1925. Nor were Jawaharlal’s efforts to improve relations between the Hindus and the Sikhs acceptable even to the Hindus of Amritsar because on his visit to that place he had stayed in a hotel where the cooks were Muslims.2
All these activities kept Jawaharlal busy, and enabled him to ignore the malaise afflicting Congress. He had even hoped to return to jail, even though on a false issue, for at one time it seemed probable that the Government would arrest him for defying, along with Pandit Malaviya, the injunction against bathing in the Sangam at Allahabad during the Kumbh Mela festival in January. That year the Ganga had somewhat changed its course, and the current was so strong near the Sangam that bathing without proper precau¬ tions became dangerous. So, with financial assistance from Government, volunteers prepared a suitable bathing place, but the district authorities refused all access to the Sangam. ‘The question of danger receded into the background and the whole issue became one of prestige. Danger can be dis¬ cussed and overcome, prestige cannot.'3 So Malaviya, Jawaharlal and a few others courted imprisonment by jumping over the barrier and bathing in the Sangam. But the Government refrained from action. ‘There appears to be little chance of my arrest for the Kumbh Mela affray. Worse luck!-'4
However, he was soon glad to be unconfined, for on 5 February 1924 Gandhi was released on grounds of health. After seeing Gandhi at Poona, Jawaharlal spent a few weeks at Juhu, where Gandhi was having talks with the Swarajist leaders Motilal and Das. In the elections in November 1923 they had achieved a considerable triumph, and they now sought Gandhi’s approval of their policy. This they could not secure, and it looked as if the Congress would break under the strain. Everything, wrote Gandhi to Jawaharlal,3 was in the melting pot- including himself; and Jawaharlal felt it might become necessary for him to resign the secretaryship. ‘Surely you can imagine a situation when it may be impossible for me as well as others to con¬ tinue in office. When everything is in the melting pot, as you put it, why should I be impervious to heat or refuse to melt?’6
At the meeting of the AICC in Ahmadabad in June 1924, Gandhi moved a resolution requiring all Congressmen to spin. This was challenged by Motilal and Das, and the resolution was finally carried with the omission of the clause depriving of Congress offices those failing to spin sufficient yarn. Gandhi
1 See Jawaharlal to Panikkar 2 April and to Dr Kitchlew 27 April 1924, AICC File 4 of 1924. 2Panikkar to Mahatma Gandhi 1 April 1924. Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 67, Part B.
5 Jawaharlal's note, 13 January 1924. Allahabad municipality file 17.
4To Gidwani, 25 January 1924.
’ 6 June 1924.
6ToShankarlal Banker, 14 June 1924, S.W., vol. 2 (Delhi, 1972), p. 106. In fact, it waa Gandhi
who had said it. **
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 85
regarded himself as defeated and humbled, and, recognizing the support which the Swarajists enjoyed in the party and the country, decided to leave the field to them. The British Government, however, spurned their offers of co¬ operation. Motilal had expected that the first Labour Government would invite him and Das to London,1 and Das, it is said, made a generous donation to Labour Party funds. Motilal s hopes were disappointed; but then Das ex¬ pected much from Birkenhead. This too fizzled out. The policy, wrote Birken¬ head confidentially to Reading,2 that he would recommend to the Cabinet over the next four years would be politically one of negation. So the Swaraj party lost all purpose and could achieve little. Deprived in June 1925 of the leadership of Das, they were further weakened by the hankering for office shown by an increasing number of their members.
Meantime, the growing tension between Hindus and Muslims seized Gandhi's attention. The Muslims, who, according to the 1921 census, formed nearly a quarter of India’s population had, before the advent of the British, lived in social harmony with the other communities. This is not surprising, for most Muslims in India were converts from Hinduism and had much in common with their Hindu neighbours. Under the East India Company, how¬ ever, regional imbalance in economic and social development led to the classes who gained most from British rule being predominantly Hindu; and by the time the interior areas of India caught up with westernization, national con¬ sciousness, particularly in Bombay but also in Bengal, increasingly spoke in a Hindu idiom. The British were not slow to take political advantage of this. Gandhi, in his search for mass support, also expressed himself in Hindu terms and, rather than strengthen the national identity, drew up a programme which took for granted the divergence between the two communities but was accept¬ able to both. So the official policy symbolized by separate electorates, or con¬ stituencies where the essential qualification for candidates and voters was a particular religion, and the response of the Congress with such activities as the Khilafat campaign combined with the lag in development between the two communities, the decline of the Muslim upper class and the failure to offset this (as in the caseof the Hindus) by the rise of new classes, to strengthen the religious element in Indian politics. This was reflected in communal rioting. During the years 1900 to 1922 there were sixteen such riots; for the three years from 1923 to 1926 the number was seventy-two.
In September 1924, to check the growing communal rancour, Gandhi began a fast for twenty-one days. He termed it both a penance and a prayer; but its objectiveon this occasion was to blackmail the conscience of his country¬ men. When Jawaharlal, who had been visiting the riot-stricken area of Sambhal, received ‘the shattering news whose consequences are terrible to contemplate', hecalleduponeach townand village in the United Provinces to hold immediately
‘Motilal to Das, 27 July 1924, Motilal Nehru papers.
129 January 1925, Reading papers, vol. 8.
86
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
its conference of leaders of all communities and parties to find means of unity. ‘Leaders of all communities are meeting at Delhi on the 23rd and, God willing, will find a way out of the impasse. But time passes and daily the danger increases.’1
A day after commencing the fast, Gandhi had written to Jawaharlal:2
My dear Jawarlal [sic\ You must not be stunned. Rather rejoice that God gives strength and direction to do my duty. I could not do otherwise.
As the author of non-co-operation, a heavy responsibility lies on my shoulders. Do give me in writing your impressions of Lucknow and Cawnpore. Let me drink the cup to the full. I am quite at peace with myself.
Jawaharlal, on his return from the Unity Conference which had passed a series of platitudinous resolutions but could not persuade Gandhi to terminate his fast earlier than scheduled, himself went down with fever; but he sent Gandhi long reports on the disturbances in Allahabad itself. Speaking with this first-hand knowledge of communal animosity, he told the U.P. Political Conference that whatever pride he had had in the national strength and awakening had been shattered, and he was now not only humiliated but ashamed. They themselves had done more harm to their countiy than any foreigner.3 An All-Parties Conference, meeting in January 1925, proved a failure, and Jawaharlal found its discussions painful to listen to.4 All that there was to do, therefore, seemed to be the preaching of unity and of non¬ violence, spinning and the wearing of khaddar. When a young man came to him in search of national work, the only possible activity Jawaharlal could think of was khaddar work.5
It is surprising that Jawaharlal did not think of utilizing the services of such young men for promoting communal harmony. Gandhi had suggested the formation of a flying column of Hindu and Muslim workers who would at a moment’s notice be ready to go to riot areas for investigation and relief.6 But Jawaharlal seems to have been too dispirited to act on this suggestion. This communal problem was such a wasteful diversion from the main cam¬ paign against the British, and it revolved round what seemed to him such unreal issues that he could not bring himself to take energetic measures to deal,with it. In his own city of Allahabad, there was a revival of-aggressiveness of Hindu communalists, inspired, according to the local magistrate, largely
1 Letter to the Editor, The Leader, 22 September 1924.
219 September 1924. Facsimile in Tendulkar, Mahatma (1961 edition), vol. 2, between
pp. 160-61.
* Tha Leader, 6 November 1924.
4To Syed Mahmud, 3 February 1923.
’ Seehis letter to Shankarlal Banker, 28July 1923. AICC File G. 60/1923, Part II.
6Letter to Jawaharlal, 12 November 1924. *
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION
87
by the desire to show the Nehru family that they had little influence with the Hindus.1 ‘As for our politics and public life,* Jawaharlal wrote,2 ‘I am sick and weary of them.’
These were also to Jawaharlal months of great personal stress and depres¬ sion. In November 1924 his wife lost a child after premature birth and soon after began to show signs of tuberculosis. Then, in March 1925, he himself had to undergo a minor operation, performed by Dr Ansari at Delhi. The deep commitment to Gandhi and known dislike of Swarajist policy had caused friction in his relations with his father, and Gandhi had sought to intervene.
This letter like the former is meant to be a plea for Jawaharlal. He is one of the loneliest young men of my acquaintance in India. The idea of your mental desertion of him jhurts me. Physical desertion I hold to be impossible. Needless to say Manzar Ali and I often talked of the Nehrus whilst we were together at Yeravda. He said once that if there was one thing for which you lived more than any other, it was for Jawahar. His remark seemed to be so true. I don’t want to be the cause direct or indirect of the slightest breach in that wonderful affection.3
These differences with Motilal made Jawaharlal acutely conscious of his dependence on his father for money.'Gandhi had offered to arrange for some re¬ munerative work, either as a press correspondent or as a college professor,4 * but nothing had come of this. Gandhi later suggested that Jawaharlal be paid as general secretary by the Gongress or that personal friends be permitted to find funds for retaining his services. ‘I will not mind even if you decided to do some business. I want your mental peace. I know that you will serve the country even as manager of a business.’3 The Bombay firm of Tata’s offered to employ him, and Motilal strongly recommended to his son that he proceed to Bombay and call on Tata.6 But this again did not materialize, probably because Jawaharlal showed no keenness to serve in a commercial firm. Finally, to earn the money required to pay for the trip to Europe which he and Kamala were planning, he had to return to the distasteful practice erf law; and for preparing a brief Motilal secured for him the large fee of Rs 10,000 — an amount which the client doubtless paid to ensure that Motilal would handle the case.
However, there was one sphere of activity which in these years provided
i Report on the political situation in the U.P. for the first half of September 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1923, File 112. 3To Gidwani, 3 November 1923, AICC File G21 (ii) of 1923. JTo Motilal, 2 September 1924, ColUctsd Works, vol. 23, p. 63. Manzar Ali Sokhta was a Congressman from the U.F. anda friend of the Nehru family. 4Letter to Jawaharlal, 13 September 1924, ColUcttd Works, vol. 23, pp. 148-9. ,Idem, 30 September 1923. 6Motilal to Jawaharlal, 9 November 1923.
88 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Jawaharla1 with some satisfaction. For two years, from April 1923 to April 1925, he was chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board; and this phase in his life is of interest as marking'his first experience of official administration. It is also of some significance, because many of the traits which marked his prime ministership can be discerned here in embryo — his domination of his colleagues, his desire for efficiency, his loyalty to his competent subordinates, his efforts topush forward in all directions with new ideas. Even officials had to recognize that he had brought a fresh impetus to municipal administration and that his management of Allahabad affairs was marked by both constructiveness and competence.
In 1923 the United Provinces Congress committee decided to contest the municipal elections on the Congress and Khilafat programme, and to enter these local bodies not to obstruct but to direct their affairs honestly and efficiently. Jawaharlal was, much against his will, persuaded to stand as one of the Congress candidates from Allahabad, and as the Congress had a majo¬ rity, soon found himself elected chairman for three years. It had earlier been thought that Purushottam Das Tandon would be chairman, but he decided to stand down in favour of a Muslim Congressman, as some loyalist Muslims had objected to a Hindu chairman. However, when it became clear that the loyalist Muslims wished to have not so much a Muslim as a loyalist, and as the Muslim Congressman was unwell, Jawaharlal’s name was suddenly put forward and he was elected by 20 votes as against 11 secured by the candidate sponsored by the officials.1
Jawaharlal was a most unwilling chairman. To him the primary task was the fight for swaraj, and he decided to continue as secretary of the provincial Congress committee, a post which he regarded as more important than the chairmanship of the municipal board and which, he declared, he was prouder to hold.
The day I am satisfied that the municipal chairmanship is injuring my Congress work that day I shall submit my resignation of the chairmanship.
For the chairmanship is to me only the means for serving the nation for hastening swaraj. The best method is to go straight ahead on the lines chalked out by our leaders and not to wander in the shady alleys and lanes of constitutional activity. My mentality is revolutionary. I believe in revolution and in direct action and in battle. I know that many times weshall have to advance and engage the enemy and offer the inevita¬ ble price of freedom before we finally carry the citadel ... I do not forget the history and agony of Indiaduring the last few years and I am not going to spend most of my time in any office while my beloved leader lies in jail. I shall give battle whenever I can. I shall fight and hit hard whenever
1 See account in The Leader, 6 April 1923, and Jawaharlal's letter in the same issue.
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION
Imay. That is my main function till swaraj is attained. All else is training
and preparation.1
Invited by the Collector of Allahabad to come and discuss the possibility of keeping general politics outside the municipal sphere, he replied that he would try to carry out the policies of the Congress, and would resign if he disagreed with the Board on any matter of principle or if the Congress com¬ mittee so desired it. ‘I regret that I cannot split myself up into various com¬ partments — one for “general politics”, another for “municipal affairs”, and so on.’2 Repeatedly during the next two years, till his resignation was finally accepted by the Government, Jawaharlal offered to relinquish office, and he never allowed it to hamper his activities in the wider world and even courted arrest as at Nabha.
However, though JawaharM’s priorities never wavered, his distaste for municipal affairs gradually weakened, and he found himself enjoying the work. ‘What I feared and disliked I have begun to like, and municipal work has begun to have some fascination for me. I feel that it is in the power of our board to make life a little more bearable, a little less painful to the inhabitants of Allahabad.'3 And he always retained this interest in his home town, con¬ tinued to keep an eye on its development and, even when engrossed in later years in national work, could find time to protest against vulgar posters or noisy brass bands.4
Once he had assumed this responsibility of the chairmanship, Jawaharlal worked hard. Himself regular in attendance, whenever he was in Allahabad, at meetings which were held at least twice a week, he deplored the tendency of the members to look to their own convenience and urged them to sacrifice their own professional work, if need be, for the sake of the municipality.3 Indeed, he almost coerced his colleagues to work as hard as he did, and rather than adjourn meetings for lack of a quorum, he directed members to wait so that they were driven to send for their truant colleagues. Soon after taking over as Chairman, he issued a public statement rebuking some members for idleness;6 this had its effect, so that later he could agree to refrain from such public criticism. Chairmen and members of standing committees were told that, in addition to their routine work, they should inspect their departments periodically and introduce efficiency. Public grievances should be removed and,
‘Circular letter of Jawaharlal as secretary, prov. cong. committee to all district, town and ttbsil Congress committees and members of prov. Cong, committee, 5 April 1923.
*To Collector of Allahabad, 4 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13.
*Letter to the Executive Officer, Allahabad Municipality, written from Nabha jail, 26 September 192.3, The Ueder, 6 October 1923.
4 See, for example, his letters to the Chairman, Allahabad Municipal Board, 24 September 1936 and 11 July 1939.
’Meeting of 26 April 1923, reported in Tbt Ltadtr, 28 April 1923.
*Ti* Ltadtr, 16 June 1923.
90 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
where this was not possible, satisfactory explanations should be provided. ‘Members have not been put on committees for show purposes but for hard work. It will perhaps be better for any member who finds it difficult to give enough time to his committee work to resign and make room for another who can give the necessary time.’1 He also forbade member* to exercise patronage in appointments or to secure municipal contracts or any other favours from the Board.2 But he soon won the confidence of all groups on the Board and was able to direct the proceedings on the lines he desired. It was the nominated Anglo-Indian member who, but two months after voting against Jawaharlal, sought an assurance from him that there was no truth in the rumour of his resignation;3 and in 1924 the Board unanimously re¬ quested the Government not to accept Jawaharlal’s resignation and, if this were not feasible, to permit the Board to re-elect him.4
The secret of JawaharlaTs influence was his manifest integrity. On one occasion, one of the vice-chairmen, Zahur Ahmed, offered his resignation orally but retracted it after its acceptance by Jawaharlal. Realizing that he had erred in acting on an oral resignation, Jawaharlal requested the Board to censure him. ‘I think that the Board would be justified in expressing its dis¬ pleasure of this action and I can assure the Board that I will appreciate this. I believe in discipline and no one should be above it.3 The Board declined and stood by Jawaharlal’s action, but was persuaded by him to cancel its vote of confidence and permit Zahur Ahmed to continue in office.6 While he did not conceal his views on major issues, he never permitted the Congress majority to push matters to extremes, and in minor matters he voted, as was expected from a chairman, against any change. He turned down the request of the municipal employees that they be allowed to suspend work on Jallian- wala Bagh day, for he knew that they were only interested in a holiday. He secured the rejection of the proposal of a member belonging to the Congress party that the Board dispense with chairs and conduct proceedings while sitting on the floor, by pointing out that this had nothing to do with swadeshi.1 He encouraged the wearing of khaddar by municipality employees and the use of Hindi or Urdu in official transactions but rejected suggestions that these be made obligatory.8 He supported the passing of a resolution deploring the treatment of Indians in the United States and the British colonies, but rejected as impractical suggestions for retaliation such as doubling municipal taxes on Englishmen and Americans or debarring them from buying land.9
'Chairman's circular, 13 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 4. Serial 1.
*Tbe Leadtr, 16 November 1923.
J The Leader, 13 June 1923.
4 Proceedings of 29 April 1924, reported in The AUababad Municipal Gazette, 1 May 1924.
’ Note 19 July 1924, Allahabad Municipality File 6.
6 Proceedings of the Board, 23, 24, 23, 28 and 31 July 1924.
7Report in The Leader, 3 May 1923.
■Report in The Leader, 7 July 1923: The Allahabad Municipal GaHtte, 16 December 1923.
’Proceedings of the Board, 9 October 1923.
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION
91
From the municipal officials he expected efficiency but was loyal to those who served him well — and those who were surprised by his support of mem* bers of the Indian Gvil Service after 1947 would have done well to study his attitude years earlier as municipal chairman. He had no illusions about dvil servants. ‘Permanent officials who are not under popular control, as we know to our cost, are a danger against which we must guard. They are too wooden, and utterly out of touch with the people, and have no sense of propor¬ tion or vision. They always tend to make a close corporation of themselves, indulge in mutual praise and are wholly intolerant of people Who differ from them.’1 But he was willing, in the conduct of municipal affairs, to co-operate with Government servants so long as the public interests and the principles of the Congress were not jeopardized.2 As he told the Collector, he and his fellow Congressmen had not sought election purely for discovering oppor¬ tunities of friction, with the Government. ‘Mr. Knox and I agreed that it was hardly possible for us to convince each other of the correctness of the other’s viewpoint on wider issues. That difference must be faced, but in the routine work of the Board this will hardly trouble anyone.’3 He instructed the heads of departments to get rid of incompetent subordinates with all speed and without mercy.4 Within a week of taking charge of his office, he suspended a dispatcher and a messenger for delay in delivering a letter. 'I shall be obliged if you will make it clear to every member of the staff that if there is one thing which will not be tolerated it is incompetence and slackness and any instance of this will be severely dealt with ... no kind of effective work is possible unless our office is run on business lines.’3 Informed that the engineering staff was efficient in its work but slack in sending reports, he recorded, ‘I am afraid the staff will have to get over this aversion to pen and paper. Any slack¬ ness of this kind is most objectionable and is own brother to incompetence. It is impossible for a person who is slack to be efficient and I desire no slack ness in the municipal employ.’6 Delay, he informed the Board,7 might be excused but it was seldom justifiable; and he expected prompt resuite. ‘Success and failure will be the teste applied. In case of the latter excuses will not find favour with the board, and immediate and drastic action will be taken. Only such officers will be-employed who are prepared for this responsibility.’’8 But those officials who worked well received the chairman’s full support even in face of public criticism and satyagrabtr,9 and no bureaucrat could have
‘Note of 24 July 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 26.
JSpeech at Ballia, 9 April, reported in Tbs Lsadsr, 11 April 1924.
5 Note on interview with Collector, 6 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13.
4 Jawaharlal’s note on municipal work, April-May 1923, dated 10 June 1923. Tbs Lsadsr, 16 June 1923.
’Note to Executive Officer, 6 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13.
*17 December 1923. Tbs Allahabad Municipal Gaxstts Extraordinary, 21 December 1923. ’Proceedings of the meeting of the Board, 16 January 1923.
•Note on the Water-Works Dept., Tbs Lsadsr, 30 April 1923.
•jawaharlal’s letter to the editor, 18 April, published in Tbs Lsadsr, 21 April 1924.
92 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
improved on his rebuke to the Public Health Committee: ‘Has the Committee ever heard of discipline? What does it think will be the effect of the Committee siding with some employees of the Board as against a high officer ... It is difficult for officers to carry on their work properly if they are censured and condemned in this manner for trivial details.’1 •
Most important of all, Jawaharlal was clearly above sectarian prejudices. His guidance enabled the Board unanimously to reject the suggestion to prohibit the slaughter of cattle;2 and the next week he reminded the members that while Christian missionaries had originally certainly come to India to convert Indians, at the same time their object was also to benefit India as far as possible.3
Such moderation and impartiality gave Jawaharlal a commanding influence. He first turned his attention to formulating a scheme for widening the muni¬ cipal franchise and ensuring fair elections. He desired the abolition of plural constituencies and the replacement of communal by proportional representa¬ tion. He also suggested, to avoid impersonation, smaller constituencies and personal registration of voters.4 But electoral reform was beyond the purview of the Municipal Board. Jawaharlal had to content himself with introducing, whenever possible, the spirit of nationalism in municipal .administration and implementing the constructive, nation-building programme of the Congress. The singing of Iqbal’s Hindustan Honiara (Our Hindustan) was made a part of the school curriculum. Tilak Day (1 August), the anniversary of the death of Tilak, and Gandhi Day (18 March), the anniversary of the day when Gandhi was sentenced to jail, were added to the list of public holidays, while Empire Day was omitted. The release of Gandhi in February 1924 was celebrated by the illumination of municipal buildings. Civic addresses were presented to the Congress leaders Das, Ajmal Khan and Shaukat Ali. The United Provinces Government sought to prevent such defiance by directing that civic addresses should be presented only to the Viceroy and the Governor of the province, but Jawaharlal secured the unanimous rejection by the Board of this directive, which he termed ‘an insult and impertinence’. In other words, even the nomi¬ nated and non-Congress members supported his assertion of the Board's inde¬ pendence on such matters? Jawaharlal made it clear to his colleagues that they should be prepared for the consequences of their disobedience; but in fact it was the Provincial Government which had to withdraw from their position.6
This was soon followed by the Board’s decision to ignore a viceregal visit to Allahabad. Jawaharlal was ill at the time of Reading’s arrival, but he cir¬ culated a note to the members of the Board emphatically objecting to the
‘Note, 4 April 1924, Allahabad Municipality File 16.
Proceedings, 29 June 1923, reported in The Leader, 2 July 1923-
’Proceedings, 3 July 1923, reported in The Leader, 7 July 1923.
4Note, 10. May 1923, Allahabad MunicioaUty File 3.
yThe Leader, 29 June 1923.
6Tbe Leader, 2 July and 10 September 1923.
escape into administration
93
presentation of an address to the Viceroy, who hyd ordered the arrest ofGandhi and many others, and was suppressing the Sikh agitation in the Punjab.
I feel that a public reception to the Viceroy is a shameful thing for any one to whom the honour of India is dear and precious. I wish no personal discourtesy to Lord Readipg. But we are human beings with eyes to see and, sometimes, to weep and ears to hear and hearts to feel — and feel the more because our arms are weak and there is no strength in us to stand upright and protect our own . . . Lord Reading, secure in his strength and proud of his might, has flung this challenge to the Sikhs and the Indian people and he would have us applaud him for it and thus complete our degradation. I am weak and powerless but I too have a little pride — the pride of the weak, perhaps,, it may be, but I would sooner be trampled by Lord Reading’s soldiery than bow down to welcome a person who was responsible for so much sorrow to my country and countrymen.1
Jawaharlal also secured the introduction of spinning and weaving in schools, and rejected the objection of the Commissioner of Allahabad Division to what seemed to the latter to be a Congress measure.
We have laid great stress on spinning in our schools because we believe in its economic value. I have little doubt that if you considered the ques¬ tion on its merits and without the prejudices born of political opinions you will appreciate the attempts to revive spinning and put it on a firm basis. If you will take the trouble to learn spinning yourself you will after a few days feel its charm and delight in the music of the wheel. Spinning is not a party matter confined to a particular group.2 * *
Most of the teachers and the boys and girls dressed in khaddar.
Jawaharlal was eager to improve the quality of instruction imparted in the municipal schools, to raise the salaries of teachers, to make education compul¬ sory and to train children to be good citizens who neither cringed nor boasted.
‘I have felt that the physical and mental development of the young should be the special care of the state and the municipality and in this respect we might well take a leaf out of the book of Soviet Russia.’9 Scouting was introduced for boys and a day’s outing was arranged every month for all children for nature study. But as Government declined to give further grants for education which was directed to encouraging the ’new spirit’, it could only be given low priority by the Board, after the maintenance of the basic municipal services — sanitation, water supply and the upkeep of roads. The staff of sanitary inspectors was in-
1Tbe Bombay Chronicle, 27 October 1923. . 2Tbe Tribune, 27 August 1924. *A note on municipal work during December 1923 and January and February 1924,' Allahabad Municipal Gazette, 1 April 1924.
94
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
creased, and better arrangements made for the disposal of refuse. As the water¬ works plant was worn out, there could be no marked improvement in water supply; but even so, many new water connections were provided. As for roads, Jawaharlal observed that although more was being spent on roads than ever before, many roads in the city had so deteriorated that soon it would be impos¬ sible for vehicles to use them.1 ‘In some places it is difficult to get any medical advice as no vehicle can safely go there and doctors refuse to walk the distance especially when this will involve wallowing in the mud.'2 Jawaharlal thought the reason for thiswas that a great part of the municipal funds allotted for roads was being utilized to improve and beautify the Civil Station where Europeans and the richer dass of Indians lived. This led him to suggest a tax on large com¬ pounds, which were to be found mostly in the Civil Station, for he thought that this area should be more built up and the compounds become smaller and better looked after. The income of the Board would also be raised and the general appearanceof Allahabad would improve. He also wished to tax open sites whose owners, interested in land speculation, had failed to build on. There should be a tax both on land value and on improvements and houses, but in such a way that the latter were encouraged.3 But nothing came of these suggestions. Nor, because of the recalcitrant attitude of the Allahabad Town Improvement Trust, dominated by civil servants and loyalists, was he able to implement any of his ideas on town planning.
However, Jawaharlal could show more substantial results in the matter of improvement of municipal finances. He was convinced that the rates would have to be increased, but in such a way as to limit the increase’s incidence to the rich. Unwilling to raise money at the expense of the poorer classes, he rejected the suggestion of an octroi duty on cycles4 and exempted houses with a low rental value from payment of water rates.3 He also terminated the practice whereby octroi was levied on foreign goods at the ‘invoice* rate, while Indian goods were charged at the market rate which often was higher, with the suit that Indian goods paid more. It was laid down that the market rate should be the wholesale and not the retail rate, although this meant a loss in income. Jawaharlal urged that a heavier rate be charged on foreign goods so as to en¬ courage Indian manufacturers,6 but the Board resolved on a complete boycott of British goods unless they were not manufactured elsewhere in the world or were not available in India.7
'Proceedings of Board meeting, 28 May 1924, The Leader, 2 June 1924.
2Jawaharlal's note on municipal work, June-August, 1923, AllahabadMunicipal Gazette Extra¬ ordinary, 1$ September 1923.
5 Note on municipal work, December 1923-February 1924, Allahabad Municipal Gazette,
I April 1924; Jawaharlal's note on taxation, 28 August 1924, The Leader, 6 September 1924.
* The Leader, 7 July 1923.
’Annual Administration Report of the Allahabad Municipaf Board, 30 May 1924. •Jawaharlal’s notes on municipal work, June-August 1923 and September-November 1923, Allahabad Municipal Gazettes Extraordinary, 13 September 1923 and 21 December 1923, respectively.
’Proceedings of the meeting, 23 October 1923, reported in The Loader, 27 October 1923.
ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION
95
Yet, despite these decisions, the Municipal Board under Jawaharlal’s guild ance, by more efficient collection of taxes, increased levy on railways passing through the city, and the imposition of a new cax on passengers, improved its financial position, paid back, for the first time foryears, a part of the loan receiv¬ ed from the Government, and set self-sufficiency as its objective.
Jawaharlal’s work attracted wide public attention because, apart from his general standing, he issued a fortnightly municipal gazette reporting the pro¬ ceedings of the Board and its committees and, in addition to the annual report, gave a detailed account of municipal activities once every three months. There were also Hindi and Urdu editions of the gazette. For the first time, too, the average citizen of Allahabad felt that he had a municipal chairman who was accessible and concerned with his welfare. The ekkawalas (drivers of horse carriages), for example, approached him with their grievances and on investi¬ gation Jawaharlal was astounded to find that in three months about 1,400 pro¬ secutions had been initiated against them by the police. This was not the direct concern of the Municipal Board, but it convinced Jawaharlal that something was very wrong somewhere, and he induced the Board to do what it could to make the life of the ekkawalas more tolerable.1
Jawaharlal had also, from the start, kept in close touch and exchanged ideas with the ten other Congress chairmen of municipal boards in the United Pro¬ vinces,2 and he was elected Chairman of the United Provinces Municipal Con¬ ference that met at Aligarh in December 1924. 1'his provincial conference accepted Jawaharlal’s proposals that training as scouts should be made part of physical education in schools, adult franchise introduced for municipal elec¬ tions and the autonomy of municipal boards protected. These recommenda¬ tions were in line with his view that municipalities could become minor arenas for national education and for constructive national and political work. He also, however, knew that the real arena for national advance lay elsewhere. In Feb¬ ruary 1924 he was dissuaded by Gandhi from resigning the chairmanship;3 but at the Congress session in December presided over by Gandhi he opposed a resolution advocating the capture by Congressmen, whenever possible, of local boards and municipalities. His own experience, he said, had convinced him that Congressmen in these boards were so restricted that the effort was futile; andon his return from the Belgaum Congress he resigned both his chair¬ manship and membership of the Board, ostensibly on the ground that he had little time to devote to municipal work. Three years later, in 1928, he allowed himself to be dragged again into municipal politics and even, despite Gandhi’s advice,4 permitted his name to be put forward for the chairmanship; but on this occasion he was, surprisingly, defeated by one vote by the loyalist candidate.3
’Jawaharlal's note on municipal work, June-August 1923, op. cit.
2See Allahabad Municipality File 22.
*Mahadeva Desai, Day to Day with Gandhi (Banaras, 1970), vol. 4, p. 22. •
4‘My conviction is that you cannot combine all India work with solid municipal work.' Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 28 November 1928.
*Tba Laadar, 20 and 21 December 1928. \
96 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
His two years in municipal office could not have given Jawaharlal much cause for satisfaction. For a man who believed that a municipality should not confine itself to such matters as housing and sanitation but should regard social welfare in its widest sense as its primary concern, the disappointment could not be glossed over. But it was astonishing how much he had succeeded in achiev¬ ing, despite the inherent limitations of the post and the demands of his wider interests. Even the Commissioner was compelled to record reluctantly his impression that ‘the improvement in the administration was largely due to the chairman, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, and a few public spirited members of the Board.’1 The comment of the U.P. Government at the time of Jawaharlal’s relinquishment of the chairmanship is also worth mention. ‘Pandit Kapildeo Malaviya’, they wrote in April 1925, ‘was elected chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board by (a majority of) two votes, in succession to Jawaharlal Nehru, who strove to show that a swarajist could be an administrator and a gentleman, and the Commissioner thinks that the newcomer’s position will be very difficult.’2
1 The Tribune, 24 August 1924. 2 Fortnightly report on die political situation in the United Provinces*for the second half of March 1925. Home Dept. Pol. 1925, File 112.