Leading the Party
During Jawaharlal’s absence in Europe he had been elected president of the Congress for 1936. The decision was, as usual, primarily that of Gandhi. The main issue before the Congress was whether they should contest the e^ctions and accept office in the provinces under the new Government of India Act. Jawaharlal’s views on the subject were well known. He regarded the Act as deliberately designed to strengthen all the vested and reactionary elements in India, and acceptance of office under this Act would be a retrogade step which might well lead to the disintegration of the Congress and obstruction of a civil disobedience campaign at any early date. Gandhi too seems to have been of this view, despite the persuasion ofJRajagopalachari and Ansari, and therefore was keenthatJawaharlal should once again accept the responsibility, even if it meant that many senior leaders would feel unable to follow his leadership. ‘Your presidency is the lightest thing that could have happened for the country.’1 TheWorking Committee accepted Gandhi’s suggestion as theonlywayof avoid¬ ing bitter controversy. The new constitution of the Congress would enable Jawaharlal to pick his own committee, and even those who could not support him agreed to stand by and give his policies a fair and unobstructed trial.2
In Europe, Jawaharlal’s hostility to the Act and his radical tendencies had been strengthened. He paid short visits to England in November 1935 and January 1936, when temporary improvements in Kamala’s condition permitted him to leave her bedside. He had not wanted to do Sb, for his mind rebelled against social relations with those responsible for the nightmare years of oppres¬ sion in India.9 But Gandhi encouraged him to go.4
Unlike in Paris, where he happily discussed Hinduism with Malraux and conditions in Russia with Gide, in London he could not avoid politics. He de¬ clined to meet any member of the British Government and took no initiative in
'Gandhi to Jawaharlal. 3 October 1933.
2 Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 22 September and 13 October 1933; Mahadeva Desai to Jawaharlal 6 September 1933.
5 See hi* letter to Agatha Harrison, 23 September 1933.
4Gandhfto Jawaharlal, early in 1936
e 200
LEADING THE PARTY
201
meetinganyoneotherthanafewpersonal friends. Evenso, hisfewdaysinLondon were crowded with talks with politicians of every variety. What impressed Jawaharlal was the personal friendliness1 as well as the general boredom over the Indian question. The presence of a representative from Scotland Yard by his side from the moment he landed at Dover constantly reminded Jawaharlal, even ifhewereinclined toforget, that hewas in a sense a ticket-of-leaveman with partof a sentence still hanging over him. But the British publicgave him awarm welcome.Therewasgeneral andgreat appreciationofhimas a man. The reporter for The Tribune was lyrical.
When the man stepped out of the train there was almost a hush. I saw a beautifully featured pale face, cast in a classic mould; certainly one of the most dignified and truly aristocratic faces I have ever seen. I heard a soft and mellow voice. I felt, as everybody who has ever met him must feel, that Jawaharlal is a Presence and in an immeasurable degree much more than a politician.2
The modesty of Jawaharlal, his lack of bitterness and his commitment to ideals, the sadness of mien born of imminent sorrow and past suffering, the difficulty he- experienced in even articulating his speeches after nearly four years in jail, the dazzlement by the light after long darkness, madea deep impact. ‘Few in the House of Commonsseemed to care’, wrote Hannen Swaffer in John Bull, ‘butwhenyou went there the other day, oneof the world’s bravest spirits — one embodied in your slight retiring frame — was within the walls of the Palace ofWestminster . . . Although you were heard by only a few people in England, you left behind you a great inspiration. If all the reformers in this country were as calmly valiant as you, a new hope would dawn in the minds of oppressed millions.’ But Jawaharlal knew that smiles, good humour and personal approval did not carry far. Even the members of the Labour Party, by and large, with all their theoretical dislike of imperialism, moved in its orbit and felt powerless to step out of it. It did not therefore seem possible to avoid conflict with the British, and all one could hope for was a little more civility in ordinary life and less brutality in battle.3 So he was more at ease talking to intellectuals and literary figures than to politicians. The discerning account of Jawaharlal in London, provided by Leonard Woolf, makes this dear.
I liked Nehru very much as a man; he was an intellectual of the intel¬ lectuals, on the surface gentle and sad. He had great charm and, though 1 Even to this, however, there were exceptions. A. G. Fraser, principal of the Achimota College in what was then the Gold Coast, invited Jawaharlal to dinner at his dob. The secretary of the club objected to Jawaharlal appearing in the public dining room. Fraser resigned from the dub and arranged thedinner in a privateroom in a hotel. See Jawaharlal’s note to Secretary-Generfl, Ministry of External Affairs, 29 May 1994, Nehru papers. 216 November 1935. 3Noteon a visit to England, 22 February 1936.
202
JAWAHARLAt NEHRU
there was a congenital aloofness about him, I had no difficulty in talking to him. It was a rather strange and inconclusive conversation. I had thought and still think that he had intended to discuss politics and, in particular, Imperial politics from the Labour'angle with me. And in a vague way we did talk politics, the problems of India and Ctylon; but it was pretty vague and somehow or other we slipped into talking about life and books rather than the fall of empire or empires . . .*
The most lasting impression on Jawaharlal was made not by any Englishman but by Krishna Menon, whom he then met for the first time. 'He is very able and energetic and is highly thought of in intellectual, journalistic and left wing labour circles. He has the virtues and failings of the intellectual.’2
However, it so happened that at Lausanne Jawaharlal met by chance Ben Bradley, who was also a patient at the dime, and Palme Dutt who had come to see Bradley. Palme Dutt and Jawaharlal spent three days together, and the British Communist found the ‘Professor’, as Jawaharlal was known in Comin¬ tern circles, very receptive. He agreed that the Congress was, on the whole, moving towards the right, but was himself willing to work in dose collabora¬ tion with the communists. He was not well read in Marxism but was persuaded of its validity and emotionally indined toward it. He also had a deep admiration for the achievements of the Soviet Union. Russia was the land of the future. ‘With all its defects and mistakes and ruthlessness, it is taking visible, vital shape there, stumbling occasionally but ever marching forward.’3 He hoped that some variation of the political and economic systems prevalent in Russia would extend to India, but hewas not prepared to have this by coercive methods. ‘I do not want India to be drilled and forced into a certain position, because the costs of such drilling are too great; it is not worth while; it is not desirable from manypoints of view. ’4 Gvil liberties were to Jawaharlal of absolute value, and the communists had to reckon with this. Jawaharlal was not a MarxistJn the normal senseofthe word. He accepted the Marxist interpretation of history and its vision of a classless society, but he certainly did not believe in revolu¬ tionary dictatorship. Conditioned under Gandhi, he hated violence even if he did not in theory reject it, and stood for democratic and peaceful though not for constitutional means. But with these reservations, Jawaharlal, according to Palme Dutt, promised that he would, as president of the Congress, do all he could to promote the Communist Party in India, and he even gave a series of specific undertakings as to what he would try to do.9
1DownhillAU tba Way (London, 1967), pp. 230-32.
JToRajendra Prasad, 22November 1935, HomeDept. Pol. File 1/2/36.
‘Foreword toM. R. Masani's bookSoviet Sidelights, 25 February 1936.
‘Talk toihe Indian Conciliation Group in London, 4 February 1936, reprinted in India and tba World (LoTdon, 1936), p. 259- *
‘Palme Dutt’s interview with the author, 20 November 1969.
LEADING THE PARTY
203
The communists, of course, were now in a mood to co-operate with the Congress. In 1931 Jawaharlal, ‘a candidate well placed for becoming the Indian Kerensky’,1 had been expelled from the League against Imperialism. ‘Jawaharlal Nehru’, ran the resolution, ‘has become traitor to the cause of the emancipa¬ tion of the people of India from the British imperialist yoke; it [the League] stigmatises his desertion to the camp of counter-revolution before the broad masses of India and expels him from its ranks,’ In subsequent years, as part of the policy of refusing to work with bourgeois nationalist parties, the com¬ munists had condemned him vehemently for his ‘left reformism’ and as one of ‘the most dangerous enemies in the struggle for independence’. Bradley himself had criticized Jawaharlal for trying to stem the rising peasant movement with vague talk of socialism and communism.2 But by the summer of 1933 there had been a shift in Soviet and international communist policy. The call was now for popular fronts. In India, said Dimitrov, speaking at the seventh congress of the Third International, the communists had to support, extend and parti¬ cipate in all anti-imperialist mass activities, not excluding those under national reformist leadership. The interview given by Jawaharlal over two years before, declaring that the choicelay between communism and fascism and he preferred the former, was now reported with approval.3
The details of what the communists hoped for from Jawaharlal in India can be discerned in an article by Palme Dutt and Bradley.4 It was conceded that the Congress was the principal mass organization of diverse elements seeking national liberation in India: but it was not yet the united front of the Indian people. To achieve this, its constitution, programme and leadership would all have to be revised and strengthened. Workers’ and peasants’ unions and other such organizations should be brought into the joint struggle either in a united front or by collective affiliation to the Congress. The constitution of the Con¬ gressshould beamended to permit such collective affiliation at the local, district, provincial and national levels, and joint bodies should be set up immediately. There should also be provision for greater initiative of the rank and file within the Congress in place of the hierarchical structure dominated by the Working Committee. Centralized direction was of course vital in a struggle; but it ought to be based not on personal dictatorship but on democratic centralism. The dogma of non-violence was a weakness which should be omitted from the Con¬ gress creed; but while a sharp ideological struggle should be conducted on this question, it was not so important that it should be allowed to split the national front. The elections should be fought jointly by the front in such a way as to provide sufficient representation for the left-wing elements and to enable the demands of the masses to be clearly expressed. The chief demand, the positive
* Saperov in the Bolsbtvik in 1930, quoted in Druhe, op. cit., p. 303.
*The Background in India', LabourMonthly, March 1934.
9 IntemationalPress Correspondence, 4 January 1936.
4Palme Dutt andBradley, TheAnti-Imperialist People’s Front in India’, LabourMoMbly, March 1936.
204
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
slogan of the front, would be for a Constituent Assembly freely elected by uni versal suffrage.
It is dear that this artide was written after the talks with Jawaharlal at Lausanne, and stated what Palme Dutt and Bradley bdieved to have been ac¬ cepted byJawaharlal as the common programme for which he would strive. He wasforajoint front against imperialism; indeed, he regarded the Congress under Gandhi as already in essence such a front which only required to be widened. He also continued to favour a Constituent Assembly;1 and the communists, reversing their earlier condemnation of this idea,2 now accepted this. But he was not ready to abandon Gandhi’s leadership or the method of non-violence. Quite apart from its ethical aspect, non-violence had helped to preserve India from civil conflict and to tone down indigenousopposition to the national movement. The concession in the article of Dutt and Bradley that, though non-violence was outmoded, its rejection was not a fundamental issue, was obviously made with Jawaharlal’s attitude inmind. AsforGandhi, as Palme Dutt reports it,9 Jawahar¬ lal had confessed that he felt in his nature an aristocrat; he was sorry for the Indian people, it moved his heart to see them turn to him for guidance, but he lacked the common touch and could not get as close to them as Gandhi did, though even Gandhi was not of the masses. This, according to Jawaharlal, was the source of his tremendous deference to Gandhi; and his audience doubtless recognized that, by its very nature, it could not be set aside for intellectual reasons. There is corroborative evidence of this overwhelmingly emotional mood of Jawaharlal at this time. He condemned imperialism for its horrors, its indecency and vulgarity as much as for its exploitation, and appreciated Gandhi above all for the psychological transformation he had wrought in the Indian people.4 In an article written at about this time in answer to Indian left-wing criticism of Gandhi, Jawaharlal contended that Gandhi had played a revolu¬ tionary role in India because he had reached the heart of the masses while groups with a more advanced ideology had functioned largely in the air.9
Now the Congress awaited Jawaharlal’s guidance. Till his return to India, no major decisions had been taken, and the party, as Gandhi described it, was 'literally tacking’.6 It was for Jawaharlal to end this policy of ‘non-action and non-thought’.7 Meeting Gandhi and senior Congressmen before the session at Lucknow, Jawaharlal found considerable support for office acceptance; and he was isolated in the Working Committee.8 But embarrassment to him was avoided by shelving any firm decision on an issue which would only arise after
> Noteon a Constituent Assembly for India, 25 February 1936.
1 See Adhikari's thesis February 1934, Impncor, vol. 14, no. 40, 20 July 1934.
* Interview with the author, 20 November 1969.
* Seehis letters to Lord Lothian, 9 December 1935and 17 January 1936.
*Mahatma Gandhi, 20 January 1936.
•To Jawaharlal, 22 September 1935. ,
TTo Rajeulra Prasad, 20 November 1935, Home Dept. Pol. 1/2/36.
•To Sye&Mahmud, 5 May 1936.
/
leading the party
the elections. Meantime, reflecting Jawaharlal’s new ideas derived in Europe, the Working Committee agreed that it was desirable to develop closer associa¬ tion between the masses and the Congress organization so that they might take their full share in the shaping of Congress policy. It was also decided that the Congress constitution should be revised to make it a joint front of all anti- imperialist elements and enable closer co-operation with organizations of pea¬ sants and others. 1 These resolutions, along with that opposing India’s participa¬ tion in any imperialist war,jvere drafted by Jawaharlal and, as he wrote later, increased his confidence in himself. There was nothing very new in substance, but they hinted a new orientation, and generally a more emphatic and radical tone was adopted.1 2 They also delighted the socialists; and the fact that Jawaharlal, though he abstained from formally joining the Congress Socialist Party, was ‘now a socialist in the full sense of the term,’3 gave the socialists great hopes of increasing their influence in the Congress. Jawaharlal might think that they themselves had not adequate support among the masses to talfp over the Congress organization, but he would certainly not allow the Congress to become a mere parliamentary body. The Congress was ‘in a rut due to idiotic ideas of certain people’, and it should be given a new direction by socialist permeation.4
However, it soon became clear that the socialists had overestimated both Jawaharlal’s influence as president and his commitment to them. There was not the faintest suspicion of socialism in any of the resolutions. Despite Jawaharlal’s open opposition the Subjects Committee approved of the Working Committee’s resolution discarding proportional representation in elections to Congress offices, thus eliminating any chances the socialists might have; and this was only set right by the full session of the Congress.5 He spoke in favour of non-acceptance of office, for the revolutionary as against the reformist mentality, but would not support the socialist amendments committing the Congress to this position because of his desire to prevent a split.6 Jawaharlal clutched at the avoidance of a decision in his own mind and in the party. He believed that, while making hisown position dear, he should not push the issue to breaking-point. He had been long away, cither in prison or abroad; the hunger for office had grown among his colleagues and could not be just wished off the scene; and Gandhi, though out of tune with this mood, was unwilling to battle with it. Jawaharlal could, in the future, use the office of president to
1 Resolutions to be placed before the Lucknow Congress, The Bombay Chronicle, 26 March and 8 April 1936. *DSVA,pp. 40-41. * Message to the AlMndia Socialist Conference at Meerut, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 January 1936. 4See the report of the viewpoint of socialist leaders at Lucknow, The Bombay Chronicle, 6 April 1936. * TheBombay Chronicle, 11 and 14 April 1936. 6Tbe Tribune, 12 April 1936.
206
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
strengthen the radical forces and win the party round, but a direct collision at this stage held no hope of success. To seek satisfaction merely in brave ideas was the way of facile intellectual opportunism. The true socialist was no armchair politician but a man of action, utilizing his philosophy and scientific outlook for achievement. The immediate task was the elections, anti this could be used to widen the base of the national movement and develop mass contacts. Indeed, the only thing to be said in favour of the 1935 Act was that it created a wider electorate. To divide the Congress at this stage on a remote issue and weaken its prospects at the polls seemed foolish tactics. Jawaharlal did not face up to the fact that electoral success and the opportunity of forming ministries would in themselves further weaken the position of those in the party of his way of thinking. It would have been far easier to secure a commit¬ ment to non-acceptance when the lure of office was not immediate. Postpone¬ ment, by the very nature of the situation, transferred the advantage to the other side.
In his presidential address Jawaharlal, as was now to be expected of him, analysed the world situation and India’s place in it. Two vast groups faced each other; decaying capitalism, imperialist and fascist, on the one hand and the progressive forces, socialist and nationalist. On the other. British im¬ perialism in India also, though still powerful, was showing signs of decay and, in its desire to hold on, was developing an increasingly fascist mentality. The growing intensity of repression required no elaboration, but worthy of special mention was the tremendous deprivation of civil liberties. All this only steeled Jawaharlal to a greater resolve to end this infamy and to have nothing to do with those willing to compromise with such a rule. But in the national movement itself there was a spirit of disunion, a malaise, a stress on petty, internal conflicts. Middle-class leadership was inevitable, but it easily tired if it did not draw strength and inspiration from the masses. The Congress should be not only for the masses but of the masses; only then would it really be for the masses
So Jawaharlal argued for the forming of new links which would permit the growthof mass consciousness within the Congress, and the revision of the party constitution for this purpose. The real problem was to join together all the anti¬ imperialist forces in the country, to forge a broad front comprising the mass elements as well as the great majority of the middle classes. The primary com¬ mittees should be made living organizations, as in the account of Soviet Russia given by the Webbs, and organizations of producers such as trade unions and peasant associations should be affiliated to the Congress or brought into full co-operationwithit. TheCongresscould have a corporate as well as an individual membership. There was no near prospect of direct action or civil disobedience, and theelectionscouldbeusedtocarry the message of the Congress to thepeople. The removal ofsocial and economic burdens and the convening ofa Constituent Assembly to frame a constitution formed the minimum programme, and these
LEADING THE PARTY
207
could not come through the Government of India Act or the legislatures con¬ stituted under it. To accept office under the Act which they had rejected was to stand self-condemned, to slide back to static futility and revive the old sterile creed of reformism. National honour and self-respect could not accept this position, for it would inevitably mean co-operation in some measure with the repressive apparatus of imperialism and partnership in the exploitation of the Indian people. The price of office acceptance was surrender. It would be a descent into a pit from which the Congress would find it difficult to come out. The sole purpose of entering the provincial assemblies should be to create deadlocks so as to kill the proposals for federation and make the working of the Act impossible.
The address had been written on 31 March, when Jawaharlal had not known for certain the strength of feeling in the party in favour of office acceptance. That he should have stuck to the written text even after he had virtually been voted down showed courage; but it also made dear how wide a gulf stretched between the president and his followers. The speech, as a whole, mirrored the contradictions in Jawaharlal’s outlook and the weaknesses of his political posi¬ tion. He affirmed his Marxist approach, his recognition of the Indian problem as a part of the world problem of capitalist imperialism. The laws of historical development had to be grasped to realize the organic connection of events and changes. “Let us try to develop the historic sense so that we can view current events in proper perspective and understand their real significance.’ The only key to the solution of the world’s problems, and of India’s problems, lay in socialism, ’and when I use this word I do so not in a vague humanitarian way but in the scientific, economic sense.’ But immediatdy, in the very next sentence, he moved away from the precise Marxist attitude. ’Socialism is, however, some¬ thing even more than an economic doctrine; it is a philosophy of life and as such also it appeals to me.’It was not merely the ending of poverty, of vested interests and private property, but a change in instincts and habits and desires, a new civilization such as was being fashioned in Soviet Russia. But it was not just a communist utopia, modelled on the Russian example and to be achieved by any means. The socialist approach in India would have to be adapted to the Indian conditions and speak in the language of the country. Socialism was to Jawaharlal more a tendency than a definable body of doctrine. He was always critical of the Indian communists for their imprisonment within the walls of dogma and for their rigid adherence to the Soviet example. ’For you,’ he frequently told them, ‘history begins with 1917.’ There was much that had happened in the Soviet Union which pained Jawaharlal greatly and he avoided the word com¬ munism because in the general understanding it signified Soviet Russia. He was a libertarian Marxist, whose idea of socialism encompassed at every stage a large and irreducible measure of civil liberty. A belief in democracy was the coreoi his socialist attitude. He rejected any mechanical view of human nature andlooked forward to a socialist societywhich, byremovingeconomic and social
JAWAHARLAL NfiHRU
20#
inhibitions and obstacles, would provide greater scope for individuality. It was this understanding of socialism which underlay his presidential address; and immediately after the Congress session he established an Indian Civil Liberties Union on non-party lines, with members of all shades of political opinion and even from outside politics. What was happening in many parts of India was beyond the limits of ‘common decency’ and it was the duty of every public- spirited citizen to protest. For when civil liberties were suppressed a nation lost all vitality and became impotent for anything substantial.1
Thedetailsof his programme for action were also not framed wholly to please the socialists, let alone the Marxists and communists. He made it clear that he would not, as president, seek to impose socialism on the Congress, even though it ‘is a vital creed which I hold with all my head and heart’. He would like the Congress to become a socialist organization but he accepted that the majority in the party were not prepared to go that far; and he would not force the issue on what was basically a nationalist organization and thereby create difficulties in the struggle for independence. Socialism was to him a personal matter; he thereforesawnorolefor himself in the Congress Socialist Party; and as president of the Congress Party he would, without compromising his beliefs, function as a political leader, leading the niajority the way it wanted to go. He cast himself in the mould of Blanqui: ‘I am their leader, therefore I must follow them.’ And, above all, he had no intention, as he had made clear in Europe to Bradley and Palme Dutt, of moving away from Gandhi; and the address ended with the customary paean to him.
It is true that Jawaharlal advocated the two chief proposals now being com¬ mended by the communists — the formation of a joint anti-imperialist front, and the affiliation to the Congress of trade and peasant unions. This gave the Communist Party much satisfaction. ‘In his presidential address Nehru’s anti¬ imperialist voice stammered on some vital points yet it was full-throated on several others, it was a clearer anti-imperialist call than had ever been made from the Congress chair.’2 But even here the implementation wasto be very different from what the communists expected. Jawaharlal’s idea of a joint front was not solely an allianceofthe Congress with political organizations ideologically to the left of it. He was thinking as much of the Congress drawing to its side groups which were more conservatively inclined, as at the time of the boycott of the Simon Commission in 1928, and spokeof it as seeking to become 'an All-Parties Conference in permanent session’.* He was willing to co-operate with anybody, irrespective of ideology, whowas opposed to imperialism; and within a few days of the Lucknow session he beganr negotiations with Pandit Malaviya, whose
‘Speech at Allahabad, 11 May, TheBombay Chronicle, 12May and talk in Bombay, The Bombay Chronicla, 18 May 1936.
Statement of the Politbureau of die Central Committee of the Communist Party of India, 24 July 1936b
*Speedj it Bombay, TbsBombay Chronicle, 19May 1936.
LEADING THE PARTY 209
outlook in politics was frankly communal, for an electoral alliance with his Nationalist Party.1 Jawaharlal’s general indifference to communal issues and his belief that they would be submerged once the emphasis was shifted to economic matters affecting the common people enabled him to ignore the communal tinge in organizations which were otherwise opposed to the British and were prepared to join him in the campaign for civil liberties. As for the affiliation of peasant and worker associations, this was watered down by the Working Committee to the constitution of a small committee to consider the promotion of closer contacts between the Congress and the masses; and this in turn became the need to grant greater responsibilities to the primary com¬ mittees of the Congress so as to make them living bodies.2
So left-wing forces had cause to be disappointed with the Lucknow Congress. Jawaharlal’s speech was heart-warming, and his personal standing in the party and the country was second only to that of Gandhi. But he had not even sought to assert thestrengthof his position. He had, at the end of the session, considered resignation and informed the delegates that having sat on a high pedestal for three days he was nowgoing back to oblivion. But he later decided not to precip- >r:atc matters. So it was the ‘old guard’ which had been successful. It had been, as Satyamurti, the Congressman from Madras, gloated, the triumph of Gandhism over socialism.3 G. D. Birla crowed:4
Mahatmaji kept his promise and without his uttering a word, he saw that no new commitments were made. Jawaharlalji’s speech in a way was thrown into the waste paper basket because all the resolutions that were passed were against the spirit of his speech ... He could have caused a split by resigning but he did not... Jawaharlalji seems to be like a typical English,democrat who takes defeat in a sporting spirit. He seems to be out for giving expression to his ideology, but he realises that action is impos¬ sible and so does not press for it.
As Gandhi himself observed in a letter5 which was seen by Jawaharlal, their ways were different and Gandhi accepted hardly any of Jawaharlal’s methods. He would strain every nerve to avoid a class war; so perhaps would Jawaharlal but he did not think it possible to avoid it. ‘But though Ik is extreme in his presentation of his methods, he is sober in action ... Whatever he does, he will do it nobly. Though the gulf between us as to the outlook upon life has undoubtedlywidened,wehavenever been so near each other in hearts as perhaps we are today.’
1 Letter to M. M. Malaviya, 20 April, and statement to the press, 22 June 1936.
2 Circular to prov. cong. Committees, 14 May 1936.
’ The Bombay Chronicle, 16 April 1936.
4 To Purushottamdas Thakurdag, 20 April 1936. Purushottamdas Thakurdas papery File 177. N.M.M.L. Emphasis in original.
*To Agatha Harrison, 30 April 1936.
210
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Jawaharlal consolidated the victory of his exponents by selecting, out of fourteen members of the Working Committee, no less than ten who disagreed with him, disapproved of socialism and were inclined towards office acceptance. Subhas Bose was in prison; and only three members, Narendra Deva, Jaya- prakash Narayan and Achyut Patwardhan, were socialists. Even they owed their appointment not to Jawaharlal but to Gandhi,who thought these socialists would be useful in weakening the support which the terrorists commanded among the younger generation; and these three were selected on the ground that they were socially acceptable.* Jawaharlal thought it vulgar and inappro¬ priate to thrust his views, however deeply held, on a party in which he and his followers were in a minority, and created for himself what was in many ways the role of an ineffective president. Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, devoted to Jawaharlal and sharing hisviewsbutnota member of the Socialist Party, was expected to replace Acharya Kripalani of the right wing as general secretary; he was not even included in the Committee. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, the only member of the old Working Committee who had on occasions joined Jawaharlal in opposing office acceptance, was now dropped. Nor, surprisingly, was any woman included. The three socialist members realized that they would have little influence in the Committee, but agreed to serve out of personal loyalty to Jawaharlal.2
Powerful as the presidential address was as an attack on imperialism, the Government felt that they would be unable to sustain a prosecution on it. In the months that followed, while Jawaharlal toured the country addressing scores of meetings and ‘simultaneously carrying on war at various fronts’,3 the authorities, regarding him as ‘a potential danger of the first magnitude’,4 followed him round with their notebooks seeking carefully but in vain for any statement that would justify his arrest and ensure a long sentence. Instead, they had to console themselves with the thought that his preaching of socialism was weakening the Congress and this would be reflected in the elections. 5 ‘Indeedweshould keep him in cotton wool and pamper him, for he is unwittingly smashing the Congress organization fiom the inside.’6 This hope was again to be belied. But the Government were right to the extent that his speeches frightened jnany in the Congress and outside. He started what was virtually a country-wide election campaign in Bombay with a bang. The Congress was contesting the elections and entering the assemblies in order to combat the Act and render it unworkable. As to how this should be done, there was as yet no agreement; but he himself was convinced that acceptance of office would weaken their movement. The first and immediate issue was political, the
Author's interview with Achyut Patwardhan, 3 April 1970.
1See statement of the executivecommittee of theCongress SocialistParty, 16 April, The Bombay Chronicla, 17 April 1936.
’To Ellen Wilkinson, 13 June 1936.
4HomeSecretary to all Local Govts.. 19 August 1936, Home Dept. Pol File 4/13/36.
’Home f<ept. Pol. Files 4/4,4/6,4/14,4/13,4/23,4/32 and 4/34to 4/96 of 1936.
‘G errorofMadras to Horne Member, 20April 1936, Home Dept. Pol. File 4/6/36.
LEADING THE PARTY
211
development of a revolutionary mentality for the attainment of independence. He believed that socialism was inevitable for the solution of India's prime problem of poverty and degradation but he had no wish to force the issue. If he talked about it now, it was solely to educate the people so that they would be in a better position to decidewhen the issue came up. Socialism — and here Jawa- harlal’sdivergence from the communists was dear — could not be imposed on India. Violence was abominable to him and he hoped that socialism would be attained with the support of the vast majority and the least harm to anyone. Compensation should be paid, though not in full, at least partially, to propertied and vested interests. However, there might be upheavals if resistance to eco¬ nomic progress developed, and he doubted if the rich in India were wise enough to avoid this.1
Such unhesitant exposition of his intellectual and emotional commitment to the socialist ideal naturally roused resentment. Bombay was the heart of ‘big business’ and there were reactive tremors to ‘the storm of communism’2 that was passing over the city. Twenty-one leading businessmen issued a manifesto condemning Jawaharlal’s ‘destructive and subversive programme’ which, ac¬ cording to them, would create disorders and impede the achievement of self- government.3 Jawaharlal’s reply was vigorous.
I have hardly mentioned socialism except incidentally, but I have laid stress on the amazing poverty of our people, the vast unemployment of our peasants and workers and middle class, on the progressive deteriora¬ tion of all classes except the handful at the top. That has been my sin in the eyes of that handful. But that is the only future that comes before my eyes when I think of India. I cannot rid myself of it, try as I may. It is not a pleasant picture. I do not like it, and as I see it, sometimes my blood freezeswithin me and sometimes it boils with indignation that such things should be.4
He accused Indian capitalists of creating Indian fascism, which was the ally of British imperialism. Their attack on his socialist views was merely a facade for attacking the Congress and the national movement. As the Congress be¬ came increasingly a lower-middle-class and mass organization, the upper strata of Indian society were drawing closer to the foreign rulers. As the struggle for freedom grew more intense, one was either for or against; there was no room for third parties or a middle course. Indian capitalists had supported the Govern¬ ment in seeking to repress civil disobedience and break the boycott. They had defended the ordinances, they had reached agreements with foreign textile interests and they had sent their representatives to those sessions of the Round
■ ‘Speeches end statements at Bombay, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 and ‘a Mmv 1<HA 2SirCowasji Jehangir in The BombayChronicle, 28 May 1936.
* Manifesto of the 21', The Tribune, 20 May 1936.
« Reply to Critics!, The Tribune, 9 June 1936.
212
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Table Conference which had been shunned by the Congress. For them to speak nowof their share in the national movement and of his weakening it was there¬ fore an impertinence.1
The more intelligent among the businessmen realized that to promote a public debate with Jawaharlal was to invite humiliation. ‘You have rendered no service to your caste men. It is curious how we businessmen are so short¬ sighted . . . It looks very crude for a man with property to say that he is opposed to expropriation in the wider interest of the country.’2 It would be obviously far more effective to strengthen the opposition to Jawaharlal within the Con¬ gress. Jawaharlal had been unfair to the Indian capitalist class in castigating them as allies of the British imperialists. Though heavily dependent on them, the Indian capitalists had not been their junior partners. They had, on the other hand, supported the non revolutionary, right-wing elements in the anti¬ imperialist camp; 3 and they now looked to these men to deal with Jawaharlal. They left it to Vallabhbhai Patel and others to remind the president of the party that he represented a very small section of minority opinion and had no mandate to make such a severe onslaught on the ideological hegemony of propertied interests. Patel, Rajendra Prasad and Rajagopalachari objected as strongly to Jawaharlal’s speeches in Bombay as any of the capitalists,4 and appealed to the grand master Gandhi, who called on Jawaharlal for an explanation. They could not openly object to his crusade for socialism, but they criticized his under¬ rating of khaddar and his suggestion that the responsibility for not including women in the Working Committee was not his. Jawaharlal replied that, though technically he was responsible for the decision, the Committee as it took shape was not of his making; and Gandhi retorted that he was not satisfied with the answer.5 Yet, on the main issue, Jawaharlal was unrepentant; and he toured the Punjab making the same points with equal vehemence. The political battle for independence was the first priority, but after freedom was won, socialism was bound to come. ‘The whole economic structure will crash and there will be upheavals which no human power can avert, the capitalist system will go and along with it the British Empire, this is how I visualise the happenings of the next ten years.’6
The public response was enthusiastic. ‘I am being attacked and criticized’, wrote Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon,7 ‘by a variety of people, Big Business, Lib¬ erals, Responsivists, someCongressmen and of courseour beloved Government.
1 Speechesand interviews, The Bombay Chronicle, 19,20,21 and 23 May 1936.
*G. D. Birla to Walchand Hirachand, one of the signatories of the manifesto, 26 May 1936. Purushottamdas Thakurdas papers, File 177.
}See Bipan Chandra, ‘The Indian capitalist class and imperialism before 1947" (1972).
4 See Vallabhbhai Patel to Rajendra Prasad, 29 May 1936, Maharashtra Govt, records—inter¬ cepted letters.
’ Jawaharlal toGandhi, 25 May and Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 29 May 1936.
6 Speech at Lahore, 2 June, The Tribune, 3 June 1936.
718 Jujf'e 1936.
LEADING THE PARTY 2n
Andyet behind all this lies the fact thatwherever Igo Iget a prodigious Welcome and the response is such that it putsout the critics. It is a tiring business to carry onwarsonnumerousfrontsandtherearefew to help. But Icarryon. The process is not without its exhilaration.' But at Wardha, when the Working Committee metin the firstweek of July, Jawaharlal was plainly rebuked by Gandhi and the others. Rajendra Prasad, on behalf of the right wing, wrote to Jawaharlal criticizing him severely and the latter offered to resign and submit the dispute to the AICC for discussion. Today there is no loyalty of the spirit which binds ourgroup together. It is a mechanical group and on either side there is a sense of suppression and that, as every student of psychology knows, results in all manner of undesirable complexes, both individual and social.’ But Gandhi pulled him up for arrogance, intolerance and lack of a sense of humour. 'You are in office by their unanimous choice but you are not in power yet. To put you in office was an attempt to find you in power quicker than you would otherwise have been.’ Jawaharlal should therefore cease wrangling and the 'tragi-comedy’ hewas playing and not destroy himself by moving openly into opposition.1
Jawaharlal meekly submitted and publicly acknowledged his responsibility for the exclusion of women from the Committee.2 Objection having also been taken to his appointment of young socialists in the AICC office, his enthusiasm for building up the central office was checked. His speeches also were thereafter all in a lower key, and lacked, as Jayakar gleefully reported to Sapru, 'the trium¬ phant freshness*3 of his earlier performances. He now gave greater emphasis tothepartwhichthe Congresshadplayed in involving thepeasants in the national movement, and made claims for the party and its leader which he himself could not have seriously believed. The Congress was not, olcourse, socialistic, but it no longer ignored economic issues; and whenever a conflict of interests emerged it was always willing to sacrifice the interests which clashed with those of the masses. The socialist outlook, which the Congress had been stress¬ ing since Gandhi took it over, helped in the political struggle by clearing the issues and strengthening the role of the masses. These bore reserves of power and a deep unrest, a hunger that gnawed and required satisfaction; and it was because the Congress promised to provide the satisfaction that the people came in their thousands to hear its leaders. No socialist imagined that socialism could have any place in India before political freedom had been established. Indeed, no longer stressing the inevitability of socialism, Jawaharlal accepted that after independence socialism could come only if India were ripe for it and the great majority of people desired it. Those who believed in socialism could not assume an attitude, of superior knowledge and make of themselves a sect apart. Their correct understanding of history and of social change was not
1 Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 5 July 1936; Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 8 July, 13 July and 30 July 1936. 2 Tb» Bombay Cbronicl*, 7 July 1936. 9 8 July 1936, Sapru papers.
214 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
enough; they had to justify themselves in other ways and seek to win over to theirwayof thinking others in the Congress and the country at large.1
IfJawaharlalgavewayto the pressure of the right wing, it could not have been for the personal reasons which Gandhi elaborated. By now Jawaharlal was as indispensable to the Congress as the party was to him. He commanded, even before his election tours gave him a wide popular appeal, the support of large sections of radical youth who, but for him, would have left the Congress for left- wing parties. Even the Congress Socialist Party might have broken away from the parent body. Throughout India there were men and women who, along with nationalist feeling, had developed a conscience on economic matters, who saw in Jawaharlal the spokesman of their viewpoint, and who, because of him, followed the lead of the Congress even if they did not belong to it. He was, too, the only Indian politician who had an international audience, and it was he who secured for the party recognition on the world stage. Had Jawaharlal, therefore, insisted in the summer of 1936 on resigning the presidency, it is difficult to believe that Gandhi and his followers would have been short¬ sighted enough to let him do so. But it was not just that it did not lie in Jawaharlal’s nature to precipitate such a conflict and to safeguard his political chastity at the price of weakening the nationalist organization. The psycholo¬ gical hankering to follow Gandhi and the ingrained loyalty to the party were only part of the explanation. Jawaharlal knew that there was no working-class leader¬ ship or even an alternative elite leadership available; and so long as this was the case, it would be disastrous to weaken the Congress. And, as ever, his col leagues took advantage of this.
Meantime, as the mimic war of the elections drew nearer, Jawaharlal gave it increasing attention. The election manifesto of the Congress, largely drafted by him,2 rejected the Act of 1935 and the Communal Award that went with it. The only purpose of sending Congressmen to the legislatures was to seek to end the Act; but how thiswas to be done, and whether office should be accepted or not, would be considered after the elections. The economic programme of the Congressremained in essence the resolution on fundamental rights passed at Karachi: land reforms, reduction of rent and revenue and an equitable adjust¬ ment of the burden on agricultural land, and reasonable standards of living and of working conditions for industrial labour. Jawaharlal excluded any reflec¬ tion in the manifesto of socialist doctrine. His weakness he justified to himself by the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War and the rapid drive to a world war which made it all the more necessary to see the Indian problem in perspective as part of the world struggle and concentrate on the fight against imperialism. Before criticizing him, it should be remembered that the socialist members of the Working Committee also raised no objection to the manifesto and did not seek to include in it such objectives as the abolition of landlordism or the
1 Article! on ‘Congress and Socialism', The Bombay Chronicle, 20and 31 July 1936; statement on the Punja| peasantry, 12 August, The Tribune, 13 August 1936.
2 See AICC FileG 71 of 1936.
LEADING THE PARTY
215
nationalization of key industries. On the other hand, Narendra Deva was delighted with the manifesto, which had been revised overnight by Jawaharlal as desired by Narendra Deva himself,1 and he commended it to the AICC as a revolutionary and not a reformist document.2
Jawaharlal’s right-wing colleagues were naturally elated. ‘I was charmed’, wrote Rajagopalachari to Gandhi, who had not been present at the Working Gommittee session which ratified this document, ‘with the manner in which Jawaharlalji got through the Working Gommittee. All the business was done exceedingly well and everyone was pleased.' Vallabhbhai Patel was equally satisfied.
We have been getting on beautifully this time. The smooth and harmo¬ nious working reminds me most forcibly of the Working Gommittee meetings before 1932. It has been more like a gathering of family mem¬ bers than a formal committee meeting. We have just finished and within half an hour the AIGG will meet. The manifesto was prepared and passed almost unanimously all co-operating with the utmost confidence and trust. I cannot speak too highly of Jawaharlal. He has done wonderful work, and has been burning the candle at both ends. We found not the slightest difficulty in co-operating with him and adjusting ourselves to his viewson certain points. I have an impression that he is also satisfied.3
%
Whether, as claimed, Jawaharlal was equally satisfied is doubtful. But he made no publicgrievance of the clipping of his wings. If he realized that, though he was president, he was being steadily forced to continue the retreat which had begun at Lucknow, he did not disclose it even to his closest friends and threw all his energies into the winning of the elections. This was the first of his national campaigns, covering the Indian village network by train, plane, car, bicycle, cart and steamer, on horse, dephant and camel, and on foot. Once he even ran for half a mile to reach a meeting-place, the crowd following him.4 On another occasion the audience was so packed that he had to walk on their shoulders, and later fdt ashamed for having done so with his shoes on.5 But such actions had little effect on his popularity. His frequent losses of temper were short-lived and patently without malice.6 There was a degree of sponta¬ neity and aggressive vitality in his behaviour which, combined with his ‘actor’s presence', endeared him to the people.
‘See his article, 'Favouriteof Fortune', in Nehru Abbinandan Grantb, pp. 108-9.
*Tbe Tribune, 23 August 1936.
JLetters toGandhicommunicated toJawaharlal by Mahadeva Desai, 26 August 1936, AICC File G 85(1) of 1936.
4 The Bombay Chronicle, 26January 1937.
* Lai Bahadur Shastri’s article in Zakaria,AStudy ofNehru, pp. 150-51.
6Francis Watson provides an eye-witness account of %uch an occasion at the Congress session in 1939. ‘As though toensurethat Ishould not overlook the item, my neighbour in one cithe prelimi¬ nary sessions, some three or four rows from the front, heckled the platform in a yescendo of
216
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Day after day the programme began at dawn and went on till late at night, and on one occasion without a break for twenty-four hours. He drew strength from the bain de multitude, made himself receptive to the impressions and thoughts roused by the thousands he met as well as by the diverse contexts in India, and yet snatched the odd hour to read Huxley’s Eyeless in Gaza and live for a while another life. ’It is an exhausting business and yet I find a strange relief in it from the politics of committees and individuals. I seem to feel a little nearer to reality and I suppose the enthusiasm and the crowds cheer me up.’1 His speeches were impersonal, with little reference to individual candidates. He talked about the common problems of the Indian people — poverty, debt, foreign rule — made them think of India as a whole, explained the party manifesto, and promised nothing except unceasing struggle till freedom was won. He spoke in simple terms but treated his audience as mature. Many of them were little interested in &11 this, and came merely to see for themselves the god-like figure of whom they had heard so much. Gandhi was one of them, but Jawaharlal was the glamorous prince. Yet in the eyes of a few there was a responsivegleam. ABritish official, reporting to his superiors, has given a vivid description of Jawaharlal on these tours.
In spite of his unattractive Congress dress and cap the Pandit looked a thoroughgentleman and an impressive figure. He is about the only good- looking Indian as I have seen in a Congress cap and appears sturdy and vigorous. He used no notes whilst he was talking and did not wear spectacles. He has agood deep voice and rams home his arguments merely by working his right forearm. He does not ’intone’ like so many Indian public speakers, but at the same time addresses his audience in rather a scolding manner. He certainly does not go out of his way to flatter them.
It is easy for a European to follow his Hindustani, partly because he uses simple words and phrases, and partly because he talks it with what I can only describe as an English accent .. The Pandit is by far the most attractive public speakerwhom I have heard in India, and there is no doubt that his manliness, frankness and reputation for sacrifice attracts a large public.2
It was obviously senseless to make a change in the Congress presidency
Panditji-baiting questions until Panditji, projecting himself from the dais like a rocket and landing more or less in mylap, shrivelled the offender with his wrath, demanded his pass, tore it up and in seconds cast the whole meeting into uproar. When 1 crawled out under a collapsed corner of the canvas, the Congress volunteers in their blue shorts v'ere still trying to tranquillize the shouting tangle of patriots. It was somehours later that 1 had a chanceof talking to Nehru alone and enquired the cause of the disturbance. He gave me a puzzled frown, “What disturbance?" he asked, and we passed to other matters.* Tba Trial of Mr. Gandhi (London, 1969), p. 21.
>To Agatha Harrison, 3*September 1936. ^
2Reportofihe District Magistrate, Multan, after hearing Jawaharlal on 28 July 1936, HomeDept.
LEADING THE PARTY
217
in the middle of the campaign, and Jawaharlal was re-elected to preside over the Congresssession atFaizpurinDecember 1936. He reiterated in his address what were by now familiar views — that the primary issue was political freedom, that socialism helped to analyse the situation and provided the only future solution to economic problems, and that the Indian.struggle was but part of a titanic conflict which gripped the world. He felt the latter even more strongly than before, for the civil war in Spain which had broken out since the Congress last met, was to Jawaharlal, as to so many intellectuals in the West, a matter of personal involvement. But on the, other hand, deep in the throes of election¬ eering, he tended to give less urgency to socialism. It was world peace and free democracy in India which were now the prime objectives.1 But his colleagues in the Congress had little time for these visions. They were concerned solely with the polls and what would follow. Jawaharlal repeated that the Congress was contesting the elections in order to rally the masses and not in search of con¬ stitutionalism or a barren reformism; to him the cornerstone of Congress policy was still the demand for a Constituent Assembly. The Act had to be wrecked so that they could write on a clean slate, but this could be done not so much by action within the assemblies as by mass struggle.
The long tirade against office acceptance, however, was not taken seriously by the audience. Jawaharlal was a useful standard-bearer, whose energy, eloqu¬ ence and popularity were assets in winning votes. These the Congress party- managers exploited, without paying much heed to his ideas, which could be defeated after the polling was over. The token protest of a hartal on 1 April, when the new Act would come into force, had little meaning. More signi¬ ficant was the decision to summon a convention of all Congressmen who had been elected. Jawaharlal might regard it as a preparation for a Constituent Assembly,2 while the Viceroy was convinced that the object was to improve Congress discipline as a prelude to refusal of office and preparation for civil disobedience.3 Both were credulous. Though called ostensibly to consider how to refuse to work the Act, any such convention of legislators could be expected todisplay an eagerness for office; and to summon such a meeting was to promote a decision to that effect. Indeed, the magnitude of the triumph of the Congress at the polls, a victory for which no single individual had been more responsible than Jawaharlal, strengthened the forces against him. The Congress had con¬ tested 1,161 of the 1,585 seats and won 716. It had a clear majority in 6 of the 11 provinces and was the largest single party in three others.
Jawaharlal believed that there had been a change in Congress thinking since the Lucknow session. Then, acceptance of office was a dead certainty: now, it
‘Presidential address at Faizpur, December 1936, reprinted in Eighteen Months in Mia, pp. 72-98.
a President's circular to all provincial Congress committees, 2 January 1937.
’Linlithgow to Zetland, 15 February 1937, Zetland papers. LO.L Mss. Eur. D609, »ol. {4.
218 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
seemed a very doubtful proposition. ‘Tiy to imagine’, he wrote to Krishna Menon,1 who, living in London, was critical of Jawaharlal’s failure to suppress the ‘hobnobbing with ministerialism’. ‘what the human materia] is in India. How they think, how they act, what moves them, what does not affect them. It is easy enough to take up a theoretically correct attitude which has little effect on anybody. We have to do something much more important and difficult, and that is to move large numbers of people, to make them act, and to do all this without breaking up the Congress. I must say that the results of the last six months have been quite extraordinary.’ But to his chagrin, immediately after the declaration of the resuhs many Congressmen thought and spoke in terms of ministries. The ostensible objective of contesting the elections, wrecking the Act, was hardly remembered, lost in arguments about the spoils of office. Such behaviour seemed to him not merely an abdication of purpose but so foolish and lacking in self-respect and political sense that he took hold of the debate in the U.P. and forced through a resolution in the provincial Congress committee against acceptance of office. Then, moving to Delhi for the crucial meetings of the Working Committee and the convention of legislators, he asserted that what the electors had said was in effect, ‘To hell with this Con¬ stitution.’2 In the presidential speech for the convention, drafted and made public well in advance, he argued that the electors had given notice to British imperialism to quit, and the Act should therefore ‘go, lock, stock and barrel, and leave the field dear for our Constituent Assembly’. Till such an Assembly met there could be nothing but conflict and struggle, and the narrow issue of office acceptance hardly arose. To co-operate was to submit to imperialist dictation and to share the odium of exploitation.3
Gandhi’sown inclination was to support Jawaharlal, but he responded to the overwhelmingmoodof the party. The Working Committee described the results of the elections as a condemnation and rejection of the Act, impressed on all Congressmen that the fundamental policy of the party was to combat and seek to end the Act, and then, without a trace of logic or embarrassment, authorized acceptance of office if the leaders of the party in the assemblies were satisfied that while the ministries acted within the constitution the Governors would not interfere. M. N. Roy was at this time Jawaharlal’s neighbour in Delhi, and his record of Jawaharlal’s reaction has the ring of truth.
On the third day, late in the afternoon, he walked in and threw himself on the bed, a broken man, nearly on the point of ciying. ‘I must resign’ he said. I enquired, ‘Why? Have they rejected your draft?’ ‘No,’ he exclaimed in impotent rage; ‘they have accepted the whole damn thing, supple-
'*28 September 1936.
2Speech at Delhi, The Bombay Chronicle, 15 March 1937. *
. * frf,J,^nti“,addr«'s«All-IndiaCongresslegislators convention, March 1937, Eighteen Months
leading the party
219
merited by a short paragraph dictated by Gandhiji, which invalidates the rest of the resolution’.1
Hedid not, it is needless to say, resign, but with his firm sense of discipline, accepted defeat. While he had not changed his views he would, ’like a humble soldier’, loyally abide by theresolution which had been adopted. The time might comewhen he would wish to resign, for no man could lead an army who did not know theway; but that timewas not yet, and till then the Congress should 'hold together, push together, fight together and win together’.2 It was theoretically feasible to accept office not in order to cooperate but to work for revolutionary charge. However, Jawaharlal still thought it possible that the assurances sought from the Governors would not be given, and, therefore, Congress ministries might not be formed.3 At first, this was the case. The Governors ignored the Congress majorities and called on men defeated in the elections to take office. Jawaharlal denounced this as the culmination of the growth of the fascist spirit in the British Government in India,4 and the Viceroy seriously considered his arrest.3 Jawaharlal could see no room for compromise and was confident that even the moderate elements in the Congress would be forced to recognize that the conflict inherent in the Act had taken immediate shape.6 But the Congress resolution had left the initiative for securing assurances to the leaders of the provincial parties; and Rajagopalachari, the leader of the Congress party in Madras, exploited the opportunity. A self-proclaimed political ascetic who, in the ’twenties, had led the opposition to Das, Motilal Nehru and the Swarajists, Rajagopalachari had now quiedy put himself in line for the Chief Ministership in Madras and wasdetermined to take office. Enjoying Gandhi’s confidence and ignoring Jawaharlal, who was first put out of action by a mild attack of typhoid and was then away in Burma and Malaya, Rajagopalachari negotiated with Lord Erskine, the Governor of Madras. While he had commended office acceptance to the convention of legislators as a means of wrecking the Act,7 he assured Erskine that ‘therewas a real chance toget rid of the Civil Disobedience mental¬ ity for good, and that it would be a thousand pities if the chance was missed’. In London, Halifax in the Cabinet was in favour of some gesture which would helpRajrgopalachari andothersofhiswayof thinking;9 but Zetland and Linlith¬ gow saw no need for it. They made speeches which sounded accommodating
1M. N. Roy, ‘Jawaharlal Nehru’, Twntiotb Cantury, February 1952.
3 Speeches at the convention of legislators, 19 March, TbaBombay Cbroriela, 20 March 1937.
’Letter to K. T. Shah, 27 March 1937.
4Statement to the press, 28 March 1937.
’Linlithgow to Zetland, 2 April 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14.
•ToAgatha Harrison, 18 April, to H. G. Alexander, 21 April, to H. N. Brailsford, 22 April, and to Stafford Cripps, 28 April 1937.
7Tba Bombay Cbroniclt, 20 March 1937.
•Erskine's telegram toViceroy, 11 June 1937, Erskinepapers I.O.L. Mss. Eur. D. 596, vol. 8.
’Zetland to Linlithgow, 3 and 9 May 1937, reprinted in Zetland, Essayax (Londok 1956)
220
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
without conceding anything of substance. However, alarmed by Jawaharlal’s repeated assertions, both abroad and on his return to India, that the funda¬ mental struggle between nationalism and imperialism could not be submerged and an Act which protected imperial and other vested interests and petrified the miseryof millions would have to go, they kept ready an ordinance in the improb¬ able circumstance of the Congress breaking off negotiations and starting civil disobedience.1 But, in fact, they had assessed their counterplayers correctly. The Working Committee, overruling Jawaharlal, decided that even though no assurances had been given the Congress should accept office. The majority were so anxious for a quick decision that they were unwilling even to refer the matter to the AICC. As Jawaharlal ruefully commented, the question was being con¬ sidered the wrong way; not what are the reasons for accepting office, but office must be taken and therefore reasons have to be found for it.2 But in sight of the prize, Rajagopalachari and the right wing were not to be diverted by such arguments. Afew days later, Congress ministries were formed in six provinces.
1Zetland to Linlithgow, 5 July 1V37, Zetland papers, vol. 8. *
Proceedingsofthe Working Committee, 5 to9July 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936.