Among the Peasants
More crucial to Jawaharlal’s development than his expulsion was his involve¬ ment in the peasant unrest in the United Provinces. The importance of bringing the peasants, with their tradition of agitation, into the national movement had been underlined by Gandhi's successful organization of resistance to the indigo planters in Champaran in Bihar in T917; and towards the end of that year Malaviya and a few others in Allahabad established the United Provinces Kisan Sabha (peasant association). The sponsors are in themselves testimony to the moderate objectives of this association; and it was reported that the Home Rule League had provided Rs 4,000 for its organization.1 Its avowed objectives were fo check the growing antagonism between peasants and zamindars (landowners) and establish friendly relations, educate the peasants and inform them of their political and social rights, promote legislation benefi¬ cial to them and amend statutes prejudicial to their interests, protect them from unlawful actions, establish village panchayats (councils), further mutual trust and cordiality between the rulers and the ruled and adopt such constitu¬ tional measures as might be conducive to their welfare. Branches of the Kisan Sabha were set up in many villages and tehsils (revenue sub-divisions) and attempts were made to establish similar organizations in other provinces and link them up with the National Congress. Peasant delegates were mustered in considerable numbers at the Congress sessions of 1918 -and 1919, by which time Gandhi had led another peasant campaign, this time against the Govern¬ ment, at Kaira in Gujarat. At the Congress session in 1919, the U.P. Kisan Sabha submitted a draft resolution which was surprisingly radical, urging the Government, among other things, to declare peasants all over India to be actual owners of the soil they cultivated; but the Congress did no more than direct the All-India Congress Committee (AICC) to investigate the various revenue systems and the condition of the peasantry.
The special cause of agrarian distress in Avadh (Oudh) was the inelastic
iCircular No. 3 of the Criminal .Investigation Department, United Provinces. Borne Dept. Pm. Deposit, January 1920, no. 49.
42
AMONG THE PEASANTS
43
Rent Act of 1886 which forbade landlords to enhance rents by more than one . anna in the rupee *once every seven years. Gearly, with the great rise in prices of consumer goods, landlords would try to circumvent the rigidity of the stat¬ ute by demanding payment of other dues; and the lack of occupancy rights ena¬ bled them to collect these dues by holding out the threat of eviction. Actual evictions were frequent, both because landlords saw an advantage, with the rising price of foodgrains, in cultivating the land themselves and enforcing their customary right to free or ill-paid labour, and because, with the apparent imminence of an amendment of the law granting fixity of tenure, it appeared worth while to terminate tenancy of any duration. In Pratabgarh district, for example, there were 936 notices for eviction in 1906-7; this figure rose to 1,238 in 1911-12, 1,403 in 1916-17 and 2,593 in 1919-20. But more often the threat to evict was utilized to compel the tenant to pay higher cesses or nazarana in addition to the rent; and this had become a regular form of income to the landlords. Tenants could only secure renewals of their leases by borrow¬ ing heavily from money-lenders or from their relatives — or from the landlords themselves — in order to pay nazarana. ‘Fathers have sold their daughters for nazarana money to husbands of advanced years/2 Sometimes the holding was divided into two parts and settled with two competitors both of whom had paid substantial nayirana; and frequently a lease was terminated because another bidder had made a more tempting offer.
However, these kisans (peasants), never wholly lacking in some form of power in at least some estates,3 were no longer unaware of anything better; and there was a growing resentment at working for, ami paying heavy cesses to, distant and unknown landowners at the bidding of foul-mouthed middle¬ men. Nor was there much faith left in the efficacy of the law courts as a means of obtaining redress, it being firmly believed that a poor man had no chance against a rich one in a contest in the courts; ‘and who will say that there is not some truth in this under the system of civil and criminal justice as it has come to be practised in India?4
The situation was particularly critical in Pratabgarh district. The popula¬ tion here was unusually dense, being 1.82 per cultivated acre as against 1.68 in Fyzabad and 1.7 in Sultanpur; and the figure appears more striking when it is remembered that there were no towns in Pratabgarh district with a popula¬ tion larger than 6,000. On the other hand, large tracts of land in the district were barren, and only 53.3 per cent of the total area was under cultivation as against 55.9 per cent in Sultanpur, and 61.8 per cent in Fyzabad. So there was a keen competition for land, and this enabled the landlords, who, as the
•At this time there were 16 annas in the rupee.
2Report of V. N. Mehta, Deputy Commissioner, Pratabgarh, November 1920. Revenue De¬ partment, File 733 of 1920. U. P. archives at Lucknow.
’Musgrave, op. dt., p. 273.
« Report by a C.I.D. officer on the kisan sabba in Allahabad, January 1921, Home Dept. Pol., February 1921, no. 13.

THE UNITED PROVINCES Before 1947
(Towns marked without names bear-the same names as the districts)
46
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Commissioner recognized,1 Were in this district a particularly poor lot, to demand exorbitant nazarana.
The social composition of Pratabgarh district was also somewhat un¬ common. 11.3 per cent of the population was composed of Kurmis, a low caste who could not muster the resistance to the exactions of landlords Which high- caste tenantry were generally able to do. They had to pay a higher rental than Brahmin or Kshatriya tenants.2 Nor were there underproprietors to act as a breakwater between the landlords and these low-caste tenants. While, for example, in Sultanpur there were many ..nants of the same caste as the land¬ lords who enjoyed a certain measure of protection from the head of the family, in Pratabgarh the Kurmis had to deal directly with the landlords.
However, if the repression of the tenants was more severe in Pratabgarh than in other districts of Avadh, there were other balancing reasons which made a peasant outbreak more probable here than elsewhere. The Kurmis had a tradition of defiance; as far back as 1867 they had risen in revolt, and they had never lost their social coherence and capacity for organization. It was of course easier to organize concerted action within a caste, however low, than to draw tenants of high and low caste together. Moreover, the Kurmi peasants of Pratabgarh could not fail to notice the occupancy rights enjoyed by the tillers, after twelve years of continuous cultivation, in the neighbouring dis¬ tricts of Allahabad and Jaunpur (which were part of the Agra division); and their kinsmen in these districts were reluctant to enter into marriage relations with persons who might overnight be reduced to the level of beggars at the whim of their landlord.3 The proximity of Allahabad city was also a source of strength, for the tenants of Pratabgarh could derive leadership and advice from urban politicians, who had by now begun to realize the value to them of peasant support.
Trouble began in Pratabgarh from April 1920, the beginning of the season of notices of eviction and of ejectment. At first the leadership of the Kurmis of Pratabgarh was assumed by a millenarian figure of shadowy antecedents, Baba Ram Chandra, who addressed large crowds, calling on them to stand up for their rights and resist the landlords, to pay their rents but not illegal cesses. He then, in June 1920, led about 500 of his followers to Allahabad in the hope of meeting Gandhi. They failed to find Gandhi, but instead met Jawaharlal, who happened to be there because of his expulsion from Mussoorie, and per¬ suaded him to return with them to Pratabgarh. So casual circumstance thrust Jawaharlal into the problem of the Indian peasantry and gave a new and perma¬ nent dimension to his outlook. The tranquil firmness of these men, living
1 H.R.C.HaileytoM. Keane, 26November 1920. Revenue Dept. File 733 of 1920. U.P. archives. JM. H. Siddiqi, The Peasant Movement in Pratabgarh, 1920', Indian Economic and Social History Raviaw, September 1972, pp. 316-17.
5 Commissioner, Fyzabad division to Chief Secretary U. P., 23 November 1920. Revenue Dept. File 733 of 1920. U. P. archives. ♦ •
AMONG THE PEASANTS
47
often below the margin of subsistence but never being overcome, impressed him profoundly.
I have had the privilege of working for them, of mixing with them, of living in their mudhuts and partaking in all reverence of their lowly fare. And I, who for long believed in the doctrine of the sword, have been converted by the kisans to the doctrine of non-violence. I have come to believe that non-violence is ingrained in them and is part of their very nature.1
Jawaharlal now gave publicity to the grievances of the kisans, objecting even to donations to the proposed University of Lucknow by estates under the management of the Court of Wards. ‘It is bad enough for illegal exactions and oppression to take place in the domains of illiterate and self-seeking talukdars who manage their own estates. It is far worse for the Government as repre¬ sented by the Court of Wards to encourage such practices.’2 But in Pratabgarh itself, where he was accompanied by Gauri Shankar Misra, a follower of Pandit Malaviya and much more conservative even than the Jawaharlal of those days, the general effect of their presence was, as the Commissioner acknow¬ ledged, ‘to bring a number of vague demands into a coherent shape and to a certain extent to moderate it’.3 They encouraged the peasants to organize themselves into village kisan sabhas and to formulate their demands for re¬ strictions on evictions and forced labour, leases for fourteen years, payment of cesses at only customary rates, cessation of fines and free access to landlords — demands which could hardly be regarded as extreme. When the authorities arrested a few kisans for ‘highhandedness’, Jawaharlal and another colleague from Allahabad, Purushottam Das Tandon, met the Deputy Commissioner and, while not approving of the conduct of the men arrested, suggested that the cases be withdrawn so that the relations between zamindars and tenants might not worsen.4
By now, however, with the non-co-operation movement in full swing, Jawaharlal began to feel that some of his colleagues were taking their modera¬ tion too far. They had set up, with the blessings of the district authorities, a Kisan Hitkarini Sabba, ostensibly to serve as a forum for landlords and ten¬ ants to discuss and settle their problems; but Jawaharlal had no use for it. ‘Its sole function appears to be to collect a few talukdars and their dependents and then to curse with bell, book and candle the irresponsible agitators who have the effronteiy to visit the tenantry. I have little doubt that this must be a com¬ forting, though somewhat fruitless, operation. Unhappily the agitators are
1 'The Ree Bareli Tragedy', W» IiuUptndtnt, 22 January 1921.
2 Letter to the Editor, 27 June 1920, published in The IiuUftuUnt, 3 July 1920.
’Hailey to Keane, 26 November 1920, Revenue Dept. File 753 of 1920 U. P. archives.
4 Report of V. N. Mehta, ibid.
48
JAWAtfARLAL NEHRU
little affected by it. They continue to flourish.'1 What, in fact, Jawaharlai hoped for was to link kisan discontent with nationalist politics. He had made no study of economic and land problems and he had no clear ideas about pea¬ sant participation. It was not his intention to provide a revolutionary dimen¬ sion to Indian nationalism. But this contact with the kisan* was satisfying psychologically, as it gave him the, feeling that he was re-Indianizing himself and functioning in a wholly Indian situation; and politically it was important, for it provided an opportunity to do in hisown province what Gandhi had done elsewhere, harnessing peasant strength in the interests of the Congress.
Pratabgarh and Rae Bareli were more suited for Jawaharlal’s effort than Allahabad district itself, for there the presence of many Muslim landlords would give communal overtones to any kisan agitation, and this was hardly to be desired while the Khilafat agitation was at its height. At a meeting held in Pratabgarh in October to federate the numerous village sabhas into an Oudh Kisan Sabba, the objectives were defined, in a harmless enough manner, as being to improve the condition of the tenantry,,to promote amity between khans and zamindars, to do everything to advance the cause of the country and to establishpanchayats for the settlement of all disputes between tenants. The Deputy Commissioner attended the meeting;* but was obliged to walk out when Jawaharlai advised his kisan audience to boycott elections to the Coun¬ cils and stressed that the only moral to be drawn from the Punjab and Khilafat events was that the Government was an utterly unjust one which cased little for the lives, honour and even the religion of the Indian people. The non-co- operation programme was approved by the Sabba and the Congress urged to 'stick to it'.2 But this effort to associate the kisan sabhas with the Congress programme led to a split in the parent U.P. Khan Sabba itself. At a meeting of its executive committee held on 24 October 1920 a majority of its members refused to subscribe to non-co-operation and decided to remain neutral on tke issue;3 and by February 1921 there were two U.P. Kisan Sabhas, each claim¬ ing to be the legitimate organization.
Throughout the winter months of 1920-21 the efforts to harness tenant power* to the non-co-operation movement continued. Jawaharlai spoke to large kisan audiences and was struck above all by their discipline.4 Gandhi himself visited Pratabgarh in November — though in his case the motivation on this occasion was alleged to have been not so much to draw in the peasants
1 Letter to the Editor, 22 September; Tib« Leader, 23 September 1920.
3 Report in The Independent, 27 October 1920; P.D. Reeves, ‘The Politics of Order’, Journal of Asian Studies, February 1966, p. 263.
* The Leader, 28 October! 1920, quoted in Reeves, op. tit.; letter of I. N. Dwivedi in The Leader, 21 February 1921.
4 Manyyears later he recounted an incident that occurred at this time. While speaking, he noticed people pushing and elbowing each other, though still remaining seated. Irritated by this behaviour, he asked that section of the crowd what was worrying them and they replied, Them is a snake here, but we dare not stand up, because the organism’s have ordered us not to do so while you are speaking.’ Speech at Calcutta, reported in the Free Press Journal (Bodtbay), 12 November 1936.

\
*
.1
2 Jawaharlal as a boy, with his mother and father

(j Swaraj Hhawan, the home ol the Nelirus until 11)28
7 Attain! Bltawan, the house built by Motilal Nehru in Allahabad
AMONG THE PEASANTS
49
as to frighten the landlords into supporting the Congress.1 The Kisan Con* gross, meeting at Fyzabad in December, attracted more persons from a few dis¬ tricts than the National Congress meeting at Nagpur attracted horn the whole of India. The landlords also helped by utilizing what they believed was their last opportunity to push through a rush of enhancements. This enraged the lower tenantry, who were now joined by landless labourers, suddenly caught by the rise in prices and diminished prospects of employment.2
The distress which, as even discerning officials realized, was genuine and very great, began to assume political overtones.
The Indian peasants’ chief idea about the war is that they supplied the men and the money and the zamindars got the credit. Government took their money and issued them bits of paper instead. It will be noticed that these notions distinctly smack of Bolshevism, and it would be interesting to know whether they are in some way the indirect result of Bolshevik propaganda, or have arisen from the same causes as have produced them in other countries. The Bolshevik idea is also rapidly spreading ... that it is the cultivators who plough, sow, irrigate and reap and are thus en* titled to the whole of the produce of the land. There is no need of, and no right to be, such things as zamindars. Here again the contention of the cultivators is very hard to refute, as there is no denying the fact that the Indian landlord is singularly backward in the performance of his duties.3
It was still, however, not the Congress nor their own strength but the Government whom the kisans looked to for an improvement of their condi¬ tion. Their discontent was entirely with the landlords and was not in any way anti-British or anti-Government. Their objectives might have seemed Bolshevik to alarmed officials; but their methods were as yet the opposite of revolutionary. ‘They have their grievances and their miseries and it is up to Government to put things right. There is no other power under Heaven that can save them.’4 The vast majority of cultivators still sought a redress of their grievances from the authorities.3 The kisans did not seem to be inte¬ rested in non-co-operation, and at a kisan meeting in Lucknow, when Jawahar- Ial began his speech by explaining the significance of non-co-operation, the
‘See Weekly Report of Director, Intelligence Bureau, 11 January 1921. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, January 1921, Proceeding no. 73.
J C. A. Bayly, The Development of Political Organization in the Allahabad Locality 1880 1923', Oxford D.Phtl. thesis, 1970. pp. 369-70.
*Report by a CLD. officer on the kisan sabba in Allahabad, January 1921. Home Dept. Pol., February 1921, not 13.
«Ibid.
* Report Cf the Director, Intelligence Bureau, 11 January 1921, Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, January 1921, no. 73; Sir H. Butler’s speech to U.P. Legislative Council, Tba Laedar, 24 January 1921. This Is a common feature of peasant revolts. Engels noted that the Russian peasants often
50 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
audience, according to official reports,1 melted away. The most that the Kisan Sabhas could do was to secure the defeat of some zamindar candidates in the elections of December 1920. But the U. P. Government threw away its chance and, by its reckless handling of the situation, gave a strong fillip to the move ment, so that throughout the year 1921 many districts in Avadh wejae shaken by explosions of agrarian unrest.
Early in January local ruffians in Rae Bareli district took advantage of the tension to burn crops grown on the sir (personal) lands of the zamindars and to loot shops in the bazaars; and there was probably some ground for the belief that a few of these miscreants had been encouraged by the zamindars themselves in order to bring the kisans and their organizations into disrepute. On the 5th three of the kisan leaders were arrested, and a large crowd began to drift towards Rae Bareli town in the hope of seeing these leaders. Encourage¬ ment for this move wasprovided by the deputy commissioner’s assurance to the kisans that he would listen at Rae Bareli to their grievances which had been heightened by the failure of the kharif{autumn) harvest and the holding off of the winter rains. However, on the 6th the police opened fire on a crowd at Fursatganj, ten miles to the east of Rae Bareli, killing between four and six people; and the next day there was heavy firing at Munshiganj, two miles south of the town, with at least nine dead and a large number wounded.
On both occasions the authorities had clearly panicked. At Munshiganj neither the deputy commissioner nor the superintendent of police had given the order to fire, and it was generally believed that the firing had been started by the local talukdar, on a crowd which was not interested in looting and had done no more than throw a few stones. Butler, the Lieutenant-Governor, reported to the Government of India that ‘the Deputy Commissioner was a poet and had lost his head’;2 and to avoid his cross-examination in court the U.P. Govern¬ mentdecided not to prosecute TheIndependent for its scathing articles on these events. It would have been difficult to explain away what even the deputy com¬ missioner accepted, that a large proportion of the injuries received by members of the crowd were in the back.3But to the public it waspretended that the firings alone had saved the whole of the south of Rae Bareli district from widespread looting and the rapid attainmentof a state of anarchy; and Butler sent a telegram of congratulations to the district authorities and the talukdar.
It was the wanton firing on the 7th near Rae Bareli which brought the kisans into direct collision with the authorities. Even the crowd at Fursatganj on the
revolted against the nobility but never against the Tsar. Chinese historians speak of a ‘peasant monarchism', the peasants being unable to conceive of any alternative to seeking salvation from an emperor. See J. P. Harrison, The Communists and Chinese Peasant Rebellions (New York, 1969), pp. 184-5.
‘Chief Secretary U. P. to Home Secretary, 2 January 1921. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, February 1921, no. 77.
2Butler to Vincent, Home Member, 10 March 1921. Home Dept. Pol., July 1921, no. 3 (confidential) & K.W.
*Reportof A.CShirreff, 29January 1921. Home Dept. General File 50 of l$2l, U. P. archives.
AMONG THE PEASANTS 51
6th was not a gathering of peasants but ‘a mob of rioters out for loot*.1 A first¬ hand account in The Independent asserted that the 'kisan sabhas are not in the least concerned with the disturbances, for which a few confirmed vagabonds and convicts are responsible’.2 However, to many officials the differences be¬ tweendacoits, kisans and non-co-operatorswere becoming increasingly blurred. ‘Ignorant peasantry’, alleged a Government communique, ‘had been persuaded by perambulating agitators that not only talukdar but British raj would shortly cease to exist and that under the beneficent rule of Mr Gandhi they would enter on a golden age of prosperity in which they would be able to buy good cloth at 4 annas per yard and other necessaries of life at similar cheap rates.’3
This confusion in the official outlook suited the talukdars; but it worried the kisan representatives, some of whom came to see Jawaharlal at Allahabad on the 5th and requested him to visit the Rae Bareli district. Jawaharlal was reluc¬ tant, as he had just returned from the Congress session at Nagpur; nor was he willing to see the Congress and kisan organizations associated with the looting that had occurred. But on hearing from a well-known citizen of Rae Bareli the next day that the situation was serious, and knowing that the local kisans had no capable leader, Jawaharlal left by the night train, reaching Rae Bareli at 2 p.m. on the 7 th. He then heard of the firing at Fursatganj the previous day, and of the confrontation between the officials and the large kisan crowd at Munshiganj. He promptly went to the scene with the intention of directing the crowd to disperse, and told the kisans he met on the way to go home. But mean¬ time he received a pencilled note from the deputy commissioner: ‘Pt Jawahar¬ lal Nehru. You are hereby informed that your presence in this district is not desired—you are directed to leave by the next train.’ Jawaharlal sent his reply on the back of the slip: ‘I should like to know if this is a formal order or a mere request. If it is the former then it should be drawn up in a formal manner mentioning the section etc. Until such an order is served on me I propose to remain here.’ Stopped by policemen from crossing a bridge on the other side of which the firing was taking place, Jawaharlal addressed such of the kisans as came across, impressing on them the need to be both non-violent and fearless. It was obviously a deep experience for Jawaharlal.
They behaved as brave men, calm and unruffled in the face of danger.
1 do not know how they felt but I know what my feelings were. For a
moment my blood was up, non-violence was almost forgotten — but for
a moment only. The thought of the great leader, who by God’s goodness
'Report of J. A. Perron, I.C.S. Home Dept. General, File 50/1921 K.W.S., U. P. archives.
2The Independent, 12 January 1921.
'Quoted in The Bombay Chronicle, 14 January 1921. The Lieutenant-Governor also, eager to dear the talukdars of responsibility for agrarian distress and the Government tor their clumsy handling of the situation, encouraged this kind of sloppy thinking. 'The agrarian disturbances which were largely due to local agitators acting as non-co-operators have been firmly dealt with and order has been.restored.' Butler's Minute 9 March 1921. Home Dept. Pol., July 1921, no. 5 (Confidential) and K.W.
52
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
has been sent to lead us to victory, came to me, and 1 saw the kisans seated and standing near me, less excited, more peaceful than I was — and the moment of weakness passed. I spoke to them in all humility on non* violence — I who needed the lesson more than they — and they heeded me and peacefully dispersed. On the other side of the river, hqwever, men lay dead and dying. It was a similar crowd with a similar object. Yet they poured their hearts* blood before they would disperse.1
The deputy commissioner, who had by now come back across the bridge, sent for Jawaharlal and informed him that meetings were prohibited. Though aware that Jawaharlal was using his influence against violent agitation, yet the officials were unwilling to let him speak to the crowd; for as they said to him, they were not there to increase his prestige.2 Jawaharlal, abiding by this order, dissolved the meeting after addressing it for a few minutes. The deputy com¬ missioner thanked Jawaharlal for his talk which had had a good effect on the kisans, and took Jawaharlal in his car, along with the local talukdar, to his house, where they had a desultory, inconsequential conversation. Told that every effort to disperse the kisans had been in vain, Jawaharlal replied that he perhaps might have succeeded where they had failed.3
The Rae Bareli firing was of major significance. The sense of tenant wrong had converged with an awareness of tenant strength. ‘For the first time in his¬ tory, they had begun to realize the power of an united peasantry — to realize that they themselves had the remedy of the most flagrant of their wrongs, the illegal exactions of their landlords, in their own hands. If they stood together, nazarana, began and other oppressive taxes would automatically cease.’4 And in the exercise of this new-found power, they had now the leadership of the Congress, whose influence over the kisans had been strengthened by the Gov¬ ernment: ‘there is nothing to choose locally between a gathering under the auspices of the kisan sabha or of the Khilafat Committee. Both movements appear to have been completely captured by the non-co-operating party, and there is one movement only in progress at the present time and that is the non- co-operation movement.’5
Joined by his father the next day, Jawaharlal visited the wounded in hospital and then left for Allahabad. His dispatches, signed and unsigned, to The Independent were sharply critical of the Government and the local talukdar, but his conduct at Rae Bareli itself was far from being that of a ‘firebrand’,6 as
*The Rae Bareli Tragedy’, Tba lnd*p*nd*nt, 22 January 1921.*
2See Jawaharlal’s article in Tb* lndtp*nd*»t, 23 January 1921.
*Report of Shirreff, 29 January 1921, Hone Dept. General File 30 of 1921. U. P. archive*; evidence of Jawaharlal in Pratap defamation case, Tba Ind*p*nd*nt, 6 July 1921.
4Report of J. A. St John Faraon, 19 January 1921, General Dept. File 50/1921. K.W., U. P. archives. Btgtri was forced labour.
1Reportof S. R. Mayers, District Superintendent of Police, Rae Bareli, 23 February 1921. IHd. *Tb* Ind*p*nd*nt, 11 January 1921.
AMONG THE PEASANTS
53
the deputy commissioner had expected before his arrival. This implied that Jawaharlal would stir the kisans- to further violence and give them a wider cause. But he had at this time noeconomic ideology to offer, and he had certain¬ ly no intent of securing any weapons for these kisans to sustain their revolt. His whole influence was thrown on the side of moderation, in urging the kisans to be quiet and peaceful, to abide by whatever orders were issued by the local officials and to go back to their homes. A few days later, when disturbances began in Fyzabad division, where too, as in Pratabgarh, the small tenants were low-caste men employed by Brahmin zamindars, he went to Unchahar to call off the meeting, which had been announced long before to inform the kisans of the decisions of the Nagpur Congress, and persuaded the kisans who had collected from various parts of Avadh to disperse;1 and the commissioner arranged for their free transport to their home by train.2 The Finance Member of the U.P. Government noted smugly that ‘it looks as if the agitators were getting cold feet'.3
Then, when news came in of sporadic renewal of looting, Jawaharlal was asked by local leaders to visit Fyzabad district; and he addressed large meetings exhorting kisans, if they were serious and earnest about sitfaraj, to take a pledge not to resort to violence or looting.4 Often, after he had spoken, men got up to confess to looting, knowing well that this would lead to their arrest. At Akbar- pur, criticizing the 'babas’ or messianic leaders like Ram Chandra and his imi¬ tators who were preaching extremism, Jawaharlal warned the kisans not to believe that every person in coloured clothes was a real sadhu and a messenger of Gandhi; for Gandhi would never advise irreligious or unlawful activities. Those who had taken part in dacoities should purge themselves of their sin by expressing their sympathy with those robbed and their hatred of the robbers. Every kisan should take a vow not to rob anyone or abuse anybody.5 Jawaharlal glamorized the kisans and saw them as brave men uncontaminated by city life or text-book education; but he was not deeply moved by their economic wretch¬ edness. He saw in them a sturdy peasantry which would be the backbone of a successful nationalist movement, and he wished to enlist them wholly for the political struggleas it was being waged by the Congress; but he did not envisage the co-ordination of these scattered outbursts against local misery and the devel¬ opmentof a large-scale peasant revolt and even perhaps a revolution. He agreed with Gandhi and the other leaders of the Congress that the kisans should pay their rents and devote their full attention to the non-violent smuggle for swafuj. When one local agitator advised the kisans not to pay rent, the kisan sabba
1 Tbt Ind*p*nd*nt, 18 January 1921.
2 Commissioner, Fyzabad ro Chief Secretary, 14 January 1921. General Administration Dept. File 50/1921-K.W.S., U. P. archives.
J General Dept, File 50-3/1921. U. P. archives.
<Tb» Indspmdsnt, 26 January 1921.
* See report of Akbarpur Conference enclosed with Commissioner’s letter to Chief Secretary, 27 January 1921. General Dept. File 50/1921 K.W. U. P. archives.
54
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
informed the authorities that they had nothing to do with him.1 Indeed, later Jawaharlal even preached kisan-zamindar unity;2 and on the issue of eject¬ ment, which, more than any other, agitated the kisans of the U. P., all he could say was that this was but a minor part of the major issue of ejectment of the British from India.3 ' #
At this time Jawaharlal had not considered carefully whether economic and social change should be part of, or even parallel to, the political revolution; and he was willing to accept without thought the suggestion that economic issues should not be allowed to hinder political activity. His idea of freedom was purely political — ridding the British of their control over finance, the army and the police. Freedom was spinning, the wearing of hand-spun cloth, justice, prohibition, removal of untouchability and all such moral virtues; and foreign rule was the opposite of these.4 There was very little economic connotation. But even this concept of ‘politics in command’ was narrow and limited. The kisan sabhasoi the Congress during this period were very different from Mao’s peasant Associations in China a few years later. These associations did not undertake drastic land reforms but they at least organized the peasants and attacked the social domination of the landlords. Jawaharlal’s political ideas in these years tended in the same direction, for they were a curious, unformed mixture of anarchism and village government, of Gandhi and Bertrand Russell. Representative institutions and democracy as found in Western countries had proved failures, and the problem was to free democracy from the malign in¬ fluences of capital, property, militarism and an overgrown bureaucracy. Ortho¬ dox socialism also did not give much hope, and the war had shown that an all-powerful state was no lover of individual liberty. Life under socialism would be a joyless and a soul-less thing/ regulated to the minutest detail by bureaucratic rules and orders. Jawaharlal was at this time a great believer in devolution and as little centralization as possible. Swaraj was to him panchayat raj and he favoured giving these village councils considerable powers even in civil and criminal matters.3 But all this lay in the future. It did not strike him to take any immediate steps such as setting up village schools and co-operatives or demand¬ ing even the minimum redressal of tenant wrong.
Whether Jawaharlal was aware of it or not, his attitudes at this time implied informal collaboration with the Government in the maintenance of law and order; and the U.P. Government were shrewd enough to realize this. As they
1 The Independent, 26 January 1921.
2 Speech at Tanda, 5 March 1923.
* Speech at Pratabgarh, 22 April 1923. Cf. Fanon: 'The nationalist parties do not attempt to givedefiniteorderstothecountrypeople, althoughthe latter are perfectly ready to listen to them . . . the nationalist parties make no use at all of the opportunity which is offered to them to integrate the people of the countryside, to educate them politically and to raise the level of their struggle.' The Wretched ofthe Earth (Penguin edition, 1967), pp. 92.3.
4 See his Hindi pamphlet 'Where are You?', published in 1922.
’Incomplete review of Russell’s Roads to Freedom, written sometime after April 1919, and letter to Sir Sita Ram, 11 May 1920, S.W., vol. 1, pp. 140*44 and 160 respectively.
AMONG THE PEASANTS
55
recorded, ‘Serious as these [kisan] disturbances have been, they would undoubt* edly have been far more serious, had not the leaders considered that the time had not yet come for pushing things to extremes.’1 The Independent was of the same opinion. ‘For our part we believe that, but for the timely appearance of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru on the scene, the situation would have become more complicated.’ Sir Lawrence Porter, the Finance Member, who was rather un- perceptive, was too easily persuaded by the talukdars to prohibit the meetings addressed by Jawaharlal ami his friends; but Butler overruled him.2
In Februaiy 1921, when Baba. Ram Chandra was arrested, a serious riot broke out. Gandhi and Jawaharlal were then in Banaras, and Jawaharlal urged the excited crowd to obey Gandhi and allow Ram Chandra to be arrested quietly.3 The U.P. Government now prohibited public meetings in the five districts of Avadh and decided to prosecute three local agitators and the officials of village panchayats — though not Jawaharlal or any other promi¬ nent leader. The situation was, from the Government’s point of view, deepening into a crisis. Kisan unrest was widespread and, in parts of the Fyzabad district, embraced the bulk of the rural population. In the affected areas, few were now on the side of the Government. It was possible for leaders to collect at a very short notice enormous crowds who were prepared to carry out any instructions without question. Where the kisan sabha movement had spread, the authority of the talukdars had crumbled at a stroke; and very few of them did anything else but shut themselves up in their houses or leave for the nearest town. The kisans had to a large extent lost all fear of the police, and the efforts of the Con¬ gress had succeeded to the extent that the kisans were now prepared to defy not just the landlords but even the Government. It was believed by the officials that the leaders of the non-co-operation party had built up an enormous organization which they could start working whenever they pleased, and that they were steadily using their influence to instil hatred of Europeans and Indian officials. No longer could the authorities comfort themselves with the belief that the kisans had no grudge against them but sought redress from them.4 In one vil¬ lage, Tajuddinpur, for a few weeks swarajwas proclaimed and a parallel govern¬ ment set up.5
The Government were baffled. ’There is undoubtedly a conspiracy behind the whole movement which we have not yet managed to unravel. The C.I.D. appear to know nothing about it.'6 The suspicion, though baseless, made the Government all the more anxious that the leadership of this movement should remain with men like Gandhi and Jawaharlal, who advised the tenants to pay
1 Administration Report of the United Provinces, 1920-21, supplementary chapter.
1 General Dept. File 50-3/1921. U. P. archives.
* Sri Prakasa's article in T921 R*minisc*nc*s (Delhi, 1971) p. 199.
Note of Commissioner, Fyzabad Division, 1 February 1921. General Dept. File 50-3/1921.
U. P. archives.
■» Report of Collector, Sultanpur District, 1 April 1921. Ibid.
‘Note of Butler, 2 April 1921. Ibid.
56 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
rents, rather than that it should pass to the itinerant sadhus who ordered the cultivators to pay nothing. The strengthening of the moderate Congress influ¬ ence was part of the same policy as marching troops through the district; they were both intended to keep the kisans from passing wholly under the influence of the extremist agitators. *
The arrest of these agitators cleared the way for the strengthening of Cong¬ ress influence over the kisans. The Government were relieved to find that though the leaders of the Congress formally recorded their protest at these arrests, they placed less emphasis on inflammatory propaganda and concen¬ trated their efforts on organization and the collection of funds. In Fyzabad division the tenants were directed to remain quiet and avoid disturbances and meetings; they should pay their subscriptions and leave it to Gandhi to win swaraj in a few months.1 Motilal Nehru drafted a leaflet for distribution to the kisans, urging them to join the Congress, take up spinning, settle disputes in their own pancbayats and not in the law courts, subscribe to the swaraj fund and promote caste and communal harmony. Nothing was said about rents or evictions, and a positive directive was given to avoid gatherings in districts where public meetings hoi been prohibited. ‘But above all it is most necessary that all kisans should follow the path of righteousness, should speak the truth, should not indulge in any looting and should refrain from every violence in word and deed, and should commit no excesses of any kind.’2
These instructions, far from being revolutionary, were to the benefit of the authorities. Yet the Government arrested six young men who were distribut¬ ing the pamphlet and sentenced them to jail for six months on the ground that the pamphlet attempted to excite disaffection and to bring the Government into hatred and contempt. The harsh action was clearly meant to proclaim that the Government had recovered their nerve, and intended no longer to tolerate intervention by Congressmen in kisan affairs. The pamphlet itself was later proscribed; but significantly no action was taken against its author, Motilal Nehru, or against Jawaharlal who distributed the pamphlet in the court room itself and wrote formally to the magistrate that he would continue to give the widest possible publicity to the pamphlet which gave expression to his views.3
The failure to be arrested, at a time when his followers were receiving savage sentences for carrying out his orders, acutely embarrassed Jawaharlal; and his predicament was not lessened by Gandhi’s article in Young India dis¬ approving of any radical demands by the kisans. There is little doubt that the kisans ... are not making wise use of their newly found power . .. Whilst we will not hesitate to advise the kisans when the moment comes to suspend payment of taxes to the Government, it is not contemplated that at any stage of non-co-operation we would seek to deprive the zamindars of their rent. The
‘Chief Secretary, U. P. to Home Secretary, 7 May 1921. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, June 1921, no. 13.
1 ‘Kisanon ka santUsa \ English translation in Tb» huUp»nd»nt, 3 May 1921.
iTh* Indsptndent, 30 April 1921.
AMONG THE PEASANTS 37
kisan movement must be confined to the improvement of the status of the kisanf and the betterment of the relations between the zamindar and them.’1 Nor, despite all the hopes held out, did the revision of the Oudh Rent Act improve substantially the condition of the tenantry; on the other hand, it strengthened the authority of the landlords, giving them the rights to evict ‘undesirable’ or non-resident tenants, to increase the area of land under their own cultivation and to acquire lands for a wide range of ‘developmental’ pur¬ poses. Cesses also continued to be exacted, while some landlords refused to give receipts for rents paid, as they were collecting more than was recorded in the village accounts.2 In November 1921, the AICC permitted full civil dis¬ obedience including non-payment of taxes (but not of rents); and though the Congress had little to do with the Eka Movement in Hardoi, Sitapur and Lucknow, which was a revival of kisan agitation in a new form, the Eka asso¬ ciations soon began to pass political resolutions. But Jawaharlal himself took little part in this kisan resurgence, being preoccupied elsewhere.
>18 May 1921.
2Report of Lt.-Col. J. C. Faunthorpe on the Eka Movement, 8 April 1922. U. P. Government