The Moderate Disciple of Gandhi
Jawaharlal had by now begun to take an interest in all-India affairs. He planned to accompany Gandhi on his tour of the Central Provinces, and he had visited Calcutta in January 1921 to address the Postal Peons Union and advise the men as to how a labour union could be utilized as a political weapon against the Government.1 But he gave close attention to the development of the non-co- operation campaign in his own province, and this afforded him no great satis¬ faction. ‘I am afraid all we can do is to try to carry on. The conditions of the experimentaresuch that it is exceedingly difficult for the U.P. to to fulfil them.2 The Government were of a similar opinion, and therefore complacent. It was true that there was a spirit of unruliness and unrest which had to some extent loosened authority, weakened the sense of law and order and depressed officials and loyalists. But the campaign of non-co-operation appeared to have generally failed, and the U.P. Government felt no need for special measures to control it or for the arrest of national leaders. It seemed adequate to prohibit meetings, protect loyalists from social boycott, organize propaganda against non-co- operation in every district and rely on the preventive sections of the ordinary law.3 In fact, even these measures were not always thought to be necessary and the Government permitted the holding of a political, a Khilafat and various other conferences at Dehra Dun.4
Jawaharlal presided over the political conference, and urged his audience not to cease from fighting till swaraj had been won. There could be no half¬ measures, no compromise on vital issues. A new spirit of liberty, sacrifice and self-purification was abroad in the country, and the Government were in a state of ‘blue funk’. Their policy of repression was a sure presage of coming victory.3 He appealed to students to leave Government schools and colleges
‘See extracts from the weekly report of the DIB, 17 January 1921.
2To Syed Mahmud, 9 April 1921.
5G.B. Lambert, Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Dept., 11 February 1921; minute of Butler, 9 March 1921; Butler to Vincent, Home Member, 10 March 1921. Home Dept., Pol. Deposit, July 1921, Proceeding no. 3 (Confidential).
*The Independent, 30 March 1921.
»IHd., 1 April 1921.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
59
and to serve as volunteers orgo out to assist the kisans. ‘But if the flesh is weak and the conditions appear hard, then there is one service which all can do — the turning of the spinning wheel.’1 This sounds like comic bathos; but there was a manifold purpose behind Gandhi’s emphasis on spinning. It provided an easy source of supplementary income to the starving millions in the countryside and helped to restore their self-confidence; and the use of the cbarka or spinning-wheel by all Congressmen could prove a binding link between the town-dwellers and the kisans. To create a market for this hand- spun yarn, Gandhi made compulsory the wearing of khaddar, or cloth woven of this yarn. Khaddar, in Jawaharlal’s later phrase, became the ‘livery of freedom’.
Jawaharlal organized the Allahabad district conference, presided over by Maulana Mahomed Ali and attended by Gandhi and other leaders, and proposed that at least 50,000 persons in the district should be registered as members of the Congress, special eftorts being made to enlist women.2 But Jawaharlal was not prepared to recommend a no-tax campaign in Allahabad city without consultation with their leaders until the other items in the non- co-operation campaign had been completed, as he did not believe this could be properly carried out.* He then undertook a tour of the districts of U.P. to strengthen the Congress and Khilafat movements. He travelled by train, car and ekka (horse carriage) and even on one occasion ran between two places 4 precedents for the election campaigns he was to undertake years later in all parts of India. Once he reached a railway station too late and missed the train. The stationmaster, an official but a patriot, provided him with a trolley to cover the twenty or thirty miles to the next junction, and was dismissed for his pains.*
Yet, despite all this energetic effort of Jawaharlal and his colleagues, the non-co-operation campaign failed to gather impetus in the United Provinces. Over 3,000 panchayats, encouraged to take the place of the law courts for settling disputes, were functioning, but nearly 7,000 panchayats in north¬ eastern Avadh were suppressed by the Seditious Meetings Act. District courts, which had worn a deserted appearance at the beginning of 1921, now once again were crowded, though mostly by friends and relatives of defendants. Many workers had been cowed by official displeasure and action, for the U.P. Government had recourse to both preventive and punitive measures. Official propaganda also was gaining ground.6 So the Government could
■Letter to die Editor, Tht Leader, 25 April 1921.
*Tbt hukp$nd*nt, 13 May 1921.
■Report of speech in Allahabad, Tba lnd*p*nd*nt, 7 May 1921.
■Jawaharlal in Tb* I*d*p*nd*nt, 25 May 1921.
■Jawaharlal to Bhai Parmanand, 26 November 1933.
■Report of the Secretaries U.P.C.C. on progress of non-co-operation 20 March-20 Jnly 1921. The hdtpnmiU, 26 and 27 July 1921; Jawaharlal to Secretary, Aligarh District Congress Com¬ mittee, 10 August 1921, Khwaja papers, N.M.M.L
60
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
relax, and even the Congress acknowledged that a distinct change was notice- able in official policy from the end of August.1
Jawaharlal was now an ardent advocate of swadeshi and no longer the ‘pink and pretty’ young man who wore only silk underwear2 and was worried as to how he would be able to move about in swadeshi socks.3 From July 1921 the U.P. Congress concentrated on promoting the making ofyam by the use of the charka and the weaving of cloth from this yarn. Most district committees formed special swadeshi departments and put their best workers in charge of them. Charkas were distributed widely, and the weavers were encouraged to utilize the yarn spun from these charkas. Model weaving-schools were esta¬ blished, and almost every national school had its spinning and weaving depart¬ ment. A large amount of yarn was also sent to other provinces. The converse of this propagation of swadeshi was the campaign against foreign cloth. Most towns and large villages had their bonfires of such cloth. Merchants and tailors were asked to take a pledge not to sell or use it; and here again the success was considerable, even without resort to large-scale picketing.4 *
This boycott now claimed Jawaharlal’s full attention. While he still demanded militant action and declared that the place of every Indian was in¬ side jail,3 yet the emphasis was on boycott offoreign cloth. In Allahabad city he was one of those who went round from house to house collecting foreign clothes.6
At the U.P. political conference in October 1921 Jawaharlal moved the resolution on swadeshi. At this time an unqualified Gandhian, he argued that as the attainment of swaraj depended on the use of swadeshi cloth, the people should be asked to discard, burn or export foreign cloth and use home-made cloth instead. He was as impatient to drive out the English from India as any¬ one else, but he had not till now discovered any new method of doing so except swadeshi. He did not agree with those who advocated the use of the sword. In the last resort they would all come to the conclusion that they could win and retain swaraj only by the use of swadeshi cloth. 7
This was indeed moderation, which the Government could got seriously quarrel with; and it was further emphasized by the resolutions passed under Jawaharlal’s presidency at the Rae Bareli district conference in November. Strict non-violence, the maintenance of Hindu-Muslim unity and the removal of the evil of untouchability were stated to be the appropriate preparations for civil disobedience.
1Report of the U.P. Congress on Government repression in U.P., Tbt Indtptndtnt, 27 November 1921. 2Oral testimony of his brother-in-law Kailas Ksul, N.M.M.L. ’Padmaja Naidu’s account of her conversation with Jawaharlal at Mussoorie in 1918, interview with the author, 24 December 1969. 4Report of U.P. Congress Committee, Tbt Indtptndtnt, 26 November 1921, ’Speech at Agra, 11 September 1921, Tbt Indtptndtnt, 13 Septembet**1921. *Tbt Indtptndtnt, 12 August 1921. ’The Ltadtr, 26 October 1921.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
61
As the achievement of swaraj is only possible if people of all professions live in union and as the tenants and zamindars can be truly happy only when independence is achieved, so this conference expresses its desire that tenants and zamindars should live in harmony through mutual goodwill and sympathy and insists that although the recent Rent Act has made their position worse, still they Should patiently bear all troubles, pay their rents and keep the welfare of the country in view.
An appeal was made to zamindars and talukdars not to be led away by petty personal gains but to make every effort in helping their tenants to attain swaraj. The talukdars were also asked to boycott the visit of the Prince of Wales to Lucknow. The one non-platitudinous resolution of the conference was the insistence on the ‘instant universal use’ of khaddar and on the manu¬ facture of khaddar on a considerable scale.1
Jawaharlal was also very careful at this time to abide by the various orders of the Government. There was little defiance in his mood. At Shikarpur, for example, when an order under S. 144 prohibiting a meeting was served on him while he was speaking, he immediately stopped and turned his attention to the collection of foreign clothes and subscriptions for the swaraj fund.2 When a similar order was served on him at Bhiti, he marched with the whole audience of about a thousand to the next district four and a half miles away and held the meeting there.
However, for some time the U.P. Government had been collecting material for taking action against The Independent for its articles, and against Jawahar¬ lal for seditious speeches. But as the case against the Ali brothers was thought to be the stronger one, Jawaharlal’s case was held over till a decision Had been taken by the Government of India on that case and that of The Independent. Opinion at Simla was in favour of giving The Independent an opportunity to express regret; and the U.P. Government, although (excepting one mini¬ ster) of the view that there was no alternative to taking proceedings, decided to give a similar opportunity to Jawaharlal.3 So, on 16 June 1921, Jawaharlal was informed that no proceedings would be taken against him if he undertook not to deliver speeches directly or indirectly inciting to violence or calculated to create an atmosphere of readiness for violence. Similar notices were sent the same day to the editor and printer of The Independent.
Jawaharlal promised the Collector of Allahabad, who had forwarded the Government’s notice, to send a reply within a week; but his father, who was at Ramgarh near Naini Tai in the hills, telegraphed direct to the Collector that a reply would only be sent after due consideration.4 Motilal was still inclined
t The Leader, 26 November 1921.
*Tkt Independent, 23 September 1921.
'Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary.Government of India, No. 1543, dated 9 July 1921, Home Dept. Pol. 1922, File 112, nos. 1-8.
4 See telegrams exchanged between Jawaharlal and Motilal, Jawaharlal's letter to Collector, Allahabad, 30 June 1921, and Motiial's telegram to Collector.
62
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
to treat his son (who was now thirty-two years of age) as an impetuous school¬ boy. He decided, as he told Jawaharlal, to act the boss, as he believed he had every right to do, and rectify by his interference — ‘vis major’ — Jawaharlal's mistake in making promises.1 Jawaharlal now drafted his reply with great care — at least three drafts exist — and took it to Ramgarh to have ft reviewed by his father. Motilal was of course fully aware that he and Jawaharlal sooner or later would find themselves in gaol, and he was unflinching. He had spurned the suggestion that he might meet Harcourt Butler or proceed to Simla to see the Viceroy.2 ‘I would not for the life of me approach Sir H. in the interest of Jawahar or myself or for that matter any other individual. . . Jawahar and I both know what is coming and are fully prepared for it.’3 But he saw no reason to make the Government’s task easier, and tightened up his son’s draft so as to make it more precise without, being any the less defiant, removing any suggestion that Jawaharlal could still be regarded by anyone else but him as an ‘impressionable youngster easily carried away by anything that he reads’.4 The accuracy of police reporting of Jawaharlal's speeches was questioned, and any apology or undertaking was refused; if he had erred by saying any¬ thing which was untrue or exaggerated or had produced the impression that he was condemning the whole British people, he would apologize, but only to the public.3
The Home Member and his department agreed with the U.P. Government that Jawaharlal should now be prosecuted.6 But the Viceroy, as Motilal had expected, viewed this in the all-India context and, as part of the delaying tactics he was employing against the Congress, decided to ignore Jawaharlal. The U.P. Government were instructed to proceed only against the editor and printer of The Independent. Butler now agreed.
If they start civil disobedience, they will put themselves in the wrong,
whereas if we run in prominent leaders, we may drive a good deal of
sympathy to their side. It is a choice of evils, and I think the lesser evil is
to hold one’s hand for the present.7
By November 1921 the Government of India were ready to take drastic action against the non-co-operation campaign, which was now developing new manifestations and frequently erupting in violence. Among other measures it was decided to strike down the volunteer movement in the
1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 and 30 June 1921.
*Sapru to Motilal, 5 June 1921. Sapru papers, National Library, Calcutta.
*Motild to Sapru, 24 June 1921. Ibid.
‘Modlal’s note on Jawaharlal's drafts.
’Jawaharlal to Chief Secretary U.P., 4 July 1921.
‘Notes of H.D. Craik, 13 July 1921. Home Dept. Pol., 1922, File 112, nos. 1-8.
’Butler to Reading 3 August 1921. Butler papers. India Office Library (hereafter I.O.L.J, Mss. Eur.F. 116/57.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
63
U.P.1 There, thanks chiefly to Jawaharlal, the volunteer squads had become well-drilled units which successfully organized a complete hartal (strike) in Lucknow, Allahabad, Kanpur and theotherprincipal towns and wereeffectively picketing shops selling foreign goods. Even the Viceroy conceded this success, particularly in Allahabad.
The non-co-operators put forward the full strength of an undoubtedly powerful organization and yet, save in Allahabad, have really not suc¬ ceeded anywhere, although, surveying the situation impartially, I am bound to admit that they have at places managed to prevent the visit [of the Prince of Wales] being the unqualified and triumphant success it would otherwise have been.2
The U.P. Congress had also announced its intention of preparing selected tehsils for civil disobedience;3 and though the Government did not take this seriously,4 it was obvious that, if civil disobedience were started, trained volunteers would be utilized for this purpose. Every district Congress com¬ mittee had been directed to constitute a volunteer board immediately. So the volunteer organization in the U.P. was declared unlawful, and Jawaharlal, the converter and secretary of the U.P. volunteer board, and his father were arrested on 5 December for their connection with this activity. Motilal was delighted togo to jail with his son, and departed in a mood of exaltation. Jawa¬ harlal too was happy to secure, as the accolade of patriotism, a sentence of six months’ simple imprisonment and a fine of Rs 100 or a further month in jail. Father and son and a few others, who were being treated better than the rank and file of Congress prisoners, wrote to the jail superintendent declining these special privileges. 'We wish to recognize no class distinction in our army of Swaraj.'3 A fellow Congressman who saw the Nehrus in jail a week after reported that 'the smiling and happy countenance of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru stood out in relief amongst the persons in the lock-up.’6 He continued to direct from jail the work of the U.P. Congress, and drew up plans to ensure that it did not cease to function despite official suppression and that it demons¬ trated its authority by filling the jails.7
Because of some technical defect in his sentence, Jawaharlal, to his own
‘Hone Dept, circular to local governments, 24 November 1921. Home Dept. Pol. 1921, File 303, nos. 1-48; R. D. Mathur, 'British policy towards the volunteer movement in India during the non-co-operation campaign’, Indian History Congress proceedings, 1970. pp. 214-23.
2Reading to Montagu, 23 February 1922. Reading papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. E. 238, vol. 4.
*Report of the U.P. Congress committee, 26 November 1921; resolutions of U.P. Congress committee, 3 December 1921. Tbt Indopondont, 6 December 1921.
4Vieeroy'a telegram to Secretary of State, 6 December 1921. Home Dept. Pol. 1921, File 18. ’Letter 27 December 1921, reprinted in Young ludin 19 January 1922.
*Pandit Gaurishankar Bhargava, reported in Tbs Bombay Cbroniclo, 13 December 1921.
7See note traced by C.I.D. anil said to have been written by him in ]ail between 9 and 12 Decem¬ ber 1921. Home Dept. PoL 1922, File 767.
64 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
surprise, was released in March 1922 when he had only served half his term. By now Gandhi had called off the civil disobedience campaign because of the increasing violence. Jawaharlal, like most others, was bitterly disappointed, especially as the campaign in his own province had been mustering strength. Even the Government had been worried by the widespread tension and pre¬ parations for intensification of civil disobedience. 'The situation is rapidly deteriorating and getting more out of control. His Excellency in Council has no doubt that the deterioration will spread and have alarming developments, unless action is taken to stop the agitation at its source.’1 Volunteer units in uniform were attempting to replace the police, while Congressmen in certain districts set up theirown schools, courts and cattle pounds. The Commissioner of Allahabad reported that the establishment of Congress tbanas (police stations) with men performing point duty and other police functions ‘was not so much an organized movement run by the nominal leaders as a more or less spontaneous movement of the lower castes, Muhammadans more especially. This made it all the more likely to spread, and the Commissioner thought that there was danger of its developing into a general strike or boycott of Europeans.’2 The U.P. Government had therefore proposed legislation to prevent usurpation of the functions of the police,
Gandhi’s action enabled the Government to relax and made' Jawaharlal’s task in sustaining the morale of Congressmen so much the harder. ‘I have only to say this — keep fighting, continue to work for independent India and do not stop. Do not abandon your creed. Do not accept false compromises. Continue to follow your great leader Mahatma Gandhi and remain true to Congress. Be efficient, be well organised and above all remember the charka and ahimsa. ’3 He attended Gandhi’s trial at Ahmedabad, and then returned to organize spinning, boycott and picketing in the United Provinces. The suggestion that he should visit England as a member of the Khilafat delegation appealed to his father who was still in jail.
I would readily welcome the opportunity of your having to spend some time on the sea and in Europe in the interest of all — yourself, myself and the country at large. As you know I am unable to follow the politic- religious philosophy of Gandhiji beyond a certain point... in any case some understandable service from outside is far preferable in my opinion to the very douibtful merit supposed to flow from rotting in jail to expiate the crime of Chauri Chaura.4 1Chlef Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, No. 366, dated 1$ February 1922. Home Dept. Pol. 1922, File 18. 2Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, No. 444, dated 24 February 1922. Home Dept. Pol. 1922, File 327, Part m, nos. MO. ’Message on release from prison, Aaj, 10 March 1922. 4Motiial to Jawaharlal, sometime in April 1922. It was the incident at Chauri Chaura, a village in the United Provinces, where a mob set fire to a police station and 22 ftmstables lost their lives, that led Gandhi to call off civil disobedience.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
65
But the idea of leaving India at this time could not have been attractive to Jawaharlal. However much he might deplore Gandhi’s latest action, he had, unlike his father, no reservations about Gandhi’s leadership and believed he had enough to do even outside political action.
You will be glad to learn that work is flourishing. We are laying sure foundations this time. God willing, our next march forward will end in victory. Rest assured that there will be no relaxation, no*lessening in our activities and above all there will be no false compromise with Government. We stand for the truth. How can we tamper with anything which has been soiled by the touch of falsehood?1
As the Government recognized, ‘quiet propaganda work’ organized by Jawaharlal from Allahabad was widespread.2 He addressed public meetings in the city and elsewhere and circulated Hindi pamphlets. The voice through¬ out was Gandhian. The atmosphere, he said, was calm but this did not mean that non-co-operation was dead. It could never die until the goal was reached; and the great war raging in the country could have only one result — an Indian victory. So they should go forward trusting God. The practical work to be done was promotion of swadeshi and spinning, removal of untouchability, sub¬ scription to the Tilak fund and enrolment of volunteers and of Congress mem¬ bers, the age limit for which had been reduced from twenty-one to eighteen. But all violence was to be avoided and there should be no forcible closing of shops. Students should not court arrest but if arrested should gladly meet their fate.
The advice Jawaharlal gave to the students he himself for a time followed. While his activity was open and effective, he did not at first go out of his way to court arrest. Hegave the lead in organizing hartals of mourning on 6 April, at the start of the National Week, in lament for lack of freedom, and on 13 April, to. commemorate Jallianwala Bagh. But he advised the organizers of the political conference at Dehra Dun to abide by the prohibitory order of Government. However, he began to feel that concentration on constructive work was becoming almost impossible because of official oppression and terrorism. He and a colleague visited Sitapur district to inquire into one in¬ stance of such allegations,3 and the atrocities committed there, said Jawaharlal in a public speech, were such as to make the occurrences in the Punjab pale.4 So it might be necessary to start individual civil disobedience again of some kind.9 The organization should therefore be perfected, tours planned and
^Jawaharlal to Syed Mahmud, 4 April 1922.
1 Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, 3 May 1922, Home Dept. Pol. 1922. FUe 18. ’Inquiry report of Jawaharlal and M. Saxena, 27 April 1922, S.W., vol. 1, pp. 242-7.
4 Speech at Lucknow, 26 April 1922.
’Circular letter of U.P. provincial Congress committee, 25 April 1922.
66
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
efforts made to visit-all important towns and rouse the people. The Govern¬ ment reacted, and on 5 May the Congress offices and Anand Bhawan were searched. Clearly arrest was imminent, and Jawaharlal issued another circular to Congress committees, written while the search was being conducted, ‘almost in the shadow of the police'. The people had shown enthusiasm and courage, and only organization was necessary to achieve success. Non-co- operation had gained India a new status in the eyes of the world. ‘That has been the achievement of a few months. Truly a wonderful record for which let us, in all humility, thank the Giver of all.’1
Aweek later, on 12 May, Jawaharlal was arrested on a charge of organizing picketing and advocating it in his writings and speeches. As a non-cooperator he refused to plead, cross-examine the witnesses or offer any defence, but he made a long statement. He pointed out that though he was being tried for criminal intimidation and extortion the prosecution could not produce any witness to suggest that the picketing had not been peaceful. On the other hand, it was the Government which had, throughout the province, been guilty of in¬ timidation and terrorism. However, he was grateful to the authorities for fram¬ ing this particular charge, for it gave publicity to the boycott of foreign cloth. The people of Allahabad and the U.P. 'would know that the salvation of India and her hungry millions demanded the use of the cbarka and the weaving of khaddar, and they would cast out all foreign cloth and consign them to the flames or to the dustbin.’
J awaharlal also referred to the wider issue of British rule. Fond as he was of England — and perhaps because of his fondness — he had now become a rebel and all his activities had but one end in view.
Jail has indeed become a heaven for us, a holy place of pilgrimage since our saintly and beloved leader was sentenced ... I marvel at my good fortune. To serve India in the battle of freedom is honour enough. To serveher under a leader like Mahatma Gandhi is doubly fortunate. But to suffer for the dear country! What greater good fortune could befall an Indian, unless it be death for the cause or the full realisation of our glorious dream.
His heart-warming statement of nationalist passion, with its loyalty to Gandhi's leadership Mended with romantic echoes of the Risorgimento, was heard far beyond the district court and Jawaharlal's own province. The Gov¬ ernment were deluding themselves with the belief that, while the doth-dealer witnesseshad respectfully saluted the accused, the case had attracted little public attention.2 Jawaharlal had in mind a wider audience, and the first of his trial statements secured for him a national audience and became the manifesto of
1Circular, 5 May 1922.
aChief Secretary U.P. to Hone Dept, 4 June 1922. Home Dept. ftl. 1922, File 18.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
67
the educated youth of India. Motilal was delighted to find, on an all-India tour later in the year, that his son’s influence was widespread; and he was much moved when a large crowd in Delhi cheered him and his wife as the father and motherof Jawaharlal.1 As Motilal saw, the points of law in the statement were weak and could be improved upon. It was not sufficient to say that picketing had been peaceful in order to disprove the charge of extortion; an association of cotton merchants had been levying fines on those who had been selling foreign cloth, and Jawaharlal should have established that he and the Congress had nothing to do with this organization. But these deficiencies in legal argument did all the more credit to Jawaharlal’s heart and to his intense patriotism and enhanced the value of the statement from the viewpoint of the Congress and non-co-operation. ’On reading your statement I felt I was the proudest father in the world. In its firm and simple dignity it would bear comparison with the best productions of the Master himself.’2
Jawaharlal had expected and hoped for a long sentence;3 he had been some¬ what galled by his earlier premature release, especially as his father was still in jail. ‘One feels almost lonely outside the jail, and selfishness prompts a quick return.’ He was not disappointed, the sentence being 18 months’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs 100 and 3 months’ further imprisonment in case of default. He was placed in Lucknow district jail — a fact which worried his father, who did not believe Jawaharlal could bear extreme heat and would have preferred his son to join him in Naini Tal jail or to be sent to Almora. Jawaharlal’s health was at this time none too good and he continued in jail homoeopathic treatment, which consisted mainly of arsenic and sulphur. His diet was frugal and vegetarian — curds, bread and butter, milk and fruit, apart from rice, chapatis, dal and vegetables for lunch, which was his only sub¬ stantial meal.
Because the jail superintendent and warders harassed visitors-and subjected themto petty indignities, Jawaharlal and his companions for some months gave up interviews and saw no friendly face from outside. He did not even visit other barracks during this period. But on the whole Jawaharlal was content with his existence. The mere fact of being confined boosted his self-respect. He hoped too that jail life, with its deprivations, would harden him, and enjoyed his enforced leisure to' the full.
It is those who work and labour outside who deserve sympathy, not we who laze and eat and sleep. Soon the pleasant autumn days will come and it will be delightful to be under the trees. And what can be pleasanter than freedom from worry? We have no appointments to keep, no piling up of work with which we cannot cope, no speechifying, no hurry. Time
Motilal to Jawaharlal, 22 July 1922.
1Motilal to Jawaharlal, 24 May 1922.
’See his circular, 5 May 1922, and statement in court, 17 May 1922.
68 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
almost ceases to have significance and life moves on like a gently flow¬ ing river.1
Apart from physical exercise — walking and running — and regular daily spinning, he spent most of his time reading. He was allowed two, daily news¬ papers, The Leader and The Englishman, till 15 November, when the jail authorities discontinued them. He started learning Urdu. The journals he received were the Nation, the New Statesman and the Modem Review. But Jawaharlal was not greatly concerned with current developments outside. His interests ranged far and wide, and he was determined to refurbish his mind which had rusted since his return from England. He was not greatly interested in philosophy or religious thought and his speculations in these matters never progressed beyond the superficial. He read in jail the Koran and Arnold’s Light ofAsia as well as the Bhagavad Gita in Mrs Besant’s translation; but he was at this time basically an unthinking, conventional Hindu theist. His attitude was almost platitudinous and lacking in humour. ‘It is a redeeming feature that the jail authorities have not the power to keep God and His nature out of jail.’ He expressed his gratitude for having such parents and near relatives as held up a lofty ideal before him and always added to his strength and spirit; and he was sure that the life they were leading now was much better than what they had abandoned. ‘Now’, he added, ‘I understand a little what Jesus meant when he asked us to forsake the world and save our soul.’ He observed his birthday in jail according to his mother’s directives, even setting aside five rupees for dis¬ tribution to the poor.
His special interests were history, travel and poetry. It was now that he began to collect the facts and thoughts which later went into the making of Glimpses of World History. Among the books he specially asked for were Havell’s Aryan Rule in India — which appealed to him through its idealiza¬ tion of India’s past — and Bryce’s Holy Roman Empire, the memoirs of Babar and Bernier’s travels. He also read Sven Hedin’s books, and, hugging to himself a private dream-world, he drew up an itinerary of a journey he would undertake after swaraj was won, via Kashmir and Ladakh to Manasarovar and Kailas and the famous cities of central Asia, and then across Afghanistan, Iran and Arabia to Europe.
In poetry his interests were romantic — Keats, Shelley, Swinburne, Tenny¬ son’s Idylls of the King; and his long letters to his family also bear a marked streak of romanticism. He relished the idea of being in the thick of a nationalist struggle, and was full of Italian precedents. ‘In the golden days to come when the history of our times and our country comes to be written the present will occupy a glorious chapter. And shall we not think of the good old days? Shall we not remember the great men who showed us the way and filled us with the fire of faith?’ And then he quotes Meredith, replacing ‘Italia’ with ‘India’:
1 Jawaharlal to Motilal, 1 September 1922. *
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI €9
We who have seen India in the throes,
Half risen but to be hurled to the ground, and now,
Like a ripe field of wheat, where once drove plough,
All bounteous as she is fair, we think of those Who blew the breath of life into her frame.
This was adolescent exaltation, yet to be channelled by hard thinking. There is, in all his letters of this time, the glow of virginal suffering and a complacent absence of reflection. Jawaharlal was so excited by the situation in which he found himself, so much in love with sacrifice and hardship, so self-conscious about the immediate context that he gave no thought to the way or the goal. He had made a cradle of emotional nationalism, and rocked himself in it. The special correspondent of the Manchester Guardian, who was permitted by the superintendent of the jail to interview Jawaharlal, was not unfair in reporting that what had struck him most in Jawaharlal’s own account of his life was the steady growth of an impulse to do something, he knew not what, for his country, and the deep satisfaction he felt when Gandhi at last showed him definite things to do; but these were acts of self-sacrifice.
The desire to make a sacrifice hid evidently been and still, I think, was very strong in him . . . But though the man’s intelligence, refinement and patriotism were very apparent, I failed to get from him any clear idea of how he proposed to win Swarajor what he proposed to do with it when he had won it.1
Selfishness, Jawaharlal had written, would hardly favour a quick discharge.2 However, once again he was released before serving his full sentence. He was set free on 31 January 1923, as part of a general amnesty declared by the U.P. Government without consulting the Government of India,3 in order to give effect to a resolution of the Provincial Legislative Council recommending such a measure. Welcoming the release of these 107 political prisoners, The Leader wrote: The greatest among these patriotic souls, the true disciple of Mr Gandhi, is Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who moves on a very high plane of thought indeed, who hates none but loves his country with the intensity of a pure nature and a feeling heart.4
The Leader went on to hope that Jawaharlal would abandon the policy of useless sacrifice and suicidal courses in favour of political action. What it seems to have had in mind was that Jawaharlal should join the Moderates and help in the functioning of dyarchy.
1 Report of interview in October, reprinted in Tbt Bombay CbronicU, 26 December 1922.
1 To his father, 15 November 1922.
* See Home Dept. Pol. 1923, File 56.
*31 January 1923.
70
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
The essence of non-co-operation consists in teaching the people the lesson of self-help. Such a lesson cannot be inculcated by laying stress merely on handspinning, or fay promulgating doctrines of hatred. In the field of agriculture, of industries, of co-operation, of education, of local self-government and social service, there is unlimited scope forpreaching the gospel of self-help.
The same suggestion was made by the well-meaning Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court, Sir Grimwood Mears. He wrote to Motilal three days before Jawaharlal’s release that he wished to establish friendly relations with the latter ‘and I honestly think I could make life happier for him if he would let me try’.1 Then, when he met Jawaharlal, Mears hinted to him that a minister- ship could come his way if he wished.2
It seems astounding that this could even be thought of, and is of interest only as showing how, despite his two terms in jail, Jawaharlal was generally thought of, at least in his home province, as basically a moderate nationalist. It was true that Jawaharlal was fay no means a revolutionary extremist, but he was not an incipient loyalist and the career of a man like Surendranath Ban¬ nerjee, whohad left the Congress to become a leading-Moderate and a minister in Bengal, was not likely to be his model. He had not, as yet, far-reaching ideo¬ logical commitments, and violent techniques were abhorrent to him; but office under the British certainly could not lure him. Reading was shrewder in his assessment of Jawaharlal as ‘fanatical in his hostility to Government’.3
Jawaharlal, therefore, wasted little time in politely rejecting these sugges¬ tions. What gave him greater concern was the sharp difference of opinion within the Congress itself. With Gandhi in jail, the Congress leadership was almost equally split on the issue of entry into Councils. The Gvil Disobedience Inquiry Committee set up by the Congress had stated the arguments of both sides — of those who were for contesting the elections due to be held in 1923 as well as of those who opposed it. Those in favour believed that with civil dis¬ obedience called off, it would be unwise to let the Moderates have a monopoly of the Councils. The Congress should win theelections and control the working of these assemblies. 'Knock these Councils on the head, and you will achieve what millions spent in foreign propaganda cannot achieve.’ But those who opposed any such step argued that it would enhance Government’s prestige; any wrecking of official marhinety should he done from outside. G R. Das Mid Motilal were the leaders of the group favouring Council entry which they envisaged as a new form of non-co-operation — Congressmen should contest the elections and present the country’s legitimate demands in the Councils; if these were not granted within a reasonable time Congressmen should adopt a policy of uniform, continuous and consistent obstruction with a view to make
i Sir G. Mean to Motilal, 28 January 1923.
3 Autobiography, pp. 101-2.
*To Montagu, 6 July 1922. Reading papers, vol. 3.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI
71
government through Councils impossible. At the annual session of the Con¬ gress in December 1922 this policy was rejected by a considerable majority. Das, who was president of the session, was persuaded not to resign; but he and Motilal formed, within the Congress, the Swaraj Party to further their policy of Council entry. It was hoped that this would enable constitutionalists like M. A. Jinnah, who had left the Congress in 1920, to return to the fold.1
The predicament of Jawaharlal was that, while he was emotionally attached to the leaders of the Swaraj Party, his mind was inclined to agree with those opposed to entering the Councils. In his first speech after his release, he de¬ clared that he still stuck to his conviction that non co-operation was the only path which could lead them to self-government. They should continue their fight and indeed further intensify it till their object had been attained. On the specific moveof Council entry he declined to express his opinion on the ground that he was not in touch with current politics; but he emphasized that the desti¬ nation and road of both groups were the same, though their conveyances might differ.2 * 4 It worried him too that the differences within the Congress might weaken the organization as a whole. So he, with a few others, sought not so much a compromise — the positions were irreconcilable — as‘an atmosphere of charity and goodwill’5 in which both sides could function. At the session of the AICC in Allahabad towards the end of February, he and Maulana Azad persuaded the two groups to suspend all propaganda till the end of April. He himself spent this period of truce touring some of the districts of the United Provinces, collecting funds for the Congress and urging discipline and the wearing of khaddar. But there was little heart in his speeches, and even the U.P. authorities were satisfied that his utterances were mild.4 At Allahabad, on 6 April, addressing a meeting to inaugurate the National Week, he was reported to have said no more than that everyone should examine for himself the events of the past four years and pray for guidance. It is not surprising that his election at this time as chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board caused no alarm in official circles. ‘He is reported as inclined to be reasonable, but as insisting that his duty to the nationalist cause must precede his obligation to the ratepayers.'9
Jawaharlal. was at this time, in fact, rudderless, with no dear ideas as to what he should do. He wrote in reply to a colleague’s demand for a more revo¬ lutionary programme:
I wholly agree. But what'is it to be? Let us remember that most people like to talk ofrevolution and direct action but they have no desire to parti- dpate in it. Those of us who really believe in direct action must stick to »M.R. Jayakar, Tbo Story ofMy Lift, val. 2, 1922-1923 (Bomb** 1939), pp. 81, 84-3. JSpeech at Allahabad, 1 February 1923, reported in Tbo Loador, 4 February 1923. ’jawaharlaTs telegram to ‘Swanjya’, Madras, Tbo Bombay Chroniclo, 24 February 1923. 4See, lor U.P. Intelligence reports on hit speeches at Sitapur, 18 March, and Gorakh¬ pur towards the end of March 1923. »Chief Secretary tsoHome Secretary, 19 April 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1923, File 23.
72
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
it and keep the ideal before the public. If you have any specific notions, do write to me.1
He himself, he wrote in a public letter, was a bit of a missionary in his own way;2 but he was a missionary without a mission. Congress politics too were once again heading to a collision; the truce was over, and in the first days of May both Motilal and Rajagopalachari, the leader of the no-changers, as they were called, issued manifestos drawing up the lines of battle. Jawaharlal was concerned to avoid this clash, if only to save the Congress, which seemed to him to have practically ceased, during the past four months, to function. “Effective political work has ceased in every province and if this state of affairs is prolonged for some time the Congress would cease to exist. It is undeniable that the most imperative necessity at the present time is to restore the Con¬ gress to its original prestige.’3 Jawaharlal’s opinion was shared by the Viceroy, who reported smugly at about the same time that non-co-operation as an effec¬ tive force was practically dead.4
Hie solution favoured by Jawaharlal was one which would give the Swaraj Party the substance and its opponents only the shadow. The decision taken by the Congress in December 1922 against Council entry would still hold, but nopropaganda should be done in its favour; in other words, its operation would be suspended, and those who wished to contest the elections would be face to do so. This formula deceived nobody; but it was accepted by the U.P. Con¬ gress committee,3 and then by the AICC at Bombay in the last week of May. Six members of the Working Committee who were opposed to Council entry promptly resigned. Jawaharlal, whose purpose was to fend off final decisions while allowing the Swarajists to have their way, suggested that these resigna¬ tions be not accepted; his resolution was carried by a large majority but the no-changers were firm. In the circumstances, it was agreed that Das also should resign the presidency, and the party executive be manned by those uncommitted to either side, such as Jawaharlal.
Thiswas Jawaharlal’s achievement — one which even he had not expected.6 It was the first time he had functioned decisively on the national pl9ne, and we have an interesting first-hand account of the impact he made on his audience.
He is no orator, has no tricks of manner of speech. He is sparing in the •wise of words, but the words are carefully chosen, for which his Harrow and Cambridge education are perhaps responsible. His voice is feeble
‘An intercepted letter to Sampumanand dated 23 April 1923, quoted in C. Kaye's confidential publication Communism in ImUa (Delhi, 1926).
3Tba Laadar, 13 May 1923.
’Circular letter of Jawaharlal, Dr M.A. Ansari and others, 11 May 1923.
*heading to Peel, 10 May 1923. Reading papers, vol. 6. <*
*Tha Laadar, 16 May 1923.
‘See Jawaharlal to A.M. Khwaja, 6 June 1923. S.W., vol. 1, pp. 338-60.
THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 73
and low, and he should make an effort to raise it, for it is possible, and should not expect his audience to do the impossible and intensify their power of hearing. When he speaks, sincerity exudes from him as per¬ spiration from the body in the month of May in Bombay. He succeeds in impressing his audience probably because he does not consciously try to do so. His anxiety is merely to explain his attitude and to lay bare the processes of the working of his mind and he sometimes overdoes it. He should remember that people are mostly interested in the finished article and not in the processes of its manufacture. His modesty is a virtue; he should be careful not to convert it into a vice. He is sometimes impatient when the audience does not rise to his intellectual level but let him remember there are hordes of people in this world who have to managewith alowerlevel of mental equipment than himself and he should sympathize with them.1
No polished orator, but one thinking on his feet; modest, stumbling along, but with sincerity intense and transparent — these remained his characteristics as a public speaker through the years. The only respect in which he did change, and for the better, was that incessant contact with the masses rid him of the early trait of talking down to his audience. In later years his hearers could follow him effortlessly, step by step, in the argument, and never felt that he was preaching to them.
However, the hollow compromise fashioned by Jawaharlal soon crumbled. Rajagopalachari repudiated it while Das toured southern India, Rajagopal- achari’s home ground, campaigning for Swarajist policy. Jawaharlal did not believe that entry into Councils would achieve anything substantial or impor¬ tant, but he blamed Rajagopalachari for violating the arrangement.2 Vallabh- bhai Patel, oneofthe no-changers, pointed out the contradiction of Jawaharlal’s position in agreeing with them but sympathizing with the Das party: ‘I wonder why you would not allow those who are in the right to have their own way and prefer, to allow those who are in the wrong to do so . . . How do you expect us to quickly reach [sic] with equanimity the rapid demolition of the magnificent edifice that had been erected by the combined sacrifice of so many in this land.*3 In Nagpur in July the AICC rejected by a majority of two votes Jawaharlai's resolution advocating disciplinary action against those provincial Congress committees which had defied the compromise resolution of May. Thereupon Jawaharlal, along with his colleagues, resigned from the Working Committee and is reported to have expressed a desire to retire from the AICC as well.4 ‘1 wish’, he remarked to a friend, ‘we would not hurt each other's hearts so easily and so constantly.’5 He had already, on 30 June, resigned his secretary¬ ship of the U.P. provincial Congress committee.
1‘Simplex’ in Tba Bombay CbronicU, 30 May 1923.
2 Interview in Aaj, *19 June 1923.
* 24 June 1923.
4 Tba Ludar, 14 July 1923.
’Sri Prelum's oral testimony, N.M.M.L.