Collision Course
Denied the chance to form a representative government which could, in Jawa- harlal’s words, light a spark in millions of hearts and offer unbroken resistance to the Japanese, Jawaharlal set about the second-best task of unofficial organiza¬ tion for self-reliance. There was no prospect of further negotiations with the British. The debris of the Cripps mission stood in the way of both parties, and neither was prepared to make a fresh move. But Jawaharlal announced that the Congress would continue its policy of non-embarrassment to the British. Warproduction should not be impeded. He was dissuaded by Azad from broad¬ casting over All-India Radio on these lines,1 but he promised Johnson that he would proceed to Calcutta to secure the termination of industrial strikes. ‘I shall have’, reported Johnson,2 ‘his complete help; he is our hope here. I trust him.’ On the other hand, if the Japanese,invaded India they would be met not only with non-violent non-co-operation, but even, if necessary, with guerrilla war¬ fare and a scorched-earth policy. Jawaharlal made these suggestions knowing that they did not meet with Gandhi’s approval and that a large sector of natio¬ nalist opinion was so embittered by British attitudes that it was ready to stand aside ifthe Japanesemoved into the country.
Some people say Jawaharlal is a fool. He is unnecessarily antagonising the Japanese and the Germans. The Japanese will wreak vengeance on him when they come to this country. It is wiser for him to keep silent if he cannot actually speak well of the Japanese. I want to tell those who give me this advice that Jawaharlal is not the man who will keep quiet when he ought to speak. On the other hand, I can only reject such advice, which is essentially based on fear, with contempt.3
‘Azad, op. tit., p. 58.
aJohnson to State Department, 11 April 1942, Foraign Relations of tb* Unitad Status, 1942, vol. 1, p. 631.
‘Speech at Delhi, 7 April, Tb* Hindustan Timas, 8 April 1942.
288
COLLISION COURSE
289
In fact, he went further than merely demanding resistance to the Japanese, and declared that he would oppose even Subhas Bose (who had gone over to the Axis powers) and the Indian troops he had mustered, for this army was really no more than ‘a dummy force under Japanese control*.1
Gandhi warned Jawaharlal that his attitude was likely to break up the Con¬ gress leadership. 'If your policy is accepted, then the Committee should not remain as it is today.’2 He even forced Jawaharlal to withdraw his suggestion about guerrilla warfare and publicly exulted over it.3 Unable to attend the Congress meetings at the end of the month, he sent a draft resolution and threatened to withdraw with his followers if his draft were not accepted. ‘The time has comewhen everyone of Us has to choose his own course. *4 The failure of the Cripps mission had by itself restored the influence of Gandhi in the Con¬ gress command, and he was now convinced that the immediate step should be the withdrawal of the British from India. There was no purpose in even holding discussions with a Government which was willing to think in terms of a division of India. His draft resolution stated that Japan’s quarrel was not with India but with the British Empire. Britain was incapable of defending India and should withdraw. India would then be able to defend herself against Japan or any other aggressor, but the first step of a free India would probably be to negotiate with Japan. The Japanese should be assured that India bore no enmity to Japan or any other nation. But if Japan attacked India and the British had not with¬ drawn, the Indian people should offer complete non-violent non-co-operation to the Japanese and not place any obstacles in the way of the British forces. However, a scorched-earth policy should not go beyond the destruction of war material.
This draft clearly moved away from the whole trend of Congress policy, since the beginning of the war, of sympathy with the Allies, and made the Indian people a passive partner of the Axis powers. His disgust with the Cripps Decla¬ ration blinded Gandhi to thegrand designof Japanese imperialism. He assumed that the Axis powers would win the war and that a victorious Japan would make no demands on India. All this was too much for Jawaharlal and he made his opposition clear. Even a toned-down version of Gandhi’s draft, produced by his followers, was unacceptable to Jawaharlal, who resisted hot an odd detail or assertion but the .whole attitude of defeatism and sympathy with Japan which underlay this resolution. His own draft asserted, in consistency with the earlier position of the Congress, that while India had no quarrel with the people of any country, she was opposed to Nazism and fascism as well as to imperialism. If India were free she might have kept out of the war but her sym-
1Presa Conference at Delhi, 12 April, National Hamid, 13 April 1942.
3Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 13 April 1942, A Bunch of Old Litters, pp. 470-71.
3 Jawaharlal's speech at Calcutta, 19 April, The Hindustan Times, 21 April 1942; Gandhi in Harijau, 26 April 1942.
* Gandhi to Jawaharlal; 24 April, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 474.
290
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
pathieswouldhave beenwith thevictims erf aggression. Britain siKHild tkmdon * her hold on India, but the Congress repudiated the idea that freedom could come to India through foreign interference or invasion. Any attack on India shouldhe resisted by non-violent non-co-operation, for the British had prevent¬ ed the organization of national defence by the people in any other way. 'If he [the Japanese enemy] wishes to take possession of our houses and our fields we will refuse to give them up even if we have to die hi the effort.’A scorched- earth policy was not affirmed, but was implicit in the intention to fight to the last.
There was a majority of 11 to 6 in the Working Committee for the revised Gandhi draft; but a few hours later, with the illogicality that lies at the heart of most democratic bodies, the Committee unanimously accepted Jawaharlal's draft.1 So Jawaharlal had had hisway. Onecanonly assume that he had persuad¬ ed his colleagues to give one more chance to his policy of support to the Allies. Nothing could be expected directly from the British; but Jawaharlal placed his faith in the United States and China. In February 1942, Roosevelt had sent Jawaharlal a friendly message through Edgar Snow and invited Jawaharlal to write to him.2 When the negotiations with Cripps broke down Jawaharlal wrote directly to Roosevelt in the hope of involving him in the Indian problem, and stated that there could be no further talks with the British ‘for the present’3 — thus hinting that the door was not completely closed. Jawaharlal's hand, cabled Johnson to Roosevelt on the eve of the Congress meetings,4 would be immensely strengthened if Britain, China and the United States could issue a joint statement on Pacific war aims assuring freedom and self-determination to India and resolving to defend India at all costs. Two days later, Madame Chiang forwarded to the President Jawaharlal’s views on the importance for defence of real identity between the state and the people.3 After the Working Committee had accepted Jawaharlal’s draft, Johnson drew up one more for¬ mula, by which the Viceroy would have todo his utmost to persuade his Council before exercising his veto, and pleaded with his Government to secure its acceptance by the British.6
Roosevelt, however, refused to intervene.7 Public opinion in the United States was, on the whole, satisfied that the British Government had done all they could to secure Indian support for the war effort, and that, it was Indian
‘For the various drafts and the discussions in the Working Committee, see transfer of Powor, vol. 2, pp. 66-70 and 158-64.
2 'When you get there and see Nehru, say hallo for me. 1 wish you would ask Nehru to write me a letter and tellmeexactly whathe wantsmetodo for India. You cin send it through our diplomatic pouch!’ E. Snow, Journeyto tboBeginning(London, 1959), p. 257.
* 12 April 1942, A Bunch of Otd Letters, pp. 469-70.
4 Foreign Retetions of the United Stetes 1942, vol. 1, pp. 638-9.
’Ibid., vol. I, p. 639.
6Ibid., vol. 1, pp. 649-50.
’Cable to Johnson, 8 May 1942, ibid., vol. I, p. 650. a
COLLISION COURSE
291
^politicians who were intransigent.1 Fortified by this attitude, the Government of Indiabecame even more aggressive. Aban was placed on the publication by newspapers of the Congress resolutions on the summary evacuation of areas, instances of misconduct of soldiers and the panicky and liiyfimimtory behav¬ iour of officials in Burma and some parts of India. These developments strengthened Gandhi’s position, and he could with much justice contend, in the sharp and prolonged private debate that now went on between him and Jawaharlal, that the latter s support for the Allies evoked no effective response in any quarter and served only to expose the Indian people to the assaults of the British. With war lapping India’s shores and the British administration both incompetent to defend India and preferring to lose India rather than mobilize popular support, the case for demanding British withdrawal became vastly stronger. When Jawaharlal returned after a fortnight in the mountains, he found the situation had so deteriorated that it would be difficult to abide by the policy of subordinating anti-British sentiment to the general policy of support to the Allies and resistance to the Japanese. Gandhi’s programme reflected widespread Indian bitterness against the British; and the fact that Gandhi took this line was in itself an objective factor in the situation which could not be ignored. Aseven the Viceroy recognized, ‘Gandhi is the biggest thing in India. ’2 With the United States declining to interest herself directly in Indian affairs, China helpless and the British mounting a new offensive against not the Japanese enemy but Indian nationalism, Jawaharlal had only his world outlook to justify the resolution which he had prevailed upon the Working Committee toaccept. Hissupporterswerethose whomhe would ratherhave done without— the Communists, now a semi-loyalist party supporting a 'people’s war', and Rajagopalachari, strengthening the Muslim League by his willingness to accept the principle of Pakistan and weakening the Congress by seeking to form a provincial government in Madras.
So, when Jawaharlal met Gandhi at the end of May, he was in no position to withstand a policy for which he had no enthusiasm. It was, of course, still important to him not to harm the cause of Russia, China and the United States, and he argued for this, as Gandhi later told the Viceroy, with ‘a passion which I have no words to describe’.* But he could invoke no argument more substan¬ tial than passion. Once Gandhi abandoned his pro-Japanese stance and conceded that after the British administration was withdrawn the Allied armies could remainin India and the first act of a national government should be the conclu¬ sion of a defence treaty with the Allies, there was no reason for Jawaharlal not
1 One could say that as regards American opinion Cripps could not have done better.’ S. K. Ratcliff* from New York to Kingsley Martin, 4 April 1942, Kingsley Martin papers; M. S. Venka- trataani and B. K. Shrivastava, ‘The United States and the Cripps Mission', India Quarterly, July-September 1965, pp. 258-9. -
*Author’s note in L. Fischer, A Waak with Gandhi (London, 1945).
’Letter of 14 August 1942, Transfar of Powar, voi. 2, p. 703.
292
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
to acquiesce in Gandhi’s policy. Even from the international viewpoint, help to China and advancement of the Allied cause, a total withdrawal of British power was necessary, for only then could the Indian people shake off their passivity and be totally involved in the war effort. As it was, there was too much indifference to British defeats to enable whole-hearted resistance to Japanese invasion if it came; nor could British authority be relied upon to push back the aggressor on its own. It was known that plans had been made for retreating from Bengal and Madras. A British withdrawal from India before the Japanese came was the only way to rouse the Indian people and prevent India going the way of Burma. Jawaharlal, more than most Congressmen, was guided by his antipathy to Nazi Germany, Japan and fascism, and sympathy for Russia and China; but even his attitude was, in the ultimate analysis, dictated by a strong sense of India's survival.
It is a hateful notion that after fiveyears of war, China should be defeated; it is a hateful notion that Russia, which represents certain human values, which means a great deal to human civilization, should be defeated. But, ultimately, naturally I have to judge every question from the Indian view¬ point. IfIndiaperishes, I must say — selfishly, ifyou like to call it — it does not do me any good if other nations survive.1
British presence implied not so much serious defence against the Japanese as the building up of forces working for the division of India. Jawaharlal was reluctantly dragged to the conclusion that the ending of British rule was the primary issue. If the Congress continued its policy of doing nothing to embar¬ rass the British, the popular will against the Government would be broken and that would break the popular will to resistance of the Japanese. On the other hand, if a spirit of resistance was built up against the British, that could be turned against the Japanese. ‘Personally’, he told the Congress committee of his province, ‘I am so sick of slavery that I am even prepared to take the risk of anarchy.’2 Gandhi could not have phrased it better.
Gandhi, as usual, had no clear ideas as to the way in which the British could be induced toquit India. Jawaharlal was against a mass civil disobedience move¬ ment, but Gandhi thought in terms of such direct action after the public mind had been prepared for it and in such a manner as not to aid the Japanese, 'll you won’t join', Gandhi is reported to have told Jawaharlal, ‘Ill do it without you.’
It was also possible that out of local opposition in various plans to official harassments, a major conflict might take shape. But he had no wish to act precipitately and hoped for an interview with the Viceroy before taking any
‘Press conference, 12 April, National Harold, 13 April 1942.
1National Harold, 2 Jane 1942.
COLLISION course
293
, firmdecisions.1 Inthe meantime, Gandhi assured Chiang Kai-shek,2 in a letter drafted by Jawaharlal, that the plan to secure British withdrawal was intended to enable India to look after herself and to help China to the best of her ability. Thanksto Jawaharlal, ‘whose love of China is only excelled, if at all, by his love of his country’, the Indian peoplewere deeply committed to the Chinese cause, and an independent India would immediately sign an alliance with the Allies. Acopy of this letter was forwarded by Jawaharlal to the United States Govern¬ ment. He added:
It has been my earnest desire that India should cooperate to the fullest extent with China and America. Asia, or any other large part of the world, dominated by fascism or nazism is an intolerable thought to me, and I should like India to do her utmost to combat this. But the blindness and obstinacy of the British Government have created a situation of extreme gravity in India and I do not see wisdom dawning upon them in the near future. It would appear that they are determined to bring about a con¬ flict with the Congress and nationalist elements in India. Already many ofmyclosest colleagues have been arrested and this process is continuing.
It is possible that I might be arrested. It is possible also that the Congress might be temporarily crushed by severe repression. But the Indian people are not going to be coerced, much less won over, by these methods, .and the price to be paid by all concerned will be a heavy one. I have endea¬ voured with all my strength to avoid this conflict and this price. But the future appears to be dark.3
However, influenced probably by a message from Chiang Kai-shek,4 who had prevented the publication of Gandhi’s letter to him and now requested the Congress to refrain from drastic action in view of the Allied reverses in Libya, the Working Committee adopted a resolution which surprised the Govern¬ mentby its mildness. The Congress pleaded with the British to relinquish their political power because India’s freedom was essential not only to India but to the security of the world. Resistance to aggression could only be built up in India if her people felt the glow of freedom. If such a withdrawal took place with goodwill, a stable provisional government could be established which would permit the stationing of Allied armies in India and co-operate with these powers in resistiqg aggression. The Congress wished to' take no hasty step or
1 Jawaharlal to Lpuis Johnson, 4 June 1942, Fortign Rotations oftbs Unitad Stutos 1942, vol. 1, pp. 667-9: Fischer, A Wotk with Gandhi, pp. 78-9, 103 and 109*10; JeweharlaTs confidential note on talks with Gandhi, June 1942.
214 June 1942, Transfar of Powar, vol. 2, p. 346.
* To Lampton Berry of. the U.S. Mission in Delhi, 14 June 1942.
4 S. H. Shen, Chinees Consul in Delhi, to Jawaharlal, 8 July 1942.
294
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
embarrass the Allies in any way; but some risks had to be taken to avoid far greater risks, and if Britain rejected this appeal, the Congress would be reluc¬ tantly compelled to resort to a non-violent struggle under Gandhi’s leadership. Obviously to give time to the British Government to respond, the AICC was convened three weeks later, on 7 August 1942, to take a final decision.
Both Gandhi and Jawaharlal stated publicly that there was no room left for further discussion. The Cripps proposals were outdated, and the British should recognize India’s independence and transfercomplete power. The Viceroy and some senior officials would have to go, but the provisional Indian government would co-operate with the Allies and give the Commander-in-Chief full dis¬ cretion in military strategy and dispositions.1 But, in contrast to the public postures, in private the Congress leaders still hoped for intervention by Roose¬ velt. Jawaharlal’s remark in his letter of 12 April to the President, that there would be no negotiations with the British 'for the present’, still held the field; and there seems nodoubt that if Roosevelt had requested the Congress to renew talks with the British they would have done so. Jawaharlal informed a Chinese diplomat that he would accept the promise of Dominion Status on condition of a Chinese-American guarantee.2 Maulana Azad, the president of the party, proposed discussions as to the arrangements for the duration of the war with Roosevelt as arbiter, provided the Allies as a whole recognized India’s right to independence.3 This was very different to the proclaimed inflexibility of Gandhi and Jawaharlal, and was a virtual offer to renew talks on the basis of those with Cripps. Gandhi was at this time bitter with Azad,4 presumably for thinking on these lines, and wanted him to be removed from the presidency; but if Azad’s offer had led to anything, Jawaharlal would certainly, despite Gandhi, have followed it up.3 So hopeful was the United States mission in Delhi that, in Johnson’s absence, the officer in charge drafted a statement for Roosevelt’s approval guaranteeing India’s independence 'without prejudice to the principal elements in the national life of the country’ and offering to draw up an arrange¬ mentforaninterimGovernment.6 But nothingcameofthis, and so the Congress had, in Jawaharlal’s phrase, to plunge deliberately into the stormy ocean. The British Empire was a castle of cards, but its rulers would rather be knocked down, as in Burma, than allow their peoples to fight for their own freedom as well as that of others. India had no wi$h to be kicked about by either of the im¬ perialist powers, Britain and Japan, and to be able to deal effectively with the
1Report of JawaharlaTs interviews with Berry, 16 and 18 July 1942, Fonign Relations of tbi Untold Statis 1942, vol. 1, pp. 683-9.
*T. V. Soong’s conversation in State Department, reported by Sir R. Campbell1to Foreign Office, 12 August 1942, Transfir of Power, vol. 2, p. 674.
* Report of the U.S. Mission in Delhi, 21 July 1942. Fonign Rotations of tbi Untold Stalls 1942, vol. 1, p. 690.
4 Gandhi to Jawahaslal, 13 July 1942.
5See his letter to Sampurnanand, 28 July 1942, Sampuraanand papers.
*21 July 1942, Fonign Rilations oftba Untold Stalls 1942, vol. 1, pg». 690-94.
COLLISION COURSE
295
latter onehadtobeginby getting ridof the former.1 At Bombay the A1CC again appeakd to Britain and the United Nations to end British rule in India and promised explicitly to throw all the resources of a free India into the war. This freedom should be the prelude to the freedom of all other dependent peoples, and countriesoccupied by Japan should not be restored to their former masters. Gandhi was authorized to start a non-violent mass struggle on the widest' posable scale, a fight to the finish, but not immediately; and he announced that he would make every effort to see the Viceroy.
The War Cabinet had, even in June, authorized the Viceroy to take quick and decisive action whenever it seemed necessary;2 and in July Amery wanted to arrest Gandhi and the Working Committee as soon as its resolution had been passed.3 However, the Government of India derided that the best moment to strike would be immediately after the AICC had ratified the resolution.4 The Congress should then be decapitated by the arrest of its leaders and denial to them of access to their followers. The Cabinet wished Gandhi to be deported to Aden and the Working Committee to Nyasaland, and a warship stood by at Bombayforthispurpose. ButinIndiawisercounselprevailed. Deportationwould be an unnecessary provocation of Indian opinion, and it would be sufficient to intern Gandhi at the Aga Khan’s Palace in Poona, and the Working Com¬ mittee in Ahmadnagar fort. This place had been used previously for State prisoners,was approachable only by adrawbridge and was surrounded by amoat.
At 5 a.m. on 9 August, the police rounded up the leaders of the Congress in their homes. Aspecial traintook them first to a station outside Poona where Gandhi and his entourage were asked to alight. Just when the Working Com¬ mittee had agreed that the British knew how to do this sort jof thing well,5 there was a hitch. At Poona itself, where the train stopped contrary to sche¬ dule because a signal was against it, the crowd on the platform recognized Jawaharlal and ran towards him. When the police tried to stop them with a Jatbi-charge, Jawaharlal, ‘with remarkable agility’, jumped through the corridor windowonto theplatform. At least four policemen were required to overpower him andgethimbade into the train. Whenthey reached Ahmadnagar, thepolice officer apologized for what had happened and hoped that, as he had only been carrying out orders, Jawaharlal bore him no personal animosity. Jawaharlal assured him that he did not, but was still very angry over the latbi-charge.6
This was Jawaharial’s longest term in prison, for 1,040 days or over 34 months, from 9 August 1942 to 15 June 1945. The twelve members lived together till March 1945, when the Working Committee was split up and the
1 Speech et Bombay, 5 August, The Hindustan Timas, 6 August 1942.
’Discussion in War Cabinet, 15 June 1942, Tnnsfar of Power, vol. 2,'p. 208.
1Ameryto Churchill, 13 July 1942, ibid., voL 2, p. 376.
4 Telegram to Secretary of State, 16 July 1942, ibid., voL 2, pp. 394-5.
’Mira Behn, The Spirit’s PHgrimego (London, 19601, p. 240.
^Report of F.E. Sharp, Dy. I. G. of Police, Bombay, 10 August 1942, Home Dept. Pol. (I) File 3/21/42, vol. 42.
296
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
members sent to jails in their own provinces. Jawaharlal, with Pant and Narendra Deva, wasmoved to Naini, then to Bareilly ami then again to Aimora. For the first few days after their arrest, Gandhi and the Working Committee were cut off from any form of communication with the outside world. No letters, newspapers or interviews were permitted, and the public did not even know where these leaders had been interned. This policy was. later relaxed to the extent of allowing newspapers and two letters to, and four letters from, members of their families per week on strictly personal matters. This latter concession did not benefit Jawaharlal much, at the start, because his daughter ami sister Vijayalakshmi were both in U.P. prisons, and the U.P. Government, out of step with the central government for months, refused either to deliver letters from Jawaharlal which had been cleared by the Government of India or to forward, letters which Jawaharlal was entitled to receive.1 Later, the prisoners were allowed books, but, for fear that uncensored information would reach them, these books were scanned for invisible writing.2 After Jawaharlal and his colleagues had been for over two years in jail, in October 1944 the Governmentconsidered allowing interviews, but the prisoners of Ahmadnagar firmly refused them. After so many months of isolation, no interview for a few minutes could be satisfactory; and there was also a question of pride involved.
I do not fancy being treated like a wild beast in a cage with occasional rope allowed so that I can move a few feet if I behave myself. I dislike being the plaything of others and to have my movements and my emo¬ tional life regulated by others. Where force prevents me from acting as I wish, I have to accept it, but I prefer to retain such freedom of mind and action as I possess. If it has been thought fit and proper to prevent us from seeing even those one cares for during these 2 V4 years or so, well and good; anyway perforce I had to adapt myself to it. But I see no reason why I should adapt myself to all the new vagaries of those who keep us in prison or stabilize myself in new positions.3
So they met no one except the prison officials.
Theotherday, reading some of the old letters of Charles Lamb... I came
across acouple of lines. We have yet the sight, he said:
*
Of Sun and Moon and star, throughout the yeqr, ' and man and woman.
‘Home Department Pol. (I) File 3/21/42, vol. 42.
2See Under Secretary, Home Dept. Govt, of India to Additional Home Secretary, Bombay Govt., 29/30 September 1943. Home Dept. Pol. 3/21/42 Pol. 1 1942-3, vol. 2.
*To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 23 October 1944. **
COLLISION COURSE
297
Yes, I thought, we have yet the sight of the sun and the moon and stars, and yesterday was sharedpurmma. In the early dawn, when I wake up, I see Jupiter peeping over the roof of a building; It is still dark then but it is the signal for getting up. In the evening Venus appears as the Evening Star. The night sky is slowly changing over and putting on its winter appearance. We have sight of all these and they never lost their freshness. But of the men we see the range is limited and I fear we grow less and less fresh to each other. And women? It struck me as an odd arresting fact that for nearly 26 months — for 785 days to be exact — I had not seen a woman even from a distance. Previously it was not so for even in prisonwehad interviews occasionally. And I began to wonder — what are women like? How do they look — how do they talk and sit and walk?1
There was little to do or look forward to. Jawaharlal’s diary entries abound with trivia:
11 January 1943 30 January 1943
12 April 1943
13 April 1943 5 May 1944
14 May 1944 20 June 1944
Felt unwell
Sowed carnation seeds in box. New canvas shoes New canvas shoes
Rain — rain — continuous rain! The monsoon The cat tragedy! Poor Chando hit inadvertently over head by cook —concussion of the brain. Hovering between life and death Cat Chando died in hospital New canvas shoes
Forced into dose companionship, these Congress leaders, who had in commononly dedication to a common cause and acceptance of Gandhi’s leader¬ ship, frequently found themselves in heated discussion, and by the time of their release some were hardly on speaking terms. Isolation for so long a period, punctuated with reports of the deaths of those dear to them — Ranjit Pandit, Azad’s wife — added to the normal rigours of imprisonment. To tone down these frictions and fraying of nerves, Jawaharlal organized a regular commu¬ nity life. Duties were allotted to each person and rotated every week. He himself did more than his share, supervising the cooking, preparing salads, nursing the sick, organizing badminton and volley-ball and taking charge of the gardening. Tothe latter in particular he devoted, especially in the early months, a great deal of*time, for it gave him a certain psychological satisfaction by pro¬ viding activity for his hands and body at a time when his mind had of necessity toliefallow.‘Beforeyourise,heisinthegarden — sowing, digging arid planting and pruning) watering and weeding* In the hot sun with his hat on and in the
‘To Krishna Hutheesing, 3 October 1944, K. N. Hutheesing, Nobru’s Utfrs to bis Sistor (London, 1963), pp. 166*7. Sborodprnruimo is the night of the full moon in October.
298
JAWAHARLAL NSHfcU
pouring rain with his raincoat, he is here, there and elsewhere.’1 Towards the end of their term Patel collected seeds from the flowers and Jawaharlal sorted them out and presented a box containing a packet of each to every prisoner.
Of those with him in Ahmadnqgar,.Jawaharlal was closest to Azad, Asaf Ali, Syed Mahmud and Narendra Deva; but even from these he kept his dis¬ tance. With Mahmud he for some time shared a cell and nursed him when he was ill; but Jawaharlal was as startled as the rest when Mahmud secured his release by writing to the Viceroy disowning the Congress resolution. This no doubt drove Jawaharlal even more into himself; but with this inner solitude there came tranquillity. The dull routine of prison life became unimportant; the deprivations, though felt, were placed in perspective. When books and journals were allowed in, he had a fresh source of comfort, and on 13 April 1944 he took up again the writing of the book which he had begun at Dehra Dun jail in 1941. Less than five months later, on 7 September 1944, The Discovery ofIndia, running into a thousand hand-written pages, was finished.
This is a great jumble of a book which bears the marks of haste and tension. It is repetitive, has many long quotations and, if Jawaharlal had had time to revise it on his release, would probably have been reduced to nearly half its length. There are some autobiographical chapters, written mostly in 1941. The account of Kamala’s death is moving in its -subdued yet intense sense of loss, but this section as a whole does not rise to the level of the Autobiography, if only because it is more impersonal, and weak in the attractively self-conscious nature of the earlier work. The chapters on the war years blend into a general, scathing account of British rule in India. The severe criticism is not so much unfair as uncharacteristic of Jawaharlal; but, as he acknowledged, he could not, for the time at least, take a detached view of British imperialism and was filled with repugnance for England.
I have looked into my own mind from time to time and examined its almost involuntary reaction to events. I had always looked forward in the past to a visit to England, because I have many friends there and old memoriesdraw me. But now I found that there wasno such desire and the ideawasdistasteful. 1wanted tokeep as far away from England as possible, and Ihad nowish even to discuss India's problems with Englishmen. And then I remembered some friends and softened a little, and I told myself how wrong it was to judge a whole people in this way. I thought also of the terrible experiences that the English people had gone through in this war,ofthecontinuous strain inwhich they had lived, ofthe lossof somany of their loved ones. All this helped to tone down my feelings, but that basic reaction remained.2
*B. P. Sitaraxnayya, Faatbars and Stonas (Bombay, 1946), pp. 392*3. Sfearsnayya was om at the prisoners at Ahmednapar.
1 Tba Discovary of India, p. 495. %
COLLISION COURSE
299
However, the core of the book is a long survey of India’s culture before the coming of the British. The dmtrast with the Glimpses is striking. Jawahar- lal is no longer primarily interested in social and economic change, in action and great men, or in Marxist analysis of class struggles. ‘I have grown more contemplative. There is perhaps a little more poise and equilibrium, some sense of detachment, a greater calmness of spirit.’1 He had not sloughed off his Marxism but there was now in his thinking an appreciation of the Vedanta, its idealism and its ethics. India’s culture in particular engrossed bin? He was fascinated by its continuity and seeming vitality and staying power. There appeared to him to be an unbroken chain from Mohenjo-Daro, which political fortunes could not destroy, and the result was a mellowness and a of the Indian spirit, a desire and a capacity to live and let live, an absorption of every fresh intrusion of foreign elements to form a new synthesis, a unity and stability which could only be explained by India’s ‘depth of soul'. So, in an astonishingly narrow nationalist tradition, he put together a version of India's cultural history derived from secondary sources and studded with testimonials from European observers. It was not just the hurry and the atmosphere in which the book was written but the theme itself which led to woolly writing. All his ideas about race, for example, make little'sense.2 ‘We are an old race, or rather an odd mixture of many races, and our racial memories go back to the dawn of history’9 — just one of many meaningless sentences of which Jawaharlal himself would later have been ashamed^
Yet, if the book is lacking in analysis, elegance and dear thinking, it had a purpose. It sought to portray an emotional comprehension of Indian national* ism and to stress the necessity of revitalizing the Indian people. India’s past could be so depicted as to draw lessons for its future. Its continuity could only be explained by the fact that while the form often remained, the inner content was always changing* However, these sodal forms, like caste, had a limit of expansion and the result was a growing, strangling rigidity. Sodal conserv-, atism and poverty had been encouraged py alien rule and were the chief: characteristics of contemporary India; but if India became free and was true to herself, there was no cause for despair. The Discovery ofIndia, written in the dark years of Indian nationalism, carried not a predse, scientific argument but a buoyant message.