Agrarian Crisis
in the United Provinces
Jawaharlal’s speeches, immediately after the announcement of the settlement, were, somewhat to Gandhi's embarrassment,1 bellicose. Hecalled on Congress¬ men to retain the war mentality, for the time wa'fc sure to come when they would have to fight again; meanwhile, they should abide by the agreement which their leader had reached, and exploit it fully in such matters as picketing of liquor shops, manufacture of salt, boycott of foreign cloth and preaching of swadeshi.2 There was also scope for more important activity in the sensitive areas of Gujarat and the United Provinces, where the movement of 1930 had developed into rural no-rent campaigns. That in Gujarat had been the more successful, but it was also the more easily called off, for it had been primarily a political effort in a small area no larger than half a district in the U.P., with relatively well-to-do cultivators responding to the call of Gandhi and Vallabh- bhai Patel to pay nothing until the Government cancelled a summary enhance ment of the revenue. The authorities were forced to acknowledge that the assessment had been carelessly arrived at, and, after the settlement, the chief issues were the restoration of lands which had been confiscated and the re¬ instatement of officials who had been dismissed. But the situation was very different in the United Provinces. Here, between the Government and the cultivators, therewas an intermediate class of about 160,000 landlords, but the fragmentation of land was such that the vast majority of these landholders paid less than Rs 100 a year in land revenue. But if the landlords were for the most part impoverished, the condition of the tenants was relatively much worse. Pressure on land was continuously increasing, and rents paid by the tenants were enhanced far more rapidly than the revenue payable by the landowners to
1 See the Viceroy’s record of interview with Gandhi, 19 March 1931, Collected Works, vol. 43 (Delhi, 1971), p. 313. 2Speeches at Lucknow, 8 March, The Leader, 11 March 1931; Allahabad9 March, The Leader, 12 March *931; Bombay 13 March, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 March 1931.
134
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
1)3
the Government. Between 1900 and 1931 rents had increased by Rs 669 lakhs while land revenue had increased by only Rs 75 lakhs. Agricultural prices, already low by January 1930, fell by December by about 50 per cent and were lower than at any time since 1901; and the yieldwas not sufficient even to cover the rising costsofproduction, let alone to enable payment of rent. Added to this was a series of bad harvests since 1927. Nearly 40 per cent of the peasants and the poorer zamindars were sunk in debt. Two years after the agrarian riots of 1921, life tenure wasgiven statutory recognition in Avadh (Oudh), and a simi¬ lar statute was passed in 1926 in Agra. But this acceptance of tenancy right had its darker side, in that rents were stabilized at a time when they were high. But there were no occupancy rights in Avadh; conditions were slightly better in the Agra districts, but evictions were widespread throughout the province, the landlords being eager to evict occupancy tenants.
The agrarian question, therefore, in the United Provinces was much more an economic than a political one; and even after the truce of March 1931 there were many instances of landlords and the police acting together in evicting and harassing tenants in order to extract rents. Some villages were even reported to have been deserted by the inhabitant* out of fear.1 Jawaharlal was under the impression that while Gandhi had assured Irwin that even if he did not attend the Round Table Conference he would not resume civil disobedience so long as the Conference was sitting, he had made it clear that this assurance did not apply to any local economic struggle that might be forced upon the Congress.2 There is nothing to this effect In the official record but it is confirmed by implication; and it was explicitly stated in Gandhi’s later correspondence, in August, with the Government. So in March 1931, as the slump in prices con¬ tinued and even the rabi (spring! crop was a failure, the whole scope of the movement in the United Provinces was changed, as Gandhi described it,3 from one for non-payment of rent to one purely for seeking economic relief. Tenants were advised to pay what was possible, which in general appeared to be 50 per cent by occupancy tenants and 40 per cent by statutory tenants, provided the landlords gave receipts for the full amount. The Congress organizations in the tebsils acted as qgents of the peasants in negotiations with the landlords, and Jawaharlal met some senior officialsofthe U.P. Govern¬ ment, while the provincial Congress committee opened an office at Lucknow to deal with the Government and deputed Govind Ballabh Pant to be in charge.4
The Government, however, though they recognized the economic distress andrealized that therewasnothingobjectionable in the attitudeofthe Congress, feared that its mediation would strengthen its hold in the rural areas and refused
‘Jawaharlal to Jagdiah Praaad, ChiefSecretary UP., 11 March cod to Maharai Singh, Commis¬ sioner, Allahabad division, 9 April 1931.Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XVI and K.W. of 1931.
Mutobiagnpby, p. 299. 9
*Letter to a.—*«n«, Home Secretary, 23 March 1931, CoUoctsd Works, vol. 45, pp. 334-5. 4Afr*ri$»Ditknss tntbo XJnUtdProvinces, report of the UP. Coogrem Sub-Committee (Luck¬ now, 1931), p. 46.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
150
to recognize that the Congress had any role in this matter. It seemed to them more than a matter of prestige.
Jawaharlal and his school have of course a great influence locally, and there is no doubt that they have for a long time been bitten with the idea of making a kind of Soviet organization of peasant workers, which will first of all abolish the landlord and then possibly Sovietize Government. Theprocedurenowadopted is well chosen and difficult to meet. Congress announces that it is really a peasant trades union and cannot desert the tenant in his hour of stress. It no longer pursues the no-rent campaign as a political measure, but it demands the right to judge as between landlord and tenant and to decide what rent the latter can pay. The landlords are thoroughly unhappy, and we ourselves find it difficult to meet the new position without recourse to ordinances, which might break up the Delhi settlement.1
Knowing Gandhi’s keen desire to make the settlement a success, they sought to drive a wedge between him and Jawaharlal. In this they were not wholly un¬ successful. Emerson reported that Gandhi fully accepted the position that it was wrong to refer to the settlement as a truce* to talk about a future war, to refer to Government as an enemy and to exploit the settlement as a victory for Congress. ‘Hewas very loyal to Pandit Jawaharlal, but, Igathered, did not regard it as altogether improbable that he would take his own line sooner or later.’2 Gandhi, in fact, was frightened by the officials with the bogy of a class war being let loose by Jawaharlal. He liked the idea of Congress tebsil committees acting on behalf of the tenants, but disapproved of advice to withhold payment of rent even in part, the appointment of Congress tehsildars and attacks by tenants on zamindars.3 He even, to the Government’s delight, practically withdrew the claim of the Congress to be an intermediary between the Govern¬ ment and the people.4
Jawaharlal’s health at this time being on the verge of collapse, he had to take a holiday, and while he was in Sri Lanka and southern India, Gandhi was in chargeofthe U.P. problem. This appeared to be the chance for the Government to press home their advantage, and to get Gandhi to throw in his weight against his ‘wild men'.5 Hailey, back as Governor by the end of April after being present
1 To Sir Findlater Stewart of the Indian Office, 25 April 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 20. 3 Emerson’s report of his interview with Gandhi, 19 March 1931, CoUoetod Works, vol. 45, Appendix IX. 5 Emerson's report of his interview with Gandhi on 6 April 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XI of 1931. 4 Crerar, Home Member, to Hailey, 6 May 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 20. ’The phrase was that of Willingdon, the new Viceroy; letter to Haitey.*R9 April 1931, Hailey papers, vol.- 20.
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
137
in London for the Round Table Conference, was wiser than most other officials in Lucknow, and realized that the economic crisis was real and it would not do merely to coerce and harass the tenants to pay rents. Remissions of revenue of about Rs 67 lakhswen announced, with parallel reductions of rent for the rabi harvest of about Rs 220 lakhs. But, though in remitting revenue the Govern¬ ment went back to the level of 1901, rents were taken back only to the level of 1913-16, and the remission amounted to only about two annas in the rupee. If rents also had been pushed back to 1901, the talukdars% the traditional allies of the Government, would have lost heavily and the Government were not willing tocontemplate this. This was hardly adequate remission even for current rents — nothing was said about arrears or the kbarif (autumn) harvest — and many district officers and most of the zamindars pointed this out.1 Landlords were practically unable to collect any rent at all in Barabanki, Rae Bareli and parts of Lucknow and Pratabgarh districts; and the situation was not much better in parts of Agra, Meerut and Allahabad districts. But the U.P. Govern¬ ment were prepared at this stage to do no more. On the other hand, the Divi¬ sional Commissioners were ordered to provide police assistance to landlords in carrying out the ordinary processes of eviction and distraint.2 This seemed theonlywayof smashing the almost total hold which the Congress had acquired in some districts, and of retaining the loyalty of the talukdars. And the pretence of conciliation, however minimal, seemed a sufficient backdrop for talks with Gandhi.
The Home Secretary, Emerson, met Gandhi at Simla in the middle of May. Gandhi was not prepared to accept that the Congress had no right to intervene at all in the relations between the* Government and the tax-payer; even if it was not a recognized intermediary, it had a role to play as the poor man’s friend in advising him on rent matters. But he roundly condemned pressure being brought on landlords, direct appeals not to pay, the proposal of a general 50 per cent reduction of rent and any refusal to pay less than what was within the individual’s capacity. Hewas then invited to meet Hailey at Naini Tal to discuss details, andthe spectre was presented to him of tenants refusing to pay any rent and resorting to violence if pressed by landlords. When he suggested an inquiry into the exact pitch of rents so as to ascertain if payment was practical, Hailey replied that this would involve such a delay in collections that Government could not agree.3 The Governor was mo shrewd to press Gandhi to any precise commitment, but that Gandhi had been sufficiently won over was shown by the manifesto he issued immediately after the interview. Ignoring the resolution of the U.P. Political Conferencepassed a few weeks earlier that the rents should on no account exceed those prevailing at a time when agricultural prices were
tH«iky toCrerar, S May 1931. Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XI of 1931.
2 Chief Secretary's circular to Commissioners, 7 May 1931, ibiil.
> Emerson’s note of discussions with Gandhi, 13, 14, 13 and 16 May 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 33/IX of 1931; Hailey’s noteof discussions, 20 May 1931, Home Dq*. Pol. 33/XI cl 1931.
158
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
what they were at this time, Gandhi called upon the tenants to pay all the rent they could as early as possible, and in no case less than 8 annas in the rupee in the case of statutory and non-occupancy tenants and 12 annas in the case of occupancy tenants — more than what the U.P. Congress had recommended. He added that the tenants should certainly not listen to advice to pay no rent at all or resort to violence.1
Fortified by Gandhi’s half-hearted support of the kisans, the Government now forced the pace and, without openly denouncing the settlement, set about breaking up the alliance of the U.P. Congress and the tenantry as well as the Congress organization in the countryside. If the Congress built up an influence in the rural areas such as they already had in the towns, in any future campaign of civil disobedience they would have the whole population behind them; and serious as Bardoli had been, it would appear insignificant compared to any no-rent campaign which might develop, encompassing the whole of the United Provinces. Administration would practicallycome to an end, it would be impos¬ sible to maintain law and order or even a semblance ofgovernment, and right in the heartof India 49 million people would be entirely out of hand. That was why it seemed important to Hailey and other perceptive officials not only to destroy the potential of the Congress in the countryside but to ride Gandhi off the United Provinces. This was doubtless one major reason why the Government were anxious that Gandhi should have no opportunity for reconsidering his position and should be encouraged to attend the Round Table Conference in London.
It is, I think, the mercy of Heaven that they have concentrated on a tehsil in Bombay when they might have been playing havoc with six or seven million tenants in the United Provinces. I do not mean that all of them are thoroughly discontented, but there is quite enough rack-renting and bullying by landlords in some of the districts to make a very fine field for agitation. Jawahar Lai and his friends have done and are doing their best, butof course they lack the halo which surrounds the unprepossessing poll of the Mahatma. 2
So when Jawaharlal came back to the U.P. in the middle of June, he found the situation and atmosphere much worse than in March. The talukdars were terrorizing the peasants with the help of the police, Congress volunteers were being beaten up in many places, and even activity such as peaceful picketing, permitted by the settlement, was in places banned by overenthusiastic district authorities. Jawaharlal had no intention of submitting meekly to this, despite letters from Gandhi,3 seen in the mail by the authorities, deploring the element
1 23 Mct 1931. *
> Hailey to Haig, 10 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22.
*20 and 24 June 1931.
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
159
of violence in the Congress ranks and urging him not to break any law himself but to seek an interview with the Governor or with Emerson. ‘On your side’, Gandhi wrote to a U.P. Congressman,1 ‘it is all well, so long as you hold the kisans in check. But Jawaharlal’s presence must now ease the situation. He has no difficulty in dealing with the kisans and restraining them.’ As much in reply to Gandhi as to the Government, Jawaharlal said that the Government were breaking the truce and using the zamindars to crush the kisans, and the Con¬ gress would have to take drastic action in reply. Talukdars who preferred to bask in official sunshine rather than to be on friendly terms with their tenants had no place in India, and those who were guilty of oppression would have to answer for it before the nation.2
Jawaharlal was too loyal to Gandhi to accept, even to himself, that his leader was weakening their case, and he dutifully sought an interview with Hailey, which, however, was not granted. But he took the view that what Gandhi had asked the tenants to pay was not the minimum but the maximum and this need not be paid if it entailed debt and sale of cattle and ploughs, or if the kisans were ill-treated.3 The U.P. Congress set up commissions of inquiry to visit the districts and ascertain details of official and zamindari repression. For their part, the U.P. Government claimed that they were prepared to grant no further remissions and were even willing to consider the arrest and prosecution of Jawaharlal for his support of the tenants or even for organization, of peaceful picketing in Allahabad.4 It is difficult to believe that Hailey, who was perhaps the shrewdestof hisgeneration ofcivil servants in India, was serious about this, and it was probably intended to keep the' Government of India, of which in Willingdon’s time he had no high opinion,3 from making any concession on the U.P. to Gandhi. For such a stupid step as the arrest of Jawaharlal would clearly have served to push Gandhi too far. However keen he might have been, as the authorities at Simla thought, to maintain the settlement and proceed to London hecould hardly have done so with one of his chief lieutenants in prison; and anopen warwith the Congress at this stagecould hardly havebeen of advan¬ tage to the Government. But fortunately, from their viewpoint, Jawaharlal left the U.P. to attend a meeting of the Working Committee and then accompanied Gandhi to Simla. There Gandhi suggested to the Viceroy and his officials that the district authorities should fix the amount of revenue and rent to be collected after consultation with Congress workers, but if this were not acceptable to the Government, at leastadetailed inquiry to enable temporary adjustments should be ordered. The Government of India were williug to consider this, but it was veotedbytheU.P. Government Jawaharlal also,onthisoccasion, met anumber
*ToMohanlal Sauna, 13 June 1931, Colltct§d"Works, vol. 46 (Delhi, 1971), p. 384. a SpeechesatDelhi,22June,TkrBombtyCkronkU, 29June 1931 andatLucknow 26June 1931. sSpeeche* at ReeBareli, 23 June, Tb»L$ad$r, 3 JulyandSoram 5 July, Tbt Pionctr, 3 July 1931. «ChiefSecretaryUJP. toHomeSecretary, 30 June and 2 July, and Governor's telegram toHome Member, 20July 1931.Home Dept. Pol. 33/XVI end K.W. 1931.
3 See Hailey to Dawaoa, 7 June, and to Findlater Stewart, 13 June 1931, Hailey paper!, vol. 21.
160
JAWAHAJRLAL NEHRU
of official including the Viceroy. ‘Jawaralalal [sic] I also saw for a short time, quite a nice man to talk to, much more practical than G.’, recorded Willingdon with silly condescension.1
Jawaharlal’s serious conversations were with Emerson, who.was impressed by his genuine concern about the economic depression, which was limiting opportunities for constructive work and social reform. He made no secret of the fact that landlords had no place in his scheme of things, but he intended to buy them out rather than confiscate their estates, and even this only when the Congress party came constitutionally into power, and not as the result of a peasants’ revolt. In the U.P., he said, the Congress was acting merely as the organization of the kisans and advising them on what rents they should pay or none at all. Indeed, according to Emerson himself, it was he who took the offen¬ sive in these discussions and Jawaharlal whowas moderate. Emerson contended that the Government would never have concluded the settlement if they had had any idea of the agrarian programme which the Congress would undertake in the U.P. and, when asked by Jawaharlal what the Congress should do if the kisans came to them with their grievances, replied naively that the Congress should refuse to intervene. Pressed by Jawaharlal as to what he would say if a peasant who had been evicted wished to till hisjand rather than leave it fallow, Emerson seems to have replied that he would sdhply refuse to answer him. Obviously this was not going to convince Jawaharlal or deflect him from his line of action, but it was dear that he was no hot-headed revolutionary.
He was not prepared to admit that Congress activities had generally been objectionable, but was less uncompromising in this matter than Mr. Gandhi... The Pandit seemed to me to appredate more dearly than Mr. Gandhi the complexity of the problem, and while of course he was naturally anxious to get from the local Government some concession in regard to existing collections, he probably realised that this was imprac ticable. Hewas moreconcerned with a permanent solution or, at any rate, alleviation. 2
In a sense, of course, these conversations were unreal, because both Jawahar¬ lal and Emerson were perceptive enough to see that, whatever the short-term bargains and haggles, there could be no final settlement between an imperialist Government and a Congress committed to independence. As Emerson recog¬ nized, even ifGandhigave a hint to Jawaharlal to slow down Congress activities in the U.P. and even if Jawaharlal wished to do so, drcumstances would
‘To Hailey, 22 July 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 21. That Willingdon could often (and not just on this occasion) get Jawaharlal’iname wrong is but ooe Indication of his general flippancy and light¬ heartedness in public affair*.
3 Emerson’s note on discussions with Jawaharlal, 19 and 20 July 1931, Home Dept., Pol. 33/23 of 193l/JawahariaT*account(though the officials ate not named)is to be*iound in Autobiography, pp. 284 and 303.
15 Jawaharlal, 1929
Hi /V procession in Madras, 1928, supporting a boycott of the Simon Commission
17 fawaharlal and Kamala leading a procession against the Salt 'lax in Allahabad, 1930
18 Police disperse < rowels on the Wadala Salt Pans, 1930
r
19 Followers of Gandhi in prison at Vcravda. near Poona, 1930
I
%
r
\
20 An election in Bombay, ( 1930; some of the demonstrators clashing with police

agrarian crisis in the united provinces
161
probably prove too strong for him. On return to Lucknow Jawaharlal met the Chief Secretary and urged that as the season for collection of rents was over and tenants had already paid 9 to 12 annas or more in the rupee, further collec¬ tions should be suspended and coercive processes stopped. This would immedi¬ ately relieve the tension and produce the proper atmosphere for an inquiry into future adjustments. But the Government, on the plea that rents had earlier been deliberately withheld, insisted that the process of collection should continue longer than in normal years. So evictions continued, and attempts were made to secure new tenants for these holdings. Congressmen in particular were penalized for taking an interest in these matters, and such tenants as declared themselves against the Congress were given special remissions.1
Jawaharlal, supported by Tassaduq Sherwani, himself a zamindar and president of the U.P. Congress committee, and Pandit Malaviya, by no stretch of the imagination a radical, reported all this to Gandhi, who sought clarifica* tion from Hailey and received a soft but evasive answer. Gandhi made no speci¬ ficdemands, Hailey was only too anxious to keep the U.P. in the background of controversy, and the Working Committee was not keen to have a breakdown of the settlement and the cancellation of Gandhi’s journey to London on such an explosive, dass-ridden issue.2 It was Bardoli and coercive processes there which the Committee put in the forefront, and Jawaharlal did not embarrass it by making the U.P. crisis a test case. Asked by Gandhi for a definite answer as to whether he should dedine to attend the Conference because of the U.P., Jawaharlal and his colleagues from the province replied that although there were sufficient instances in the U.P. of a breach of the truce, they would tty to see that conditions improved and they did not want the U.P. to stand in the way of Gandhi going to London;3 For Jawaharlal realized that though he himself favoured the abolition oflandlordism, his colleagues in theWorking Committee (not exduding Gandhi) were unwilling to recognize, whatever their theoretical commitments in earlier resolutions, even the possibility of marked sodal and economic change. The crisis in the U.P. was real enough, and conservatives like Sherwani and Malaviya could not shut their eyes to it; but the Congress leaders from other parts of India had no wish to take up a problem which might open the door to unpredictable forces, and preferred to confront the Govern¬ menton the saferground of Gujarat. On this, however, a last-minute agreement was reached, and Gandhi sailed for England, leaving Jawaharlal to deal with the U.P.
Indeed, even before Gandhi’s departure, Jawaharlal appears to have decided that on the U.P. problem his guidance was unsafe. The U.P. Government set
*jawaharlal's tetters to Jagdish Prasad, 29 and 30 July and 1 August 1931, AICC File G. 118 of 1931 and 31 July 1931, AICC Fife G40(KW)(Ui) of 1931; report of UP. Government for the second half of July 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 18/7/31.
aSee Puraahottam Das Tendon's comments on the Working Committee meeting, Tbg Ltadtr,
9 August 1931.
*JawaharlaTs speech at Allahabad, 20 August, Tbt Ltadtr, 22 August 1931.
t)AWAHARLAL ATHRU
162
up a committee to consider future agrarian policy and invited Govind Ballabh Pant to serve on it. Gandhi, when consulted, advised that Pant should agree, but his advice was ignored and Pant declined to serve till he had received the approval of the U.P. Congress committee.1 Clearly Jawaharlalk normal and ostentatious loyalty to his leader did not now exclude an occasional exercise of quiet defiance. The official committee recommended a complicated system of reduction of rents on the basis of the fall in prices, but never more than 50 per cent and never below the average rentals for 1901-05. They would also not be reduced if their rise could beshown to be the result of causes other than the rise in prices, such as irrigation or the use of improved seeds.2 The Government accepted this recommendation, which would result in a reduction of Rs 4.1 crores^outof a total cash rental of Rs 18 crores. But the actual implementation of this cumbrous scheme depended on a host of minor revenue officials, sus¬ ceptible to local pressures and the influence of zamindars. Evictions, issue of processes and arrests of Congressmen continued as before, though ‘more quietly and without fuss’.4 There were about 5,000 evictions in Allahabad district alone, while in Muttra district over 2,000 processes were issued in August. There were more ejectments, sales of property and cases and convictions of ejected tenants for trespass in the ten months from October 1930 to July 1931 than in the twelve months of the previous revenue years 1928-29 and 1929-30.5 Officials both at Simla and at Naini Tal counselled Jawaharlal to be patient and give them time to reinstate the tenants,6 but in fact there was never any intention of doing so. The argument that there should be no evictions for non¬ payment of rent was regarded by the U.P. Government as untenable and tanta¬ mount to granting proprietary rights to the tenants.7 They were prepared, on the other hand, for any organization by Jawaharlal of defensive direct action — that is, civil disobedience — in the last resort, a course which the Congress had madeknown to the Government that it kept open to itself.8 So, although at this time the Central Government adopted a posture of friendliness and seemed to wish to strengthen the efforts of the Congress to maintain the settlement, 9
the U.P. Government did not even pretend to do so. Gandhi’s suggestion10 to
*
1 See Jawaharlal's telegram to Gandhi and Gandhi’s reply, 15 August 1931.
2 Letter of Revenue Secretary U.P. to district officers, 24 August 1931, The Leader, 12 October 1931.
5A crore is ten millions, or one hundred lakhs.
4 Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 1 September 1931 -
5 See table on p. 163: enclosure to letter from Chief Secretary, U.P. to Home Secretary, Govern¬ ment of India, 26 October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
* See Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 5 September 1931-
7 Fortnightly report of the U.P. Government for the second half of August 1931, Home Dept.
Pol 18/8/31.
* Jawaharlal’s interview in The Bombay Chronicle, 31 August 1931, and circular to provincial Congress committees, 31 August 1931, A1CC File P-1/1931.
* E.C. Midville, Private Secretary to Viceroy, to Jawaharlal, 28 August 1931, AICC File G7/19&.
<o Letter, 28 August 1931.
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
163
Statement showing ejectments etc. in the United Provinces
Revenueyear 1928-29 (1 October 1928 to 30 September 1929)
Revenueyear Revenueyear
1929-30 1930-31
(1 October 1929 (1 October 1930 to 30 September to 31 July 1931) 1930)
(1) Number of arrears of rent suits
271,919
340,249
288,465
(2) Number of ejectments ordered for arrears
42,280
53,421
64,076
(3) Area from which eject¬ ment actually took place (in acres)
117,517.874
149,071.254
189,362.960
(4) Number of applica¬ tions for surrender or relinquishment
25,182
26,188
94,800
(5) Number of cases in which property was actually sold after distraint
8,880
10,897
13,337
(6) Number of cases under Section 447, Indian Penal Gode, against ejected tenants for re¬ entering or attempting to reenter their hold¬ ings, and number of convictions, vide Sec¬ tion 95 of the Agra Tenancy Act
Cases
818
982
1,054
Gonvictions
284
267
345
Hailey to send for Jawaharlal was coldly ignored. It was not that an open con¬ frontation with the Congress was desired, but the hope was that if Jawaharlal and the U.P. Congress were pushed to extreme courses, in Gandhi’s absence Jawaharlal's rivals, who had no wish to revive civil disobedience, might gain the upper hand, and the organization itself might split up.1
Sensing that the Government of India were, at least as far as the U.P. was concerned, at this time less belligerent than the Local Government, Jawaharlal
1 Hailey to Frank Brown, 9 August, and to Gen. Shea, 29 August 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 21.
164
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
got Patel, as president of the Congress, to write to them to intervene.1 But nothing happened, and meantime the general attitude of the Government of India also stiffened. There were shooting outrages at Hijli detention camp in Bengal, the salt concession in the whole area covered by the Salt Range in Shah- pur district in the Punjab was withdrawn, and Congressmen were arrested in large numbers in that province. In the U.P. itself, evictions and harassments continued, and men and women were beaten up for the recovery of such petty arrears as two or five rupees.2 Yet, under Jawaharlal’s guidance, the U.P. Congress committee did not consider the request of the Rae Bareli district committee for permission to start civil disobedience, but instead called on all its branches to refrain from any such action for the time being.3 The committee appointed by the U.P. Congress to inquire into the agrarian situation, which also reported at this time, publicly denied that the Congress was opposed to the zamindars or wished to countenance a class war.4 Jawaharlal had no wish to embarrass Gandhi in London or his colleagues in the Working Committee; nor was the organization on a war footing.
Touring the district, Jawaharlal found the conditions varied, depending on the particular attitudes of the local officials. He was more interested in ascer¬ taining the facts than in exploiting them. Even the U.P. Government conceded that his speeches were less open to objection than usual*.3 But, on the whole, the situation was grim. The kisans, losing all hope of redress from the Govern¬ ment or the Congress, were desperately raising money to avoid eviction and the loss of their crops. They sold their cattle, dumped their grain on the markets thus further reducing its price, and borrowed from moneylenders and paid not only the current rent in full but often some arrears and heavy costs. Thosewho had been evicted paid very muchmore to recover their land than if they had paid the full rent without any remission at the start, and in the process they lost their occupancy rights and became life tenants.6 Moreover, these direct transactions were regarded by the authorities as mutual arrangements between the landlords and the tenants which dispensed with the need for remissions. To deter Jawaharlal from visiting villages in Gonda district, where there were serious allegations of harassment, ditches were dug across the road; and in Bahraich district, to prevent attendance at Jawaharlal’s meetings, the kisans were directed to stay in their villages on the particular dates to receive their remis¬ sion slips.7 In many districts the peasants were informed that these remissions
* Patel to Emerson, 15 September 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
2Jawaharlal to V.N. Mehta, Commissioiier, Allahabad Division, 23 September 1931, AICC
File G40(KW)(iii)/1931.
J The Leader, 23 September 1931.
*Agrarian Distress in the United Provinces, pp. 49-50.
’Fortnightly report of U.P. Government for the first half of October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 18/10/31^ *
^Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 16 October 1931.
iTbe Leader, 14 October 1931.
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
163
would be cancelled if the rent for the current kharifctop was withheld for over a month. It was only when rent had been fully paid, moreover, that any objec¬ tions of the tenant regarding the rent would be considered. But it was obvious that money once paid would never be returned, and dearly the purpose was to terrorize the peasant into paying all he could. In Allahabad district, the popula¬ tion had increased over the years, while the cultivated area had dedined, so that the pressure on holdings, already uneconomic, was acute. The kharifcrop was also wdl bdow average because of untimdy rains. But heedless of these con¬ siderations, as well as of the public opinion to which the district was exposed, the Collector, R.F. Mudie, granted remissions for 1931 of only Rs 9.3 lakhs, out of a total cash rental of Rs 37 lakhs for both the kharif and rabi crops, as against Rs 11 lakhs in 1930 for the rabi crop only,1 on the ground that there were a large number of occupancy tenants whose rents had not been raised in recentyears. TheCollectoralsocontended that therentaldemand in 1913-16 had been the same as in 1901, the base year selected by the U.P. Government, and on this wrong premiss, assumed without checking or publishing the figures, further reduced the remissions.2 So the remissions were only 17 per cent or 2 annas 7 pies3 in the rupee, although the prices of cereals had fallen by 33 per cent, and grain formerly worth a rupee was now worth only seven annas.
Jawaharlal was at last forced to contemplate a no-rent campaign. ‘Thus the outlook for the tenant’, he wrote to the Chief Secretary, ‘is about as black as it could wdl be and there seems no way out. If the Government policy is enforced he is doomed to even greater suffering than he has passed through. We have been anxiously considering this and the Allahabad District Congress Gommittee have felt that they can be no parties to this continuous oppression of the kisan leading to his economic death.’ So it might become necessary to advise the tenantry to withhold payment of rent till a satisfactory solution was found. Though they did not wish to take any decision, involving such far-reaching consequences, without the fullest consultation, there seemed no other way. But they were convening a representative kisan conference to consider this question, and also communicating with the provincial and the All-India Congress.
I regretgready that such a step should be contemplated by them, specially at a time when Gandhiji is attending the Round Table Conference. But the question of payment or non-payment is an urgent issue and cannot await the deliberations of the Round Table Conference or the return of Gandhiji. We have tried to avoid raising any issue which might lead to
iThough for 1930 the U.P. Government had sanctioned remissions of Rs 12.3 lakhs, the Col¬ lector granted only Rs 11 lakhs.
•Press interview ofCollector of Allahabad, 140ctober, Tb*L**d»r, 16 October 1931; Jawahar lad to Jagdiah Prasad, 13 October 1931 (two letters), AICC File 34, Part 1II/1931. |
•A pie was one-twelfth of an anna.
166
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
friction and we shall continue to do so. But the fates seem to be against
this.1
Jawaharlal also brought the crisis to the notice of the Viceroy and of Gandhi. The Government of India merely referred his letter to the U.P. Government, whileGandhi authorized Jawaharlal to do as he thought fit.2 Both the Allahabad district committee and the kisan conference recommended the cessation of pay¬ ment of rents,3 ‘It is war,’ Jawaharlal was reported as having said, ‘war now and ever till the end ofour lives. ’4 What exasperated him as much as tenancy wrong in the U.P. was the shabby treatment to which Gandhi was being exposed in London.
By now the Government of India were ptepared for a fight. ‘Jawarlalal [sic] seems to be on the warpath again and Gandhi’s last speech when he evidently lost his temper and let himself go makes one feel one will be busy again ere long’.3 But at this stage it was the U.P. Government that hung back. Hailey felt that Jawaharlal was bluffing, and that the telegraphic correspondence with Gandhi was as much meant for the official censor as for themselves.6 Yet the Governor was not willing to call the bluff. Mudie was transferred from Allaha¬ bad, an error in his calculation of the remissions was acknowledged and a further one lakh was sanctioned, and the Congress leaders were invited to a discussion with the officials concerned. This enabled the Working Committee to postpone a firm decision and refer the recommendation of the district committee to the U.P. committee, with the final approval or veto of a no-rent campaign vesting in the president, Patel.7
The talks, however, came to nothing, the official side refusing to discuss the proposals of the Congress for further rental reductions, cancellation of arrears, revocation of ejectments and lowering of interest on money owed to money¬ lenders. Any modifications of the decisions already announced were regarded as impracticable, and nothing more than further information about present policy wasoffered.8 The U.P. Congress committee, still reluctant to have a con¬ frontation in which the tenants would obviously suffer most, offered to renew negotiations.9 But there was not even a remote chance of these succeeding, for the authorities were determined to yield no ground; the only question for them
1Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 15 October 1931, AICC File 54, Part 111/1931.
2 Jawaharlal to E. C. Midville, P.S.V., 16 October 1931 and Emerson to Jagdish Prasad, 21 October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 33/36 of 1931; Jawaharlal’s cable to Gandhi, 16 October 1931, and Gandhi's reply, 19 October 1931.
2 Tba Leader, 19 and 25 October 1931.
4 The Tribune, 25 October 1931.
2 Willingdon to Hailey, 22 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22.
6 Hailey to Crerar, 24 October, and to Stewart, 28 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22; Jagdish Prasad toEmerson, 26 October 1931.Home Dept, PoL 33/36of 1931.
2 29 October 1931, The Leader, 31 October 1931. *
•Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 3 November 1931, AICC File G/25 of 1931; Hailey to Crerar. 9 November 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
’T. A. K. Sherwani toChief Secretary, 3 November 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES
167
was whether the charade of discussion should be gone through. The Central and Local Governments believed that this would have the advantageofstrength¬ ening the forces within the Congress against Jawaharlal.
As you say in your letter, Jawaharlal himself is probably in favour of an immediate declaration of Civil Disobedience if he can get sufficient sup¬ port from other Congress leaders. He has always objected to the Delhi pact; he is clearly disgusted that Congress ever consented .to appear at the Round Table Conference; and he is of course inordinately vain and desirous of attracting to himself the limelight which has hitherto shone on Gandhi and to a certain extent on Patel.1
In fact, this assessment was inaccurate as well as prejudiced. Jawaharlal was as disinclined as any other Congress leader to start a no-rent movement, primarily because of the absence of Gandhi. He now, unlike in 1921, understood the basic nature of the peasant problem; he knew that it was a part of the class war; but he preferred to project it as an aspect of the struggle against the British, and even in this he sought to avoid battle. But the option was being gradually re moved. The Government expressed their willingness to parley, but made it clear that there would be no reconsideration of principles. Meantime, collec¬ tions for the current season were due to commence on 15 November, and the U.P. Congress committee, with the authorization of Patel, directed the kisans of Allahabad district to withhold payment of rent and revenue while negotia¬ tions were pending.2
There was logic in this, for it was pointless to pay rent and revenue while the whole question of the quantum was under discussion. But the Government utilized this resolution to call off the discussions. Indeed, the Government of India, in Hailey’s words, ‘took fire’3 and wanted him to move against the Congress with all his forces and without dday. The Congress and its affiliated bodies should be outlawed, the Instigation Ordinance re-promulgated and the leaders arrested.4 With the Conservatives back in power in Britain and the second Round Table Conference a failure, the Government of India had dearly dedded to turn their backs on Irwin’s settlement; and the harsh Bengal Ordi¬ nance and the drastic policy favoured in the U.P. were both parts of a general return to a policy of repression. Willingdon and Emerson went to Lucknow to speed up matters, but Hailey refused to be hustled. The Round Table Confer¬ ence had still a fortnight to run, the payment of rents had been ddayed by late rains and would not starton any large scale until 1 December, and the Congress had served no clear-cut challenge. So, in the U.P. at any rate, there continued
‘Hailey to Crerar, 9 November 1931, ibid.
*7*Ae Ltadtr, 18 November 1931.
•To de Montmorency, 3 December 1931, Hailey paper*, vol. 22.
4Crerar to Hailey, 16 November 1931, Home Dept. PoL File 33/36 of 1931.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
whatJawaharlal described as an impossible situation. ‘Peace we can understand and war we are not unused to, but this hybrid state we cannot understand. 1 The Congress had received private information from Delhi that the Government of India were spoiling for a fight,2 but yet there was no action in*the U.P.
Qearly, however, this was only a temporary lull. The days of the truce were obviously numbered, and Jawaharlal and his colleagues braced themselves for the struggle which they had sought so hard to postpone. ‘If we are to die, we shall die after a fight. I do not want a'half-way settlement or a half-way fight.’3 Heexpected to be arrested within a few days, and had no hope of seeing Gandhi on his return.4 Indeed, the Pioneer, which had access to official sources, referred to the possibility of deportations,5 and Willingdon would certainly have done this if he could. 'One thing I do regret very much in all this business and that is we have no power of deportation out of India. It would be an enor¬ mous advantage if we can take hold of 15 or 20 of these leaders, send them right away to the West Indies or somewhere instead of having to keep them under surveillance in some Province or other.’6
On 6 December the district Congress committees in Rae Bareli, Btawah, Kanpur and Unao, in addition to Allahabad, were authorized to commence their no-rent campaigns.7 Payment of rent in these districts came to an almost complete standstill,8 other districts were also lining up, and it was clear that once the movement started it would spread throughout the province. The U.P. Government secured the permission of the Government of India to arrest Jawaharlal if he toured any of these districts.9 However, though Jawaharlal did visit some of these districts, nothing was done. Hailey knew that his case was weak and, despite the impatience of the authorities at Simla, remained ‘cold-footed’.10 Unlike in the previous year, this no-rent campaign had no obvious political overtones and was motivated, and justified, by economic causes. In many European countries there would have been hesitation in pena¬ lizing such agitation, and repressive action would alienate moderate opinion in India and abroad. Nor, unlike the Government of India, did he now believe that the Congress under Jawaharlal was determined to force the issue in Gandhi's absence. ‘It is not unlikely that the Congress really desire to wait till
‘Speech at Calcutta, 17 November, The Tribunt, 19 November 1931.
1 Autobiography, p. 309.
3 Speech at the kisan conference at Allahabad, 23 November, The Leader, 27 November 1931.
« ToPatel, 26 November 1931, AICC FileG 60 of 1931; to Syed Mahmud, 27 November 1931.
5 27 November 1931.
4 Willingdon to Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State, 13 December 1931, Templewood papers,, I.O.L. Mss, Eur. E. 240, vol. 3.
7 The Bombay Chronicle, 7 December 1931.
■Fortnightly Report of U.P. Government for the first half of December 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 18/12/31.
9U. P. Government's telegram and reply of Government of India, 7 December 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
>oTo de Montmorency, 3 December 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22.
/
AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 169
Gandhi’s return before precipitating matters.’1 So, to strengthen their case, the U. P. Government lowered the water rates, introduced a bill to secure tenants from eviction if they paid two-thirds of the arrears due for the pre¬ vious fouryears, and offered to consider immediate measures to protect tenants against debts which had become overdue owing to the fall in prices.
Then, at last, Hailey decided to strike. What ultimately determined his action was not so much the spurring from Simla as the fear that the situation might slip out of control and if Gandhi, on his return, decided to support the agitation, norentor revenue at all could be collected.2 Even then, he toned down the Ordinance drafted by the Government of India3 and issued it together with what was really a long apologia. It was contended that the Congress had utilized the economic crisis to increase its following among the kisans, that the spirit of the truce had never been respected and that Jawaharlal had preached class warfare.4 Under the Ordinance which, even as modified, was drastic enough, action was now taken against Congressmen. Notices were served on Jawaharlal and other leaders prohibiting them from speaking or writing in support of the campaign; and Anand Bhawan, along with many Congress offices, was searched. Jawaharlal’s own arrest was delayed because he was away on tour in Bombay and the Karnatak.
Even at this stage, the Congress was in no mood for a general campaign of civil disobedience. The Secretary of State, Sir Samuel Hoare, found Gandhi in London as well disposed as could be expected. He contemplated no imme¬ diate general renewal of civil disobedience, and promised before taking any such step to communicate with Hoare and Willingdon — 'the satisfactoiy part about the interview was the genuine friendliness of the old man.’5 In Bombay, Patel, the Congress president, publicly offered to let any impartial judge, or even Irwin, decide as to which party had broken the settlement, and Jawaharlal suggested an inquiry by any Indian or European judge appointed by the Govern¬ ment.6 On his return to Allahabad Jawaharlal was served with a notice not to leave the city without official permission and the U. P. Provincial Conference, scheduled to be held on 26 December, was banned. Still the Congress struggled to avoid battle, and postponed the conference.7 But Jawaharlal himself was arrested on 26 December for violating the order restricting him to Allahabad. The local magistrate had thought that this restriction had merely been to
fortnightly report of U.P. Government for the second half of November 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 18/11/31.
aHailey to Verney Lovett, 14 December 1931, and to Irwin, 2 January 1932, Hailey papers, vols. 22 and 23, respectively.
’Hailey to Emerson, 11 December 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931.
Statement issued by the U.P. Government, 14 December 1931.
’HoaretoWillingdon, telegram 7 December and letter, 10 December 1931, Templewood papers, Box 11 and vol. 1, respectively.
Speeches at Bombay, 13 December, The Bombay CbronieU, 16 December 1931.
7Tba Leader, 25 December 1931.
170
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
prevent Jawaharlal’s furtherance of the no-tax agitation in his home province, and had informed the Government that he was willing to allow Jawaharlal to proceed to Bombay if informed of this by Jawaharlal.1 Though Jawaharlal gave no formal notice of this, it was known that he was leaving Allahabad in order to welcome Gandhi on his return from London and not to promote the no-rent campaign; but the U.P. Government ordered his arrest. He was arrested and taken off the train at Iradatnagar station, and sentenced a week later to two years’ imprisonment. He was also fined Rs 500, and for realizing this amount a car registered in the name of his daughter was attached.
The arrest of Jawaharlal soon appeared as not just a provincial matter but partofageneral offensive against the Congress. Willingdon and his Government believed that Irwin had made an error in negotiating with the Congress and signing a truce, and they had no intention of repeating it. The Viceroy was ‘perfectly clear as I have always been that Gandhi is a sort of Jekyll and Hyde, and while he may possibly have his saint-like side, on the other he is the most Machiavellian bargaining little political humbug I have ever come across.’2 When Gandhi sought an interview with the Viceroy, he was asked first to repudiate his colleagues and to agree not to discuss Bengal, the U. P. and the North-West Frontier, where also a number of stern ordinances had been imposed and Abdul Gaffar Khan arrested. These were terms which Gandhi obviously could not, and was not expected to, accept; and when the Working Committee decided on a resumption of civil disobedience, Gandhi, Patel and other leading Congressmen were arrested. The ‘shock tactics’3 of the Govern¬ ment of India surprised almost everybody. The Secretary of State was dot too happy but supported the man on the spot,4 who, on his own admission, was ‘becoming a sort of Mussolini in India’.9 This time, however long it might take, the back of the Congress was to be broken. ‘We can, in my opinion,’ wrote the Home Member after twelve months of repression,’ do without the goodwill of Congress, and in fact I do not believe for a moment that we shall ever have it, but we cannot afford to do without the confidence of those who have supported us during the long struggle against the Congress.’6 So the policy of seeking to destroy the nationalist movement was to be continued, and Jawaharlal would obviously remain one of its prime targets. His ambition
‘Fortnightly report of the U.P. Government for the second half of December 1931, Home Dept. File No. 18/12/31 Poll.
2Willingdon to Hoare, 10 January 1932, Templewood papers, vol. 3.
’Hailey to de Montmorency, 17 January 1932, Hailey papers, vol. 23. Surprisingly, however, even a friend of the Congress-like Edward Thompson at this time supported Government policy. ‘But Congress last December was an insolent and intolerant faction.' A LttUrfront India (London, 1932), p. 41.
4 Home to Willipgdon, 31 December 1931 and 8 January 1932, Templewood papers vol. 1. ’Willingdon to Hoare, 26 December 1931, Templewood papers, vol. 3.
‘Note oFH. G. Haig, Home Member, 28 December 1932, Home Dept Pei File 31/97/32.
agrarian crisis in the united provinces
171
was believed to be some form of Leninism, the establishment of a Leninite directorate.1 ‘Jawahar Lai is a fanatic. There are threatenings of an attempt to revive a no-rent campaign in the U.P. Jawahar Lai Nehru is the author of that policy and his release would obviously give it a definite stimulus.’2