The Campaign for Independence
ONE
It was in this mood, not as before of novelettish romanticism but of thoughtful commitment to revolutionary change, that Jawaharlal returned to India. The British Government, too, had noticed this change of outlook, and, as Jawahar¬ lal knew, shadowed his activities in Europe during 1927, while at Simla the Home Member had warned his father that ‘Jawahar was sailing too near the wind’.1 In fact, it was aft<"r this friendly caution that Motilal decided to sail for Europe to keep an eye on his son and escort him safely home.
However, Jawaharlal, his wife and daughter came back ahead and reached Madras in time for the Congress session in December 1927. He was itching for action. For this, the first step seemed to him to be the acceptance of full indepen¬ dence as the objective. Jawaharlal had been thinking about this for a long time and had now finally come round to the view that the Congress should commit it¬ self firmly to the goal of independence. He could not accept the usual argument that there was no real difference between Dominion Status and independence because the former carried with it the right to secede. Theoretically this was so, but in fact Dominion Status implied the maintenance of a connection with Britain and allowing her dominance in every major field. This might be suited to countries like Australia and Canada, but was meaningless for India. Either India left the empire or she stayed as a dependent, under whatever guise, within it; there was no third alternative. Co-operation between the lamb and the lion always resulted in the lamb being inside the lion. But this need not mean enmity with Britain. Though there could be no friendship within the empire, once India was out of the imperial stranglehold, she could co-operate with Britain as an equal.
Even more important to Jawaharlal than the political and economic im¬ plications of independence were the psychological consequences of a com¬ mitment to such an uncompromising policy. The assent to Dominion Status
«
IMotilal to Gandhi, 6 May 1927..Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, vol. $2, no. 12576.
t in
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 'll 1
as the objective was in itself an indication of India's mental degradation, for behind it lay an unquestioning acceptance of the inevitability of a British presence in India. That the Congress should adhere to it revealed a craven fear of being declared an unlawful assembly if it claimed anything more, and the preponderance within it of elements which on the whole profited by the British connection. The spider’s web of imperialism had obviously caught even Con¬ gressmen. But once the Congress made independence its goal, it wopld shake off the defeatism and weariness that had followed the non-cooperation move¬ ment, sweep away Swarajist temporizings, gain a new strength and again pull in the masses. Jawaharlal’s stay in Europe had confirmed him in the resolve that India should look for no favours from Britain. Relatively and potentially Indian nationalism was not weak, while England was daily losing ground despite her apparent strength. It made no difference which party was in office. His first-hand contacts with British Labour leaders had filled him with particular contempt for these 'sanctimonious and canting humbugs’.1
Jawaharlal, therefore, was eager for wholehearted combat, with no quarter sought or given. His new radical ideas affirmed rather than diverted his en¬ thusiasm for political action. Even the arrest of capitalist exploitation and a lightening of India's poverty required the termination of imperialist rule. But the mirage of Dominion Status weakened‘resistance in India to the British and generally strengthened reformist as against revolutionary forces. The real strength of the British in India lay in the submissive attitude of Indians to the statusquo — to the raj, to established ideas, to old customs and traditions. So, as he complained to Gandhi, 'it passes my comprehension how a national organization can have as its ideal and goal dominion status. The very idea suffocates and strangles me.’2
It was Gandhi, of course, who was the main hurdle. He was not present at the sessions of the Madras Congress when Jawaharlal secured the passage of a resolution committing the Congress to independence. But the followers of Gandhi had been there in sufficient numbers to secure the removal of the parts of the resolution which clarified independence to mean full control of defence, finance and economic and foreign policy and demanded that this be implemented immediately, in particular by the complete withdrawal ofthe British army of occupation. So all that the party accepted was a general ad¬ herence to die goal of complete national independence; and even this was not incorporated into the constitution of the Congress. That still proclaimed the objective to be swaraj, and thus enabled those who did not believe in indepen¬ dence and a total severance from Britain, and had no wish to see the British army withdraw at once, continue to be members of the party.
So Jawaharlal's resolution, as he himself recognized,3 was not really taken
1 Speechat the All-Parties Conference, 29 August 1928, S.W., vol. 3 (Delhi, 1972), p. 99.
*11 January 1928. •
*Autobiography, p. 167.
112 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
seriously and was meant primarily to humour him. But Gandhi did not conceal his disdain for what seemed to him mock heroics. He described the resolution in Young India as ‘hastily conceived’ and 'thoughtlessly passed’, and the Con¬ gress as a whole as having descended to the level of a schoolboy debating society.1 He also warned Jawaharlal privately that he was proceeding too fast.2 When Jawaharlal replied stiffly that he had a large measure of support, that Gandhi’s leadership was now hesitant and ineffective, and that their ideals were very different,3 Gandhi offered to publish the correspondence. In other words, he was prepared for an open break. The relationship had not yet developed to the extent that to the olderman it was in any way indispensable. But Jawaharlal drew back. The firmness of his views was not to him incom¬ patible with emotional dependence, and he was eager to remain, in Gandhi’s phrase, ‘under stupefaction’.4 He recoiled from further publicity being given to their differences which, he assured Gandhi, were only on a few points and need not spread to the many other issues on which they agreed. His regard and affection for Gandhi were personal, but they were also something more; ‘even in the wider sphere am I not your child in politics, though perhaps a truant and errant child?’9
So, without breaking away completely from Gandhi and the old leadership, Jawaharlal campaigned for independence as the ultimate objective. It was a circumscribed revolt. The issue came up again at the All-Parties Conference and at the proceedings of the committee set up by it, with Motilal Nehru as the chairman, to draw up a constitution for India as an answer to the challenge of the Secretary of State, Lord Birkenhead, that Indian politicians were capable of no constructive suggestions. Though Jawaharlal was not a member of this com-? mittee, he took an active part in its meetings and helped his father with the sec¬ retarial work. But he was thoroughly ill at ease in an atmosphere of haggling and compromise. ‘The fault must be mine but anyway it results in my feeling always that I do not fit in with anything. I am always the square peg and the holes are all round. I feel very lonely.’6 His suggestions that the constitution should establish a democratic socialist republic and a beginning be made in elections by economic units7 were not given even a moment’s consideration. To secure the broadest level of agreement in a body many of whose members were not Congressmen, Motilal favoured Dominion Status and gave his atten¬ tion mostly to finding a possible solution of the communal problem. In this he was successful, and the Nehru Report recommended, as concessions to the
*5 January 1928.
*4 January 1928. A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 55-6.
*11 January 1928.
417 January 1928, Collected Works, vol. 32 (New Delhi. 1969), pp. 468-9.
*23 January 1928.
*To Gandhi, 30 June 1928.
7Note, 8 March 1928, Report of the Committee to the All-Parties Conference.
*HE CAMPAIGN for independence 113
Muslims, not separate electorates but reservations of seats, the constitution of Sind as a separate province and the introduction of the reforms of 1919 in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) and Baluchistan.* The hope of Jawa- harlal and many others that reservation of seats should be terminated after ten years or earlier with the consent of the parties concerned1 could not be incor¬ porated into the report. But even this measure of consensus was a notable achievement and Jawaharlal was not alone in expecting that the report might provide the finishing kick to communalism.2 But the acceptance of Dominion Status went against the grain. He spoke repeatedly against it and often had to engage in public debate with his father. He knew, however, that he had no chance of getting the decision reversed, and fell back on keeping alive the com¬ mitment of the Congress to independence. The fact that it was a party to the Nehru Report need not mean that it had abandoned its own preference.
It was for this purpose that he organized the Independence for India League as, in the first instance, a pressure group within the Congress. Knowing that Gandhi and other leading Congressmen disapproved of independence and all that it implied, Jawaharlal resigned the general secretaryship; but the Working Committee declined to accept it.3 Ostensibly this was because the resolution of the Madras Congress gave legitimacy to propaganda for independence; but in fact it was because the general run of Congressmen attached little importance to Jawaharlal’s efforts. To them the only value which the demand for indepen¬ dence now had was that it enabled them to bargain for Dominion Status. Had there been any danger of the Independence for India League altering the general direction of the Congress, it would doubtless have been hastily stifled. For the League was intended to keep alive not only the objective of political indepen¬ dence but also the concomitant ideals of republicanism and socialism. To Jawaharlal independence was not a purely political issue. Severance of the British connection implied also an attack on the vested interests supported by the British in India; indeed, the basis of the struggle was economic. The future republican government of India would be based not on the exploitation of the masses but on social equality.4 The object of the Independence for India League was therefore both to achieve independence and to reconstruct Indian society by changing its capitalist and feudal basis. 'It means that the League aims at the socialist democratic State in which every person has the fullest opportunities of development and the State control of the means of production and distribu¬ tion;’3. Instead of a few individuals amassing huge fortunes by the exploitation
m
iNote, 7 July 1928.
2Intfrview to the press, 4 September. The Tribune, 9 September 1928.
9The Bombay Chronicle, 4 Septmber 1928
^Presidential address at the first session of the Republican Congress, The Hindu, 29 December 1927.
Programme of the Independence for India League, U. P. Branch, April 1929, S.W., voll 3,
114
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
of others, the state should be organized on a vast co-operative basis for the benefit of all, and this in turn should lead on to 'a great world co-operative commonwealth’.1
Independence, therefofe, was a composite ideal, and for its attainment Jawaharlal looked far beyond the Congress. TheLeague should beboth an active element within the parent party and a general catalyst in the nation. The Con¬ gress might head the political campaign and take the lead in drafting constitu¬ tions, but economic and social changes could be effected only by the sanction provided by the exploited classes. For this a revolutionary atmosphere would have to becreated in thecountry and the people organized on a large scale.2 But this required an economic programme. Gandhi had drawn the masses into the political struggle in a way in which no one else could have done, and this to Jawaharlal made his leadership indispensable. But they could only be kept in this struggle by providing an economic content to swaraj — something which Gandhi had never done. Gandhi claimed not to object to this on principle, but thought the effort was premature. 1 am quite of your opinion that some day we shall have to start an intensive movement without the ricKpeople and without the vocal educated class. But that time is not yet.’3 However, Jawaharlal went ahead and formulated a precise programme. Though he hada grand design of socialism, he wanted a very modest beginning. In the U.P. in particular there seemed to be no alternative to the abolition of landlordism, but this should be done with the payment of partial compensation and replaced by smallholdings owned by individual peasant proprietors with no right of alienation. There would be not nationalization but socialization of laid, and the most that the Statewouldmanagewould be model farms. Agricultural debts should bewritten off but after part payment. The State should gradually acquire key industries, ensure a minimum living wage and impose sharply graduated direct taxes an inheritance tax and a tax on agricultural income.4
Jawaharlal was aware thAsuch a programme would inevitably, at some stage or other, raise issues of the dass struggle and bring about dashes of in¬ terests between labour and capitalists and between landlords and tenants; but these could not be shirked. It was no wisdom to refuse to recognize or face conflict where it existed. Such conflicts would have to be fought and Overcome. Pushed to it, Jawaharlal was willing to concede both that violence was not objectionable in itself and that the final goal, thfe resolution of the struggle, might well be communism. If India were convinced that she could become free throughviolence, shewould undoubtedly have the right to indulge in it as other countries had done. He stood for intensive non-violent non-co-operation, only
^rcularletter toCongressmen, 5 April 1928, S.W., vol. 3, p. 184.
’See speech at Banins, 17 January, Tbs BombayCbnmicls, 18 January 1928.
’To Jawaharlal, 1 April 1928, CoUtcUd Works, vol. 36, p. 174.
Presidential address to the U. P, Provincial Conference, 27,October 1928,3. W., vo). 3. pp. 233-63; Programme of the Independence for India League, U. P. Brandi, ap. dt.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
113
because in India's condition mass violence was impracticable while individual acts of terrorism had a counter-revolutionary effect and injured the national cause.1 Violence was contrary to the logic of politics and not of ethics; and terrorism was a tactic of defeat. As for the ultimate objective, addressing a students’ conference in Calcutta, he publicly accepted that though he personally did not agree with manyof the methodsof theCommunists andwasbynomeans sure to what extent Communism would suit conditions in India, yet he did believe in Communism as an ideal of society. For essentially it was socialism, and to him socialism was the only way if the world was to escape disaster.2
For the work of organization Jawaharlal looked to the young men and women of India. Impressed by what he had seen in the Soviet Union and read about the achievements of Lenin and the Bolsheviks, Jawaharlal was thinking in terms of youth cadres in India. He did not fancy Communist workers, if only because there appeared to him to be no trained Marxists in India, and he certainly did not consider himself as one. Moreover, the strongest appeal in India inevitably came from nationalism, and any programme for economic and social reforms would have to be linked to that. So, while he continued to promote the work of the Hindustani Seva Dal, he also looked further afield. Within a few months of his return, he wrote to jthe press calling on those who were for independence, detested the growing influence of religion in politics and desired the removal of inequalities of class and caste and wealth to get in touch with each other and with him.3 But revolutionary battalions do not spring into existence on the merewriting of letters to the editor, and Jawaharlal’s appeal was significant only as indicative of his own aspirations. Throughout the year he gave the greatest importance to youth leagues and conferences, and was prepared to sacrifice all other work to the organization of youth. But an all-India corps dedicated to ‘full- blooded socialism' and carrying the fight to various parts of the country never came into being.
Nor did the Independence for India League, as Jawaharlal sadly recognized soon enough, fulfil the hopes of its creator. It consisted of a few politicians who either were disgruntled with Gandhi and Motilal or hoped to draw on the grow¬ ing popularity of Jawaharlal for their own advantage. Indeed, often people joined the League with the intention of smothering it.4 Jawaharlal was too honest himself to realize in time the machinations of others; and it has been suggested that he was by now increasingly the victim of flattery.3 The charge
*See addresses to Punjab Provincial Conference, 11 April, The Tribune, 18 April 1928, and to Delhi Political Conference, 13 October, The Bombay Chronicle, 20 October 1928.
* Address to the Bengal Students Conference, 22 September 1928, S.W.,vol.3,p. 193.
*Letter to the press, 20 March 1928.
4 See Jawaharlai’s letter to& S. Vidyarthi, 2 October 1928.
’ 'Asfor Pandit Jawaharlal 1 love and admire few men as I do him, but I also feel that he is getting too fond of clap-trap, too eager to receive idolatrous homage from people around him. This weak¬ ness he must have imbibed recently.* Kapil Deva Maiaviya, an old friend of the family, in The Leader, 30 November 1928. *
116
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
is unjustified; Jawaharlal was more the victim of innocence. But the result was that the Independence for India League never became the spearhead of revolu¬ tion, well-knit in its organization and dear-cut in its ideology. Rather, for a year it struggled on in a state of suspended animation till it ceased to have a raison d’itre in the beginning of 1929. with the Congress as a whole committed, in certain circumstances, to the goal of independence. Its significance in history is its testimony to the unalloyed idealism of Jawaharlal. But his enthusiasm for action in a noble cause was not matched by a capacity for organization.
TWO
However, if at this time Jawaharlal failed to create an instrument to mobilize the country for a long-term revolution, he was more successful in helping to plan demonstrations all over the country as a reply to the insult proffered to it by the announcement in 1927 of a Commission consisting solely of British members of Parliament to consider whether India was ready for a further instalment of constitutional reforms. The mistake was primarily that of the Viceroy, Lord Irwin, and his officials. They soon realized that they had blun¬ dered, but convinced themselves that a boycott of the Commission was not a serious threat. It was thought that the Congress was weak and divided, and dominated by the Swarajists who were moving more and more towards con¬ stitutional opposition;1 and with the Congress lukewarm in its boycott of the Commission, other parties need not be expected to be rigid in their hostility. So things might right themselves in the course of a few months, especially if some small sops could be found.2 Various concessions were suggested by the Governmentof India and by Sir John Simon, the chairman of the Commission, to make it easier for the Indian political parties to abandon the boycott and co¬ operate with the Commission. Gandhi thought this might well happen;3 and Motilal, who shared this fear, was, by the summer, planning to visit Canada rather than waste his time in India.4
However, the boycott held. Liberals like Sapru, who relied heavily on British goodwill, resented the jilting so deeply that for once they refused to behave like moderates. Jinnah also could not be won over by the Government, with the result that the Muslim leaders who were willing to collaborate could not claim to represent all Muslims. To Jawaharlal the failure to nominate any Indian to membership of the Commission seemed but a minor incident of
1 See letters ofHome Dept, to India Office, 13 January and 2 June 1927, Horn Dept. Pol. File 6 of 1927. aSee Cierar to Hailey, 14 November and Hailey to Frank Brown, 14 December 1927. Hatley papers, vol. 11. 3Gandhi to Motilal, 29 February 1928, ColUctsd Works, voi. 36, pp. 67-8. 4Motilalfo Jawaharlal, 22 March, and to GandHi, 27 June 1928. Motilal^ehru papers.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
117
Imperial rule; what should be boycotted was not only the Simon Commission but the whole conception behind it, that India would be for ever a part of the British Empire and the British Parliament had the right to give India what it wished and deny her what it liked.1 Freedom was India’s fundamental right, and as all commissions sent out from England denied that right they could receive no quarter in India. ‘Our aim is a completely free India and we have nothing to discuss except on this basis.’2 But at least the affront of the Simon Commission could be used as an occasion for united action, to bring together members of various parties in a common cause. The boycott might not lead India far on the path of independence, but it would certainly help to create a healthyatmosphere in which work of national organization could be expedited.* The chance of hitting back had almost a therapeutic effect on Jawaharlal, and he set about, as general secretary of the Congress, organizing the boycott on a countrywide scale. February 3rd, the day the Commission was to land in India, was to be treated as a day not of mourning but of rejoicing, for on that day would commence afresh the war for independence.4
The national hartal was a greater success than Jawaharlal had anticipated,9 and thereafter, throughout the year, wherever the Commission went, demon- strations ending in police charges and firing took place. At Lahore the leading Congressman of the Punjab, Lajpat Rai, was severely beaten. Jawaharlal and his colleagues now awaited the arrival of the Commission in the United Prov¬ inces. The Provincial Government at first decided to adopt an accommodating attitude and to allow processions, provided the organizers asked for permission and agreed to follow the route laid down by the police. This moderation was believed to have been based on the assumption that the demonstrations would not amount to much, as the Muslims would not participate in it. The local organizers of the boycott also decided to abide by these conditions, as they had no desire to have a conflict with the police; and processions were taken out with permission on 23 and 24 November. Jawaharlal arrived in Lucknow on the 25th and the tempo immediately rose. He had little enthusiasm for law- abiding processions. ‘I shall only stay on till the 28th if there is much doing. Otherwise I do not propose to waste good time in waving a little flag.’4 News of the death of Lajpat Rai on 18 November had already inflamed tempers throughout India, and Jawaharlal called on the youth of Lucknow to answer this challenge.7 A procession on the 26th, permitted by the authorities, was so vast that there could be np doubt of the tremendous strength of feeling
‘Speech at Allahabad, 10 January, Tbt Leader, 12 January 1928.
’Message to the press, Tbt Bombay Chronicle, 23 January 1928.
’Speech at Lucknow, 23 January, The Lender, 27 January 1928.
* Speech at Allahabad, 19 January, The Lender, 21 January 1928.
’See his letter to the editor, 3 February, The Leader, 6 February 1928, and interview at Bombay, The Bombay Chronicle, 1 February 1928.
•To M. Saxena, 14 November 1928, A1CC File G-73 of 1928. 1 •
’See his circular 'They have dared!’, ibid.
118
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
against the Commission; and though the procession proceeded without inci¬ dent, the officials realized that such demonstrations were serving to organize and rehearse what was planned to take place on the arrival of the Commission.
When the boycott committee sought permission for a procession on the 28th, it was granted on condition that the route was changed to avoid the European shopping area, where the Governor was that day attending a garden party.1 The organizers of the procession replied that it was too late to alter the route, and when the procession started to move it was lathi-chargeA by mounted police. Jawaharlal had by this time, probably expecting no major confrontation, left Lucknow; but on hearing of the lathi charge he returned to the cityon the 29th. Thepolice, whobelieved that the defiance of the boycott committee on the 28th had been on Jawaharlal’s orders,2 refused to permit any more processions. They stopped a small group of twelve led by Jawaharlal and Govind Ballabh Pant, which was on its way to a public Sheeting, and asked them if they had secured a licence for a procession. Jawaharlal replied that in view of the behaviour of the police the previous day he was not prepared to have any further dealings with them, and the police thereupon broke up the group with lathis. Jawaharlal himself received two blows. Despite this, the group refused to disperse. Meantime a large crowd had gathered, and the officials were compelled to permit Jawaharlal and his companions to proceed along their chosen route to the meeting with, in fact, the police riding in front as a vanguard.3
The next morning the Commission arrived in Lucknow. The Congress, which had sought permission to hold a blade flag demonstration, was allotted a site nearly 500 yards from the station, so that Simon and his colleagues would hardly notice it. Alarge procession, led by Jawaharlal — Modlal,whohadcome from Allahabad, was prevented by his son from joining them — reached the station, and sought to take up a position nearer to the route of the Commission than theoneallotted to them. Thiswasnear anopen space, and thepolice carried out a cavalry charge, using both lathis and spears, on a crowd of over thirty thousand for two or three furlongs. Though hundreds were beaten and many trampled down, the large crowd generally stood its ground, neither retreating nor retaliating, till the police, once the Commission had passed, fell back. Jawaharlal, after receiving half a dozen lathi Mows on his back, shoulders and legs, was surrounded by students who shielded him from further attack.4 Just then ayoung man, ostensibly a student but later discovered to be a police agent, offered to provide Jawaharlal with two revolvers.5 The offer was politely
Report of Deputy Commr Lucknow, 5 December 1928. Home Dept. Pol. Pile 130 of 1929.
’Ibid.
’Report in Tb* Tribun*, 1 December 1928; pees* statements of Jawaharlal, 1 and 4 December 1928. S.W., vol. 3, pp. 108-13 and 119.
4Pieaa statements of Jawaharlal, 30 November and 1 December 1928; report in Tb* Tribum, 2 December 1928; Gandhi in Navmjivon, 9 December 1928. CoUsctod Works!vol. 38, p. 184.
’Jawaharlal’* letter to Gandhi, quoted by him in Young Indi*, 13 December 1928. CoU*ct*i Works, vol. 38, p. 209.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
119
declined, but the incident is suggestive of an effort to aggravate the situation and seriously incriminate Jawaharlal. It strengthens Jawaharlal’s accusation that the police, angry at their loss of prestige on the two previous days, were out on this occasion for vengeance, and primarily ^gainst Jawaharlal.
The news of the latbi charges on the 29th and 30th and of the injuries in¬ flicted on Jawaharlal roused widespread anger in India. The deputy commis¬ sionerof Lucknow sought to play it down. Of the dash on the 29th he reported that if Pant and Jawaharlal were beaten it was very slightly indeed; and as for the confrontation the next day at the station he remarked that the ‘actual occurrence was rather like the dealing of a football ground in England when the crowd havebroken loose. There have been gross exaggerations in the press, and Jawaharlal’s report is so ludicrous and overstated as to carry its own refuta¬ tion.’1 In fact, it was Jawaharlal’? statements, fortified by other eye-witness accounts in the press, that were bdieved. The raj was thought to have bared its teeth, and its actions, bom of bloodlust and cracking of nerve, evoked memories of Amritsar in 1919. Jawaharlal wa$ not slow to draw the paralld.
The events of Lucknow make it dear that the authorities in the United Provinces at least are modelling themselves on the old Punjab model and Haileyism is coming to mean much the same thing as ODwyerism. O’Dwyerism was followed by non-co-operation and the greatest national awakening of modem times in India. That awakening shook the fabric of British rule. India is different today from what it was nine years ago and Haileyism is likely to lead to an even greater national response which may carry us to our goal.2
THREE
Apart from the impact on the devdopment of the national resistance to British rule, the police actions at Lucknow confirmed Jawaharlal’s national standing. He was no longer merdy a politician of the United Provinces; throughout India his popularity leapt, and he was firmly established as one of the front¬ runners of his generation. Gandhi realized and wdcomed this. ‘My love to you. It was all done bravdy. You have braver things to do. May God spare you for many along year to come and make you his chosen instrument for freeing India from [the] yoke.’3
The Government’s reaction to the growing popularity of Jawaharlal was to consider his arrest. As early as September, when Jawaharlal founded the Independence for India League, there was a rumour that he was soon to be
•Home Dept. Pol. File No. 130 of 1929.
•Annual Report of General Secretarial of the Congress (drafted by Jawaharla^. See A1CC
He G 80 of 1929.
*3 December 1928, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 68.
120
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
imprisoned,1 though Jawaharlal himself attached no importance to it2 But in October the Viceroy directed that his speeches be scanned carefully,9 and in December, when Jawaharlal came to Poona, after the Lucknow lathi charges, to address the Bombay Presidency Youth Conference, he was received with a rapturous enthusiasm which alarmed the Government. ‘From start \o finish’, reported the Bombay police, ‘the prevalent note of the conference was frankly communistic and revolutionary;’4 and Jawaharlal’s speech itself was described by the Home Secretary as no casual utterance but a deliberate preaching of violent revolt with the intention to follow it up by organization.9 In fact, the speech was in Jawaharlal’s usual vein, a castigation of British imperialism as an aspect of the world phenomenon of capitalism, a vivid description of India’s low condition and a call to revolt against evil and the establishment of a co¬ operative socialist commonwealth in a world federation of socialist states. As suited an address to students, it was more academic than his other speeches of the time. Yet the jittery Government of India asked the Bombay Government to consider prosecution, and were brought back tp reality only by that Govern¬ ment’s comment that everyone must agree with much of what Jawaharlal had said, and it would be difficult to prove that communism and revolution, and not merely socialism, were being advocated.6
The Government acquired another opportunity to proceed against Jawahar¬ lal at Jharia, where the annual session of the All-India Trade Union Congress was being held. The League against Imperialism had deputed W.J. Johnston as a fraternal delegate, and the police walked into the meeting to arrest him. Jawaharlal had the police turned out, made a fiery speech and led the infuriated delegates in affiliating the Trade Union Congress to the League. When, the next day, Johnston was arrested outside the conference pandal, Jawaharlal delivered yet another vehement denunciation of imperialism and called for united action against the British.7 But, rather than arrest Jawaharlal, the Government preferred to await the decisions of the National Congress which was to meet in its annual session in a few days at Calcutta.
The hope of Motilal at Calcutta was to secure the adoption by the Congress of the Nehru Report and the acceptance of Dominion Status without prejudice to the ultimate goal of complete independence. In this way he expected to hold the line, and to retain moderate support without losing that of his son and the othermembers of the Independence for India League. Gandhi came to Calcutta
Statement of MauUna Zafar AU, Tba Tribun*, 12 September 1928.
*To Syed Mahmud, 14 September 1928.
’Note ofHome Secretary, 18 October 1928. Home Dept. File 179/29Pol. of 1929.
4Note, 13 December 1928, ibid.
’Note of Home Secretary, 27 December 1928, ibid.
‘Teleiram to Bombay Government, 29 December 1928 and Bombay Government’s reply, 11 January 1929, ibid.
*G. Chettopadhyay, Communism and Bangui’s Fraadom Movamant, vol. 1 (Delhi, 19701, pp. 113*16 and*141. *
THE CAMPAIGN FOJR INDEPENDENCE
1*1
especially to ensure this. Jawaharlal was in a difficult position. The psychology behind the Nehru Report was alien to him. ‘It is obvious that the Congress contains at least two if not more groups which have nothing in common be¬ tween them and the sooner they break apart the better.’1 But if such a break occurred, Gandhi and his father would be on the other side; and, as so often in his public life, affection prevailed over logic. He opposed Dominion Status in the severest terms. To accept it, as Gandhi suggested, was to declare that the Congress was prepared to allow India to be exploited by British imperial¬ ism. All energy oozed out of him at the very thought of Dominion Status.2 But he toned down independence to mean severance of all connection not with the British but only with British imperialism; and he commended the Nehru Report without prejudice to the independence resolution of the Madras Congress. This suggested both a desire to find common ground and a willing¬ ness to face both ways.
Gandhi was as anxious to avoid a break. He, of course, preferred Dominion Status to independence, but he was not enamoured of the Nehru Report. 'The way to constitutional swaraj may lie through Lucknow; the way to organic swaraj, which is synonymous with Ramarajya, lies through Bardoli.’* If he supported the Report it was primarily out of loyalty to Motilal. But in the effort to hold the party together, he was not prepared to discard all consistency. The final sentence in Jawaharlal’s speech probably gave him the clue: ‘Pre¬ pared as this House should be for any compromise on any lines, it should not be prepared to give up its definite real goal of independence for any length of time.' This hinted that Jawaharlal was willing to shelve temporarily the de¬ mand for independence. So Gandhi recommended that if the Government did not accept and act upon the Nehru Report within two years, the Congress should revert to full independence. Such flexibility of approach involved no long-term compromise on ideals and, especially as no one seriously expected the Government to accept the Nehru Report, made a concession only to the ear. As a further step to placate Jawaharlal, the time-limit was reduced in discussions to one year. So Jawaharlal and his friends could accept the re¬ solution; but to mark his disapproval of even the paper concession, Jawaharlal stayed away from the final session when the resolution was passed. Gandhi explained his absence.
He thinks this resolution itself falls far short of what he wants but, a
high-souled man as he is, he does not want to create unnecessary bitter¬ ness ... how can he help feeling disatisfied? He would not be Jawaharlal
if he did not strike out for himself an absolutely unique and original
1To Aosari, 2) September 1928.
’Speech 27 December 1928. S.W., vol. 3, pp. 270-74.
*ToB.G. Homiman, 28 August 1928, ColUcttd Works, vol. 37, p. 212. Ramarajya lb the Hindfe) idealofthegolden age. Bardoll, in Gujeret, hsd been the scene of«peasant no-tax campaign in 1928.
122
JAWAHARLAt NEHRU
line in pursuance of his path. He considers nobody, not even his father, nor wife, nor child. His own country and his duty to his own country he considers and nothing else.1
FOUR
So the Congress gave its support to the Nehru Report and the demand fir Dominion Status for one year, after which it would again resort to non-co- operation as the means for securing independence. As there was obviously no chance of the Government responding to this resolution in any satisfactory way, 1929 was dearly to be a year of preparation. It was in that spirit that Jawaharlal carried out his duties as general secretary of the Congress, and he was encouraged in this by Gandhi. ‘I wish that Jawahar could travel through¬ out all the provinces and see that the Congress organizations become living bodies.’2 He asked Jawaharlal to reorganize the provincial Congress commit¬ tees, compel obedience to instructions from the Working Committee and direct them to implement fully the constructive programme. 3 Jawaharlal had also been directed by the AICC to prepare, with Subhas Bose, a scheme to train volunteers to work in the villages and among the dty labourers. So Jawaharlal set out to revitalize the Congress and run it on proper lines.
It seems to be the general opinion that everything connected with the Congress can be done in an unbusinesslike way. Certainly no business could have survived the want of method which the poor Congress has had toput up with. My own personal bent is all for method and thorough¬ ness. The less I see of these in Congress offices the more I get put out.4
He himself was short of money, but spent as much as he could out of his own pocket on Congress work.3 He secured authorization from the Working Com¬ mittee to inspect, personally or by representatives chosen by him, the offices of the provincial committees and to make recommendation for their improved working. He also arranged for auditors to visit these offices and 'examine the accounts. Almost all the provincial headquarters were inspected and sugges¬ tions made for their improvement, and their finances were put in order.
Jawaharlal also, while 1m sought to avoid public speaking as far as possible and was not greatly excited by the constructive programme of spinning and boycott, gave considerable attention to the Congress volunteer corps, the Hindustani Seva Dal, youth leagues and student organizations. What 1m wanted was dedicated young men and women who would organize the pea¬ sants and workers and create a mass consciousness in preparation for the
* 28 December 1928, CoUoctod Works, vol. 38, pp. 284-3.
2Gandhi g>Motilal, 1 February 1929, CoUoctod Works, vol. 38, p. 426.
* 12 January and 1 February 1929, Ibid., pp. 337 and 423-4. *
«To Lala Shankarlai, 2 May 1929.
5 See Sri Prakasa's article in R. Zakaria.AStudyofNtbru (Bombay, 1959), pp. 328-9.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
123
coming struggle. The main question before the people was that of bread, and when the driving forces of hunger led the poor into the struggle for freedom, then swaraj wold be attained.1 He planned an Indian National Service, at both all-India and provincial levels, and collected funds for building up a cadre of whole-time workers in the United Provinces. He also sought to reacti¬ vate the Independence for India League and provide it with an economic and social programme, even though the League had never shown much sign of life and, by the end of the year, there would be no need for a separate pressure group to champion the cause of independence as the whole Congress would be committed to it.
These activities of Jawaharlal alarmed the Government. They regarded the Calcutta resolution, passed primarily to accommodate Jawaharlal and those of his way of thinking, as a clear triumph for extremism. As the ulti¬ matum presented to the British Government was not expected to be complied with, the resolution was a definite declaration that civil disobedience would be started a year later. ‘If the experience of the Calcutta Congress is any guide, the decision of future policy appears to be almost entirely with the younger men notably Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Babu Subhas Chandra Bose, and on their intentions and activities future developments may be expected largely to depend.’2 The Government attached greater significance at this time to these efforts of Jawaharlal and-his colleagues to rouse the masses and particu¬ larly, as they thought, the peasants and the students, to destroy the raj, than to the Communist programme to stir up a movement, chiefly among industrial labour, to attack the economic organization of society and aimed directly against employers and only indirectly against imperialism. The Government recognized that the two movements had points of contact and in some respects were closely linked. There is a tendency for the political and the Communist revolutionaries to join hands, and Pandit Jawahar Lai Nehru, an extreme nationalist who is at the same time genuinely attracted by some of the Com¬ munist doctrines, stands about at the meeting point.’3 But the tacticians of the Home Department felt that it would be advantageous from their point of view to stress the differences between the Communists and the nationalists.
Communism contains grave dangers for the very classes who support the extreme nationalist movement, and our aim should be to do nothing which will produce an artificial union between the two movementswhich, if left to themselves, may tend to diverge. This suggests the conclusion that we should be very cautious in taking action against Communism .which may rouse for the Communists any general sympathy among the nationalists or provide the nationalists with what they are searching
'Speeches-at Delhi, 5 February, and at Lahore, 8 February 1929, S.W., vol. 4, (Delhi, 1973), PP. 1-4. *
’Home Secretary to all Local Govts., 21 February 1929, Home Dept. Pol. File No. 168 of 1929.
124 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
for at the moment, namely a good rallying-cry for an intensive anti-
Government agitation.1
At first, it was intended merely to prosecute Jawaharlal;2 but then the Government decided to move on the other front-and deal first with the Com¬ munists. But rather than try and uproot Communism by attacking Com¬ munist organizations throughout India and seeking special powers for this purpose, the Government preferred to arrest the leading Communists in various parts of India and to prosecute them for conspiracy to overthrow British rule. It was hoped to secure a judicial pronouncement which would enable the Government to deal with the further spread of Communism and to prevent the movement recovering from the blow which it had been dealt by the arrest of its leaders; and there might also be the political advantage of convincing the general public that Communism was not the kind of move¬ ment that should receive the sympathy of nationalists.3 Meantime, no action was contemplated against the latter.
The trial of the Communist leaders was staged at Meerut, chosen as the venue in order to avoid a jury, who might jeopardize the chance of a conviction. The Congress, though on principle it did not believe in defence in British courts, promptly formed a defence committee, of which Jawaharlal was a member; and this committee engaged lawyers to appear for the defence. For the first time, and as a very special case, the Congress sanctioned Rs 1,500 for the defence, while Jawaharlal sought financial and other assistance from abroad. Indeed for months there was a widespread belief among the public, shared by both Motilal and Jawaharlal, that Jawaharlal himself would soon be arrested.4 In the long indictment of Communist activities made by the prosecution, the League against Imperialism was specially mentioned as one of the organizations inspired by the Communists; Jawaharlal’s correspondence with Virendranath Chattopadhyaya and others in Europe was regularly inter¬ cepted;9 and the Intelligence Bureau and the Home Department attached great importance to a faked letter from M. N. Roy, in which Jawaharlal was described as the ‘liaison agent between Moscow and India’.6 But after a careful examination of, his dossier, the prosecution concluded that there was insuf¬ ficient evidence against him.7 A number of letters received by Jawaharlal from abroad were* cited by the procecution, but they could find no letters written by him; and though his book on Soviet Russia was placed before the
1 Note of H.G. Haig, Home Secretary, and J. Crerar, Home Member, 4 January 1929, Home Dept. File 18/XVI Pol. and K.W. of 1928.
* Note of Haig, 4 January 1929, Home Dept. Pol. File 179/29 of 1929.
5 See Haig to J.W.A. Langford James, chief prosecution counsel, 29 April 1929, Home Dept 10/IV/29 Pol. of 1929.
4See Jawaharlal to A.C.N. Nambiar, 11 July 1929, AICC File FD 20, part 11,1929.
’Home Dfept. Pol. File 20/XI of 1929. *
•Home Dept. Pol. File 18/VU/28, Appendix III to Notes.
’J.P. Mitter, junior prosecution counsel in the Meerut case, in Tba Sunday Standard, 21 December 1969.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
m
court, it was realized that a charge based on that alone could hardly stand. The magistrate trying the case served notice on Jawaharlal to produce all the letters received by him from certain persons abroad. Jawahaiial's first reaction, approved by Gandhi, was to refuse, on the principle that the prosecution should not be helped in any way. Howeyer, on second thoughts which were dearly encouraged by his father, he replied that he had thrown away or destroyed those letters which he had received in his personal capacity; his correspondence as general secretary of the Congress was to be found in the official files, but these he could disdose only with the permission of the Congress. Motilal was concerned that a further order would follow which would result in a search of the Congress offices and the court securing the papers it wanted, and the locking up ofJawaharlal for six months. To my mind Jawahar will only himself ridiculous by both helping the govt to the fullest extent he can and going to jail for it.*1 But, in the event, Jawaharlal was only asked to certify that he had no personal correspondence in his possession. Jawaharlal did so, and |p avoid his being dted as a witness by the prosecution, Motilal advised the lawyers for the defence not to object to secondary evidence of those letters being produced.2 Later, when the prosecution wished to call Jawaharlal as* a court witness, the magistrate agreed that Jawaharlal seemed to be the re- presentative in India of the League against Imperialism, and his evidence would probably be illuminating; but calling him would not be worth while as it would mean unreasonable delay, and he was anxious that the arguments should begin.3 So Jawaharlal did not appear in the case, either as witness or as accused.
The lade of direct evidence and the desire to isolate the Communists from the general nationalist movement and not Motilal’s alleged influence with the authorities, though 1m was doubtless greatly relieved, would seem to be the real reasons for the Government's obvious reluctance to drag Jawaharlal into the net. Gandhi, perceptive as usual, saw this from the start. ‘It is quite like Jawahar’, he wrote to the worried father, ‘that he should give up smoking, a fine preparation to face Hailey. I do not know that Hailey will lay his hands upon Jawahar quite so easily as you think.*4 Though attracted by the ideology ofCommunism, Jawaharlal was not involved in the activities of the Communist Party. Not, as was dear from the names of quite a few who had been arrested, that the Government had any qualms about involving the innocent. As Jawaharlal is reported to have remarked on his first visit to Meerut jail, ‘How little do these accused persons know about the Communist International.
I know a lot more than they.’3 But the Government could secure little direct evidence implicating him, while the Communists themselves felt little accord
'Motilal to Gandhi, 4 September 1929, Motilal Nehru papers.
’Motilal to K.C. Chakravarty, 10 September 1929, Motilal Nehru papers.
*Tbo Bombay QbronicU, 13 November 1929. •
4To Motilal, 17 January 1929, Coiiactad Works, vol. 38, p. 361.
’Muutffar Ahmad’s introduction in Communists CbaUanga Imperialism from tba Dock (Calcutta, 1967).
126
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
with one whom they regarded as 'a timid reformist’.1 The Communist assess¬ ment of Jawaharla! at this time was not left in doubt. A writer in the Comin¬ tern journal condemned the Independence for India League as superficial intelligentsia organization which in parts had already fascist tendencies’ and described Jawaharlal as a person ‘who promises all the blessings of socialism without a revolutionary struggle’.2 Jawaharlal, wrote a British Communist, had
formed an Independence of India League: and at the same time he is president of the Socialist League of Youth. The Independence of India League is a complete sham. The Socialist League of Youth is a more complete sham; it puts forward most wonderful slogans for Communism and the Dictatorshipof the Proletariat and takes no steps to achieve them. They are merely a means for getting support from the proletariat and for stemming the tide of the onward movement... It is dear that the British Government knows the difference between young Nehru and the Workers’ and Peasants’ party, and that the latter cannot look over the hedge, where Jawahar Lai Nehru can steal a horse.3
FIVE
It was in this context that Jawaharlal found himself pitchforked by Gandhi and his father into the presidency of the Congress. Motilal had for long wanted his son to secure this high honour, and had discussed it with Gandhi even two years earlier. In 1927 Gandhi had not been enthusiastic and, after consulting Jawaharlal who was then in Europe, had decided in favour of Ansari, in the hope that the latter would improve rdations between Hindus and Muslims.
•
Things, as they are shaping in the Congress, confirm the opinion that it is not yet time for Jawaharlal to shoulder the burden. He is mo high-souled to stand the anarchy and hooliganism that seem to be grow¬ ing in the Congress, and it would be cruel to expect him to evolve order all of a sudden out of chaos. I am confident, however, that the anarchy will spend itself before long and the hooligans will themselves want a disciplinarian. Jawaharlal will come in then.4
The next year Motilal renewed his suggestion and Gandhi was agreeable, but on this occasion theleaders of the Congress in Bengal, where the session was to
* Muzaffar Ahmed to P.C. Joshi, 9 March 1929, Meerut Conspiracy Case, Exhibit No. P. 304.
* Communist International, May 1929. *
*R. Pate Arnot, HowBritain Ruiat India (London, 1929), pp. 29. 30.
‘Gandhi to Motilal, 19 June 1927, CoUacted Works, vol. 34, p. 31.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
127
be held, successfully insisted that Motilal himself should preside. Though the reasonsgiven were local, the real objection, as Jawaharlal saw it, was not youth or jealousy but fear of his radical ideas.1 In 1929, ten Congress committees voted for Gandhi, five for Vallabhbhai Patel and only three for Jawaharlal.2 The general feeling was that he was still unseasoned for the presidency. Jawaharlal himself was unwilling.
My own personal inclination always is not to be shackled down to any office. I prefer to be free and to have the time to act according to my own indinations... I represent nobody but myself. I have not the politician’s flair for forming groups and parties. My one attempt in this direction — theformationoftheIndependencefor IndiaLeaguelastyear — wasa hope¬ less failure so far as I was concerned ... Most people who put me forward for the Presidentship do so because they want to keep someone else out.
Iamthelesserevil. Thiskind of negative backing is hardlygood enough...
If I have the misfortune to be president you will see that the very people who put me there, or many of them, will be prepared to cast me to the wolves.3
But Gandhi wrung consent out of him and then announced that the crown should be worn by Jawaharlal. Older men had had their innings, and it was but right that the young should be led into battle by one of themsdves. Gandhi added, with a candour that was not flattering to his victim, that his relations with the younger man were such that the latter’s being in the chair was as good as Ik himself being in it.4 Again Jawaharlal begged Gandhi not to press his name,J while Motilal, much as he desired his son’s election, pointed out to Gandhi that forcing Jawaharlal on the country against its will was unfair to both Jawaharlal and the country. * But Gandhi had made up his mind, and on 29 September 1929 the AICC reluctantly elected Jawaharlal to preside over the next session at Lahore in December.
So circumstances, and Gandhi’s will, were too strong for Jawaharlal. ‘I have been quite dear in my own mind that my election as President would reduce my effectiveness in many directions. But fate has willed it otherwise and I fed in spite of my sdentific spirit and outlook that after all we are to some extentplaythings of fate.’7From the viewpoint of the older leaders, there was a great advantage in having in the chair the malleable founder of the inde¬ pendence movement; his opinions underwrote the genuineness of their inten*
*To Syed Mahmud, 30 June 1928.
* See AICC File G 100 for 1929-30.
UiMhitU to Gandhi. 13 July 1929.
4Article in Young IndU, 1 August 1929, reprinted in CoUtcfd Works, vol. 41, pp. 239-41.
* Telegram to Gandhi, 21 August 1929. Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya P.S. 13496.
* 21 August 1929, CoUsctod Works, vol. 41, p. 305n.
TTo S.A. Brelvi, 7 October 1929. AICC File G 40(ii), Part m, 1929.
136
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
tion to start civil disobedience, even while they could be confident that he would be amenable, if need be, to Gandhi’s persuasion. On the other hand, Jawaharlal’s colleagues in the League against Imperialism expected that he would use his position to split the Congress and carry the country with a fully revolutionary programme, i Only Jawaharlal knew his predicament, that he would be torn between his loyalty to Gandhi and the Congress organization on the one side, and his ideological leanings on the other. As he wrote to an old friend, ‘I am afraid I shall have my work cut out for me to avoid losing all mycheerfulness and light-heartedness.’2
The testing-time was not long in coming. Jawaharlal was getting ready for civil disobedience. ‘Already the blood tingles in the veins and the call to the field of action becomes louder and louder.’3 But the lines of battle were suddenly blurredbythe Viceroy’s statement, on his return from Britain at the endofOcto¬ ber, that the British Government would meet representatives of British India and the Indian States for securing the greatest possible measure of agreement for the final proposals to be submitted to Parliament and that the natural issue of India’s constitutional progress was the attainment of Dominion Status. This in itself meant nothing, but Gandhi was convinced of Lord Irwin’s sincerity4 and associated the Congress with the Liberals and others in what he regarded as a reciprocation of this sincerity. The Delhi manifestooffered co-operation to the British provided the Government adopted a policyofgeneral conciliation, politi¬ calprisoners weregranted ageneral amnesty, progressive political organizations were adequately represented at the conference with the Congress being given predominance, and it was understood that the conference was not for discussing when Dominion Status was to be established but to frame a scheme of a Domi¬ nion constitution suitable for India’s needs.
Despite these provisos, however, the manifesto marked a retreat by the Con¬ gress. Far from preparing for a struggle for independence, or even from insisting on a full acceptance of the Nehru Report, it was, under Gandhi’s guidance, thinking in terms of negotiations with the British Government without the latter making any precise commitments beforehand. Jawaharlal fought hard, if he could not secure rejection of the Viceroy’s proposals, at least to stiffen the terms offered by the Congress: but he failed, and then, to the surprise of his friends, signed the manifesto. Subhas Bose,who had refused to sign, saw in this the triumph of Gandhi’s personality over Jawaharlal’s principles. ’Jawaharlal has nowgiven up Independence at the instanceof the Mahatma.’9 In fact, Jawa¬ harlal had not changed his views but was persuaded to sign by appeals to his sense of discipline. It was urged that as a member of the Working Committee
lSee,e.g.,V. Chattopedhyaya to Jawaharlal, 28 August 1929, AICC File F.D. l(ii). Part 1,1929. >To Shivaprasad Gupta. 1 October 1929, AICC File F.D. 1 <ii), Part III, 1929.
» To Master Tara Singh, 10 October 1929, AICC File G 93 of 1929.
4 Article ip Young India, 7 November 1929. *
>To Mrs C.R. Das, 3 November 1929, S.C. Bose, Corraspondanca 1924-32 (Calcutta, 1967), p. 403.


11 British rule in India: the Prime of Wales receiving gifts from the Maharajah
of Kolhapur, 11)21

THjE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
129
and general secretary hewasbound to carry out thewishes of the majority of the members. But having done so, he resigned both his membership and the secre¬ taryship,1 and seriously considered abdicating from the presidency. *1 am myself a believer in discipline. And yet I suppose there can be too much of dis¬ cipline. Something seems to have snapped inside me evening before last and I am unable to piece it together.'2 * 4
However, Gandhi, Motilal, Ansari and others persuaded Jawaharlal to hold his hand, mainly on the ground that he could rely on the British not to accept the four provisos stipulated by the Congress; 3 and on 19 November the Work¬ ing Committee, while confirming the Delhi manifesto, revised Gandhi’s draft resolution to say, obviously to placate Jawaharlal, that it should be clearly understood that this confirmation would only hold till the next session of the Congress.4 Jawaharlal was greatly relieved. 'It is clear enough that there is not an outside chance of the British Government acceding to the four conditions laid down, so that even moderate Congressmen will have no alternative left except to stick to independence.’5 By giving some rope to those who favoured a compromise, the ground for the coming struggle'Was being better prepared. The Government, even if they could not accept the Nehru Report, could still perhaps have retained Gandhi's co-operation by somegesture such as the release of prisoners;6 for to Gandhi, as Hailey observed,7 Dominion Status was not a constitutional objective but a frame of mind, ‘a general kind of political kiss- in-the ring’. But imagination was not among the virtues of Irwin’s Government, and by the middleof December Gandhi was thinking in terms of befog in prison by January.8 When he and Motilal met the Viceroy along with Sapru, Jinnah and Vithalbhai Patel on 23 December, the break was dear. Gandhi announced that unless the establishment of Dominion Status could be presumed as an immediate result of the conference he could not attend; not Parliament but India ought to frame India’s future. He added that he doubted the sincerity of British purpose broadly, though he recognized that of individuals; and the Viceroy replied that there was obviously no common ground.9 The focus of attention now shifted to Lahore.
1 To President AICC 4 November 1929. AICC File G-I17 of 1929. * To Gandhi, 4 November 1929, reprinted itt Collacttd Works, vol. 42, Appendix O, p. 516. * Gandhi's telegram 6 November and letter, 18 November 1929, CoUactad Works, vol. 42, pp. 101 and 181, respectively; Ansari to Jawaharlal, 7 November 1929, Ansari papers, Jamie Millie; Motilal to Jawaharlal, 7 November 1929, Motilal Nehru papers. 4 ThoLaadtr, 20 November 1929. •To S. Srinivasa Iyengar, 20 November 1929, AICC File G 1JL7 of 1929. •Sapru to Irwin, 25 November (after meeting Gandhi) and Hailey to Irwin 4 December 1929. Halifax papers, I.O.L. MssJSur C 152, vol. 25. ? Hailey to Irwin, 4 December 1929, Halifax papers, vci. 23. * See his letter toRamanand Chatterjee, 16 December 1929, CoUactad Works, vof. 42, p. 285 * Minutea of conversations drafted byPrivate Secretary to Viceroy, Sapru papers, 119.
130
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SIX
Jawaharlal had, therefore, been vindicated. He had had his way by yielding in the first instance. The hope of the officials that the Viceroy’s statement might split the Congress1 had been defeated. But though Jawaharlal^ nationalist followers in India now had no grievance, he had still to contend with his radical friends abroad. Convinced by the frequent references to the League against Im¬ perialism in the Central Assembly during the debates ori’fhe Public Safety Bill and by the proceedings at Meerut that the Government was making a dead set against the League, Jawaharlal took much trouble during the summer of 1929 to prove to the public that the League was not a Communist organization, even though many Communists belonged to it, but rather an association to establish contacts between all movements throughout the world which supported the struggle against imperialism. If a broader and more international vision was gradually animating the Congress, this was the direct consequence of its asso¬ ciationwiththeLeague. Communists were undoubtedly the strongest opponents of imperialism and as such their co-operation was welcome to all nationalists. They need not be treated as untouchables. Co-operation with them — as with imperialist powers other than the British like the United States — was possible when interests coincided, though this co-operation should be on one’s own terms. But Jawaharlal was certain that in no sense did Communists dominate the League. Nor was the Congress, which was merely associated with the League, bound by every resolution orprogramme of that organization.
This confidence of Jawaharlal was shaken by the end of the year when he heard that the Communists had taken over the central apparatus of the League and muzzled non-Communists like James Maxton. Clearly he himself would have ik> place in the League, and the organization as he had conceived it, the grand all-party alliance between the forces of national freedom and social equal¬ ity, had collapsed. So it caused him no great concern that those now in charge of the League disapproved of his acceptance of the Delhi manifesto.
It is a fundamental political error to think that unity in the Congress is more important than the vital interests of the masses. After having risen to be the undoubted leader of the youth of the country and to enjoy even the confidence of the working masses, you seem in a moment of inexpli¬ cable weakness and mental confusion to have left your followers in the lurch.2
Possibly Jawaharlal was rationalizing his weakness and proneness to what Subhas Bose termed 'sentimental politics’ into a claim to superior tactics and
1 See, for example. Hailey to O’Dwyer, 4 October and 1VDecember and to Irwin, 7 October and 18 November 1929, Hailey papers, vol. 16. *
*V. Chattopadhyaya to Jawaharlal, 4 December 1929.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
131
topermitting events so to develop as to stress the unavoidainiityofa dash with the Government; but in doing so he was certainly not distressed by the rebukes of the Communists. Rather, he would seem to have been reinforced in his con¬ viction that the political struggle for freedom demanded the first priority, and that in this,the leadership of Gandhi was the most powerful individual factor. Future success seemed to him to lie in acceptance of this ipther than in co¬ operation with the Communists. And his first ill-fated experiment of working with the Communists suggested to him that equal co-operation with them was not to be too easily taken for granted.
So the decks were dear, and Jawaharlal was free to act as he chose, neither held back by his moderate colleagues nor pushed off course by his erstwhile friends of theleft. In the lastweek of November, before his gamble had paid off, he presided at Nagpur over the annual session of the All-India Trade Union Congress. Elected the previous year in his absence, Jawaharlal had agreed to serve because, although he had no experience of trade unionism, he realized the importanceof awakening industrial labour to the national cause. But during his year in office fie could hardly devote himsdf to this effort in education. While the Government, by their legislation and summary arrests and trials, mounted a massive attack against the whole labour movement, the latter was riven by sharp differences between the Communists and the rest; and Jawaharlal had to toil hard — aftd, as it proved, in vain — merely to hold the movement to¬ gether. The moderates in the Trade Union Congress, led by the general secre¬ tary, N. M. Joshi, were anxious to isolate labour from political currents in India and abroad and to improve working conditions in industry by co-operating with' the Government. Jawaharlal, of course, reacted instinctively against this, and in consequence was regarded as acting in accord with the Communists. Jawa¬ harlal feared that a split was inevitable, but sought not to precipitate it.1 How¬ ever, the advent to office of the British Labour Party in the summer of 1929 strengthened the moderate trade unionists in their eagerness to co-operate, and increased the differences within the movement. Jawaharlal was requested by the radicals to accept the presidentcy of the largest railway trade union, that of the Great Indian Peninsular in Bombay, which was dominated by the Com¬ munists, and although he already had as much work as he could manage he was willing to consider acceptance if it would help in securing a compromise.2 The fact that the Communists were criticizing Jawaharlal as one of the ‘dangerous enemies of labour’3might have been expected to make his name acceptable to conservative trade unionists; but in fact the suggestion fell through.
The criticism itself was obviously unjustified. Jawaharlal was primarily involved in politics, and his basic loyalty was to the Congress; and that was, of
‘jawaharlal to C.B. John. 12 July 1929. AICC File P/20 of 1929.
*To Johri, 23 August 1929, AICC File G 40. Part m of 1929 and to DU. Kulkarni, 10 September 1929, AICC File 16 of 1929. *
sArticle in G.I.P. R*ilw*yma%, aee Jawaharlal’* letter to Kulkarni, 10 September 1929.
132 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
course, far from being a purelylabourorganization. But in problems concerning theworkers, therewas nodoubt as to where his sympathies lay; and in the strug¬ gle for trade union leadership, he threw his weight against the moderates. To the chagrin ofthese men,whowished to co-operate with the RoyalCommission on Labour appointed by the Government, Jawaharlal publicly called for a boycott.! There was such acrimony that Jawaharlal thought of resigning the presidency, but decided that, with the year drawing to its dose, it was not worth while.2
Itwas in this atmosphere of dissension, with both sides so suspidous of each other that they sparred fiercdy even on such trivial issues as the dates of meet¬ ings, that the Trade Union Congress met for its annual session. Jawaharlal’s addresswas wholly acceptable to neither faction, but true to himself. He placed the responsibility for the miserable condition of the Indian workeron the system which was the natural outcome of capitalism and imperialism, and called on labour to join the national movement in its fight against imperialism even while it sought to recruit nationalists in its own struggle against capitalism. The real problem was the conquest ofpower, theoverthrow of both the fordgn ruler and the exploiting employer, and the goal was a socialist order of sodety in which the interests of the workers were supreme and the sources ofwealth were owned by the community and not by individuals.
All this was most pleasing to the Communists in his audience, but then Jawaharlal condudedwiththesuggestion that the Trade Union Congress should affiliate itself to neither the Second nor the Third International. The Second International was disliked by Jawaharlal because it was mainly preoccupied with the fight not against capitalism but against Communism; but the Third Inter¬ national had for Jawaharlal its own drawbacks. Personally he was a staunch admirerof thegeneral trend of policy in the Soviet Union; that country, despite all its heavy blunders and many sins, still held out, more than any other country, the bright promise of a better day to the world at large and to the worker espedally.
With all my sympathy for the Communist view point, however, I must confess that I do not appredate many of their methods. The history of the past few years in China and elsewhere has shown that these methods have failed and often brought reaction in their train. To affiliate with the Third International must mean an adoption of their methods in their entirety. I do not think this is desirable for us.
These sentences the moderates applauded. But if they saw in this rejection oftheleadershipofMoscow an indication that thepresident would support them in the wrangles of detail, they were soon disillusioned. Indeed, his only positive
* Statement, 20 September 1929, S.W., vol. 3. pp. 41-2. * '
2To Bakhale, 24 September 1929, AICC File 16 oI 1929.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
133
act shifted the bias of the whole session. For by his pasting vote Jawaharlal re¬ cognized the Gimi Kamgar (Red Flag) Union of the textile workers in Bomba/ as having a membership of40,000, thusgiving it and the G.I.P. Railway Union, both controlled by the Communists, a majority, under the constitution of the Trade Union Congress, in the open sessions. Otherwise, he sat silent at the meetings of the Executive Committee while resolutions were passed rejecting the Nehru Report, condemning the Delhi manifesto, favouring independence as against Dominion Status, demanding the establishment of a workers' repub¬ lic and calling for affiliation with the League against Imperialism. The fact that he and the Congress were still committed to negotiations for Dominion Status does not seem to have bothered him, while his inner hesitations about the League found no expression. It was not so much that Jawaharlal saw his role as president to be akin to that of a figurehead as that, whatever his public posture, he privately approved of most of these decisions. He also made no strong effort tQ prevent the* secession of the moderates and the formation of a separate All- India Trade Union Federation.
If at Nagpur Jawaharlal had to connive at the rejection of policies to which he was still officially committed, at Lahore at the end of the year he was utterly unshackled. Riding, with his sense of theatre, on a white charger in the Con¬ gress procession, he fitted to perfection, as Gandhi had prophesied, the role of the young Galahad of revolt. The Congress was by now committed to indepen¬ dence and to dvil disobedience. The Viceroy, it is said,1 had at one stage considered banning the session, but finally decided not to interfere. Such action, even if ostensibly in the interestsof maintaining law and order in the city, would have been foolhardy. There was, as an impartial eye-witness noted, no spirit of animosity to the British but a love of India, confidence in their leaders ‘and a new spirit of sacrifice dominant in their thought even to the point of suffering and loss'.2 The same conclusion was reached by an English observer who was normally an ardent Imperialist: ‘The present movement is a deep all-India affair. It's no use pretending that it is the concern of the Indian “Intelligentsia” ,.. Time and education can only intensify the feeling of thinking Indians for India: and the love for the idea ofIndia is one of the finest, and also one of the most incalculable forces in the country.’3 Jawaharlal's speech was attuned to this atmosphereofdefiance and rebellion. He had begun to draft his presidential address about the tenth of December,4 but even then he could write with the full knowledge that the talks with the Viceroy had no prospect of success^
Jawaharlal put the Indian problem in its international context. The whole world was one vast question-mark, and every country and every people were in
* A. r^mphtU Johnson, Viscount Halifax (London, 1941). p. 241.
^Report of Bally Kkmaitd, 8 January 1930, enclosure to Wedgwood Batin’s letter, 5 Mach
1930, Halifax papers, Vpl. 6. . „ _
}J.L.Morisot from Lahore to Dr Norman Leys, 11 January 1930. T. Jones, WbOabaU Diary,
voL 2 (London, 1969), pp. 238-40.
4See letters to Dr Gopichand, 6,10 and 14 December 1929, AICC FileG 100 of 1929-30.
134
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
the melting-pot. It appeared to be a dissolving period of history, when the world was in labour, and outof her travail wouldgive birth to a new order. In this Asia and even India would play a determining part, for the brief day of European domination was already approaching its end and the future lay with America and Asia. But if India had a message to give to the world, she had also much to learn and receive from other peoples.
Then, reverting to India, Jawaharlal pointed out that though her social struc¬ ture had proved to be wonderfully stable, it had failed in one vital particular: it had found no solution for the problem of equality and in fact had deliberately based itselfon inequality. But a solution based on thegenius of the Indian people and on India’s thought and culture had to be found if the political and social structure was to have any stability and the discords between the various com¬ munities were to disappear. And this led Jawaharlal to plead for the faith and generosity which would remove fear and suspicion between the communities.
... by right of birth I shall venture to submit to the leaders of the Hindus that it should be their privilege to take the leadin generosity. ’ That was not only good morals but often good politics and sound expediency. The time was coming soon when such labels as Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs would have little meaning* and when struggles would be on an economic basis. Till then it mattered little what mutual arrangementsweremade, provided only that barriers in the wayoffuture progress were not built up.
The British army of occupation, Jawaharlal went on, held India in its iron grip, and thewhipof the master was ever ready to comedownon the best of them who raised their heads. The answer to the Calcutta resolution had been clear and definite. Only by the greatest stretch of imaginatidh could the Viceroy’s statement be interpreted as a possible response, but he and others like him had signed the Delhi manifesto because even an outside chance of honourable peace had to be taken before launching on a national struggle. But now they had but one goal — independence, complete freedom from British domination, which alone could lead to world co-operation and an international community of equals. The British Empirewas certainly not such agroup; it could not be a true commonwealth so long as imperialism was its basis and the exploitation of other races its chief means of sustenance. In'any such group, India’s position was bound to be oneof subservience. Out of imperialism and capitalism peace could never come, and because the British Empire Stood for these and based itself on the exploitation of the masses Indiacould find nowilling place in it. Many of the problems India had to face were the problems of vested interests, mostly created or encouraged by the British Government; and so long as the British Empire continued, in whatever shape, in India it would strengthenthese vested interests and create more.
The controversy about the relative merits of independence and Dominion Status was to Jawaharlal really a question about the conquest of power, and he did not think that any form of Dominion Status applicable to India would trans¬ fer real power. A test of this power would be the entire withdrawal of the alien army of occupation and of its economic control. India demanded the fullest
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 135
freedom. They were very conscious of their weakness, but let no one underrate the strength of their resolve. There would be no turning back. Agreat nation could not be thwarted for long when once its mind was made up.
‘I must frankly confess’, Jawaharlal continued, 'that I am a Socialist and a republican, and am no believer in kings and princes, or in the order which pro* duces the modern kings of industry, who have greater power over the lives and fortunes ofmen than even the kings of old, and whose methods are as predatory as those of the old feudal aristocracy.’ He acknowledged that the Congress, as it *was then constituted, might not be able to adopt a full socialistic programme, but the philosophy of socialism had gradually permeated the entire structure of society the world over, and almost the only points in dispute were the pace and the methods of advance. India too would have to go that way if she wished to end poverty and inequality, though she might evolve her own methods and adapt the ideal to her own genius.
On the two particular problems of India, the minorities and the states, Jawaharlal had little that was startlingly new to say. He wanted the minorities to begiven the fullest assurances that their culture and traditions would be safe. The princes were the products of a vicious system which would ultimately have to go. Only the people of the states could determine the future of those areas, and while the Congress was perfectly willing to confer with such rulers as were prepared to do so and to devise means for smoothing the transition, in no event could thepeopleof thestates be ignored. But, as regards the problem of peasantry and labour, Jawaharlal asked the Congress to commit itself to ending the domination of any one class over another, and to draw up a programme of such changes as could be immediately put into operation. Paternalism and trustee¬ ship were both equally barren theories. The least that every worker in field or factory was entitled to was a minimum wage and humane hours of labour; and in the long.term the Congress should strive for workers’ control of industry on a co-operative basis and for a system of peasant proprietorship.
The immediate problem, however, was the conquest of power, and the forg¬ ing of sanctions to enforce the national will. The Congress had not the material or the training for organized violence, and individual and sporadic violence was a confession of despair.
The great majority of us, I take it, judge the issue not on moral but on practical grounds, and if we reject the way of violence it is because it pro¬ mises no substantial results. But if this Congress or the nation at any future time comes to the conclusion that methods of violence will rid us of slavery then I have no doubt that it will adopt them. Violence is bad, but slavery is far worse.
Gandhi himself had said that it was better to fight than to refuse to fight out of cowardice. But except in times of organized revolt, all mass movements must necessarily be peaceful. The basic idea of non-co-operation must remain, but
136
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
JawaharlaJ did not think it wise to declare a boycott of schools and law courts at the very start. Theprogramme should be one of political and economic boy¬ cott, the reduction of all points of contact with the British Government. This would release energy and direct attention to the real struggle, whichshould take the shape of non-payment of taxes and, where possible, general strikes. It was now an Open Conspiracy, which everyone should join, to free the country from foreign rule.
The presidential address shows both the strength and the weakness of Jawaharlal at this stage. His impatient and full-blooded eagerness for freedom was manifest. He had no use for political compromise. He wished to eject the British from India and thereafter cut his country off from the British Empire. In the campaign of civil disobedience which was to begin he accepted.the leader¬ ship of Gandhi, but made it clear that he accepted non-violence as a technique rather than as a moral end in itself, and did not rule out the adoption of violent methods at any future time. There was still very much of the romantic in Jawaharlal; he was still, beneath the added maturity and sophistication, the emotional nationalist of the early twenties. The impact of ideology to which he had been exposed during his stay in Europe in 1926 and 1927 could be dearly seen, but it was not deep absorption. With courage he announced that he was a socialist and a republican, but it was courage tinged with apology. The social- ism which he envisaged was clearly of a mild and timid variety, and he spoke of India evolving her own methods and adjusting it to her traditions. There was little here of forthright Marxism or of the scientific socialism of which he had heard so much in Europe. He was groping more in the direction of Utopian, Gandhian socialism,.though he went on to criticize the concepts of trusteeship. Similarly, while he realized that the basic problem in India was an economic one and communal troubles were artificial, he spoke of finding an interim solu¬ tion which would be typically Indian. The confusion of thought was probably the result of a dislike of precise choice, an instinctive rductance to abandon Indian ways even while his mind turned away from them, and the feeling of a lack of immediacy about these matters. They all had to give way to the conquest of power, and for this the Congress was the obvious instrument. He added almost in the same breath as his assertion of his personal credo that he did not expect the Congress, with its predominantly middle-class composition, to agree with him or to adopt a revolutionary programme. His loyalty to the Congress being unreserved, this could only mean that, while he would not abandon his principles, he would be willing to keep them in abeyance. His extremism in objectives did not carry with it an intensity of purpose and method. So, while the leader-writers of the British and the Indian press threw up their hands in horror at this enthronement by the sedate Congress of a seeming revolutionary, for Gandhi therewas no dismay. Hedid not forget that the author of this radical address rfas also a signatory of the Delhi manifesto and tl&t to Jawaharlal
THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 137
discipline was more important than revolution and political freedom took priority over economic and social change. There was little to fear from a man whom Gandhi described as a confirmed socialist who wanted for his country only what it could manage, a practical statesman who tempered his ideals to suit his surroundings.1 On the other hand, it was worth having in the chair a figure of glamour and integrity who would keep captive within the Congress his wide following among the students and the intelligentsia. During the next ten years, no single individual did more to build in the Congress an awareness of economic issues; but Jawaharlal was also the best shield of the Congress against left-wing groups and organizations.
i Young