The Transfer of Power
On 24 March 1947, Mountbatten was sworn in as Viceroy. Romantic myth has been built, not without encouragement, round his short term of office. Books have been written depicting the Prince Charming who appeared in the last scene of the Indian drama, dominated the British Cabinet and imposed his will on Indian politicians. ‘I was governing by personality.’1 Taking, we are told, firm hold of a crumbling situation, he decided to partition the country and effected it in just over four and a half months, thus solving a problem which had baffled statesmen in Britain and India for years.
Mountbatten had, of course, great personal assets: good looks, links with royalty, a dazzling war reputation, a wife of charm and intelligence. But it is childish to suggest that these even helped to solve the Indian question by bemusing those concerned into accepting his solution. In fact, even before Mountbatten came to India, both the British Government and the Congress Party had come round to the view that there was no alternative to accepting Jinnah’s demand in some form or another. It was now an axiom of official British thinking not only in Delhi but in London as well that the Congress represented the Hindus and the League the Muslims. Cripps, for example, said ofthe 1946 elections: ’For the first time since the beginning of the war the full strength of the rival communities was made clear and it became apparent that Indians had ranged themselves substantially upon a communal basis behind the Congress and the Muslim League.’2 Attlee’s statement of 20 Feb¬ ruary clearly recognized that the Mission Plan was dead and the British would transfer authority, if need be, to governments other than that at the centre. Even the fixing of the date by which the British would leave would seem to have been Attlee's idea, and therefore one for which Mountbatten cannot take the main credit. It has been ingeniously suggested that it was Mountbatten who was most insistent on a firm date and decided that the best way to secure
> Mountbatten's interview with the author, 28 May 1970.
2 3 March 1947. Italicsmine. In the original draft the word had been ‘parties’ but it was altered to ‘communities* to leave no doubt about what was meant. Cripps papers, PUe 13.
**
342
THE TRANSFER OF POWER 343
it was to impute it to the Prime Minister.1 But perhaps it is best to rely in this matter on the testimony of Lord Ismay, who served on Mountbatten’s staff in India and, besides being well-informed, was if anything prejudiced in Mount- batten’s favour. Congratulating Attlee on the outcome of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ Conference when India, though a republic, was enabled to remain in the Commonwealth, Ismay wrote:
It was a wonderful personal triumph for you — as was the original deci¬ sion to appoint a definite date for the handing over of power in India and to send Dickie [Mountbatten] as Viceroy. You have, if I may be so bold as to say so, ridden an absolutely consistent and far seeing line on India from the very outset. . . Anyway you have brought off a wonderful right and left, which history will certainly acclaim.2
The Congress Working Committee too had, early in March, reconciled itself to the partition of the Punjab and recognized that the same principle would also be applicable to Bengal. To Gandhi the unity of India was still important, but he had by now departed into the shadows. His role in the Con¬ gress was similar to that of a head of an Oxbridge college who is greatly revered but has little influence on the governing body. Jawaharlal and Patel had come to the conclusion that there was no alternative to at least temporary secession. Various psychological tensions seemed to them to have developed among the Indian people, and especially among the Muslims, and these could not be re¬ solved by reason or dealt with by force. To insist on the maintenance of the Indian Union could only mean continuing trouble. Even a very loose union seemed out of the question and efforts to sustain it could only result in weaken¬ ing the country and halting all social and economic progress. The total inability of the interim government to reach a decision on any major issue was powerful testimony in favour of division. So Jawaharlal and the Congress, while rejecting the two-nation theoiy, agreed to the separation of those parts of the country which wished to break away. Indeed, that might make it easier for reason and the compulsion of logic ultimately to prevail. There were some subjects like defence which, even after partition, would not of choice but of necessity have to be looked after-in common, and this might lead gradually back to a reintegra¬ tion of India. ‘I have no doubt whatever that sooner or lata* India will have to function as a unified country. Perhaps the best way to reach that stage is to go through some kind of a partition now.’3 It was wise to let events have their course for a while so that they might return on their own to the normal equi¬ librium. 'But of one thing I am convinced that ultimately there will be a united
- * Hodson, op. dt., p. 194.
2 Ismay to Attlee, 6 March 1949, Attlee papers, Box 6.
»To K. P. S. Meoon, 29 April 1947.
344
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
and strong India. We have often to go through the valley of the shadow before we reach the sun-lit mountain tops.’1
Mountbatten’s task, therefore, was merely to work out the details and effect the partition demanded by the League and accepted by both the British Govern¬ ment and the Congress; and this the new Viceroy moved comigandingly to perform. Before Mountbatten’s arrival, Jawaharlal had been concerned by the inclusion in his staff of Ismay and Sir Eric Mieville, who had last been in India with Willingdon, but he was soon impressed by Mountbatten's goodwill, commonsensical directness and sense of urgency — all in such sharp contrast to Wavell’s dithering and prejudice. In the first few weeks of the viceroyalty, while Mountbatten went through the motions of consultations and seeking to breathe life into the Cabinet Mission Plan, Jawaharlal was content to be a mere spectator,
He first gave all his attention to the Asian Relations Conference. The idea ofsuch a conference had been in Jawaharlal’s mind from December 1945, and, after preliminary arrangements had been made, invitations were sent out in September 1946. It was to be a non-official conference representative of all shades of opinion in the countries of Asia (plus Egypt). So each country was requested to send a delegation of sixteen chosen by established institutions (where they existed) which were interested in world affairs; and these delega¬ tions were to be supplemented by four observers nominated by the government of the country and by distinguished scholars invited in their individual capacity. Convened in the uninhibited times before India was free and Jawaharlal was restricted by the requirements of official policy, the conference could hear the views of both the Kuomintang and the Communists, of the Arab League as well as the Hebrew University. The Soviet Central Asian republics were represented; and in addition the Soviet Union, along with Australia, New Zealand, Britain and the United States, sent observers.
There was, in fact, an euphoric atmosphere about the Conference. Its main purpose was to enable the leaders of Asia, on the threshold of a new world, to meet. Not only controversial issues involving these countries, but even matters like defence and security which concerned powers outside Asia were excluded from the agenda, which listed only such innocuous subjects as national freedom movements, migration and racial problems, economic development and the status ofwomen. But the agenda was the least important part of the conference. For ten days, from 23 March to 2 April, Delhi saw itself as the natural centre of a resurgent continent, conscious of its glorious past and forging links for the future. *
Standing on this watershed which divides two epochs of human history
and endeavour, we can look back on our long past and look forward to
•To Brigadier (later General) Cariappa, 29 April 1947.
THE TRANSFER OF POWER
545
the future that is taking shape before our eyes ... An Indian, wherever he may go in Asia, feds a sense of kinship with the land he visits and the people he meets .. . For too long we of Asia have been petitioners in Western courts and chancelleries. That story must now belong to the past. Wepropose to standonourown feet and to cooperate with all others who are prepared to cooperate with us. We do not intend to be the play¬ things of others.1
Nothing came of the Asian Relations Organization set up by the Confer¬ ence, and no participant country acted on the resolution to set up national units of this Organization or academies of Asian studies. There was not even a second session of the Asian Relations Conference, though one may trace its influence in the origins of the Asian-African Conference hdd at Bandung in 1955. Yet Jawaharlal was satisfied with the Conference as the expression of anfemotion which he personally felt deeply. Soto himthe Conferencewas
an amazing success from every point of view. 1 think we can definitely call it the beginnings of a new era in Asian history. All those who came from the four corners of Asia fdt the importance and significance of the occasion and went away duly impressed. Delhi did them well. India as a whole suddenly became conscious not only of all our neighbours but of Asia. We are all Asia-conscious at present.2
Even after the Conference, Jawaharlal took no active part in the constitu¬ tional discussions. ‘He is very tired mentally and physically’, commented Ismay afteran interview with him,9 ‘and he’s subject to emotion to an alarming degree. But he has courage and statesmanship of a sort.’ Convinced of Mountbatten's bonafides, his main objective at this time was merely to clear the way for the Viceroy to concentrate on the major problems by shelving or disposing of the minor ones.,He did not press for Caroe’s removal. He resolved the minor crisis which had developed on the eve of Wavell’s departure over the release of the members of the Indian National Army still in prison. This was the only issue on which the members of the interim government were united, and they were supported by the Legislative Assembly. Wavell, however, with the approval of the British Government exercised his veto. Normally any government could have been expected to resign, but the interim government was not a normal government. It is extremely doubtful if the representatives of the League, de¬ spite the comfnon viewpoint, would have joined the Congress in sod) a step. This probably also influenced Jawaharlal in yielding to Mountbatten’spressure
1JawaharlaTiinaugural address to the conference, 23 March 1947, reprinted in AtkmH^Utkms (report of the proceedings), New Delhi, 1948, pp. 20*27.
aTo Aaef All, 7 April 1947.
*6 April 1947, R. Wingate, Lord Ismty (London, 1970), p. 133.
346 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
and suggesting reference of all these cases to the Federal Court for advice. He was resentful of Jinnah’s insistence that he would.sign an appeal for communal peace only with Gandhi and not also with J. $. Kripalani, who had taken over the Congress presidency from Jawaharlal. Jinnah’s intent was clearly to imply that Gandhi represented Hindu India, and he, Muslin^ India — an approach unfair to Gandhi and contrary to the policy of the Congress. Yet Jawaharlal agreed to abide by Mountbatten’s decision and the appeal was issued by Gandhi and Jinnah alone.1
Jawaharlal, therefore, even to the detriment of his own party, gave the Viceroy full scope to work out the best way in which the country could be parti¬ tioned. Mountbatten and his advisers drew up a ‘Plan Balkan’, whereby power would be demitted to the provinces and they would be left to decide whether they would form any groups.2 The plan was not shown in detail to the Con¬ gress leaders, and Jawaharlal knew only the general outlines. He certainly does not seem to have known that power was being transferred to the provinces, and was assuming that partition would involve no more than a division of the Punjab and Bengal. It has been stated that Mieville showed the draft proposals to Jawaharlal and had a satisfactory interview with him.3 But the evidence is all the other way. ‘Neither I nor my colleagues of the Interim Government who were present at our meeting’, wrote Jawaharlal to Mountbatten on 1 May, ‘know the full extent of the proposals that Lord Ismay is taking with him to London. But you have been good enough to keep me informed of the broad outlines of these proposals and I placed these before the [Working] Com¬ mittee ... I have not entered in this letter into any detailed consideration of all your proposals as we have not got them before us in their final form.' So, apart from reiterating that the Congress would accept the principle of partition based on self-determination as applied to definitely ascertained areas, Jawaharlal stressed only the unfairness of attempts to dislodge the Congress ministry in the Frontier province in order to make Pakistan a practical proposition. To yield to the demands of the League, backed up by terrorism and rioting, for fresh elections would be a surrender which would have far-reaching repercussions not only in the Frontier province but in the rest of India.4 But far from putting down this violence and the policy underlying it, the Governor and sometrf his adviserswereencouraging the League; and Jawaharlal now hinted at resignation if Caroe were not removed. ‘I find it increasingly difficult to continue to be in charge of a Department which is responsible in some way for the activities of officials who function wrongly and are completely beyond my control.’9 Mountbatten could have had no doubts about Caroe’s abuse of his position.
jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 14 April, and MouYitbatten's reply, 13 April 1947.
2Hodson, op. cit., pp. 229-30.
Mbid.. p. 293.
4Jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 17 and 26 April 1947.
’Idem, 1 May 1947.
THE TRANSFER OF POWER
347
it*, fow
Jttow CLlwt’, 4W^lt •■Ul dU{**V Ci^u *f fl*
f **4{,4U* «ul tAct»m <C5* ♦'«*—«• ;
toutoun. . j 'UCtx~+i *{<•*•
•k^ Cr> i.»« >>»<ii^ AtS»4!«»« j ^(v»Q*A *M' •A •
S^J*A VWJ0UA,U-J^ fc-O - '*•-*■ j
ftm »\tfc<Cv^ ^ .
Dv ?v~~\ : —A «&*»*£*..
dL4*Jl*~<w
3v WU£v : —*• T^**>
S«Ok«A. B«JQow
^Ua ^*wa- • ^■*^*/'/
fa, <•. ft . ft L.-44* •*
K, R*f. • <?*>—
SaJJt U.WC : H<*-Wr
*$v ft. R. Aw>UM*A. Lw
Sk4 R. A. 5kiK^*KA.lA,t>^*~*
$v SU}«~** ;
Su^ b. V. <5~y. ■• —1 P’~*’‘-
Jawaharlal’s first Cabinet List
348
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
The Governor openly acted on the premiss that ‘the Congress is not natural here’ and it was but proper that the province, sandwiched between the Punjab and the tribes, should have a League ministry. As the League lacked leaders in the province of the calibre of Abdul Gaffar Khan and his brother Dr Khan Sahib, the Congress premier, Caroe repeatedly urged the latter «to oust the Hindus in his ministry and sever his connection with the Congress1 — advice which was hardly in keeping with the Governor’s constitutional position. But Mountbatten was not prepared, at this stage at any rate, to remove Caroe. Wavell’had advised strongly against it and the dismissal of a senior LC.S. governor at the request of half hisgovernment was not a step to be taken lightly. Moreover, on a visit to the Frontier province, Mountbatten seems to have been impressed by the mass demonstrations organized to establish the growing strength of the League. On the other hand, he protested against the agitation promoted by the Congress in various cities for the removal of Caroe, and Gaffar Khan’s public criticism of the Governor, as attempts to make him act under duress.2 In fact, Mountbatten decided to adopt Caroe’s policy and make it acceptable to the Congress, when the time came, by getting rid of Caroe. He told Khan Sahib that he could only remove Caroe if the Congress agreed to a referendum; they could work out which they preferred.3
Even after Ismay had secured the Cabinet’s approval, with minor amend¬ ments, to Mountbatten’s Plan Balkan, Jawaharlal and Mountbatten continued primarily to discuss its application to the Frontier province. Jawaharlal was, on 10 May, Mountbatten’s guest at Simla. There the Viceroy wrote to him that instead of Governor’s rule or fresh elections in the NWFP, a referendum should be held on the issue of partition by an organization under the control not of the Governor but of the Viceroy. ‘1 will tell Caroe to tell Dr Khan Sahib that you are in general agreement with the procedure.’ Jawaharlal promptly denied this and refused to be hustled. This was a matter on which the Working Committee felt very strongly and had specifically directed Jawaharlal to convey its feeling to the Viceroy. All that Jawaharlal had agreed to was that the people of the Frontier province should be consulted before final decisions were taken, but it was very important when this was done and in what context, and any referendum would require the full concurrence of the provincial government.4
On the night of 10 May Mountbatten, acting on ’an absolute hunch’, gave Jawaharlal the complete text of the Plan Balkan as revised by the Cabinet. ‘The moment’, writes the chronicler of the Mountbatten phase in India, 'was a watershed in the history of three nations.’3 This is to overrate the importance
1Caroeto Mountbatten, 22 March and 7 April 1947, Caroe papers.
3Mountbatten to Jawaharlal, 6 May\1947.
’Interview with the author, 28 May 1970.
4Mountbatten to Jawaharlal, 10 May, and Jawaharlai's reply ot the same date.
’Hodaon, op. dfc, pp. 293-6.
THE TRANSFER OF POWER
349
of the event if Jawaharlal was merely being shown again a text which he had already seen, but with some minor alterations. In fact, he was seeing the full text for the first time, and was so upset that he burst into Krishna Menon's room at 2 a.m., speechless with indignation.1 That certain features of the Plan came as a complete surprise to him demands emphasis, for an understanding of JawaharlaTs reaction hinges on this. Jawaharlal places this beyond doubt in a note recorded by him at the time:
At Simla
On the 10th May night I was given some idea of the draft proposals as they had been sent to London. I considered them that night and early next morning I dictated a long note. As there was delay in typing this note and events were marching fast, I sent a brief hand-written letter to Lord Mountbatten. I kept no copy of this. This letter produced an imme¬ diate impression and led to a talk. Later I handed over to Mountbatten the typewritten note of 11/5.
On the 11th afternoon it was decided to postpone the Conference called for May 17th to June 2nd.
J.N.
The hastily written note which he sent to Mountbatten shows signs of excitement and is in places incoherent. But it made clear that the Congress Would not accept the break-up of the Indian Union and the transfer of sover¬ eignty to the provinces. Any plan should start with the Union and the opting out of certain areas rather than a number of sovereign units coming together if they so desired. To jettison the basic conception of India and denude the Constituent Assembly of its significance was to yield to the League and ignore the viewsof all other sections ofopinion in India. The 'preposterous' suggestion to settle the future of Baluchistan in accordance with the wishes of a few nomi¬ nated Sirdars, the insistence that the NWFP be given a fresh opportunity to reverse its decision to form a part of India and the refusal to apply to Sind the formulaenforced on Assam that a Muslim-majority partof it should be attached to the contiguous seceding area were all intended as special favours to the League. The inevitable consequences would be to invite the Balkanization of India, provoke civil conflict ami add to violence and disorder, ensure a further breakdown of’the central authority and demoralize the army, the police and the civil service. The States would also declare themselves independent kingdoms, probably in subordinate alliance with Britain, and this would create an almost
1Mountbatten’s speech on the occasion of the third Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Lecture, London, 12 November 1970.
350 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
unbridgeable gulf between the peoples of India and Britain. The public assur¬ ance to the tribeson the frontier that they could have treaties with whomsoever they liked was to invite them to profit by internal difficulties in India.
Jawaharlal’s reaction surprised Mountbatten. He attributed it, as did Ismay later, to old suspicions of the British Government, and he believed that Jawa- harlal resented the mere fact that the Plan had been revised in London.1 Alater interpretation draws on psychology. Jawaharlal, it is said, was prone to amnesia; even while discussing partition he had been entranced by the vision of a united India, and at the moment of truth reacted violently. The development at Simla is seen as essentially an internal crisis in the mind of an emotional dreamer; Jawaharlal was unconsciously balancing two sets of attitudes, experiencing one of his unpredictable, moody interludes, at odds with himself and with others, rebelling against the fact that he, the revolutionary, was putting himself into the hands of the Viceroy and the British Government.2 But this interpre¬ tation assumes that Jawaharlal had seen the full text of the proposals which Ismay took to London; and he clearly had not. In his eagerness to get things done, Mountbatten was inclined to wishful believing. ‘He’s a grand chap in a thousand ways but clarity of thought and writing is not his strong suit.’3 He had convinced himself that he had secured Jawaharlal’s approval of the Plan Balkan and interpreted Jawaharlal’s personal cordiality for whole-hearted acceptance of his scheme. But no doubt there was a gnawing sense of reality at the back of his mind and it was this which inspired his ‘hunch’. Jawaharlal, taken aback by the concept of fragmentation, had too much faith in Mount- batten's integrity to believe either that he had introduced this feature into the Plan or that he had failed to inform Jawaharlal of it. He assumed, therefor^, that it had been introduced by the British Cabinet and blamed them severely for it. This, andnotthe suggestion that hewasso petty as to resent even minor altera¬ tions made in London, explains the language of his letter to.the Viceroy. ‘The relatively simple proposals that we had previously discussed now appeared in garb that HMG had provided for them in an entirely new context which gave them an ominous meaning .. . The picture of India that emerged frightened me . . . HMG seem to function in an ivory tower of their own isolated from realities in India . . . ’4
Nor were Jawaharlal’s fears wholly unreal and theoretical. There were powerful forces at work seeking to break up India into a number of units. Suhrawardy put himself at the head of a movement to create an independent Bengal and gained the support of some influential Congressmen. In the NWFP
1Campbell Johnson, op. tit, p. 90; Hodson, op. tit., p. 297; Ismay, Memoirs (London, 1960), p. 421.
2H. Tinker, Experiment with Freedom (Oxford, 1967), p. 112; and ‘Jawaharlal Nehru at Simla May 1947’, Modern Asian Studies, October 1970, pp. 349-58.
’Ismay on 23 April 1947, Wingate, op. tit., p, 153.
4This extract from Jawaharlal's handwritten letter (of which he kept no copy) of 11 May, is taken from Tinker's article, op. tit., p. 354. <*
THE TRANSFER OF POWER 351
also, many Congressmen talked loosely of independence as.being preferable to being coerced into joining Pakistan. With the coming lapse of paramountcy the Political Department, over which the interim government had no control, was suspected by the Congress of encouraging the leading Princes to set them¬ selves up as independent rulers.1 The Nawab of Bhopal and the Nizam of Hyderabad were known to be toying with the idea of independence, and the Dewan of Travanoore announced that this State would assume sovereign power. If the British Government had declared the Plan Balkan to be their policy, partition might well have expanded into fragmentation, and India as such ceased to exist.
AfterJawaharlal’srejectionofthe Plan, Mountbatten, hurriedlyplasteringover hiscracked confidence, postponed his meeting with the Indian leaders scheduled for 17 May, and directed his advisers to recast the Plan to meet Jawaharlal’s main objection. The Constituent Assembly would continue to meet; and there would be a second Constituent Assembly for those areas which decided not to participate in the existing Assembly. The Punjab and Bengal would be parti¬ tioned if the representatives of either the Muslim-majority districts or the rest of the province desired it, and boundary commissions would be set up later to demarcate the boundaries on the basis of contiguous majority areas and other factors. It would not, however, be possible to provide a separate state for the Sikhs. Though Sylhet district was a part of Assam, as it was predominantly Muslim and contiguous to Bengal, a referendum should be held there to deter¬ mine whether it should also be divided. Sind would decide through its assembly which state to join, and an appropriate mechanism would be devised to enable British Baluchistan also to choose. The real problem was with the NWFP, the majority of whose representatives were already participating in the Constituent Assembly. Here democratic principles were frankly set aside to enable Pakistan to become a reality. ‘But it is clear, in view of its geographical situation, and other considerations, that if the whole or any part of the Punjab decides not to join the existing Constituent Assembly, it will be necessary to give the NWFP an opportunity to reconsider its position.’ So if the Punjab decided on partition, a referendum would be held in the NWFP under the aegis of the Governor-General and in consultation with the Provincial Government. Agreements with the frontier tribes would be negotiated by the appropriate successor authorities. As for the Indian States, British policy would continue as before and the Plan would not apply to them.
This Plan was broadly acceptable to the Congress because it accepted the premiss that India was a continuing entity, with the separation of those areas the majorityofwhose inhabitants desired it. Jawaharlal and his colleagues were anxious too for quick and find decisions. Lahore was being gradually reduced to ashes while Calcutta prepared for another round of killings; but the admini-
»Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 27 February 1947.
352
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
stration was doing little to stem the spread and intensification of communal fury. 'We are at present living in the midst of crises and the situation is volcanic. Theonly comfort one can derive from it is that some solution must come soon. We have to face very hard realities now and the time for vague resolutions is passed. Definite choices have to be made and the choice is often ayery difficult one.’1 The first thing to be done was to effect an immediate transfer of power out of British hands, for British officials seemed neither willing nor competent to deal with the situation. Knowing that they would soon depart, many of them often showed little interest, while some appeared to derive satisfaction at the thought that India was going to pieces. 'The situation has become intolerable and all the evident goodwill of Mountbatten does not make it more bearable.'2 With no one assuming responsibility, there was mere drift from bad to worse. As Patel told the Viceroy, ‘You won’t govern yourself, and you won’t let us govern.’3
Catching Jawaharlai in this mood, Mountbatten induced him not only, despite all his earlier reservations, to agree to a referendum in the NWFP, but also to accept Dominion Status. From the start the Viceroy’s objective had been to achieve a solution which would retain the Indian parties within the Commonwealth, and Jinnah, at one stage of the negotiations, sought to pro¬ mote the chances of Pakistan by offering to accept Dominion Status. But obviously the prime importance was attached to the attitude of the Congress. Patel, with his conservative tendencies, and Krishna Menon, with his Anglo¬ phile attitudes, saw eye to eye on this. But Jawaharlai, occupying a central position, was adamant in opposition. His position had not changed since the days when he had moved the independence resolution at Madras in 1927 and presided over the Congress at Lahore in 1929 which had resolved on civil disobedience if independence was not granted. Thereafter every year Indepen¬ dence Day had been celebrated; and in December 1946 Jawaharlai had moved in the Constituent Assembly the resolution that India should be an independent sovereign republic. His speech on that occasion reflected his bitterness with the British authorities for their rejection of the interpretation of the Mission Plan put forward by the Congress. In the following months Mountbatten’s personal friendship had made Jawaharlai less edgy but he had not altered his views on this subject.
Under no conceivable circumstances is India going to remain in the British Commonwealth whatever the consequences. This is'not a question for me to decide or for any few of us to decide. Any*attempt to remain in the Commonwealth will sweep away those who propose it and might bring about major trouble in India. We must, therefore,
1 Jawaharlai to S. Radhakrishnan, 14 May 1947.
1 Jawaharlai to Vtjayalalcshmi Pandit, 22 May 1947.
} Campbell Johnson, op. cit, p. 72. %
THE transfer of power
proceed on the assumption which is a practical certainty that India wifi fgy out of the British Commonwealth by the middle of next year.
Friendly arrangements could be made with Britain on many matters, «nrlnrii*^g defence, but only on the basis of independence. If British army officers threat- ened to leave, ‘I shall accept that without losing a night’s sleep.’1 It might immediately mean some weakness in the higher ranks, but in the long run it would build up India’s self-reliance as well as give reality to India’s indepen¬ dence. Severance from the Commonwealth would also in a sense strengthen India’s security, for Britain was incapable of defending India and the main result of being in the Commonwealth would be to drag India into Britain’s foreign commitments and animosities, while India herself was threatened by no major power.2
In May, however, Jawaharlal’s keenness for an early de facto transfer of power was exploited in favour of Dominion Status. In his note of 11 May he had suggested that even before the British withdrew, the interim government should be treated as a Cabinet with joint responsibility based 'upon full Domi¬ nion autonomy’; and if the League refused to accept this, its representatives Should be told to resign. Mountbatten at first agreed to this, subject to the Viceroy retaining his overriding power to safeguard the interests of minor¬ ities; but then, presumably because of Jinnah’s objection, he withdrew his consent. The Congress strongly objected and there was a fairly heated argu¬ ment. ‘Mountbatten, almost for the first time, took up an entirely contrary view and said that he thought we were unreasonable in insisting on this even to the point of breaking when it was only a question of two or three months.’ Jawaharlal and Patel replied that this was a vital matter and if they were asked once again to give in to Jinnah they would prefer to resign. But Mountbatten refused to yield and accused the Congress of wanting to crush the. League during the coming months, and possibly to interfere with the Muslim-majority areas to the League's disadvantage. In the end the Congress had to give way.’ It was finally dedded that, to enable a speedy transfer of power once partition wasdecided upon, there should be twoDominionGovernments with acommon Governor-General or two separate Govemors-General; and the armed forces would also be divided in accordance with the territorial basis of their recruit¬ ment.
On the main clauses of the May Plan the Congress had little objection at this stage, except that they wished certain Hindu-majority areas in Sind to be given the right to secede from the province, and proposed the deletion of all reference to the Sikhs unless it could be said that the boundary commission would bear in mind their desire that as far as possible the majority of their
>To Bakiev Singh, 14 April 1947.
JIdem, 8 April 1947.
*To Krishna Menon, 17 May 1947.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
934
community should be included in eastern Punjab. Mountbatten rejected the first suggestion on the ground that: it would open the way for the League to lay claim to little pockets elsewhere1 — an argument which would have applied to Sylhet as well; but here again the Congress, now almost desperate for final¬ ity, did not pursue its case. On the question of the Sikhs, it was decked to make no reference to them at all.
Seeing that the Congress was continually yielding and that Mountbatten, for all his personal liking for Jawaharlal, was not favouring the Congress, Jinnah continued to pitch his claim high. Despite his verbal message to Mountbatten that the Plan as it stood was acceptable to the League, he con¬ tinued — for the record, at any rate — to ask for more. The Constituent Assembly should be dissolved and two new Assemblies, for India and for Pakistan, should be convened; the Punjab and Bengal should not be parti¬ tioned; Calcutta should not be given to India, and, at the worst, should be made a free port; and the Congress ministry should not be consulted on a referendum- in the NWFP. Then, when Mountbatten was in London for consultations with the Cabinet, he publicly formulated a demand for a corridor between western and eastern Pakistan. It is unlikely that Jinnah expected anything more at this stage than what had been conceded in Mountbatten’s plan; but nothing was lost by playing this game of nerves. As Mi£ville com¬ mented, ‘it was all so disappointing to me and yet at the same time not wholly unexpected.’2 Jawaharlal’s reply to this claim was that Jinnah obviously wanted no settlement and Mountbatten’s plan should therefore be abandoned, the Cabinet Mission Plan imposed and the interim government treated as a Domi¬ nion government.^
Ignoring these demands of both sides, the Cabinet approved the plan as it stood, with only one major addition: that the date for the transfer of power could be brought forward* from June 1948 by conferring Dominion Status on one or two successor authorities even in 1947 Mountbatten presented this plan to the Congress and the League, secured their agreement to work it, and asked Jawaharlal, Jinnah and Baldev Singh to follow him and broadcast to the nation on the evening of 3 June. Jawaharlal’s effort was one of his out¬ standing performances. He was normally no orator but could, with genuine¬ ness and spontaneity, rise to the occasion. He stumbled along on the plains but was at home in the heights. His rhetoric was never over-blown, his prose never over-excited. He now spoke of the past nine months when the Congress had been in office at the centre, months of sore trial and difficulty, of anxiety and sometimes even of heartbreak. There was much on the credit side, for India had advanced nationally and internationally; but his mind was heavy with the thought of the tragedy and suffering which the Indian people had
1Jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 16 May, and Mountbatten ! reply of the tame date.
iTo Jawaharlal, 22 May 1947.
* Jawaharlal'! press statement, 29 May, and letter to Mldville, 25 May 1947.
the transfer of power
355
undergone. It was with no joy that he now commended the proposals for session, though he had no doubt that this was the right course. It was an India united not by compulsion but by the free and willing association of a free people that they laboured for, and it might be that these proposals would
enable them to reach such an united India sooner than otherwise and with a stronger foundation.
We are little men serving a great cause, but because the cause is great something of that greatness falls upon us also. Mighty forces are at work in the world today and in India, and I have no doubt that we are ushering in a period of greatness for India. The India of geography, of history and tradition, the India of our minds and hearts, cannot change.
It was with that faith that they should bury the bad past and make a fresh start.
This was the appropriate blend of sadness and commitment, courage and magnanimity; and even a tough soldier like Ismay was moved.
I hesitate to add to the number of papers that you have to read, but I must beg leave to send you my warmest congratulations on your splendid broadcast last night. It was, if I may say so, brave, generous and deeply moving; and I cannot imagine any words that are more likely to inspire us all to do our utmost in the days that lie ahead. I particularly liked your reference to ‘small men’ and ‘big causes'. It so exactly describes the feeling that I have entertained about my own unworthy self ever since I under¬ took my task.
Believe me in gratitude, Yours very sincerely Ismay.1
It now remained only to implement the plan, to ascertain the wishes of the people in the areas concerned and to arrange for separation if it were desired by the majority. Curiously, Jawaharlal expected little trouble. He regarded the communal frenzy as a fever which would pass once the decision about Pakistan had been taken. He had too noble an idea of his countrymen to be¬ lieve that the desire to kill and torture, born of religious zeal, had any deep root in their nature. He was wrong, but so was everyone else in a position of responsibility at this time; and all were surprised and caught unprepared by the widespread and savage killings that disfigured India before and after parti¬ tion. After 2 June, Jawaharlal, in the belief that the present had been settled, thought mainly of the future. It was a difficult time but India would muddle her way through, and once they had settled down to the new order they should move fast. In these summer months Jawaharlal, for the first time since his
> Ismay to Jawaharlal, 4 Jane 1947.
356
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
release in 1945, was not caught up in the rush of events. The loss of certain parts of India seemed to him a temporary phenomenon which would soon right itself. This was a view shared even by Cripps. He also did not see the June Plan as a complete severance of the seceding areas, and advised Professor Morris-Jones, who was going out to India at the end of May as constitutional adviser to Mountbatten, to make a study of such joint organizations as the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the International Postal Union.1
Nor did Jawaharlal see partition coming soon. Once partition had been decided on, Mountbatten believed that if it were not done rapidly ‘the thing would have blown up under my hands’.2 He had therefore announced, without any consultation with the Congress or the League, that the division would be effected and the two Dominion Governments come into existence by 15 August. But Jawaharlal does not seem to have taken this in. He was still thinking in terms of the British leaving in June 1948, when alone India would attain full independence. Dominion Status was nothing more than an interim arrangement, ‘an ex gratia gift’ from the British, advantageous to them in the long run because it increased their prestige and helped to produce good¬ will.9 Mountbatten tried to clear this confusion,4 but obviously in vain; for even later Jawaharlal was writing ‘that from the 15th August onwards our Government will be a substantially free Government.’ A measure of British control over the Indian army would still continue, and even by 1 April 1948 the Indian Government hoped to have ‘substantial’ — but presumably not full — control.3 To Jawaharlal Dominion Status had never meant full in¬ dependence, and he had not now changed his views. So long as India was a Dominion, the interim phase was not for him over. It was only when, India had become a republic that she could be considered as fully free.
In acting on the clauses of the plan creating Pakistan, the Congress was chiefly concerned about its betrayal of the NWFP. At the meeting of the Work¬ ing Committee which accepted the plan, Gandhi and Abdul Gaffar Khan were the only regular members who spoke against partition, and Gaffar Khan asked his colleagues to find out, as a small mercy, if the plebiscite in the NWFPcould include the third alternative of independence as well.6 The president of the party wrote accordingly to the Viceroy, and Gandhi took Gaffar Khan to meet Mountbatten. But Mountbatten refused to consider the suggestion and silenced the Congress by pointing out that it was Jawaharlal himself who had strongly objected to the grant of independence to any province. Jawaharlal had agreed to a referendum in the NWFP, as in Sylhet, as part of a larger pattern of con¬ sulting the people of the areas concerned; and the Congress could not retract.
1 Professor W. H. Morris-Jones to the author, 11 March 1970.
* Interview with the author, 28 May 1970.
* To M. Chalapathi Rao, 6 June 1947.
* Campbell Johnson, op. cit., pp. 116-17.'
>To Amir Sjarifoeddln, Prime Minister of Indonesia, 6 July 1947.
* Proceedings of the Wkg. Ctee., 2 June 1947, AICC File G 43<Part 1)71947; R. M. Lohia, Guilty Men of India's Partition (Hyderabad, 1970), p. 21,
THE TRANSFER OF POWER
357
Ifthey had, as the Viceroy pointed out to Jawaharlal, both their positions would become untenable.1 A further complication was the lade of darity about the conceptof independence. What the Congress leaders of the NWFP had in mind was apparently only a Pathan state enjoying full provincial autonomy within ♦India,2 but this was merely a confused way of demanding accession to India; and the confusion served to drag in issues of foreign policy and encourage Afghan irredentist ambition. The most striking feature of the negotiations for partition and the transfer of power in the summer of 1947 was the ambiguity on most of the vital issues. Was secession to be total or partial, would power bej handed over by the British wholly or only in a measure, andwhat were the impli¬ cations of a referendum in the Frontier province? — on none of these matters was there any dear understanding. The Congress, in its eagerness for finality, lostholdofcertainty; andfor this it could, toa large extent, blame Mountbatten’s tactics of stampede. Only two men were dear-sighted. Gandhi had an over¬ whelming sense of disaster, and Jinnah knew predsely what he wanted and where he was going.
Jawaharlal urged the Khan brothers to abandon ideas of independence and to rally their forces to secure a majority vote on the straight issue of accession to India or to Pakistan. A number of offirials from the Governor downwards, who were antagonists of the Congress, had expressed their opinion that its chances were still fifty-fifty; and the party should be prepared to put it to the test. Even if the Congress lost by a small margin, it could renew the struggle ♦later.
Another factor to be borne in mind is the personality of the present Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. He is obviously playing and going to play an importantpart in various developments. I have no doubt about his sincer¬ ity and bona fides and his desire to do the right thing. To some extent he is naturally bound by the past and the present set-up; but he is trying his best to,go ahead in the right direction. He realizes the difficulties of the Frontier problem and wants to do everything in his power to solve them.
I think he will prove helpful. He is convinced, however, that in the peculiar conditions that are arising in India now owing to possible secession of some parts, a chance must be given to the Frontier people to decide themselves by meansof areferendum. Hehas definitely committed himselfto this and he cannot get out of it without grave injury to his own prestige and impartiality. He would probably prefer to resign than to face such a situation.3
TheonlyconcessionMountbattenmadeto the Congresswasto replace Caroe by General Lockhart. This ensured a fair election, and it is probable that if the
tMountbatten to Jawaharlal, 17 June 1947.
* Khan Sahib to JawahtrU', 2 July 1947.
J Javaharlal'a note on the poeitJon in the NWFP, 8 June 1947.
358 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Congress had accepted battle it would have polled a large vote. As it was, the provincial party decided to abstain, suggesting timidity and even a certain lack of integrity. Despite this, outof an electorate of 572,798, only 289,244 (5049 percent) were in favour of Pakistan, with 2,874 against. This hairline majority in favour of Pakistan justifies Jawaharlal’s acceptance of a referendum, for the Congress might have won it or at worst lost very narrowly; and this would have exploded the case for Pakistan. In fact, the league was given a walk-over.
Theother problems created by the transfer of power and the process.of parti¬ tion were sorted out, though not without acute bickerings. A partition com¬ mittee representative of the two parties and boundary commissions with Sir Cyril Raddiffe as the chairman with the decisive voice were set up. But the relationship of the partition committee with the interim government, and the role of the interim government after the decision to divide had been taken, caused controversy. Jawaharlal proposed that the government work as two committees, each dealing with all subjects, one for India and the other for the future Pakistan. Mountbatten was willing to act on this sensible suggestion but Jinnah objected, and as the letter of the law was on his side nothing could be done and the administration continued to be ineffective. Jawaharlal was driven to offer his resignation, and this crisis was only averted by Mountbatten dividing the Cabinet as soon as the Indian Independence Act had been passed. The wording of this statute also caused concern, especially to Gandhi, who feared that it would grant recognition to the two-nation theory; and arrange¬ ments were made for its scrutiny before passage by the Indian leaders.
The aspect of the future that was of chief interest to Mountbatten at this time was the possibility of,his continuance as the governor-general of-both the new Dominions. As early as 17 May, Jawaharlal had agreed to this. Apart from his desire to oblige Mountbatten, he saw in this a means, however tenuous, of holding the old India together and enabling other ties to develop. Indeed, it is possible that Mountbatten did not provide in his plan for common councils or agencies, to which Jinnah might well have agreed, because he saw himself as the common link. But now, after the plan had been accepted, Jinnah refused tocommit himself to acommongovernor-general and then put himself forward as governor-general of Pakistan, inviting Mountbatten to remain as an arbi¬ trator between the two countries. Mountbatten fumed and blustered but to no avail.1 He had to content himself with the governor-generalship of India and chairmanship of the joint defence council. Even to the latter Jinnah gave his assent in terms characteristic of his method of functioning. *1 hqye considered your suggestion and wish to state that if you decide to accept the Governor- Generalship of the "Dominion of India" and if your future Government will permit you to act as an independent and impartial chairman of the joint defence
1C. Muhammed All, Tbs Emtrgtnc* ofPakistan (New York, 1967), p. 177; Hodson, Op. cit.," PP. 330-31. *
THE TRANSFER OF POWER
council, I would be glad to agree on behalf of the Dominion of Pakistan to your acting in this capacity.* This could hardly be called an invitation to serve as chairman. ‘You will note*, reported Mountbatten to the Secretary of State, 'that Jinnah consistently refrains from committing himself in writing to asking me to do anything. He merely agrees in a form that implies that I asked for his agreement.*1
India’s decision to retain Mountbatten as governor-general did not, there¬ fore, help in the way Jawaharlal had expected; but in another respect it paid prompt dividends. Lahore continued to smoulder and there were ruraoursthat Calcuttawould be set on fire once it was announced that it had been awarded to India. Some precautions were taken both in the Punjab and Bengal, though in no way adequate to the horrors that finally engulfed these provinces. But the full intensity of this savagery and large-scale migration still lay unexpected in thefuture. What worried the Congress at this time,was the conductof the Indian States. The Political Department had always, but with added emphasis since the formation of the interim government, been shoring up the Princes in their autocratic pretensions and aspirations of sovereignty; and Jawaharlal had repeatedly to complain to Wavell and Mountbatten about this. But Wavell had refused to interfere; and the Political Department began to burn* records, wind up the Residencies and Political Agencies and transfer railways, cantonments and other government property. Hyderabad, a large state in the core of India, which since the’thirties had been seeking to increase its viability by securing access to the sea,2 was now invited to acquire financial and industrial conces¬ sions in neighbouring principalities such as Bastar. Encouraged by all this, many of the Princes openly prepared for independence, the expansion of their armies and the acquisition of modem arms. One of them, Travancore, guided by a dewan of unbalanced ambition and vanity, declared that it would assume sovereignty on15 August, nominated a representative at Delhi and appointed an agent to Pakistan.
Jawaharlal held strong views on this subject of the States. He detested the feudal autocracy and total suppression of popular feeling, and the prospect of these puppet princes, with the encouragement of the Political Department, setting themselves up as independent monarchs drove him into intense ex¬ asperation. The whole policy of the Political Department was one of 'operation scuttle', with the deliberate intentof breakingup the unityof India and introduc¬ ing anarchy by the back door; and Jawaharlal was prepared to thwart this even, ashehinted to Mountbatten, by using force if necessary. 'It mustberemembered also that the right of protection which the States possess will also go with paramountcy.*3 In this matter even Mountbatten had little influenceover him; On one occasion, arguing that paramountcy did not lapse but was inherited by
1 Bocta Jlnnah's tetter and Mountbatten'* telegram are in Gov. Gen. Seen. File 38/19/GG 43.
* See Lord Birkenhead, Wtlfr Monckton (London, 1969), PP- 116 end 221.
5 To Mountbatten, 4 June 1947.
360
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
the successor Government, he demanded that the Political Adviser to die Viceroy be tried for unlawful exerdse of his authority. 'In fact', wrote Mountbatten,1 'as usual he completely lost control of himself.'
Tojawaharlalthe test casewasKashmir, Notonly had hedosepersonal links with this State and the National Conference under Abdullah; it irked him that, despite his two visits in 1946, Abdullah and many of his colleagues remained in prison. So he planned to go there again, and Mountbatten’s effort to dissuade him made him only the more determined. 'For many months — ever since Mountbatten came —' he wrote to Gandhi,2 ‘this question of your going or mine has been discussed and postponed. I have had enough of this business. This is not my way of doing anything. I hardly remember anything that has exasperated me quite so much as this affair... I shall go ahead with my plans. As between visiting Kashmir when my people need me there and being Prime Minister, I prefer the former.’ In fact, he did not go, Gandhi and Mountbatten going instead; but the Maharaja succeeded in evading a decision on accession to either India or Pakistan.
However, apart from Kashmir, Hyderabad and Junagadh, all other States acceded to one or other of the two new Dominions before 15 August; and Mountbatten served India well in laying the bogy of independence. In view of the coming constitutional changes, he decreed that the Political Department should die anatural death and be replaced by direct relations between the States and the new Dominion governments. Patel took charge of the new States portfolio. He was essentially aman of government, unhampered by theoretical considerations. Though Mountbatten had agreater personal liking for Jawahar- lal, it is clear that he found it easier to work with Patel. From the stare they understood each other. At first, according to Mountbatten, Patel tried to bully himanddemandedthathedismiss the chiefcommissionerof Delhi. TheViceroy replied that he would instead telegraph home his resignation and leave the next morning after publicly disclosing the cause of his departure.3 Patel did not press the issue and thereafter the two worked well together.
Patel’s willingness to reach agreements with the rulers and to give lower priority to popular representation facilitated Mountbatten’s task in securing the accession of the States on the three subjects of defence, external affairs and communications. It was Jawaharlal and his way of thinking which the Princes and their advisers resented, and by setting him aside Mountbatten made it easier for the Princes to accede. He even got Travancore to retrace its steps by sternly telling the dewan to 'be your age’4 and keep in line with all-India trends and the unanimous feeling of the people of Travancore. Working against the text
127 June 1947, quoted in Hodson, op. dt., p. 363.
2 28 July 1947, quoted in Pyarelal, Mahatma Gandhi Tha Lott Pbata (Ahmedabad, 1938), vol. 2, p. 334.
* Mountbatten’s interview with the author, 28 May 1970.
Idem.
THE TRANSFER OF POWER 361
of the British Government's statement and disregarding their directive not to apply pressure on the States,1 brushing aside the advice of the Political Depart¬ ment, countering the wishes of the Princes for, ifnot sovereignty, at least higher privileges, and ignoring Jawaharlal's desire to involve the people of the States, Mountbatten ensured the continuance of an integrated India but, in doing so, strengthened right-wing elements in Indian politics.
It seemed that all was over now bar the shouting and the ceremonial. To the latter Mountbatten devoted considerable attention, and in his preoccupation with such detail was a true successor of Curzon. He invited Jawaharlal and Patel to drive on the great occasion either with him and his wife in the State carriage or in a semi-State carriage on their own; but he added to this invita¬ tion private advice that acceptance might weaken their political position. Jawa- harlal’s reply was characteristic. He said that ‘he would have hated not to have been asked, but would equally have hated to have had to accept.’2
On 4 August Jawaharlal sent Mountbatten the names of the members of what would be the first Cabinet of free India. Though formed by the Congress, it was given the image of an all-party coalition by the inclusion of a loyalist, a leader of the Hindu Mahasabha, and Ambedkar, the extremist leader of the Scheduled Castes. It also, from the start, included Patel — a fact which would not require mentioning but for the story that Jawaharlal had decided to omit him but was persuaded by Mountbatten not to do so.3 Were this so, Jawaharlal would have been lacking in not only integrity and loyalty but common sense; but the truth is very different. On 1 August Jawaharlal wrote to Patel formally inviting him to join. ‘This writing is somewhat superfluous because you are the strongest pillar of the Cabinet.’ Patel replied in the warmest terms. ‘My services will be at your disposal, I hope, for the rest of my life and you will have unques¬ tioned loyalty and devotion from me in the cause for which no man in India has sacrificed as much as you have done. Our combination is unbreakable and therein lies our strength.’4 Jawaharlal also utilized Patel’s services in recruit¬ ing other members of the Cabinet.3 What lies behind the absurd story was that an unconfirmed rumour to this effect was carried to Mountbatten, but was not even mentioned by him to Jawaharlal when he saw that Jawaharlal was not only including Patel in the Cabinet but making him Deputy Prime Minister.6
At midnight on 14 August the Constituent Assembly met to usher in the
>See Secretary of State’s telegram, 1 August, and Viceroy’s reply, 4 August 1947, Attlee papers, Box 7.
a Mountbatten’s report at his staff meeting, 28 July 1947, Gov. Gen. Sectt. File 1446/33/ GG 43.
*Hodson, op. dt., p. 389.
sJawaharlal toPatel, 1 August, and Patel’s reply, 3 August 1947. Sardar Patti's Cornspondanci, vol. 4, (Ahmadabad, 1972), p. 337.
J Jawaharlal to Patel, 30 July 1947, ibid., p. 336.
*Mountbattentotheauthor, 28May 1970, andMr H. V. Hodson’s letter to author, 3 June 1970.
362
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
dawnof freedom. Jawaharlal once again madeone of his most movingly approp¬ riate speeches and, in the process, coined an undyiqg phrase.
Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure} but very substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation long suppressed finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity.
The next morning — The Appointed Day!’ as Jawaharlal had noted in his pocket diary — Mountbatten was invited to continue as Governor-General and he in turn swore in Jawaharlal as the first Prime Minister of a free India. For the next few days Delhi and India seethed with joyous excitement. Only Gandhi celebrated independence in Calcutta by fasting, and was not surprised when the country was overtaken by the disillusion which was round the comer.