The Cripps Mission
The Viceroy, having no wish to co-operate with the Congress, disliked the Bardoli resolution. He, therefore, saw to it that Reuters cabled the full text of Jinnah’s statement criticizing the resolution and urged Amery to give it the fullest weight in Britain and use it in the United States. ‘If, under pressure from liberal quarters in the United Kingdom, Rajagopalachari and his friends were able to stifle me in their close embrace, I feel quite sure that the Mahatma would emerge once again upon the stage to give tne coup de grace to British influence in India.’1 Meantime, the Japanese sweep drew closer to'India’s shores. Early in the year, Franklin Roosevelt thought that India was as good as gone. 2 In February Winston Churchill told the King that Burma, Ceylon, Calcutta and Madras as well as a part of Australia might fall into enemy hands.3 Jawaharlal also realized that the British refusal to part with power was unrealistic in the face of the imminent fall of their empire in India. Whatever happened, British imperialism was doomed to collapse. It was more urgent, therefore, to plan for the confrontation of events than to hope for negotiations with the British. ‘This war is our war. But you don’t understand; in this war Britain is on the other side.A Satyagraha had been called off because of the desire not to emba¬ rrass the British, whose allies were Russia, China and the United States; but there was no question of being merely passive if the Japanese stepped into India. Congress workers should spread out into the countryside and organize towns, wards and villages for every eventuality. Small units of about fifty houses eacn should be formed, and the residents mobilized to prevent panic, prepare for air raids, maintain law and order when control slipped from British hands, set up local co-operatives to ensure food supplies, encourage khadi, cottage industries and village handicrafts to enable local self-sufficiency.
1 Linlithgow to Amery, 30 December 1941, Linlithgow papers, vol. 10.
IW.D. Hassett, Off the Record with F.D.R. (New Brunswick, 1958), p. 28.
* J. W. Wheeler-Bennett, King George VI (London, 1958), p. 538.
4To Eve Curie, 22 March 1942, quoted in E. Curie, Journey among Warriors (London, 1943), p. 440. Emphasis in original.
276
THE CRIPPS MISSION 277
and resist the Japanese as best they could. What Jawaharlal appears to have had in mind was a fragmented war of attrition such as was taking place in China. The British had spurned the offer of the Congress to co-operate in the war, but in no case would the Congress bow before a foreign invader. They might not be able to push back armies but these armies would have to pass over their dead bodies. India would never accept the fate of France.
The U.P. Government, oblivious to all that was happening, considered arresting Jawaharlal for his bitter references to the blindness and incompetence of the raj and his prophecy that the empire in India might not last six months.1 But even Linlithgow realized that there could not be a worse moment for taking such a step.2 It was not Jawaharlal but the Japanese who were destroy¬ ing British prestige, and his repeated calls to resist any invasion could hardly be resented. In Calcutta he sought to allay fright and exodus, and in Allahabad he discarded his car for a bicycle to get in closer touch with the people. The elaborate black-outs and air raid precautions ordered by the Government were not only out of date but likely to increase panic: ‘it does no good to worry. That is the lesson which our people should be taught.’9 Marshal Chiang and his wife came to India, met Jawaharlal and Gandhi and, while unable to change Jawaharlal’s thinking, seemingly toned down his hostility to the British. The best comment on that visit was provided by Gandhi.
He [Chiang] came and went without creating any impression, but fun was had by all. I would not say that I learnt anything, and there was nothing that we could teach him. All that he had to say was this: Be as it may, help the British. They are better than others and they will now become still better.4
The general alienation from the British bureaucracy increased when, after the fall of Rangoon on 7 March, reports came in of discrimination against Indian refugees on the long trek from Burma. At last the British Cabinet woke up to the urgency of the situation. For long, even with the enemy approaching the gates, Churchill, Amery and Linlithgow had had; as Jawaharlal expected, no intention of making any move to secure popular Indian support for the war. The very danger seemed to them an argument for doing nothing, for it was contended that this was no time for long-term objectives and that the introduc¬ tion of a hostile political element into the defence machine would paralyse
action.9 But there were other forces at work. Roosevelt told his wife that he •
‘Hallett to Linlithgow, 17 February 1942, Home Dept. File 3/48/41*Pol (I), vol. 5, and 21 February 1942; Transfer ofPower, voL 1 (H.M.S.O., 1970), pp. 219-22.
1Linlithgow to Hallett, 24 February 1942, Home Dept. File 3/48/41-Pol. (I), vol. 5. i To GJ*. Hutheesing, 28 February 1942.
4To Vailabhbhai Patel. Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 6, p. 62.
’Amery to Linlithgow, 7 January, Churchill to Attlee, 7 January and Linlithgow to Amery, 21 January 1942. Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 13, 14 and 46, respectively.
278
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
would have to compel the British to give Dominion Status to India,1 and he urged Churchill with tact to do so. Chiang, after his visit to India, informed Roosevelt that if the British did not fundamentally change their policy it would be like presenting India to the enemy.’2 In Britain itself, the crisis had created a sudden interest in India among the back-benchers of Parliament, *and Attlee, condemning the ‘crude imperialism’ of the Viceroy, called for an immediate act ofstatesmanship. ‘To mark time is to lose India. ’3 The War Cabinet listened to Attlee rather than to Amery, and Churchill, characteristically, if only temporarily, getting into the swing of it, formulated a scheme for expanding the defence council in India, offered to broadcast to India recommending it, and even planned to fly out to Delhi. His ardour was dampened by Amery and Linlithgow, who protested that Churchill’s scheme was weighted qgainst the League and in favour of the Congress; but the idea of seeking a settlement in India had been accepted. ‘We have resigned ourselves’, as Churchill com¬ mented,4 ‘to fighting our utmost to defend India in order, if successful, to be turned out.’ Attlee, strengthened by the entry of Cripps into the War Cabinet on 19 February, drafted the British proposals. Their main points were the convening after the war of a constituent assembly elected on a system of pro¬ portional representation by; freshly elected provincial assemblies, the recog¬ nition of the possibility of Pakistan by conceding the right of any province that was not prepared to accept the new Dominion constitution to retain its existing constitutional position, and the request for the collaboration, while the war lasted, of Indian parties with the British Government, who would continue to bear the full responsibility for India’s defence.
Armed with this Declaration, Cripps flew to India to secure its acceptance by the Indian leaders. It was, as Amery explained to the less percipient Viceroy,* in essence a conservative, reactionary and limited offer. There would be for the time being only collaboration in defence, and in the future a Dominion constitution with possibly a partition of India. Nor had Cripps any authority to alter the text of the Declaration approved by the Cabinet. Yet he was hopeful of success. There was nothing in the Declaration to which the Congress could heartily respond. The idea of Dominion Status made men like Jawaharlal ‘slightly seasick’6 while the suggestion of Pakistan was bound to cause alarm. But Cripps relied on his persuasive ability, his known goodwill for the cause of Indian freedom and, above all, his close friendship with Jawaharlal. In the winter of 1939 he had come to India ‘as a self-appointed Ambassador to treat with the Congress’7 and had been Jawaharlal’s guest; now, as the emissary
1 26 December 1941, J. P. Lash, EUanor and Franklin (London, 1972), p. 669.
* 24 February 1942, Foreign Relations of the United States 1942, vol. 1, pp. 605-06.
* Memorandum to War Cabinet, 2 February 1942, Transfer ofPower, vol. 1, p. 111.
4 To Mackenzie King, 18 March 1942, Transfer ofPower, vol. 1, p. 440.
* Amery’s. telegram and letter to Linlithgow, 10 March 1942, TransferofPower, vol. 1, pp. 396
and 403. *
4 Jawaharlal quoted in Curie, op. cit., p. 441.
7 Laski to Mr and Mrs Frankfurter, 7 December 1939, Laslci papers.
THE CRIPPS MISSION 279
ofthe WarCabinet, hewas confident of an agreement. What he failed to under¬ stand was that Jawaharlal liked him but had no high opinion of his judgment1 and that the fate of India was not an issue which Jawaharlal would be willing to determine at a personal level.
From the start, Cripps’s negotiations in Delhi centred on the immediate transitory arrangements during the war, the Declaration being, in the phrase of the Viceroy’s entourage, ‘the wrapper round a pound of tea’, which was the control of the Government of India. The Viceroy insisted that this was a matter of which only he should decide the details, and he would be unwilling to alter the composition of his Executive Council if only one of the parties (i.e. the Congress) agreed to join. He feared that if the Congress secured official influence, the Muslims and other minorities would be antagonized, the war effort would be impeded and the ‘P6tainism’ of Gandhi and other elements in the Congress would gain ground.2 Jinnah, however, surprised by the ex¬ tent to which the notion of Pakistan had been conceded? was willing to accept the proposals and saw no great difficulty in the interim arrangements.3 There was no discussion throughout Cripps’s stay in India as to how many represen¬ tatives in the Government each party should be allotted. Jinnah has been so often criticized in this book that it is a pleasure to record that, on this critical occasion, he was guided by partriotism.
The Congress disliked the provisions about a Dominion constitution rather than full independence, the representation of the Indian States in a constituent assembly by their rulers rather than popular representatives and, above all, the recognition of the ideaof a partition. It was for the last reason that Gandhi opposed the Declaration and urged the Working Committee to reject ‘the post-dated cheque’.4 In an undated letter to Jawaharlal, written at 2 a.m., and which we can place because it was .written on the back of a dentist’s bill dated 27 March 1942. Gandhi declared that he was convinced that the offer could not be accepted. ‘It will ruin the country. If you hold the same opinion,, have a talk with Rajaji and take the final decision. If you and Rajaji think alike, then let us act accordingly.' The wording shows Gandhi’s intense dislike of the proposals, but it also makes dear that he did not expect the final word to be his. Both before and after March 1942, the Congress had frequently not hesi¬ tated to set aside Gandhi’s opinion, and on this occasion too they would have done so if necessary. Rajagopalachari was for such a step. He believed that the Congress should accept office without even examining the details of the
Dedaration. Jawaharlal was away in Allahabad for the wedding of his daughter •
1 See Jeweharlal to Mahadeva Oesai, 9 December 1939, A Bunch of O' * mors, pp. 402-03.
2 Note by L. G. Pinnell, acting P.S.V., of conversation with F. F. Turnbull, an official who accom¬ panied Cripps, on 23 March 1942, Linlithgow papers, vol. 141, diary of the Cripps Mission.
2 Cripps’s account of interview with Jinnah, 25 March 1942, Transfer ofPower, vol. 1, p. 480.
* The phrase hasgonedowninto history as ‘a post-dated cheque ona crashing bank'; but it is now known that the second part, 'on a crashing bank*, was the addition of an enterprising journalist. See J. Hennessy's letter in The Spectator, 11 October 1969.
280 MWAHttULNEHRU
on 26 March; but Azad, speaking for the Congress, emphasised the iopof. tance of effective control of defence by Indian representatives. He stated that this was far more important than the provision for non-accession of pro¬ vinces.1 It was therefore dear that, however disappointed the Congress might have been with the long-term proposals and whatever Gandhi might think, its attention was concentrated on the need to mobilize the forces of the Indian people to meet the immediate crisis.
However, as Rajagopalachari told Cnpps,* all depended on Jawaharlal. The latter was anxious to collaborate in the defence of India and if he were satisfied that the Dedaration enabled this, Gandhi could not have pressed his objection. So, on the eve of meeting Jawaharlal, Cripps secured Churchill's approval for rewording the paragraph on defence arrangements, and it was now affirmed that the task of organizing the defence of India must be the responsibility of the Government of India with the co-operation of the peo¬ ples of India. However, when he met Cripps Jawaharlal made no commit¬ ment, and Cripps concluded that Jawaharlal was willing to accept the Declaration but was beaten by Gandhi who was prepared to use any means to thwart the organization of India for war.
This was a total misreading of the situation. Repeatedly in the years since the outbreak of war, the Congress had, despite Gsuidhi, offered its co¬ operation in defence. The very fact that discussions with Cripps were con¬ tinued even after Gandhi had made his attitude clear establishes beyond doubt the bona fides of the Congress. Indeed Gandhi left Delhi on 4 April in an almost sulky mood.9 The Congress would have reached a settlement with Cripps if the arrangements for defence had been satisfactoiy. But the Viceroy stepped in, and toned down the co-operation in the military effort to mean merely the designation of an Indian to some office connected with the defence responsibilities,of the Government of India without in any way impinging upon the functions and duties of the Commander-in-Chief.4 This was ob¬ viously inadequate and Cripps concluded that his mission had failed. As a final effort he suggested that Azad and Jawaharlal should meet the Com¬ mander-in-Chief, Wavell.5 The Congress had already reached a decision rejecting the proposals not merely because of the objectionable nature of the long-term arrangements but for the failure to transfer responsibility for defence, to which the Working Committee attached the greatest importance; but Azad agreed that he and Jawaharlal would meet Wavell and the Congress refrained from publishing its resolution.
1 Cripps’s account of interviews with Azad, 25 and 28 March 1942, Transfer ofPower, vol. 1, pp. 479 and 514.
2 Cripps's account of interview with Rajagopalachari, 28 March 1942, Transfer ofPower, vol. 1, p. 512.
2 Cf. his statement at a press conference before leaving Delhi: 'I must now live my message af non-violence. What is the use ofmy speaking when I cannot enforce my message In myown little way?' Quoted by B. Shiva Rao, ‘India, 1935-47’, In The Partition ofIndio, p.^132 4 Cripps to Azad, 30 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 363.
* Idem, 1 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 598.
the cripps mission.
281
On this basis, the talks continued. The War Cabinet was not in favour of associating a Congressman with defence responsibilities, but a more precise interpretation of the association of an Indian with defence could be consider¬ ed ifthe Congressdesireditand the Viceroy could select ‘some suitable Indian’ — presumably a loyalist.1 Cripps, eager for an agreement and now realizing that if he could satisfy Jawaharlal, Azad and Rajagopalachari on defence the opposition of Gandhi would not prevail, sought to interpret the Declaration to meet the requirements of the Congress. He himself preferred to transfer the defence ministry to an Indian, subject to a written convention that nothing would be done contrary to British policy; but knowing the opposition this would arouse in Delhi and London, he suggested the transfer to an Indian of such functions of the defence ministry as the Commander-in-chief con¬ sidered could be handed over safely and practically. A further safeguard was that 'under the new arrangement whereby the Executive Council will approx¬ imate to a Cabinet’ all important matters would be decided by the Council as a whole and not by any individual member.2 It is dear from this letter that Cripps was thinking in terms of cabinet government in India as generally understood. He had also obviously spoken in these terms to Indian leaders. There is no reason to doubt Azad’s statement that at the very first interview Cripps had talked of a National Government functioning as a Cabinet, and the Viceroy’s position becoming analogous to that of the King of England3 — a statement which Cripps never contradicted. In fact, at his first press con¬ ference on 20 March, he had recognized that the Executive Coundl could be turned into a Cabinet;4 and on 4 April Azad wrote to Cripps that ‘the effectual control of the defence of India should rest with the Indian National Govern¬ ment’ 5 — the first time that the phrase was used in the correspondence. Linlithgow now saw another opportunity to intervene. He secured authority to write direct to the British Government on these matters, and made sure that Wavell would stand firm.6 Wavell claimed to be working out details on the lines of Cripps’s proposal.7 There is nothing in the published British documents to show what took place at Wavell’s interview with Jawaharlal and Azad, and the Congress leaders also refrained from talking about it. But in fact it was a disaster.
When tea was cleared away, Wavell asked the Indian leaders to open pro¬ ceedings, and Pandit Nehiu spoke for some time. Briefly he wanted the
1 Minute of War«Cabinet discussion and Churchill’s draft telegram to Cripps, 2 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 612-14. a Cripps to Churchill, 4 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 636*9.
’Azad to Cripps. 11 April 1942, Transfer of Power, voi. 1, pp. 743-5.
4 Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 547.
’Azad to Cripps, 4 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 640.
* Viceroy’s telegram to Amery and Amery's reply 2 April, and note of Viceroy's. Secretary,
3 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 614-15 and 623.
’ Telegram bo Churchill, 6 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 655.
282
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Defence Member of Council to be an Indian in place of the Commander- in-Chief, who would become an executive adviser. He was asking for hundred per cent on Defence. When he had finished I imagined th'at some discussions, and, perhaps, bargaining would take place; Wavell perhaps offering something, Nehru conceding something until Some sort of compromise might be reached to form the basis of further discussions at a higher level. How far Wavell would go I did not know. To my intense astonishment Wavell said, ‘If that is your case there is nothing more to be said.’ There was dead silence. After a pause Wavell stood up and the Indian leaders rose to take their leave.1
The Cripps mission was by now beyond redemption, and the Congress had nothing to do with its failure. Cripps had got out of his depth, and Churchill, Amery, Linlithgow and Wavell made sure that he could not scramble back to land. The War Cabinet informed him that the character of the Viceroy’s Council could not be changed, and Cripps was obliged to agree with Linlith¬ gow and Wavell that nothing more would be done but transfer some non- essential functions of the Commander-in-Chief to an Indian Member. 2 But, in his letter to the Congress enumerating the nondescript defence matters which would be transferred to an Indian, he used the phrase ‘National Govern¬ ment’.3 Considering that he knew by now that the Cabinet in London had rejected any such change, one can only conclude that he hoped that once the Congress came in without insisting on its understanding of what a National Government meant, he could use his authority in Britain to permit the Execu¬ tive Council to function as a Cabinet and that he could even, if need be, secure the replacement of the Viceroy. The standing of Cripps at this time in Britain was high; he was regarded almost as the alternative Prime Minister. With an Indian settlement under his belt, he could have overborne any resistance to its working. He wanted such a settlement for its own sake, for India was always dear to him. India was his second country, and even on his death-bed his thoughts were of her.4 Here was an occasion when his conscience and his career were not at war.3 But there was naiVety in his arrogance and a streak of innocence in his brilliance; and this enabled his adversaries to outmanoeuvre him.
The final agony was drawn out by the eagerness of the Congress to find some way of reaching a settlement and the arrival of Louis Johnson, Roose¬ velt’s personal representative in India. Johnson, apparently with Cripps’s
1 General G. N. Molesworth, Curfew on Olympus (London, 1965), p. 220.
* Linlithgow to Amery, Amery memorandum, minute of India Committee, Cripps to Churchill and Amery to Cripps, all of 6 April, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 653-63.
* Cripps to Azad, 7 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1 p. 683.
4 Dame Isobel Cripps to the author, 2 December 1969.
* ‘The trouble is, his chest is a cage in which two squirrels are at war.^is conscience and his career.' Churchill to Stalin on Cripps, cited in Lord Moran, Winston Churchill: The Strugglefor Survival (London, 1966), p. 74.
THE CRIPPS MISSION
283
approval, asked Roosevelt to intercede with Churchill and, on Roosevelt declining to do so, himself began to mediate.1 A defence formula was drawn up dividing the functions of the Indian Member and the Commander-in-Chief. WaveU first refused even to consider any such formula ‘because he is tired, discouraged and depressed and hates and distrusts Nehru’.2 Later, WaveU and Linlithgow agreed to a demarcation which gave the Commander-in-Chief residuary powers. At the suggestion of Jawaharlal, Johnson and Cripps revised the formula to leave the residuary powers with the Indian Member and authorizing the British Government and not the Viceroy to allot any new function or settle any dispute regarding the allotment.3 This approach recog¬ nized that the National Government would be responsible for the entire government of the country including its defence but, in view of the war, would delegate fuU control of military operations to the Commander-in-Chief. Linlithgow objected to the Congress being shown by an American any formula of which he was unaware, and regarded arbitration by the British Government as a serious invasion of his own powers.4 Cripps’s justification was that die situation was getting hot and something had to be done; and Johnson thought thatwith these minor amendments the Congresswould settle. In fact, theWork¬ ing Committee asked for illustrative lists of the functions of the Defence Minister and the Commander-in-Chief and, to avoid delay, authorized Azad and Jawaharlal to discuss these matters with Cripps.3 There was now general expectation of a settlement.6 Jawaharlal himself said later that he at this timeestimated the chances ofsuccess at 75 per cent.7
Had ChurchiU and the War Cabinet backed Cripps, the Viceroy’s tantrums could have been ignored. But the Cabinet, fortified by Hopkins’s virtual dis¬ owning of Johnson and assurance to Churchill that Roosevelt would not interfere,8 directed Cnpps to bring the whole matter back to its Declaration with only agreed amplifications and wanted a precise definition of the term ‘National Government’.9 They had no intention, as suggested by Cripps in one of his letters to Azad, of transferring the Home Department to Indian hands. When Cripps told officials in Delhi soon after his arrival that the Cabinet had quite made up its mind that India should have defacto Dominion Status and complete Indianization of the Executive Council except for defence,10 he was guilty either of misunderstanding or, what was more, likely,
1 Johnson to State Department, 4 April, State Department to Johnson, 5 April and Johnson to Roosevelt, 7 April 1942, Foreign Relations of tbe U.S. 1942, vol. I, pp. 626-9.
2 Johnson to Statij Department, 9 April 1942, ibid,, p. 630..
* Ibid. For texts of formulae, see Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 699-700.
* Note by the Viceroy, 8 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1,‘pp. 694-6.
> See Jawabarlal’s note, AICC File G. 26 (Part I) of 1942.
* The Hindustan Times, 9 April 1942.
2 Press Conference 12 April, National Herald, 13 April 1942. a R. E. Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins (New York, 1930), vol. 2, p. 102.
* Telegram, 9 April, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 707-08.
H. V. Hodson, The Great Divide (London, 1969), p. 103.
284
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
of self-deception. His threat to hand the matter over if he were not trusted was sharply repelled by Churchill, and Linlithgow was directly informed that there was no question of any convention limiting in any way his powers under the existing constitution.1
The luckless Cripps now quibbled. He drew a distinction between .national government and cabinet government, assuring the War Cabinet that he. had throughout emphasized that the existing legal and constitutional position must remain unchanged, and described a National Government loosely as one 'mainly composed of representative Indians together with Viceroy and Gom- mander-in-Chief’.2 On the other hand, he informed the Congress that the Viceroy would doubtless do all he could by means of appropriate conventions. With a co-operative Viceroy this might have worked. Indeed, Jawaharlal thought that if Linlithgow had talked to the Congress leaders and discussed with them how the Executive Council worked, a settlement might have been reached.3 But Linlithgow had no desire to see Cripps succeed.
In despair, Cripps appealed to Jawaharlal, as an old friend, to save him:
Personal and private My dear Jawaharlal,
Let me make a final appeal to you, upon whom rests the great burden of decision — a decision so far-reaching in its bearing upon the future relations of our two peoples that its magnitude is indeed portentous.
We can and must carry our people through to friendship and co¬ operation — I in my sphere, you in yours.
The chance which now offers cannot recur. Other ways may come if this fails but never so good a chance to cement the friendship of our people.
Leadership — the sortof leadershipyou have — can alone accomplish the result. It is the moment for the supreme courage of a great leader to face all the risks and difficulties — and I know they are there — to drive through to the desired end.
I know your qualities and your capacity and I beg you to make use of them now.
Yours always affectionately,
Stafford4
1 CrippstoWarCabinet, War Cabinet to Viceroyand Churchill to Cripps, all of 10 April, Transfer of Power, vol, 1, pp. 717, 720 and 721. aTo War Cabinet, 10 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 716.
’Report of Sir E. Villiers of conversation with Jawaharlal, 5 July 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 2 (H.M.S.O., 1971), p. 690. *
4A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 468.
THE CR1PPS MISSION
283
But Jawaharlal’s hands were bound - not by Gandhi or his colleagues in the Working Committee but by Gripps’s own shifts of position. He told Cripps that there were limits beyond which he could not carry the Congress and the Congress could not carry the country; but Cripps would not believe him.1
TRAPEZE TRAGEDY ?
Comment by Shankar, the cartoonist, on the Cripps Mission
At this stage, a weaker man would have resigned. It is no discredit to Cripps that he did not. He was a minister in a war-time government when his country was in extreme crisis. Burma and the Andaman Islands were lost; the Indian Ocean was in enemy hands; the loss of the Calcutta area and the Orissa coast ■ was probable; and a Japanese landing in south India as part of a pincer opera¬ tion against Ceylon could not be ruled out. In such a context, Cripps’s attitude was in line with that of another great British socialist, Robert Blatchford: 'When England is at war, I'm English. I have no politics and no party. I am English.'2 So patriotic motivesjdoubtless led Cripps to stick to his post and to retract his commitments. He informed Johnson with embarrassment that he had to revert to the text of the original Declaration; and Jawaharlal and Azad were amazed, at their final interview with Cripps on 9 April, to find that all the searching for new formulae had been a waste of time and the phrase 'National
1Jawaharlal to Evelyn Wood, 3 June 1942.
*Quoted in B. Sentmel, Imperialism and Social Reform (London, I960), p. 226.
286
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Government ’now meant nothing at all. It was to be neither a free nor a cabinet government.1 Ignoring all his earlier suggestions of a National Government and constitutional conventions, Cripps now stated that there could be no joint responsibility or any assurances that the Viceroy would not exercise his powers of intervention or veto. All that he now proposed was a slight vacation of the offer of August 194Q. Some popular representatives could be added to (he Exe¬ cutive Council, and if its members resented the Viceroy’s attitude, it was always open to them to resign
The failure of the Cripps mission is not surprising. Both the War Cabinet (barring Attlee) and Linlithgow’s Government had no wish to see it succeed. Cripps’s method of negotiation was also not suited to this situation. He was a lawyerwhostated hiscasepowerfullyandexpected it to prevail. Onthis occasion, having handed over the Declaration, he could only urge the Congress to accept it. Both his technique and his briefleft him no room for manoeuvre. His friends in the Congress were alienated.
1 was surprised at his woodenness and insensitiveness, in spite of his public smiles. He was all the time the formal representative of the War Cabinet, in fact he was the War Cabinet speaking to us with a take it or leave it’ attitude. Always he seemed to impress upon us that he knew the Indian problem in and out and he had found the only solution for it. Any¬ onewhodid not agree with it was to say the least of it utterly misguided.2
On the other hand, his tendency to slur over differences in his anxiety to win over the Congress was exploited by his antagonists. What is clear is that the Working Committee, despite the attitude of Gandhi and its own dislike of the provisions for India’s future, took the stand that it was the present that counted andwaswilling to co-operate in defence ifgiven the full opportunity. But Cripps, intensely disappointed at this setback to his hopes and his career, most unfairly made the Congress the scapegoat; and it is for this that he has to be severely faulted. He accused the Congress of suggesting a change in the constitution for the first time nearly three weeks after it had received the proposals and described the working by a convention of a nominated cabinet as a constitu¬ tional government as ’an absolute dictatorship of a majority'. This was. the first suggestion of any differences between the Congress and the League on this matter; for throughout the discussions there was no hint by any of the parties of any difficulty on this issue. For Cripps to allege at the end that, with deep communal divisions, ’an irresponsible majority government’ would be rejectedby all minorities andwasnot possible,3 wasincredible and mischievous.
*101111100 to State Department, 11 April 1942, op. cit., p. 631; Azad to Crippa, 10 April 1942, Transfer of Poumr, vol. 1, pp. 726-30.
*Jawahaiiai to Evelyn Wood, 3 lone 1942.
* Crippa to Azad, 10 April 1942, op. cit.
THE CRIPPS MISSION
287
After his return from India, Cripps reported to the War Cabinet that Gandhi was determined to prevent an agreement at all costs not merely because of his devotion to non-violence but also because he feared loss of bis leadership to Jawaharlal or some other supporter of the war effort. He had, therefore, in a two-hour telephone conversation from Wardha on the afternoon of 9 April, ordered the Congress leaders to break oft negotiations, and Jawaharlal and Azad had come to Cripps that evening and chosen the question of a National Government as a better ground on which to do so than the defence question, which had been successfully settled.1 Some sentences which Cripps drafted and later omitted from his broadcast to the United States on 27 July confirm how completely he had convinced himself that a fair offer had been rejected by anover-reaching Congress. Gandhi, he thought, was 'being led on by the shadow of his visions rather than by the substantial facts of the world situation’, and was threatening the extremes of pressure not only qgainst Great Britain but against the Indian minorities as well to win political power for his own party. As for the Congress, it was ‘a religious party’ representing not a political majo¬ rity but a permanent religious and racial majority to which the minorities had no wish to be subjected.2 ’Had Congress accepted,’ Cripps wrote later to a Chinese friend,3 'which but for Mr. Gandhi they would have done, the Indian question would have been well on the way to settlement.’ Thanks to Cripps, this interpretation has now become a part of conventional history.4 It was this effort, sodiscordant with both his intellectual sharpness and his general charac¬ ter, to attribute petty motives to Gandhi and to prove the Goqgress, as Jawahar¬ lal said, ‘not only wrong but damnably wrong’5 that poisoned for a long time Cripps’s personal relations with Jawaharlal and, what was perhaps more impor¬ tant, made it more difficult for Jawaharlal in the coming months to prevent a direct collision between the Congress and the Government.
1 Report to War Cabinet, 6 July 1942, Transfer of Power, voi. 2, p. 318.
* See the first draft of his broadcast in the Cripps papers, Nuffield College Library, File 1143. >To Professor Tuan Sheng-chien, 19 February 1943, Cripps papers. File 690.
* For example, Roy Jenkins: ‘Nehru, even Jinnah, were tempted. But Gandhi, who cared little about the threat of die new invaders, moved in and snatched the prospect of achievement away from Cripps.' The Times, 27 November 1972.
’Press Conference, 12 April, Notional Herald, 13 April 1942.