Action — and Anti-Climax
After the Lahore Congress, however, Jawaharlal* could push aside these nagging problems of the gap between thought and practice and devote himself happily to action. He had, at a moving ceremony on the banks of the Ravi, unfurled the flag of independence; and on New Year’s Eve he danced round the flagpole.1 The Congress now urged its members to work exclusively towards the attainment of independence. It also authorized the AICC, when¬ ever it deemed fit, to start a programme of civil disobedience, including the non-payment of taxes, in selected areas or all over the country and under whatever safeguards it considered necessary; but in fact this meant that full direction in the tactics of struggle was left to Gandhi.
While Gandhi brooded over the best means of initiating the battle, Jawahar¬ lal, as president, was engrossed in mobilizing the forces, though he expected to be arrested at any moment. In fact, the Punjab Government had suggested prosecuting Jawaharlal for his Lahore address, but the Government of India preferred to wait and watch developments, leaving the initiative to the Congress.2 * So Jawaharlal was free to organize the celebration throughout India of 26 January as Independence Day, when everyone was called upon to take the independence pledge drafted by Gandhi and Jawaharlal. The latter had directed that this should be done in the morning, at the time of the unfurling of the national flag, with a procession and a public meeting later in the day;9 but Gandhi vetoed processions and speeches. He was anxious not to precipitate a crisis till he was ready to commence civil disobedience.4 The Government, on their part, as anxious to avoid a clinch, did not prohibit the meetings. On the actual day, the response seemed to the Congress spectacular, while the Government preferred to believe that outside the
1 To A. C. Bombwal. 5 June 1963, Nehru papers. 2Chief Secretary Punjab Government to Home Secretary, 3 January 1930, and Home Secretary to all Local Governments, 30 January 1930. Home Dept. Pol. File 98 of 1930; Note of Home Secretary, 27 January 1930, and Home Secretary to Chief Secretary, Punjab, 30 January 1930. Home Dept. Pol. File 65 of 1930. * Statefnent, 6 January, The Tribune, 8 January 1930. * 4 Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 12 January 1930, AICC File 26 of 1930.
138
ACTION—AND ANTI CLIMAX
139
Punjab, the United Provinces, Bombay and Delhi there had been little enthusiasm.1
With the Government refusing to act on their own, with Gandhi still inert, and with both sides satisfied with the result, Jawaharlal was free to rnnrinw the work of consolidation in anticipation of the big struggle. The inriA>n» at Bombay on the 26th, when some mill-workers sought to displace the natinnal tricolour with the red flag, coming in the wake of continuous efforts by the League against Imperialism to ridicule the Congress and its leadership, dearly infuriated Jawaharlal. ‘It seems to be a ddiberate policy of Gommunists to be offensive. As a matter of fact there are very few real Gommunists in India. Many people who pose as such are British agents.*2 He informed the League and its supporters in India in no uncertain terms that the Congress would not allow its ranks to be weakened by the Communists. While the Congress was willing to co-operate with Communists or to be assodated with any anti¬ imperialist organization, in no event would it take orders from the League or be associated with it if that were going t0 function as a purely Communist organization. Never had the Congress been,more advanced in its views, both political and social, and to attack its leaders without the least knowledge of conditions in India at a moment when they had begun a great revolutionary struggle was in effect to hdp the British Government. Jawaharlal also re¬ quested the League to accept his resignation from its Executive Council if the position of non-Cocnmunists in the League were not clarified.3
Having done what he could to answer the Communist critics, Jawaharlal sought to ensure the support of the minorities, and especially the Muslims, for the Congress cause. Leading Muslim Congressmen, including Ansari, Tassaduq Sherwani and Khaliquzzaman (but with the honourable exception of Azad), disliked the non-co-operation campaign,* and gave priority to the building of communal harmony. In the Working Committee, which met on 15 February, Syed Mahmud asserted that the Muslims as a whole were indif¬ ferent to the struggle and he feared that civil disobedience would rapidly, with official encouragement, degenerate into Hindu-Muslim riots. Gandhi was re¬ ported to have replied that he realized this danger but it could not be helped. They had to march ahead, as there was no other alternative.5 Till now they had failed in achieving Hindu-Muslim unity because they had been working on
1Statement of Jawaharlal, 28 January, Tb§ Tribune, 30 January 1930; Home Department's telegram to Secretary of State, 3 February 1930, cited in S. Gopal, Tb* Victroyalty of Lord Irwin (Oxford, 1937), p. 33.
1 To Edo Fimmen, 4 March 1930.
9 To Secretaries, League against Imperialism, 30 January 1930.
4 See Ansari to Sherwani, 6 January, and to Gandhi, 10 and 13 February 1930, Khaliquzzaman
to Ansari, 1 March 1930; and Sherwani to Ansari, 3 March 1930, Ansari papers; M. Desai,
Maulona Abut Kalom Axad (Indian edition, 1943), p. 40.
*Mahmud to Ansari, undated but written after meeting of Working Committee, Ansari
s
papers.
140
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
wrong lines; they should seek it on an economic basis and in the course of the fight for freedom. This would also sterilize the third party, the British.1 But Jawaharlal was more sensitive than Gandhi or his father to the fears of the minorities and recommended assurances that under no circumstaQces would any coercion or repression of these communities be tolerated and, in fact, favoured treatment in economic matters would be guaranteed. Political repre¬ sentation should also be on economic lines, as this would fit in far more with modern conditions and do away automatically with communal electorates. The Nehru Report had lapsed, but its non-controversial parts were still binding on the Gongress; and Jawaharlal hoped that its role in the fight for freedom would convince all of its bonafides.2
Meanwhile, the Working Committee authorized Gandhi to start civil dis¬ obedience as and when he desired, and advocated, once the mass movement had started, a boycott of law courts and schools. By now Gandhi had at last seen his way ahead, and decided to march to the sea and violate the salt laws. Jawaharlal had not been enamoured of the eleven points earlier put forward by Gandhi. Prohibition, reduction of land revenue, military expenditure and high salaries, abolition of the salt tax, lowering of the exchange ratio of the rupee, licences for firearms, tariffs on foreign textiles, reservation of coastal shipping, a political amnesty and abolition of the secret police had seemed to him to comprise a tame definition of independence. He himself had been thinking in terms of public ownership of the principal industries, peasant proprietorship, annulment of agricultural indebtedness, a minimum wage, a steeply graduated income tax, high death duties, and no indirect taxation.3 But law-breaking was invigorating in itself, and his support for Gandhi now was without any mental reservation. ‘How I wish I could join your gallant band or at least could see it start off bravely on the morning of the 12th.’4 Gandhi’s march to the sea at Dandi, with a small group of tough and disciplined men and women, has a high place, as fact and as legend, in the history of the Indian freedom movement and, indeed, of freedom in the world. The challenge gripped the imagination in India and beyond, and the refusal of Irwin’s Government to arrest Gandhi in the belief that the march would evoke no response showed how little they were aware of the true situation. Thousands lined the route, large meetings were held at every halting-place, and many village and district officials resigned, while the rest of India was enthralled by every detail of Gandhi’s progress. Jawaharlal with a few friends went down to Gujarat and marched with Gandhi for one stage, and the impression left on him was profound and permanent. Over twenty years later he wrote;3
1 Gandhi to Ansari, 16 February, and Motilal to Ansari, 17 February 1930, Ansari papers.
3 The Problem of Minorities', 14 March 1930, reprinted in Young India, 13 May 1930.
)Resolution at meeting of U P. Congress Committee, 26 February 1930, The Laadtr, 1 March 1930. * *
*Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 7 March 1930.
*30 June 1931. Foreword to Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 1 (Bombay, 1931).
ACTION-AND ANTICLIMAX 141
Many pictures rise in my mind of this man, whose eyes were often full of laughter and yet were pools of infinite sadness. But the. picture that is dominant and most significant is as I saw him marching, staff in hand, to Dandi on the Salt March in 1930. He was the pilgrim on his quest of truth, quiet, peaceful, determined and fearless, who would continue that quiet pilgrimage regardless of consequences.
After this experience it was not perhaps to be expected that, whatever the ideological and temperamental strains, Jawaharlal would ever completely break away from his leader.
AstheGovernment had not arrested Gandhi, Jawaharlal and other Congress¬ men could only wait impatiently till he reached the sea and collected salt before themselves launching a mass campaign of civil disobedience by violating the salt laws. Jawaharlal appealed especially to the young to be ready to jump into the fray,1 and persuaded the Congress committee in his own province to look ahead and organize wherever possible a campaign for non-payment of land revenue or rent.2 Hetoured intensively in the villages and was filled with confi¬ dence by the spirit among the peasants.
There is no doubt that India is awake and astir and we are going to give a good fight to the British Government. The Government will no doubt try its utmost to break us. But it is quite likely that in attempting to crack the nut the cracker itselfmay break. Somehow I cannot help thinking that the days of the British Empire are numbered now and that it is going to be our privilege and good fortune to help to end it.3
On6 April, Jallianwala Bagh Day, Gandhi manufactured salt and Jawaharlal called on the country to go ahead with mass civil disobedience. He himself took charge of the campaign in Allahabad district.*As there was no possibility here of manufacturing salt, technical breaches were organized for inviting arrest. On the 9th he sold packets of contraband salt in the city*and the next day he and his wife led a large proces&on and collected salt from a special kind of earth brought in for the purpose. T have never seen Allahabad quite so excited.’4 But the U.P. Government, though authorized by the Government of India to arrest Jawaharlal if need be,5 declined to do so on this occasion because, in what Jawaharlal termed ‘an amazingly idiotic’6 communique, it concluded that salt had not been manufactured but brought in bottles. There-
1 ‘Inquilab Zindabad', 24 March 1930, published in Young Indio, 3 April 1930; ‘The AICC, 23 March 1930, published in Young India, 27 March 1930.
2The Leader, 19 March 1930.
’To Roger Baldwin, 4 April 1930.
*To Sitla Sahai, 11 April 1930.
’Home Department telegram to Governor U.P., 4 April 1930. Home Dept. Pol. ♦ile 249 and JCW of 1930.
«To Syed Mahmud, 11 April 1930.
142 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
after Jawaharlal organized the collection of salt in various parts of the city as well as in vehicles, making salt in them and selling it with appropriate songs. More worrying to the Government was his activity in the Rae Bareli district and the formation of associations among the tenants for non-payment of rent.1 On the 14th, while on his way to Raipur to attend a local Congress conference, Jawaharlal was arrested at Cheoki, a few miles outside Allahabad, tried in Naini jail and sentenced to six months’ simple imprisonment for assisting in the manufacture of salt on 11 April.
Great Day!' Jawaharlal wrote in his pocket diary the day the prison gates shut on him. He was placed in solitary confinement in a barrack reserved for dangerous prisoners and surrounded by a circular wall nearly fifteen feet high. To Jawaharlal this gave a greater sense of captivity than any rectangular en¬ closure; for, apart from creating a feeling of being closed in, it cut off a good bit of the sky in the day and the stars at night — the sight of which was one of Jawaharlal’s chief pleasures in prison. ‘What a terrible waste of brick and mortar,’ he wrote in his diary,2 ‘just to deprive people of their liberty! A very decent, large-sized house could be built out of the materials of my particular wall only.’
Jawaharlal had been placed in the ‘A’ class, which meant that once a fortnight he could have one interview, write one letter and receive one. As a special concession, he was allowed to sleep outside his cell, but his bed was chained to the wall to prevent it beinj^used for scaling the wall. He could also receive two weeklies, one in English and the other in Hindi, but no daily newspapers. A fellow-prisoner was deputed to cook for him, and he was in addition permitted to receive food and fruit from home. He was also allotted some servants to work the punkha fan. But Jawaharlal chafed at these privileges, especially as news reached him that others in prison for salt satyagraha were being treated harshly. So he dispensed with the punkha boys, and wrote to the jail superintendent, much against his father’s wishes, that he did not desire any special treatment.3 Told in reply that it was always open to him not to utilize these privileges, he returned some sweets sent from home and asked that no more fruit be sent.
Even the weekly budget of news that trickles through the massive walls and iron gates of Naini prison, by means of the Hindi Bharat, is enough to give some idea of happenings outside. Frequent firings, assaults, martial law, flogging of boys, imprisonment of women and so on and so forth denote a state of affairs that is very far from normal, and in this siate it is difficult for me to accept with pleasure dainty articles of food. The very sight of these dainties has the reverse of an agreeable effect on me. If Naini prison prevents me from doing something when barbarities are
bailey to Hirtzel, 8 May 1930, Hailey papers, vol. 19.
1Entry 1# April 1930. *
*4 May 1930.
ACTION—AND ANTI CLIMAX
143
being committed all over the country, at least I cannot hold high festival here.1
He decided to have two light, simple meals and no more, and as a result often went hungry.
Worse than the hunger, however, was the boredom. Life in prison was about as uneventful as that of the average turnip.
The object of jail appears to be first to remove such traces of huma¬ nity as a man might possess, and then to subdue even the animal element in him so that ultimately he might become the perfect vegetable! Soil- bound, cut off from the world and its activity, nothing to look forward to, blind obedience the only ‘virtue’ that is instilled, and spirit con¬ sidered the great sin — is it any wonder that the prisoner approximates to the plant?2
To evade this ennui, Jawaharlal organized his life to a rigorous schedule. Up with the dawn, after a run of about a mile beside the main prison wall and a brisk walk for the same distance, Jawaharlal spent the remainder of the day mostly in spinning, weaving and reading. Since at first he was not allowed a charka, Jawaharlal, keen on some form of manual labour, took up newar weavk ing and continued it even later. But as a disciplined Congressman his main interest was in hand-spinning.9
Jawaharlal was allowed only six books at a time, and there was some uncertainty as to whether this included reference works and dictionaries and whether a multi-volume work counted as one book or more. So Jawaharlal had to give up the idea of continuing his letters to Indira, tracing the history of man. In 1928, when she was in Mussoorie and he was wandering in the plains, he had written to her giving in brief outline the origins of the earth, the beginnings of life and human prehistory. He had got as far as the forma¬ tion of classes, the development of organized religion and the coming of the Aryans, when he had been forced by the stress ofpublic affairs to discontinue.4 Now, in prison, though time was not lacking, he needed more books and probably even missed the inspiration: my mind was too full of the making of history, as it was being made from day to day in India, for me to think of the dead past.’5 But he read much and made copious notes; and the books he read disclose the spreading range of his interests. Spengler, Bukharin and
‘To his father, 28 May 1930.
‘To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 25 June 1930.
5 During this term of six months he spun over 30,000 yards of yam on the charka and nearly 750 yards on the tahli {• hand spindle).
4Letters from a Father to bis Daughter (Allahabad, 1929).
5 Preface to second edition, October 1931. *
144 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Russell’s ABC of Relativity were gutted, with Maurois’s Ariel and Disraeli and Romain Rolland’sJean-Christopbe (all in French), Lloyd George’s speeches, Shakespeare and an anthology of French poetry as light relief; and the interest in Indian and Asian history was maintained. “I seldom read the notes again but I had a substance of that book in my memory.#I had to think of what the book meant, put it down and that became for me a library of reference.’1
Jawaharlai’s isolation was never complete. It was broken from the start by the presence of numerous convict warders and orderlies, ostensibly intended to attend on him but also used to keep a watch on him, and not allowed to mix with other prisoners lest they carry messages. But in fact a large number of other warders and servants also came daily for darshan and to discuss swaraj. Convicts smuggled in flowers, and his punkha coolie, who was not a convict, brought him a few little mangoes almost daily. ’They are not up to much,’ wrote Jawaharlal, much moved, ‘but the gift is worthy of the Gods. The man is very poor.’2 Officials of the jail and the town also called on him frequently. A month after his arrest, another Congressman arrested for civil disobedience was placed in the same barrack. But it was the arrival of Motilal Nehru and Syed Mahmud on 30 June that disrupted the placid routine of Jawaharlal’s life. Looking after his father became now his main preoccupation, till both father and son were soon drawn, even from within jail, into political negotiations.
Jawaharlal, despite the taboo on discussion of politics at interviews and the denial of newspapers, had been kept fairly well and quickly informed of events outside by the warders and later arrivals in prison. ‘Peshawar occurrences' runs the entry in the pocket diary for 23 April, revealing that the solitary prisoner had heard and been thrilled by the knowledge that the Government had virtually lost control of that city. What particularly delighted Jawaharlal was the fact that the inhabitants of the N.W.F.P. were predominantly Muslim, and by their revolt had belied the foreboding that the Muslims would keep aloof from the movement. The news of the spread and intensification of civil dis¬ obediencewasindeed so exciting that Jawaharlal fretted inhis idleness and could not sleep. On 5 May he heard that Gandhi had been arrested in far-off Bombay a few hours earlier, and was well pleased. 'Ca marche bien. It is full-blooded war to the bitter end. Good.’3 Nothing, he thought, would be more unfortunate than any premature compromise.
This attitude ensured from the start that the effort of the professional media¬ tors, Sapru and Jayakar, to negotiate a settlement between the Government and the Congress was bound to fail. Jawaharlal held all Liberals in contempt and minced no words in his diary:4
'Speech to the Foreign Press Association, New Delhi, 20 March 1956.
2Diar$ entry 2 May 1930. *
'Diary entry, 5 May 1930.
431 May 1930.
ACTION—AND ANTI-CLIMAX
145
Some of the moderates are waking up, but some behave like old women — weeping and howling and feeling terribly oppressed about everything! TheLeader is evidently among the weeping widows. If they have not got gumptionenough to do anything why do they not shut up? It is enough to sicken one to hear them sing the praises of Irwin and Benn and co! It is difficult to imagine agreater dope at the political game than the moderate in India. Nothing could condemn British rule in India more than the amazing product of it!
So he was taken aback when some slack statements to a British journalist by Gandhi and Motilal were picked up by the two leading Liberals as a basis for a settlement atatimewhenbothcivil disobedienceand the Government's attempts to crush it were in full fury. Armed with some general platitudes from the Viceroy, they saw Gandhi in Yeravda jail and found him in what they felt to be a co-operative mood. In fact, however, while Gandhi sounded accommodating on the constitutional issue, he had clearly not given his whole mind to it and insisted that Jawaharlal's should be the final voice1 So the peacemakers pro¬ ceeded to Naini prison to interview the Nehrus.
Lot of time was wasted in listening to what Irwin said and Jinnah did and Fazl-i Husain intrigued. Nothing important or hopeful. Bapu’s2 note disappointing although it is dear that even that will not be acceptable to the Viceroy. We have not suggested anything. Have said that without full consultation with colleagues, especially Gandhiji, we cannot make any suggestion. Wehave not committed ourselves in any way although we have hinted at a stiff attitude. I have been worried however for last two or three days. I wish wehaddefinitely stopped all talk of 'peace'. It is harmful and diverts attention. There is no peace anywhere in sight.3
However, theimpressionoftheover-optimistic negotiatorswasverydifferent. Sapru reported to the Viceroy.'4
Much to our agreeable surprise we found Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in quite a reasonable frame of mind yesterday. Both he and his father gave us a very patient and courteous hearing. On the constitutional issue however we did not find our task with them so easy as we had found with Mr. Gandhi, whereas*on the question of salt and the 11 points of Mr. Gandhi on which he had laid so much stress at' Poona we did not find them in complete agreement with Mr. Gandhi.
1 Gandhi to Motilal, 23 July 1930, Tba Bombay Cbronicla, 6 September 1930.
2Gandhi was addressed as 'Bapu' or 'father' by Jawaharlal and many others.
5 Diary entry, 1 August 1930. Fazl-i Husain leader of the Unionist party in the Punjab and at this rim* mwnhw of the Viceroy's council, was a frank protagonist of Muslim communalism.
4 28 July 1930, Sapru papers 147.
146
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
So, despite a letter1 from Jawaharlal to Gandhi given them to deliver, in which Jawaharlal made dear that he and his father had not been persuaded by Gandhi’s approach to the constitutional issue and that he himself wished to continue the campaign, Sapru persuaded the Viceroy to transport the Nehrus to Yeravda for consultations with Gandhi. Though Jawaharlal had not been very keen, Motilal had said that they had no objection,2 and a special train sped them across the country to see Gandhi. Meanwhile, Jayakar, who had taken the letter to Gandhi and seen him alone, was confident that Gandhi was anxious for a settlement.3
But the talks of Gandhi and the Nehrus with Sapru and Jayakar came to nothing. The Congress stated its terms precisely and stiffly to be a complete national government with the right of secession and reference of all British claims to an independent tribunal. These terms would obviously not be accept¬ able to the Government; and though the indefatigable Sapru and Jayakar continued their ‘silly peace negotiations’4 and shuttled between Simla, Naini and Poona, no one shared their illusory hopes of a compromise. What, indeed, struck the Secretary of State was ‘Gandhi's deference to Jawaharlal and Jawa- harlal’s pride in what had been achieved as well as his declaration of belief in non-violence. It was the apparent pride which depressed me, because it did not show the spirit of a beaten man.'3
A few days later, Motilal was released on grounds of ill-health, and Jawaharlal’s own term of six months was drawing to a dose. But the U.P. Government had no intention of leaving him at large for long.6 Nor did Jawaharlal expect it. Released on 11 October, he promptly resumed the Con¬ gress presidency, thereby, as the organization had been outlawed; rendering himself liable to artest, and he then directed all the provincial committees to launch a fresh offensive. The manufacture of salt and the boycott of British goods, especially cloth, which formed the backbone of the movement, should be vigorously sustained, and in addition efforts should be made to initiate no-tax campaigns as in Gujarat.7
. It is clear that India, big as it is, is not big enough to contain both the Indian people and the British Government. Oneof the two has to go and there can be little doubt as to which this is going to be... we are in deadly earnest, we have burnt our boats, we have taken the great resolve and there is no going back for us.8 •28 July 1930.
*Sapru to Jayakar, 8 August 1930, Sapru papers J 16.
3Jayakar to Sapru, 4 August 1930, Sapru papers J 15.
"Hailey to General Shea, 15 August 1930, Hailey papers, vol. 19.
3Wedgwood Benn to Irwin, 3 September 1930, Halifax papers, vol. 6.
6 Hailey, Governor, to Crerar, Home Member, 2 October 1930, Home Dept. Pol File 237/III of 1930. b
7 Circular to provincial Congress committees, 14 October 1930.
"Speech at Allahabad, 12 October 1930.
ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX 147
In his own province, where agricultural prices had been on a steep decline throughout the year, a no-tax campaign would obviously meet with a favour¬ able response; and Jawaharlal announced that the district and town Congress committees would shortly organize non-payment of land revenue, rent and income-tax.1 Though, on the face of it, this involved all sections of society, landowners, tenants and professional classes, in the political struggle against the Government, basically it was a call to the peasant tillers not to pay rent to the landlords; and its explosive nature lay in its rousing class conflict and spreading it to the countryside. The next day he was arrested, tried for sedition and incitement to manufacture of salt and non-payment of taxes, and sentenced to two years’ rigorous imprisonment plus five months in default of fines. He had been out of prison for less than ten days.
Denied the artistry of action,2 Jawaharlal reverted to the regular tenor of Naini life. A pain in the shoulder prevented him from much spinning and newar weaving. But the insatiable reading was taken up again. He re-read Radhakrishnan’s Hindu View of Life, and made notes from, among others, Trotsky, Shaw, Maeterlinck, Kropotkin and Keyserling. He also recommenced his letters to his daughter, basing himself on his memory and his notebooks, for by now it was clear that ahead lay many years in prison — indeed he would only be able to write in prison — and if he hoped for the help of reference books he would never write at all. But his sense of wonder had led him to amass a great deal of odd information. Over these letters Jawaharlal took much trouble, collecting his thoughts on paper and then organizing them lucidly to suit a girl of thirteen. The handling of the language was easy, but his style had not quite settled down and occasionally there was a trace of affectation. The letters dealt with the histoty of man. Like Raleigh and Condorcet, Jawaharlal wrote a history of the world while sitting in prison. Each letter was devoted to one theme or development; and the whole, starting with Mohenjo-Daro and ancient Greece and ending with the writer’s own times, was spread over nearly three years. The letters showed, when published as Glimpses of World History, a unity of outlook and a command of fact which would have done credit to any pro¬ fessional writer; and that they were written with no research assistance of any kind and as an escape from the monotony of jail made the work an astonishing achievement.
The newsof the celebration of his forty-first birthday all over the country on 16Novemberthrilledhim.‘JawaharDay! Arrests —convictions— lathicharges all over the country!'3 About twenty million people had participated in 384 cities and villages (including Colombo); the police had opened fire in one place and carried out lathi charges in 26 others; one person was killed, about 1,500 were wounded and 1,679 were arrested. Sothe morale of the movement
'Speech at Lucknow, 18 October 1930, The Tribune, 21 October 1930.
*See letter to Dhan Gopal Mukherji, 17 October 1930. *
JDiary entry, 16 November 1930.
148 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
was obviously still high, and Jawaharlal gave some thought to its future. A revolutionary dynamic, even in politics, could only be maintained by the goal of an economic revolution and by the rousing of a mass revolt.
*
Ultimately, that is theonly thing that will tell. In spite of the great success of our movement we have not yet come within reasonable distance of moving the masses in a revolutionary sense. There is sympathy but no more. Gradually, if we do not look out, even this sympathy will get less and less.1
From this point of view, a no-tax campaign was vital and some attention should be given to defining its objective. The battle-cry of an economic programme was a far more powerful one for the peasant than that of political swaraj alone, and the object of a no-tax movement should be economic advance and not the release of a few leaders. Even the idea of a Constituent Assembly to settle the political future of India, which struck Jawaharlal at this time, could not be expected to rouse the kisans. In May 1929 the national body, following in the steps of the U.P. Congress, had accepted that the poverty and misery of the Indian people was due not only to foreign exploitation but also to the economic structure of society which required ‘revolutionary changes’. Thanks to Jawa harlal the Congress was acquiring, if not a socialist viewpoint, at least an economic dimension. But no thought had been given to these ‘revolutionary changes'. The Congress, in the middle of a war, could not be expected to draw up a definite economic and agrarian programme, but it should at least formulate some tentative ideas. Jawaharlal thought of some, 'not', as he said, ‘from a purely socialistic standpoint, but from a Congress viewpoint with some lean¬ ings towards socialism’. Big zamindaris should be acquired by the State, with compensation to all except those who had sided with the British and against the national movement, and replaced by peasant proprietorship and large state farms, where major experiments could be tried by the cultivators to whom they would be jointly leased. There should be also an inheritance tax and a land tax which would be at a flat rate of 25 per cent of the agricultural income above a certain minimum and up to a certain limit, and beyond that graduated like the income tax. Tenants should have rights of occupancy, purchase, transfer, improvement and inheritance, and a ceiling should be placed on rent. The time might not be ripe for a radical agrarian programme for the whole of India, and leading Congressmen would not agree to it; but the U.P. could take the lead. While there was no point in needlessly irritating the zamindars and the capital¬ ists and adding to one’s enemies in the middle of a great fight, where a choice had to be made between two positions the Congress should without fear back the masses — the kisans, the landless people and the petty zamindars — for they weje the vital groups. The Congress was wise in abiding precipitation
*Notes probably written in October-November 1930.
ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX
149
of the dass conflict, but it should always be remembered that such a conflict was there and could not be wholly ignored. The ultimate ideal should be dear* cut in their minds; it need not be advertised but it need not be kept secret either.
These ideas, very similar to the U.P. manifesto of 1928, were, as Jawaharlal was well aware, by no means revolutionary; but even their attainment was poised in his eyes on the continuance of a revolutionary struggle, and to that extent he was racing far ahead of reality. Even from within prison he and his companions sought to resist, and for the first time Jawaharlal contravened the jail rules byorganizing a three-day fast in protest against the flogging of political prisoners and their harsh treatment in other jails. He was vasdy delighted, too, by the news of his wife’s arrest on New Year’s Day and by her message on that occasion: ‘1 am happy beyond measure and proud to follow in the footsteps of my husband. I hope the people will keep the flag flying.’ But generally, as Jawaharlal was compelled angrily to recognize, spirits were flagging and there was a mood for compromise.
Unhappily the hartal age inaugurated by the Mahatma and the Con¬ gress has had some evil effects. It has resulted in continuous hartals in the heads and brains of some people. The upper storey has been locked up and the key is missing. It is a sad and deplorable result, but I suppose we must all bear up with this additional affliction.1
It was in this context of fatigue that the British Government sent out seductive messages suggesting a settlement. The first session of the Round Table Conference had made dear that it was futile to discuss Indian problems with anyone except the Congress: ‘no Indian delegation’, wrote the corres¬ pondent in India of The Times, ‘without a three-quarter line composed of Gandhi on one wing, the two Nehrus in the centre, and Malaviya or Patel on the other, can possibly be looked on as representative.’2The Viceroy also came round to the recognition that logically there were only two alternatives: to govern without consent or to make terms with Gandhi. The concept of the knock-out blow being futile, there had to be some settlement.3 On 17 January 1931 theViceroy, in the new, Christian style of imperialism, appealed to Gandhi for co-operation on a basis of mutual trust; and two days later the Prime Mini¬ ster, Ramsay MacDonald, offered provincial autonomy, responsibility of the central executive to a federal legislature with some safeguards for minorities during a period of transition, and reforms in the existing constitution pending final decisionon permanentchanges. The thought that these siren voices might strike a 'response in the Congress drove Jawaharlal almost frantic. All such statements, he pleaded with his father, even if they offered full independence,
*To hit father, 28 December 1930.
JLetter to his editor, 12 September 1930, The History of the Times, 1912-1948, (ft. ii (New York, 1952). p. 877.
5Irwin to Wedgwood Bean, 5 September and 3 November 1930, Halifax papers, vol. 6.
150
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
should be ignored and the fight carried on; but, in fact, MacDonald’s state¬ ment amounted to nothing. ‘The British Government are past masters in the art of political chicanery and fraud, and we are babes at their game.’ In even dreaming of a compromise the Working Committee would be*playing with fire — fire which might consume the country at no distant date — and lower¬ ing the morale of the people. ‘Some people may be tired. There are also some people who have got the iron into their souls and who will go through hell if necessary before giving in to an ignoble compromise.’ The Government should be made to realize that the fight would go on not for months but for years if necessary and the Congress would not give in except on its own terms. ‘The day we convince the enemy that we are immovable like the Himalayas and as difficult to crush, that nothing in the world can make us bend — that weshall put up with all that they may inflict on us — that day the enemy will crumple up.’ The larger world-situation also demanded that Britain make peace with India.1
Motilal, however, was dying, and could give no guidance to the Working Committee, whose members had now been released. Gandhi was unwilling to reject the Government’s overtures out of hand both because he sensed a kindred spirit in the Viceroy, and because he believed that the war-weariness was more widespread than Jawaharlal was willing to recognize. The latter was prepared to overcome the staleness in the towns by stirring up the rural areas, but this did not appeal to Gandhi. Out of time, therefore, with the mood of his leader, and deeply stricken by his father’s death on 6 February, Jawaharlal made no decisive contribution to the discussions. Trained to conceal his emotions, he continued to attend all the meetings of the Working Committee. But the undemonstrativeness could not hide the depth of his grief. Jawaharlal’s personalitywas still incomplete and lacking in an assured centre. He was a man in the process of becoming, and therefore greatly dependent on his strong family background and on the support of a powerful father. His mother had no influence over him. The differing attitudes of father and son on many poli¬ tical issues, the gradual shift of Motilal to a viewpoint closer to Jawaharlal’s and the many legends woven round his ambitious and spoiling love for his son, cannot detract from the fact that his was the weightier influence. For long after Motilal’s death, Jawaharlal felt the lack of his sheltering wisdom, and doubtless this deprivation did muchto reinforce his dependence on Gandhi.
Just at this moment, however, Gandhi’s ways were wholly alien to him. The negotiations with the Viceroy, carried out by Gandhi on his own, and the settlement which resulted, seemed to Jawaharlal a total and unwarranted surrender. He still had not understood that Gandhi was no different from the Moderates in his basic strategy of negotiating with the British for concessions;
he only sought to build up greater mass pressures in his favour.* ‘All these • *
‘Two undated letters to his father, clearly written in January 1931.
*For an analysis of this, see Bipan Chandra, ‘Elements of Continuity and Change in Early Nationalist Activity*, paper read at the Indian History Congress, December 1972.
ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX
151
forms of action', in Fanon’s words,1 'serve at one and the same time to bring pressure to bear on the forces of colonialism, and to allow the people to work off their energy.’ Assuming that the Congress was committed to the position Gandhi and the others had taken up at Yeravda the year before,2 and expect¬ ing, till almost the very end,3 the talks to break down, the actual terms came to Jawaharial as a severe jolt. Gandhi had agreed to discontinue civil disobedience in return for a partial amnesty limited to those not charged with violence, and permission to picket peacefully and to manufacture salf under certain con¬ ditions; and he committed Congress to take part in the Round Table Con¬ ference to consider a scheme of federation and responsibility with safe¬ guards 'in the interests of India* for such matters as defence, external affairs, the position of minorities, financial credit and the discharge of obligations. This was a far cry from the demand for independence and the right to secede, and even from the position taken up by the Congress in the talks with Sapru and Jayakar in the summer of 1930. Nor had Gandhi stood firm on the demands for a general amnesty, an inquiry, into police excesses, which to Jawaharial was preliminary to any participation in the Round Table Con¬ ference,4 the return of all immovable property which had been attached, and the unlimited right to collect salt.
Thousands ofpoor people are pledged to eatonly tax-free salt or salt manu¬ factured by themselves. Hundreds have during the past eight months bled for vindicating the right. The leaders are involved in the pledge taken by thepeople. Humiliation ofthepeopleand theirleaders and invita¬ tion to break their pledge is hardly the way to approach peace.3
It appeared to most members of the Working Committee, and above all to Jawaharial, that Gandhi had been outwitted and, in return for some empty phrases which recognized the indispensability of Congress in any Indian settlement, had yielded on every crucial issue and ignored the long-term objectives. But Gandhi threatened to retire if his settlement were repudiated and demanded personal loyalty even if not approval. Jawaharial was in tears and moreaware than ever that the loss of his father was more than a personal one. Never had Motilal’s clear-sightedness and ruthlessness in negotiation been more needed. ‘Always’, he recorded in jail a year later, ‘when thinking of the truce people start guessing what might have happened if father had been there and there appears to be a general consensus that events would have taken a very different turn. Foolishly I said so in Delhi a few hours after the truce. How Bapu was pained at my remark!’6
1 Op. dt., p. 52.
2 See his continents to t journalist, 18 February, Tba Tribum, 22 February 1931.
’‘Hie long conversations are at last drawing to a dose and we have to prepare again for jail or nonet This is all to the good.' Jawaharial to Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 28 February 1931.
4See his undated note which dearly was written at this time, AICC File G 6(KW)(iJsl931.
’Ibid.
‘Prison diary, 4 March 1932.
152
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
However, despite his disappointment, at the Congress session at Karachi Jawaharlal moved the resolution ratifying this settlement. It has frequently been suggested that Gandhi secured this by agreeing, in turn,‘to a resolution, drafted by Jawaharlal and revised by him, committing the organization to provide in any future constitution for not only the basic civil liberties, adult suffrage and free primary education, but also ‘real economic freedom’. But the argument that in return for hisacceptanceofthe political compromise Jawaharlal was given a recognition of socialist objectives is defeated by the list of fundamen¬ tal rights incorporated in the resolution. In industry, economic freedom meant only a living wage and proper conditions of work, liberation from serfdom or conditions bordering on serfdom, decent treatment of women workers, pro¬ hibition against the employment of school-going children, the right to form trade unions and the establishment of machinery for settling disputes by arbitration. The state should control mineral resources and the key industries. These could not constitute part of the ‘revolutionary changes' which the Cong¬ ress had accepted in 1929 as being necessary. But in agriculture the position was even worse. The.Karachi resolution stipulated no more than a substantial reduction of land revenue and rent with total exemption only for necessary periods in the case of uneconomic holdings, a progressive tax on agricultural income above a certain level and a graduated inheritance tax. There was no reference to the abolition of landlordism or the socialization of land or even the annulment of at least a portion of the rural debt. On the other hand, much ofGandhi’seleven pointsof 1930was included — reduction of civil and military expenditure, exclusion of foreign cloth and yam, prohibition, abolition of the salt tax and lowering of the exchange ratio of the rupee.
Obviously, therefore, this resolution was no sugar on the political pill. There was nothing socialistic about it. Only the secret police could have believed that M. N. Roy, who was present at Karachi, had helped in drafting this resolution, which he later denounced as confused, compromising with foreign imperialism and native feudalism and ‘an instrument of deception’.1 Jawaharlal too was aware that this resolution did not go even as far as his earlier efforts, from 1928 onwards, at drafting an economic programme which would have some meaning for the peasants and workers of India. But he sponsored it as it formed at least one more step taken by the Gongress, however haltingly, not on the road to socialism but towards the recognition of the need for an economic policy. It indicated ‘that our national movement is gradually turning towards the left.
I think this is a desirable development and that this in itself will help the fuller development of an advanced ideology in groups. It will provide the background out of which that ideology can develop.’2
So the resolution on fundamental rights in itsdf did not compensate for the loss of ground suffered because of the political settlement; and if Jawaharlal
» *
1 J.P. Haitbcox, Communism and Nationalism in India (Princeton, 1971), pp. 190-91.
2To Onkar Nath Verma, 2 December 1933.
ACTION-AND ANTICLIMAX
153
publicly supported the latter, it was because such conduct was in consonance with both his policy and his character. Once the settlement had been reached, Jawaharlal, ‘lonely and almost uninterested’ as Gandhi described him,1 in¬ formed his colleagues that he was unable to accept or reconcile himself to the references to safeguards and reservations. But he added: ‘I do not desire, how¬ ever, that any impediment should be placed in the way of those who interpret the words differently from me and who propose to extract independence out of them. Truce having been proclaimed by the Working Committee, I trust all of us will honour it and carry out the directions of the W.C. in regard to it.’2 In other words, Jawaharlal resented the conclusion of this agreement but was not going even to offer to resign, as he had done in 1929, and intended to abide by the settlement. But the contradiction between his mental attitude and his decision to conform was not complete. It was not the case of a middle-aged fledgling who believed in extremism and acted in moderation. As Jawaharlal saw it, the settlement was undoubtedly a self-inflicted defeat. But he would not have agreed with Irwin’s claim, at a private meeting of the Conservative Party after his return to London, that he had built a breakwater against the great agrarianforceswhichwerebeingharnessed by Jawaharlal by ensuring the loyalty of the older politicians who were on the side of ‘conservatism’.3 No permanent damage had been done to Indian nationalism. Gandhi had not broken, but only ignored, the logic of the struggle for freedom; that struggle, in fact, could only end with the attainment of independence. So this was no peace but only a truce. The temporary phase was bound to pass sooner rather than later, and the fight recommence; and then once again the nation would require the leadership of the man who had called a depressed people to life and action. Till then, in the period of neither peace nor war, it was Jawaharlal’s duty to keep the spirit of battle alive, to respect the cohesion of the party and to abide by the leadership of Gandhi. The fears of the Brftish Government4 that he might split with Gandhi and cariy on civil disobedience on his own showed how little they knew him. As he advised a young Congressman:
•
Wecannot afford to get excited in politics. We must preserve our balance and not rush into any action without proper consideration. Such action as we take should not be individual as far as possible. If we do so we lose the benefit of collective action and of an organization.3
‘See Gandhi’s handwritten note to Jawaharlal, AICC File G 6(KWXi) 1931. Undated note, AICC File G 6<KW)(>) 1931.
’Lord Butler, The Art of tb* Possibh (London, 1971), p. 41.
4Wedgwood Benn to Irwin, 25 March 1931, Halifax papers, vol. 6.
’To Anjani Kumar, 21 July 1931. AICC File G 59 of 1931.