Europe 1926-1927
On 1 March 1926 Jawaharlal sailed with his wife and child for Europe, The trip was undertaken primarily in the causeof his wife’s health. It was hoped that a long stay in Switzerland would help her to shake off the tuberculosis that was still in an incipient stage, while her husband would spend his time in study and travel. But these two years, while they did Kamala little good, were to have a profound effect on Jawaharlal’s mental development. Till now he had been one of the ordinary run of conforming nationalists, an unquestioning follower of the Mahatma. The Government of the United Provinces, reporting their deci¬ sion to give him a passport, summed up his position: ‘He is a devoted follower of Gandhi, is much respected and carries great influence with his party.’1 An over-enthusiastic district magistrate had suggested to Jawaharlal that he should facilitate the issue of a passport by giving an assurance that he was not visiting Europe for political purposes; but neither at Lucknow nor at Simla did Jawahar- lal’s refusal to give any such assurance cause any hesitation in permitting him to leave. He was not regarded as particularly dangerous, and it seemed worth while to keep his father in good humour. But it was this spell in Europe, and not the earlier years at Harrow and Cambridge, that was to provide Jawaharlal with his real political education; and here again it was Gandhi who was the most perceptive. ‘I expect', he wrote to Motilal on the eve of the family’s depar¬ ture, ‘great results from this trip, not only for Kamla [sic] but also for Jawaharlal.’2
In leaving India, Jawaharlal felt somewhat of a deserter.
I amcertainly looking forward to the visit to Europe but I am full of appre¬ hension. It is quite likely that when I get there I shall be looking backward to India! It is good to have a change and a holiday but this should rest on the solid foundation of something accomplished. The idea of going away just at present with your mother as president of the
‘Letter of Chief Secretary to Government, United Provinces, to Home Secretary, Government of India, 6 February 1926. Home Dept. Pol. File 23 of 1926.
*17 February 1926, Colbettd Works, vol. 30 (Delhi, 1968), p. 20.
97
99
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Congress and Gandhiji toiling away as ever is not particularly gratifying. On the whole perhaps it is as well that 1 am going but I doubt if I shall be veryhappythere. Indiaissolikeawoman — sheattractsandrepels.1
Itwas the sense of relief, however, which grew as the months passed. Indian politics at this time were in a low and grim condition. The Congress was riven with dissension, and even within the Swaraj Party Motilal was fighting a losing battle against opportunism. Communal tension was rising, and many old Con¬ gressmen were reacting to events more as Hindus and Muslims than as natio¬ nalists. Gandhi had not lost heart, but even he was reconciled to the situation getting much worse before it began to improve. ‘I must confess’, wrote Jawahar- lal to his father later in the year,2 ‘to a feeling of satisfaction at not being in India just at present.-Indeed the whole future outlook is so gloomy that, from the political viewpoint, a return to India is far from agreeable.’ Settled in Geneva in cheap lodgings, his principal occupations now, besides nursing his wife and escorting his daughter to school and back, were learning French, reading widely and attending various courses and lectures.
The older I grow the more I feel that there is so much to be learnt and studied and so little time to do it in. Most of us after a very perfunctory education imagine that we have learnt as much as is necessary and do not even attempt to increase our knowledge. This is sad for progress can only come with knowledge and the few years that we spend at school and college teach us precious little.3
t
Bertrand Russell’s books, particularly On Education and What 1 Believe, made a deep impact.
I think what is required in India most is a course of study of Bertrand Russell’s books, or at any rate some of them. No country or people who are slaves to dogma and the dogmatic mentality can progress, and un¬ happily our country and people have become extraordinarily dogmatic and little-minded. Generosity of heart is a good thing but what is wanted is not an emotional outburst of generosity but coldly reasoned tolerance.4
Like Gandhi he was a long-term, far-seeing optimist about India: 'The outlook in India is dark enough but somehow I do not feel as pessimistic as the news would warrant. Do not get down-hearted. We shall still see Swaraj. Whatever
*ToPadmaja Naidu, 29 January 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 226. In December 1925, Sarojini Naidu bed taken over as President of the Congress.
•6 October 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 244.
’To Syed Mahmud, 22 March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 314.
4Idem, 12 September 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 242. *
EUROPE 1926-1927
99
India might or might not do, I am fairly sore that England cannot hold on to India for long.’1 The news from India of communal rioting depressed him, but he was convinced that the only remedy was to scotch this so-called religion, secularize the intelligentsia at least and proceed on secular lines in politics. ‘How long that will take I cannot say but religion in India will kill that country and its peoples if it is not subdued.’ Europe, as Jawaharlal saw it, had got rid of religion by mass education which had followol industrialism, with the result that conflicts were now not religious but economic; and the same process was bound to be repeated in India.2 This was, of course, too easy and hopeful a solu¬ tion, based on asomewhat simplistic understanding of European developments. But Jawaharlal was still* optimist enough to believe that religious differences in India would be automatically dissolved by economic advance, and therefore gave no serious thought to it.
By the end of the year it was dear that Kamala had benefited little from the treatment of Spahlinger’s vaccine injections; so Jawaharlal dedded to shift her from Geneva to Dr Stephani’s dinic in the more bracing climate of Montana (Valais). The move to the mountains enabled Jawaharlal to take lessons in ski¬ ing and ice-skating; but he was beginning to feel restive, for the wider world and for India. Hecould not as yet return to India; his wife was still far from wdl and Motilal was planning a trip to the West. So the family started their wander¬ ings round Europe. There were visits to the museums of London, Paris, Berlin and Heiddberg, tours of factories and interviews with Indian exiles and revolu¬ tionaries. Jawaharlal was at Paris airport, with his daughter perched on his shoulder,3 waiting for Lindbergh to complete his lone journey across the Atlantic — an achievement which greatly impressed him for its human daring and resolution. Always keen on flying* and having himself done two short hops at this time from Londbn, once to Paris and once to Ostend, Jawaharlal urged his countrymen to become more air-minded.4
However, the real significance of these travels was that Jawaharlal now came into contact with European political workers and movements, and these gave a new depth to his thinking and activities. The discursive reading under¬ taken in Switzerland had ploughed up his mind; it was ready for new seeds but had not yet received them. A letter published in the Journal de Geneve was staunchly nationalist in tone and expounded the standard arguments about the traditional unity of India and the impoverishments and divisions brought about by British rule;3 but there was no glimmer of any fresh effort at inter-, pretation. In an article published in India, he advocated complete independence
> Idem, 11 August 1926, S.W„ vol. 2, p. 241.
aMem, 24 May, IS July and 11 August 1926 and 14 July 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 232*6,240*41 and 328-9.
’Mrs Gandhi’s broadcast reported in the Hindustan Timas, 24 July 1969.
4Letter to his father, 16 November 1926, and *Victory over the Air', article in Aaf, 28 September 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 250-51 and 364-7, respectively. #
*3 August 1926, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 236-240.
100
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
in the sense of full freedom in both external and internal affairs and favoured the formation of an extremist pressure-group within the Congress to counter the activities of those who tried to hold the organization back.1 This received wide publicity and, as Motilal complained, was generally interpreted as a criti¬ cism of the Swaraj Party and of its leadership: ‘it is the most famous document in India at the present moment and is being used for a variety of purposes not even dreamt of by you.’2 Jawaharlal was irritated equally by the Liberals, the Swarajists, and the no-changers, all of whom seemed to have more or less the same moderate mentality.
The mention of Independence frightens them and every effort is made to dissociate oneself from the idea or from its implications. The Indian States and foreign policy are taboo and not to be discussed; the army and problems of defence are beyond us, and so we spend all our energy in protesting, with varying degrees of emphasis, against internments and imprisonments and regulations etc. I am afraid this very tame and consti¬ tutional and legal and proper and reasonable activity raises no enthusiasm in me.3
But while there was commitment and impatience, there was no fresh line of analysis.
The turning-point in Jawaharlal’s mental development was the invitation to help in organizing — and to participate as the representative of the Indian National Congress in — the International Congress against Colonial Oppres¬ sion and Imperialism to be held at Brussels in February 1927. The chief organizer of the conference was Willi Muenzenberg, who ‘really invented the fellow-traveller’.4 The Soviet Union kept severely aloof and no one from that country attended the conference, though, as Jawaharlal realized even at the time,9 the objectives of the conference were wholly in accordance with Soviet foreign policy and were intended to bring together the forces of anti¬ colonialism and organized labour as against imperialism, especially British imperialism. This did not frighten Jawaharlal and he suggested that a large delegation, including an economist and an expert on military matters, be sent from India by the Congress,6 but in fact he was the only delegate.
Clearly, at such a conference where the prime target was British imperia¬ lism, the official representative of the Indian Congress would be an important
'Article in Pratap, December 1926.
2 13 January 1927.
’To A. Rangaswamy Iyengar, general secretary of the Congress, 23 January 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 258-9.
4Hugh Thomas, The Spanish Civil War (Peiican edition, 1968), footnote on pp. 283-6.
’See his confidential report to the Working Committee, 19 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2. pp. 278-97' ■ %
6To his father, 16 November 1926, S. W„ vol.2, pp. 250-31.
EUROPE 1926-1927
101
figure; and Jawaharlal was appointed one of the members of the Presidium. He arrived at Brussels on 6 February, took part in all the informal meetings, presided overoneof the formal sessions and played a leading role in the drafting of many of the resolutions. ‘I am dead tired’, he wrote from Brussels on the 16th,1 ‘after 8 or 9 days of the Congress here. I have not had a good night’s sleep and hardly a decent meal since I came here.’ It was a strange medley of delegates — European Communists, trade unionists and pacifists, nationalists from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and secret service agents — with many delegates doubling the roles. However, Jawaharlal could not but be influenced by some of the men and women he met here — Henri Barbusse, George Lans- bury, Ellen Wilkinson, Fenner Brockway, Harry Pollitt, Reginald Bridgman, Edo Fimmen, Willi Muenzenburg, Ernst Toller, Mohammed Hatta and Roger Baldwin, apart from a large number of delegates from China, Africa, Mexico andLatin America — and his fallow mind was receptive to Marxist and radical ideas.
In his first statement to the press, Jawaharlal merely emphasized the common element in the struggles against imperialism in various parts of the world; the fabric of imperialism looked imposing and appeared to hold to¬ gether, but any rent in it would automatically lead to its total destruction. Indian nationalism was based on the most intense internationalism, just as the problem of Indian freedom was a world problem; as in the past, so in the future, other countries and peoples would be vitally affected by the condition of India. But his speech at the inaugural session of the conference was at a deeper level. Jawaharlal pointed out that India was the prime example of imperialism. She had been continuously exploited and terrorized by the British, and her workers and peasants had been systematically crushed. ‘It does not require statistics, facts or figures to convince you that India in the course of the last few genera¬ tions had terribly deteriorated, and is in such a bad way that if something dras¬ tic is not done to stop this process India may even cease to exist as a nation.’ It was the policy of the British to create differences among Indians or, where they already existed, to increase them, to maintain the feudal princes in power, to support the rich landowners and to promote an unholy alliance of British and Indian capitalists. ‘Naturally, therefore,’ concluded Jawaharlal, introducing into his articulated thought a consciousness of the interlinking of economics and politics, ‘from their capitalist and imperialist point of view they wanted to do everything in their power to hold on to India.’ For the first time, instead of merely condemning British imperialism, Jawaharlal had tried to understand the motives, manner and methods of its functioning. His mind had taken a big step forward.
The resolution on India, drafted by Jawaharlal, accorded the warm support of the conference to the liberation of India from foreign domination and all
1 To, A. Rangaswamy Iyengar, 16 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 277. *
102
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
kinds of exploitation as an essential step in the full emancipation of the peoples of the world. The peoples and workers of other countries should fully co¬ operate in this task and in particular take effective steps to prevent the dispatch of foreign troops to India and the retention of an army of occupation in India. This was really meant by Jawaharlal for his audience in India, to weaken ‘the extraordinary mentality which clings on to the British connection in spite of everything’ and took the presence of British troops for granted. Similarly, to goad the Indian National Congress into looking beyond political freedom, Jawaharlal, in the last paragraph of the resolution, expressed the hope of the conference that the Indian national movement would base its programme on the full emancipation of the peasants and workers of India, ‘without which there can be no real freedom’, and would co-operate with the movements for emancipation in other parts of the world.
Apart from India, the chief planks of the conference were China and Mexico. At this time in China the Kuomintang, in short-lived alliance with the Communists, was riding on a wave of nationalism and seeking to unite the country; and the Chinese delegation to the Brussels conference, to a large extent official, was hoping to enlist the sympathy, if not support, of public opinion and labour organizations in other countries. A joint declaration of the Indian and Chinese delegations, clearly drafted by Jawaharlal, bears the marks of an outlook which was to remain unchanged for over thirty years. Friendship with China was the core of his pan-Asian feeling. The declaration, in line with the prevalent attitude of cultural nationalism in India and its stress on the ancient civilizations of the East, recalled the close cultural ties between the peoples of India and China for over three thousand years and blamed the British for fostering ill-will against India in China by utilizing Indian merce- napy troops ‘in support of British capitalist brigandage’. It was therefore urgent and essential that the Indian people should be educated regarding China, and British imperialism should be simultaneously engaged on two of its most vital fronts. ‘We must now resume the ancient personal, cultural and political rela¬ tions between the two peoples. British imperialism which in the past has kept us apart and done us so much injury, is now the very force that is uniting us in a common endeavour to overthrow it.’ The Indian and Chinese delegations thereafter persuaded the British delegation, representative of the British Com¬ munist Party, the Independent Labour Party and certain sections of the Labour Party, to commit themselves to support the oppressed countries in their fight for ‘full independence’ (a phrase preferred by the British to ‘severance of the British connexion’), to oppose all forms of coercion against colonial peoples,
. to vote against all credits for the maintenance of armed forces to be used against oppressed nations and to cany on propaganda among British troops. In parti- cular, the British delegation promised to advocate direct action, including strikes and embargoes, to prevent the movement of munitions and troops to China, and demanded unconditional recognition of the nationalist Govern-
EUIOPE 1926-1927 103
ment, abolition of unequal treaties and of extraterritorial rights and surrender of foreign concessions.
The Chinese delegation was keen on promoting contacts between the Kuomintang and the Indian Congress and on educating Indian opinion on the Chinese question. Jawaharlal realized that the British Government could prevent exchange of visits at any level, but he felt that the effort should be made. ‘It is up to us in India to do something practical for China. Vague resolu¬ tions of sympathy do not carry one far.’ What he had in mind was the dispatch of an ambulance unit of twenty to twenty-five volunteers.1 This was intended not only to encourage cordial relations between India and China; Jawaharlal was also anxious to widen the vision of Indian nationalism. He saw too the importance to the world of the future of China, especially as at this time the Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party were acting in alliance. What was happening in China, therefore, was not merely an assault on foreign im¬ perialism but a direct attack on the capitalist system.
A victory for the Chinese means the creation of a great Soviet republic in the East closely allied with Russia and together with it gradually domi¬ nating the whole of Asia and Europe. This does not mean that the Chinese Republic will be fashioned- wholly on the lines laid down by Marx. Even Soviet Russia, owing to the pressure of the peasantry, has had to give up part of its communism, and in China where the small peasant is the deciding factor, the departure from pure communism will be all the greater.2
This prescience, the realization that if the alliance of Chinese parties held it would be the Communists and not the much larger Kuomintang who would determine the lines of the future, and the recognition that there would be a large indigenous element in Chinese communism, can only be regarded as astounding — especially as at this time Stalin’s agents were dominating the Chinese Communist Party. But this was not all. Jawaharlal proceeded to point out that Britain, even with the aid of other European countries, would be un¬ able to do much injury to the great continental bloc of Russia and China. ‘What is more likely is that England in order to save herself from extinction will be¬ come a satellite of the United States and incite the imperialism and capitalism of America to fight by her side.’ It was at Brussels that Jawaharlal for the first time, perhaps because of his meeting with the delegates from Mexico and other countries of America, discerned that Britain was fast losing its leader¬ ship to the United States.
Most of us, specially from Asia, were wholly ignorant of the problems of South America, and ofhow the rising imperialism of the United States,
1LettertoN.S.Hardikar, 8 March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 304.'See also his article in Tf>e Volunteer, April 1927, on The Situation in China and India's Duty’, ibid., pp. 326-8.
^Confidential report to die Working Committee, 19 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 281.
104
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
with its tremendous resources and its immunity from outside attack, is gradually taking a stranglehold of central and south America. But we are not at liberty to remain ignorant much longer, for the great problem of the near future will be American imperialism, even more thaif British imperialism. Or it may be, and all indications point to it, that the two will join together to create a powerful Anglo-Saxon bloc to dominate the world.
Jawaharlal expected, in face of the Chinese threat to imperialism, a world war in five years if not earlier. In any such war the North-West Frontier area of India would naturally be a principal battleground, and it was thought that the British were planning with this in view. Again, under the guise of en¬ couraging Indian industries, the British were seeking to make India a self- sufficient country in munitions and other sinews of war. Jawaharlal wished the Indian Congress to take cognizance of these developments and formulate its own policy and programme on that basis. There should be a strong agitation against British intervention in China and the utilization of Indian troops for this purpose.
Jawaharlal s forecasts did not come immediately true, if only because the Kuomintang fell out with its Communist partner. But more than twenty years after this report was written, with the triumph of the Communists in China, the conclusion of a Sino-Soviet alliance, the formulation of a Chinese pattern of Communism and the evolution of Britain’s ‘special relationship’ with the United States, Jawaharlal was to be proved one of the most far-seeing prophets in world affairs in our age.
The Brussels conference concluded with the issue of a manifesto based on the Marxist-Leninist theory of imperialism. It was asserted that European capitalism had battened on the exploitation of countries in Asia, Africa and America. In its latest phase of finance capitalism a few countries, and in them a few individuals, controlled the world. But the world war and its consequences had dearly shown that imperialist capitalism was its own grave-digger. A huge wave of the movement for national emandpation was passing over the world, and had received a mighty push forward from the Russian revolution and the formation of the Soviet Union. But the imperialists would not easily give up their booty, as was proved by the activities of ‘the worst adventurer of our time’, Winston Churchill. So the Brussels Conference dedded to found the League against Imperialism and for National Independence, to organize co-operation between nationalist movements in the colonial countries and labour and anti¬ imperialist movements in the exploiting countries.
Jawaharlal does not seem to have taken an active part in drafting this mani¬ festo, originally written in French, and resented the way in which it was rushed through the conference. But by this time he had no verygreat objection to its sentiments. He had come round to the Marxist viewpoint in its broad essen-
.EUROPE 1926-1927.
105
tials. He agreed that imperialism and capitalism went hand in hand and neither would disappear until both were put down. As against this, the forces opposing imperialism and capitalism should be co-ordinated so as to strengthen each other. In colonial countries, nationalism automatically and rightly took pre¬ cedence over all other ideologies, but such nationalism should have a broad basis, derive its strength from the masses and work specially for them.
Jawaharlal was appointed an honorary president of the League as well as a member of the Executive Committee, though he declined appointment as one of the secretaries on the grounds that he would be away in India. But during his stay in Europe for the rest of the year he attended regularly the meetings of the Executive Committee. Though the Communists were only a minority in this body, they sought to dominate it, and Jawaharlal was one of the leaders of an effective resistance. Often irritated, but never angry,1 he made it clear that while he accepted in its fundamentals the socialist theory of the state, he had ‘the strongest objection to being led by the nose by the Russians or by anybody else’.2 But he did not think there was much danger of this, and, so long as the Soviet Union tried to utilize the League on unobjectionable lines, he saw no harm in co-operating with her against British imperialism. So he recommended to the Working Committee that the Congress might become an associate memb¬ erof the League. It was possible that the League might develop, in contrast to the ineffective Leagufe of Nations, into a powerful League of Peoples; but this was not the reason why Jawaharlal advocated association of the Congress. He was enough of a realist not to place faith in such fantasies. Nor did he trust much to the support of British and other foreign working-class movements; 'almost every Englishman, however advanced he may be politically, is a bit of an im¬ perialist in matters relating to India.’3 He would have agreed broadly with Gandhi that India had little to expect from such bodies as this League, because most of the European states were partners in the exploitation of India, and their sympathy could not be expected in the final heat of the struggle.4 He wrote to Gandhi:3
I do not expect much from it and indeed I am quite sure that none of the members of the so-called imperialist or oppressing nations will help us in the least whenever their interests conflict with ours. I have no illu¬ sions about their altruism. But I welcome all legitimate methods of getting into touch with other countries and peoples so that we may be able to understand their viewpoint and world politics generally. I do not 1Roger Baldwin’s recollections recorded in 1967, N.M.M.L. Confidential report to the Working Committee, S.W., vol. 2, p. 289. *Note for the Working Committee on a proposal to prepare a Parliamentary bill for India, 10 March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 306-7. 4See, for example, Gandhi to Motilai, 14 May 1927, Coiltcttd Works, vol. 33 (New Delhi, 1969). p. 321. • * 22 April 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 326.
106
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
think it is desirable, nor indeed is it possible for India to plough a lonely furrow now or in the future. It is solely with a view to self-education and self-improvement that I desire external contacts. I am afraid we are terribly narrow in our outlook and the sooner we get out of this narrow¬ ness the better. Our salvation can of course come only from the internal strength that we may evolve but one of the methods of evolving such strength should be study of other people and their ideas.
Association would also enable the Congress to utilize the League as its vehicle for propaganda abroad without committing it to the adoption of a socialist programme or limiting its freedom of action in India or elsewhere. Moreover, the League could be used by the Asian members to keep in close touch. At Brussels many delegates from Asia, despite discouragement from the organizers, had met informally and talked in terms of forming an ‘Asiatic federation.’ But this was thought to be premature and it was decided, for the time being, to concentrate efforts on strengthening the League and promoting bilateral relations.
However, it was the Soviet Union that now dominated Jawaharlal’s mind, just as it had, an unseen presence, dominated the Brussels conference. He read all that he could lay hands on, books both by partisans and by critics, about developments and conditions in that country, and found much to admire. He believed that whatever the tradition of hostility between Britain and Russia, to a free India she would be no threat; and even if India were wholly opposed to Communism she could have friendly relations with Russia. Jawaharlal, far-seeing as ever, recognized that as she grew in power Soviet Russia might develop a new type of imperialism; but he thought there was little chance of this for a long time to come, and for the moment, for reasons of self-interest, Russia was befriending all oppressed nationalities.1 It seemed logical, there¬ fore, that he should visit the Soviet Union before returning to India; and the opportunity came, after Motilal’s arrival in Europe in the autumn, when father and son were invited to the decennial celebrations of the 1917 revolution. When they were at Berlin the Soviet ambassador conveyed the invitation to them; and though this was short notice they decided, after some hesitation, to accept it.2
The invitation came in the last phase of the Soviet policy of support for national liberation movements in Asia, regardless of their ideology. This was a heritage from Lenin, who had believed that colonial countries like India should have their bourgeois, democratic revolution before they could think of proletarian rule, and that therefore it was the duty of Communists to work at this stage in co-operation with the leadership of the bourgeoisie. So to Lenin Gandhi was a revolutionary, and he rejected the argument of M.N. Roy that
*A Note on Foreign Policy for India, 13 September 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 348-64.
*Nehru to Amal Home, 20 October 1999, Nehru paper*.
EUROPE 1926-1927
107
the Indian bourgeoisie was no different from the traditional feudal classes. ThethesisofLenin became the official policy of the Soviet Union and the Com¬ intern, and although by the end of 1922 there were the beginnings of Com¬ munist party organization in India, the general plan was for the Communists to infiltrate the Congress rather than promote a revolutionary mass party of their own. It was true that in May 1925 Stalin had accepted the position of Roy and advocated the formation of a revolutionary bloc in India led by the proletariat in general and the Communists in particular, and including the revolutionary section of the bourgeoisie.1 But the other line of working with bourgeois leadership still held the field till the end of 1927. The Brussels Congress testified to the importance the Soviet Union still attached to bour¬ geois nationalist movements; and the severance of diplomatic relations by Britain in 1927 followed by strong rumours of British preparations for military invasion, with Peshawar as a base,2 led to a war scare in the Soviet Union. Now more than ever it seemed invaluable to have the sympathy, if not the active support, of the Congress Party.
Achange in Soviet attitude came towards the end of 1927. The setbacks in China and the failure of the efforts to reach a rapprochement with the Western Powers unnerved the makers of Soviet and Comintenf policy; and Stalin, who was now finally emerging as the victor in his rivalry with Trotsky, viewed the colonial question only against the background of European events and had a more limited idea of the security of the Soviet Union. At the Fifteenth Party Congress, Bukharin made it clear that the bourgeoisie in India could no longer be supported. The Sixth Congress of the Third International formally aban¬ doned in 1928 the policy of a united front against imperialism and directed the Indian Communist Party to act in isolation and work for an armed insurrec¬ tion, for the bourgeois nationalist parties had become supporters of imperialism and, having assumed ‘a reformist and class-collaborationist character’, could not be expected to lead the revolution.
So November 1927 was the last occasion, for many years at any rate, when the Nehrus could expect an official invitation to Moscow. They were in Russia for only a few days, but the articles which Jawaharial wrote for The Hindu covering this visit ami which were later published as a book,3 show the deep impression made on him by 'this strange Eurasian country of the hammer and sickle, where workers and peasants sit on the thrones of the mighty and upset the best-laid schemes of mice and men’.4 They were, he wrote to his sister from Moscow,3 'in topsy turvy land. All one’s old values get upset and life wears a strange aspect here.' He knew that they were on a conducted tour, seeing only what they were allowed to see; he knew too that conditions in the
1 D.N. Dnthe, Soviet Russia and Indian Communism (New York, 1939), p. 95.
*Naw York Timas, 50 June 1927.
*Soviai Russia, soma random skatcbas and knpnsshns (Allahabad, 1928). •
♦ibid.
*10 November 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 569.
108
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
sprawling provinces hardly came up to what was to be found in Moscow and its environs. Yet he was convinced that the Soviet Union had made rapid progress in agriculture, prison reform, the eradication of illiteracy, the treat¬ ment of women, the handling of the problem of minorities and the removal of the sharp contrasts between luxury and poverty and of the hierarchy of class. He was sure too that the Soviet Union had much to teach India, which also was a large agricultural country with a poor and illiterate population. His mood was defined by the lines which he put on the title-page of his book:
‘Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
But to be young was very heaven.’
Starry-eyed? Perhaps; but it is well to remember that the Russia which Jawaharlal visited was still very much the Russia of Lenin, even though Lenin had been dead for over three years. Stalin had not yet become the undisputed dictator, and there was a considerable amount of mass support for the Soviet regime. The New Economic Policy was still in effect. ‘Get rich’, Bukharin had advised the peasants in 1925; and the peasants still dominated the country- ide and brought about a strong recovery in food production. This was to them the ‘golden era of Soviet rule’. The number of family holdings rose to 25 millions in 1927, and comprised 98-3 per cent of the sown area.1 Stalin, like Lenin, was still speaking in terms of voluntary collectivization of agricul¬ ture. It was only after 1927 that it was felt that ‘Bolshevism in alliance with the peasants’, apart from being ideologically untenable, was also impracticable. The food shortages in large cities in the summer of 1927, despite a good harvest, showed that, without mass production of consumer goods, the pea¬ sants could not be induced to sell their grain. The percentage of the crops being sent to the urban markets was even less than that in the years before the war. On the other hand, industrial production, which till 1927 had shown a rapid rise because of the reactivation of productive capacity of the years before 1917, now began to slacken. If industrialization — and specially,heavy indus¬ trialisation, thought to be so necessary with the imminent prospect of war -*■ were to be maintained, itwas necessary to insiston the peasants disgorging their supplies; and this meant rapid and enforced collectivizatiop. In December 1927, therefore — a month after the visit of the Nehrus — the P:.rty Congress de¬ cided on an offensive against thekulak, opening a new chapter in Soviet history.
So Jawaharlal saw the Soviet Union in the last days of its first, halcyon period. If his reaction was idealistic, it was partly because there was still some idealism in the air. The grounding in Marxism, which he had received at the Brussels conference and after, was followed by a near-conversion to commun¬ ism by practical testimony. Jawaharlal had been particularly impressed by Lenin’s leadership, by his realism and resilience, and above all by his insistence
.A. Nove, An Economic History of the U.S.S.R. (London, 1969), p.l06.
EUROPE 1926-1927 109
on professional, full-time revolutionaries. The need for such workers in India was obviously even greater, and it was as one such that Jawaharlal now doubt¬ less saw himself. He who had sailed from India as a dedicated disciple of Gandhi returned a self-conscious revolutionary radical. Although always to be deeply influenced by Gandhi, he was never again to be wholly a prisoner in the Gandhian mould. But it is significant that the change was wrought not by the revolutionary situation in India but by what he saw and heard and read in Europe. Jawaharlal was always a radical in the European tradition, seeking to apply and adapt its doctrine to his own country. This could be both a strength and a weakness.