Unformative Years
The broad details of the early life of Jawaharlal Nehru are by now well known.
He himself, in his Autobiography, looked back with an untinted eye and pro¬
vided a fairly detached, and even critical, account which has since been fre¬
quently paraphrased, and sometimes embroidered, by later writers. He was
born at 11.30 p.m. on 14 November 1889 at Allahabad, to which place his
father, Motilal Nehru, had moved three years earlierTrom Kanpur. Jawahar¬
lal — the name was one which its owner never greatly fancied — was doted on
by his parents; and this is not surprising, as Motilal had lost both a wife and
son, had married again, and had lost another son before Jawaharlal, who re¬
maided an only child for eleven years.
Nothing, therefore, was going to be denied to Jawaharlal. A pampered
child surrounded by luxury, with a private swimming pool and tennis court,
Jawaharlal ran the risk of being smothered by devotion and affluence. Though
Motilal’s explosive temper frequently mitigated his spoiling of his son, there
were no checks on the adulation Jawaharlal received from his mother, Swaruprani Nehru. As so often happened in Indian families of those days, the lack of
companionship between husband and wife led to the mother building her
life and her affections round her son.
The mother’s influence ensured an Indian environment. The atmosphere
of Hindu custom and folklore was not lacking in the Nehru home, and
Jawaharlal picked up a great deal of legend from the women and indulged in
temple-going and Ganga-bathing. When, in 1900, the father bought what was
later known as Swaraj Bhawan, the boy was no doubt often told that this was
on the site where, according to story, the rishi Bharadwaja hoi had his uni¬
versity, and that across the road where once the Ganga had flowed Rama was
reported to have halted on his way toexile. But the Nehru family was never fully
integrated into the high-caste Hindu society of Allahabad, for not only was
Motilal a relative newcomer but he had been excommunicated in 1899 for
his refusal to make atonement for having travelled overseas. This insulated
*rom t^le rev‘valism then rampant in Hindu orthodox circles in
Allahabad, and even cut them off from the more orthodox sections among
16
UNFORMATIVE YEARS 17
the Kashmiri Pandits. Even as late as 1919, there was always a problem about
the women of the Nehru household dining together with other Kashmiri
women at weddings and other ceremonies.1
However, the Kashmiri Pandit community derived certain incidental
advantages which distinguished it from the other Hindus. Among the Hindus
of Kashmir, there were no castes below the Brahmins;2 and so while the
Pandits were very conscious of their status, inter-caste antagonisms did not
enter deeply into their lives. There was also, among the Kashmiri Pandits,
often little feeling of separateness from the Muslims. A small enclave com¬
munity totalling never more than five to seven per cent in a State where the
majority was Muslim, many of its members learnt Persian and sought official
service. This eclectic, cosmopolitan tendency continued even among those
who migrated southwards to the plains. Motilal himself was, like his ancestors,
more fluent in Arabic and Persian and in Urdu than in any other Indian langu¬
age. The chief retainer of his household was a Muslim, and it wasfrom Mubarak
Ali that .Jawahkrlal heard innumerable stories of heroism and tragedy of the
years of the revolt.
The fortunes of the Nehrus had for generations been tied to Muslim patrons.
There is no evidence for saying that in the early eighteenth century, Farruksiyar,
the Mogul emperor, had invited Raj Kaul to join his court at Delhi. All that we
do know is that Raj Kaul came to Delhi, and gradually the Kauls assumed the
double-barrelled name of Kaul-Nehrus, because, it is said, their house was
situated on the banks of a canal (nahar in Urdu).3 Then, after the revolt of
1858, and the final collapse of the Mogul, the Kaul-Nehrus moved to Agra.
They had left the canal, but it was the Kaul part of the name that gradually
dropped out. The use of surnames in India was the result of British influence,
and it is possible that as the Kaul-Nehrus were drawn into the British adminis¬
trative network, they began to use that surname which was less indicative of
their caste origins. Ifthis be so, it hides an irony. The use ofthe surname Nehru
did not become common till much later,4 and even after.it did, both father and
son were commonly addressed as Pandit Motilal and Pandit Jawaharlal. Hard
as he tried, Jawaharlal could nevershake off this prefix which he found distaste¬
ful, and was referred to respectfully by his countrymen as ‘Panditji’.5
The Nehrus were one of the many Indian families who took advantage of
the conditions and opportunities created by the raj. At Delhi their landed estate
had gradually dwindled, and Motilal’s father, Ganga Dhar Nehru, was a minor,
police official. A portrait of him that exists depicts him in Mogul costume. He
• •» • . ’ *• ^
AUtmiiaHaksar, The Future That Way(pe1hi, 1972),-p.Z4. ^' .*
2SeeT. N. Madan, Family and Khtship, a study of the Pandits of rural Kashmir !London, 1963),
p. 18. ”
*This was Motilal’s theory, to which Jawaharlal gave currency in his Autobiography, but oil the
other hand, it has to be remembered that there were Nehrus even in Kashmir.
4As late as 1888 the list of delegates to the Congress session at Allahabad mentions not Motilal
Nehru but ’Pandit Motilal, Hindu, Brahmin, Vakil High Court, North West Provinces.'
vJi’ denotes respect.
18 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
died in 1861, three months before the birth of Motilal, but the two older
brothers, who themselves had taken service directly under the British or in a
neighbouring Indian state, saw to it that Motilal received a proper education
in the English language. He was a bright pupil, though he never graduated,
and set up legal practice, first inKanpur and then in Allahabad. The vast web of
litigation created in the North-West Provinces by the talukdari system, debt,
alienation, succession and transfers, and the enforcements of the revenue law
made the province a paradise for an ambitious lawyer.1 Specializing in these
branchesofthe civil law, with many clients among the zamindars and talukdars
and links doubtless with the Kashmiri Pandits who had infiltrated into the
landed estates,2 soon Motilal became one of the leaders of the Allahabad Bar.
Though Motilal had been born poor, had acquired many responsibilities at
an early age as head of a large Hindu joint family, and was professionally equip¬
ped rather than generally educated, he had no complexes. A cheerful extrovert,
full of the confidence and inner balance that come from self-made success, he
set about living the life of an English gentleman. A photograph taken in 1894
shows him attired in English style, his wife, who was from an orthodox family
of Lahore, in traditional Kashmiri dress, and his five-year-old son in a sailor
suit. It is the kind of photograph a bourgeois English family would have had
taken on a visit to Brighton.
Even the fact that his country was under alien rule did not subdue Motilal.
He was too busy making Money, and enjoying what money could buy. As soon
as he could, he moved tw ay from the traditional residential area of the Hindu
middle class, and, till he bought a house of his own, lived in theCivil Lines where
his neighbours were mostly British. He entertained generously, and his natural
courtesy enabled him to overcome the restrictions of Anglo-Indian society and
tomake a numberof English friends. His house wasfitted with the latest gadgets
imported from Europe. Like most members of the educated Indian dlite, he
took an interest in politics and dutifully attended as many sessions of the Indian
National Congress as he could. But these were the years when the Congress
was a loyalist organization, interested not in subverting British rule, not even
in extracting concessions from it, but in pleading for greater opportunities for
service.
So it was but natural that Motilal should want for his son the best that
British education could offer. He first engaged two English governesses, and
then sent his son for a few months to a local convent and finally decided on
private instruction at home. The great Sanskrit scholar, Pandit Ganganatha
Jha, tried, with no noticeable success, to teach Jawaharlal Sanskrit.3 But the
main emphasis was on a British tutor. A young and ardent Irish-French theosophist, F. T. Brooks, who had been recommended by Mrs Annie Besant, wasin
charge of Jawaharlal’s education from 1901 to 1904. Brooks would seem to
‘See the chapter 'The Frustration of Legal Remedy’ in E. Whitcombe.’aA^rawa* Conditions in
Northern Mia, vol. 1 (Los Angeles, 1972), pp. 205ff.
JP- J. Musgrave, ‘ Landlords and Lords of the Land ’, Modem Asian Studies, July 1972, p. 269.
}See Jawaharlal’s message on the death of Amaranatha Jha, 19 September 1955.
UNFORMATIVE YEARS 19
have been more interested in spreading theosophy in Allahabad, where he
founded three lodges,1 than in coaching his pupil; but he had a considerable
influence on his impressionable charge. He introduced him to English poetry
and literature and developed in him an interest in science by improvising a tiny
laboratory in his rooms. He also, by allowing Jawaharlal to be present at his
regular discourses on theosophy, planted in the boy’s mind the idea that there
might be more in religion than myth and miracle. The concept of ethics is what
Jawaharlal perhaps rather vaguely comprehended when, at Brooks's instance,
he read the not-too-easy Upantshods and the Bhagavad Gita. Certainly he was
sufficiently engaged to seek and secure, at the age of thirteen, his father’s per¬
mission to become a theosophist; and Mrs Besant herself initiated him at a
solemn ceremony in Banaras. Motilal was right in not taking thisseriously, and
soon, once Brooks’s influence was removed, Jawaharlal forgot all about the
episode. But it was, in fact, more than a charade, and indicative of the delicacy
of the young mind and spirit. Theosophy would also seem to have had a more
permanent, though not major, influence, probably at a subconscious level,
than Jawaharlal ever acknowledged. He always, for instance, unlike his father,
favoured an austerity of diet.
Dissatisfied with private tuition, and in particular with Brooks, in May 1905
Motilal took his family to Britain and secured admission for his son at Harrow.
Jawaharlal was now a boy of fifteen. Not very tall, and slightly built, he was
handsome with a fair skin, clear features and well-brushed black hair which
was, however, never very thick. For some time he sported a moustache, not so
much because he fancied it as to please his father, who, did not like his son’s
shaven face. In other words, you look like a fool.’2 He was good at his school
work and impressed his teachers. ‘He looks very well and happy’ wrote the
headmaster to his father,3 ‘and is doing remarkably well in every way, being
again head of his form, and winning golden opinions from his masters for his
industry and ability.’ The school report in October 1906 read, ‘Inaccurate in
French grammar, Latin poor, but he prepares well. English subjects excellent.
Progress good — has brains.’ In fact Jawaharlal was clever and diligent, and
this was his best academic phase. He never fulfilled academically, in later years
at Cambridge or the Bar, the promise he showed at Harrow. The reason was
that he was not very keen, did not share his father’s ambition for such prizes as
the senior wranglership and did well at school merely because there was at this
time very little else that interested him. He carried out his fagging duties, joined
the chess club, played football and cricket, ran in the half-mile and mile races
and in the cross-country steeplechase and was often in the gymnasium and on
the ice-rink — but all in a rather desultory way. Only the Officers Training
Corps roused any enthusiasm.
Jawaharlal was not unhappy at Harrow, and when he left after two years,
1Theosophy in India (1912), p.61.
2Motilal to Jawaharlal, 7 December 1905.
3DrJoseph Wood to Motilal, 19 March 1906, Motilal Nehru papers, Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library, New Delhi, (hereafter N. M. M. L. ). •
20 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
on the last night, he tells us, his pillow was covered with tears. But none of
his teachers had any lasting influence on him, nor did ‘Joe’ Nehru, while gene¬
rally liked, make any deep and enduring friendships. Lord Alexander of Tunis,
who was his contemporary, remembered him as merely ‘an average popular
boy’, not outstanding in any respect, and with no close friends or enemies.1
Sir James Butler, who was in the Headmaster’s house with Jawaharlal, could
only say that he had not been particularly distinguished and had made no great
mark in the House.2 Jawaharlal was a quiet and somewhat lonely boy, and
though, once he had settled down, he was not particularly homesick, he never
quite fitted in nor felt at ease with his schoolfellows. The English boys he found
mostly immature and childish, while the few Indians, belonging to the princely
families, who were there, he heartily disliked. So he looked forward eagerly to
Indian visitorswith whom he could talk freely and in his own language; and the
nostalgia for things Indian may explain his habit in his schooldays — which
he 1 ter discarded — of chewing betel-nut, which his mother sent him from
home. In his adult years Jawaharlal was very conscious of his Harrovian con¬
nexions. While in prison in the’thirties, he stuck pictures of Harrow in his
diaries and drew up lists of poets and politicians who had been to Harrow. He
even sensed a certain affinity with Byron on the ground that they had both been
to Harrow and Trinity, and he used to sing the school songs with the younger
members of the family. As Prime Minister he attended an old boys’ dinner in
London, and in 1960 visited the school and received an enthusiastic welcome.
But all this did not come very naturally, and he was doubtless far happier as an
old Harrovian-than in his actual years at that school.
Jawaharlal’s arrival at Harrow coincided with startling events in India and
outside, and it was now that he began, for the first time, to take an interest in
politics and world affairs. In 1904 he had attended the Congress session at
Bombay with his father, an occasion that, not surprisingly, had left no impres¬
sion on him; but the situation was now very different. In 1905 the Viceroy,
Lord Curzon, had, by his heavy-handed partitioning of the province of Bengal,
forced the transition in India from the era of supplication to that of pressure.
The broad-based agitation in Bengal found vigorous support in every other
part of India because the partition was regarded not as a minor administrative
reform but as a deliberate attempt to weaken the growing forces of Indian
nationalism. So the Swadeshi movement, or the insistence on the use of arti¬
cles of Indian manufacture, and the boycott of British goods, inaugurated in
Bengal, spread far and wide and even, to Jawaharlal’s surprise, reached distant
Kashmir. Motilal too, normally no admirer of the ‘oily babus’ of Bengal, was
stirred to sympathy and appreciation, and thought that they had after all justi¬
fied themselves. ‘The Bengali reigns supreme throughout Bengal.. . We are
passing through the most critical period of British Indian history . .. Bande
Mataram3 has become the common form of salutation even it^Allahabad . ..
‘Interview with the author, 30 May 1969.
Mnterview with the author, 16 February 1969.
9The name of a Bengali nationalist song, ‘Hail to the Motherland'.
INFORMATIVE YEARS 21
If this movement only continues you will on vour return find an India quite
different to the India you left.’1 Jawaharlal was avid for news, and asked his
father to mail Indian newspapers —‘not The Pioneer'2— to him regularly
Motilal’s own enthusiasm was short-lived, and soon he was denouncing the
movement against partition as the most srupid and dishonest thing he had ever
seen;3 but Jawaharlal was not shaken.
The course of the agitation against partition accentuated division of opinion
within the Congress, between the Extremists who believed in methods of agita¬
tion and the Moderates who were committed to constitutional processes.
There was no disagreement between these two groups as to the objectives. The
Extremists under Tiiak were not revolutionaries who sought a violent end to
British rule. Even their remote ideal was only a confederacy of Indian pro¬
vinces with a measure of autonomy and the reservation of all Imperial ques¬
tions for the British Government. All that they wanted immediately was to
impress on public opinion in England that all was not well in India, and this
purpose was shared by the Moderates. The only difference was as to the way
that thisshould be done. While Gokhale and his followers believed in speeches,
meetings and deputations, the slogan of Tiiak was self-reliance. Jawaharlal
found himself in sympathy with the Extremists, and Tiiak seemed to him the
embodiment of Indian nationalism struggling for freedom.4 But it was a vague
sympathy. The ideas were unformed and the emotion imprecise, going no
further than, under the influence of Trevelyan’s Garibaldi, swashbuckling
fantasies. His political enthusiasm was still a form of idealized chivalric
romance.
However, it was not only developments in India that excited Jawaharlal’s
interest. He followed, far more closely than most of the other boys at Harrow,
the general election in 1905 in Britain, which swept the Liberal Party into
power and enabled Campbell-Bannerman to form his government. Even more
absorbing were the changes in Asia. On the day Jawaharlal landed in Britain,
news came of Japan’s decisive naval victory over Russia at Tshushima. Feeling
relatively a stranger in a British public school, and with his mind full of reports
of the grow ing estrangement between the British rulers and the Indian people,
he thrilled to this evidence of the new strength of an Asian nation. It was at this
time that he came across Meredith Townsend’s Asia andEurope; and his mind
was particularly receptive. For the thesis of that book, shorn of its crudities
such as that caste was a form of socialism and that India would gradually
become a Muslim country, was that Asia and Europe were separate in every
sense. Neither could conquer the other with permanence, nor would the
peoples of the two continents really come together, for there was an inherent
antipathy between them. Europe had never enduringly influenced Asia and
was unlikely ever to do so; in fact, Europe had received from Asia far more
1 Letter to Jawaharlal, 16 November 1905.
2This was an F.nRhs.h-owned newspaper of Lucknow.
2 Letter to Jawaharlal. i January 1906.
4 See his message on Tiiak. 18 June 1956.
22 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
than she had given. About India in particular, Townsend was firmly of the
view thattheBritish hadwon nogenuine loyalty from any section ofthe people,
and their empire, which came in a day, would disappear in a night. The effort
which the British had put forward in 1857 to hold their authority could never
be repeated, for the British people had lost the energy and the unscrupulous¬
ness to maintain government by slaughter; but India could not be retained in
any other way. Jawaharlal was willing to be convinced.
Bored with Harrow, Jawaharlal sat for the entrance examinations to Cam¬
bridge in the spring of 1907, a year before his father and his headmaster
thought he should, and went up to Trinity that October. In the intervening
' summer he had spent a few weeks in Ireland. He missed the rioting in Belfast
and was disappointed that Dublin was quiet during his stay. But he had felt,
first-hand, the force of nationalist agitation and wasimpressed by the Sinn Fein
movement. He recommended to his father a book just then published, The
New Irelandby Sydney Brooks, which saw in Ireland the rebirth of an ancient
nation and commended the Sinn Feinmovement for its revolt against ‘thimble¬
rigging’ politics and its belief that nothing could be secured from England by
whining. Such gains as Ireland had made in the past had been by extortion. The
only sound policy' for Ireland to follow was that which caused England the
greatest annoyance. But there was no need for violence; all that was required
to thwart the alien ruler was to ignore him and boycott his merchandise. The
parallel in India was, of course, obvious, and Jawaharlal’s visit to Ireland and
his understanding of her politics seem to have strengthened his Extremist
sympathies. The result wasthat he became more critical of his father’s attitude
in politics. He accused Motilal of being ‘immoderately moderate’,1 and a later
light-hearted reference to the Government demonstrating their satisfaction
with ‘the insulting offer of a Rai Bahadurship’2 hurt Motilal so deeply thaf
Jawaharlal had to apologize.
Theextremism, however, was confined tohisletterstohisfather. Jawaharlal
did not plunge intoche student politics of Cambridge. He never spoke at the
Union, though he was a member and used the club rooms. He joined the
Magpie and Stump, the debating society of his own college, within a week of
coming up, his name having been proposed by St John Philby and seconded by
Charles Darwin. However, although failure to speak throughout a term meant
payment of a fine, during his three years Jawaharlal spoke only once, for two
minutesthirty seconds on 29 May 1908 on the motion ‘This house approves of
thepresent public school system. Unfortunately, the minutes do not disclose
whether Jawaharlal spoke for or against the motion. Nor does he seem to have
taken part in the debates in doggerel, mode trials and pageants and smoking
concerts organized by this club.
iLetter, 20 December 1907,SslscttdWorks ofJaw*b*rlslNtbru (hereafter S.W.) vol. l,(Ddb.
1972), p. 39.
*Letter, 30 January 1908, S.W., vol. 1, p. 44. •
*Minutes of the Magpie and Stump Debating Society, Trinity College Library.
UNFORMATIVE YEARS 23
. As for the other undergraduate societies, Jawaharial was a member of the
Majlis, the society of Indian students which he joined despite his father’s dis¬
approval. He seems to have attended many of its meetings and dinners but,
again, rarely spoke. The only report we have of a speech was at an Jd dinner,
where he spoke reluctantly but when he did is said to have spoken well.1 Palme
Dutt, a schoolboy in those days, remembers Jawaharial occasionally attending
the meetings of the Majlis which used to be held in his father’s house, but the
impression thatJawaharial had left on him was that of being an aesthetic rather
than a political type.2
Therein, perhaps, lies part of the answer. Jawaharial was wincingly shy,
and public speaking must have seemed to him a nightmare. But, in addition,
the passionate debates that went on among the Indian students on the relative
merits of moderation and extremism must also have seemed to him rather
vulgar. He had, for example, warmly defended in his letters Bepin Pal, one of
the Extremist leaders, when Motilal had sneered at him as ‘the great bathroom
hero of Barisal’;3 but Pal’s speech at Cambridge when, apart from adopting a
narrowly Hindu attitude and speaking of India as God’s chosen country, he had
thundered to a small audience as if he were at a public meeting, embarrassed
Jawaharial acutely. So he wrote to Allahabad welcoming the split in the Con¬
gress at Surat and expressing his firm belief that in a very few years there
would hardly be any Moderates left; but in Cambridge he successfully kept his
opinions to himself.
These opinions, it should be added, were still not deep-seated or transform¬
ing his whole outlook. They were but a natural part of the general posture of
dilettantism which Jawaharial deliberately cultivated. Though he told no one
but hisfather of these views, the occasional assertion doubtless gave him inner
satisfaction. But that was all. There was no greater hint of the rebel about him
or about his view of his own future. He showed at thistime no real signs of any
sort of fire or distinction, and did not stand out among his generation. He
accepted the values and ambitionsof his class, and was quite at ease in the vapid
society of Indian middle-class convention. He did not, despite his epistolary
extremism, resist the hopes which his father had nurtured from the strut of
entombing him in the Indian Civil Service. In fact, it was Motilal who, early in
1910, abandoned the idea of Jawaharial sitting for the I.C.S. examination,
mainly because he could not brook the prospect of his only son serving for long
years in remote districts away from home, and had a growing feeling that the
examiners were biased against Indian candidates. But neither father nor, more
startlingly in the light of later events, son resented the thought of serving
the British rulers. They had not yet recognized the necessity of freedom.
In 1912, after listening to Fenner Brockway urging that India should move on
1 Syed Mahmud, ‘Jawaharial Nehru as I knew himIslamic Institute files. I owe this reference
to Mr David Page.
2Interview with the author, 20 November 1969.
*Letter, 18 October 1907.
24 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
to independence, Jawaharlal criticized the speaker privately for his extremist
speech.1
The impression Jawaharlal gives as an undergraduate is of a man only halfawakened and waiting for further experience and comprehension. He attend¬
ed, in his first term, a lecture by Bernard Shaw on Socialism and theUniversity
Man, but more to see the speaker than to hear him. Shaw’s plays, and even
more his prefaces, had already begun to fill him with excitement, and to the
end of his days Shaw ’occupied a niche in my mind and I have sought his com¬
pany to my great advantage’.2But it was, one suspects, Shaw the social crusader
rather than the political reformer who so appealed to Jawaharlal. Fabianism,
with its hopes of reforming capitalism and imperceptibly gliding to socialism,
was at thistime popularin Cambridge, but it seems to have attracted Jawaharlal
little, and there is no reason to believe that he was a member of the Cambridge
Fabian Society.3 Hugh Dalton, also at Cambridge at this time and prominent
in the Fabian Society and the Union, knew Jawaharlal slightly but does not
remember much else about him.4 He clearly made no impact in left-wing
circles. But Jawaharlal was, as we know, interested in William Morris, and
bought a full set of the collected works, which began to be issued from 1910.5
There was clearly greater affinity with Morris than with Shaw. The revolt of
Morris against the ugliness of industrial capitalism and its impoverished
human relationships had led on to a frontal attack on class exploitation and the
evils of imperialism. The life of Morris was the story of the evolution of a revo¬
lutionary, the progress from aestheticism to the basic question of class power;
and Jawaharlal may have been, in his own context, moving in the same direc¬
tion. His moral sensibility and fastidiousness were beginning to develop in the
social context. His awareness of the class issue is indicated by a trivial fact: his
keenness to dance with a waitress to discover what she would talk about.
Looking back on these years, Jawaharlal described his primary mood as a
vague kind of Cyrenaicism.6 But even the assiduous cultivation of pleasure
seems to have been only half hearted. Cambridge in those days was an exciting
place, but Jawaharlal never got into its full swing. In his own college, admit¬
tedly a large one with about 600 members, he hardly seems to have been
noticed. He lived the first year in lodgings, at 40 Green Street, and then in
Whewell Court, in what he described as ‘probably the rottenest rooms in the
whole college’, with the only advantage that they were near the baths. He got
on well with his tutor, Sir Walter Fletcher, but neither Fletcher nor any other
senior member of the university had a great influence on him. He took as his
>Lord Brockway in a B.B.C. broadcast. See Personality and Power (B.B.C. publication, 1971),
p. 55.
zTo S. S. Dbavan 15 July 1950. Nehru papers.
’The records of the Cambridge University Fabian Society for these years are unfortunately not
available,
4Call Back Yesterday (London, 1955), p. 52.
’See his letter to E. P. Thompson, written in 1955. Nehru papers. *
6Autobiography (Indian edition, 1962), p. 20.
UNFORMATIVE YEARS 25
subjects chemistry, geology and physics but soon gave up physics for botany,
and in the final tripos was placed in the second half of the second class. This
was an achievement well below the level of his talent, but Jawaharlal was not
by temperament an academic,^and appears to have done very little work. How¬
ever, he had so diligently prepared his family for an outright failure that the
result was received with champagne. The type of education provided at Cam¬
bridge and Oxford seemed to him of little value to an Indian. He was not there¬
fore greatly concerned at the proposal to restrict the admission of Indians to
Cambridge, and took no part in the controversy that raged fiercely on this issue
during his years at the university. He believed that it would be an advantage if
such restriction forced Indian students to go to universities in Europe and else¬
where, and thus be better fitted for the world.
Outside the laboratories and lecture rooms, Jawaharlal led a busy life, even
if it was unspectacular. He played tennis, rode a great deal and applied for
admission to the University Mounted Infantry. He was summoned to a riding
test but did not go, ostensibly for lack of time but probably because he knew
that as an Indian he would be rejected, for at that time Indians were not
admitted. He joined the Trinity Boat Gub and being only 8 st. 4 lb. in
weight was made cox. He had not looked forward to this, but proved efficient
enough. In the third-division trials his boat won easily. ‘Nehru coxed well*,
says the record.1 In the Lent college races in 1908, however, his boat was no
great success. ‘On the whole’, he wrote over fifty years later,2 ‘I rather liked
it though my boat... did not perform any wonders. All we could manage to
do was to go through the races with some dignity and avoid being bumped.’
Here his memory was being kind. In fact his boat was bumped thrice. He did
not go on the river again.
Jawaharlal had .many acquaintances but no small intimate social circle,
no close friendships without reserve; nor does he seem to have, known any
women. His public-school background helped him to do Without them. But
as he confessed to his father, at times he was ‘almost overpowered by the sense
of my solitary condition’.3 As for his vacations they were spent frequently
in hydros, which were hotels meant mainly for invalids. Where, then, was
the successful pursuit of egoistic hedonism, the deliberate achievement of
sensation? It was obviously a pose to cover an emptiness in his life. Jawaharlal
had opinions but needed a cause; there stretched before him a future secure
but with no purpose. He accepted the ennui of bourgeois stability for want of
anything more demanding. He went through his years at Cambridge without
demur, although its attractions had little to offer him.
Even before his final tripos examination, Jawaharlal had joined the Inner
Temple, and the fond father believed that the son had followed his aptitude*
1 Trinity Boat Qab minutes, Trinity College Library. •
a To his nephew Marsha Hutheesing, 26 August 1959. Nehru papers.
» Letter, 29 October 1908. S.W., vol. 1, p. 59.
26 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Motilal was confident of Jawaharlal’s success; ‘if my knowledge of human
nature does not deceive me I think he is bound to rise in his father’s profession.
He has already begun to like it and in deciding that he should devote his
energies to the study of law I have only followed the bent of his own mind.’1
Motilal felt that he himself had but five or six years' work left in him, but in
that period he intended to merge his own professional existence in that of
Jawaharlal, have no clients of his own but pass them on to his son and place
Jawaharlal well on the road to success.2 He had failed to realize thatJawaharlal
had no enthusiasm for the law and joining the Inner Temple was merely part
of hisgeneral policy, at thistime, of drift. He was bored with Cambridge, which
was ‘becoming too full of Indians’, and wanted a change; but it was Oxford
rather than London that he had preferred. When Motilal opposed this because
he wanted Jawaharlal, in addition to qualifying for the Bar, to work in the
chambers of a senior lawyer and attend the law courts, he at last had an
inkling into his son’s mind. He would much rather, wrote Jawaharlal, risk
his success at the Bar than go through life as a mere lawyer with no interest
in anything save the technicalities and trivialities of law.
However, as usual, Jawaharlal gave way to his father's wishes and moved
to London. The only sop given him was permission to join the London School
of Economics. 'Politics are inseparable from law and economics the soul of
politics.’3 But being forced to do what he disliked resulted, as was to be
expected, in Jawaharlal leading a life of idleness. But before that he had nearly
succeeded in killing himself. On a holiday in Norway with a friend, while
trekking somewhere north of Bergen,4 he plunged into an ice-cold fjord for
a bath and became numb. Hisfootslipped and he wasswept away by the current.
His companion pulled him out on the brink of a waterfall. But Jawaharlal
was always a man of physical courage, and proximity to death pleased rather
than sobered him.
For the next two years Jawaharlal was caught up in the whirl of London
life. Renewing contact with some old school acquaintances, he was very much
the gay man of fashion — ‘very well-dressed, well-mannered, almost Euro¬
pean’.3 Music concerts, golf at Crowborough, tennis at the Queen’s Club,
watching cricket at Lord’s and waltzing on ice-rinks, rather than attending
lectures at the LS.E. and devilling at the law, took up his time. The pas¬
times seem to have been innocent but they were expensive. Never over¬
loaded with money, Jawaharlal now found himself often in debt, was forced
to pawn his watch and chain, sometimes had no money even for bus or tube
fare, and more and more frequently approached his father for supplementary
1 Motilal to his brother 30 January 1910. Motilal Nehru papers.
* Motilal to Jawaharlal, 1 September 1910 and 6 January 1911.
5 Modlal to Jawaharlal, 13 October 1910. Motilal Nehru papers.
4Jawaharlal could not remember the exact place; letter to Judge Andren, 11 October 1934.
Nehru papers. *
’Brockway, op. tit., p. 53.
UNFORMAITV* YEARS 27
grants. He never in his life had any money sense. 'If I had £5000 a year I am
sure I would spend it all with the greatest ease and then get into debt.’1
His expenditure in 1911 was about' £800, which in those years enabled
most Indian students to pay for a stay of three years in London. Motilal was
alarmed. Far from carrying offthe scholarships and prizes at the Bar examina¬
tions, Jawaharlal just managed to pass, and seemed more interested in con¬
certs. ‘Your papers at the last exam, must have been very musical. 1 hope the
examiners had the sense to appreciate them. It would perhaps be an improve¬
ment in future to let the musical treat follow* the exam, instead of allowing
the two to overlap.’2 And when, the next year, Jawaharlal passed the Bar
finals, Motilal expressed hisgreatrelief. ‘Ido not look upon it as a great achieve¬
ment. But you have eminently succeeded in investing the event with an im¬
portance which it did not possess.’3
t Suchheavy sarcasm irritated Jawaharlal, and when his father wrote a brus¬
que letter demanding to see his accounts, Jawaharlal replied with such acidity
that this time it was Motilal’s turn to apologize. The fact was that Jawaharlal
wasspendingmuch but enjoying himself little. He was bored and listlessrather
than immersed in extravagant dissipation, and the gaiety was very much on
the surface. Never in perfect harmony with the British environment, he was
quite happy to return in August 1912 to what Motilal termed ‘this land of
regrets’. In his Autobiography Jawaharlal described himself at that time,
a young man of 23, as ‘a bit of a prig with little to commend me’ ,4It was a
harsh self-judgment. In fact he seems to have been a rather vague and un¬
practical person, dominated, even suppressed, by a doting and determined
father. Jawaharlal had done all the things he had been told to do, but with no
great enthusiasm. His deep attachment to hisfather had the defect that it made
him almost passive. He was willing to conform and to leave the major deci¬
sions of his life to be made by his father. He had emerged from seven years in
England, having passed through the mill of a traditional education, with no
confidence in himself or interest in the world. But his mind and character had
been trained not for a profession but for the call which was to come in the
years ahead. Two stray remarks in his letters home^give some indication of
the future. *1 am’, he Wrote to his father,9 ‘an ardent believer in a child--or
forthematterofthat agrownupperson — beingendowedwith alotofimagina¬
tion, and can conceive of no greater evil than for a person to be totally devoid
ofit.Ofcourse toomuchimagination is bad forone,butI had rathersufferfrom
that than from the other extreme.’ And again, looking back on his years in
England towards the end of his stay, he commented, 'To my mind education
does not consist of passing examinations or knowing English or mathematics.
1 Letter to fethcr. 11 April 1912.
1Motilal to Jawaharlal, 15 June 1911.
•Idem, 6 June 1912.
4 p. 26.
* 20 October 1911.
28 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
It is a mental state and if this is not present it matters little how many exami¬
nations a person has passed.*1 Others might have been disappointed that he
had not fulfilled the promise of Harrow and carried off the academic spoils,
but Jawaharlal himself saw no reason to regret or repent. He returned to India
with a nurtured mind and imagination. *
In addition, he brought back with him attachments to Britain, and the
values he considered British, which were never to leave him. They moulded
his outlook, sustained him in his struggles and influenced his policies in the
days of his power. Throughout his life, Britain was a country with which
Jawaharlal identified extensively in the personal sense. He himself was aware
of this.
Less than ten years ago | he told the judge at his trial in May 1922 21 I
returned from England after a lengthy stay there. I had passed through
the usual course of public school and university. I had imbibed most
of the prejudices of Harrow and Cambridge and in my likes and dislikes
I was perhaps more an Englishman than an Indian. I looked upon the
world almost from an Englishman’s standpoint. And so I returned to
India as much prejudiced in favour of England and the English as it
was possible for an Indian to be.
Indeed, he felt that his reaction to foreign rule would be that, in similar
circumstances, of any average Englishman uncontaminated by imperialism.
Addressing an audience of schoolchildren he advised them to emulate the
spirit of adventure and patriotism which inspired the English schoolboy and
impressed upon them how the ancestors of the British had risked their lives
in the past. That spirit was the possession of free nations but in India it had
died during the past one hundred and fifty years of slavery.3
> 26 April 1912.
1 S.W.', voi. 1, pp. 252-3.
} Address to the Tilak Vidyalaya, Allahabad, 2 April 1922, U. P. Government Intelligence
Reports for 1922.
2