Death of Kamala Nehru
On 2 September the doctor cabled Jawaharlal as well as the Government that Kamala’s condition was critical, and his sentence was suspended to enable him to proceed at once to her bedside. ‘So this is the end’ he wrote in his diary; but even at this moment his dignity did not fail him. He asked for clarifications, and was told that his movements would be unrestricted in India till his departure as well as in Europe, but if he returned before his sentence expired in February 1936 he would be imprisoned again.1 He was also requested not to make any political speeches before departure. On these terms, which did not infringe his honour, Jawaharlal left Almora for Allahabad and took the first available flight to Europe.
Kamala was in a clinic in Badenweiler in the Black Forest in Germany, and Jawaharlal found her condition changed very much for the worse. However, he still thought there was an even chance of a slow recovery. Keeping away from the Nazis and only asserting his viewpoint by patronizing Jewish shops, Jawaharlal spent his time nursing his wife, correcting the proofs of the Autobiographyand meeting the odd visitor — Andrews, Subhas Bose, Raja Rao. But the long hours in hospital were oppressive, and as he observed long after, ‘I found that life affecting me powerfully, as it was.affecting much more the patients themselves. Since then I have never advised anyone to stay too long in a clinic.'2 Kamala too, in addition to the physical ravages of her illness, was giving way to the psychological strain. She was anxious to get back to Switzer* land and Jawaharlal therefore moved her early in 1936 to a clinic in Lausanne. ‘There is no immediate crisis’, he reported in January, ‘but there is a kind of continuing semi-crisis and certain complications appear to have set in due largely to extreme weakness. Her heart is not as good as it was. This present state cannot continue for long. It will either grow worse or better within the next three or four weeks at most.’3 Her condition fluctuated daily, and
1 Press statement, The Bombay CbronicU, 5 September 1935.
’To Jayaprakash Narayan, 28 July 1952, Nehru-papers.
5To Rajendra Prasad, 23 January 1936, AICC file G43 (KW)(i) 1935.
193
194 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Jawaharlal clutched at momentary glimmers of recovery. But there was really no hope, and at 5 a.m. on 28 February she died.
Kamala’s short life — she was not thirty-seven when she died — was over¬ cast with acute pain and suffering. Born in a social milieu much humbler than that of the Nehrus, she was faced from the start with the resistance of some of her husband's family, who treated her as an intruder from the otitside world into their exclusive relations with Jawaharlal. Smart, snobbish and insensitive, they led her to feel that she did not belong, made Jawaharlal a poor wife — andwasplain anddowdyinto thebargain. Fine-grained and high-spirited, Kamala was continually humiliated in her deepest feminine instincts, and con¬ sequently developed a growing sense of futility.
Nor, in these early years of tension and repression, were Kamala’s relations with Jawaharlal cloudless. Theirs was not love in spring. He did not suspect her distress and fear of inadequacy, and after .1920 was so engrossed in public affairs that the result was emotional reluctance. It is curious how little she figures in his jail diaries of the 'twenties. Different in temperament and up¬ bringing, deliberate adjustment was required from both sides and a special effort from Kamala to raise her personality to his level, if their marriage was to succeed. But from the start she was dogged with sickness. Their daughter, Indira, was born in November 1917; but thereafter her health slowly slid down¬ hill. Tuberculosis was first diagnosed in 1919 and, despite varied treatment and a long stay in Europe, took firm root. In 1925 a son was born prematurely and after two days; and three years later she suffered a miscarriage.
" ‘Added to this were the strains of national politics, with the family often scat¬ tered, Jawaharlal for long stretches in prison and the house frequently searched and property attached. It was no wonder that not only did her health sharply deteriorate, from about 1932, but she became increasingly neurotic.1
Yet, despite all these stresses and disadvantages, Kamala s life was, in its own way, one of happiness and achievement. Never a simpering consort, she slowlyroseabove her surroundings and grew in mindand character till she could derive joy and companionship from her married life. The moody self-pity and death-wish, induced by being bedridden for months at a time, were shaken off. Illness was no longer stagnation but an impetus to energy. That she had not received a regular education was a handicap she felt sorely. 'Today in this world only the educated are honoured. People do not want to talk to those who are uneducated; indeed dose relatives and even husbands do not wish to talk to them. Undersuch conditions the lives of the girls become unbearable; and then will it be a life or a curse?’2 This disadvantage too she surmounted in her own life;buttheeducMtonofwon^il becameto her a part of the struggle for freedom.
1 The facts aboutKamels Nehru’s health arederived front Jawaharlal’s note on the subject written for the doctors .in May 1935.
3 ToSyed Mahmud froth Geneva, 4 November 1926, original in Utdu.
DEATH OF KAMALA NEHRU
193
‘Daily I grow more determined that on my return, taking your wife along with me, I shall urge Indian women to have faith in God and fight for their own freedom — and educate their daughters so that they may not be in trouble like us and may be able to win independence for their country and end Hindu* Muslim conflict.’1
It was more than mere faith in God and works of charity in the Ramakrishna Mission and similar institutions which gave her strength and scope for service. She was formally enrolled into the Mission as a lay follower,2but did not adopt the life of a recluse. Social action of a more exciting kind called her, and she trained herself not only to endure the separations from Jawaharlal but to parti¬ cipate in the struggle. Though ill, her courage never failed. Oik of Jawaharlal’s keenest experiences ofsatisfaction was when she was arrested in 1931 and went to jail with a statement which was an unconscious blend of self-confidence and commitment to him. Even during her last months, the impression she left on Palme Dutt was of a woman of strength and perception: ‘a wonderful person’, with enormous directness, clarity of political vision and burning desire to serve — and with such influence over her husband that Palme Dutt was con¬ vinced that‘with her death some of his backbone went out of him.’3
Gradually, as time passed, their relationship had matured. His early lack of serious interest was replaced first by a light-hearted, protective loyalty and then by acommitment which was stronger than passion and warmer than considera¬ tion. In Sri Lanka in 1931 they had discovered each other again, and realized that their marriage had neither broken nor tarnished. Stricken by his past neglect, he allowed Kamala to move slowly from the fringes towards the centre of his life, till, by the end, as even the unimaginative police department recog¬ nized, he was a‘devoted husband’.4 Many women, drawn by his charm or driven by snobbery, made claims on him and, especially after Kamala’s death, sought to thrust themselves into his life; and he did not always firmly resist their gross ardours. Yet, despite occasional dalliances, Kamala was the only woman who ever meant anything to him; and he kept her image unsullied. ‘Kamala five years’ runs the single-line entry in his pocket diary on 28 February 1941. He kept in his bedroom or his jail cell, along with her photograph, a small portion of her ashes, and requested that they be mingled with hisown after his death. As far as he was concerned, the wound of her death never healed; but, of course, the wounds which do not heal are usually those which have remorse festering in them.
So, over the years, Kamala had evolved anequal human relationship with her husband. Writing two years after her death, Jawaharlal acknowledged that she,
'To Syed Mahmud from Brighton, June 1927, original in Urdu.
3P. Kalhan, Kamala Nabru (Delhi, 1973). p. 83.
3Interview with the author, 20 November 1969.
4 Note of H. Williamson, Director, Intelligence Bureau, 27 September 1935, Home Dept. Pol. 4/7/33.
196 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
his father and Gandhi were the major personal influences in his life. ‘My wife influenced me considerably in many ways, though unobtrusively.’1 A serious, deeply moral, intense figure, she was a champion of Women’s Lib long before that became a slogan and a movement,2 and had she lived might well have had a career akin to that of Eleanor Roosevelt. If a successful struggle foe self-aware nessand self-emancipation is the true testofgreatness, thenKamala ranks among the greatest of the Nehrus.
Messages of condolence swamped him, from the Secretary of State and the Viceroy as well as from humble Congress workers add friends in various parts of the world. ‘How shall I console you’, wired Gandhi, ‘all our hearts with you. Godgiveyoupeace love Bapu’. Another message is also worthy of remembrance. ‘You will not’, wrote Naomi Mitchison, ‘have made the mistake of importing human qualities like justice and mercy into the universe: one has to go to deeper principles less easy to understand.’ These were no routine messages, for to Jawaharlal the loss was severe. The child-wife he had married on his father’s directive had become in twenty years a brave and true comrade whose death left him lonely and desolate.3
The publication of Jawaharlal’s Autobiography in the spring of 1936, only a few weeks after the death of Kamala, gave the world an inkling of his nature and enabled it to share his sorrow. All the reviews in Britain, including those in Conservative journals, immediately recognized the book’s importance and quality. It was not surprising that friends like Ellen Wilkinson, Edward Thomp¬ sonand H. N. Brailsford hailed it as a basic utteranceofoneof the few great men of the time; but even those whodisapproved of Jawaharlal’s politics commended it. The life, the man, the witness, all seem to have imposed a paralysing humility on the critics. Any understanding, wrote The Economist,4 of the last fifteen years in Indiawas incomplete without reading it; Sir StanleyJleed thought it an exceptional book;3 ‘a book to read’, said The Timesp ‘however much one may disagree with the outlook of the author.’ It was an essential document of the period, a key to the ideas and politics of a whole new world. Here was a man who spoke and thought in the language of modernity and reason, whom, unlike Gandhi, the West could understand, a man like‘themselves who happened to find himself on the other side. His individual vision was of general interest and universal value. In this, the first important first-hand account of the modern phase of Asian nationalism, Jawaharlal showed that in India it was a civilized, responsible movement that owed as much to the principles of European revolu¬ tion and the liberalism and nonconformity of Britain as to the Indian context.
'Note for John Gunther, 16 March 1938.
2On this point she was clear-sighted even about Gandhi: ‘there is no one else like Gandhi in the world, but as regards women’s rights he is nobetter than other men.’ Letter to Jawaharlal (in Hindi),
9 October 1932.
5See his statement to the press, 17 March 1936; The Discovery ofIndia (Calcutta, 1946), p. 40. 4U July 1936.
*The Spectator, 15 May 1936.
‘28 April 1936.
Deathof kamaia nehru
1*7
So the Autobiography, despite being a long and serious book, became a best¬ seller and within weeks ran into many editions — though unfortunately lor Jawaharlal his publisher. The Bodley Head, soon after went into liquidation.1
The book was characteristic of Jawaharlal. It was honest and introspective. Standing almost outside himself he commented frankly on the society and age in which he lived, on the people he had known and on his own mental develop¬ ment. The book is not awooden narrative ofevents; nor is it, like Gandhi's auto¬ biography, a part of confessional literature. Jawaharlal was too undemonstra¬ tive, too repelled by any trace of exhibitionism* to interest the world primarily in himself. Indeed theAutobiography is inone sense a tourdoforce in that, after over 600 dose-knit pages, his privacy remains unbroken. It is a reverie on the context into which he had been thrown, and of his reactions to it. If a portrait ofa personality, wistful, complex and ofindrawn tension, caught in its own inte¬ grity, is gradually built up, it is almost as a by-product. But what Jawaharlal did set out to tell was of the Indian condition and of British rule, which hurt both his feelings and his intelligence by forcing the large majority of his countrymen to live in sordid and brutal drcumstances. The reader found himsdf in the pre¬ sence of great moral and historical issues as seen through the eyes of a refined and humane man.
What further helped to gain a wide audience for the Autobiography was its prose style. It was a dear, fluent bode, ‘an excellent substitute for a novel’,2 written withterse, nervous elegance and control ofphrase and with a wideknow¬ ledgeofEnglish writing, old and new. It showed amindof intdlectual and moral quality, freeofdicheemotions, butattractivelyreplete with half-tones, subtleties and diffidences. In later years, Jawaharlal often spoke of the Autobiography as having ‘dated’. It has, of course, ‘dated’ in the sense that it deals with a period that is deed. But the book has not lost its freshness as a piece of craftsmanship and as the expression of a sensitive human being.
Moreover, Jawaharlal wrote with detachment. There was sdf-scrutiny and self-criticism but no self-pity. The hardships he had opted for were taken for granted. Theattemptwas not at self-justification but at justification to himsdf. Estranged from hisownpeople by being soaked in the exploiter’s culture, he was a mixed-up being, yearning for roots and struggling toworkout his own destiny. Tortured by doubt, impressivein his indecision, agonizingover all rides of every question,alwaysasking towhatend was the long, wearying struggle, heprovided a picture of warm am] vulnerable humanity.. Jawaharlal made no daim to be exceptional; rather, he was a natural disciple with a taste for heroes. He dupg to thosewhowould determine his intdlectual uncertainties. Motilal andGandhi are the chief characters in the book, and he recognized how much he owed to them and depended on them, even while he was dear-sighted, espedally about
1 Soooafterliquidation,anewadministratkmtookoverTheBodley Head, andfrom thenonregular
royalty payments were made to Nehru'• account. *
lTb* St*Usm«n (Calcutta), 10 May 1936.
198
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Gandhi’s limitations. The bond of mutual confidence between him and Gandhi was also seen as an iron corset, supporting but confining. He confessed to his repeated display of weakness at critical moments, to his frequent surrender of judgment to personal loyalties, to his dedication to purpose and principle rather than to doctrine and definition. *
Jawaharlal was not strong in analytic thought and the book provides no pro¬ found ideas or philosophy. Such ideas as he had were intellectual impulses rather than logical constructions. Even his Marxism was vague and confused, for his ideology was to a large extent based more on sympathy thanon conviction. But heborewitness toapassionate commitment to nationalism, though in nonarrow sense, to an awareness of world forces, and to a total personal integrity. Bom to wealth and an easy life, he had been forced by the situation into the world outside. A heterogeneous character with great inner resources and of infinite mood, awareof naturalbeautyand in love with mountains, capableof responding toevery side of life, yet he had preferred to spend years in prison. Fastidious and lonely by instinct, he had taken to politics and become indifferent to all else because he cared about the human scene and was disturbed by the ugliness and stupidityof the world. Thedeep personal affections he could give he had almost stifled. His sense of the essential pushed private life to the background, and led to a conscious withholding of emotion. Out of the pages of the Autobiography rises, almost, it would seem, against Jawaharlal’s will, the story of the slow development of what was by the end a happy marriage; and its tragic close was revealed in the six brief words of the dedication, ‘To Kamala, who is no more*.
The whole book was written in jail at a time when writing was at once a dis¬ cipline, an indulgence and a solace. But there is no bitterness against the British. The book was not abrasive; it had no rant or claptrap. Jawaharlal's quarrel was not with the foreign ruler but with systems — with imperialism, with capital¬ ism, with the social evils of religion. Such bitterness and contemptuous wit as hedoesdisclose he reserves for some of his fellow-Indians. The Liberals who, as he thought, concealed behind platitudes and compromises a low-minded oppor¬ tunism, came in for sharp derision. Gandhi, who read the book in manuscript, suggested that these portions be revised;1 but Jawaharlal left them as they were. TheLiberate were naturally resentful, it is an insufferable book’, wrote Jayakar to Sapru,2 ‘full of self-laudation .. . There is nothing in that book which is illuminating or exalting ... the vapourings of a half-baked politician.’ Right- wing Congressmen, whose thinking and attitudes were alien to him, Jawaharlal had tended to ignore. There is no mention, for example, throughout the book, of Rajagopalachari. Their reactionwassummed upin the review by K.MMunshi, who described Jawaharlal as being scarcely in tune with the ‘soul of India’ (whatever that mightbe) and criticized him for having time and again destroyed the possibility of immediate gains by insisting on independence and socialism.3
‘MaMtevaDeui to Jawaharlal, 11 December 1955.
*21 May 1936. Sapru papers.
DEATH OF KAMALA NEHRU 199
But most Indian readers, drawn from the middle classes, were able to identify themselves with Jawaharlal in his expression of the hopes and obstacles of a whole generation.
After his wife’s death, Jawaharlal returned to India, resisting, on the way, the blandishments of Mussolini who sent a personal message of sympathy and sought to inveigle Jawaharlal into an interview while in transit at Rome airport. ’It was a most embarrassing and ticklish affair but I survived it with a display of extreme tact and firmness.’1 He brought back Kamala’s ashes and immersed all —butthefew he retained — atthe Sangam in Allahabad. ‘Despite his courage, Pandit Jawaharlal was visibly moved as he immersed the ashes in the waters of the two mighty rivers.’2
Jawaharlal sought to smother the inner emptiness in work. Many years later he wrote to a friend who had suffered a like bereavement, ‘those who have had similar experiences, and I am one of them, can understand to some extent the sorrow that comes to one. The only way to deal with it, so I found, is to apply oneself with greater earnestness to the causes for which one has stood.’3 But the emotional strain was never far below the surface.4