Skip to main content
 
Search
 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS 
VIDEO 
AUDIO 
SOFTWARE 
IMAGES
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
 Search Metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived websites
Advanced Search
Sign up for free
Log in
Full text of "JAWAHARLAL NEHRU A BIOGRAPHY"
See other formats




Sarvepalli Gopal 


JAWAHARLAL 

NEHRU 

A Biography 

VOLUME ONE 
1889-1947 


BOMBAY 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

DELHI CALCUTTA MADRAS 
1976 



Oxford University Press 

OXFORD LONDON GLASGOW NEW YORK 
TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON CAPETOWN 
IBADAN NAIROBI DAR ES SALAAM LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA 
KUALA I.UMrUR SINGAPORE JAKARTA HONG KONC TOKYO 
DELHI BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI 


Pint published in Cheat Britain by Jonathan Cape in 1975 
This edition is reprinted by arrangement with Jonathan Cape Ltd 

Sarvepalli Copal 1975 


PRINTED IN INDIA BY S. R. KRISHNAN AT INLAND PRINTERS, VICTORIA MILLS 
BUILDINGS, 55 GAM DEV I ROAD, BOMBAY 400 007 AND PUBLISHED BY C. H. LEWIS, 
OXtORI) UNIVERSITY PRESS, M*OI.I.O BUNDER, BOMBAY 400 039 



Preface 


Jawaharlal Nehru played a decisive role in the history of the twentieth century— 
as a leader of the Indian people, as a representative of the new mood of Asia, 
and as a spokesman of the international conscience. So, striking as was his 
personality, any study of him is bound to be more than merely the personal 
biography of a great man. This first volume, which covers the period when he 
strove for India’s freedom, has become, because of his influential position, 
almost a history of the last thirty years of the Indian nationalist movement. 
While the focus is on the man, and matters in which his interest was peri¬ 
pheral have been skirted over, yet the range is necessarily broad. In the next 
two volumes, which will cover his seventeen years as Prime Minister, the 
approach will be the same. 

Throughout this volume I have referred to him as Jawaharlal and not as 
Jawaharlal Nehru. This has the advantage of making it easy to distinguish him 
from his father, Motilal Nehru, who figures prominently in the first half of the 
book.x But there is also a wider justification. This volume deals primarily with 
the Indian scene; and to the people of India, who took him to their hearts, he 
was, and is, Jawaharlal. 

This has not been an easy book to write. Jawaharlal was the hero of my 
youth. Then, for nearly ten years, I served him in the Ministry of External 
Affairs; and over a fairly long period, from April 1959 to December 1962, I 
saw him almost every day. He was the Prime Minister,- and I among the most 
junior of his officials. But my memory is crowded with instances of his per¬ 
sonal generosity and affection. So to me his image still glows. 

It is hard for me, therefore, to be objective about Jawaharlal Nehru. Yet I 
have tried; and I have been helped in this by the knowledge that this is wha' \e 
himself would have wanted. His constant criticism of biographical writing in 
India was that it tended to be eulogistic and failed to assess the historical and 
impersonal forces at work. 

This work has only been made possible by Shrimathi Indira Gandhi, who 
has given me unlimited access to her father’s papers and placed no restriction 
on my freedom of opinion and judgement. These papers are now open up to 



6 


PREFACE 


September 1946 and lodged in the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library at 
New Delhi. When no references are given, the quotations are from these 
papers. References to some papers which were at Anand Bhawan, Jawaharlal 
Nehru's residence at Allahabad, are given as Anand Bhawan papers. Refer¬ 
ences to documents of the period after 1947 are given as from the Nehru 
papers. Many of Jawaharlal Nehru’s letters, articles and statements are being 
published in the Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru, being brought out by 
the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund. Six volumes, covering the years up to 
the summer of 1936, have so far appeared, and references to these have been 
cited. 

The official records consulted, unless otherwise stated, are those of the 
Government of India in the National Archives of India at New Delhi. 

I am grateful to the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund which invited me to 
take up this work and granted me various facilities. Many people have talked 
to me about him, and this has been acknowledged in the footnotes. Sir Olaf 
Caroe has allowed me to consult his papers. Access was given to me by Dame 
Isobel Cripps to such of the Cripps papers as are at Nuffield College, Oxford; 
by Lady Beatrix Evison to the papers of her father, A.V. Alexander (later Earl 
Alexander of Hillsborough), at Churchill College, Cambridge; by Mr Robin 
Hallett to the papers of his father, Sir Maurice Hallett, in the India Office 
Library; and by the Librarian of the British Library of Political and Economic 
Science in the London School of Economics to the diaries of Beatrice Webb 
in the Passfield papers. Dorothy Woodman permitted me to go through the 
Kingsley Martin papers and the Laski papers which were then in her posses¬ 
sion. Shankar has been good enough to let me reprint one of his cartoons. 

Mr Christopher Hill most kindly read the manuscript and made many 
valuable suggestions. Mr Martin Gilbert has helped me with the proofs. 
I have exploited to the full the goodwill and scholarship of my colleagues 
at the Centre for Historical Studies in the Jawaharlal Nehru University. 
I am grateful to all of them. 



Contents 



Abbreviations 

9 


List of Illustrations and Maps 

11 


Prologue 

13 

1 

Unformative Years 

16 

2 

Marking Time 

29 

3 

Immersion in Politics 

35 

4 

Among the Peasants 

42 

5 

The Moderate Disciple of Gandhi 

58 

6 

In Nabha Jail 

74 

7 

Escape into Administration 

81 

8 

Europe 1926-1927 

97 

9 

The Campaign for Independence 

110 

0 

Action — and Anti-Climax 

138 

1 

Agrarian Crisis in the United Provinces 

154 

2 

In and Out of Prison 

172 

3 

Death of Kamala Nehru 

193 

4 

Leading the Party 

200 

5 

Out of Tune with the Congress 

222 

6 

The War Crisis 

249 

7 

The Cripps Mission 

276 

8 

Collision Course 

288 

9 

Post-War Prelude 

300 

0 

The Cabinet Mission 

313 

1 

The Interim Government 

326 

2 

The Transfer of Power 

342 


Biographical Notes 

363 


Glossary 

373 


Bibliography 

376 


Index 

383 




Abbreviations 


AICC 

All-India Congress Committee 

C.I.D. 

Criminal Intelligence Department 

Dep. 

Deposit 

D.I.B. 

Director, Intelligence Buieau 

D.S.V.A. 

Draft second volume of autobiography 

Gov.-Gen. 

Governor-General 

H.M.S.O. 

Her. Majesty’s Stationery Office 

I.C.S. 

Indian Civil Service 

I.N.A. 

Indian National Army 

I.O.L 

India Office Library 

Mss. Eur. 

Manuscripts European 

N.A.I. 

National Archives of India 

N.M.M.L 

Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 

NWFP 

North-West Frontier Province 

Pol. 

Political 

S.W. 

Selected Works 

U.P. 

United Provinces 

U.P.P.C.C. 

United Provinces Provincial Congress Committee 




Illustrations 


between pages 48 and 49 

1 Ganga Dhar Nehru, Jawaharlal’s grandfather 

2 Jawaharlal as a boy, with his mother and father 

3 At Harrow in 1907 

4 As a member of the Harrow School Cadet Corps 

5 As an undergraduate member of Trinity College Boat Qub, at Cambridge 

6 Swaraj Bhawan, the home of the Nehrus until 1928 

7 Anand Bhawan, the house built by Motilal Nehru in Allahabad 

between pages 128 and 129 

8 Arrests after the massacre at Amritsar, 1919 

9 Jawaharlal, aged 32, as leader of the peasants, 1921 

10 Edward, Prince of Wales, aged 28, during his tour to India, 1922 

11 British rule in India: the Prince of Wales receiving gifts from the 
Maharajah of Kolhapur, 1921 

12 The Prince of Wales visiting Malakand Pass, 1922 

13 Gandhi spinning at a demonstration in Calcutta, 1923 

14 Rioting in Bombay, 1929 

between pages 160 and 161 

15 Jawaharlal, 1929 

16 A procession in Madras, 1928, supporting a boycott of the Simon 
Commission 

17 Jawaharlal and Kamala leading a procession against the Salt Tax in 
Allahabad, 1930 

18 Police disperse crowds on the Wadala Salt Pans, i930 

19 Followers of Gandhi in prison at Yeravda, near Poona, 1930 

20 An election in Bombay, 1930; some of the demonstrators clashing with 
police 

21 Jawaharlal, after his committal to prison, with his father outside Naini 
Jail, 1930 

22 Jawaharlal in prison, 1932 

23 Kamala Nehru 

between pages 224 and 225 

24 With Gandhi, 1938 

25 Jawaharlal presents a signed copy of his Autobiography to his d«ighn»r 

26 An election speech in 1936 


ti 



12 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


27 Speaking in Trafalgar Square on ‘Aid to Spain’, 1938 

28 Jawaharlal and Krishna Menon with General Lister, at Lister’s head¬ 
quarters in Spain, 1938 

29 With his daughter and grandson, 1946 

between pages 256 and 257 

30 Jawaharlal with M. A. Jinnah, 1946 

31 With Lord Mountbatten in Singapore, 1946 

32 The Naval rebellion, 1946 

33 Jawaharlal defends the leaders of the l.N. A., 1946 

34 With Lord Pethick-Lawrence, 1946 

35 With Lord Wavell, 1946 

36 The Constituent Assembly, New Delhi, 8 February 1947: Jawaharlal 
moves the resolution for an independent sovereign republic 

37 Independence Day celebrations below the Red Fort, Delhi, 15 August 
1947 


Illustrations in the text 



page 

Part of a page from Jawaharlal's prison diary 

190 

Shankar’s cartoon on the Cripps Mission 

285 

Jawaharlal’s first Cabinet List 

347 


Maps 


1 

The United Provinces before 1947 

44-5 

2 

India before 1947 

221 

3 

India and Pakistan 1947 

339 


Picture credits 

The author and publishers would like to thank the following for permission 
to reproduce copyright material in the illustrations: 

Prpcc T fH' Platp 4 

Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund: Plates 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 15, 17, 21, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35; Illustrations in the text on pp. 190 
and 347 

Keystone Press Agency, 32 

Press Association Ltd: Plates 10,11,12,14,18,19, 20 
Press Information Bureau, Government of India: Plates 2, 37 
Radio Times Hulton Picture Library: Plates 3,8,13,16,30,36 
K. Shankar Pillai (Shankar): illustration in the text on p. 285 

Picture research by Robyn Wallis. 



Prologue 


The years after the suppression of the revolt in 1858 marked the heyday of the 
raj in India. The British regarded themselves as a superior race ruling by right 
of conquest, and they saw no reason why they should not remain in India 
indefinitely. There was little hesitancy about accepting this position. Even 
Gladstone, who spoke normally in terms of holding India in trust and training 
Indians in self-government, could write in one of his unbuttoned moods, 
when we go, if we are ever to go . . . 1 Efficient administration was all that 
seemed to be required in order to maintain India within the empire in the in¬ 
terests of the British. They led the world in trade and manufacture, and India 
fitted smoothly into this pattern of world domination. Railways were laid 
down, with great profit to British investors and manufacturers but with little 
advantage to economic growth in India. There was a decline in the production 
of foodgrains and an incentive to grow cotton and jute, which were required 
by the factories in Britain, and indigo and opium, which sold at high prices 
abroad. India’s export surplus was utilized to balance Britain’s deficits with 
Europe and the United States; but British capital was mostly invested in 
'white settler’ countries. The banks in India were largely foreign and made no 
effort to attract Indian capital and direct it to the promotion of Indian industry. 
The refusal to permit industrialization on any major scale not only arrested 
progress but distorted the existing economy by increasing the pressure on 
land, with a11 the attendant evils of rural indebtedness, absentee landlordism 
and a large increase in landless labour and seasonal unemployment. The 
annual per capita income in 1875 has been officially estimated at about £2; 
and nearly 29 millions are thought to have died of starvation in the years 
from 1854 to 1901. 

It was taken for granted that efficiency in administration meant that it 
would be, at any level that mattered, untouched by Indian hands. Education in 
the English language had been introduced in schools, and in 1857, the year 
that the revolt broke out, universities were established in the three leading 

Gladstone to Northbrook, 15 October 1872, Northbrook papers, India Office Library, Mss. 
Eur.C. 144, vol. 20, part 1, p. 74. 


13 



14 


PROLOGUE 


towns of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. But the products of these institutions 
were recruited to no higher posts than those of clerks. Entry by competitive 
examination into the higher official ranks was in theory open to Indians, but 
was made in practice almost impossible. All the senior appointments in the 
civil service were closed to Indians; and in the army, of course, there were no 
Indian officers at all. Indians were not permitted even to enlist in the volunteer 
corps. 

Yet this unbroken monopoly of power had to be maintained in a vast 
country distant from the ultimate seat of authority, and by a civil service and 
troops which were numerically insignificant in comparison to those over 
whom they ruled. The revolt left with most British a legacy of hatred for 
Indians as well as an acceptance of the expediency of buttressing their rule with 
Indian support, if this could be obtained without compromise of their control. 
The obvious answer seemed to lie in an arrangement with the feudal classes. 
There were the 662 Indian Princes, with their principalities scattered over the 
country. Some,.like Hyderabad, were as large as an Indian province, others 
were no more than small estates. But all these Princes had in common a total 
dependence on the British, who allowed them, in return for loyalty, to exercise 
despotic power over their subjects. In British India itself were the rural gentry, 
the zamindars of Bengal, the talukdars of the United Provinces and the land¬ 
lords in other parts of the country. The revenue payable by them to the Govern¬ 
ment had been settled either in perpetuity or for long terms. It was on these 
men, whose economic interests were tied to those of the colonial system, that 
the British relied. It was from their ranks that nominees were chosen for the 
powerless legislative councils. Other empty, loud-sounding forms were also 
created to bind the conservative elements of Indian society to the empire with¬ 
out devolving any power or even influence. The Queen was declared Empress of 
India, an Imperial Assembly was held at Delhi, all the leading Indian Princes 
were given the title of Counsellors to the Empress, and uneducated young men 
of high birth were recruited to the lower levels of the public service. 

There was, however, another class in India, the small, growing, elite of 
Indians educated in the English language. By 1885 they were not more than 
about 50,000. Some of them went into official service; but the majority, the 
lawyers, the doctors and the journalists, familiar with English political litera¬ 
ture, were eager for wider avenues of public work. They were not revolution¬ 
aries, asserted their loyalty, and sought only greater opportunities of official 
employment, administrative reform, facilities for trade and a measure of elec¬ 
tions to the legislative councils. For a time, in the years after 1880 when Glad¬ 
stone was Prime Minister, an attempt was made to rely on this educated sector 
rather than on the upper classes. But even in the short term the attempt did 
not succeed. Local self-government never took root, while the effort to win 
middle-class support for the central government was broken by the weakness 
of the authorities and the fierce hostility of the British community in India. 



PROLOGUE 


15 


The only result was a further quickening of political awareness and the forma¬ 
tion of various associations, culminating with the establishment of the Indian 
National Congress in 1885. 

The British Government were not happy about this, but could find no ratio¬ 
nal grounds for complaint. The Congress was not so much a party in opposi¬ 
tion as an over-eager suppliant. Its supporters hoped that the British, who 
had, for their own reasons, helped to unify India, would now proceed to 
introduce modern technology and economic organization as well as repre¬ 
sentative government. That their rulers should reject such proposals, dismiss 
the Congress as a tiny group which represented nobody and encourage divisive 
trends in Indian politics were all shocks to their innocence. 



1 

Unformative Years 


The broad details of the early life of Jawaharlal Nehru are by now well known. 
He himself, in his Autobiography , looked back with an untinted eye and pro¬ 
vided a fairly detached, and even critical, account which has since been fre¬ 
quently paraphrased, and sometimes embroidered, by later writers. He was 
born at 11.30 p.m. on 14 November 1889 at Allahabad, to which place his 
father, Motilal Nehru, had moved three years earlierTrom Kanpur. Jawahar¬ 
lal — the name was one which its owner never greatly fancied — was doted on 
by his parents; and this is not surprising, as Motilal had lost both a wife and 
son, had married again, and had lost another son before Jawaharlal, who re¬ 
maided an only child for eleven years. 

Nothing, therefore, was going to be denied to Jawaharlal. A pampered 
child surrounded by luxury, with a private swimming pool and tennis court, 
Jawaharlal ran the risk of being smothered by devotion and affluence. Though 
Motilal’s explosive temper frequently mitigated his spoiling of his son, there 
were no checks on the adulation Jawaharlal received from his mother, Swarup- 
rani Nehru. As so often happened in Indian families of those days, the lack of 
companionship between husband and wife led to the mother building her 
life and her affections round her son. 

The mother’s influence ensured an Indian environment. The atmosphere 
of Hindu custom and folklore was not lacking in the Nehru home, and 
Jawaharlal picked up a great deal of legend from the women and indulged in 
temple-going and Ganga-bathing. When, in 1900, the father bought what was 
later known as Swaraj Bhawan, the boy was no doubt often told that this was 
on the site where, according to story, the rishi Bharadwaja hoi had his uni¬ 
versity, and that across the road where once the Ganga had flowed Rama was 
reported to have halted on his way to exile. But the Nehru family was never fully 
integrated into the high-caste Hindu society of Allahabad, for not only was 
Motilal a relative newcomer but he had been excommunicated in 1899 for 
his refusal to make atonement for having travelled overseas. This insulated 
* rom t ^ le rev ‘ v alism then rampant in Hindu orthodox circles in 
Allahabad, and even cut them off from the more orthodox sections among 


16 



UNFORMATIVE YEARS 


17 


the Kashmiri Pandits. Even as late as 1919, there was always a problem about 
the women of the Nehru household dining together with other Kashmiri 
women at weddings and other ceremonies. 1 

However, the Kashmiri Pandit community derived certain incidental 
advantages which distinguished it from the other Hindus. Among the Hindus 
of Kashmir, there were no castes below the Brahmins; 2 and so while the 
Pandits were very conscious of their status, inter-caste antagonisms did not 
enter deeply into their lives. There was also, among the Kashmiri Pandits, 
often little feeling of separateness from the Muslims. A small enclave com¬ 
munity totalling never more than five to seven per cent in a State where the 
majority was Muslim, many of its members learnt Persian and sought official 
service. This eclectic, cosmopolitan tendency continued even among those 
who migrated southwards to the plains. Motilal himself was, like his ancestors, 
more fluent in Arabic and Persian and in Urdu than in any other Indian langu¬ 
age. The chief retainer of his household was a Muslim, and it was from Mubarak 
Ali that .Jawahkrlal heard innumerable stories of heroism and tragedy of the 
years of the revolt. 

The fortunes of the Nehrus had for generations been tied to Muslim patrons. 
There is no evidence for saying that in the early eighteenth century, Farruksiyar, 
the Mogul emperor, had invited Raj Kaul to join his court at Delhi. All that we 
do know is that Raj Kaul came to Delhi, and gradually the Kauls assumed the 
double-barrelled name of Kaul-Nehrus, because, it is said, their house was 
situated on the banks of a canal (nahar in Urdu). 3 Then, after the revolt of 
1858, and the final collapse of the Mogul, the Kaul-Nehrus moved to Agra. 
They had left the canal, but it was the Kaul part of the name that gradually 
dropped out. The use of surnames in India was the result of British influence, 
and it is possible that as the Kaul-Nehrus were drawn into the British adminis¬ 
trative network, they began to use that surname which was less indicative of 
their caste origins. If this be so, it hides an irony. The use of the surname Nehru 
did not become common till much later, 4 and even after.it did, both father and 
son were commonly addressed as Pandit Motilal and Pandit Jawaharlal. Hard 
as he tried, Jawaharlal could never shake off this prefix which he found distaste¬ 
ful, and was referred to respectfully by his countrymen as ‘Panditji’. 5 

The Nehrus were one of the many Indian families who took advantage of 
the conditions and opportunities created by the raj. At Delhi their landed estate 
had gradually dwindled, and Motilal’s father, Ganga Dhar Nehru, was a minor, ■ 

police official. A portrait of him that exists depicts him in Mogul costume. He 

• •» • . ’ *• ^ 

A UtmiiaHaksar, The Future That Way(pe1hi, 1972),-p.Z4. ^' .* 

2 SeeT. N. Madan, Family and Khtship, a study of the Pandits of rural Kashmir !London, 1963), 

p. 18. ” ■ 

*This was Motilal’s theory, to which Jawaharlal gave currency in his Autobiography, but oil the 
other hand, it has to be remembered that there were Nehrus even in Kashmir. 

4 As late as 1888 the list of delegates to the Congress session at Allahabad mentions not Motilal 
Nehru but ’Pandit Motilal, Hindu, Brahmin, Vakil High Court, North West Provinces.' 

v Ji’ denotes respect. 



18 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


died in 1861, three months before the birth of Motilal, but the two older 
brothers, who themselves had taken service directly under the British or in a 
neighbouring Indian state, saw to it that Motilal received a proper education 
in the English language. He was a bright pupil, though he never graduated, 
and set up legal practice, first in Kanpur and then in Allahabad. The vast web of 
litigation created in the North-West Provinces by the talukdari system, debt, 
alienation, succession and transfers, and the enforcements of the revenue law 
made the province a paradise for an ambitious lawyer. 1 Specializing in these 
branches of the civil law, with many clients among the zamindars and talukdars 
and links doubtless with the Kashmiri Pandits who had infiltrated into the 
landed estates, 2 soon Motilal became one of the leaders of the Allahabad Bar. 

Though Motilal had been born poor, had acquired many responsibilities at 
an early age as head of a large Hindu joint family, and was professionally equip¬ 
ped rather than generally educated, he had no complexes. A cheerful extrovert, 
full of the confidence and inner balance that come from self-made success, he 
set about living the life of an English gentleman. A photograph taken in 1894 
shows him attired in English style, his wife, who was from an orthodox family 
of Lahore, in traditional Kashmiri dress, and his five-year-old son in a sailor 
suit. It is the kind of photograph a bourgeois English family would have had 
taken on a visit to Brighton. 

Even the fact that his country was under alien rule did not subdue Motilal. 
He was too busy making Money, and enjoying what money could buy. As soon 
as he could, he moved tw ay from the traditional residential area of the Hindu 
middle class, and, till he bought a house of his own, lived in the Civil Lines where 
his neighbours were mostly British. He entertained generously, and his natural 
courtesy enabled him to overcome the restrictions of Anglo-Indian society and 
to make a number of English friends. His house was fitted with the latest gadgets 
imported from Europe. Like most members of the educated Indian dlite, he 
took an interest in politics and dutifully attended as many sessions of the Indian 
National Congress as he could. But these were the years when the Congress 
was a loyalist organization, interested not in subverting British rule, not even 
in extracting concessions from it, but in pleading for greater opportunities for 
service. 

So it was but natural that Motilal should want for his son the best that 
British education could offer. He first engaged two English governesses, and 
then sent his son for a few months to a local convent and finally decided on 
private instruction at home. The great Sanskrit scholar, Pandit Ganganatha 
Jha, tried, with no noticeable success, to teach Jawaharlal Sanskrit. 3 But the 
main emphasis was on a British tutor. A young and ardent Irish-French theo- 
sophist, F. T. Brooks, who had been recommended by Mrs Annie Besant, was in 
charge of Jawaharlal’s education from 1901 to 1904. Brooks would seem to 

‘See the chapter 'The Frustration of Legal Remedy’ in E. Whitcombe.’aA^rawa* Conditions in 
Northern Mia, vol. 1 (Los Angeles, 1972), pp. 205ff. 

J P- J. Musgrave, ‘ Landlords and Lords of the Land ’, Modem Asian Studies, July 1972, p. 269. 
} See Jawaharlal’s message on the death of Amaranatha Jha, 19 September 1955. 



UNFORMATIVE YEARS 


19 


have been more interested in spreading theosophy in Allahabad, where he 
founded three lodges, 1 than in coaching his pupil; but he had a considerable 
influence on his impressionable charge. He introduced him to English poetry 
and literature and developed in him an interest in science by improvising a tiny 
laboratory in his rooms. He also, by allowing Jawaharlal to be present at his 
regular discourses on theosophy, planted in the boy’s mind the idea that there 
might be more in religion than myth and miracle. The concept of ethics is what 
Jawaharlal perhaps rather vaguely comprehended when, at Brooks's instance, 
he read the not-too-easy Upants hods and the Bhagavad Gita. Certainly he was 
sufficiently engaged to seek and secure, at the age of thirteen, his father’s per¬ 
mission to become a theosophist; and Mrs Besant herself initiated him at a 
solemn ceremony in Banaras. Motilal was right in not taking this seriously, and 
soon, once Brooks’s influence was removed, Jawaharlal forgot all about the 
episode. But it was, in fact, more than a charade, and indicative of the delicacy 
of the young mind and spirit. Theosophy would also seem to have had a more 
permanent, though not major, influence, probably at a subconscious level, 
than Jawaharlal ever acknowledged. He always, for instance, unlike his father, 
favoured an austerity of diet. 

Dissatisfied with private tuition, and in particular with Brooks, in May 1905 
Motilal took his family to Britain and secured admission for his son at Harrow. 
Jawaharlal was now a boy of fifteen. Not very tall, and slightly built, he was 
handsome with a fair skin, clear features and well-brushed black hair which 
was, however, never very thick. For some time he sported a moustache, not so 
much because he fancied it as to please his father, who, did not like his son’s 
shaven face. In other words, you look like a fool.’ 2 He was good at his school 
work and impressed his teachers. ‘He looks very well and happy’ wrote the 
headmaster to his father, 3 ‘and is doing remarkably well in every way, being 
again head of his form, and winning golden opinions from his masters for his 
industry and ability.’ The school report in October 1906 read, ‘Inaccurate in 
French grammar, Latin poor, but he prepares well. English subjects excellent. 
Progress good — has brains.’ In fact Jawaharlal was clever and diligent, and 
this was his best academic phase. He never fulfilled academically, in later years 
at Cambridge or the Bar, the promise he showed at Harrow. The reason was 
that he was not very keen, did not share his father’s ambition for such prizes as 
the senior wranglership and did well at school merely because there was at this 
time very little else that interested him. He carried out his fagging duties, joined 
the chess club, played football and cricket, ran in the half-mile and mile races 
and in the cross-country steeplechase and was often in the gymnasium and on 
the ice-rink — but all in a rather desultory way. Only the Officers Training 
Corps roused any enthusiasm. 

Jawaharlal was not unhappy at Harrow, and when he left after two years, 

1 Theosophy in India (1912), p.61. 

2 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 7 December 1905. 

3 Dr Joseph Wood to Motilal, 19 March 1906, Motilal Nehru papers, Nehru Memorial Museum 
and Library, New Delhi, (hereafter N. M. M. L. ). • 



20 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


on the last night, he tells us, his pillow was covered with tears. But none of 
his teachers had any lasting influence on him, nor did ‘Joe’ Nehru, while gene¬ 
rally liked, make any deep and enduring friendships. Lord Alexander of Tunis, 
who was his contemporary, remembered him as merely ‘an average popular 
boy’, not outstanding in any respect, and with no close friends or enemies. 1 
Sir James Butler, who was in the Headmaster’s house with Jawaharlal, could 
only say that he had not been particularly distinguished and had made no great 
mark in the House. 2 Jawaharlal was a quiet and somewhat lonely boy, and 
though, once he had settled down, he was not particularly homesick, he never 
quite fitted in nor felt at ease with his schoolfellows. The English boys he found 
mostly immature and childish, while the few Indians, belonging to the princely 
families, who were there, he heartily disliked. So he looked forward eagerly to 
Indian visitors with whom he could talk freely and in his own language; and the 
nostalgia for things Indian may explain his habit in his schooldays — which 
he 1 ter discarded — of chewing betel-nut, which his mother sent him from 
home. In his adult years Jawaharlal was very conscious of his Harrovian con¬ 
nexions. While in prison in the’thirties, he stuck pictures of Harrow in his 
diaries and drew up lists of poets and politicians who had been to Harrow. He 
even sensed a certain affinity with Byron on the ground that they had both been 
to Harrow and Trinity, and he used to sing the school songs with the younger 
members of the family. As Prime Minister he attended an old boys’ dinner in 
London, and in 1960 visited the school and received an enthusiastic welcome. 
But all this did not come very naturally, and he was doubtless far happier as an 
old Harrovian-than in his actual years at that school. 

Jawaharlal’s arrival at Harrow coincided with startling events in India and 
outside, and it was now that he began, for the first time, to take an interest in 
politics and world affairs. In 1904 he had attended the Congress session at 
Bombay with his father, an occasion that, not surprisingly, had left no impres¬ 
sion on him; but the situation was now very different. In 1905 the Viceroy, 
Lord Curzon, had, by his heavy-handed partitioning of the province of Bengal, 
forced the transition in India from the era of supplication to that of pressure. 
The broad-based agitation in Bengal found vigorous support in every other 
part of India because the partition was regarded not as a minor administrative 
reform but as a deliberate attempt to weaken the growing forces of Indian 
nationalism. So the Swadeshi movement, or the insistence on the use of arti¬ 
cles of Indian manufacture, and the boycott of British goods, inaugurated in 
Bengal, spread far and wide and even, to Jawaharlal’s surprise, reached distant 
Kashmir. Motilal too, normally no admirer of the ‘oily babus’ of Bengal, was 
stirred to sympathy and appreciation, and thought that they had after all justi¬ 
fied themselves. ‘The Bengali reigns supreme throughout Bengal.. . We are 
passing through the most critical period of British Indian history . .. Bande 
Mataram 3 has become the common form of salutation even it^ Allahabad . .. 

‘Interview with the author, 30 May 1969. 

Mnterview with the author, 16 February 1969. 

9 The name of a Bengali nationalist song, ‘Hail to the Motherland'. 



INFORMATIVE YEARS 


21 


If this movement only continues you will on vour return find an India quite 
different to the India you left.’ 1 Jawaharlal was avid for news, and asked his 
father to mail Indian newspapers —‘not The Pioneer' 2 — to him regularly 
Motilal’s own enthusiasm was short-lived, and soon he was denouncing the 
movement against partition as the most srupid and dishonest thing he had ever 
seen; 3 but Jawaharlal was not shaken. 

The course of the agitation against partition accentuated division of opinion 
within the Congress, between the Extremists who believed in methods of agita¬ 
tion and the Moderates who were committed to constitutional processes. 
There was no disagreement between these two groups as to the objectives. The 
Extremists under Tiiak were not revolutionaries who sought a violent end to 
British rule. Even their remote ideal was only a confederacy of Indian pro¬ 
vinces with a measure of autonomy and the reservation of all Imperial ques¬ 
tions for the British Government. All that they wanted immediately was to 
impress on public opinion in England that all was not well in India, and this 
purpose was shared by the Moderates. The only difference was as to the way 
that this should be done. While Gokhale and his followers believed in speeches, 
meetings and deputations, the slogan of Tiiak was self-reliance. Jawaharlal 
found himself in sympathy with the Extremists, and Tiiak seemed to him the 
embodiment of Indian nationalism struggling for freedom. 4 But it was a vague 
sympathy. The ideas were unformed and the emotion imprecise, going no 
further than, under the influence of Trevelyan’s Garibaldi, swashbuckling 
fantasies. His political enthusiasm was still a form of idealized chivalric 
romance. 

However, it was not only developments in India that excited Jawaharlal’s 
interest. He followed, far more closely than most of the other boys at Harrow, 
the general election in 1905 in Britain, which swept the Liberal Party into 
power and enabled Campbell-Bannerman to form his government. Even more 
absorbing were the changes in Asia. On the day Jawaharlal landed in Britain, 
news came of Japan’s decisive naval victory over Russia at Tshushima. Feeling 
relatively a stranger in a British public school, and with his mind full of reports 
of the grow ing estrangement between the British rulers and the Indian people, 
he thrilled to this evidence of the new strength of an Asian nation. It was at this 
time that he came across Meredith Townsend’s Asia and Europe ; and his mind 
was particularly receptive. For the thesis of that book, shorn of its crudities 
such as that caste was a form of socialism and that India would gradually 
become a Muslim country, was that Asia and Europe were separate in every 
sense. Neither could conquer the other with permanence, nor would the 
peoples of the two continents really come together, for there was an inherent 
antipathy between them. Europe had never enduringly influenced Asia and 
was unlikely ever to do so; in fact, Europe had received from Asia far more 

1 Letter to Jawaharlal, 16 November 1905. 

2 This was an F.nRhs.h-owned newspaper of Lucknow. 

2 Letter to Jawaharlal. i January 1906. 

4 See his message on Tiiak. 18 June 1956. 



22 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


than she had given. About India in particular, Townsend was firmly of the 
view that the British had won no genuine loyalty from any section of the people, 
and their empire, which came in a day, would disappear in a night. The effort 
which the British had put forward in 1857 to hold their authority could never 
be repeated, for the British people had lost the energy and the unscrupulous¬ 
ness to maintain government by slaughter; but India could not be retained in 
any other way. Jawaharlal was willing to be convinced. 

Bored with Harrow, Jawaharlal sat for the entrance examinations to Cam¬ 
bridge in the spring of 1907, a year before his father and his headmaster 
thought he should, and went up to Trinity that October. In the intervening 
' summer he had spent a few weeks in Ireland. He missed the rioting in Belfast 
and was disappointed that Dublin was quiet during his stay. But he had felt, 
first-hand, the force of nationalist agitation and was impressed by the Sinn Fein 
movement. He recommended to his father a book just then published, The 
New Ireland by Sydney Brooks, which saw in Ireland the rebirth of an ancient 
nation and commended the Sinn Fein movement for its revolt against ‘thimble¬ 
rigging’ politics and its belief that nothing could be secured from England by 
whining. Such gains as Ireland had made in the past had been by extortion. The 
only sound policy' for Ireland to follow was that which caused England the 
greatest annoyance. But there was no need for violence; all that was required 
to thwart the alien ruler was to ignore him and boycott his merchandise. The 
parallel in India was, of course, obvious, and Jawaharlal’s visit to Ireland and 
his understanding of her politics seem to have strengthened his Extremist 
sympathies. The result was that he became more critical of his father’s attitude 
in politics. He accused Motilal of being ‘immoderately moderate’, 1 and a later 
light-hearted reference to the Government demonstrating their satisfaction 
with ‘the insulting offer of a Rai Bahadurship’ 2 hurt Motilal so deeply thaf 
Jawaharlal had to apologize. 

The extremism, however, was confined to his letters to his father. Jawaharlal 
did not plunge intoche student politics of Cambridge. He never spoke at the 
Union, though he was a member and used the club rooms. He joined the 
Magpie and Stump, the debating society of his own college, within a week of 
coming up, his name having been proposed by St John Philby and seconded by 
Charles Darwin. However, although failure to speak throughout a term meant 
payment of a fine, during his three years Jawaharlal spoke only once, for two 
minutes thirty seconds on 29 May 1908 on the motion ‘This house approves of 
the present public school system. Unfortunately, the minutes do not disclose 
whether Jawaharlal spoke for or against the motion. Nor does he seem to have 
taken part in the debates in doggerel, mode trials and pageants and smoking 
concerts organized by this club. 

i Letter, 20 December 1907, Sslscttd Works ofJaw*b*rlsl Ntbru (hereafter S.W.) vol. l,(Ddb. 
1972), p. 39. 

* Letter, 30 January 1908, S.W., vol. 1, p. 44. • 

* Minutes of the Magpie and Stump Debating Society, Trinity College Library. 



UNFORMATIVE YEARS 


23 


. As for the other undergraduate societies, Jawaharial was a member of the 
Majlis, the society of Indian students which he joined despite his father’s dis¬ 
approval. He seems to have attended many of its meetings and dinners but, 
again, rarely spoke. The only report we have of a speech was at an Jd dinner, 
where he spoke reluctantly but when he did is said to have spoken well. 1 Palme 
Dutt, a schoolboy in those days, remembers Jawaharial occasionally attending 
the meetings of the Majlis which used to be held in his father’s house, but the 
impression that Jawaharial had left on him was that of being an aesthetic rather 
than a political type. 2 

Therein, perhaps, lies part of the answer. Jawaharial was wincingly shy, 
and public speaking must have seemed to him a nightmare. But, in addition, 
the passionate debates that went on among the Indian students on the relative 
merits of moderation and extremism must also have seemed to him rather 
vulgar. He had, for example, warmly defended in his letters Bepin Pal, one of 
the Extremist leaders, when Motilal had sneered at him as ‘the great bathroom 
hero of Barisal’; 3 but Pal’s speech at Cambridge when, apart from adopting a 
narrowly Hindu attitude and speaking of India as God’s chosen country, he had 
thundered to a small audience as if he were at a public meeting, embarrassed 
Jawaharial acutely. So he wrote to Allahabad welcoming the split in the Con¬ 
gress at Surat and expressing his firm belief that in a very few years there 
would hardly be any Moderates left; but in Cambridge he successfully kept his 
opinions to himself. 

These opinions, it should be added, were still not deep-seated or transform¬ 
ing his whole outlook. They were but a natural part of the general posture of 
dilettantism which Jawaharial deliberately cultivated. Though he told no one 
but his father of these views, the occasional assertion doubtless gave him inner 
satisfaction. But that was all. There was no greater hint of the rebel about him 
or about his view of his own future. He showed at this time no real signs of any 
sort of fire or distinction, and did not stand out among his generation. He 
accepted the values and ambitions of his class, and was quite at ease in the vapid 
society of Indian middle-class convention. He did not, despite his epistolary 
extremism, resist the hopes which his father had nurtured from the strut of 
entombing him in the Indian Civil Service. In fact, it was Motilal who, early in 
1910, abandoned the idea of Jawaharial sitting for the I.C.S. examination, 
mainly because he could not brook the prospect of his only son serving for long 
years in remote districts away from home, and had a growing feeling that the 
examiners were biased against Indian candidates. But neither father nor, more 
startlingly in the light of later events, son resented the thought of serving 
the British rulers. They had not yet recognized the necessity of freedom. 
In 1912, after listening to Fenner Brockway urging that India should move on 

1 Syed Mahmud, ‘Jawaharial Nehru as I knew himIslamic Institute files. I owe this reference 
to Mr David Page. 

2 Interview with the author, 20 November 1969. 

* Letter, 18 October 1907. 



24 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


to independence, Jawaharlal criticized the speaker privately for his extremist 
speech. 1 

The impression Jawaharlal gives as an undergraduate is of a man only half- 
awakened and waiting for further experience and comprehension. He attend¬ 
ed, in his first term, a lecture by Bernard Shaw on Socialism and the University 
Man, but more to see the speaker than to hear him. Shaw’s plays, and even 
more his prefaces, had already begun to fill him with excitement, and to the 
end of his days Shaw ’occupied a niche in my mind and I have sought his com¬ 
pany to my great advantage’. 2 But it was, one suspects, Shaw the social crusader 
rather than the political reformer who so appealed to Jawaharlal. Fabianism, 
with its hopes of reforming capitalism and imperceptibly gliding to socialism, 
was at this time popular in Cambridge, but it seems to have attracted Jawaharlal 
little, and there is no reason to believe that he was a member of the Cambridge 
Fabian Society. 3 Hugh Dalton, also at Cambridge at this time and prominent 
in the Fabian Society and the Union, knew Jawaharlal slightly but does not 
remember much else about him. 4 He clearly made no impact in left-wing 
circles. But Jawaharlal was, as we know, interested in William Morris, and 
bought a full set of the collected works, which began to be issued from 1910. 5 
There was clearly greater affinity with Morris than with Shaw. The revolt of 
Morris against the ugliness of industrial capitalism and its impoverished 
human relationships had led on to a frontal attack on class exploitation and the 
evils of imperialism. The life of Morris was the story of the evolution of a revo¬ 
lutionary, the progress from aestheticism to the basic question of class power; 
and Jawaharlal may have been, in his own context, moving in the same direc¬ 
tion. His moral sensibility and fastidiousness were beginning to develop in the 
social context. His awareness of the class issue is indicated by a trivial fact: his 
keenness to dance with a waitress to discover what she would talk about. 

Looking back on these years, Jawaharlal described his primary mood as a 
vague kind of Cyrenaicism. 6 But even the assiduous cultivation of pleasure 
seems to have been only half hearted. Cambridge in those days was an exciting 
place, but Jawaharlal never got into its full swing. In his own college, admit¬ 
tedly a large one with about 600 members, he hardly seems to have been 
noticed. He lived the first year in lodgings, at 40 Green Street, and then in 
Whewell Court, in what he described as ‘probably the rottenest rooms in the 
whole college’, with the only advantage that they were near the baths. He got 
on well with his tutor, Sir Walter Fletcher, but neither Fletcher nor any other 
senior member of the university had a great influence on him. He took as his 

>Lord Brockway in a B.B.C. broadcast. See Personality and Power (B.B.C. publication, 1971), 
p. 55. 

z To S. S. Dbavan 15 July 1950. Nehru papers. 

’The records of the Cambridge University Fabian Society for these years are unfortunately not 
available, 

4 Call Back Yesterday (London, 1955), p. 52. 

’See his letter to E. P. Thompson, written in 1955. Nehru papers. * 

6 Autobiography (Indian edition, 1962), p. 20. 



UNFORMATIVE YEARS 


25 


subjects chemistry, geology and physics but soon gave up physics for botany, 
and in the final tripos was placed in the second half of the second class. This 
was an achievement well below the level of his talent, but Jawaharlal was not 
by temperament an academic,^and appears to have done very little work. How¬ 
ever, he had so diligently prepared his family for an outright failure that the 
result was received with champagne. The type of education provided at Cam¬ 
bridge and Oxford seemed to him of little value to an Indian. He was not there¬ 
fore greatly concerned at the proposal to restrict the admission of Indians to 
Cambridge, and took no part in the controversy that raged fiercely on this issue 
during his years at the university. He believed that it would be an advantage if 
such restriction forced Indian students to go to universities in Europe and else¬ 
where, and thus be better fitted for the world. 

Outside the laboratories and lecture rooms, Jawaharlal led a busy life, even 
if it was unspectacular. He played tennis, rode a great deal and applied for 
admission to the University Mounted Infantry. He was summoned to a riding 
test but did not go, ostensibly for lack of time but probably because he knew 
that as an Indian he would be rejected, for at that time Indians were not 
admitted. He joined the Trinity Boat Gub and being only 8 st. 4 lb. in 
weight was made cox. He had not looked forward to this, but proved efficient 
enough. In the third-division trials his boat won easily. ‘Nehru coxed well*, 
says the record. 1 In the Lent college races in 1908, however, his boat was no 
great success. ‘On the whole’, he wrote over fifty years later, 2 ‘I rather liked 
it though my boat... did not perform any wonders. All we could manage to 
do was to go through the races with some dignity and avoid being bumped.’ 
Here his memory was being kind. In fact his boat was bumped thrice. He did 
not go on the river again. 

Jawaharlal had .many acquaintances but no small intimate social circle, 
no close friendships without reserve; nor does he seem to have, known any 
women. His public-school background helped him to do Without them. But 
as he confessed to his father, at times he was ‘almost overpowered by the sense 
of my solitary condition’. 3 As for his vacations they were spent frequently 
in hydros, which were hotels meant mainly for invalids. Where, then, was 
the successful pursuit of egoistic hedonism, the deliberate achievement of 
sensation? It was obviously a pose to cover an emptiness in his life. Jawaharlal 
had opinions but needed a cause; there stretched before him a future secure 
but with no purpose. He accepted the ennui of bourgeois stability for want of 
anything more demanding. He went through his years at Cambridge without 
demur, although its attractions had little to offer him. 

Even before his final tripos examination, Jawaharlal had joined the Inner 
Temple, and the fond father believed that the son had followed his aptitude* 

1 Trinity Boat Qab minutes, Trinity College Library. • 
a To his nephew Marsha Hutheesing, 26 August 1959. Nehru papers. 

» Letter, 29 October 1908. S.W., vol. 1, p. 59. 



26 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Motilal was confident of Jawaharlal’s success; ‘if my knowledge of human 
nature does not deceive me I think he is bound to rise in his father’s profession. 
He has already begun to like it and in deciding that he should devote his 
energies to the study of law I have only followed the bent of his own mind.’ 1 
Motilal felt that he himself had but five or six years' work left in him, but in 
that period he intended to merge his own professional existence in that of 
Jawaharlal, have no clients of his own but pass them on to his son and place 
Jawaharlal well on the road to success. 2 He had failed to realize that Jawaharlal 
had no enthusiasm for the law and joining the Inner Temple was merely part 
of his general policy, at this time, of drift. He was bored with Cambridge, which 
was ‘becoming too full of Indians’, and wanted a change; but it was Oxford 
rather than London that he had preferred. When Motilal opposed this because 
he wanted Jawaharlal, in addition to qualifying for the Bar, to work in the 
chambers of a senior lawyer and attend the law courts, he at last had an 
inkling into his son’s mind. He would much rather, wrote Jawaharlal, risk 
his success at the Bar than go through life as a mere lawyer with no interest 
in anything save the technicalities and trivialities of law. 

However, as usual, Jawaharlal gave way to his father's wishes and moved 
to London. The only sop given him was permission to join the London School 
of Economics. 'Politics are inseparable from law and economics the soul of 
politics.’ 3 But being forced to do what he disliked resulted, as was to be 
expected, in Jawaharlal leading a life of idleness. But before that he had nearly 
succeeded in killing himself. On a holiday in Norway with a friend, while 
trekking somewhere north of Bergen, 4 he plunged into an ice-cold fjord for 
a bath and became numb. His foot slipped and he was swept away by the current. 
His companion pulled him out on the brink of a waterfall. But Jawaharlal 
was always a man of physical courage, and proximity to death pleased rather 
than sobered him. 

For the next two years Jawaharlal was caught up in the whirl of London 
life. Renewing contact with some old school acquaintances, he was very much 
the gay man of fashion — ‘very well-dressed, well-mannered, almost Euro¬ 
pean’. 3 Music concerts, golf at Crowborough, tennis at the Queen’s Club, 
watching cricket at Lord’s and waltzing on ice-rinks, rather than attending 
lectures at the LS.E. and devilling at the law, took up his time. The pas¬ 
times seem to have been innocent but they were expensive. Never over¬ 
loaded with money, Jawaharlal now found himself often in debt, was forced 
to pawn his watch and chain, sometimes had no money even for bus or tube 
fare, and more and more frequently approached his father for supplementary 

1 Motilal to his brother 30 January 1910. Motilal Nehru papers. 

* Motilal to Jawaharlal, 1 September 1910 and 6 January 1911. 

5 Modlal to Jawaharlal, 13 October 1910. Motilal Nehru papers. 

4 Jawaharlal could not remember the exact place; letter to Judge Andren, 11 October 1934. 
Nehru papers. * 

’Brockway, op. tit., p. 53. 



UNFORMAITV* YEARS 


27 


grants. He never in his life had any money sense. 'If I had £5000 a year I am 
sure I would spend it all with the greatest ease and then get into debt.’ 1 

His expenditure in 1911 was about' £800, which in those years enabled 
most Indian students to pay for a stay of three years in London. Motilal was 
alarmed. Far from carrying off the scholarships and prizes at the Bar examina¬ 
tions, Jawaharlal just managed to pass, and seemed more interested in con¬ 
certs. ‘Your papers at the last exam, must have been very musical. 1 hope the 
examiners had the sense to appreciate them. It would perhaps be an improve¬ 
ment in future to let the musical treat follow* the exam, instead of allowing 
the two to overlap.’ 2 And when, the next year, Jawaharlal passed the Bar 
finals, Motilal expressed his great relief. ‘Ido not look upon it as a great achieve¬ 
ment. But you have eminently succeeded in investing the event with an im¬ 
portance which it did not possess.’ 3 

t Such heavy sarcasm irritated Jawaharlal, and when his father wrote a brus¬ 
que letter demanding to see his accounts, Jawaharlal replied with such acidity 
that this time it was Motilal’s turn to apologize. The fact was that Jawaharlal 
was spendingmuch but enjoying himself little. He was bored and listless rather 
than immersed in extravagant dissipation, and the gaiety was very much on 
the surface. Never in perfect harmony with the British environment, he was 
quite happy to return in August 1912 to what Motilal termed ‘this land of 
regrets’. In his Autobiography Jawaharlal described himself at that time, 
a young man of 23, as ‘a bit of a prig with little to commend me’ , 4 It was a 
harsh self-judgment. In fact he seems to have been a rather vague and un¬ 
practical person, dominated, even suppressed, by a doting and determined 
father. Jawaharlal had done all the things he had been told to do, but with no 
great enthusiasm. His deep attachment to his father had the defect that it made 
him almost passive. He was willing to conform and to leave the major deci¬ 
sions of his life to be made by his father. He had emerged from seven years in 
England, having passed through the mill of a traditional education, with no 
confidence in himself or interest in the world. But his mind and character had 
been trained not for a profession but for the call which was to come in the 
years ahead. Two stray remarks in his letters home^give some indication of 
the future. *1 am’, he Wrote to his father, 9 ‘an ardent believer in a child--or 
for the matter of that a grown up person — being endowed with a lot of imagina¬ 
tion, and can conceive of no greater evil than for a person to be totally devoid 
of it. Of course too much imagination is bad for one, but I had rather suffer from 
that than from the other extreme.’ And again, looking back on his years in 
England towards the end of his stay, he commented, 'To my mind education 
does not consist of passing examinations or knowing English or mathematics. 

1 Letter to fethcr. 11 April 1912. 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 15 June 1911. 

•Idem, 6 June 1912. 

4 p. 26. 

* 20 October 1911. 



28 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


It is a mental state and if this is not present it matters little how many exami¬ 
nations a person has passed.* 1 Others might have been disappointed that he 
had not fulfilled the promise of Harrow and carried off the academic spoils, 
but Jawaharlal himself saw no reason to regret or repent. He returned to India 
with a nurtured mind and imagination. * 

In addition, he brought back with him attachments to Britain, and the 
values he considered British, which were never to leave him. They moulded 
his outlook, sustained him in his struggles and influenced his policies in the 
days of his power. Throughout his life, Britain was a country with which 
Jawaharlal identified extensively in the personal sense. He himself was aware 
of this. 

Less than ten years ago | he told the judge at his trial in May 1922 2 1 I 
returned from England after a lengthy stay there. I had passed through 
the usual course of public school and university. I had imbibed most 
of the prejudices of Harrow and Cambridge and in my likes and dislikes 
I was perhaps more an Englishman than an Indian. I looked upon the 
world almost from an Englishman’s standpoint. And so I returned to 
India as much prejudiced in favour of England and the English as it 
was possible for an Indian to be. 

Indeed, he felt that his reaction to foreign rule would be that, in similar 
circumstances, of any average Englishman uncontaminated by imperialism. 
Addressing an audience of schoolchildren he advised them to emulate the 
spirit of adventure and patriotism which inspired the English schoolboy and 
impressed upon them how the ancestors of the British had risked their lives 
in the past. That spirit was the possession of free nations but in India it had 
died during the past one hundred and fifty years of slavery. 3 


> 26 April 1912. 

1 S.W.', voi. 1, pp. 252-3. 

} Address to the Tilak Vidyalaya, Allahabad, 2 April 1922, U. P. Government Intelligence 
Reports for 1922. 



2 


Marking Time 


Back in India, Jawaharlal slipped without resistance into the vacuous, para¬ 
sitic life of upper-middle-class Indian society in Allahabad. He joined his 
father’s chambers and Motilal saw to it that work came his way. ‘An over- 
zealous client sent a money order for Rs.500 to you as your fee and it has been 
redirected to Mussoorie. The first fee your father got was Rs. 5 (five only). You 
are evidently a hundred times better than your father. I wish I were my son 
instead of being myself. Rao Maharajsingh has several cases pending in the 
High Court and I do not know In which of them he intends to retain you. But 
the money is yours . . .’ 1 Clearly, though the father’s pride forbade him to 
recognize it, Jawaharlal was being paid handsomely to keep Motilal happy. 
Jawaharlal toiled fairly hard and had the advantages of his father’s sponsor¬ 
ship and of social contacts with judges, eminent lawyers like Sapru and Rash 
Behari Ghose and the leading landlords and industrialists of the U. P. But he 
could whip up no enthusiasm for the law, was shy of speaking, and found the 
work tedious.’Reading books written by great lawyers’, he wrote long after, 
‘is apt to make one think of big and intricate cases. But the average lot of the 
lawyer, especially a junior one, is to deal with petty and rather dull cases.’ 2 So 
it is doubtful whether, even if politics had not seduced him, he would have 
developed into one of the leading lawyers of the U.P. or India. It is more likely, 
as he himself thought, that if he had continued at the Bar he would have led a 
comfortable existence and retired as a judge, ‘highly respectable and solemn 
looking’, 3 but probably of no great distinction. 

Apart from professional work, Jawaharlal continued in Allahabad the life 
of a man-about-town which he had led in his last years in London. He enjoyed 
the lavish entertainments of his father; and there are, in addition, reports of 
his own late-night parties and revels. The casual sympathy with Extremist 


'Motilal to Jawaharlal, 21 October 1912. 

1 To Harsha Hutheesing, 26 August 1959. Nehru papers. 

* * The Mind of a Judge', Modern Review, September 1935. reprinted in India end the World 
(London, 1936), pp. 130-45. 


29 



30 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


politics which he had shown in Cambridge did not inhibit him from participat¬ 
ing in the formal rounds of Anglo-Indian society. He left his cards at the homes 
of English judges and officials, and they in turn called on him, ‘Called on 8 
English families’, runs the entry in his pocket diary for 27 March 1916, and 
again three days later/Called on 9 English families’. * 

However, the great event of that year was his marriage on 8 February 1916. 
This question had been worrying Motilal and his wife ever since their son went 
to Harrow. For even though their son was then only a boy of fifteen, Motilal 
was concerned lest Jawaharl&l begin to show interest in women, particularly 
in view of the entanglement of one of his friends. Writing, as he said, not as a 
father but as his dearest friend, Motilal invited confidences, warned against 
passing passions, and condemned the concept of love at first sight . 1 

Motilal had no cause for worry. His son, apart from showing little interest in 
women, declared that he had never been in favour of marrying a European and 
had, during his years in England, seen no reason to change his opinion. 2 He 
sometimes gave expression to idealized views about marriage. 

Would you like me to marry a girl whom I may not like for the rest of my 
life and who may not like me? Rather than marry in that way, I would 
greatly prefer to remain unmarried. After all, I have to spend my whole 
life with my wife. Is it surprising, then, if I wish to marry a girl whom I 
like? I am not obliged to like a girl of a good family, nor is it to be taken 
for granted that every educated girl would come up to my expectations. 

I accept that any girl selected by you and father would be good in all res¬ 
pects, but still, I may not be able to get along well with her. In my opin¬ 
ion, unless there is a’degree of mutual understanding, marriage should 
not take place. I think it is unjust and cruel that a life should be wasted 
merely in producing children. 3 

But there is, in the number of letters he wrote on this subject, little evi¬ 
dence of a desire in his own life for an intense and romantic experience. Once, 
while still at Harrow, he evinced an upsurge of restlessness which qurte sur¬ 
prised his father. 

The sooner it is done the better it will be. I.am in no hurry to get married 
or even engaged but it is most tiring and annoying not to know what is 
going to happen. If no one had ever mentioned anything about my marri¬ 
age I would have been quite contented and happy, but now that all this 
fuss and trouble has been taken I cannot rest till something is done. 4 

But in fact it was irritation rather than impatience. Jawaharlal was tired of 

1 Letters to Jawaharlal, 1 March 1906 and 1 September 1910. 
r Jawaharlal to his father, 30 September 1910. * 

i Letter to his mother, 14 March 1912 (Original in Hindi). S.W., vol. 1, p. 97. 

4 Letter to his father; 21 December 1906. 



MARKING TIME 


31 


the subject and wished to be done with it. With an odd detachment he wanted 
his father to settle his engagement so that there need be no further discussion. 

This suited Motilal, who took, as of natural right and with Jawaharlal’s 
consent, the decisions in this as in all other major matters in his son’s life. 'It 
is all right my boy. You may leave your future happiness in my hands and rest 
assured that to secure that is the one object of my ambition.’ 1 Hie conditions 
of Indian life, he assured Jawaharlal, were so different to those prevailing in 
Europe and elsewhere that Jawaharlal’s happiness could not be secured by 
leaving him to act independently of his parents. 2 There were only two points 
which Jawaharlal suggested rather weakly: that he need not necessarily marry 
within the Kashmiri community, and that the engagement need not be fixed 
while he was still in England and had hardly had the chance to know the girl. 

1 hope’, he hastened to add, 3 ‘you will take my objections into consideration 
before arriving at a decision, which of course lies with you.’ But Kashmiri 
Pandits, even those who had migrated to Allahabad, had a strong sense of 
exclusiveness, 4 and in this respect Motilal was no more immune than the rest. 
So he preferred a Kashmiri if he could find a suitable one and he surveyed the 
Kashmiri girls everywhere, even those settled in Madras, for one who was 
neither an illiterate beauty nor a plain blue-stocking, but combined good looks 
with education. 'I asked Jawahar if he preferred books to looks or vice versa. 
His answer was that I might as well ask if he preferred a nose to eyes — they 
were both necessary.’ 5 There was no obvious ‘Blue Bird’ to be found who 
would not require a special course of preparation and instruction before she 
fully qualified to be Jawaharlal’s wife; but Motilal could see no far superior 
person outside the community either, and this strengthened his feeling akin 
to prejudice against it. 6 However, the lack of an obvious candidate enabled 
Motilal to yield to his son’s second suggestion, that he should see the girl 
before the final selection. 

After years of search, in 1912, just before Jawaharlal’s return to India, 
Motilal chose Kamala Kaul, a young girl of thirteen belonging to a Kashmiri 
Brahmin middle-class family who rah a flour mill in Delhi. Jawaharlal, being 
nearly ten years older, thought she was too young for him. Nor did he think 
he could marry her for another six to seven years, till she was at least eighteen 
or nineteen. But this did not worry him as he was not, as he observed, ‘in a 
matrimonial state of mind at present'; 7 and it suited Motilal as it provided 
time to mould the young girl into a proper wife for Jawaharlal. She had been 
educated at home and spoke Hindi and Urdu; and after the engagement she 

* Motilal to Jawaharlal, 21 February 1907. 

2 Idem, 9 December 1910. 

1 Letter to his father, 7 October 1910. 

* C(. Urtnila Haksar, writing of the late 'twenties: 'For the first time, in Allahabad 1 became aware 
of the fact that we w ar e Kashmiris andjthat it set us apart from the rest of Indians in the country. 
“We" were Kashmiris whereas everyone else was “they"/ Op- c«t., PP- 44-5. 

’Motilal to his brother, 11 February (1911?)- Motilal Nehru papers. 

* Letters to Jawaharlal, 1 September and 28 October 1910. 

. ’Letter to his father, 26 April 1912. 



32 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


was brought to Allahabad for training in deportment. When she was seventeen 
the marriage was celebrated in Delhi on a munificent scale, with special trains 
carrying the guests to the ‘Nehru marriage camp’. 

That summer Jawaharlal spent in Kashmir. He went in pursuit of bear 
and shot one as well as a large number of pigeons and marmots. He also had 
his second brush with death. Trekking up to the top of the ZojiTa, a very stiff 
climb of about three and a half miles, he then attempted to go over the Amar- 
nath shoulder into the head of the valley above the cave. From Matayan he and 
his friends moved to Gumba and went up to the Gumba ravine and glacier. 
After climbing a veiy steep gradient for miles, they arrived at the top of the 
glacier and then set off, at about 17,000 feet, in bad weather, to cross a large 
ice-field covered with fresh snow. Trying to hop across a crevasse, Jawaharlal 
slipped and fell in, and was pulled out by the rope. As there were many other 
such crevasses and it was still snowing, the party turned back. 1 

Along with high life and shikar, there was the usual ostentatious public 
service. For three or four years Jawaharlal served as one of the provincial 
secretaries of the St John Ambulance Association. He was also one of the joint 
secretaries of the U.P. South Africa Committee for the collection of funds for 
Gandhi’s passive resisters in South Africa, but this was not an dnti-Government 
activity, for the Government of India had frequently expressed their support for 
the Indian community in South Africa. He was willing to join the Indian 
Defence Force, constituted on the lines of the territorial army, and encourage 
other young Indians to do the same. It was decided to constitute a strong and 
representative committee in Allahabad for this purpose, and an invitation to 
all who were interested was published in the local newspapers. 2 

Within a week, however, the situation underwent a marked change. For 
many years the Indian national movement had been at a low ebb. The Congress 
was controlled by the Moderates who were satisfied with the annual adoption 
of academic resolutions. Jawaharlal and others like him in the U.P. had no 
great interest in such activity nor were they drawn into Extremist agitation. 
Tilak and Mrs Besant, failing to secure the re-admission of the Extremists 
into the Gongress, had set up Home Rule Leagues. Mrs Besant’s plan was to 
agitate on the lines of British radical movements in the nineteenth century, 
and in April 1915 she had presided over the U.P. Provincial Conference. 3 
Jawaharlal had taken no interest in this. His first public speech was on 20 June 
1916, to protest against the Press Act and the demand from Mrs Besant 
of security under that Act, 4 but this intervention would seem to have been 

1 Diary entries from 24 August to 7 September 1916; letter to S. S. Khera, 1 July 1938, Nehru 
papers.' 

2 Notice signed amorfe others by Motilal, Jawaharlal and T.B. Sapru, 13 June 1917, The Leader, 
22 June 1917. 

J SeeH.F. Owen, ‘The Home Rule Leagues 1913-18’, in D.A. Low (ed.), Soundings in Modern 
South Asian History (London, 1968), pp. 139-93. 

4 Report in The Leader, 23 June 1916. „ 



MARKING time 


33 


more out of personal loyalty to Mrs Besant, whom he had known from his child¬ 
hood, than from any strong feelings about the freedom of the press. It was no 
sparkling performance, and all that his father could say, after reading the report 
in the press, was that the speech, though not very informative, had the rare 
merit of being free from commonplaces, which was the besetting sin of all 
Indian speakers, at least in the U. P. 1 He had not been anything more than a silent 
spectator at the Lucknow Congress in December 1916. But what Mrs Besant 
and Tilak had failed to achieve on their own was accomplished by the 
Government. 

The Home Rule Leagues of Mrs Besant were intended to be primarily 
educative — to argue the case for Home Rule, hold classes and seminars, cir¬ 
culate literature, collect funds and organize social work. But the Government 
teared Mrs Besant’s influence. She was first expelled from Bombay and then 
from the Central Provinces and finally, in June 1917, interned at a hill station 
by the Madras Government. This panicky step caused resentment throughout 
India; and among those roused to annoyance was Jawaharlal. He was, at long 
last, beginning,to find his role. The meeting for considering the expansion 
of the Indian Defence Force was promptly cancelled; 2 and Jawaharlal withdrew 
his own application for enlistment. A Home Rule League was formed in the 
U. P. with Motilal as president and Jawaharlal as one of the joint secretaries. 
The internment of Mrs Besant seemed to him a sign of the madness which 
had befallen the bureaucracy and presaged its fall. ‘Home Rule has come and 
we have but to take it if we stand up like men and falter not.’ Mere protest 
meetings and representations were the politics of cowards and opium-eaters: 
what was now needed was non-co-operation with the Government till they re¬ 
versed their folly. 5 

Such vehemence showed that despite the superficiality of his yay of living, 
his spirit was not dead and he was keen on action. He had been greatly moved 
by Roger Casement’s speech at his trial. ‘It seemed he said years later, 4 to 
point out exactly how a subject nation should feel. In August 1917, when 
Motilal called on the British public, ‘the sole tribunal appointed by Providence’, 
to mediate between the Indian people and the bureaucracy, someone from 
the audience shouted ‘Question’. Motilal lost his temper and challenged the 
heckler to come out in the open. There was complete silence. 5 What is of inter¬ 
est is that we now know that the timid heckler was Jawaharlal. 6 But what action 
should be taken, what form non-co-operation should be given, was not clear 
to him. He had no startling ideas of his own. Neither the Anglo-Saxon approach 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 June 1916. 

2 Letter to the editor, 20 June 1917, The Leader, 22 June 1917. 

* Letter to the editor. The Leader, 21 June 1917. 

4 B. Inglis, Roger Casement (London, 1973), p. 346. 

5 Account at Kapil Deva Malaviya, Pandit Motilal Nehru, cited in B.R. Nando, The Nehrus 
(London, 1962), P . 139. 

6 Eye-witness account of Sochidanonda Sinha in his article on Motilal Nehru. Sachidananda 
Sinha papers at Patna. 



34 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


of Mrs Besant nor the orthodox extremism of Tilak had any great appeal for 
him, and, while he spoke in terms of Home Rulers capturing the Congress, 1 
he had given no thought as to what should be done once that organization had 
been taken over. In fact his mind, for lack of anything better, fell into Moderate 
grooves, and he objected to the refusal by the Government to permit deputa¬ 
tions to proceed to England to plead the cause of Home Rule 2 At this time, 
unlike the year before, it was Motilal who was the stauncher revolutionaiy, 
and he pointed out to Jawaharlal that the work which lay before them in India 
was far more important than anything that deputations could achieve in 
England. 3 

So Jawaharlal, even in his late twenties, was a man who had yet to know 
his mind, discontented with his lot of comfort and affluence, dissatisfied with 
merely helping to run The Independent, the newspaper started by his father 
in February 1919 to give voice in the U. P. to the viewpoint of the Congress, 
and groping for some form of action which would provide mental and emotional 
satisfaction. When, therefore, the call of Gandhi came he could respond to 
it not merely at a political but at a human level. Long after, looking back on 
these fallow years, he remarked that it was the acceptance of Gandhi’s leader¬ 
ship, and the civil disobedience and jail-going which had followed, that had 
made a man of him. 4 Life now had meaning in the service of a cause. 


1 See his letter to A.M. Khwaja, 12 December 1917. 

2 Resolution moved by Jawaharlal at the U.P. Political Conference, TJ* laarfsr, 16 October 1918. 

J Motilal to Jawaharlal, 16 February 1919. 

4 Narendra Deva, ‘Favourite of Fortune', in Ntbnt Abbkumden Grtntb (New Delhi, 1949), 

p. 108. * 



3 

Immersion in Politics 


The Independent began its career with severe criticism of the Rowiatt Bills, 
whereby the Government of India established summary procedures for dealing 
with political agitation; and Jawaharlal did not rule out the possibility of his 
arrest. ‘That too would be preferable to the present state of doubt and despair.’ 1 
This did not happen. Jawaharlal was one of the signatories of the satyagraha 
vow, formulated by Gandhi, pledging refusal to obey cer tin laws, and, a mem¬ 
ber of the committee formed at Allahabad to organize satyagraha in that dis¬ 
trict and to get in touch with other districts to constitute a provincial com¬ 
mittee. 2 After the massacre at Amritsar, he assisted the Congress Inquiry 
Committee, and visited Amritsar and the Punjab to take depositions and 
collect material for the speeches in the Assembly of his father and Pandit 
Malaviya, a moderate Congress leader, about the actual firing, the atrocities 
under martial law and the ‘general misbehaviour of tommies’. 3 He also helped 
in relief work, though the Government believed that any distinction between 
such humanitarian effort and political agitation was fanciful. 4 The Allahabad 
Seva Samiti , or relief organization, raised over a lakh 5 of rupees for the work 
and Jawaharlal took some volunteers with him to the Punjab to help in organ¬ 
izing such relief. 6 A chance encounter with General Dyer on a train led to a 
classic piece of description: 


1 To Padmaja Naidu, 22 February 1919. 

*Tba Leader, 3 April 1919- Satyagraha, or ’truth-force', was Gandhi's name for his technique of 
passive resistance. 

* Notes on the Occurrence in the Punjab, April-June 1919. S.W., vol. 1, pp. 130-40. At 
Amritsar, General Dyer, dealing with civil disorder, had opened fire without warning on a large 
crowd that had inadequate means of dispersal, ordered that Indians could only crawl on their 
stomachs along a street in which an English woman had been attacked and had some persons 
whom he suspected of defiance of this order summarily whipped. 

4 Report on the political and economic situation in the Punjab for the fortnight ending 15 Sep¬ 
tember 1919. Hook Dept. Political Deposit, October 1919- Proceeding 59. 

* A lakh is one hundred thousand. 

•Note of the U.P. Criminal Investigation Dept., 18 December 1919. Home Dept. Pol. A., June 
1921, Proceedings 248-62. 


35 



36 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


The compartment I entered was almost full and all the berths except 
one upper one, were occupied by sleeping passengers. I took the vacant 
upper berth. In the morning I discovered that all my fellow-passengers 
were military officers. They conversed with each other in loud voices 
which I could not help overhearing. One of them was holding fbrth in an 
aggressive and triumphant tone and soon I discovered that he was Dyer, 
the hero of Jallianwala Bagh, 1 and he was describing his Amritsar ex¬ 
periences. He pointed out how he had the whole town at his mercy and 
he had felt like reducing the rebellious city to a heap of ashes, but he took 
pity on it and refrained. He was evidently coming back from Lahore after 
giving his evidence before the Hunter Committee of Enquiry. I was 
greatly shocked to hear his conversation and to observe his callous 
manner. He descended at Delhi station in pyjamas with bright pink 
stripes, and a dressing-gown. 2 

Jawaharlal wrote to the press in rather stilted language in defence of 
Malaviya and Motilal when the Punjab Government accused them of not 
substantiating their charge that some police officers had taken bribes. ‘It 
would be weariness to the flesh to controvert all the misstatements which 
Mr. Thompson managed to compress in his (wo speeches in Council.’ 3 Jawa¬ 
harlal met the Deputy Commissioner of Amritsar on 5 September on his 
father’s behalf and said the data in Motilal’s possession regarding police bribery 
would be disclosed on condition that those who had provided the evidence would 
be publicly assured immunity; but the Punjab Government were willing to give 
no more than private assurances. Jawaharlal also challenged the official figure 
that only 291 persons had been killed in the Jallianwala Bagh. A few days later 
Jawaharlal wrote another letter to the press pointing out that the ‘crawling 
order’ was not, as Gandhi had suggested, a ‘hands and knees’ order; people 
had in fact been made to crawl ‘on their bellies after the manner of snakes and 
worms’. 4 

Later that month, at the U.P. Political Conference at Saharanpur, Jawahar¬ 
lal moved the resolution protesting against the appointment of the official 
Hunter Commission and urging that it be replaced by an independent Royal 
Commission. If the Hunter Commission were to continue, at least one mem¬ 
ber of the Congress Committee should be co-opted to it, as the Indian members 
of the Hunter Commission had no local knowledge. Full opportunity should 
also be given to the people to present their case and counsel should appear on 
both sides. Instead of the Commission selecting whom it would hear, counsel 
should have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine, for it was the 

‘The garden et Amritsar which was the scene of the firing, 

* Autobiography, pp. 43*4. 

^Letter to the editor, 28 September 1919. The Bombay Chronicla, 2 October 1919. 

4 1 October 1919. The Bombay Chronicle, 6 October 1919. 



IMMERSION IN POLITICS 


37 


Government which was on trial. If these facilities were not granted, the Hunter 
Commission should -be boycotted. 1 

Yet, as in the case of Mahatma Gandhi and many others in India, it was not 
the happenings at Amritsar and the attitude of Dyer at the time and later before 
the official commission of inquiry which upset Jawaharlal as much as the re¬ 
action in England to these events. 'This cold-blooded approval of that deed’, 
he wrote many years later, 2 ‘shocked me greatly. It seemed absolutely immoral, 
indecent; to use public school language, it was the height of bad form. I realized 
then, more vividly than I had ever done before, how brutal and immoral impe¬ 
rialism was and how it had eaten into the souls of the British upper classes.’ Till 
now he had been in the stream of Indian moderate tradition, expecting favours 
from the benign British rulers; and his conversion was part of the general 
realization that freedom could never be a gift but only the achievement of 
struggle and resistance. 

In February 1920 Jawaharlal participated in the Allahabad district confer¬ 
ence at Bahadurganj, and in July he was elected vice-president of the Allahabad 
district congress committee. Meantime, Gandhi had taken up the cause of the 
Khilafat. To men like Jawaharlal, while active opposition to Government was 
welcome, such a prime facie religious issue did not fit in with their secular 
political attitude. So attempts were made in The Independent to provide political 
arguments for supporting the Khilafat movement. It was contended that the 
Caliph had been set aside because Britain and the other European powers wished 
to divide the Turkish Empire amongst themselves and the Khilafat movement 
was part of the political struggle for the freedom of Asia. The agitation in 
Allahabad city itself was intense. There was considerable fraternizing between 
Hindus and Muslims, 3 and the U.P. Government reported that ‘the extremists 
appear to have got most of the city on their side.’ 4 

,Motilal, however, disliked greatly the idea of boycott of the Councils and, 
not expecting that the Congress would accept this programme of Gandhi for 
non-co-operation, planned the election campaign in the United Provinces for 
the Congress against the Moderates. Jawaharlal helped in drafting the elec¬ 
tion manifesto, 3 and Motilal was seriously considering the choice of a suitable 
constituency for his son. 'You ought to select a constituency from which you 
are sure to be returned. I am more keen on your going into the Council than 
mine [«c].’ 6 He finally decided on Fatehpur and was disappointed that Jawa¬ 
harlal turned it down, preferring to follow Gandhi’s lead. ‘So far as your follow¬ 
ing the request of Gandhiji is concerned, there is nothing to be said. That is 

1 The'Leader, 22 October 1919 end The Independent, 24 October 1919. 

2 Article on the Quetta earthquake written in August 1933 and reprinted in India and the World 
(London, 1936), p. 147. 

1 The Independent, 12 October 1919. 

4 1 December 1919. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, June 1920, no. 44. 

* See Motilal to Gandhi, 23 April 1920. Gandhi papers. Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, Serial 
No. 7163. 

4 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 13 June 1920. 



38 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


more or less a matter of sentiment of a kind which does not enter into my 
composition.’ 1 

On 22 August the U.P. Congress Committee met at Motilal’s residence 
and resolved, with not more than two or three members voting against, that 
the usual methods of agitation hitherto followed were wholly insufficient to 
meet the intolerable situation created by official policy in regard to the Punjab 
and the Khilafat questions, and whole-heartedly recommended the principle 
of non-co-operation with the Government 'at the greatest sacrifice possible’. 
As regards the steps to be taken in the first stage of non-co-operation, it was 
decided after prolonged discussion to suggest the renunciation of titles, arbitra¬ 
tion instead of recourse to law courts, the promotion of national education by 
establishment of national schools and colleges and gradual withdrawal of 
students from Government institutions, resignation from all honorary non¬ 
elective posts in public bodies, refusal to buy government loans and attend 
official functions and boycott of British goods. The Committee then considered 
the boycott of councils. Jawaharlal pointed out that this could not mean enter¬ 
ing the councils even to obstruct but refusal either to participate in elections 
or to attend the councils after the elections. He expressed his own preference 
for boycott of even the elections, but finally the Committee recommended, by 
a narrow majority of about two, the boycott of councils, thus leaving open the 
question of participation in elections. 

Jawaharlal was satisfied. ‘The real question of principle, to my mind, was 
that we should not enter the Councils and take the oath of allegiance. The rest 
was a matter of tactics.’ But he regretted that the Committee had not gone 
further along the lines laid down by Gandhi and advocated total renunciation 
of legal practice, immediate withdrawal from educational institutions, and 
rejection even of elective places in official bodies. ‘I am an ardent believer in 
non-co-operation with all that it implies and I am firmly convinced that non- 
co-operation and no other course will bring us victory. That victory will not 
come in aday or a year, but come it will and must, ruat coelum. ’ 2 Later, a special 
session of the Congress decided by an overwhelming majority in favour of 
complete boycott of the councils and called on voters to abstain from voting. 

Motilal fell into line with no great enthusiasm. He knew that his destiny 
and that of his son were scrambled together, but he did not always relish it. 
Austerity and puritanism did not come naturally to him, and watching Jawa¬ 
harlal embrace Gandhian rigours caused him intense pain. ‘This is a time’, he 
remarked with tears when he saw Jawaharlal boarding a third-class railway 
compartment, ‘when he should be enjoying himself, but he has given up every¬ 
thing >nd has become a sadbu He gave up his legal practice at a time when 
his services were in demand in various parts of the country, and he was con¬ 
cerned about the future. ‘Have you had any time to attend to the poor cows in 

Anand Bhavan. Not that they are redly cows but have been reduced to the 

* 

* Idem, 3 July 1920. 

3 Letter to the editor, 1 Septe m ber 1920. Tb» Ltod*r, 4 September 1920. 

* Rajendra Prasad’* article in S.P. and P. ChaMani (eds.). Motikl Ntbm (Delhi, 1961), p. 7. 



IMMERSION IN POLITICS }9 

position of cows by nothing short of culpable negligence on your part and 
mine — I mean your mother, your wife, your child and your sisters? I do not 
know with what grace and reason we can claim to be working for the good of 
the masses — the country at large — when we fail egregiously to minister to 
the most urgent requirements of our own flesh and blood and those whose 
flesh and blood we are/ 1 The closing down of The Independent the next year 
became inevitable, and savings had to be counted. 

To live on public charity does not appeal to me even in the best interests 
of the motherland. I can easily kick away the lakhs and lakhs put before 
me but will die a thousand deaths before I come to the stage where 1 have 
to be supported by others. I am willing to undergo any sacrifice to be able 
to live within our means — but we must have some means within which 
to live. . . You can easily understand how I feel with all these matters 
troubling me and with the prospect of a beggarship after turning away 
from me a stream of gold flowing at my very feet. 2 

When Jawaharlal sought permission to transfer his war bonds worth Rs. 10,000 
to the Tilak Swaraj fund and meantime announced it as an'anonymous dona¬ 
tion in The Independent , Motilal in great irritation replied that he was plan¬ 
ning to resume practice. , 

i 

t 

Swaraj or no swaraj the one thing which I will not willingly permit is the 
possibility of any child or grandchild of mine having to depend for main¬ 
tenance on any other person in the world however near or dear, or that 
of their being a charge on the nation. If to avoid this it is necessary to 
make more money I would resume my practice today in spite of all that 
has happened ... I do not think that a man who is capable of starving 
his own children can be of much good to the nation. 

And he added brutally, stressing that it was his affluence that made possible 
Jawaharlal’s political involvement: ‘You cannot have it both ways: Insist on my 
having no money and yet expect me to pay you money/ 3 

These financial worries, however, Jawaharlal left to his father. Gandhi had 
at last given India a lead in action, and Jawaharlal was enthusiastic. His main 
preoccupation was the task of organizing non-co-operation in the U.P., and 
he was soon among its recognized leaders. To introduce some discipline into 
the movement, he organized drill for the volunteers and had plans for linking 
up the various local organizations. He was elected President of the Etah district 
Congress conference; and though the Government banned the procession and 
sought to‘prevent the conference, Jawaharlal was welcomed by large crowds 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 16 September 1920. 

2 Idem, 19 September 1920. 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 June 1921. 



40 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


at every wayside station and he delivered his address as scheduled. 1 No report 
of his speech exists, but the general tenor of his advocacy can be gleaned from 
a speech he delivered to students at Allahabad a few weeks later. It was not, 
he said, a time to weigh losses and gains; to enter the movement with a mathe¬ 
matical mind would only be to hinder it. The existing system had Jp be destroy¬ 
ed; there was no middle course left; oik was with either the pountiy or its 
enemies, either with Gandhi or with the Government. If on account of their 
lack of enthusiasm the cause was defeated, future generations would curse 
them. 2 

The hold which Gandhi had acquired on Jawaharlal and which he was never 
to lose is, at first view, incongruous. Gandhi was Christ-like in his seizure of 
men; but his conversion of Jawaharlal is capable of rational explanation. What 
appealed to the younger manwas Gandhi’s strength, his rock-like commitment 
to India's freedom, the way in which he had perfected his character and person¬ 
ality so as to make himself an effective instrument of political change in India 
— ’Indian leadership, Indian style’. He was.above all a man of action, of enor¬ 
mous restlessness and energy, with a will to power and a touch of ruthlessness. 
He functioned with a shrewd grasp of whatever context he found himself in, 
and was a saint who placed his halo at the service of his secular aspirations. He 
repeatedly stressed that God appears not in person but in action. Throughout 
his life he functioned primarily in politics; and if, curious about his body 
and his spirit, he experimented constantly, he acknowledged that it was from 
'experiments in the spiritual field that I derived such power as I possess for 
working in the political field’. 

’ It was this primacy of action, and successful action at that, that throughout 
Gandhi’s life retained Jawaharlal ultimately in thrall. At this time he was quite 
captivated and, along with Gandhi’s political leadership, willingly accepted all 
his other teachings. As the years passed, Jawaharlal realized that Gandhi had 
no use for systematic thinking on economic problems and that, while he had 
secured a hold on the masses by living and working among them and being ab¬ 
sorbed by them, he made no effort to inspire and rouse then^on anything other 
than political and social reform movements. But still he clung to Gandhi; and 
this one-to-one relationship, in which Gandhi specialized, was based on the 
call to battle with alien rule which Gandhi gave. 

Jawaharlal’s first direct dash with the Government, however, came about 
in an entirely fortuitous way and had nothing to do with Gandhi. In the summer 
of 1920, he had taken the family up to Mussoorie, a hill station, and was spend¬ 
ing hiS time teaching his wife and sisters when, as he wrote to his father, 3 great¬ 
ness was thrust on him by the Government. An Afghan delegation was staying 
at the same hotel and the authorities well knew that Jawaharlal had, during 
the period of over a fortnight when he was there, not seen anything of them. 

1 The Independent, 1 October 1920. 

t Ibid.. 14 November 1920. % 

314 M«y 1920. S.W., vol. 1, p. 161. 



IMMERSION IN POLITICS 


41 


Yet suddenly the local superintendent of police called on him and asked him 
either to furnish a positive undertaking not to get into touch with the Afghan 
delegation or to leave Mussoorie on his own. The police official was, in fact, 
carrying out a decision of the Government of India. Alarmed by the rumours 
in the Punjab that the Afghan delegation had come to India to support the 
Khilafat movement with which the Anilr was believed to be in full sympathy, 
suspecting even men like Rajagopalachari, an extremely conservative follower 
of Gandhi, of pro-Bolshevik sympathies and of clandestine contacts with emigri 
Indians in Afghanistan and the Soviet Union, 1 and disturbed by the police 
report that Indian malcontents were flocking to Mussoorie, the Home Depart¬ 
ment drew up a list of twenty-three persons who should be excluded from 
Mussoorie. 2 Jawaharlal’s name was on this list, and it was then realized that 
he was already in Mussoorie. The police at once jumped to the conclusion that 
the purpose of his visit was to secure an interview with the Afghans. Hence 
the sudden visit of the police officer. 

Jawaharlal, faced with this unnecessary provocation, refused to bind him¬ 
self not to meet the Afghans or to leave Mussoorie on his own. However, he 
departed after an expulsion order had been served on him. He made no effort 
to resist expulsion, nor, on his return to the plains, did he seek to break the 
order and return to Mussoorie — inaction which pleased his father. 

We have in all conscience suffered enough during the last six months 
and I would not court further trouble by a provocative act. The consequ¬ 
ences are so obvious both from the public and private points of view that 
it is hardly necessary to discuss them. It will mean the final break up of 
the family and the upsetting of all private, public and professional work. 
One thing will lead to another and something is sure to turn up which 
will compel me to follow you to the jail or something similar. I would 
leave well alone. We have certainly scored so far and should wait for 
further developments. 3 

It is hard to believe that the Jawaharlal of later years would have so mildly 
complied with such an ‘insensate’ 4 order and been satisfied with a mere refusal 
to give an undertaking. Even at this time, when there was a deterioration in 
his mother’s health, he might have returned to Mussoorie in defiance of the 
order and courted arrest, had not the U.P. Government, genteel as ever, with¬ 
drawn the order in view, as they said, of the health of the ladies of the family. 


> Weekly Reports of the Special Bureau of Information, 1920, cited in Z. Imam, Colonialism 
in East-West Rotations (New Delhi, 1969), p. 70? 

fJVote of the Home Dept.; C.I.D. report from Mussoorie, 28 April; Home Secretary to Chief 
Secretary U.P., telegram 1 May 1920. Home Dept. Pol. B. Confidential, June 1920, nos. 165-6. 

*Motilal to Jawaharlal, 3 June 1920. J. Nehru, A Bunch of Old lattors (Delhi, 1958), p. 12. 
*Tba Independent, 19 May 1920. 



4 


Among the Peasants 


More crucial to Jawaharlal’s development than his expulsion was his involve¬ 
ment in the peasant unrest in the United Provinces. The importance of bringing 
the peasants, with their tradition of agitation, into the national movement had 
been underlined by Gandhi's successful organization of resistance to the 
indigo planters in Champaran in Bihar in T917; and towards the end of that 
year Malaviya and a few others in Allahabad established the United Provinces 
Kisan Sabha (peasant association). The sponsors are in themselves testimony 
to the moderate objectives of this association; and it was reported that the 
Home Rule League had provided Rs 4,000 for its organization. 1 Its avowed 
objectives were fo check the growing antagonism between peasants and 
zamindars (landowners) and establish friendly relations, educate the peasants 
and inform them of their political and social rights, promote legislation benefi¬ 
cial to them and amend statutes prejudicial to their interests, protect them 
from unlawful actions, establish village panchayats (councils), further mutual 
trust and cordiality between the rulers and the ruled and adopt such constitu¬ 
tional measures as might be conducive to their welfare. Branches of the Kisan 
Sabha were set up in many villages and tehsils (revenue sub-divisions) and 
attempts were made to establish similar organizations in other provinces and 
link them up with the National Congress. Peasant delegates were mustered in 
considerable numbers at the Congress sessions of 1918 -and 1919, by which 
time Gandhi had led another peasant campaign, this time against the Govern¬ 
ment, at Kaira in Gujarat. At the Congress session in 1919, the U.P. Kisan 
Sabha submitted a draft resolution which was surprisingly radical, urging the 
Government, among other things, to declare peasants all over India to be 
actual owners of the soil they cultivated; but the Congress did no more than 
direct the All-India Congress Committee (AICC) to investigate the various 
revenue systems and the condition of the peasantry. 

The special cause of agrarian distress in Avadh (Oudh) was the inelastic 

iCircular No. 3 of the Criminal .Investigation Department, United Provinces. Borne Dept. 
Pm. Deposit, January 1920, no. 49. 


42 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


43 


Rent Act of 1886 which forbade landlords to enhance rents by more than one 
. anna in the rupee *once every seven years. Gearly, with the great rise in prices 
of consumer goods, landlords would try to circumvent the rigidity of the stat¬ 
ute by demanding payment of other dues; and the lack of occupancy rights ena¬ 
bled them to collect these dues by holding out the threat of eviction. Actual 
evictions were frequent, both because landlords saw an advantage, with the 
rising price of foodgrains, in cultivating the land themselves and enforcing 
their customary right to free or ill-paid labour, and because, with the apparent 
imminence of an amendment of the law granting fixity of tenure, it appeared 
worth while to terminate tenancy of any duration. In Pratabgarh district, for 
example, there were 936 notices for eviction in 1906-7; this figure rose to 
1,238 in 1911-12, 1,403 in 1916-17 and 2,593 in 1919-20. But more often 
the threat to evict was utilized to compel the tenant to pay higher cesses or 
nazarana in addition to the rent; and this had become a regular form of income 
to the landlords. Tenants could only secure renewals of their leases by borrow¬ 
ing heavily from money-lenders or from their relatives — or from the landlords 
themselves — in order to pay nazarana. ‘Fathers have sold their daughters for 
nazarana money to husbands of advanced years/ 2 Sometimes the holding was 
divided into two parts and settled with two competitors both of whom had paid 
substantial nayirana; and frequently a lease was terminated because another 
bidder had made a more tempting offer. 

However, these kisans (peasants), never wholly lacking in some form of 
power in at least some estates, 3 were no longer unaware of anything better; 
and there was a growing resentment at working for, ami paying heavy cesses 
to, distant and unknown landowners at the bidding of foul-mouthed middle¬ 
men. Nor was there much faith left in the efficacy of the law courts as a means 
of obtaining redress, it being firmly believed that a poor man had no chance 
against a rich one in a contest in the courts; ‘and who will say that there is not 
some truth in this under the system of civil and criminal justice as it has come 
to be practised in India? 4 

The situation was particularly critical in Pratabgarh district. The popula¬ 
tion here was unusually dense, being 1.82 per cultivated acre as against 1.68 
in Fyzabad and 1.7 in Sultanpur; and the figure appears more striking when it 
is remembered that there were no towns in Pratabgarh district with a popula¬ 
tion larger than 6,000. On the other hand, large tracts of land in the district 
were barren, and only 53.3 per cent of the total area was under cultivation as 
against 55.9 per cent in Sultanpur, and 61.8 per cent in Fyzabad. So there was 
a keen competition for land, and this enabled the landlords, who, as the 

•At this time there were 16 annas in the rupee. 

2 Report of V. N. Mehta, Deputy Commissioner, Pratabgarh, November 1920. Revenue De¬ 
partment, File 733 of 1920. U. P. archives at Lucknow. 

’Musgrave, op. dt., p. 273. 

« Report by a C.I.D. officer on the kisan sabba in Allahabad, January 1921, Home Dept. Pol., 
February 1921, no. 13. 





THE UNITED PROVINCES Before 1947 

(Towns marked without names bear-the same names as the districts) 






46 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Commissioner recognized, 1 Were in this district a particularly poor lot, to 
demand exorbitant nazarana. 

The social composition of Pratabgarh district was also somewhat un¬ 
common. 11.3 per cent of the population was composed of Kurmis, a low caste 
who could not muster the resistance to the exactions of landlords Which high- 
caste tenantry were generally able to do. They had to pay a higher rental than 
Brahmin or Kshatriya tenants. 2 Nor were there underproprietors to act as a 
breakwater between the landlords and these low-caste tenants. While, for 
example, in Sultanpur there were many ..nants of the same caste as the land¬ 
lords who enjoyed a certain measure of protection from the head of the family, 
in Pratabgarh the Kurmis had to deal directly with the landlords. 

However, if the repression of the tenants was more severe in Pratabgarh 
than in other districts of Avadh, there were other balancing reasons which 
made a peasant outbreak more probable here than elsewhere. The Kurmis had 
a tradition of defiance; as far back as 1867 they had risen in revolt, and they 
had never lost their social coherence and capacity for organization. It was of 
course easier to organize concerted action within a caste, however low, than 
to draw tenants of high and low caste together. Moreover, the Kurmi peasants 
of Pratabgarh could not fail to notice the occupancy rights enjoyed by the 
tillers, after twelve years of continuous cultivation, in the neighbouring dis¬ 
tricts of Allahabad and Jaunpur (which were part of the Agra division); and 
their kinsmen in these districts were reluctant to enter into marriage relations 
with persons who might overnight be reduced to the level of beggars at the 
whim of their landlord. 3 The proximity of Allahabad city was also a source of 
strength, for the tenants of Pratabgarh could derive leadership and advice 
from urban politicians, who had by now begun to realize the value to them of 
peasant support. 

Trouble began in Pratabgarh from April 1920, the beginning of the season 
of notices of eviction and of ejectment. At first the leadership of the Kurmis of 
Pratabgarh was assumed by a millenarian figure of shadowy antecedents, Baba 
Ram Chandra, who addressed large crowds, calling on them to stand up for 
their rights and resist the landlords, to pay their rents but not illegal cesses. 
He then, in June 1920, led about 500 of his followers to Allahabad in the hope 
of meeting Gandhi. They failed to find Gandhi, but instead met Jawaharlal, 
who happened to be there because of his expulsion from Mussoorie, and per¬ 
suaded him to return with them to Pratabgarh. So casual circumstance thrust 
Jawaharlal into the problem of the Indian peasantry and gave a new and perma¬ 
nent dimension to his outlook. The tranquil firmness of these men, living 

1 H.R.C.Hailey toM. Keane, 26November 1920. Revenue Dept. File 733 of 1920. U.P. archives. 
J M. H. Siddiqi, The Peasant Movement in Pratabgarh, 1920', Indian Economic and Social 
History Raviaw, September 1972, pp. 316-17. 

5 Commissioner, Fyzabad division to Chief Secretary U. P., 23 November 1920. Revenue Dept. 
File 733 of 1920. U. P. archives. ♦ • 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


47 


often below the margin of subsistence but never being overcome, impressed 
him profoundly. 

I have had the privilege of working for them, of mixing with them, of 
living in their mudhuts and partaking in all reverence of their lowly fare. 
And I, who for long believed in the doctrine of the sword, have been 
converted by the kisans to the doctrine of non-violence. I have come to 
believe that non-violence is ingrained in them and is part of their very 
nature. 1 

Jawaharlal now gave publicity to the grievances of the kisans, objecting 
even to donations to the proposed University of Lucknow by estates under the 
management of the Court of Wards. ‘It is bad enough for illegal exactions and 
oppression to take place in the domains of illiterate and self-seeking talukdars 
who manage their own estates. It is far worse for the Government as repre¬ 
sented by the Court of Wards to encourage such practices.’ 2 But in Pratabgarh 
itself, where he was accompanied by Gauri Shankar Misra, a follower of 
Pandit Malaviya and much more conservative even than the Jawaharlal of those 
days, the general effect of their presence was, as the Commissioner acknow¬ 
ledged, ‘to bring a number of vague demands into a coherent shape and to a 
certain extent to moderate it’. 3 They encouraged the peasants to organize 
themselves into village kisan sabhas and to formulate their demands for re¬ 
strictions on evictions and forced labour, leases for fourteen years, payment of 
cesses at only customary rates, cessation of fines and free access to landlords — 
demands which could hardly be regarded as extreme. When the authorities 
arrested a few kisans for ‘highhandedness’, Jawaharlal and another colleague 
from Allahabad, Purushottam Das Tandon, met the Deputy Commissioner 
and, while not approving of the conduct of the men arrested, suggested that 
the cases be withdrawn so that the relations between zamindars and tenants 
might not worsen. 4 

By now, however, with the non-co-operation movement in full swing, 
Jawaharlal began to feel that some of his colleagues were taking their modera¬ 
tion too far. They had set up, with the blessings of the district authorities, a 
Kisan Hitkarini Sabba, ostensibly to serve as a forum for landlords and ten¬ 
ants to discuss and settle their problems; but Jawaharlal had no use for it. ‘Its 
sole function appears to be to collect a few talukdars and their dependents and 
then to curse with bell, book and candle the irresponsible agitators who have 
the effronteiy to visit the tenantry. I have little doubt that this must be a com¬ 
forting, though somewhat fruitless, operation. Unhappily the agitators are 

1 'The Ree Bareli Tragedy', W» IiuUptndtnt, 22 January 1921. 

2 Letter to the Editor, 27 June 1920, published in The IiuUftuUnt, 3 July 1920. 

’Hailey to Keane, 26 November 1920, Revenue Dept. File 753 of 1920 U. P. archives. 

4 Report of V. N. Mehta, ibid. 



48 


JAWAtfARLAL NEHRU 


little affected by it. They continue to flourish.' 1 What, in fact, Jawaharlai 
hoped for was to link kisan discontent with nationalist politics. He had made 
no study of economic and land problems and he had no clear ideas about pea¬ 
sant participation. It was not his intention to provide a revolutionary dimen¬ 
sion to Indian nationalism. But this contact with the kisan* was satisfying 
psychologically, as it gave him the, feeling that he was re-Indianizing himself 
and functioning in a wholly Indian situation; and politically it was important, 
for it provided an opportunity to do in his own province what Gandhi had done 
elsewhere, harnessing peasant strength in the interests of the Congress. 

Pratabgarh and Rae Bareli were more suited for Jawaharlal’s effort than 
Allahabad district itself, for there the presence of many Muslim landlords 
would give communal overtones to any kisan agitation, and this was hardly 
to be desired while the Khilafat agitation was at its height. At a meeting held 
in Pratabgarh in October to federate the numerous village sabhas into an 
Oudh Kisan Sabba, the objectives were defined, in a harmless enough manner, 
as being to improve the condition of the tenantry,,to promote amity between 
khans and zamindars, to do everything to advance the cause of the country and 
to establish panchayats for the settlement of all disputes between tenants. The 
Deputy Commissioner attended the meeting;* but was obliged to walk out 
when Jawaharlai advised his kisan audience to boycott elections to the Coun¬ 
cils and stressed that the only moral to be drawn from the Punjab and Khilafat 
events was that the Government was an utterly unjust one which cased little 
for the lives, honour and even the religion of the Indian people. The non-co- 
operation programme was approved by the Sabba and the Congress urged to 
'stick to it'. 2 But this effort to associate the kisan sabhas with the Congress 
programme led to a split in the parent U.P. Khan Sabba itself. At a meeting 
of its executive committee held on 24 October 1920 a majority of its members 
refused to subscribe to non-co-operation and decided to remain neutral on tke 
issue; 3 and by February 1921 there were two U.P. Kisan Sabhas, each claim¬ 
ing to be the legitimate organization. 

Throughout the winter months of 1920-21 the efforts to harness tenant 
power* to the non-co-operation movement continued. Jawaharlai spoke to 
large kisan audiences and was struck above all by their discipline. 4 Gandhi 
himself visited Pratabgarh in November — though in his case the motivation 
on this occasion was alleged to have been not so much to draw in the peasants 

1 Letter to the Editor, 22 September; Tib« Leader, 23 September 1920. 

3 Report in The Independent, 27 October 1920; P.D. Reeves, ‘The Politics of Order’, Journal of 
Asian Studies, February 1966, p. 263. 

* The Leader, 28 October! 1920, quoted in Reeves, op. tit.; letter of I. N. Dwivedi in The Leader, 
21 February 1921. 

4 Many years later he recounted an incident that occurred at this time. While speaking, he noticed 
people pushing and elbowing each other, though still remaining seated. Irritated by this behaviour, 
he asked that section of the crowd what was worrying them and they replied, Them is a snake 
here, but we dare not stand up, because the organism’s have ordered us not to do so while you are 
speaking.’ Speech at Calcutta, reported in the Free Press Journal (Bodtbay), 12 November 1936. 






\ 



* 

.1 


2 Jawaharlal as a boy, with his mother and father 






(j Swaraj Hhawan, the home ol the Nelirus until 11)28 


7 Attain! Bltawan, the house built by Motilal Nehru in Allahabad 











AMONG THE PEASANTS 


49 


as to frighten the landlords into supporting the Congress. 1 The Kisan Con* 
gross, meeting at Fyzabad in December, attracted more persons from a few dis¬ 
tricts than the National Congress meeting at Nagpur attracted horn the whole 
of India. The landlords also helped by utilizing what they believed was their 
last opportunity to push through a rush of enhancements. This enraged the 
lower tenantry, who were now joined by landless labourers, suddenly caught 
by the rise in prices and diminished prospects of employment. 2 

The distress which, as even discerning officials realized, was genuine and 
very great, began to assume political overtones. 

The Indian peasants’ chief idea about the war is that they supplied the 
men and the money and the zamindars got the credit. Government took 
their money and issued them bits of paper instead. It will be noticed that 
these notions distinctly smack of Bolshevism, and it would be interesting 
to know whether they are in some way the indirect result of Bolshevik 
propaganda, or have arisen from the same causes as have produced them 
in other countries. The Bolshevik idea is also rapidly spreading ... that 
it is the cultivators who plough, sow, irrigate and reap and are thus en* 
titled to the whole of the produce of the land. There is no need of, and 
no right to be, such things as zamindars. Here again the contention of 
the cultivators is very hard to refute, as there is no denying the fact that 
the Indian landlord is singularly backward in the performance of his 
duties. 3 

It was still, however, not the Congress nor their own strength but the 
Government whom the kisans looked to for an improvement of their condi¬ 
tion. Their discontent was entirely with the landlords and was not in any 
way anti-British or anti-Government. Their objectives might have seemed 
Bolshevik to alarmed officials; but their methods were as yet the opposite 
of revolutionary. ‘They have their grievances and their miseries and it is up 
to Government to put things right. There is no other power under Heaven 
that can save them.’ 4 The vast majority of cultivators still sought a redress 
of their grievances from the authorities. 3 The kisans did not seem to be inte¬ 
rested in non-co-operation, and at a kisan meeting in Lucknow, when Jawahar- 
Ial began his speech by explaining the significance of non-co-operation, the 

‘See Weekly Report of Director, Intelligence Bureau, 11 January 1921. Home Dept. Pol. 
Deposit, January 1921, Proceeding no. 73. 

J C. A. Bayly, The Development of Political Organization in the Allahabad Locality 1880 
1923', Oxford D.Phtl. thesis, 1970. pp. 369-70. 

* Report by a CLD. officer on the kisan sabba in Allahabad, January 1921. Home Dept. Pol., 
February 1921, not 13. 

«Ibid. 

* Report Cf the Director, Intelligence Bureau, 11 January 1921, Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, 
January 1921, no. 73; Sir H. Butler’s speech to U.P. Legislative Council, Tba Laedar, 24 January 
1921. This Is a c o mm o n feature of peasant revolts. Engels noted that the Russian peasants often 



50 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


audience, according to official reports, 1 melted away. The most that the Kisan 
Sabhas could do was to secure the defeat of some zamindar candidates in the 
elections of December 1920. But the U. P. Government threw away its chance 
and, by its reckless handling of the situation, gave a strong fillip to the move 
ment, so that throughout the year 1921 many districts in Avadh wejae shaken 
by explosions of agrarian unrest. 

Early in January local ruffians in Rae Bareli district took advantage of 
the tension to burn crops grown on the sir (personal) lands of the zamindars 
and to loot shops in the bazaars; and there was probably some ground for the 
belief that a few of these miscreants had been encouraged by the zamindars 
themselves in order to bring the kisans and their organizations into disrepute. 
On the 5th three of the kisan leaders were arrested, and a large crowd began 
to drift towards Rae Bareli town in the hope of seeing these leaders. Encourage¬ 
ment for this move was provided by the deputy commissioner’s assurance to the 
kisans that he would listen at Rae Bareli to their grievances which had been 
heightened by the failure of the kharif{ autumn) harvest and the holding off 
of the winter rains. However, on the 6th the police opened fire on a crowd at 
Fursatganj, ten miles to the east of Rae Bareli, killing between four and six 
people; and the next day there was heavy firing at Munshiganj, two miles 
south of the town, with at least nine dead and a large number wounded. 

On both occasions the authorities had clearly panicked. At Munshiganj 
neither the deputy commissioner nor the superintendent of police had given 
the order to fire, and it was generally believed that the firing had been started by 
the local talukdar, on a crowd which was not interested in looting and had done 
no more than throw a few stones. Butler, the Lieutenant-Governor, reported 
to the Government of India that ‘the Deputy Commissioner was a poet and had 
lost his head’; 2 and to avoid his cross-examination in court the U.P. Govern¬ 
ment decided not to prosecute The Independent for its scathing articles on these 
events. It would have been difficult to explain away what even the deputy com¬ 
missioner accepted, that a large proportion of the injuries received by members 
of the crowd were in the back. 3 But to the public it was pretended that the firings 
alone had saved the whole of the south of Rae Bareli district from widespread 
looting and the rapid attainment of a state of anarchy; and Butler sent a telegram 
of congratulations to the district authorities and the talukdar. 

It was the wanton firing on the 7 th near Rae Bareli which brought the kisans 
into direct collision with the authorities. Even the crowd at Fursatganj on the 

revolted against the nobility but never against the Tsar. Chinese historians speak of a ‘peasant 
monarchism', the peasants being unable to conceive of any alternative to seeking salvation from 
an emperor. See J. P. Harrison, The Communists and Chinese Peasant Rebellions (New York, 
1969), pp. 184-5. 

‘Chief Secretary U. P. to Home Secretary, 2 January 1921. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, February 
1921, no. 77. 

2 Butler to Vincent, Home Member, 10 March 1921. Home Dept. Pol., July 1921, no. 3 
(confidential) & K.W. 

* Report of A. C Shirreff, 29 January 1921. Home Dept. General File 50 of l$2l, U. P. archives. 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


51 


6th was not a gathering of peasants but ‘a mob of rioters out for loot*. 1 A first¬ 
hand account in The Independent asserted that the 'kisan sabhas are not in the 
least concerned with the disturbances, for which a few confirmed vagabonds 
and convicts are responsible’. 2 However, to many officials the differences be¬ 
tween dacoits, kisans and non-co-operators were becoming increasingly blurred. 
‘Ignorant peasantry’, alleged a Government communique, ‘had been persuaded 
by perambulating agitators that not only talukdar but British raj would shortly 
cease to exist and that under the beneficent rule of Mr Gandhi they would 
enter on a golden age of prosperity in which they would be able to buy good 
cloth at 4 annas per yard and other necessaries of life at similar cheap rates.’ 3 

This confusion in the official outlook suited the talukdars; but it worried the 
kisan representatives, some of whom came to see Jawaharlal at Allahabad on 
the 5th and requested him to visit the Rae Bareli district. Jawaharlal was reluc¬ 
tant, as he had just returned from the Congress session at Nagpur; nor was he 
willing to see the Congress and kisan organizations associated with the looting 
that had occurred. But on hearing from a well-known citizen of Rae Bareli the 
next day that the situation was serious, and knowing that the local kisans had 
no capable leader, Jawaharlal left by the night train, reaching Rae Bareli at 
2 p.m. on the 7 th. He then heard of the firing at Fursatganj the previous day, 
and of the confrontation between the officials and the large kisan crowd at 
Munshigan j. He promptly went to the scene with the intention of directing the 
crowd to disperse, and told the kisans he met on the way to go home. But mean¬ 
time he received a pencilled note from the deputy commissioner: ‘Pt Jawahar¬ 
lal Nehru. You are hereby informed that your presence in this district is not 
desired—you are directed to leave by the next train.’ Jawaharlal sent his reply 
on the back of the slip: ‘I should like to know if this is a formal order or a 
mere request. If it is the former then it should be drawn up in a formal manner 
mentioning the section etc. Until such an order is served on me I propose to 
remain here.’ Stopped by policemen from crossing a bridge on the other side 
of which the firing was taking place, Jawaharlal addressed such of the kisans 
as came across, impressing on them the need to be both non-violent and fearless. 
It was obviously a deep experience for Jawaharlal. 

They behaved as brave men, calm and unruffled in the face of danger. 

1 do not know how they felt but I know what my feelings were. For a 

moment my blood was up, non-violence was almost forgotten — but for 

a moment only. The thought of the great leader, who by God’s goodness 

'Report of J. A. Perron, I.C.S. Home Dept. General, File 50/1921 K.W.S., U. P. archives. 

2 The Independent, 12 January 1921. 

'Quoted in The Bombay Chronicle, 14 January 1921. The Lieutenant-Governor also, eager to 
dear the talukdars of responsibility for agrarian distress and the Government tor their clumsy 
handling of the situation, encouraged this kind of sloppy thinking. 'The agrarian disturbances 
which were largely due to local agitators acting as non-co-operators have been firmly dealt with 
and order has been.restored.' Butler's Minute 9 March 1921. Home Dept. Pol., July 1921, no. 5 
(Confidential) and K.W. 



52 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


has been sent to lead us to victory, came to me, and 1 saw the kisans seated 
and standing near me, less excited, more peaceful than I was — and the 
moment of weakness passed. I spoke to them in all humility on non* 
violence — I who needed the lesson more than they — and they heeded 
me and peacefully dispersed. On the other side of the river, hqwever, 
men lay dead and dying. It was a similar crowd with a similar object. Yet 
they poured their hearts* blood before they would disperse. 1 

The deputy commissioner, who had by now come back across the bridge, 
sent for Jawaharlal and informed him that meetings were prohibited. Though 
aware that Jawaharlal was using his influence against violent agitation, yet the 
officials were unwilling to let him speak to the crowd; for as they said to him, 
they were not there to increase his prestige. 2 Jawaharlal, abiding by this order, 
dissolved the meeting after addressing it for a few minutes. The deputy com¬ 
missioner thanked Jawaharlal for his talk which had had a good effect on the 
kisans, and took Jawaharlal in his car, along with the local talukdar , to his 
house, where they had a desultory, inconsequential conversation. Told that 
every effort to disperse the kisans had been in vain, Jawaharlal replied that he 
perhaps might have succeeded where they had failed. 3 

The Rae Bareli firing was of major significance. The sense of tenant wrong 
had converged with an awareness of tenant strength. ‘For the first time in his¬ 
tory, they had begun to realize the power of an united peasantry — to realize 
that they themselves had the remedy of the most flagrant of their wrongs, the 
illegal exactions of their landlords, in their own hands. If they stood together, 
nazarana, began and other oppressive taxes would automatically cease.’ 4 And 
in the exercise of this new-found power, they had now the leadership of the 
Congress, whose influence over the kisans had been strengthened by the Gov¬ 
ernment: ‘there is nothing to choose locally between a gathering under the 
auspices of the kisan sabha or of the Khilafat Committee. Both movements 
appear to have been completely captured by the non-co-operating party, and 
there is one movement only in progress at the present time and that is the non- 
co-operation movement.’ 5 

Joined by his father the next day, Jawaharlal visited the wounded in hospital 
and then left for Allahabad. His dispatches, signed and unsigned, to The 
Independent were sharply critical of the Government and the local talukdar, 
but his conduct at Rae Bareli itself was far from being that of a ‘firebrand’, 6 as 

*The Rae Bareli Tragedy’, Tb a lnd*p*nd*nt, 22 January 1921.* 

2 See Jawaharlal’s article in Tb* lndtp*nd*»t, 23 January 1921. 

* Report of Shirreff, 29 January 1921, Hone Dept. General File 30 of 1921. U. P. archive*; 
evidence of Jawaharlal in Pratap defamation case, Tb a Ind*p*nd*nt, 6 July 1921. 

4 Report of J. A. St John Faraon, 19 January 1921, General Dept. File 50/1921. K.W., U. P. 
archives. Btgtri was forced labour. 

1 Report of S. R. Mayers, District Superintendent of Police, Rae Bareli, 23 February 1921. IHd. 
*Tb* Ind*p*nd*nt, 11 January 1921. 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


53 


the deputy commissioner had expected before his arrival. This implied that 
Jawaharlal would stir the kisans- to further violence and give them a wider 
cause. But he had at this time no economic ideology to offer, and he had certain¬ 
ly no intent of securing any weapons for these kisans to sustain their revolt. 
His whole influence was thrown on the side of moderation, in urging the kisans 
to be quiet and peaceful, to abide by whatever orders were issued by the local 
officials and to go back to their homes. A few days later, when disturbances 
began in Fyzabad division, where too, as in Pratabgarh, the small tenants were 
low-caste men employed by Brahmin zamindars , he went to Unchahar to call 
off the meeting, which had been announced long before to inform the kisans 
of the decisions of the Nagpur Congress, and persuaded the kisans who had 
collected from various parts of Avadh to disperse; 1 and the commissioner 
arranged for their free transport to their home by train. 2 The Finance Member 
of the U.P. Government noted smugly that ‘it looks as if the agitators were 
getting cold feet'. 3 

Then, when news came in of sporadic renewal of looting, Jawaharlal was 
asked by local leaders to visit Fyzabad district; and he addressed large meetings 
exhorting kisans , if they were serious and earnest about sitfaraj, to take a pledge 
not to resort to violence or looting. 4 Often, after he had spoken, men got up to 
confess to looting, knowing well that this would lead to their arrest. At Akbar- 
pur, criticizing the 'babas’ or messianic leaders like Ram Chandra and his imi¬ 
tators who were preaching extremism, Jawaharlal warned the kisans not to 
believe that every person in coloured clothes was a real sadhu and a messenger 
of Gandhi; for Gandhi would never advise irreligious or unlawful activities. 
Those who had taken part in dacoities should purge themselves of their sin by 
expressing their sympathy with those robbed and their hatred of the robbers. 
Every kisan should take a vow not to rob anyone or abuse anybody. 5 Jawaharlal 
glamorized the kisans and saw them as brave men uncontaminated by city life 
or text-book education; but he was not deeply moved by their economic wretch¬ 
edness. He saw in them a sturdy peasantry which would be the backbone of a 
successful nationalist movement, and he wished to enlist them wholly for the 
political struggle as it was being waged by the Congress; but he did not envisage 
the co-ordination of these scattered outbursts against local misery and the devel¬ 
opment of a large-scale peasant revolt and even perhaps a revolution. He agreed 
with Gandhi and the other leaders of the Congress that the kisans should pay 
their rents and devote their full attention to the non-violent smuggle for swafuj. 
When one local agitator advised the kisans not to pay rent, the kisan sabba 

1 Tbt Ind*p*nd*nt, 18 January 1921. 

2 Commissioner, Fyzabad ro Chief Secretary, 14 January 1921. General Administration Dept. 
File 50/1921-K.W.S., U. P. archives. 

J General Dept, File 50-3/1921. U. P. archives. 

<Tb» Indspmdsnt, 26 January 1921. 

* See report of Akbarpur Conference enclosed with Commissioner’s letter to Chief Secretary, 
27 January 1921. General Dept. File 50/1921 K.W. U. P. archives. 



54 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


informed the authorities that they had nothing to do with him. 1 Indeed, later 
Jawaharlal even preached kisan-zamindar unity ; 2 and on the issue of eject¬ 
ment, which, more than any other, agitated the kisans of the U. P., all he could 
say was that this was but a minor part of the major issue of ejectment of the 
British from India. 3 ' # 

At this time Jawaharlal had not considered carefully whether economic 
and social change should be part of, or even parallel to, the political revolution; 
and he was willing to accept without thought the suggestion that economic 
issues should not be allowed to hinder political activity. His idea of freedom 
was purely political — ridding the British of their control over finance, the 
army and the police. Freedom was spinning, the wearing of hand-spun cloth, 
justice, prohibition, removal of untouchability and all such moral virtues; 
and foreign rule was the opposite of these. 4 There was very little economic 
connotation. But even this concept of ‘politics in command’ was narrow and 
limited. The kisan sabhasoi the Congress during this period were very different 
from Mao’s peasant Associations in China a few years later. These associations 
did not undertake drastic land reforms but they at least organized the peasants 
and attacked the social domination of the landlords. Jawaharlal’s political ideas 
in these years tended in the same direction, for they were a curious, unformed 
mixture of anarchism and village government, of Gandhi and Bertrand Russell. 
Representative institutions and democracy as found in Western countries had 
proved failures, and the problem was to free democracy from the malign in¬ 
fluences of capital, property, militarism and an overgrown bureaucracy. Ortho¬ 
dox socialism also did not give much hope, and the war had shown that an 
all-powerful state was no lover of individual liberty. Life under socialism would 
be a joyless and a soul-less thing/ regulated to the minutest detail by bureaucratic 
rules and orders. Jawaharlal was at this time a great believer in devolution and 
as little centralization as possible. Swaraj was to him panchayat raj and he 
favoured giving these village councils considerable powers even in civil and 
criminal matters. 3 But all this lay in the future. It did not strike him to take any 
immediate steps such as setting up village schools and co-operatives or demand¬ 
ing even the minimum redressal of tenant wrong. 

Whether Jawaharlal was aware of it or not, his attitudes at this time implied 
informal collaboration with the Government in the maintenance of law and 
order; and the U.P. Government were shrewd enough to realize this. As they 

1 The Independent, 26 January 1921. 

2 Speech at Tanda, 5 March 1923. 

* Speech at Pratabgarh, 22 April 1923. Cf. Fanon: 'The nationalist parties do not attempt to 
givedefiniteorderstothecountrypeople, although the latter are perfectly ready to listen to them . . . 
the nationalist parties make no use at all of the opportunity which is offered to them to integrate 
the people of the countryside, to educate them politically and to raise the level of their struggle.' 
The Wretched of the Earth (Penguin edition, 1967), pp. 92.3. 

4 See his Hindi pamphlet 'Where are You?', published in 1922. 

’Incomplete review of Russell’s Roads to Freedom, written sometime after April 1919, and 
letter to Sir Sita Ram, 11 May 1920, S.W., vol. 1, pp. 140*44 and 160 respectively. 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


55 


recorded, ‘Serious as these [kisan] disturbances have been, they would undoubt* 
edly have been far more serious, had not the leaders considered that the time 
had not yet come for pushing things to extremes.’ 1 The Independent was of the 
same opinion. ‘For our part we believe that, but for the timely appearance of 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru on the scene, the situation would have become more 
complicated.’ Sir Lawrence Porter, the Finance Member, who was rather un- 
perceptive, was too easily persuaded by the talukdars to prohibit the meetings 
addressed by Jawaharlal ami his friends; but Butler overruled him. 2 

In Februaiy 1921, when Baba. Ram Chandra was arrested, a serious riot 
broke out. Gandhi and Jawaharlal were then in Banaras, and Jawaharlal urged 
the excited crowd to obey Gandhi and allow Ram Chandra to be arrested 
quietly. 3 The U.P. Government now prohibited public meetings in the five 
districts of Avadh and decided to prosecute three local agitators and the 
officials of village panchayats — though not Jawaharlal or any other promi¬ 
nent leader. The situation was, from the Government’s point of view, deepening 
into a crisis. Kisan unrest was widespread and, in parts of the Fyzabad district, 
embraced the bulk of the rural population. In the affected areas, few were now 
on the side of the Government. It was possible for leaders to collect at a very 
short notice enormous crowds who were prepared to carry out any instructions 
without question. Where the kisan sabha movement had spread, the authority 
of the talukdars had crumbled at a stroke; and very few of them did anything 
else but shut themselves up in their houses or leave for the nearest town. The 
kisans had to a large extent lost all fear of the police, and the efforts of the Con¬ 
gress had succeeded to the extent that the kisans were now prepared to defy not 
just the landlords but even the Government. It was believed by the officials that 
the leaders of the non-co-operation party had built up an enormous organization 
which they could start working whenever they pleased, and that they were 
steadily using their influence to instil hatred of Europeans and Indian officials. 
No longer could the authorities comfort themselves with the belief that the 
kisans had no grudge against them but sought redress from them. 4 In one vil¬ 
lage, Tajuddinpur, for a few weeks swaraj was proclaimed and a parallel govern¬ 
ment set up. 5 

The Government were baffled. ’There is undoubtedly a conspiracy behind 
the whole movement which we have not yet managed to unravel. The C.I.D. 
appear to know nothing about it.' 6 The suspicion, though baseless, made the 
Government all the more anxious that the leadership of this movement should 
remain with men like Gandhi and Jawaharlal, who advised the tenants to pay 

1 Administration Report of the United Provinces, 1920-21, supplementary chapter. 

1 General Dept. File 50-3/1921. U. P. archives. 

* Sri Prakasa's article in T921 R*minisc*nc*s (Delhi, 1971) p. 199. 

Note of Commissioner, Fyzabad Division, 1 February 1921. General Dept. File 50-3/1921. 

U. P. archives. 

■» Report of Collector, Sultanpur District, 1 April 1921. Ibid. 

‘Note of Butler, 2 April 1921. Ibid. 



56 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


rents, rather than that it should pass to the itinerant sadhus who ordered the 
cultivators to pay nothing. The strengthening of the moderate Congress influ¬ 
ence was part of the same policy as marching troops through the district; they 
were both intended to keep the kisans from passing wholly under the influence 
of the extremist agitators. * 

The arrest of these agitators cleared the way for the strengthening of Cong¬ 
ress influence over the kisans. The Government were relieved to find that 
though the leaders of the Congress formally recorded their protest at these 
arrests, they placed less emphasis on inflammatory propaganda and concen¬ 
trated their efforts on organization and the collection of funds. In Fyzabad 
division the tenants were directed to remain quiet and avoid disturbances and 
meetings; they should pay their subscriptions and leave it to Gandhi to win 
swaraj in a few months. 1 Motilal Nehru drafted a leaflet for distribution to the 
kisans, urging them to join the Congress, take up spinning, settle disputes in 
their own pancbayats and not in the law courts, subscribe to the swaraj fund 
and promote caste and communal harmony. Nothing was said about rents or 
evictions, and a positive directive was given to avoid gatherings in districts 
where public meetings hoi been prohibited. ‘But above all it is most necessary 
that all kisans should follow the path of righteousness, should speak the truth, 
should not indulge in any looting and should refrain from every violence in 
word and deed, and should commit no excesses of any kind.’ 2 

These instructions, far from being revolutionary, were to the benefit of the 
authorities. Yet the Government arrested six young men who were distribut¬ 
ing the pamphlet and sentenced them to jail for six months on the ground that 
the pamphlet attempted to excite disaffection and to bring the Government 
into hatred and contempt. The harsh action was clearly meant to proclaim that 
the Government had recovered their nerve, and intended no longer to tolerate 
intervention by Congressmen in kisan affairs. The pamphlet itself was later 
proscribed; but significantly no action was taken against its author, Motilal 
Nehru, or against Jawaharlal who distributed the pamphlet in the court room 
itself and wrote formally to the magistrate that he would continue to give the 
widest possible publicity to the pamphlet which gave expression to his views. 3 

The failure to be arrested, at a time when his followers were receiving 
savage sentences for carrying out his orders, acutely embarrassed Jawaharlal; 
and his predicament was not lessened by Gandhi’s article in Young India dis¬ 
approving of any radical demands by the kisans. There is little doubt that the 
kisans ... are not making wise use of their newly found power . .. Whilst 
we will not hesitate to advise the kisans when the moment comes to suspend 
payment of taxes to the Government, it is not contemplated that at any stage 
of non-co-operation we would seek to deprive the zamindars of their rent. The 

‘Chief Secretary, U. P. to Home Secretary, 7 May 1921. Home Dept. Pol. Deposit, June 1921, 
no. 13. 

1 ‘Kisanon ka santUsa \ English translation in Tb» huUp»nd»nt, 3 May 1921. 

i Th* Indsptndent, 30 April 1921. 



AMONG THE PEASANTS 


37 


kisan movement must be confined to the improvement of the status of the 
kisan f and the betterment of the relations between the zamindar and them.’ 1 
Nor, despite all the hopes held out, did the revision of the Oudh Rent Act 
improve substantially the condition of the tenantry; on the other hand, it 
strengthened the authority of the landlords, giving them the rights to evict 
‘undesirable’ or non-resident tenants, to increase the area of land under their 
own cultivation and to acquire lands for a wide range of ‘developmental’ pur¬ 
poses. Cesses also continued to be exacted, while some landlords refused to 
give receipts for rents paid, as they were collecting more than was recorded in 
the village accounts. 2 In November 1921, the AICC permitted full civil dis¬ 
obedience including non-payment of taxes (but not of rents); and though 
the Congress had little to do with the Eka Movement in Hardoi, Sitapur and 
Lucknow, which was a revival of kisan agitation in a new form, the Eka asso¬ 
ciations soon began to pass political resolutions. But Jawaharlal himself 
took little part in this kisan resurgence, being preoccupied elsewhere. 


>18 May 1921. 

2 Report of Lt.-Col. J. C. Faunthorpe on the Eka Movement, 8 April 1922. U. P. Government 
Gazette, 13 May 1922. 



The Moderate Disciple of Gandhi 


Jawaharlal had by now begun to take an interest in all-India affairs. He planned 
to accompany Gandhi on his tour of the Central Provinces, and he had visited 
Calcutta in January 1921 to address the Postal Peons Union and advise the 
men as to how a labour union could be utilized as a political weapon against the 
Government. 1 But he gave close attention to the development of the non-co- 
operation campaign in his own province, and this afforded him no great satis¬ 
faction. ‘I am afraid all we can do is to try to carry on. The conditions of the 
experiment are such that it is exceedingly difficult for the U.P. to to fulfil them. 2 
The Government were of a similar opinion, and therefore complacent. It was 
true that there was a spirit of unruliness and unrest which had to some extent 
loosened authority, weakened the sense of law and order and depressed officials 
and loyalists. But the campaign of non-co-operation appeared to have generally 
failed, and the U.P. Government felt no need for special measures to control it 
or for the arrest of national leaders. It seemed adequate to prohibit meetings, 
protect loyalists from social boycott, organize propaganda against non-co- 
operation in every district and rely on the preventive sections of the ordinary 
law. 3 In fact, even these measures were not always thought to be necessary 
and the Government permitted the holding of a political, a Khilafat and 
various other conferences at Dehra Dun. 4 

Jawaharlal presided over the political conference, and urged his audience 
not to cease from fighting till swaraj had been won. There could be no half¬ 
measures, no compromise on vital issues. A new spirit of liberty, sacrifice and 
self-purification was abroad in the country, and the Government were in a 
state of ‘blue funk’. Their policy of repression was a sure presage of coming 
victory. 3 He appealed to students to leave Government schools and colleges 

‘See extracts from the weekly report of the DIB, 17 January 1921. 

2 To Syed Mahmud, 9 April 1921. 

5 G.B. Lambert, Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Dept., 11 February 1921; minute of Butler, 
9 March 1921; Butler to Vincent, Home Member, 10 March 1921. Home Dept., Pol. Deposit, 
July 1921, Proceeding no. 3 (Confidential). 

*The Independent, 30 March 1921. 

»IHd., 1 April 1921. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


59 


and to serve as volunteers or go out to assist the kisans. ‘But if the flesh is weak 
and the conditions appear hard, then there is one service which all can do — 
the turning of the spinning wheel.’ 1 This sounds like comic bathos; but there 
was a manifold purpose behind Gandhi’s emphasis on spinning. It provided 
an easy source of supplementary income to the starving millions in the 
countryside and helped to restore their self-confidence; and the use of the 
cbarka or spinning-wheel by all Congressmen could prove a binding link 
between the town-dwellers and the kisans. To create a market for this hand- 
spun yarn, Gandhi made compulsory the wearing of khaddar, or cloth woven 
of this yarn. Khaddar, in Jawaharlal’s later phrase, became the ‘livery of 
freedom’. 

Jawaharlal organized the Allahabad district conference, presided over 
by Maulana Mahomed Ali and attended by Gandhi and other leaders, and 
proposed that at least 50,000 persons in the district should be registered as 
members of the Congress, special eftorts being made to enlist women. 2 But 
Jawaharlal was not prepared to recommend a no-tax campaign in Allahabad 
city without consultation with their leaders until the other items in the non- 
co-operation campaign had been completed, as he did not believe this could 
be properly carried out.* He then undertook a tour of the districts of U.P. to 
strengthen the Congress and Khilafat movements. He travelled by train, car 
and ekka (horse carriage) and even on one occasion ran between two places 4 
precedents for the election campaigns he was to undertake years later in all 
parts of India. Once he reached a railway station too late and missed the train. 
The stationmaster, an official but a patriot, provided him with a trolley to 
cover the twenty or thirty miles to the next junction, and was dismissed for 
his pains.* 

Yet, despite all this energetic effort of Jawaharlal and his colleagues, the 
non-co-operation campaign failed to gather impetus in the United Provinces. 
Over 3,000 panchayats, encouraged to take the place of the law courts for 
settling disputes, were functioning, but nearly 7,000 panchayats in north¬ 
eastern Avadh were suppressed by the Seditious Meetings Act. District courts, 
which had worn a deserted appearance at the beginning of 1921, now once 
again were crowded, though mostly by friends and relatives of defendants. 
Many workers had been cowed by official displeasure and action, for the 
U.P. Government had recourse to both preventive and punitive measures. 
Official propaganda also was gaining ground. 6 So the Government could 

■Letter to die Editor, Tht Leader, 25 April 1921. 

*Tbt hukp$nd*nt, 13 May 1921. 

■Report of speech in Allahabad, Tb a lnd*p*nd*nt, 7 May 1921. 

■Jawaharlal in Tb* I*d*p*nd*nt, 25 May 1921. 

■Jawaharlal to Bhai Parmanand, 26 November 1933. 

■Report of the Secretaries U.P.C.C. on progress of non-co-operation 20 March-20 Jnly 1921. 
The hdtpnmiU, 26 and 27 July 1921; Jawaharlal to Secretary, Aligarh District Congress Com¬ 
mittee, 10 August 1921, Khwaja papers, N.M.M.L 



60 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


relax, and even the Congress acknowledged that a distinct change was notice- 
able in official policy from the end of August. 1 

Jawaharlal was now an ardent advocate of swadeshi and no longer the ‘pink 
and pretty’ young man who wore only silk underwear 2 and was worried as to 
how he would be able to move about in swadeshi socks. 3 From July 1921 the 
U.P. Congress concentrated on promoting the making of yam by the use of the 
charka and the weaving of cloth from this yarn. Most district committees 
formed special swadeshi departments and put their best workers in charge of 
them. Charkas were distributed widely, and the weavers were encouraged to 
utilize the yarn spun from these charkas. Model weaving-schools were esta¬ 
blished, and almost every national school had its spinning and weaving depart¬ 
ment. A large amount of yarn was also sent to other provinces. The converse 
of this propagation of swadeshi was the campaign against foreign cloth. Most 
towns and large villages had their bonfires of such cloth. Merchants and 
tailors were asked to take a pledge not to sell or use it; and here again the 
success was considerable, even without resort to large-scale picketing. 4 * 

This boycott now claimed Jawaharlal’s full attention. While he still 
demanded militant action and declared that the place of every Indian was in¬ 
side jail, 3 yet the emphasis was on boycott of foreign cloth. In Allahabad city 
he was one of those who went round from house to house collecting foreign 
clothes. 6 

At the U.P. political conference in October 1921 Jawaharlal moved the 
resolution on swadeshi. At this time an unqualified Gandhian, he argued that 
as the attainment of swaraj depended on the use of swadeshi cloth, the people 
should be asked to discard, burn or export foreign cloth and use home-made 
cloth instead. He was as impatient to drive out the English from India as any¬ 
one else, but he had not till now discovered any new method of doing so except 
swadeshi. He did not agree with those who advocated the use of the sword. In 
the last resort they would all come to the conclusion that they could win and 
retain swaraj only by the use of swadeshi cloth. 7 

This was indeed moderation, which the Government could got seriously 
quarrel with; and it was further emphasized by the resolutions passed under 
Jawaharlal’s presidency at the Rae Bareli district conference in November. 
Strict non-violence, the maintenance of Hindu-Muslim unity and the removal 
of the evil of untouchability were stated to be the appropriate preparations for 
civil disobedience. 

1 Report of the U.P. Congress on Government repression in U.P., Tbt Indtptndtnt, 27 
November 1921. 

2 Oral testimony of his brother-in-law Kailas Ksul, N.M.M.L. 

’Padmaja Naidu’s account of her conversation with Jawaharlal at Mussoorie in 1918, interview 
with the author, 24 December 1969. 

4 Report of U.P. Congress Committee, Tbt Indtptndtnt, 26 November 1921, 

’Speech at Agra, 11 September 1921, Tbt Indtptndtnt, 13 Septembet**1921. 

*Tbt Indtptndtnt, 12 August 1921. 

’The Ltadtr, 26 October 1921. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


61 


As the achievement of swaraj i s only possible if people of all professions 
live in union and as the tenants and zamindars can be truly happy only 
when independence is achieved, so this conference expresses its desire 
that tenants and zamindars should live in harmony through mutual 
goodwill and sympathy and insists that although the recent Rent Act 
has made their position worse, still they Should patiently bear all troubles, 
pay their rents and keep the welfare of the country in view. 

An appeal was made to zamindars and talukdars not to be led away by petty 
personal gains but to make every effort in helping their tenants to attain 
swaraj. The talukdars were also asked to boycott the visit of the Prince of 
Wales to Lucknow. The one non-platitudinous resolution of the conference 
was the insistence on the ‘instant universal use’ of khaddar and on the manu¬ 
facture of khaddar on a considerable scale. 1 

Jawaharlal was also very careful at this time to abide by the various orders 
of the Government. There was little defiance in his mood. At Shikarpur, for 
example, when an order under S. 144 prohibiting a meeting was served on 
him while he was speaking, he immediately stopped and turned his attention 
to the collection of foreign clothes and subscriptions for the swaraj fund. 2 
When a similar order was served on him at Bhiti, he marched with the whole 
audience of about a thousand to the next district four and a half miles away 
and held the meeting there. 

However, for some time the U.P. Government had been collecting material 
for taking action against The Independent for its articles, and against Jawahar¬ 
lal for seditious speeches. But as the case against the Ali brothers was thought 
to be the stronger one, Jawaharlal’s case was held over till a decision Had been 
taken by the Government of India on that case and that of The Independent. 
Opinion at Simla was in favour of giving The Independent an opportunity 
to express regret; and the U.P. Government, although (excepting one mini¬ 
ster) of the view that there was no alternative to taking proceedings, decided 
to give a similar opportunity to Jawaharlal. 3 So, on 16 June 1921, Jawaharlal 
was informed that no proceedings would be taken against him if he undertook 
not to deliver speeches directly or indirectly inciting to violence or calculated 
to create an atmosphere of readiness for violence. Similar notices were sent 
the same day to the editor and printer of The Independent. 

Jawaharlal promised the Collector of Allahabad, who had forwarded the 
Government’s notice, to send a reply within a week; but his father, who was at 
Ramgarh near Naini Tai in the hills, telegraphed direct to the Collector that 
a reply would only be sent after due consideration. 4 Motilal was still inclined 

t The Leader, 26 November 1921. 

*Tkt Independent, 23 September 1921. 

'Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary.Government of India, No. 1543, dated 9 July 1921, 
Home Dept. Pol. 1922, File 112, nos. 1-8. 

4 See telegrams exchanged between Jawaharlal and Motilal, Jawaharlal's letter to Collector, 
Allahabad, 30 June 1921, and Motiial's telegram to Collector. 



62 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


to treat his son (who was now thirty-two years of age) as an impetuous school¬ 
boy. He decided, as he told Jawaharlal, to act the boss, as he believed he had 
every right to do, and rectify by his interference — ‘vis major’ — Jawaharlal's 
mistake in making promises. 1 Jawaharlal now drafted his reply with great 
care — at least three drafts exist — and took it to Ramgarh to have ft reviewed 
by his father. Motilal was of course fully aware that he and Jawaharlal sooner 
or later would find themselves in gaol, and he was unflinching. He had spurned 
the suggestion that he might meet Harcourt Butler or proceed to Simla to 
see the Viceroy. 2 ‘I would not for the life of me approach Sir H. in the interest 
of Jawahar or myself or for that matter any other individual. . . Jawahar and 
I both know what is coming and are fully prepared for it.’ 3 But he saw no reason 
to make the Government’s task easier, and tightened up his son’s draft so as 
to make it more precise without, being any the less defiant, removing any 
suggestion that Jawaharlal could still be regarded by anyone else but him as an 
‘impressionable youngster easily carried away by anything that he reads’. 4 
The accuracy of police reporting of Jawaharlal's speeches was questioned, 
and any apology or undertaking was refused; if he had erred by saying any¬ 
thing which was untrue or exaggerated or had produced the impression that 
he was condemning the whole British people, he would apologize, but only 
to the public. 3 

The Home Member and his department agreed with the U.P. Government 
that Jawaharlal should now be prosecuted. 6 But the Viceroy, as Motilal had 
expected, viewed this in the all-India context and, as part of the delaying tactics 
he was employing against the Congress, decided to ignore Jawaharlal. The 
U.P. Government were instructed to proceed only against the editor and 
printer of The Independent . Butler now agreed. 

If they start civil disobedience, they will put themselves in the wrong, 

whereas if we run in prominent leaders, we may drive a good deal of 

sympathy to their side. It is a choice of evils, and I think the lesser evil is 

to hold one’s hand for the present. 7 

By November 1921 the Government of India were ready to take drastic 
action against the non-co-operation campaign, which was now developing 
new manifestations and frequently erupting in violence. Among other 
measures it was decided to strike down the volunteer movement in the 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 27 and 30 June 1921. 

*Sapru to Motilal, 5 June 1921. Sapru papers, National Library, Calcutta. 

* Motild to Sapru, 24 June 1921. Ibid. 

‘Modlal’s note on Jawaharlal's drafts. 

’Jawaharlal to Chief Secretary U.P., 4 July 1921. 

‘Notes of H.D. Craik, 13 July 1921. Home Dept. Pol., 1922, File 112, nos. 1-8. 

’Butler to Reading 3 August 1921. Butler papers. India Office Library ( h erea ft er I.O.L.J, 
Mss. Eur.F. 116/57. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


63 


U.P. 1 There, thanks chiefly to Jawaharlal, the volunteer squads had become 
well-drilled units which successfully organized a complete hartal (strike) in 
Lucknow, Allahabad, Kanpur and the other principal towns and were effectively 
picketing shops selling foreign goods. Even the Viceroy conceded this success, 
particularly in Allahabad. 

The non-co-operators put forward the full strength of an undoubtedly 
powerful organization and yet, save in Allahabad, have really not suc¬ 
ceeded anywhere, although, surveying the situation impartially, I am 
bound to admit that they have at places managed to prevent the visit 
[of the Prince of Wales] being the unqualified and triumphant success 
it would otherwise have been. 2 

The U.P. Congress had also announced its intention of preparing selected 
tehsils for civil disobedience; 3 and though the Government did not take this 
seriously, 4 it was obvious that, if civil disobedience were started, trained 
volunteers would be utilized for this purpose. Every district Congress com¬ 
mittee had been directed to constitute a volunteer board immediately. So 
the volunteer organization in the U.P. was declared unlawful, and Jawaharlal, 
the converter and secretary of the U.P. volunteer board, and his father were 
arrested on 5 December for their connection with this activity. Motilal was 
delighted to go to jail with his son, and departed in a mood of exaltation. Jawa¬ 
harlal too was happy to secure, as the accolade of patriotism, a sentence of 
six months’ simple imprisonment and a fine of Rs 100 or a further month in 
jail. Father and son and a few others, who were being treated better than the 
rank and file of Congress prisoners, wrote to the jail superintendent declining 
these special privileges. 'We wish to recognize no class distinction in our army 
of Swaraj .' 3 A fellow Congressman who saw the Nehrus in jail a week after 
reported that 'the smiling and happy countenance of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru 
stood out in relief amongst the persons in the lock-up.’ 6 He continued to 
direct from jail the work of the U.P. Congress, and drew up plans to ensure 
that it did not cease to function despite official suppression and that it demons¬ 
trated its authority by filling the jails. 7 

Because of some technical defect in his sentence, Jawaharlal, to his own 

‘Hone Dept, circular to local governments, 24 November 1921. Home Dept. Pol. 1921, File 
303, nos. 1-48; R. D. Mathur, 'British policy towards the volunteer movement in India during 
the non-co-operation campaign’, Indian History Congress proceedings, 1970. pp. 214-23. 

2 Reading to Montagu, 23 February 1922. Reading papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. E. 238, vol. 4. 

* Report of the U.P. Congress committee, 26 November 1921; resolutions of U.P. Congress 
committee, 3 December 1921. Tbt Indopondont, 6 December 1921. 

4 Vieeroy'a telegram to Secretary of State, 6 December 1921. Home Dept. Pol. 1921, File 18. 
’Letter 27 December 1921, reprinted in Young ludin 19 January 1922. 

*Pandit Gaurishankar Bhargava, r e p orte d in Tbs Bombay Cbroniclo, 13 December 1921. 

7 See note traced by C.I.D. anil said to have been written by him in ]ail between 9 and 12 Decem¬ 
ber 1921. Home Dept. PoL 1922, File 767. 



64 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


surprise, was released in March 1922 when he had only served half his term. 
By now Gandhi had called off the civil disobedience campaign because of the 
increasing violence. Jawaharlal, like most others, was bitterly disappointed, 
especially as the campaign in his own province had been mustering strength. 
Even the Government had been worried by the widespread tension and pre¬ 
parations for intensification of civil disobedience. 'The situation is rapidly 
deteriorating and getting more out of control. His Excellency in Council has 
no doubt that the deterioration will spread and have alarming developments, 
unless action is taken to stop the agitation at its source.’ 1 Volunteer units 
in uniform were attempting to replace the police, while Congressmen in certain 
districts set up their own schools, courts and cattle pounds. The Commissioner 
of Allahabad reported that the establishment of Congress tbanas (police 
stations) with men performing point duty and other police functions ‘was 
not so much an organized movement run by the nominal leaders as a more 
or less spontaneous movement of the lower castes, Muhammadans more 
especially. This made it all the more likely to spread, and the Commissioner 
thought that there was danger of its developing into a general strike or boycott 
of Europeans.’ 2 The U.P. Government had therefore proposed legislation 
to prevent usurpation of the functions of the police, 

Gandhi’s action enabled the Government to relax and made' Jawaharlal’s 
task in sustaining the morale of Congressmen so much the harder. ‘I have 
only to say this — keep fighting, continue to work for independent India and 
do not stop. Do not abandon your creed. Do not accept false compromises. 
Continue to follow your great leader Mahatma Gandhi and remain true to 
Congress. Be efficient, be well organised and above all remember the charka 
and ahimsa. ’ 3 He attended Gandhi’s trial at Ahmedabad, and then returned 
to organize spinning, boycott and picketing in the United Provinces. The 
suggestion that he should visit England as a member of the Khilafat delegation 
appealed to his father who was still in jail. 

I would readily welcome the opportunity of your having to spend some 
time on the sea and in Europe in the interest of all — yourself, myself 
and the country at large. As you know I am unable to follow the politic- 
religious philosophy of Gandhiji beyond a certain point... in any case 
some understandable service from outside is far preferable in my opinion 
to the very douibtful merit supposed to flow from rotting in jail to expiate 
the crime of Chauri Chaura. 4 

1 Chlef Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, No. 366, dated 1$ February 1922. Home Dept. Pol. 
1922, File 18. 

2 Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, No. 444, dated 24 February 1922. Home Dept. Pol. 
1922, File 327, Part m, nos. MO. 

’Message on release from prison, Aaj, 10 March 1922. 

4 Motiial to Jawaharlal, sometime in April 1922. It was the incident at Chauri Chaura, a village 
in the United Provinces, where a mob set fire to a police station and 22 ftmstables lost their lives, 
that led Gandhi to call off civil disobedience. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


65 


But the idea of leaving India at this time could not have been attractive to 
Jawaharlal. However much he might deplore Gandhi’s latest action, he had, 
unlike his father, no reservations about Gandhi’s leadership and believed he 
had enough to do even outside political action. 

You will be glad to learn that work is flourishing. We are laying sure 
foundations this time. God willing, our next march forward will end 
in victory. Rest assured that there will be no relaxation, no*lessening 
in our activities and above all there will be no false compromise with 
Government. We stand for the truth. How can we tamper with anything 
which has been soiled by the touch of falsehood? 1 

As the Government recognized, ‘quiet propaganda work’ organized by 
Jawaharlal from Allahabad was widespread. 2 He addressed public meetings 
in the city and elsewhere and circulated Hindi pamphlets. The voice through¬ 
out was Gandhian. The atmosphere, he said, was calm but this did not mean 
that non-co-operation was dead. It could never die until the goal was reached; 
and the great war raging in the country could have only one result — an Indian 
victory. So they should go forward trusting God. The practical work to be done 
was promotion of swadeshi and spinning, removal of untouchability, sub¬ 
scription to the Tilak fund and enrolment of volunteers and of Congress mem¬ 
bers, the age limit for which had been reduced from twenty-one to eighteen. 
But all violence was to be avoided and there should be no forcible closing of 
shops. Students should not court arrest but if arrested should gladly meet 
their fate. 

The advice Jawaharlal gave to the students he himself for a time followed. 
While his activity was open and effective, he did not at first go out of his way 
to court arrest. He gave the lead in organizing hartals of mourning on 6 April, 
at the start of the National Week, in lament for lack of freedom, and on 13 
April, to. commemorate Jallianwala Bagh. But he advised the organizers of 
the political conference at Dehra Dun to abide by the prohibitory order of 
Government. However, he began to feel that concentration on constructive 
work was becoming almost impossible because of official oppression and 
terrorism. He and a colleague visited Sitapur district to inquire into one in¬ 
stance of such allegations, 3 and the atrocities committed there, said Jawaharlal 
in a public speech, were such as to make the occurrences in the Punjab pale. 4 
So it might be necessary to start individual civil disobedience again of some 
kind. 9 The organization should therefore be perfected, tours planned and 

^Jawaharlal to Syed Mahmud, 4 April 1922. 

1 Chief Secretary U.P. to Home Secretary, 3 May 1922, Home Dept. Pol. 1922. FUe 18. 
’Inquiry report of Jawaharlal and M. Saxena, 27 April 1922, S.W., vol. 1, pp. 242-7. 

4 Speech at Lucknow, 26 April 1922. 

’Circular letter of U.P. provincial Congress committee, 25 April 1922. 



66 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


efforts made to visit-all important towns and rouse the people. The Govern¬ 
ment reacted, and on 5 May the Congress offices and Anand Bhawan were 
searched. Clearly arrest was imminent, and Jawaharlal issued another circular 
to Congress committees, written while the search was being conducted, 
‘almost in the shadow of the police'. The people had shown enthusiasm and 
courage, and only organization was necessary to achieve success. Non-co- 
operation had gained India a new status in the eyes of the world. ‘That has 
been the achievement of a few months. Truly a wonderful record for which 
let us, in all humility, thank the Giver of all.’ 1 

A week later, on 12 May, Jawaharlal was arrested on a charge of organizing 
picketing and advocating it in his writings and speeches. As a non-cooperator 
he refused to plead, cross-examine the witnesses or offer any defence, but he 
made a long statement. He pointed out that though he was being tried for 
criminal intimidation and extortion the prosecution could not produce any 
witness to suggest that the picketing had not been peaceful. On the other hand, 
it was the Government which had, throughout the province, been guilty of in¬ 
timidation and terrorism. However, he was grateful to the authorities for fram¬ 
ing this particular charge, for it gave publicity to the boycott of foreign cloth. 
The people of Allahabad and the U.P. 'would know that the salvation of India 
and her hungry millions demanded the use of the cbarka and the weaving of 
khaddar, and they would cast out all foreign cloth and consign them to the 
flames or to the dustbin.’ 

J awaharlal also referred to the wider issue of British rule. Fond as he was of 
England — and perhaps because of his fondness — he had now become a 
rebel and all his activities had but one end in view. 

Jail has indeed become a heaven for us, a holy place of pilgrimage since 
our saintly and beloved leader was sentenced ... I marvel at my good 
fortune. To serve India in the battle of freedom is honour enough. To 
serve her under a leader like Mahatma Gandhi is doubly fortunate. But to 
suffer for the dear country! What greater good fortune could befall an 
Indian, unless it be death for the cause or the full realisation of our 
glorious dream. 

His heart-warming statement of nationalist passion, with its loyalty to 
Gandhi's leadership Mended with romantic echoes of the Risorgimento, was 
heard far beyond the district court and Jawaharlal's own province. The Gov¬ 
ernment were deluding themselves with the belief that, while the doth-dealer 
witnesses had respectfully saluted the accused, the case had attracted little public 
attention. 2 Jawaharlal had in mind a wider audience, and the first of his trial 
statements secured for him a national audience and became the manifesto of 

1 Circular, 5 May 1922. 

a Chief Secretary U.P. to Hone Dept, 4 June 1922. Home Dept. ftl. 1922, File 18. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


67 


the educated youth of India. Motilal was delighted to find, on an all-India tour 
later in the year, that his son’s influence was widespread; and he was much 
moved when a large crowd in Delhi cheered him and his wife as the father and 
mother of Jawaharlal. 1 As Motilal saw, the points of law in the statement were 
weak and could be improved upon. It was not sufficient to say that picketing 
had been peaceful in order to disprove the charge of extortion; an association of 
cotton merchants had been levying fines on those who had been selling foreign 
cloth, and Jawaharlal should have established that he and the Congress had 
nothing to do with this organization. But these deficiencies in legal argument 
did all the more credit to Jawaharlal’s heart and to his intense patriotism and 
enhanced the value of the statement from the viewpoint of the Congress and 
non-co-operation. ’On reading your statement I felt I was the proudest father 
in the world. In its firm and simple dignity it would bear comparison with the 
best productions of the Master himself.’ 2 

Jawaharlal had expected and hoped for a long sentence; 3 he had been some¬ 
what galled by his earlier premature release, especially as his father was still in 
jail. ‘One feels almost lonely outside the jail, and selfishness prompts a quick 
return.’ He was not disappointed, the sentence being 18 months’ rigorous 
imprisonment and a fine of Rs 100 and 3 months’ further imprisonment in 
case of default. He was placed in Lucknow district jail — a fact which worried 
his father, who did not believe Jawaharlal could bear extreme heat and would 
have preferred his son to join him in Naini Tal jail or to be sent to Almora. 
Jawaharlal’s health was at this time none too good and he continued in jail 
homoeopathic treatment, which consisted mainly of arsenic and sulphur. His 
diet was frugal and vegetarian — curds, bread and butter, milk and fruit, apart 
from rice, chapatis, dal and vegetables for lunch, which was his only sub¬ 
stantial meal. 

Because the jail superintendent and warders harassed visitors-and subjected 
them to petty indignities, Jawaharlal and his companions for some months gave 
up interviews and saw no friendly face from outside. He did not even visit other 
barracks during this period. But on the whole Jawaharlal was content with his 
existence. The mere fact of being confined boosted his self-respect. He hoped 
too that jail life, with its deprivations, would harden him, and enjoyed his 
enforced leisure to' the full. 

It is those who work and labour outside who deserve sympathy, not we 
who laze and eat and sleep. Soon the pleasant autumn days will come and 
it will be delightful to be under the trees. And what can be pleasanter than 
freedom from worry? We have no appointments to keep, no piling up 
of work with which we cannot cope, no speechifying, no hurry. Time 

Motilal to Jawaharlal, 22 July 1922. 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 24 May 1922. 

’See his circular, 5 May 1922, and statement in court, 17 May 1922. 



68 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


almost ceases to have significance and life moves on like a gently flow¬ 
ing river. 1 

Apart from physical exercise — walking and running — and regular daily 
spinning, he spent most of his time reading. He was allowed two, daily news¬ 
papers, The Leader and The Englishman , till 15 November, when the jail 
authorities discontinued them. He started learning Urdu. The journals he 
received were the Nation , the New Statesman and the Modem Review. But 
Jawaharlal was not greatly concerned with current developments outside. His 
interests ranged far and wide, and he was determined to refurbish his mind 
which had rusted since his return from England. He was not greatly interested 
in philosophy or religious thought and his speculations in these matters never 
progressed beyond the superficial. He read in jail the Koran and Arnold’s Light 
of Asia as well as the Bhagavad Gita in Mrs Besant’s translation; but he was at 
this time basically an unthinking, conventional Hindu theist. His attitude was 
almost platitudinous and lacking in humour. ‘It is a redeeming feature that the 
jail authorities have not the power to keep God and His nature out of jail.’ He 
expressed his gratitude for having such parents and near relatives as held up a 
lofty ideal before him and always added to his strength and spirit; and he was 
sure that the life they were leading now was much better than what they had 
abandoned. ‘Now’, he added, ‘I understand a little what Jesus meant when he 
asked us to forsake the world and save our soul.’ He observed his birthday in 
jail according to his mother’s directives, even setting aside five rupees for dis¬ 
tribution to the poor. 

His special interests were history, travel and poetry. It was now that he 
began to collect the facts and thoughts which later went into the making of 
Glimpses of World History. Among the books he specially asked for were 
Havell’s Aryan Rule in India — which appealed to him through its idealiza¬ 
tion of India’s past — and Bryce’s Holy Roman Empire , the memoirs of Babar 
and Bernier’s travels. He also read Sven Hedin’s books, and, hugging to himself 
a private dream-world, he drew up an itinerary of a journey he would undertake 
after swaraj was won, via Kashmir and Ladakh to Manasarovar and Kailas and 
the famous cities of central Asia, and then across Afghanistan, Iran and Arabia 
to Europe. 

In poetry his interests were romantic — Keats, Shelley, Swinburne, Tenny¬ 
son’s Idylls of the King; and his long letters to his family also bear a marked 
streak of romanticism. He relished the idea of being in the thick of a nationalist 
struggle, and was full of Italian precedents. ‘In the golden days to come when 
the history of our times and our country comes to be written the present will 
occupy a glorious chapter. And shall we not think of the good old days? Shall 
we not remember the great men who showed us the way and filled us with the 
fire of faith?’ And then he quotes Meredith, replacing ‘Italia’ with ‘India’: 

1 Jawaharlal to Motilal, 1 September 1922. * 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


€9 


We who have seen India in the throes, 

Half risen but to be hurled to the ground, and now, 

Like a ripe field of wheat, where once drove plough, 

All bounteous as she is fair, we think of those 
Who blew the breath of life into her frame. 

This was adolescent exaltation, yet to be channelled by hard thinking. There 
is, in all his letters of this time, the glow of virginal suffering and a complacent 
absence of reflection. Jawaharlal was so excited by the situation in which he 
found himself, so much in love with sacrifice and hardship, so self-conscious 
about the immediate context that he gave no thought to the way or the goal. 
He had made a cradle of emotional nationalism, and rocked himself in it. The 
special correspondent of the Manchester Guardian, who was permitted by the 
superintendent of the jail to interview Jawaharlal, was not unfair in reporting 
that what had struck him most in Jawaharlal’s own account of his life was the 
steady growth of an impulse to do something, he knew not what, for his country, 
and the deep satisfaction he felt when Gandhi at last showed him definite things 
to do; but these were acts of self-sacrifice. 

The desire to make a sacrifice hid evidently been and still, I think, was 
very strong in him . . . But though the man’s intelligence, refinement 
and patriotism were very apparent, I failed to get from him any clear idea 
of how he proposed to win Swaraj or what he proposed to do with it when 
he had won it. 1 

Selfishness, Jawaharlal had written, would hardly favour a quick discharge. 2 
However, once again he was released before serving his full sentence. He was 
set free on 31 January 1923, as part of a general amnesty declared by the U.P. 
Government without consulting the Government of India, 3 in order to give 
effect to a resolution of the Provincial Legislative Council recommending 
such a measure. Welcoming the release of these 107 political prisoners, The 
Leader wrote: The greatest among these patriotic souls, the true disciple of 
Mr Gandhi, is Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who moves on a very high plane of 
thought indeed, who hates none but loves his country with the intensity of a 
pure nature and a feeling heart. 4 

The Leader went on to hope that Jawaharlal would abandon the policy of 
useless sacrifice and suicidal courses in favour of political action. What it seems 
to have had in mind was that Jawaharlal should join the Moderates and help 
in the functioning of dyarchy. 

1 Report of interview in October, reprinted in Tbt Bombay CbronicU, 26 December 1922. 

1 To his father, 15 November 1922. 

* See Home Dept. Pol. 1923, File 56. 

*31 January 1923. 



70 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


The essence of non-co-operation consists in teaching the people the 
lesson of self-help. Such a lesson cannot be inculcated by laying stress 
merely on handspinning, or fay promulgating doctrines of hatred. In the 
field of agriculture, of industries, of co-operation, of education, of local 
self-government and social service, there is unlimited scope for preaching 
the gospel of self-help. 

The same suggestion was made by the well-meaning Chief Justice of the 
Allahabad High Court, Sir Grimwood Mears. He wrote to Motilal three days 
before Jawaharlal’s release that he wished to establish friendly relations with 
the latter ‘and I honestly think I could make life happier for him if he would let 
me try’. 1 Then, when he met Jawaharlal, Mears hinted to him that a minister- 
ship could come his way if he wished. 2 

It seems astounding that this could even be thought of, and is of interest 
only as showing how, despite his two terms in jail, Jawaharlal was generally 
thought of, at least in his home province, as basically a moderate nationalist. 
It was true that Jawaharlal was fay no means a revolutionary extremist, but he 
was not an incipient loyalist and the career of a man like Surendranath Ban¬ 
ner jee, who had left the Congress to become a leading-Moderate and a minister 
in Bengal, was not likely to be his model. He had not, as yet, far-reaching ideo¬ 
logical commitments, and violent techniques were abhorrent to him; but office 
under the British certainly could not lure him. Reading was shrewder in his 
assessment of Jawaharlal as ‘fanatical in his hostility to Government’. 3 

Jawaharlal, therefore, wasted little time in politely rejecting these sugges¬ 
tions. What gave him greater concern was the sharp difference of opinion 
within the Congress itself. With Gandhi in jail, the Congress leadership was 
almost equally split on the issue of entry into Councils. The Gvil Disobedience 
Inquiry Committee set up by the Congress had stated the arguments of both 
sides — of those who were for contesting the elections due to be held in 1923 
as well as of those who opposed it. Those in favour believed that with civil dis¬ 
obedience called off, it would be unwise to let the Moderates have a monopoly 
of the Councils. The Congress should win the elections and control the working 
of these assemblies. 'Knock these Councils on the head, and you will achieve 
what millions spent in foreign propaganda cannot achieve.’ But those who 
opposed any such step argued that it would enhance Government’s prestige; 
any wrecking of official marhinet y should he done from outside. G R. Das Mid 
Motilal were the leaders of the group favouring Council entry which they 
envisaged as a new form of non-co-operation — Congressmen should contest 
the elections and present the country’s legitimate demands in the Councils; if 
these were not granted within a reasonable time Congressmen should adopt a 
policy of uniform, continuous and consistent obstruction with a view to make 


i Sir G. Mean to Motilal, 28 January 1923. 

3 Autobiography, pp. 101-2. 

*To Montagu, 6 July 1922. Reading papers, vol. 3. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


71 


government through Councils impossible. At the annual session of the Con¬ 
gress in December 1922 this policy was rejected by a considerable majority. 
Das, who was president of the session, was persuaded not to resign; but he and 
Motilal formed, within the Congress, the Swaraj Party to further their policy of 
Council entry. It was hoped that this would enable constitutionalists like 
M. A. Jinnah, who had left the Congress in 1920, to return to the fold. 1 

The predicament of Jawaharlal was that, while he was emotionally attached 
to the leaders of the Swaraj Party, his mind was inclined to agree with those 
opposed to entering the Councils. In his first speech after his release, he de¬ 
clared that he still stuck to his conviction that non co-operation was the only 
path which could lead them to self-government. They should continue their 
fight and indeed further intensify it till their object had been attained. On the 
specific move of Council entry he declined to express his opinion on the ground 
that he was not in touch with current politics; but he emphasized that the desti¬ 
nation and road of both groups were the same, though their conveyances might 
differ. 2 * 4 It worried him too that the differences within the Congress might 
weaken the organization as a whole. So he, with a few others, sought not so 
much a compromise — the positions were irreconcilable — as‘an atmosphere 
of charity and goodwill’ 5 in which both sides could function. At the session of 
the AICC in Allahabad towards the end of February, he and Maulana Azad 
persuaded the two groups to suspend all propaganda till the end of April. He 
himself spent this period of truce touring some of the districts of the United 
Provinces, collecting funds for the Congress and urging discipline and the 
wearing of khaddar. But there was little heart in his speeches, and even the 
U.P. authorities were satisfied that his utterances were mild. 4 At Allahabad, 
on 6 April, addressing a meeting to inaugurate the National Week, he was 
reported to have said no more than that everyone should examine for himself 
the events of the past four years and pray for guidance. It is not surprising that 
his election at this time as chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board caused 
no alarm in official circles. ‘He is reported as inclined to be reasonable, but as 
insisting that his duty to the nationalist cause must precede his obligation to 
the ratepayers.' 9 

Jawaharlal. was at this time, in fact, rudderless, with no dear ideas as to 
what he should do. He wrote in reply to a colleague’s demand for a more revo¬ 
lutionary programme: 

I wholly agree. But what'is it to be? Let us remember that most people 
like to talk of revolution and direct action but they have no desire to parti- 
dpate in it. Those of us who really believe in direct action must stick to 

»M.R. Jayakar, Tbo Story of My Lift, val. 2, 1922-1923 (Bomb** 1939), pp. 81, 84-3. 

J Speech at Allahabad, 1 February 1923, reported in Tbo Loador, 4 February 1923. 

’jawaharlaTs telegram to ‘Swanjya’, Madras, Tbo Bombay Chroniclo, 24 February 1923. 

4 See, lor U.P. Intelligence reports on hit s p e e c hes at Sitapur, 18 March, and Gorakh¬ 

pur towards the end of March 1923. 

» Chief Secret ar y tso Home Secretary, 19 April 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1923, File 23. 



72 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


it and keep the ideal before the public. If you have any specific notions, 
do write to me. 1 

He himself, he wrote in a public letter, was a bit of a missionary in his own 
way; 2 but he was a missionary without a mission. Congress politics too were 
once again heading to a collision; the truce was over, and in the first days of 
May both Motilal and Rajagopalachari, the leader of the no-changers, as they 
were called, issued manifestos drawing up the lines of battle. Jawaharlal was 
concerned to avoid this clash, if only to save the Congress, which seemed to 
him to have practically ceased, during the past four months, to function. 
“Effective political work has ceased in every province and if this state of affairs 
is prolonged for some time the Congress would cease to exist. It is undeniable 
that the most imperative necessity at the present time is to restore the Con¬ 
gress to its original prestige.’ 3 Jawaharlal’s opinion was shared by the Viceroy, 
who reported smugly at about the same time that non-co-operation as an effec¬ 
tive force was practically dead. 4 

Hie solution favoured by Jawaharlal was one which would give the Swaraj 
Party the substance and its opponents only the shadow. The decision taken by 
the Congress in December 1922 against Council entry would still hold, but 
no propaganda should be done in its favour; in other words, its operation would 
be suspended, and those who wished to contest the elections would be face 
to do so. This formula deceived nobody; but it was accepted by the U.P. Con¬ 
gress committee, 3 and then by the AICC at Bombay in the last week of May. 
Six members of the Working Committee who were opposed to Council entry 
promptly resigned. Jawaharlal, whose purpose was to fend off final decisions 
while allowing the Swarajists to have their way, suggested that these resigna¬ 
tions be not accepted; his resolution was carried by a large majority but the 
no-changers were firm. In the circumstances, it was agreed that Das also 
should resign the presidency, and the party executive be manned by those 
uncommitted to either side, such as Jawaharlal. 

This was Jawaharlal’s achievement — one which even he had not expected. 6 
It was the first time he had functioned decisively on the national pl9ne, and 
we have an interesting first-hand account of the impact he made on his 
audience. 

He is no orator, has no tricks of manner of speech. He is sparing in the 
•wise of words, but the words are carefully chosen, for which his Harrow 
and Cambridge education are perhaps responsible. His voice is feeble 

‘An intercepted letter to Sampumanand dated 23 April 1923, quoted in C. Kaye's confidential 
publication Communism in ImUa (Delhi, 1926). 

3 Tba Laadar, 13 May 1923. 

’Circular letter of Jawaharlal, Dr M.A. Ansari and others, 11 May 1923. 

* heading to Peel, 10 May 1923. Reading papers, vol. 6. <* 

*Tha Laadar, 16 May 1923. 

‘See Jawaharlal to A.M. Khwaja, 6 June 1923. S.W., vol. 1, pp. 338-60. 



THE MODERATE DISCIPLE OF GANDHI 


73 


and low, and he should make an effort to raise it, for it is possible, and 
should not expect his audience to do the impossible and intensify their 
power of hearing. When he speaks, sincerity exudes from him as per¬ 
spiration from the body in the month of May in Bombay. He succeeds 
in impressing his audience probably because he does not consciously 
try to do so. His anxiety is merely to explain his attitude and to lay bare 
the processes of the working of his mind and he sometimes overdoes it. 
He should remember that people are mostly interested in the finished 
article and not in the processes of its manufacture. His modesty is a 
virtue; he should be careful not to convert it into a vice. He is sometimes 
impatient when the audience does not rise to his intellectual level but 
let him remember there are hordes of people in this world who have to 
manage with a lower level of mental equipment than himself and he should 
sympathize with them. 1 

No polished orator, but one thinking on his feet; modest, stumbling along, 
but with sincerity intense and transparent — these remained his characteristics 
as a public speaker through the years. The only respect in which he did change, 
and for the better, was that incessant contact with the masses rid him of the 
early trait of talking down to his audience. In later years his hearers could 
follow him effortlessly, step by step, in the argument, and never felt that he 
was preaching to them. 

However, the hollow compromise fashioned by Jawaharlal soon crumbled. 
Rajagopalachari repudiated it while Das toured southern India, Rajagopal- 
achari’s home ground, campaigning for Swarajist policy. Jawaharlal did not 
believe that entry into Councils would achieve anything substantial or impor¬ 
tant, but he blamed Rajagopalachari for violating the arrangement. 2 Vallabh- 
bhai Patel, one of the no-changers, pointed out the contradiction of Jawaharlal’s 
position in agreeing with them but sympathizing with the Das party: ‘I wonder 
why you would not allow those who are in the right to have their own way and 
prefer, to allow those who are in the wrong to do so . . . How do you expect us 
to quickly reach [sic] with equanimity the rapid demolition of the magnificent 
edifice that had been erected by the combined sacrifice of so many in this land. * 3 
In Nagpur in July the AICC rejected by a majority of two votes Jawaharlai's 
resolution advocating disciplinary action against those provincial Congress 
committees which had defied the compromise resolution of May. Thereupon 
Jawaharlal, along with his colleagues, resigned from the Working Committee 
and is reported to have expressed a desire to retire from the AICC as well. 4 
‘1 wish’, he remarked to a friend, ‘we would not hurt each other's hearts so 
easily and so constantly.’ 5 He had already, on 30 June, resigned his secretary¬ 
ship of the U.P. provincial Congress committee. 

1 ‘Simplex’ in Tba Bombay CbronicU, 30 May 1923. 

2 Interview in Aaj, *19 June 1923. 

* 24 June 1923. 

4 Tba Ludar, 14 July 1923. 

’Sri Prelum's oral testimony, N.M.M.L. 



6 


In Nabha Jail 


Jawaharlal was now, therefore, a free nian, relieved of the tussles within the 
party which had filled him with such distaste. As irksome to him as the lack of 
discipline of the no-changers was the resistance of the Swarajists to working 
through the Congress machinery. 'Are you going to keep the Congress intact 
or let it go to pieces?* 1 At the Congress session in Delhi iq September the no¬ 
changers conceded defeat by agreeing to the entry into Councils of such Con¬ 
gressmen ‘as have no religious or other conscientious objection’ to it; but Jawa¬ 
harlal took little part in arriving sfi this decision. His attention was given wholly 
to such opportunities for ‘cold-blooded action’ 2 as came his way. ‘I am weary’, 
he wrote to a friend in August,^ ‘and sick at heart. Nagpur has been a most 
painful experience for me. I came here with the intention of wandering about 
in the interior for a while away from the haunts of man.’ Strengthening of the 
party organization and extension of its network, the training and discipline of 
volunteers and the creation in the country of a general atmosphere of resistance 
and of indifference to the Government—these were to him the important tasks. 
He recognized that mass civil disobedience was out of the question for the 
time being, but Ik helped to organize the satyagraba campaign that developed in 
Nagpur over the refusal of the district magistrate to allow a Congress procession 
to carry the national flag. Volunteer squads from different parts of the country 
were sent to reinforce the local workers till the authorities gave way and permit¬ 
ted a Congress procession with the flag to pass. Again in need of some issue to 
occupy him, Jawaharlal went to Nabha for a first-hand view of the Akali 
agitation. 

The Sikhs had for long been a group favoured by the British Government. 
They were encouraged to remain a separate community and not to merge in the 
general Hindu fold. Sikh soldiers were required to keep the five distinctive 
symbols, and the premium placed on Sikh recruitment led many Hindus to 

1 Report in Tb* Bombay Cbronielt, 10 July 1923. 

2 Interview in Aaj, 19 June 1923. 

* To Mahadeva Desai. 


74 



IN NABHA JAIL 


75 


become Sikhs. 1 The 1919 reforms extended separate representation to Sikhs. 
However, at the end of the First World War, certain sections of the Sikh com¬ 
munity wished to reform the management of the Sikh temples {gurdwaras ), 
which were believed to have become ‘dens of drunken vice and debauchery’, 2 
and the reformers sought to takeover the shrines. The Punjab Government saw 
in this Akali movement a threat to law and order, and the resistance that the 
Akalis encountered led to their efforts developing into a widespread mass move¬ 
ment. A plan for religious reform had been converted, despite itself, into a 
political campaign. A semi-military organization, the Akali Dal, was formed, 
not merely to evict the corrupt managers of the Sikh shrines but also to accept 
the challenge of the Government. 

It was natural that the Akali movement should, at this stage, evoke the in¬ 
terest of the National Congress. This was not because, as Sir Malcolm Hailey 
later suggested, the Congress had always been looking for a party of physical 
force to replace their own ‘somewhat backboneless agitation’, and it would be a 
godsend to them to secure the Akalis ‘as a kind of spearhead to their very wobbly 
staff’. 3 Rather, influenced by Gandhi’s leadership of the non-co-operation cam¬ 
paign, the Sikhs had pledged themselves to non-violence; and they abode by 
their pledge despite severe provocation. In February 1921, the authorities of 
Nankana, the shrine at Guru Nanak’s birthplace, were alleged to have poured 
oil on about two hundred Sikh pilgrims and burned them alive, and officials 
near by had not intervened. But this did not stop the volunteers of the Akali Dal 
from proceeding to this and other shrines in protest at mismanagement. In 1922 
a jatha (squad) of 100 Sikh dissenters proceeded daily to the Guru-ka-bagh 
temple, there to be beaten up by the police; and this continued for about three 
weeks, resulting in about 2,000 Sikhs being beaten without their attempting 
to defend themselves. Thereafter the police, tired of lathi charges, summarily 
arrested the volunteers, and in time about 6,000 found themselves in jail. 

So, whatever the original motivation, the Akalis were now acting in the 
spirit of the Congress campaign, and the Congress in turn took an interest in 
them. The movement was of special interest to Jawaharlal, for he attached 
importance to discipline, and was impressed by the organization of the Akali 
Dal, which maintained order among its recruits and provided for the upkeep of 
the families of those injured or arrested. He attended conferences, at Lahore 
and Amritsar in June and July 1923, of Congress, Khilafat and Sikh League 
workers, and urged them not to be distracted by such sterile issues as communal 
representation on district boards and municipalities. The Congress regarded 
the principle as essentially evil, and local bodies were not of any importance; 

i'll was almost a daily ^occurrence for—say—Ram Chand to enter our office and leave it as 
Ram Singh—Sikh recruit.’ H, L O. Garrett in Census Report of 1921, quoted in 8. R. Nayar, 
Minority Polities in tbs Punjab (Princeton, 1966), p. 65. 

*Sardar Didar Singh's telegram to Ramsay MacDonald, 15 February 1924. AfCC File 4( 11/1924, 
N.M.M.L. 

’Hailey to E Howard, 15 July 1924. Hailey Papers, LO.L Mss. Eur. E 220, vof. 6. 



76 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


but if agreement could be reached on the basis of such a principle in the Punjab, 
the Congress might be prepared to approve it so as to enable the immediate suc¬ 
cess of the struggle against the bureaucracy. 1 And in September, when in Delhi 
for the special Congress session, Jawaharlal heard that Sikh jathas were daily 
proceeding to Nabha state, the deposition of whose maharaja in July for mal¬ 
administration was strongly resented by the Sikhs; and he decided to go there to 
see for himself the Akalis in action. 

On the night of the 19th September, Jawaharlal, with two companions, 
Gidwani and Santanam, left Delhi for Muktesar, an Akali centre, and after ad¬ 
dressing a meeting there on the 20th, commending the Akali struggle, 2 he 
entered Nabha state on the morning of the 21 st, along with a Sikh jatha, at Jaito. 
There he and his two friends sat down under a tree to watch proceedings and 
intended to return to Delhi by the evening train. Wilson Johnston, the British 
official who was serving as the administrator of the state, on hearing that 
Jawaharlal had set out for Nabha, had obtained the permission of the Viceroy 
and the Home Member to serve an order on Jawaharlal at the frontier of Nabha 
state forbidding him to enter the state for two months; 3 but he had not anti¬ 
cipated that Jawaharlal would come by road on horseback. The result was that 
Jawaharlal was well within the state before the order was served on him not to 
enter Nabha on the ground that he and some of his companions were members 
of the AICC and their presence was likely to lead to a disturbance of the peace. 
Jawaharlal replied that he had already entered Nabha and could not vanish into 
thin air, but that he had no intention of leaving the state; and he and his two 
friends, on whom an oral order had been served, sat down in a rest-house 
near by. A prohibitory order incapable of enforcement was ipso facto invalid, 
and an oral order was of no worth at all; but clearly the Nabha Government, 
even though now headed by a British official, attached no importance to 
legality. Although the presence of Jawaharlal had led to no disturbance, he 
and his companions were arrested, handcuffed and chained together, and 
marched to the railway station. They were brought by the night train, in a 
crowded third-class compartment, to Nabha town, and the chains and handcuffs 
were only removed twenty hours after, by noon the next day, after they were 
locked up in Nabha jail. 

The conditions in this jail were, even by official admission, ‘horrible’; 4 and 
Wilson Johnston reported that though the jail department left much to be 
desired any immediate improvement was out of the question as the Akali agita¬ 
tion was keeping their hands full. 3 The prisoners were prevented from seeing or 
communicating with persons outside, denied all books and papers, and for two 
days not even allowed to bathe or change. Their trial was held in camera by a 

1 Report of Jawaharlal’s speech in The Tribune, 4 July 1923. 
a Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File I.K.W. 
a See Home Dept. Pol. File 401 of 1924. 

4 Note of Special Commissioner on conditions in Nabha jails, 14 June 19®3. Home Dept Pol. 
File 401 of 1924. 

» 24 September 1923. Ibid. 



IN NABHA JAIL 


77 


magistrate who knew no English and openly referred every issue for decision to 
Wilson Johnston. The latter had by now realized that, even in Nabha, Jawaharlal 
could not be convicted for entering the state before he had been prohibited from 
doing so, and decided to alter the charge to one of being in the company of an 
Akali jatha and therefore of being a member of an unlawful assembly. 1 On the 
24th fresh proceedings were casually started before another magistrate, and 
Jawaharlal and the others were charged with being members of the jatha and 
forcibly resisting dispersal. The straight thing to do’, wrote Jawaharlal in his 
draft statement 2 which was later revised by his father and these sentences excis¬ 
ed, ’is to run me in for sedition and I shall gladly and joyfully admit the charge. 
But the ways of the Nabha administration are not straight. They are crooked.’ 

As soon as Motilal heard of his son’s arrest he left for Nabha and informed 
the Viceroy that his sole object was to see Jawaharlal. He had so far taken no 
part in the Akali agitation and expected that there would be no interference in 
the exercise of his ‘natural right’. 3 The Administrator of Nabha gave orders 
forbidding Motilal’s entry but was overruled by the Government of India, who 
ordered that Motilal should be permitted to enter Nabha provided he undertook 
not to engage in political activities in the state and to leave it immediately after 
his interview with his son. 4 Even this was an indefensible attitude and demon¬ 
strates that Wilson Johnston was not wholly responsible for all the arbitrary 
actions of the Nabha administration. Motilal naturally refused to give any such 
undertakings and, on being ordered to leave the state, did so without meeting 
Jawaharlal. Wilson Johnston described Motilal’s reaction as one of ‘veiled 
insolence’, but the Secretary of State, Lord Olivier, later remarked that this was 
what any self-respecting professional man in his position in any other civilized 
country would have done. 3 In fact, the Government of India realized immediate¬ 
ly that they had overreached themselves, and modified the conditions; Motilal 
was now required not to engage in any political activity in Nabha and to leave 
immediately after the conclusion of the trial. 6 This was still much to demand, 
but so intense was Motilal’s anxiety, especially as he had heard of the unhealthy 
conditions in Nabha jail, that he agreed to abide by these restrictions and return 
ed to Nabha. 

On the 27 th Motilal saw his son in jail. The interview, lasting over two hours, 
was not a success. The officials at Nabha flattered themselves that both father 
and son looked dejected because Motilal had concluded that Jawaharlal’s action 
had put him legally in the wrong and there was little hope of his escaping convic¬ 
tion. 2 In fact, the reasons for the unsatisfactory nature of the interview were 

> Administrator Nabha state to Agent, Governor-General Punjab, 22 September 1923. Ibid. 
a 25 September 1923. 

i The Bombay Cbropiete, 24 September 1923. 

* Telegram of Administrator, 23 September and telegram of Home Dept., 24 September, Home 
Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401. 

’ToReading, 20March and 26 June 1924. Reading Papers, vol. 7. 

6 The Bombay Chronicla, 27 September 1923. 

7 Administrator to Agent, Gov.-Gen. Punjab, 27 September 1923. Home Dept. Pol. Hie 401 
of 1924. 



78 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


very different. Jawaharlal had shown his irritation at his father’s intervention, 
and this had deeply upset Motilal. So Motilal left Nabha. 

I was pained to tind that instead of affording you any relief my visit of 
yesterday only had the effect of disturbing the even tenor of your happy 
jail life. After much anxious thinking I have come to the conclusion that 
I can do no good either to you or to myself by repeating my visits. I can 
stand with a clear conscience before God and man for what I have done 
so far after your arrest but as you think differently it is no use trying to 
make opposites meet.. . please do not bother about me at all. I am as 
happy outside the jail as you are in it... I do not wish you to have the 
impression that you have.offended me in the least. I believe honestly that 
the position has been forced upon us both by circumstances over which 
neither has any control. 1 

Jawaharlal was now deeply sorry. *1 confess that the idea of causing you any 
pain is most distressful to me and I am haunted by the thought. It is a dearly 
cherished desire of mine to serve you and to lighten if possible the heavy bur* 
den you carry.’ 2 But he was quite reconciled to a term in Nabha jail. ‘It will 
be a new experience and in this blase' world, it is something to have a new 
experience.’ 3 However, Motilal sent his son, through his secretary, a drasti¬ 
cally altered statement to be read by him in court. Jawaharlal had written an 
emotionally worded text, criticizing the Nabha administration and eulogizing 
the Akali movement. " 

I rejoice that I am being tried for a cause which the Sikhs have made 
their own. I was in jail when the Guru-Ka-Bagh struggle was gallantly 
fought and won by the Sikhs. I marvelled at the courage and sacrifice of 
the Akalis and wished that I could be given an opportunity of showing 
my deep admiration of them by some form of service. That opportunity 
has now been given to me and I earnestly hope that I shall prove worthy 
of their high tradition and fair courage. Sat Sri Aka/. 4 

Motilal replaced these paragraphs with a closely argued statement written 
with the cold pen of a lawyer, and it was this which Jawaharlal read. 

Meantime, the case dragged on. The Government of India directed that 
sentence should be passed on Jawaharlal but it should be announced at the 
same time that the Nabha Government had suspended its execution without 

1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 28 September 1923. 

2 Jawaharlal to Motilal from Nabha jail, 30 September 1923. 

Jawaharlal to Kapil Deva Malaviya and Mahadeva Desai, undated but clearly written from 
Nabha jail. 

4 Draft statement, 23 September 1923. Sat Sri Akai is a Sikh form of greeting, meaning “True 
is the Immortal God.” 



IN NABHA JAIL 


79 


condition, and Jawaharlal should be expelled from the state. This would meet 
the probable contingency of the convicted persons declining to accept any 
conditions; but if they returned to the state the suspension would be cancelled. 
This did not please Wilson Johnston, who wished Jawaharlal to serve his 
sentence, and argued that mere expulsion would severely shake the con¬ 
fidence of loyalists by establishing that there was one law for Akalis and 
another for Congressmen. But the Government of India believed that such 
discrimination would in itself be of advantage in that it would loosen the 
alliance between the Akalis and the Congress. 1 So Jawaharlal and his two com¬ 
panions were each sentenced to 30 months’ rigorous imprisonment; but these 
sentences were suspended and they were ordered to leave the state and not to 
return. They all left Nabha the same night. 

It was not, however, disclosed that the sentences would be operative if they 
returned to Nabha; and Jawaharlal had no reason to believe that the suspen¬ 
sion was conditional. So he later challenged the statement of the Adminis¬ 
trator that if they had refused to leave they .would have had to undergo the 
sentence, and he added the hope that if it .was necessary in the interests of their 
cause to return to Nabha, he and his’companions would do so. 2 In fact, the 
next year, when Gidwani returned to Nabha he was thrown into prison, and 
Jawaharlal challenged the Administrator to let him have a copy of the suspen¬ 
sion order and to inform him as to whether he too would be arrested if he 
returned to Nabha. 3 The Administrator replied that the sentence had only 
been suspended and not remitted, to which Jawaharlal retorted that the 
suspension had been unconditional. 4 

As Jawaharlal recognized years later in his Autobiography, probably the 
bold step to have taken, especially as Gidwani had been imprisoned again, 
would have been for him to return to Nabha. 'As often with us all, discretion 
was preferred to valour.’ 3 On his return to Allahabad, where he received a 
hero’s welcome, he had developed typhoid with high fever and confessed that 
he had not felt quite so feeble physically for a long time. 6 Gandhi dissuaded 
him from returning to Nabha, 7 and his father too made sure that he did not 
involve himself in Nabha affairs again. He would not even permit Jawaharlal 
to meet the Maharaja of Nabha. ’Having once burnt your fingers over Nabha 

‘Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 23 September 1923; Administrator Nabha to Agent 
to Gov.-Gen., 23 September 1923; Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 26 September 1923. 
Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401. 

2 Jawaharial’s letter in The Tribune, 11 October 1923. 

J Jawaharlal's letters to the Administrator, 24 May and 19 June 1924, reprinted in The Leader, 
29 May and 23 June 1924, respectively. 

4 Administrator Nabha to Jawaharlal, 23 June, and his reply, reproduced in The Leader, 27 
July 1924. 

>p. 116. 

• To Sri Prakasa, 7 October 1923. 

i i Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 6 September 1924, Collected Works, vol. 25 (Delhi, 1967) p. 98; Jawa- 
harlal's speech at Allahabad, 20 September 1924. 



80 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


I do not wish you to take any more risks.' 1 So the Government of India, who 
had encouraged the Administrator of Nabha to act arbitrarily, were not embar¬ 
rassed by any further challenge. Both the Secretary of State 2 and Lord Curzon, 
who was by no means dominated by a commitment to the rule of law and spoke 
for the opposition in the House of Lords, felt that the situation had not been 
handled quite so well as it possibly might have been. But the Government were 
enabled to congratulate themselves on an easy if undeserved victory. ‘There is 
no doubt that Nehru and his son were substantially defeated over the Nabha 
affair and they know this full well.' 3 


1 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 29 August 1923. . 

2 Olivier to Reading, 20 March 1924. Reading papers, vol. 7. 

* Home Dept, to Administrator Nabha, 9 October 1923. Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 401. 




Escape into Administration 


Free again after a fortnight in jail, but now a sick man, Jawaharlal could do 
little more for a while than write speeches. In his presidential address to the 
U.P. provincial conference in October, which was read in his absence, he 
deplored the loss of the faith and confidence which had inspired the Congress 
in 1920 and 1921. ‘We did not sit down to debate and argue, we knew we were 
right and we marched on from victory to victory. We felt the truth in us and 
every fibre of our being thrilled at the idea of our fighting for the right, and 
fighting in a manner unique and glorious.’ But now pro-changer and no¬ 
changer ‘went for each other, and the average no-changer was not behind the 
pro-changer in forgetting the basic lesson of non-violence and charity and in 
imputing the basest of motives to persons of a different way of thinking.’ These 
two viewpoints being fundamentally different, there could be no real or stable 
compromise between them; and the result was that a noble movement had 
been converted into two caucuses, concerned only with securing support 
against each other. 

The Congress session at Delhi, said Jawaharlal, had marked a retreat from 
direct action. But non-violent non-co-operation could not die, and it was the 
duty of those like him to fight on while the main army rested or was engaged 
in peaceful pursuits. Till the time came for launching another mighty cam¬ 
paign of civil disobedience, they should keep the practice and ideal of direct 
action and peaceful revolution before the people. He was still very much a 
Gandhian. 

I believe that the salvation of India, and indeed of the rest of the world, 
will come through non-violent non-cooperation. Violence has had a 
long enough career in the world, it has been weighed repeatedly and 
found wanting. The present condition of Europe is eloquent testimony 
of the inefficacy of violence to settle anything. I believe that violence in 
Europe will go from excess to excess arid will perish in the flames it has 
itself kindled and be reduced to ashes. 


81 



82 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Bolshevism and Fascism were the ways of the West; they were really alike 
and represented different phases of insensate violence and intolerance. 'The 
choice for us is between Lenin and Mussolini on the one side and Gandhi on 
the other. Can there be any doubt as to who represents the soul of India today?’ 
Non-violence was not weakness but required courage; better theJhonest man 
of evil and violence than the non-violent coward. However, no circumstance 
could justify terrorism or secret violence, the dagger of the. assassin or the 
stab in the dark. 

Besides extolling non-violence Jawaharlal expounded in Gandhian terms 
the merits of non-co-operation. 

Evil flourishes only because we tolerate it and assist in it. The most des¬ 
potic and tyrannical government can only carry on because the people 
it misgoverns themselves submit to it. England holds India in bondage 
because Indians co-operate with Englishmen and thereby strengthen 
British rule. Withdraw that co-operation and the fabric of foreign rule 
collapses. 

Political freedom was bound to come before long, if not entirely through 
their strength then through the weakness of Europe and England. Europe 
was in the melting pot, and England, with all her seeming might, could not 
but be affected by the collapse of the continent. But by then, feared Jawaharlal, 
once again reflecting an unqualifiedly Gandhian viewpoint, India, instead of 
being a shining example to the rest of the world, might have become but a 
cheap and inefficient replica of the countries of the West. ‘Let us take the 
longer view from now and try to avoid this, and build up a great and strong 
India worthy of the great leader whom God has blessed us with. 

Two months later, at the Kakinada session of the Congress, he again 
emphasized, in Gandhian terms, that there was not really much in common 
between Indian volunteers and any Western counterparts, and an Indian 
volunteer organization must have non-violence as its basic principle. What 
India needed was non-violent, disciplined soldiers. ‘We meet as soldiers of 
freedom and must be men of action rather than of words.’ They should have 
little to do with the wordy warfare that was going on and devote themselves 
to training as many as possible for effective action; for without such training 
strength would be wasted and courage bear little fruit. But much as Jawaharlal 
desired action, he never doubted that such action should be controlled and 
encompassed by the Gandhian doctrine. Indeed, there was frequently a clear 
suggestion in his speeches that the sterile debate in the Congress had only 
been made possible by the absence of Gandhi in jail. To Jawaharlal non-violent 
non-co-operation was a positive programme, and its exponent above all a man 
of action. 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 


83 


Jawaharlal himself, however, could at this stage engage in no thrilling 
action and had to consume his energies in a variety of administrative duties. 
*1 am developing into a kind of Pooh-Bah.’ 1 He was already president of the 
Allahabad town Congress committee and heavily involved in provincial Con¬ 
gress work, and at Kakinada the President. Maulana Mohamed Ali, insisted on 
Jawaharlal becoming one of the general secretaries of the Congress. This 
added considerably to Jawaharlal’s work, he being the most active of'the three 
secretaries. He tried to introduce method and procedure into Congress admi¬ 
nistration, which had till then been rather ad hoc and haphazard. This meant 
that he had to give considerable attention to matters of detail. He also checked 
the office accounts carefully, demanded that everyone, from the President 
downwards, should submit detailed accounts, and issued regular statements 
on Congress finances. He kept in touch with committees abroad — in Britain, 
Japan and the United States - that sought affiliation to the Congress. He 
toured the province widely on a fund-collecting mission for the U.P. Congress 
which, in January 1924, had only twenty rupees in the bank. 2 

Because of the direct interest which Jawaharlal had shown in the Akali 
campaign and his excursion to Nabha, the Congress had appointed him one 
of the liaison officers to keep in touch with, the defiant Sikhs; and as general 
secretary it wgs his responsibility to implement the Congress resolution to 
render all possible assistance, including the dispatch of men and money. An 
Akali Sahayak (assistance) Bureau was set up at Amritsar, and though 
Jawaharlal was in no position to act on Rajagopalachari’s suggestion 3 that he 
should take charge of this office, he kept in close touch with Gidwani, who 
was appointed to this post, and, after Gidwani’s arrest, with his successor, 
K.M. Panikkar. The Congress had little money to provide, and Jawaharlal 
thought that the best assistance it could render was to perfect its own organiza¬ 
tion and throw in its whole weight at the moment of crisis, and till then to give 
full publicity to Akali activities, keeping the political side of it and the side 
affecting other communities well in the forefront. 4 Jawaharlal felt that the 
Congress could also help in rallying Hindus and Muslims behind the cam¬ 
paign, which should be regarded as part of the general movement for freedom. 
Shaukat Ali, for example, had pledged the full support of the Muslims. ‘To the 
Akalis I will declare that the warfare they have engaged in is like the Khilafat 
question taken up by the Muslims and the Swaraj problem by the Hindus ... 
So long as this war shall last Hindus and Mussalmans will be ready to parti¬ 
cipate in it in lakhs and lakhs.’ 3 But the Sikhs themselves did not seem anxious 


•To A.M. Khwaja, 6 June 1923. S.W., vol. 1, p. 359. 

2 JawaharlaI to A.T. Gidwani, 25 January 1924, AICC Fite 4(1) of 1924. 

3See Jawaharlal to Rajagopalachari, 12 March 1924. AICC Fite 4(1) KW(II) of 1924. 
4 To Gidwani, 25 January 1924; to Panikkar, 27 March 1924, AICC Fite 4 of 1924. 

5 Speech at a. public meeting in Delhi, 27 February 1924. 



84 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


to receive such support even from the Hindus, let alone the Muslims, or from 
the Congress. 1 Clearly their hope now was to secure concessions from the 
Government, as in fact they did in 1925. Nor were Jawaharlal’s efforts to 
improve relations between the Hindus and the Sikhs acceptable even to the 
Hindus of Amritsar because on his visit to that place he had stayed in a hotel 
where the cooks were Muslims. 2 

All these activities kept Jawaharlal busy, and enabled him to ignore the 
malaise afflicting Congress. He had even hoped to return to jail, even though 
on a false issue, for at one time it seemed probable that the Government would 
arrest him for defying, along with Pandit Malaviya, the injunction against 
bathing in the Sangam at Allahabad during the Kumbh Mela festival in 
January. That year the Ganga had somewhat changed its course, and the 
current was so strong near the Sangam that bathing without proper precau¬ 
tions became dangerous. So, with financial assistance from Government, 
volunteers prepared a suitable bathing place, but the district authorities 
refused all access to the Sangam. ‘The question of danger receded into the 
background and the whole issue became one of prestige. Danger can be dis¬ 
cussed and overcome, prestige cannot.' 3 So Malaviya, Jawaharlal and a few 
others courted imprisonment by jumping over the barrier and bathing in the 
Sangam. But the Government refrained from action. ‘There appears to be 
little chance of my arrest for the Kumbh Mela affray. Worse luck! - ' 4 

However, he was soon glad to be unconfined, for on 5 February 1924 
Gandhi was released on grounds of health. After seeing Gandhi at Poona, 
Jawaharlal spent a few weeks at Juhu, where Gandhi was having talks with 
the Swarajist leaders Motilal and Das. In the elections in November 1923 
they had achieved a considerable triumph, and they now sought Gandhi’s 
approval of their policy. This they could not secure, and it looked as if 
the Congress would break under the strain. Everything, wrote Gandhi to 
Jawaharlal, 3 was in the melting pot- including himself; and Jawaharlal felt it 
might become necessary for him to resign the secretaryship. ‘Surely you can 
imagine a situation when it may be impossible for me as well as others to con¬ 
tinue in office. When everything is in the melting pot, as you put it, why should 
I be impervious to heat or refuse to melt?’ 6 

At the meeting of the AICC in Ahmadabad in June 1924, Gandhi moved a 
resolution requiring all Congressmen to spin. This was challenged by Motilal 
and Das, and the resolution was finally carried with the omission of the clause 
depriving of Congress offices those failing to spin sufficient yarn. Gandhi 

1 See Jawaharlal to Panikkar 2 April and to Dr Kitchlew 27 April 1924, AICC File 4 of 1924. 
2 Panikkar to Mahatma Gandhi 1 April 1924. Home Dept. Pol. 1924, File 67, Part B. 

5 Jawaharlal's note, 13 January 1924. Allahabad municipality file 17. 

4 To Gidwani, 25 January 1924. 

’ 6 June 1924. 

6 To Shankarlal Banker, 14 June 1924, S.W., vol. 2 (Delhi, 1972), p. 106. In fact, it waa Gandhi 

who had said it. ** 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 85 

regarded himself as defeated and humbled, and, recognizing the support 
which the Swarajists enjoyed in the party and the country, decided to leave the 
field to them. The British Government, however, spurned their offers of co¬ 
operation. Motilal had expected that the first Labour Government would 
invite him and Das to London, 1 and Das, it is said, made a generous donation 
to Labour Party funds. Motilal s hopes were disappointed; but then Das ex¬ 
pected much from Birkenhead. This too fizzled out. The policy, wrote Birken¬ 
head confidentially to Reading, 2 that he would recommend to the Cabinet 
over the next four years would be politically one of negation. So the Swaraj 
party lost all purpose and could achieve little. Deprived in June 1925 of the 
leadership of Das, they were further weakened by the hankering for office 
shown by an increasing number of their members. 

Meantime, the growing tension between Hindus and Muslims seized 
Gandhi's attention. The Muslims, who, according to the 1921 census, formed 
nearly a quarter of India’s population had, before the advent of the British, 
lived in social harmony with the other communities. This is not surprising, 
for most Muslims in India were converts from Hinduism and had much in 
common with their Hindu neighbours. Under the East India Company, how¬ 
ever, regional imbalance in economic and social development led to the classes 
who gained most from British rule being predominantly Hindu; and by the 
time the interior areas of India caught up with westernization, national con¬ 
sciousness, particularly in Bombay but also in Bengal, increasingly spoke in a 
Hindu idiom. The British were not slow to take political advantage of this. 
Gandhi, in his search for mass support, also expressed himself in Hindu terms 
and, rather than strengthen the national identity, drew up a programme which 
took for granted the divergence between the two communities but was accept¬ 
able to both. So the official policy symbolized by separate electorates, or con¬ 
stituencies where the essential qualification for candidates and voters was a 
particular religion, and the response of the Congress with such activities as 
the Khilafat campaign combined with the lag in development between the 
two communities, the decline of the Muslim upper class and the failure to 
offset this (as in the case of the Hindus) by the rise of new classes, to strengthen 
the religious element in Indian politics. This was reflected in communal 
rioting. During the years 1900 to 1922 there were sixteen such riots; for the 
three years from 1923 to 1926 the number was seventy-two. 

In September 1924, to check the growing communal rancour, Gandhi 
began a fast for twenty-one days. He termed it both a penance and a prayer; 
but its objective on this occasion was to blackmail the conscience of his country¬ 
men. When Jawaharlal, who had been visiting the riot-stricken area of Sambhal, 
received ‘the shattering news whose consequences are terrible to contemplate', 
he called upon each town and village in the United Provinces to hold immediately 

‘Motilal to Das, 27 July 1924, Motilal Nehru papers. 

1 29 January 1925, Reading papers, vol. 8. 



86 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


its conference of leaders of all communities and parties to find means of unity. 
‘Leaders of all communities are meeting at Delhi on the 23rd and, God willing, 
will find a way out of the impasse. But time passes and daily the danger 
increases.’ 1 

A day after commencing the fast, Gandhi had written to Jawaharlal: 2 

My dear Jawarlal [sic\ You must not be stunned. Rather rejoice that 
God gives strength and direction to do my duty. I could not do otherwise. 

As the author of non-co-operation, a heavy responsibility lies on my 
shoulders. Do give me in writing your impressions of Lucknow and 
Cawnpore. Let me drink the cup to the full. I am quite at peace with 
myself. 

Jawaharlal, on his return from the Unity Conference which had passed a 
series of platitudinous resolutions but could not persuade Gandhi to terminate 
his fast earlier than scheduled, himself went down with fever; but he sent 
Gandhi long reports on the disturbances in Allahabad itself. Speaking with 
this first-hand knowledge of communal animosity, he told the U.P. Political 
Conference that whatever pride he had had in the national strength and 
awakening had been shattered, and he was now not only humiliated but 
ashamed. They themselves had done more harm to their countiy than any 
foreigner. 3 An All-Parties Conference, meeting in January 1925, proved a 
failure, and Jawaharlal found its discussions painful to listen to. 4 All that 
there was to do, therefore, seemed to be the preaching of unity and of non¬ 
violence, spinning and the wearing of khaddar. When a young man came to 
him in search of national work, the only possible activity Jawaharlal could 
think of was khaddar work. 5 

It is surprising that Jawaharlal did not think of utilizing the services of 
such young men for promoting communal harmony. Gandhi had suggested 
the formation of a flying column of Hindu and Muslim workers who would 
at a moment’s notice be ready to go to riot areas for investigation and relief. 6 
But Jawaharlal seems to have been too dispirited to act on this suggestion. 
This communal problem was such a wasteful diversion from the main cam¬ 
paign against the British, and it revolved round what seemed to him such 
unreal issues that he could not bring himself to take energetic measures to 
deal, with it. In his own city of Allahabad, there was a revival of-aggressiveness 
of Hindu communalists, inspired, according to the local magistrate, largely 

1 Letter to the Editor, The Leader, 22 September 1924. 

2 19 September 1924. Facsimile in Tendulkar, Mahatma (1961 edition), vol. 2, between 

pp. 160-61. 

* Tha Leader, 6 November 1924. 

4 To Syed Mahmud, 3 February 1923. 

’ See his letter to Shankarlal Banker, 28 July 1923. AICC File G. 60/1923, Part II. 

6 Letter to Jawaharlal, 12 November 1924. * 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 


87 


by the desire to show the Nehru family that they had little influence with the 
Hindus. 1 ‘As for our politics and public life,* Jawaharlal wrote, 2 ‘I am sick 
and weary of them.’ 

These were also to Jawaharlal months of great personal stress and depres¬ 
sion. In November 1924 his wife lost a child after premature birth and soon 
after began to show signs of tuberculosis. Then, in March 1925, he himself 
had to undergo a minor operation, performed by Dr Ansari at Delhi. The 
deep commitment to Gandhi and known dislike of Swarajist policy had caused 
friction in his relations with his father, and Gandhi had sought to intervene. 

This letter like the former is meant to be a plea for Jawaharlal. He is one 
of the loneliest young men of my acquaintance in India. The idea of 
your mental desertion of him jhurts me. Physical desertion I hold to be 
impossible. Needless to say Manzar Ali and I often talked of the Nehrus 
whilst we were together at Yeravda. He said once that if there was one 
thing for which you lived more than any other, it was for Jawahar. His 
remark seemed to be so true. I don’t want to be the cause direct or indirect 
of the slightest breach in that wonderful affection. 3 

These differences with Motilal made Jawaharlal acutely conscious of his 
dependence on his father for money.'Gandhi had offered to arrange for some re¬ 
munerative work, either as a press correspondent or as a college professor, 4 * 
but nothing had come of this. Gandhi later suggested that Jawaharlal be paid 
as general secretary by the Gongress or that personal friends be permitted 
to find funds for retaining his services. ‘I will not mind even if you decided to 
do some business. I want your mental peace. I know that you will serve the 
country even as manager of a business.’ 3 The Bombay firm of Tata’s offered 
to employ him, and Motilal strongly recommended to his son that he proceed 
to Bombay and call on Tata. 6 But this again did not materialize, probably 
because Jawaharlal showed no keenness to serve in a commercial firm. Finally, 
to earn the money required to pay for the trip to Europe which he and Kamala 
were planning, he had to return to the distasteful practice erf law; and for 
preparing a brief Motilal secured for him the large fee of Rs 10,000 — an 
amount which the client doubtless paid to ensure that Motilal would handle 
the case. 

However, there was one sphere of activity which in these years provided 

i Report on the political situation in the U.P. for the first half of September 1923. Home Dept. 

Pol. 1923, File 112. 

3 To Gidwani, 3 November 1923, AICC File G21 (ii) of 1923. 

J To Motilal, 2 September 1924, ColUctsd Works, vol. 23, p. 63. Manzar Ali Sokhta was a 
Congressman from the U.F. and a friend of the Nehru family. 

4 Letter to Jawaharlal, 13 September 1924, ColUcttd Works, vol. 23, pp. 148-9. 

, Idem, 30 September 1923. 

6 Motilal to Jawaharlal, 9 November 1923. 



88 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Jawaharla1 with some satisfaction. For two years, from April 1923 to April 
1925, he was chairman of the Allahabad Municipal Board; and this phase in 
his life is of interest as marking'his first experience of official administration. 
It is also of some significance, because many of the traits which marked his 
prime ministership can be discerned here in embryo — his domination of his 
colleagues, his desire for efficiency, his loyalty to his competent subordinates, 
his efforts to push forward in all directions with new ideas. Even officials had to 
recognize that he had brought a fresh impetus to municipal administration and 
that his management of Allahabad affairs was marked by both constructiveness 
and competence. 

In 1923 the United Provinces Congress committee decided to contest 
the municipal elections on the Congress and Khilafat programme, and to 
enter these local bodies not to obstruct but to direct their affairs honestly and 
efficiently. Jawaharlal was, much against his will, persuaded to stand as one 
of the Congress candidates from Allahabad, and as the Congress had a majo¬ 
rity, soon found himself elected chairman for three years. It had earlier been 
thought that Purushottam Das Tandon would be chairman, but he decided 
to stand down in favour of a Muslim Congressman, as some loyalist Muslims 
had objected to a Hindu chairman. However, when it became clear that the 
loyalist Muslims wished to have not so much a Muslim as a loyalist, and as 
the Muslim Congressman was unwell, Jawaharlal’s name was suddenly put 
forward and he was elected by 20 votes as against 11 secured by the candidate 
sponsored by the officials. 1 

Jawaharlal was a most unwilling chairman. To him the primary task was 
the fight for swaraj, and he decided to continue as secretary of the provincial 
Congress committee, a post which he regarded as more important than the 
chairmanship of the municipal board and which, he declared, he was prouder 
to hold. 

The day I am satisfied that the municipal chairmanship is injuring my 
Congress work that day I shall submit my resignation of the chairmanship. 

For the chairmanship is to me only the means for serving the nation 
for hastening swaraj. The best method is to go straight ahead on the 
lines chalked out by our leaders and not to wander in the shady alleys 
and lanes of constitutional activity. My mentality is revolutionary. I 
believe in revolution and in direct action and in battle. I know that many 
times we shall have to advance and engage the enemy and offer the inevita¬ 
ble price of freedom before we finally carry the citadel ... I do not forget 
the history and agony of India during the last few years and I am not going 
to spend most of my time in any office while my beloved leader lies in 
jail. I shall give battle whenever I can. I shall fight and hit hard whenever 

1 See account in The Leader, 6 April 1923, and Jawaharlal's letter in the same issue. 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 

Imay. That is my main function till swaraj is attained. All else is training 

and preparation . 1 

Invited by the Collector of Allahabad to come and discuss the possibility of 
keeping general politics outside the municipal sphere, he replied that he 
would try to carry out the policies of the Congress, and would resign if he 
disagreed with the Board on any matter of principle or if the Congress com¬ 
mittee so desired it. ‘I regret that I cannot split myself up into various com¬ 
partments — one for “general politics”, another for “municipal affairs”, and 
so on.’ 2 Repeatedly during the next two years, till his resignation was finally 
accepted by the Government, Jawaharlal offered to relinquish office, and he 
never allowed it to hamper his activities in the wider world and even courted 
arrest as at Nabha. 

However, though JawaharM’s priorities never wavered, his distaste for 
municipal affairs gradually weakened, and he found himself enjoying the 
work. ‘What I feared and disliked I have begun to like, and municipal work 
has begun to have some fascination for me. I feel that it is in the power of our 
board to make life a little more bearable, a little less painful to the inhabitants 
of Allahabad.' 3 And he always retained this interest in his home town, con¬ 
tinued to keep an eye on its development and, even when engrossed in later 
years in national work, could find time to protest against vulgar posters or 
noisy brass bands. 4 

Once he had assumed this responsibility of the chairmanship, Jawaharlal 
worked hard. Himself regular in attendance, whenever he was in Allahabad, 
at meetings which were held at least twice a week, he deplored the tendency 
of the members to look to their own convenience and urged them to sacrifice 
their own professional work, if need be, for the sake of the municipality. 3 
Indeed, he almost coerced his colleagues to work as hard as he did, and rather 
than adjourn meetings for lack of a quorum, he directed members to wait 
so that they were driven to send for their truant colleagues. Soon after taking 
over as Chairman, he issued a public statement rebuking some members for 
idleness; 6 this had its effect, so that later he could agree to refrain from such 
public criticism. Chairmen and members of standing committees were told 
that, in addition to their routine work, they should inspect their departments 
periodically and introduce efficiency. Public grievances should be removed and, 

‘Circular letter of Jawaharlal as secretary, prov. cong. committee to all district, town and ttbsil 
Congress committees and members of prov. Cong, committee, 5 April 1923. 

*To Collector of Allahabad, 4 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13. 

* Letter to the Executive Officer, Allahabad Municipality, written from Nabha jail, 26 September 
192.3, The Ueder, 6 October 1923. 

4 See, for example, his letters to the Chairman, Allahabad Municipal Board, 24 September 1936 
and 11 July 1939. 

’Meeting of 26 April 1923, reported in Tbt Ltadtr, 28 April 1923. 

*Ti* Ltadtr, 16 June 1923. 



90 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


where this was not possible, satisfactory explanations should be provided. 
‘Members have not been put on committees for show purposes but for hard 
work. It will perhaps be better for any member who finds it difficult to give 
enough time to his committee work to resign and make room for another 
who can give the necessary time.’ 1 He also forbade member* to exercise 
patronage in appointments or to secure municipal contracts or any other 
favours from the Board. 2 But he soon won the confidence of all groups on the 
Board and was able to direct the proceedings on the lines he desired. It was 
the nominated Anglo-Indian member who, but two months after voting 
against Jawaharlal, sought an assurance from him that there was no truth 
in the rumour of his resignation; 3 and in 1924 the Board unanimously re¬ 
quested the Government not to accept Jawaharlal’s resignation and, if this 
were not feasible, to permit the Board to re-elect him. 4 

The secret of JawaharlaTs influence was his manifest integrity. On one 
occasion, one of the vice-chairmen, Zahur Ahmed, offered his resignation 
orally but retracted it after its acceptance by Jawaharlal. Realizing that he 
had erred in acting on an oral resignation, Jawaharlal requested the Board to 
censure him. ‘I think that the Board would be justified in expressing its dis¬ 
pleasure of this action and I can assure the Board that I will appreciate this. 
I believe in discipline and no one should be above it. 3 The Board declined 
and stood by Jawaharlal’s action, but was persuaded by him to cancel its vote 
of confidence and permit Zahur Ahmed to continue in office. 6 While he did 
not conceal his views on major issues, he never permitted the Congress 
majority to push matters to extremes, and in minor matters he voted, as was 
expected from a chairman, against any change. He turned down the request 
of the municipal employees that they be allowed to suspend work on Jallian- 
wala Bagh day, for he knew that they were only interested in a holiday. He 
secured the rejection of the proposal of a member belonging to the Congress 
party that the Board dispense with chairs and conduct proceedings while 
sitting on the floor, by pointing out that this had nothing to do with swadeshi. 1 
He encouraged the wearing of khaddar by municipality employees and the use 
of Hindi or Urdu in official transactions but rejected suggestions that these 
be made obligatory. 8 He supported the passing of a resolution deploring the 
treatment of Indians in the United States and the British colonies, but rejected 
as impractical suggestions for retaliation such as doubling municipal taxes 
on Englishmen and Americans or debarring them from buying land. 9 

'Chairman's circular, 13 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 4. Serial 1. 

*Tbe Leadtr, 16 November 1923. 

J The Leader, 13 June 1923. 

4 Proceedings of 29 April 1924, reported in The AUababad Municipal Gazette, 1 May 1924. 

’ Note 19 July 1924, Allahabad Municipality File 6. 

6 Proceedings of the Board, 23, 24, 23, 28 and 31 July 1924. 

7 Report in The Leader, 3 May 1923. 

■Report in The Leader, 7 July 1923: The Allahabad Municipal GaHtte, 16 December 1923. 

’Proceedings of the Board, 9 October 1923. 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 


91 


From the municipal officials he expected efficiency but was loyal to those 
who served him well — and those who were surprised by his support of mem* 
bers of the Indian Gvil Service after 1947 would have done well to study 
his attitude years earlier as municipal chairman. He had no illusions about 
dvil servants. ‘Permanent officials who are not under popular control, as we 
know to our cost, are a danger against which we must guard. They are too 
wooden, and utterly out of touch with the people, and have no sense of propor¬ 
tion or vision. They always tend to make a close corporation of themselves, 
indulge in mutual praise and are wholly intolerant of people Who differ from 
them.’ 1 But he was willing, in the conduct of municipal affairs, to co-operate 
with Government servants so long as the public interests and the principles 
of the Congress were not jeopardized. 2 As he told the Collector, he and his 
fellow Congressmen had not sought election purely for discovering oppor¬ 
tunities of friction, with the Government. ‘Mr. Knox and I agreed that it was 
hardly possible for us to convince each other of the correctness of the other’s 
viewpoint on wider issues. That difference must be faced, but in the routine 
work of the Board this will hardly trouble anyone.’ 3 He instructed the heads 
of departments to get rid of incompetent subordinates with all speed and 
without mercy. 4 Within a week of taking charge of his office, he suspended 
a dispatcher and a messenger for delay in delivering a letter. 'I shall be obliged 
if you will make it clear to every member of the staff that if there is one thing 
which will not be tolerated it is incompetence and slackness and any instance 
of this will be severely dealt with ... no kind of effective work is possible 
unless our office is run on business lines.’ 3 Informed that the engineering 
staff was efficient in its work but slack in sending reports, he recorded, ‘I am 
afraid the staff will have to get over this aversion to pen and paper. Any slack¬ 
ness of this kind is most objectionable and is own brother to incompetence. 
It is impossible for a person who is slack to be efficient and I desire no slack 
ness in the municipal employ.’ 6 Delay, he informed the Board, 7 might be 
excused but it was seldom justifiable; and he expected prompt resuite. ‘Success 
and failure will be the teste applied. In case of the latter excuses will not find 
favour with the board, and immediate and drastic action will be taken. Only 
such officers will be-employed who are prepared for this responsibility.’’ 8 But 
those officials who worked well received the chairman’s full support even 
in face of public criticism and satyagrabtr, 9 and no bureaucrat could have 

‘Note of 24 July 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 26. 

J Speech at Ballia, 9 April, reported in Tbs Lsadsr, 11 April 1924. 

5 Note on interview with Collector, 6 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13. 

4 Jawaharlal’s note on municipal work, April-May 1923, dated 10 June 1923. Tbs Lsadsr, 
16 June 1923. 

’Note to Executive Officer, 6 April 1923, Allahabad Municipality File 13. 

*17 December 1923. Tbs Allahabad Municipal Gaxstts Extraordinary, 21 December 1923. 
’Proceedings of the meeting of the Board, 16 January 1923. 

•Note on the Water-Works Dept., Tbs Lsadsr, 30 April 1923. 

•jawaharlal’s letter to the editor, 18 April, published in Tbs Lsadsr, 21 April 1924. 



92 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


improved on his rebuke to the Public Health Committee: ‘Has the Committee 
ever heard of discipline? What does it think will be the effect of the Committee 
siding with some employees of the Board as against a high officer ... It is 
difficult for officers to carry on their work properly if they are censured and 
condemned in this manner for trivial details.’ 1 • 

Most important of all, Jawaharlal was clearly above sectarian prejudices. 
His guidance enabled the Board unanimously to reject the suggestion to 
prohibit the slaughter of cattle; 2 and the next week he reminded the members 
that while Christian missionaries had originally certainly come to India to 
convert Indians, at the same time their object was also to benefit India as far 
as possible. 3 

Such moderation and impartiality gave Jawaharlal a commanding influence. 
He first turned his attention to formulating a scheme for widening the muni¬ 
cipal franchise and ensuring fair elections. He desired the abolition of plural 
constituencies and the replacement of communal by proportional representa¬ 
tion. He also suggested, to avoid impersonation, smaller constituencies and 
personal registration of voters. 4 But electoral reform was beyond the purview 
of the Municipal Board. Jawaharlal had to content himself with introducing, 
whenever possible, the spirit of nationalism in municipal .administration and 
implementing the constructive, nation-building programme of the Congress. 
The singing of Iqbal’s Hindustan Honiara (Our Hindustan) was made a part of 
the school curriculum. Tilak Day (1 August), the anniversary of the death of 
Tilak, and Gandhi Day (18 March), the anniversary of the day when Gandhi 
was sentenced to jail, were added to the list of public holidays, while Empire 
Day was omitted. The release of Gandhi in February 1924 was celebrated by 
the illumination of municipal buildings. Civic addresses were presented to the 
Congress leaders Das, Ajmal Khan and Shaukat Ali. The United Provinces 
Government sought to prevent such defiance by directing that civic addresses 
should be presented only to the Viceroy and the Governor of the province, but 
Jawaharlal secured the unanimous rejection by the Board of this directive, 
which he termed ‘an insult and impertinence’. In other words, even the nomi¬ 
nated and non-Congress members supported his assertion of the Board's inde¬ 
pendence on such matters? Jawaharlal made it clear to his colleagues that they 
should be prepared for the consequences of their disobedience; but in fact it was 
the Provincial Government which had to withdraw from their position. 6 

This was soon followed by the Board’s decision to ignore a viceregal visit 
to Allahabad. Jawaharlal was ill at the time of Reading’s arrival, but he cir¬ 
culated a note to the members of the Board emphatically objecting to the 

‘Note, 4 April 1924, Allahabad Municipality File 16. 

Proceedings, 29 June 1923, reported in The Leader, 2 July 1923- 

’Proceedings, 3 July 1923, reported in The Leader, 7 July 1923. 

4 Note, 10. May 1923, Allahabad MunicioaUty File 3. 

y The Leader, 29 June 1923. 

6 Tbe Leader, 2 July and 10 September 1923. 



escape into administration 


93 


presentation of an address to the Viceroy, who hyd ordered the arrest of Gandhi 
and many others, and was suppressing the Sikh agitation in the Punjab. 

I feel that a public reception to the Viceroy is a shameful thing for any 
one to whom the honour of India is dear and precious. I wish no personal 
discourtesy to Lord Readipg. But we are human beings with eyes to see 
and, sometimes, to weep and ears to hear and hearts to feel — and feel the 
more because our arms are weak and there is no strength in us to stand 
upright and protect our own . . . Lord Reading, secure in his strength 
and proud of his might, has flung this challenge to the Sikhs and the 
Indian people and he would have us applaud him for it and thus complete 
our degradation. I am weak and powerless but I too have a little pride — 
the pride of the weak, perhaps,, it may be, but I would sooner be trampled 
by Lord Reading’s soldiery than bow down to welcome a person who was 
responsible for so much sorrow to my country and countrymen. 1 

Jawaharlal also secured the introduction of spinning and weaving in schools, 
and rejected the objection of the Commissioner of Allahabad Division to what 
seemed to the latter to be a Congress measure. 

We have laid great stress on spinning in our schools because we believe 
in its economic value. I have little doubt that if you considered the ques¬ 
tion on its merits and without the prejudices born of political opinions 
you will appreciate the attempts to revive spinning and put it on a firm 
basis. If you will take the trouble to learn spinning yourself you will after 
a few days feel its charm and delight in the music of the wheel. Spinning 
is not a party matter confined to a particular group. 2 * * 

Most of the teachers and the boys and girls dressed in khaddar. 

Jawaharlal was eager to improve the quality of instruction imparted in the 
municipal schools, to raise the salaries of teachers, to make education compul¬ 
sory and to train children to be good citizens who neither cringed nor boasted. 

‘I have felt that the physical and mental development of the young should be the 
special care of the state and the municipality and in this respect we might well 
take a leaf out of the book of Soviet Russia.’ 9 Scouting was introduced for boys 
and a day’s outing was arranged every month for all children for nature study. 
But as Government declined to give further grants for education which was 
directed to encouraging the ’new spirit’, it could only be given low priority by 
the Board, after the maintenance of the basic municipal services — sanitation, 
water supply and the upkeep of roads. The staff of sanitary inspectors was in- 

1 Tbe Bombay Chronicle, 27 October 1923. . 

2 Tbe Tribune, 27 August 1924. 

*A note on municipal work during December 1923 and January and February 1924,' Allahabad 

Municipal Gazette, 1 April 1924. 



94 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


creased, and better arrangements made for the disposal of refuse. As the water¬ 
works plant was worn out, there could be no marked improvement in water 
supply; but even so, many new water connections were provided. As for roads, 
Jawaharlal observed that although more was being spent on roads than ever 
before, many roads in the city had so deteriorated that soon it would be impos¬ 
sible for vehicles to use them . 1 ‘In some places it is difficult to get any medical 
advice as no vehicle can safely go there and doctors refuse to walk the distance 
especially when this will involve wallowing in the mud .' 2 Jawaharlal thought 
the reason for this was that a great part of the municipal funds allotted for roads 
was being utilized to improve and beautify the Civil Station where Europeans 
and the richer dass of Indians lived. This led him to suggest a tax on large com¬ 
pounds, which were to be found mostly in the Civil Station, for he thought that 
this area should be more built up and the compounds become smaller and better 
looked after. The income of the Board would also be raised and the general 
appearance of Allahabad would improve. He also wished to tax open sites whose 
owners, interested in land speculation, had failed to build on. There should be 
a tax both on land value and on improvements and houses, but in such a way 
that the latter were encouraged . 3 But nothing came of these suggestions. Nor, 
because of the recalcitrant attitude of the Allahabad Town Improvement Trust, 
dominated by civil servants and loyalists, was he able to implement any of his 
ideas on town planning. 

However, Jawaharlal could show more substantial results in the matter of 
improvement of municipal finances. He was convinced that the rates would 
have to be increased, but in such a way as to limit the increase’s incidence to the 
rich. Unwilling to raise money at the expense of the poorer classes, he rejected 
the suggestion of an octroi duty on cycles 4 and exempted houses with a low 
rental value from payment of water rates . 3 He also terminated the practice 
whereby octroi was levied on foreign goods at the ‘invoice* rate, while Indian 
goods were charged at the market rate which often was higher, with the suit 
that Indian goods paid more. It was laid down that the market rate should be 
the wholesale and not the retail rate, although this meant a loss in income. 
Jawaharlal urged that a heavier rate be charged on foreign goods so as to en¬ 
courage Indian manufacturers , 6 but the Board resolved on a complete boycott 
of British goods unless they were not manufactured elsewhere in the world or 
were not available in India . 7 

'Proceedings of Board meeting, 28 May 1924, The Leader, 2 June 1924. 

2 Jawaharlal's note on municipal work, June-August, 1923, Allahabad Municipal Gazette Extra¬ 
ordinary, 1$ September 1923. 

5 Note on municipal work, December 1923-February 1924, Allahabad Municipal Gazette, 

I April 1924; Jawaharlal's note on taxation, 28 August 1924, The Leader, 6 September 1924. 

* The Leader, 7 July 1923. 

’Annual Administration Report of the Allahabad Municipaf Board, 30 May 1924. 
•Jawaharlal’s notes on municipal work, June-August 1923 and September-November 1923, 
Allahabad Municipal Gazettes Extraordinary, 13 September 1923 and 21 December 1923, 
respectively. 

’Proceedings of the meeting, 23 October 1923, reported in The Loader, 27 October 1923. 



ESCAPE INTO ADMINISTRATION 


95 


Yet, despite these decisions, the Municipal Board under Jawaharlal’s guild 
ance, by more efficient collection of taxes, increased levy on railways passing 
through the city, and the imposition of a new cax on passengers, improved its 
financial position, paid back, for the first time for years, a part of the loan receiv¬ 
ed from the Government, and set self-sufficiency as its objective. 

Jawaharlal’s work attracted wide public attention because, apart from his 
general standing, he issued a fortnightly municipal gazette reporting the pro¬ 
ceedings of the Board and its committees and, in addition to the annual report, 
gave a detailed account of municipal activities once every three months. There 
were also Hindi and Urdu editions of the gazette. For the first time, too, the 
average citizen of Allahabad felt that he had a municipal chairman who was 
accessible and concerned with his welfare. The ekkawalas (drivers of horse 
carriages), for example, approached him with their grievances and on investi¬ 
gation Jawaharlal was astounded to find that in three months about 1,400 pro¬ 
secutions had been initiated against them by the police. This was not the direct 
concern of the Municipal Board, but it convinced Jawaharlal that something 
was very wrong somewhere, and he induced the Board to do what it could to 
make the life of the ekkawalas more tolerable. 1 

Jawaharlal had also, from the start, kept in close touch and exchanged ideas 
with the ten other Congress chairmen of municipal boards in the United Pro¬ 
vinces, 2 and he was elected Chairman of the United Provinces Municipal Con¬ 
ference that met at Aligarh in December 1924. 1'his provincial conference 
accepted Jawaharlal’s proposals that training as scouts should be made part of 
physical education in schools, adult franchise introduced for municipal elec¬ 
tions and the autonomy of municipal boards protected. These recommenda¬ 
tions were in line with his view that municipalities could become minor arenas 
for national education and for constructive national and political work. He also, 
however, knew that the real arena for national advance lay elsewhere. In Feb¬ 
ruary 1924 he was dissuaded by Gandhi from resigning the chairmanship; 3 
but at the Congress session in December presided over by Gandhi he opposed 
a resolution advocating the capture by Congressmen, whenever possible, of 
local boards and municipalities. His own experience, he said, had convinced 
him that Congressmen in these boards were so restricted that the effort was 
futile; and on his return from the Belgaum Congress he resigned both his chair¬ 
manship and membership of the Board, ostensibly on the ground that he had 
little time to devote to municipal work. Three years later, in 1928, he allowed 
himself to be dragged again into municipal politics and even, despite Gandhi’s 
advice, 4 permitted his name to be put forward for the chairmanship; but on this 
occasion he was, surprisingly, defeated by one vote by the loyalist candidate. 3 

’Jawaharlal's note on municipal work, June-August 1923, op. cit. 

2 See Allahabad Municipality File 22. 

*Mahadeva Desai, Day to Day with Gandhi (Banaras, 1970), vol. 4, p. 22. • 

4 ‘My conviction is that you cannot combine all India work with solid municipal work.' Gandhi 
to Jawaharlal, 28 November 1928. 

*Tba Laadar, 20 and 21 December 1928. \ 



96 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


His two years in municipal office could not have given Jawaharlal much 
cause for satisfaction. For a man who believed that a municipality should not 
confine itself to such matters as housing and sanitation but should regard social 
welfare in its widest sense as its primary concern, the disappointment could not 
be glossed over. But it was astonishing how much he had succeeded in achiev¬ 
ing, despite the inherent limitations of the post and the demands of his wider 
interests. Even the Commissioner was compelled to record reluctantly his 
impression that ‘the improvement in the administration was largely due to the 
chairman, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, and a few public spirited members of the 
Board.’ 1 The comment of the U.P. Government at the time of Jawaharlal’s 
relinquishment of the chairmanship is also worth mention. ‘Pandit Kapildeo 
Malaviya’, they wrote in April 1925, ‘was elected chairman of the Allahabad 
Municipal Board by (a majority of) two votes, in succession to Jawaharlal 
Nehru, who strove to show that a swarajist could be an administrator and a 
gentleman, and the Commissioner thinks that the newcomer’s position will 
be very difficult.’ 2 


1 The Tribune, 24 August 1924. 

2 Fortnightly report on die political situation in the United Provinces*for the second half of 
March 1925. Home Dept. Pol. 1925, File 112. 



8 


Europe 1926-1927 


On 1 March 1926 Jawaharlal sailed with his wife and child for Europe, The 
trip was undertaken primarily in the cause of his wife’s health. It was hoped that 
a long stay in Switzerland would help her to shake off the tuberculosis that was 
still in an incipient stage, while her husband would spend his time in study and 
travel. But these two years, while they did Kamala little good, were to have a 
profound effect on Jawaharlal’s mental development. Till now he had been one 
of the ordinary run of conforming nationalists, an unquestioning follower of 
the Mahatma. The Government of the United Provinces, reporting their deci¬ 
sion to give him a passport, summed up his position: ‘He is a devoted follower 
of Gandhi, is much respected and carries great influence with his party.’ 1 An 
over-enthusiastic district magistrate had suggested to Jawaharlal that he should 
facilitate the issue of a passport by giving an assurance that he was not visiting 
Europe for political purposes; but neither at Lucknow nor at Simla did Jawahar- 
lal’s refusal to give any such assurance cause any hesitation in permitting him 
to leave. He was not regarded as particularly dangerous, and it seemed worth 
while to keep his father in good humour. But it was this spell in Europe, and 
not the earlier years at Harrow and Cambridge, that was to provide Jawaharlal 
with his real political education; and here again it was Gandhi who was the 
most perceptive. ‘I expect', he wrote to Motilal on the eve of the family’s depar¬ 
ture, ‘great results from this trip, not only for Kamla [sic] but also for 
Jawaharlal.’ 2 

In leaving India, Jawaharlal felt somewhat of a deserter. 

I am certainly looking forward to the visit to Europe but I am full of appre¬ 
hension. It is quite likely that when I get there I shall be looking 
backward to India! It is good to have a change and a holiday but this 
should rest on the solid foundation of something accomplished. The idea 
of going away just at present with your mother as president of the 

‘Letter of Chief Secretary to Government, United Provinces, to Home Secretary, Government 
of India, 6 February 1926. Home Dept. Pol. File 23 of 1926. 

*17 February 1926, Colbettd Works, vol. 30 (Delhi, 1968), p. 20. 

97 



99 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Congress and Gandhiji toiling away as ever is not particularly gratifying. 
On the whole perhaps it is as well that 1 am going but I doubt if I shall be 
very happy there. Indiaissolikeawoman — she attracts and repels. 1 

It was the sense of relief, however, which grew as the months passed. Indian 
politics at this time were in a low and grim condition. The Congress was riven 
with dissension, and even within the Swaraj Party Motilal was fighting a losing 
battle against opportunism. Communal tension was rising, and many old Con¬ 
gressmen were reacting to events more as Hindus and Muslims than as natio¬ 
nalists. Gandhi had not lost heart, but even he was reconciled to the situation 
getting much worse before it began to improve. ‘I must confess’, wrote Jawahar- 
lal to his father later in the year, 2 ‘to a feeling of satisfaction at not being in 
India just at present.-Indeed the whole future outlook is so gloomy that, from 
the political viewpoint, a return to India is far from agreeable. ’ Settled in Geneva 
in cheap lodgings, his principal occupations now, besides nursing his wife and 
escorting his daughter to school and back, were learning French, reading widely 
and attending various courses and lectures. 

The older I grow the more I feel that there is so much to be learnt and 
studied and so little time to do it in. Most of us after a very perfunctory 
education imagine that we have learnt as much as is necessary and do not 
even attempt to increase our knowledge. This is sad for progress can only 
come with knowledge and the few years that we spend at school and 
college teach us precious little. 3 

t 

Bertrand Russell’s books, particularly On Education and What 1 Believe, 
made a deep impact. 

I think what is required in India most is a course of study of Bertrand 
Russell’s books, or at any rate some of them. No country or people who 
are slaves to dogma and the dogmatic mentality can progress, and un¬ 
happily our country and people have become extraordinarily dogmatic 
and little-minded. Generosity of heart is a good thing but what is wanted 
is not an emotional outburst of generosity but coldly reasoned tolerance. 4 

Like Gandhi he was a long-term, far-seeing optimist about India: 'The outlook 
in India is dark enough but somehow I do not feel as pessimistic as the news 
would warrant. Do not get down-hearted. We shall still see Swaraj. Whatever 

*ToPadmaja Naidu, 29 January 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 226. In December 1925, Sarojini Naidu 
bed taken over as President of the Congress. 

•6 October 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 244. 

’To Syed Mahmud, 22 March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 314. 

4 Idem, 12 September 1926, S.W., vol. 2, p. 242. * 



EUROPE 1926-1927 


99 


India might or might not do, I am fairly sore that England cannot hold on to 
India for long.’ 1 The news from India of communal rioting depressed him, but 
he was convinced that the only remedy was to scotch this so-called religion, 
secularize the intelligentsia at least and proceed on secular lines in politics. 
‘How long that will take I cannot say but religion in India will kill that country 
and its peoples if it is not subdued.’ Europe, as Jawaharlal saw it, had got rid of 
religion by mass education which had followol industrialism, with the result 
that conflicts were now not religious but economic; and the same process was 
bound to be repeated in India. 2 This was, of course, too easy and hopeful a solu¬ 
tion, based on a somewhat simplistic understanding of European developments. 
But Jawaharlal was still* optimist enough to believe that religious differences 
in India would be automatically dissolved by economic advance, and therefore 
gave no serious thought to it. 

By the end of the year it was dear that Kamala had benefited little from the 
treatment of Spahlinger’s vaccine injections; so Jawaharlal dedded to shift her 
from Geneva to Dr Stephani’s dinic in the more bracing climate of Montana 
(Valais). The move to the mountains enabled Jawaharlal to take lessons in ski¬ 
ing and ice-skating; but he was beginning to feel restive, for the wider world 
and for India. He could not as yet return to India; his wife was still far from wdl 
and Motilal was planning a trip to the West. So the family started their wander¬ 
ings round Europe. There were visits to the museums of London, Paris, Berlin 
and Heiddberg, tours of factories and interviews with Indian exiles and revolu¬ 
tionaries. Jawaharlal was at Paris airport, with his daughter perched on his 
shoulder, 3 waiting for Lindbergh to complete his lone journey across the 
Atlantic — an achievement which greatly impressed him for its human daring 
and resolution. Always keen on flying* and having himself done two short 
hops at this time from Londbn, once to Paris and once to Ostend, Jawaharlal 
urged his countrymen to become more air-minded. 4 

However, the real significance of these travels was that Jawaharlal now 
came into contact with European political workers and movements, and these 
gave a new depth to his thinking and activities. The discursive reading under¬ 
taken in Switzerland had ploughed up his mind; it was ready for new seeds but 
had not yet received them. A letter published in the Journal de Geneve was 
staunchly nationalist in tone and expounded the standard arguments about 
the traditional unity of India and the impoverishments and divisions brought 
about by British rule; 3 but there was no glimmer of any fresh effort at inter-, 
pretation. In an article published in India, he advocated complete independence 

> Idem, 11 August 1926, S.W„ vol. 2, p. 241. 

a Mem, 24 May, IS July and 11 August 1926 and 14 July 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 232*6,240*41 
and 328-9. 

’Mrs Gandhi’s broadcast reported in the Hindustan Timas, 24 July 1969. 

4 Letter to his father, 16 November 1926, and *V ictory over the Air', article in Aaf, 28 September 
1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 250-51 and 364-7, respectively. # 

*3 August 1926, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 236-240. 



100 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


in the sense of full freedom in both external and internal affairs and favoured 
the formation of an extremist pressure-group within the Congress to counter 
the activities of those who tried to hold the organization back. 1 This received 
wide publicity and, as Motilal complained, was generally interpreted as a criti¬ 
cism of the Swaraj Party and of its leadership: ‘it is the most famous document 
in India at the present moment and is being used for a variety of purposes not 
even dreamt of by you.’ 2 Jawaharlal was irritated equally by the Liberals, the 
Swarajists, and the no-changers, all of whom seemed to have more or less the 
same moderate mentality. 

The mention of Independence frightens them and every effort is made 
to dissociate oneself from the idea or from its implications. The Indian 
States and foreign policy are taboo and not to be discussed; the army and 
problems of defence are beyond us, and so we spend all our energy in 
protesting, with varying degrees of emphasis, against internments and 
imprisonments and regulations etc. I am afraid this very tame and consti¬ 
tutional and legal and proper and reasonable activity raises no enthusiasm 
in me. 3 

But while there was commitment and impatience, there was no fresh line of 
analysis. 

The turning-point in Jawaharlal’s mental development was the invitation 
to help in organizing — and to participate as the representative of the Indian 
National Congress in — the International Congress against Colonial Oppres¬ 
sion and Imperialism to be held at Brussels in February 1927. The chief 
organizer of the conference was Willi Muenzenberg, who ‘really invented 
the fellow-traveller’. 4 The Soviet Union kept severely aloof and no one from 
that country attended the conference, though, as Jawaharlal realized even at 
the time, 9 the objectives of the conference were wholly in accordance with 
Soviet foreign policy and were intended to bring together the forces of anti¬ 
colonialism and organized labour as against imperialism, especially British 
imperialism. This did not frighten Jawaharlal and he suggested that a large 
delegation, including an economist and an expert on military matters, be sent 
from India by the Congress, 6 but in fact he was the only delegate. 

Clearly, at such a conference where the prime target was British imperia¬ 
lism, the official representative of the Indian Congress would be an important 

'Article in Pratap, December 1926. 

2 13 January 1927. 

’To A. Rangaswamy Iyengar, general secretary of the Congress, 23 January 1927, S.W., vol. 2, 
pp. 258-9. 

4 Hugh Thomas, The Spanish Civil War (Peiican edition, 1968), footnote on pp. 283-6. 

’See his confidential report to the Working Committee, 19 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2. 
pp. 278-97' ■ % 

6 To his father, 16 November 1926, S. W„ vol.2, pp. 250-31. 



EUROPE 1926-1927 


101 


figure; and Jawaharlal was appointed one of the members of the Presidium. 
He arrived at Brussels on 6 February, took part in all the informal meetings, 
presided over one of the formal sessions and played a leading role in the drafting 
of many of the resolutions. ‘I am dead tired’, he wrote from Brussels on the 
16th, 1 ‘after 8 or 9 days of the Congress here. I have not had a good night’s 
sleep and hardly a decent meal since I came here.’ It was a strange medley of 
delegates — European Communists, trade unionists and pacifists, nationalists 
from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and secret service agents — with many 
delegates doubling the roles. However, Jawaharlal could not but be influenced 
by some of the men and women he met here — Henri Barbusse, George Lans- 
bury, Ellen Wilkinson, Fenner Brockway, Harry Pollitt, Reginald Bridgman, 
Edo Fimmen, Willi Muenzenburg, Ernst Toller, Mohammed Hatta and 
Roger Baldwin, apart from a large number of delegates from China, Africa, 
Mexico and Latin America — and his fallow mind was receptive to Marxist and 
radical ideas. 

In his first statement to the press, Jawaharlal merely emphasized the 
common element in the struggles against imperialism in various parts of the 
world; the fabric of imperialism looked imposing and appeared to hold to¬ 
gether, but any rent in it would automatically lead to its total destruction. 
Indian nationalism was based on the most intense internationalism, just as the 
problem of Indian freedom was a world problem; as in the past, so in the future, 
other countries and peoples would be vitally affected by the condition of India. 
But his speech at the inaugural session of the conference was at a deeper level. 
Jawaharlal pointed out that India was the prime example of imperialism. She 
had been continuously exploited and terrorized by the British, and her workers 
and peasants had been systematically crushed. ‘It does not require statistics, 
facts or figures to convince you that India in the course of the last few genera¬ 
tions had terribly deteriorated, and is in such a bad way that if something dras¬ 
tic is not done to stop this process India may even cease to exist as a nation.’ It 
was the policy of the British to create differences among Indians or, where they 
already existed, to increase them, to maintain the feudal princes in power, to 
support the rich landowners and to promote an unholy alliance of British and 
Indian capitalists. ‘Naturally, therefore,’ concluded Jawaharlal, introducing 
into his articulated thought a consciousness of the interlinking of economics 
and politics, ‘from their capitalist and imperialist point of view they wanted to 
do everything in their power to hold on to India.’ For the first time, instead of 
merely condemning British imperialism, Jawaharlal had tried to understand 
the motives, manner and methods of its functioning. His mind had taken a 
big step forward. 

The resolution on India, drafted by Jawaharlal, accorded the warm support 
of the conference to the liberation of India from foreign domination and all 

1 To, A. Rangaswamy Iyengar, 16 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 277. * 



102 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


kinds of exploitation as an essential step in the full emancipation of the peoples 
of the world. The peoples and workers of other countries should fully co¬ 
operate in this task and in particular take effective steps to prevent the dispatch 
of foreign troops to India and the retention of an army of occupation in India. 
This was really meant by Jawaharlal for his audience in India, to weaken ‘the 
extraordinary mentality which clings on to the British connection in spite of 
everything’ and took the presence of British troops for granted. Similarly, to 
goad the Indian National Congress into looking beyond political freedom, 
Jawaharlal, in the last paragraph of the resolution, expressed the hope of the 
conference that the Indian national movement would base its programme on 
the full emancipation of the peasants and workers of India, ‘without which 
there can be no real freedom’, and would co-operate with the movements for 
emancipation in other parts of the world. 

Apart from India, the chief planks of the conference were China and 
Mexico. At this time in China the Kuomintang, in short-lived alliance with 
the Communists, was riding on a wave of nationalism and seeking to unite the 
country; and the Chinese delegation to the Brussels conference, to a large 
extent official, was hoping to enlist the sympathy, if not support, of public 
opinion and labour organizations in other countries. A joint declaration of the 
Indian and Chinese delegations, clearly drafted by Jawaharlal, bears the marks 
of an outlook which was to remain unchanged for over thirty years. Friendship 
with China was the core of his pan-Asian feeling. The declaration, in line with 
the prevalent attitude of cultural nationalism in India and its stress on the 
ancient civilizations of the East, recalled the close cultural ties between the 
peoples of India and China for over three thousand years and blamed the 
British for fostering ill-will against India in China by utilizing Indian merce- 
napy troops ‘in support of British capitalist brigandage’. It was therefore urgent 
and essential that the Indian people should be educated regarding China, and 
British imperialism should be simultaneously engaged on two of its most vital 
fronts. ‘We must now resume the ancient personal, cultural and political rela¬ 
tions between the two peoples. British imperialism which in the past has kept 
us apart and done us so much injury, is now the very force that is uniting us in 
a common endeavour to overthrow it.’ The Indian and Chinese delegations 
thereafter persuaded the British delegation, representative of the British Com¬ 
munist Party, the Independent Labour Party and certain sections of the Labour 
Party, to commit themselves to support the oppressed countries in their fight 
for ‘full independence’ (a phrase preferred by the British to ‘severance of the 
British connexion’), to oppose all forms of coercion against colonial peoples, 

. to vote against all credits for the maintenance of armed forces to be used against 
oppressed nations and to cany on propaganda among British troops. In parti- 
cular, the British delegation promised to advocate direct action, including 
strikes and embargoes, to prevent the movement of munitions and troops to 
China, and demanded unconditional recognition of the nationalist Govern- 



EUIOPE 1926-1927 


103 


ment, abolition of unequal treaties and of extraterritorial rights and surrender 
of foreign concessions. 

The Chinese delegation was keen on promoting contacts between the 
Kuomintang and the Indian Congress and on educating Indian opinion on the 
Chinese question. Jawaharlal realized that the British Government could 
prevent exchange of visits at any level, but he felt that the effort should be 
made. ‘It is up to us in India to do something practical for China. Vague resolu¬ 
tions of sympathy do not carry one far.’ What he had in mind was the dispatch 
of an ambulance unit of twenty to twenty-five volunteers. 1 This was intended 
not only to encourage cordial relations between India and China; Jawaharlal 
was also anxious to widen the vision of Indian nationalism. He saw too the 
importance to the world of the future of China, especially as at this time the 
Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party were acting in alliance. What 
was happening in China, therefore, was not merely an assault on foreign im¬ 
perialism but a direct attack on the capitalist system. 

A victory for the Chinese means the creation of a great Soviet republic 
in the East closely allied with Russia and together with it gradually domi¬ 
nating the whole of Asia and Europe. This does not mean that the 
Chinese Republic will be fashioned- wholly on the lines laid down by 
Marx. Even Soviet Russia, owing to the pressure of the peasantry, has 
had to give up part of its communism, and in China where the small 
peasant is the deciding factor, the departure from pure communism 
will be all the greater. 2 

This prescience, the realization that if the alliance of Chinese parties held 
it would be the Communists and not the much larger Kuomintang who would 
determine the lines of the future, and the recognition that there would be a 
large indigenous element in Chinese communism, can only be regarded as 
astounding — especially as at this time Stalin’s agents were dominating the 
Chinese Communist Party. But this was not all. Jawaharlal proceeded to point 
out that Britain, even with the aid of other European countries, would be un¬ 
able to do much injury to the great continental bloc of Russia and China. ‘What 
is more likely is that England in order to save herself from extinction will be¬ 
come a satellite of the United States and incite the imperialism and capitalism 
of America to fight by her side.’ It was at Brussels that Jawaharlal for the first 
time, perhaps because of his meeting with the delegates from Mexico and 
other countries of America, discerned that Britain was fast losing its leader¬ 
ship to the United States. 

Most of us, specially from Asia, were wholly ignorant of the problems 
of South America, and of how the rising imperialism of the United States, 

1 Letter toN.S. Hardikar, 8 March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 304.'See also his article in Tf>e Volunteer, 
April 1927, on The Situation in China and India's Duty’, ibid., pp. 326-8. 

^Confidential report to die Working Committee, 19 February 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 281. 



104 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


with its tremendous resources and its immunity from outside attack, is 
gradually taking a stranglehold of central and south America. But we 
are not at liberty to remain ignorant much longer, for the great problem 
of the near future will be American imperialism, even more thaif British 
imperialism. Or it may be, and all indications point to it, that the two will 
join together to create a powerful Anglo-Saxon bloc to dominate the 
world. 

Jawaharlal expected, in face of the Chinese threat to imperialism, a world 
war in five years if not earlier. In any such war the North-West Frontier area 
of India would naturally be a principal battleground, and it was thought that 
the British were planning with this in view. Again, under the guise of en¬ 
couraging Indian industries, the British were seeking to make India a self- 
sufficient country in munitions and other sinews of war. Jawaharlal wished 
the Indian Congress to take cognizance of these developments and formulate 
its own policy and programme on that basis. There should be a strong agitation 
against British intervention in China and the utilization of Indian troops for 
this purpose. 

Jawaharlal s forecasts did not come immediately true, if only because the 
Kuomintang fell out with its Communist partner. But more than twenty years 
after this report was written, with the triumph of the Communists in China, 
the conclusion of a Sino-Soviet alliance, the formulation of a Chinese pattern 
of Communism and the evolution of Britain’s ‘special relationship’ with the 
United States, Jawaharlal was to be proved one of the most far-seeing prophets 
in world affairs in our age. 

The Brussels conference concluded with the issue of a manifesto based on 
the Marxist-Leninist theory of imperialism. It was asserted that European 
capitalism had battened on the exploitation of countries in Asia, Africa and 
America. In its latest phase of finance capitalism a few countries, and in them 
a few individuals, controlled the world. But the world war and its consequences 
had dearly shown that imperialist capitalism was its own grave-digger. A huge 
wave of the movement for national emandpation was passing over the world, 
and had received a mighty push forward from the Russian revolution and the 
formation of the Soviet Union. But the imperialists would not easily give up 
their booty, as was proved by the activities of ‘the worst adventurer of our time’, 
Winston Churchill. So the Brussels Conference dedded to found the League 
against Imperialism and for National Independence, to organize co-operation 
between nationalist movements in the colonial countries and labour and anti¬ 
imperialist movements in the exploiting countries. 

Jawaharlal does not seem to have taken an active part in drafting this mani¬ 
festo, originally written in French, and resented the way in which it was rushed 
through the conference. But by this time he had no very great objection to its 
sentiments. He had come round to the Marxist viewpoint in its broad essen- 



.EUROPE 1926-1927. 


105 


tials. He agreed that imperialism and capitalism went hand in hand and neither 
would disappear until both were put down. As against this, the forces opposing 
imperialism and capitalism should be co-ordinated so as to strengthen each 
other. In colonial countries, nationalism automatically and rightly took pre¬ 
cedence over all other ideologies, but such nationalism should have a broad 
basis, derive its strength from the masses and work specially for them. 

Jawaharlal was appointed an honorary president of the League as well as a 
member of the Executive Committee, though he declined appointment as one 
of the secretaries on the grounds that he would be away in India. But during 
his stay in Europe for the rest of the year he attended regularly the meetings of 
the Executive Committee. Though the Communists were only a minority in 
this body, they sought to dominate it, and Jawaharlal was one of the leaders of 
an effective resistance. Often irritated, but never angry, 1 he made it clear that 
while he accepted in its fundamentals the socialist theory of the state, he had 
‘the strongest objection to being led by the nose by the Russians or by anybody 
else’. 2 But he did not think there was much danger of this, and, so long as the 
Soviet Union tried to utilize the League on unobjectionable lines, he saw no 
harm in co-operating with her against British imperialism. So he recommended 
to the Working Committee that the Congress might become an associate memb¬ 
er of the League. It was possible that the League might develop, in contrast to the 
ineffective Leagufe of Nations, into a powerful League of Peoples; but this was 
not the reason why Jawaharlal advocated association of the Congress. He was 
enough of a realist not to place faith in such fantasies. Nor did he trust much 
to the support of British and other foreign working-class movements; 'almost 
every Englishman, however advanced he may be politically, is a bit of an im¬ 
perialist in matters relating to India.’ 3 He would have agreed broadly with 
Gandhi that India had little to expect from such bodies as this League, because 
most of the European states were partners in the exploitation of India, and 
their sympathy could not be expected in the final heat of the struggle. 4 He 
wrote to Gandhi: 3 

I do not expect much from it and indeed I am quite sure that none of the 
members of the so-called imperialist or oppressing nations will help us 
in the least whenever their interests conflict with ours. I have no illu¬ 
sions about their altruism. But I welcome all legitimate methods of 
getting into touch with other countries and peoples so that we may be 
able to understand their viewpoint and world politics generally. I do not 

1 Roger Baldwin’s recollections recorded in 1967, N.M.M.L. 

Confidential report to the Working Committee, S.W., vol. 2, p. 289. 

*Note for the Working Committee on a proposal to prepare a Parliamentary bill for India, 10 
March 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 306-7. 

4 See, for example, Gandhi to Motilai, 14 May 1927, Coiltcttd Works, vol. 33 (New Delhi, 
1969). p. 321. • 

* 22 April 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 326. 



106 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


think it is desirable, nor indeed is it possible for India to plough a lonely 
furrow now or in the future. It is solely with a view to self-education and 
self-improvement that I desire external contacts. I am afraid we are 
terribly narrow in our outlook and the sooner we get out of this narrow¬ 
ness the better. Our salvation can of course come only from the internal 
strength that we may evolve but one of the methods of evolving such 
strength should be study of other people and their ideas. 

Association would also enable the Congress to utilize the League as its vehicle 
for propaganda abroad without committing it to the adoption of a socialist 
programme or limiting its freedom of action in India or elsewhere. Moreover, 
the League could be used by the Asian members to keep in close touch. 
At Brussels many delegates from Asia, despite discouragement from the 
organizers, had met informally and talked in terms of forming an ‘Asiatic 
federation.’ But this was thought to be premature and it was decided, for the 
time being, to concentrate efforts on strengthening the League and promoting 
bilateral relations. 

However, it was the Soviet Union that now dominated Jawaharlal’s mind, 
just as it had, an unseen presence, dominated the Brussels conference. He read 
all that he could lay hands on, books both by partisans and by critics, about 
developments and conditions in that country, and found much to admire. He 
believed that whatever the tradition of hostility between Britain and Russia, 
to a free India she would be no threat; and even if India were wholly opposed 
to Communism she could have friendly relations with Russia. Jawaharlal, 
far-seeing as ever, recognized that as she grew in power Soviet Russia might 
develop a new type of imperialism; but he thought there was little chance of 
this for a long time to come, and for the moment, for reasons of self-interest, 
Russia was befriending all oppressed nationalities. 1 It seemed logical, there¬ 
fore, that he should visit the Soviet Union before returning to India; and the 
opportunity came, after Motilal’s arrival in Europe in the autumn, when father 
and son were invited to the decennial celebrations of the 1917 revolution. 
When they were at Berlin the Soviet ambassador conveyed the invitation to 
them; and though this was short notice they decided, after some hesitation, 
to accept it. 2 

The invitation came in the last phase of the Soviet policy of support for 
national liberation movements in Asia, regardless of their ideology. This was 
a heritage from Lenin, who had believed that colonial countries like India 
should have their bourgeois, democratic revolution before they could think of 
proletarian rule, and that therefore it was the duty of Communists to work at 
this stage in co-operation with the leadership of the bourgeoisie. So to Lenin 
Gandhi was a revolutionary, and he rejected the argument of M.N. Roy that 

*A Note on Foreign Policy for India, 13 September 1927, S.W., vol. 2, pp. 348-64. 

*Nehru to Amal Home, 20 October 1999, Nehru paper*. 



EUROPE 1926-1927 


107 


the Indian bourgeoisie was no different from the traditional feudal classes. 
The thesis of Lenin became the official policy of the Soviet Union and the Com¬ 
intern, and although by the end of 1922 there were the beginnings of Com¬ 
munist party organization in India, the general plan was for the Communists 
to infiltrate the Congress rather than promote a revolutionary mass party of 
their own. It was true that in May 1925 Stalin had accepted the position of 
Roy and advocated the formation of a revolutionary bloc in India led by the 
proletariat in general and the Communists in particular, and including the 
revolutionary section of the bourgeoisie. 1 But the other line of working with 
bourgeois leadership still held the field till the end of 1927. The Brussels 
Congress testified to the importance the Soviet Union still attached to bour¬ 
geois nationalist movements; and the severance of diplomatic relations by 
Britain in 1927 followed by strong rumours of British preparations for military 
invasion, with Peshawar as a base, 2 led to a war scare in the Soviet Union. 
Now more than ever it seemed invaluable to have the sympathy, if not the 
active support, of the Congress Party. 

A change in Soviet attitude came towards the end of 1927. The setbacks in 
China and the failure of the efforts to reach a rapprochement with the Western 
Powers unnerved the makers of Soviet and Comintenf policy; and Stalin, who 
was now finally emerging as the victor in his rivalry with Trotsky, viewed the 
colonial question only against the background of European events and had a 
more limited idea of the security of the Soviet Union. At the Fifteenth Party 
Congress, Bukharin made it clear that the bourgeoisie in India could no longer 
be supported. The Sixth Congress of the Third International formally aban¬ 
doned in 1928 the policy of a united front against imperialism and directed the 
Indian Communist Party to act in isolation and work for an armed insurrec¬ 
tion, for the bourgeois nationalist parties had become supporters of imperialism 
and, having assumed ‘a reformist and class-collaborationist character’, could 
not be expected to lead the revolution. 

So November 1927 was the last occasion, for many years at any rate, when 
the Nehrus could expect an official invitation to Moscow. They were in Russia 
for only a few days, but the articles which Jawaharial wrote for The Hindu 
covering this visit ami which were later published as a book, 3 show the deep 
impression made on him by 'this strange Eurasian country of the hammer 
and sickle, where workers and peasants sit on the thrones of the mighty and 
upset the best-laid schemes of mice and men’. 4 They were, he wrote to his 
sister from Moscow, 3 'in topsy turvy land. All one’s old values get upset and 
life wears a strange aspect here.' He knew that they were on a conducted tour, 
seeing only what they were allowed to see; he knew too that conditions in the 

1 D.N. Dnthe, Soviet Russia and Indian Communism (New York, 1939), p. 95. 

*Naw York Timas , 50 June 1927. 

*Soviai Russia, soma random skatcbas and knpnsshns (Allahabad, 1928). • 

♦ibid. 

*10 November 1927, S.W., vol. 2, p. 569. 



108 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


sprawling provinces hardly came up to what was to be found in Moscow and 
its environs. Yet he was convinced that the Soviet Union had made rapid 
progress in agriculture, prison reform, the eradication of illiteracy, the treat¬ 
ment of women, the handling of the problem of minorities and the removal 
of the sharp contrasts between luxury and poverty and of the hierarchy of class. 
He was sure too that the Soviet Union had much to teach India, which also 
was a large agricultural country with a poor and illiterate population. His 
mood was defined by the lines which he put on the title-page of his book: 

‘Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, 

But to be young was very heaven.’ 

Starry-eyed? Perhaps; but it is well to remember that the Russia which 
Jawaharlal visited was still very much the Russia of Lenin, even though Lenin 
had been dead for over three years. Stalin had not yet become the undisputed 
dictator, and there was a considerable amount of mass support for the Soviet 
regime. The New Economic Policy was still in effect. ‘Get rich’, Bukharin 
had advised the peasants in 1925; and the peasants still dominated the country- 
ide and brought about a strong recovery in food production. This was to 
them the ‘golden era of Soviet rule’. The number of family holdings rose to 
25 millions in 1927, and comprised 98-3 per cent of the sown area. 1 Stalin, 
like Lenin, was still speaking in terms of voluntary collectivization of agricul¬ 
ture. It was only after 1927 that it was felt that ‘Bolshevism in alliance with 
the peasants’, apart from being ideologically untenable, was also impracticable. 
The food shortages in large cities in the summer of 1927, despite a good 
harvest, showed that, without mass production of consumer goods, the pea¬ 
sants could not be induced to sell their grain. The percentage of the crops 
being sent to the urban markets was even less than that in the years before the 
war. On the other hand, industrial production, which till 1927 had shown a 
rapid rise because of the reactivation of productive capacity of the years before 
1917, now began to slacken. If industrialization — and specially,heavy indus¬ 
trialisation, thought to be so necessary with the imminent prospect of war -*■ 
were to be maintained, it was necessary to insist on the peasants disgorging their 
supplies; and this meant rapid and enforced collectivizatiop. In December 1927, 
therefore — a month after the visit of the Nehrus — the P:.rty Congress de¬ 
cided on an offensive against the kulak, opening a new chapter in Soviet history. 

So Jawaharlal saw the Soviet Union in the last days of its first, halcyon 
period. If his reaction was idealistic, it was partly because there was still some 
idealism in the air. The grounding in Marxism, which he had received at the 
Brussels conference and after, was followed by a near-conversion to commun¬ 
ism by practical testimony. Jawaharlal had been particularly impressed by 
Lenin’s leadership, by his realism and resilience, and above all by his insistence 

.A. Nove, An Economic History of the U.S.S.R. (London, 1969), p.l06. 



EUROPE 1926-1927 


109 


on professional, full-time revolutionaries. The need for such workers in India 
was obviously even greater, and it was as one such that Jawaharlal now doubt¬ 
less saw himself. He who had sailed from India as a dedicated disciple of 
Gandhi returned a self-conscious revolutionary radical. Although always to be 
deeply influenced by Gandhi, he was never again to be wholly a prisoner 
in the Gandhian mould. But it is significant that the change was wrought not 
by the revolutionary situation in India but by what he saw and heard and read 
in Europe. Jawaharlal was always a radical in the European tradition, seeking 
to apply and adapt its doctrine to his own country. This could be both a 
strength and a weakness. 




The Campaign for Independence 


ONE 

It was in this mood, not as before of novelettish romanticism but of thoughtful 
commitment to revolutionary change, that Jawaharlal returned to India. The 
British Government, too, had noticed this change of outlook, and, as Jawahar¬ 
lal knew, shadowed his activities in Europe during 1927, while at Simla the 
Home Member had warned his father that ‘Jawahar was sailing too near the 
wind’. 1 In fact, it was aft<"r this friendly caution that Motilal decided to sail 
for Europe to keep an eye on his son and escort him safely home. 

However, Jawaharlal, his wife and daughter came back ahead and reached 
Madras in time for the Congress session in December 1927. He was itching for 
action. For this, the first step seemed to him to be the acceptance of full indepen¬ 
dence as the objective. Jawaharlal had been thinking about this for a long time 
and had now finally come round to the view that the Congress should commit it¬ 
self firmly to the goal of independence. He could not accept the usual argument 
that there was no real difference between Dominion Status and independence 
because the former carried with it the right to secede. Theoretically this was 
so, but in fact Dominion Status implied the maintenance of a connection with 
Britain and allowing her dominance in every major field. This might be suited 
to countries like Australia and Canada, but was meaningless for India. Either 
India left the empire or she stayed as a dependent, under whatever guise, within 
it; there was no third alternative. Co-operation between the lamb and the lion 
always resulted in the lamb being inside the lion. But this need not mean enmity 
with Britain. Though there could be no friendship within the empire, once 
India was out of the imperial stranglehold, she could co-operate with Britain 
as an equal. 

Even more important to Jawaharlal than the political and economic im¬ 
plications of independence were the psychological consequences of a com¬ 
mitment to such an uncompromising policy. The assent to Dominion Status 

« 

I Motilal to Gandhi, 6 May 1927..Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, vol. $2, no. 12576. 

t in 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 'll 1 

as the objective was in itself an indication of India's mental degradation, for 
behind it lay an unquestioning acceptance of the inevitability of a British 
presence in India. That the Congress should adhere to it revealed a craven fear 
of being declared an unlawful assembly if it claimed anything more, and the 
preponderance within it of elements which on the whole profited by the British 
connection. The spider’s web of imperialism had obviously caught even Con¬ 
gressmen. But once the Congress made independence its goal, it wopld shake 
off the defeatism and weariness that had followed the non-cooperation move¬ 
ment, sweep away Swarajist temporizings, gain a new strength and again pull 
in the masses. Jawaharlal’s stay in Europe had confirmed him in the resolve 
that India should look for no favours from Britain. Relatively and potentially 
Indian nationalism was not weak, while England was daily losing ground 
despite her apparent strength. It made no difference which party was in office. 
His first-hand contacts with British Labour leaders had filled him with 
particular contempt for these 'sanctimonious and canting humbugs’. 1 

Jawaharlal, therefore, was eager for wholehearted combat, with no quarter 
sought or given. His new radical ideas affirmed rather than diverted his en¬ 
thusiasm for political action. Even the arrest of capitalist exploitation and a 
lightening of India's poverty required the termination of imperialist rule. But 
the mirage of Dominion Status weakened‘resistance in India to the British 
and generally strengthened reformist as against revolutionary forces. The 
real strength of the British in India lay in the submissive attitude of Indians 
to the status quo — to the raj, to established ideas, to old customs and traditions. 
So, as he complained to Gandhi, 'it passes my comprehension how a national 
organization can have as its ideal and goal dominion status. The very idea 
suffocates and strangles me.’ 2 

It was Gandhi, of course, who was the main hurdle. He was not present 
at the sessions of the Madras Congress when Jawaharlal secured the passage 
of a resolution committing the Congress to independence. But the followers 
of Gandhi had been there in sufficient numbers to secure the removal of the 
parts of the resolution which clarified independence to mean full control of 
defence, finance and economic and foreign policy and demanded that this 
be implemented immediately, in particular by the complete withdrawal of the 
British army of occupation. So all that the party accepted was a general ad¬ 
herence to die goal of complete national independence; and even this was not 
incorporated into the constitution of the Congress. That still proclaimed the 
objective to be swaraj, and thus enabled those who did not believe in indepen¬ 
dence and a total severance from Britain, and had no wish to see the British 
army withdraw at once, continue to be members of the party. 

So Jawaharlal's resolution, as he himself recognized, 3 was not really taken 

1 Speech at the All-Parties Conference, 29 August 1928, S. W., vol. 3 (Delhi, 1972), p. 99. 

*11 January 1928. • 

* Autobiography, p. 167. 



112 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


seriously and was meant primarily to humour him. But Gandhi did not conceal 
his disdain for what seemed to him mock heroics. He described the resolution 
in Young India as ‘hastily conceived’ and 'thoughtlessly passed’, and the Con¬ 
gress as a whole as having descended to the level of a schoolboy debating 
society. 1 He also warned Jawaharlal privately that he was proceeding too 
fast. 2 When Jawaharlal replied stiffly that he had a large measure of support, 
that Gandhi’s leadership was now hesitant and ineffective, and that their 
ideals were very different, 3 Gandhi offered to publish the correspondence. 
In other words, he was prepared for an open break. The relationship had not 
yet developed to the extent that to the older man it was in any way indispensable. 
But Jawaharlal drew back. The firmness of his views was not to him incom¬ 
patible with emotional dependence, and he was eager to remain, in Gandhi’s 
phrase, ‘under stupefaction’. 4 He recoiled from further publicity being given 
to their differences which, he assured Gandhi, were only on a few points and 
need not spread to the many other issues on which they agreed. His regard 
and affection for Gandhi were personal, but they were also something more; 
‘even in the wider sphere am I not your child in politics, though perhaps a 
truant and errant child?’ 9 

So, without breaking away completely from Gandhi and the old leadership, 
Jawaharlal campaigned for independence as the ultimate objective. It was a 
circumscribed revolt. The issue came up again at the All-Parties Conference 
and at the proceedings of the committee set up by it, with Motilal Nehru as the 
chairman, to draw up a constitution for India as an answer to the challenge of 
the Secretary of State, Lord Birkenhead, that Indian politicians were capable of 
no constructive suggestions. Though Jawaharlal was not a member of this com-? 
mittee, he took an active part in its meetings and helped his father with the sec¬ 
retarial work. But he was thoroughly ill at ease in an atmosphere of haggling 
and compromise. ‘The fault must be mine but anyway it results in my feeling 
always that I do not fit in with anything. I am always the square peg and the 
holes are all round. I feel very lonely.’ 6 His suggestions that the constitution 
should establish a democratic socialist republic and a beginning be made in 
elections by economic units 7 were not given even a moment’s consideration. 
To secure the broadest level of agreement in a body many of whose members 
were not Congressmen, Motilal favoured Dominion Status and gave his atten¬ 
tion mostly to finding a possible solution of the communal problem. In this he 
was successful, and the Nehru Report recommended, as concessions to the 

*5 January 1928. 

*4 January 1928. A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 55-6. 

*11 January 1928. 

4 17 January 1928, Collected Works, vol. 32 (New Delhi. 1969), pp. 468-9. 

*23 January 1928. 

*To Gandhi, 30 June 1928. 

7 Note, 8 March 1928, Report of the Committee to the All-Parties Conference. 



*HE CAMPAIGN for independence 


113 


Muslims, not separate electorates but reservations of seats, the constitution of 
Sind as a separate province and the introduction of the reforms of 1919 in the 
North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) and Baluchistan.* The hope of Jawa- 
harlal and many others that reservation of seats should be terminated after ten 
years or earlier with the consent of the parties concerned 1 could not be incor¬ 
porated into the report. But even this measure of consensus was a notable 
achievement and Jawaharlal was not alone in expecting that the report might 
provide the finishing kick to communalism. 2 But the acceptance of Dominion 
Status went against the grain. He spoke repeatedly against it and often had to 
engage in public debate with his father. He knew, however, that he had no 
chance of getting the decision reversed, and fell back on keeping alive the com¬ 
mitment of the Congress to independence. The fact that it was a party to the 
Nehru Report need not mean that it had abandoned its own preference. 

It was for this purpose that he organized the Independence for India League 
as, in the first instance, a pressure group within the Congress. Knowing that 
Gandhi and other leading Congressmen disapproved of independence and all 
that it implied, Jawaharlal resigned the general secretaryship; but the Working 
Committee declined to accept it. 3 Ostensibly this was because the resolution 
of the Madras Congress gave legitimacy to propaganda for independence; but 
in fact it was because the general run of Congressmen attached little importance 
to Jawaharlal’s efforts. To them the only value which the demand for indepen¬ 
dence now had was that it enabled them to bargain for Dominion Status. Had 
there been any danger of the Independence for India League altering the general 
direction of the Congress, it would doubtless have been hastily stifled. For the 
League was intended to keep alive not only the objective of political indepen¬ 
dence but also the concomitant ideals of republicanism and socialism. To 
Jawaharlal independence was not a purely political issue. Severance of the 
British connection implied also an attack on the vested interests supported by 
the British in India; indeed, the basis of the struggle was economic. The future 
republican government of India would be based not on the exploitation of the 
masses but on social equality. 4 The object of the Independence for India League 
was therefore both to achieve independence and to reconstruct Indian society 
by changing its capitalist and feudal basis. 'It means that the League aims at the 
socialist democratic State in which every person has the fullest opportunities 
of development and the State control of the means of production and distribu¬ 
tion;’ 3 . Instead of a few individuals amassing huge fortunes by the exploitation 

m 

iNote, 7 July 1928. 

2 Intfrview to the press, 4 September. The Tribune , 9 September 1928. 

9 The Bombay Chronicle, 4 Septmber 1928 

^Presidential address at the first session of the Republican Congress, The Hindu, 29 December 
1927. 

Programme of the Independence for India League, U. P. Branch, April 1929, S.W., voll 3, 



114 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


of others, the state should be organized on a vast co-operative basis for the 
benefit of all, and this in turn should lead on to 'a great world co-operative 
commonwealth’. 1 

Independence, therefofe, was a composite ideal, and for its attainment 
Jawaharlal looked far beyond the Congress. The League should be both an active 
element within the parent party and a general catalyst in the nation. The Con¬ 
gress might head the political campaign and take the lead in drafting constitu¬ 
tions, but economic and social changes could be effected only by the sanction 
provided by the exploited classes. For this a revolutionary atmosphere would 
have to be created in the country and the people organized on a large scale. 2 But 
this required an economic programme. Gandhi had drawn the masses into the 
political struggle in a way in which no one else could have done, and this to 
Jawaharlal made his leadership indispensable. But they could only be kept in 
this struggle by providing an economic content to swaraj — something which 
Gandhi had never done. Gandhi claimed not to object to this on principle, but 
thought the effort was premature. 1 am quite of your opinion that some day we 
shall have to start an intensive movement without the ricKpeople and without 
the vocal educated class. But that time is not yet.’ 3 However, Jawaharlal went 
ahead and formulated a precise programme. Though he had a grand design of 
socialism, he wanted a very modest beginning. In the U.P. in particular there 
seemed to be no alternative to the abolition of landlordism, but this should be 
done with the payment of partial compensation and replaced by smallholdings 
owned by individual peasant proprietors with no right of alienation. There 
would be not nationalization but socialization of laid, and the most that the 
State would manage would be model farms. Agricultural debts should be written 
off but after part payment. The State should gradually acquire key industries, 
ensure a minimum living wage and impose sharply graduated direct taxes an 
inheritance tax and a tax on agricultural income. 4 

Jawaharlal was aware thAsuch a programme would inevitably, at some 
stage or other, raise issues of the dass struggle and bring about dashes of in¬ 
terests between labour and capitalists and between landlords and tenants; but 
these could not be shirked. It was no wisdom to refuse to recognize or face 
conflict where it existed. Such conflicts would have to be fought and Overcome. 
Pushed to it, Jawaharlal was willing to concede both that violence was not 
objectionable in itself and that the final goal, thfe resolution of the struggle, 
might well be communism. If India were convinced that she could become free 
through violence, she would undoubtedly have the right to indulge in it as other 
countries had done. He stood for intensive non-violent non-co-operation, only 

^rcular letter to Congressmen, 5 April 1928, S. W., vol. 3, p. 184. 

’See speech at Banins, 17 January, Tbs Bombay Cbnmicls, 18 January 1928. 

’To Jawaharlal, 1 April 1928, CoUtcUd Works, vol. 36, p. 174. 

Presidential address to the U. P, Provincial Co nf e ren ce, 27,October 1928,3. W., vo). 3. pp. 
233-63; Programme of the In dependence for India League, U. P. Brandi, ap. dt. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


113 


because in India's condition mass violence was impracticable while individual 
acts of terrorism had a counter-revolutionary effect and injured the national 
cause. 1 Violence was contrary to the logic of politics and not of ethics; and 
terrorism was a tactic of defeat. As for the ultimate objective, addressing a 
students’ conference in Calcutta, he publicly accepted that though he personally 
did not agree with many of the methods of the Communists and was by no means 
sure to what extent Communism would suit conditions in India, yet he did 
believe in Communism as an ideal of society. For essentially it was socialism, 
and to him socialism was the only way if the world was to escape disaster. 2 

For the work of organization Jawaharlal looked to the young men and women 
of India. Impressed by what he had seen in the Soviet Union and read about the 
achievements of Lenin and the Bolsheviks, Jawaharlal was thinking in terms 
of youth cadres in India. He did not fancy Communist workers, if only because 
there appeared to him to be no trained Marxists in India, and he certainly did 
not consider himself as one. Moreover, the strongest appeal in India inevitably 
came from nationalism, and any programme for economic and social reforms 
would have to be linked to that. So, while he continued to promote the work of 
the Hindustani Seva Dal, he also looked further afield. Within a few months 
of his return, he wrote to jthe press calling on those who were for independence, 
detested the growing influence of religion in politics and desired the removal 
of inequalities of class and caste and wealth to get in touch with each other and 
with him. 3 But revolutionary battalions do not spring into existence on the 
mere writing of letters to the editor, and Jawaharlal’s appeal was significant only 
as indicative of his own aspirations. Throughout the year he gave the greatest 
importance to youth leagues and conferences, and was prepared to sacrifice all 
other work to the organization of youth. But an all-India corps dedicated to ‘full- 
blooded socialism' and carrying the fight to various parts of the country never 
came into being. 

Nor did the Independence for India League, as Jawaharlal sadly recognized 
soon enough, fulfil the hopes of its creator. It consisted of a few politicians who 
either were disgruntled with Gandhi and Motilal or hoped to draw on the grow¬ 
ing popularity of Jawaharlal for their own advantage. Indeed, often people 
joined the League with the intention of smothering it. 4 Jawaharlal was too 
honest himself to realize in time the machinations of others; and it has been 
suggested that he was by now increasingly the victim of flattery. 3 The charge 

*See addresses to Punjab Provincial Conference, 11 April, The Tribune, 18 April 1928, and to 
Delhi Political Conference, 13 October, The Bombay Chronicle, 20 October 1928. 

* Address to the Bengal Students Conference, 22 September 1928, S.W.,vol.3,p. 193. 

*Letter to the press, 20 March 1928. 

4 See Jawaharlai’s letter to & S. Vidyarthi, 2 October 1928. 

’ 'As for Pandit Jawaharlal 1 love and admire few men as I do him, but I also feel that he is getting 
too fond of clap-trap, too eager to receive idolatrous homage from people around him. This weak¬ 
ness he must have imbibed recently.* Kapil Deva Maiaviya, an old friend of the family, in The 
Leader, 30 November 1928. * 



116 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


is unjustified; Jawaharlal was more the victim of innocence. But the result was 
that the Independence for India League never became the spearhead of revolu¬ 
tion, well-knit in its organization and dear-cut in its ideology. Rather, for a year 
it struggled on in a state of suspended animation till it ceased to have a raison 
d’itre in the beginning of 1929. with the Congress as a whole committed, in 
certain circumstances, to the goal of independence. Its significance in history 
is its testimony to the unalloyed idealism of Jawaharlal. But his enthusiasm for 
action in a noble cause was not matched by a capacity for organization. 


TWO 

However, if at this time Jawaharlal failed to create an instrument to mobilize 
the country for a long-term revolution, he was more successful in helping to 
plan demonstrations all over the country as a reply to the insult proffered to it 
by the announcement in 1927 of a Commission consisting solely of British 
members of Parliament to consider whether India was ready for a further 
instalment of constitutional reforms. The mistake was primarily that of the 
Viceroy, Lord Irwin, and his officials. They soon realized that they had blun¬ 
dered, but convinced themselves that a boycott of the Commission was not a 
serious threat. It was thought that the Congress was weak and divided, and 
dominated by the Swarajists who were moving more and more towards con¬ 
stitutional opposition; 1 and with the Congress lukewarm in its boycott of the 
Commission, other parties need not be expected to be rigid in their hostility. 
So things might right themselves in the course of a few months, especially if 
some small sops could be found. 2 Various concessions were suggested by the 
Government of India and by Sir John Simon, the chairman of the Commission, 
to make it easier for the Indian political parties to abandon the boycott and co¬ 
operate with the Commission. Gandhi thought this might well happen; 3 and 
Motilal, who shared this fear, was, by the summer, planning to visit Canada 
rather than waste his time in India. 4 

However, the boycott held. Liberals like Sapru, who relied heavily on 
British goodwill, resented the jilting so deeply that for once they refused to 
behave like moderates. Jinnah also could not be won over by the Government, 
with the result that the Muslim leaders who were willing to collaborate could 
not claim to represent all Muslims. To Jawaharlal the failure to nominate any 
Indian to membership of the Commission seemed but a minor incident of 

1 See letters of Home Dept, to India Office, 13 January and 2 June 1927, Horn Dept. Pol. File 6 
of 1927. 

a See Cierar to Hailey, 14 November and Hailey to Frank Brown, 14 December 1927. Hatley 
papers, vol. 11. 

3 Gandhi to Motilal, 29 February 1928, ColUctsd Works, voi. 36, pp. 67-8. 

4 Motilalfo Jawaharlal, 22 March, and to GandHi, 27 June 1928. Motilal^ehru papers. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


117 


Imperial rule; what should be boycotted was not only the Simon Commission 
but the whole conception behind it, that India would be for ever a part of the 
British Empire and the British Parliament had the right to give India what it 
wished and deny her what it liked. 1 Freedom was India’s fundamental right, 
and as all commissions sent out from England denied that right they could 
receive no quarter in India. ‘Our aim is a completely free India and we have 
nothing to discuss except on this basis.’ 2 But at least the affront of the Simon 
Commission could be used as an occasion for united action, to bring together 
members of various parties in a common cause. The boycott might not lead 
India far on the path of independence, but it would certainly help to create a 
healthy atmosphere in which work of national organization could be expedited.* 
The chance of hitting back had almost a therapeutic effect on Jawaharlal, and 
he set about, as general secretary of the Congress, organizing the boycott on 
a countrywide scale. February 3rd, the day the Commission was to land in 
India, was to be treated as a day not of mourning but of rejoicing, for on that 
day would commence afresh the war for independence. 4 

The national hartal was a greater success than Jawaharlal had anticipated, 9 
and thereafter, throughout the year, wherever the Commission went, demon- 
strations ending in police charges and firing took place. At Lahore the leading 
Congressman of the Punjab, Lajpat Rai, was severely beaten. Jawaharlal and 
his colleagues now awaited the arrival of the Commission in the United Prov¬ 
inces. The Provincial Government at first decided to adopt an accommodating 
attitude and to allow processions, provided the organizers asked for permission 
and agreed to follow the route laid down by the police. This moderation was 
believed to have been based on the assumption that the demonstrations would 
not amount to much, as the Muslims would not participate in it. The local 
organizers of the boycott also decided to abide by these conditions, as they had 
no desire to have a conflict with the police; and processions were taken out 
with permission on 23 and 24 November. Jawaharlal arrived in Lucknow on 
the 25th and the tempo immediately rose. He had little enthusiasm for law- 
abiding processions. ‘I shall only stay on till the 28th if there is much doing. 
Otherwise I do not propose to waste good time in waving a little flag.’ 4 News 
of the death of Lajpat Rai on 18 November had already inflamed tempers 
throughout India, and Jawaharlal called on the youth of Lucknow to answer 
this challenge. 7 A procession on the 26th, permitted by the authorities, was 
so vast that there could be np doubt of the tremendous strength of feeling 

‘Speech at Allahabad, 10 January, Tbt Leader, 12 January 1928. 

’Message to the press, Tbt Bombay Chronicle, 23 January 1928. 

’Speech at Lucknow, 23 January, The Lender, 27 January 1928. 

* Speech at Allahabad, 19 January, The Lender, 21 January 1928. 

’See his letter to the editor, 3 February, The Leader, 6 February 1928 , and interview at Bombay, 
The Bombay Chronicle, 1 February 1928. 

•To M. Saxena, 14 November 1928, A1CC File G-73 of 1928. 1 • 

’See his circular 'They have dared!’, ibid. 



118 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


against the Commission; and though the procession proceeded without inci¬ 
dent, the officials realized that such demonstrations were serving to organize 
and rehearse what was planned to take place on the arrival of the Commission. 

When the boycott committee sought permission for a procession on the 
28th, it was granted on condition that the route was changed to avoid the 
European shopping area, where the Governor was that day attending a garden 
party. 1 The organizers of the procession replied that it was too late to alter 
the route, and when the procession started to move it was lathi-chargeA by 
mounted police. Jawaharlal had by this time, probably expecting no major 
confrontation, left Lucknow; but on hearing of the lathi charge he returned 
to the city on the 29th. The police, who believed that the defiance of the boycott 
committee on the 28th had been on Jawaharlal’s orders, 2 refused to permit 
any more processions. They stopped a small group of twelve led by Jawaharlal 
and Govind Ballabh Pant, which was on its way to a public Sheeting, and asked 
them if they had secured a licence for a procession. Jawaharlal replied that in 
view of the behaviour of the police the previous day he was not prepared to 
have any further dealings with them, and the police thereupon broke up the 
group with lathis. Jawaharlal himself received two blows. Despite this, the 
group refused to disperse. Meantime a large crowd had gathered, and the 
officials were compelled to permit Jawaharlal and his companions to proceed 
along their chosen route to the meeting with, in fact, the police riding in front 
as a vanguard. 3 

The next morning the Commission arrived in Lucknow. The Congress, 
which had sought permission to hold a blade flag demonstration, was allotted 
a site nearly 500 yards from the station, so that Simon and his colleagues would 
hardly notice it. A large procession, led by Jawaharlal — Modlal, who had come 
from Allahabad, was prevented by his son from joining them — reached the 
station, and sought to take up a position nearer to the route of the Commission 
than the one allotted to them. Thiswasnear an open space, and the police carried 
out a cavalry charge, using both lathis and spears, on a crowd of over thirty 
thousand for two or three furlongs. Though hundreds were beaten and many 
trampled down, the large crowd generally stood its ground, neither retreating 
nor retaliating, till the police, once the Commission had passed, fell back. 
Jawaharlal, after receiving half a dozen lathi Mows on his back, shoulders and 
legs, was surrounded by students who shielded him from further attack. 4 Just 
then a young man, ostensibly a student but later discovered to be a police agent, 
offered to provide Jawaharlal with two revolvers. 5 The offer was politely 

Report of Deputy Commr Lucknow, 5 December 1928. Home Dept. Pol. Pile 130 of 1929. 

’Ibid. 

’Report in Tb* Tribun*, 1 December 1928; pees* statements of Jawaharlal, 1 and 4 December 
1928. S.W., vol. 3, pp. 108-13 and 119. 

4 Pieaa sta te ments of Jawaharlal, 30 November and 1 De ce mb er 1928; r epo rt in Tb* Tribum, 
2 December 1928; Gandhi in Navmjivon, 9 D ecemb er 1928. CoUsctod Works! vol. 38, p. 184. 

’Jawaharlal’* letter to Gandhi, quoted by him in Young Indi*, 13 De cem ber 1928. CoU*ct*i 
Works, vol. 38, p. 209. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


119 


declined, but the incident is suggestive of an effort to aggravate the situation 
and seriously incriminate Jawaharlal. It strengthens Jawaharlal’s accusation 
that the police, angry at their loss of prestige on the two previous days, were 
out on this occasion for vengeance, and primarily ^gainst Jawaharlal. 

The news of the latbi charges on the 29th and 30th and of the injuries in¬ 
flicted on Jawaharlal roused widespread anger in India. The deputy commis¬ 
sioner of Lucknow sought to play it down. Of the dash on the 29th he reported 
that if Pant and Jawaharlal were beaten it was very slightly indeed; and as for 
the confrontation the next day at the station he remarked that the ‘actual 
occurrence was rather like the dealing of a football ground in England when 
the crowd have broken loose. There have been gross exaggerations in the press, 
and Jawaharlal’s report is so ludicrous and overstated as to carry its own refuta¬ 
tion.’ 1 In fact, it was Jawaharlal’? statements, fortified by other eye-witness 
accounts in the press, that were bdieved. The raj was thought to have bared 
its teeth, and its actions, bom of bloodlust and cracking of nerve, evoked 
memories of Amritsar in 1919. Jawaharlal wa$ not slow to draw the paralld. 

The events of Lucknow make it dear that the authorities in the United 
Provinces at least are modelling themselves on the old Punjab model and 
Haileyism is coming to mean much the same thing as ODwyerism. 
O’Dwyerism was followed by non-co-operation and the greatest national 
awakening of modem times in India. That awakening shook the fabric 
of British rule. India is different today from what it was nine years ago 
and Haileyism is likely to lead to an even greater national response which 
may carry us to our goal. 2 


THREE 

Apart from the impact on the devdopment of the national resistance to British 
rule, the police actions at Lucknow confirmed Jawaharlal’s national standing. 
He was no longer merdy a politician of the United Provinces; throughout 
India his popularity leapt, and he was firmly established as one of the front¬ 
runners of his generation. Gandhi realized and wdcomed this. ‘My love to you. 
It was all done bravdy. You have braver things to do. May God spare you for 
many a long year to come and make you his chosen instrument for freeing India 
from [the] yoke.’ 3 

The Government’s reaction to the growing popularity of Jawaharlal was 
to consider his arrest. As early as September, when Jawaharlal founded the 
Independence for India League, there was a rumour that he was soon to be 

•Home Dept. Pol. File No. 130 of 1929. 

•Annual Report of Ge n er a l Se cr et ari a l of the Congress (drafted by Jawaharla^. See A1CC 

He G 80 of 1929. 

*3 December 1928, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 68. 



120 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


imprisoned, 1 though Jawaharlal himself attached no importance to it 2 But 
in October the Viceroy directed that his speeches be scanned carefully, 9 and 
in December, when Jawaharlal came to Poona, after the Lucknow lathi charges, 
to address the Bombay Presidency Youth Conference, he was received with a 
rapturous enthusiasm which alarmed the Government. ‘From start \o finish’, 
reported the Bombay police, ‘the prevalent note of the conference was frankly 
communistic and revolutionary;’ 4 and Jawaharlal’s speech itself was described 
by the Home Secretary as no casual utterance but a deliberate preaching of 
violent revolt with the intention to follow it up by organization. 9 In fact, the 
speech was in Jawaharlal’s usual vein, a castigation of British imperialism as 
an aspect of the world phenomenon of capitalism, a vivid description of India’s 
low condition and a call to revolt against evil and the establishment of a co¬ 
operative socialist commonwealth in a world federation of socialist states. As 
suited an address to students, it was more academic than his other speeches of 
the time. Yet the jittery Government of India asked the Bombay Government 
to consider prosecution, and were brought back tp reality only by that Govern¬ 
ment’s comment that everyone must agree with much of what Jawaharlal had 
said, and it would be difficult to prove that communism and revolution, and 
not merely socialism, were being advocated. 6 

The Government acquired another opportunity to proceed against Jawahar¬ 
lal at Jharia, where the annual session of the All-India Trade Union Congress 
was being held. The League against Imperialism had deputed W.J. Johnston 
as a fraternal delegate, and the police walked into the meeting to arrest him. 
Jawaharlal had the police turned out, made a fiery speech and led the infuriated 
delegates in affiliating the Trade Union Congress to the League. When, the 
next day, Johnston was arrested outside the conference pandal, Jawaharlal 
delivered yet another vehement denunciation of imperialism and called for 
united action against the British. 7 But, rather than arrest Jawaharlal, the 
Government preferred to await the decisions of the National Congress which 
was to meet in its annual session in a few days at Calcutta. 

The hope of Motilal at Calcutta was to secure the adoption by the Congress 
of the Nehru Report and the acceptance of Dominion Status without prejudice 
to the ultimate goal of complete independence. In this way he expected to hold 
the line, and to retain moderate support without losing that of his son and the 
other members of the Independence for India League. Gandhi came to Calcutta 

Statement of MauUna Zafar AU, Tba Tribun*, 12 September 1928. 

*To Syed Mahmud, 14 September 1928. 

’Note of Home Secretary, 18 October 1928. Home Dept. File 179/29 Pol. of 1929. 

4 Note, 13 December 1928, ibid. 

’Note of Home Secretary, 27 December 1928, ibid. 

‘Teleiram to Bombay Government, 29 December 1928 and Bombay Government’s reply, 
11 January 1929, ibid. 

*G. Chettopadhyay, Communism and Bangui’s Fraadom Movamant, vol. 1 (Delhi, 19701, pp. 
113*16 and *141. * 



THE CAMPAIGN FOJR INDEPENDENCE 


1*1 


especially to ensure this. Jawaharlal was in a difficult position. The psychology 
behind the Nehru Report was alien to him. ‘It is obvious that the Congress 
contains at least two if not more groups which have nothing in common be¬ 
tween them and the sooner they break apart the better.’ 1 But if such a break 
occurred, Gandhi and his father would be on the other side; and, as so often in 
his public life, affection prevailed over logic. He opposed Dominion Status 
in the severest terms. To accept it, as Gandhi suggested, was to declare that 
the Congress was prepared to allow India to be exploited by British imperial¬ 
ism. All energy oozed out of him at the very thought of Dominion Status. 2 
But he toned down independence to mean severance of all connection not 
with the British but only with British imperialism; and he commended the 
Nehru Report without prejudice to the independence resolution of the Madras 
Congress. This suggested both a desire to find common ground and a willing¬ 
ness to face both ways. 

Gandhi was as anxious to avoid a break. He, of course, preferred Dominion 
Status to independence, but he was not enamoured of the Nehru Report. 'The 
way to constitutional swaraj may lie through Lucknow; the way to organic 
swaraj , which is synonymous with Ramarajya, lies through Bardoli.’* If he 
supported the Report it was primarily out of loyalty to Motilal. But in the 
effort to hold the party together, he was not prepared to discard all consistency. 
The final sentence in Jawaharlal’s speech probably gave him the clue: ‘Pre¬ 
pared as this House should be for any compromise on any lines, it should not 
be prepared to give up its definite real goal of independence for any length of 
time.' This hinted that Jawaharlal was willing to shelve temporarily the de¬ 
mand for independence. So Gandhi recommended that if the Government 
did not accept and act upon the Nehru Report within two years, the Congress 
should revert to full independence. Such flexibility of approach involved no 
long-term compromise on ideals and, especially as no one seriously expected 
the Government to accept the Nehru Report, made a concession only to the 
ear. As a further step to placate Jawaharlal, the time-limit was reduced in 
discussions to one year. So Jawaharlal and his friends could accept the re¬ 
solution; but to mark his disapproval of even the paper concession, Jawaharlal 
stayed away from the final session when the resolution was passed. Gandhi 
explained his absence. 

He thinks this resolution itself falls far short of what he wants but, a 

high-souled man as he is, he does not want to create unnecessary bitter¬ 
ness ... how can he help feeling disatisfied? He would not be Jawaharlal 

if he did not strike out for himself an absolutely unique and original 

1 To Aosari, 2) September 1928. 

’Speech 27 December 1928. S.W., vol. 3, pp. 270-74. 

*ToB.G. Homiman, 28 August 1928, ColUcttd Works, vol. 37, p. 212. Ramarajya lb the Hindfe) 
ideal of the golden age. Bardoll, in Gujeret, hsd been the scene of « peasant no-tax campaign in 1928. 



122 


JAWAHARLAt NEHRU 


line in pursuance of his path. He considers nobody, not even his father, 
nor wife, nor child. His own country and his duty to his own country 
he considers and nothing else. 1 


FOUR 

So the Congress gave its support to the Nehru Report and the demand fir 
Dominion Status for one year, after which it would again resort to non-co- 
operation as the means for securing independence. As there was obviously 
no chance of the Government responding to this resolution in any satisfactory 
way, 1929 was dearly to be a year of preparation. It was in that spirit that 
Jawaharlal carried out his duties as general secretary of the Congress, and he 
was encouraged in this by Gandhi. ‘I wish that Jawahar could travel through¬ 
out all the provinces and see that the Congress organizations become living 
bodies.’ 2 He asked Jawaharlal to reorganize the provincial Congress commit¬ 
tees, compel obedience to instructions from the Working Committee and 
direct them to implement fully the constructive programme. 3 Jawaharlal 
had also been directed by the AICC to prepare, with Subhas Bose, a scheme 
to train volunteers to work in the villages and among the dty labourers. So 
Jawaharlal set out to revitalize the Congress and run it on proper lines. 

It seems to be the general opinion that everything connected with the 
Congress can be done in an unbusinesslike way. Certainly no business 
could have survived the want of method which the poor Congress has 
had to put up with. My own personal bent is all for method and thorough¬ 
ness. The less I see of these in Congress offices the more I get put out. 4 

He himself was short of money, but spent as much as he could out of his own 
pocket on Congress work. 3 He secured authorization from the Working Com¬ 
mittee to inspect, personally or by representatives chosen by him, the offices 
of the provincial committees and to make recommendation for their improved 
working. He also arranged for auditors to visit these offices and 'examine the 
accounts. Almost all the provincial headquarters were inspected and sugges¬ 
tions made for their improvement, and their finances were put in order. 

Jawaharlal also, while 1 m sought to avoid public speaking as far as possible 
and was not greatly excited by the constructive programme of spinning and 
boycott, gave considerable attention to the Congress volunteer corps, the 
Hindustani Seva Dal, youth leagues and student organizations. What 1 m 
wanted was dedicated young men and women who would organize the pea¬ 
sants and workers and create a mass consciousness in preparation for the 

* 28 December 1928, CoUoctod Works, vol. 38, pp. 284-3. 

2 Gandhi g>Motilal, 1 February 1929, CoUoctod Works, vol. 38, p. 426. 

* 12 January and 1 February 1929, Ibid., pp. 337 and 423-4. * 

«To La la Shankarlai, 2 May 1929. 

5 See Sri Prakasa's article in R. Zakaria. A Study ofNtbru (Bombay, 1959), pp. 328-9. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


123 


coming struggle. The main question before the people was that of bread, and 
when the driving forces of hunger led the poor into the struggle for freedom, 
then swaraj wold be attained. 1 He planned an Indian National Service, at 
both all-India and provincial levels, and collected funds for building up a 
cadre of whole-time workers in the United Provinces. He also sought to reacti¬ 
vate the Independence for India League and provide it with an economic and 
social programme, even though the League had never shown much sign of 
life and, by the end of the year, there would be no need for a separate pressure 
group to champion the cause of independence as the whole Congress would 
be committed to it. 

These activities of Jawaharlal alarmed the Government. They regarded 
the Calcutta resolution, passed primarily to accommodate Jawaharlal and 
those of his way of thinking, as a clear triumph for extremism. As the ulti¬ 
matum presented to the British Government was not expected to be complied 
with, the resolution was a definite declaration that civil disobedience would 
be started a year later. ‘If the experience of the Calcutta Congress is any guide, 
the decision of future policy appears to be almost entirely with the younger 
men notably Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Babu Subhas Chandra Bose, and 
on their intentions and activities future developments may be expected largely 
to depend.’ 2 The Government attached greater significance at this time to 
these efforts of Jawaharlal and-his colleagues to rouse the masses and particu¬ 
larly, as they thought, the peasants and the students, to destroy the raj, than to 
the Communist programme to stir up a movement, chiefly among industrial 
labour, to attack the economic organization of society and aimed directly 
against employers and only indirectly against imperialism. The Government 
recognized that the two movements had points of contact and in some respects 
were closely linked. There is a tendency for the political and the Communist 
revolutionaries to join hands, and Pandit Jawahar Lai Nehru, an extreme 
nationalist who is at the same time genuinely attracted by some of the Com¬ 
munist doctrines, stands about at the meeting point.’ 3 But the tacticians of 
the Home Department felt that it would be advantageous from their point 
of view to stress the differences between the Communists and the nationalists. 

Communism contains grave dangers for the very classes who support 
the extreme nationalist movement, and our aim should be to do nothing 
which will produce an artificial union between the two movements which, 
if left to themselves, may tend to diverge. This suggests the conclusion 
that we should be very cautious in taking action against Communism 
.which may rouse for the Communists any general sympathy among 
the nationalists or provide the nationalists with what they are searching 

'Speeches-at Delhi, 5 February, and at Lahore, 8 February 1929, S.W., vol. 4, (Delhi, 1973), 
PP. 1-4. * 

’Home Secretary to all Local Govts., 21 February 1929, Home Dept. Pol. File No. 168 of 1929. 



124 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


for at the moment, namely a good rallying-cry for an intensive anti- 

Government agitation. 1 

At first, it was intended merely to prosecute Jawaharlal; 2 but then the 
Government decided to move on the other front-and deal first with the Com¬ 
munists. But rather than try and uproot Communism by attacking Com¬ 
munist organizations throughout India and seeking special powers for this 
purpose, the Government preferred to arrest the leading Communists in 
various parts of India and to prosecute them for conspiracy to overthrow 
British rule. It was hoped to secure a judicial pronouncement which would 
enable the Government to deal with the further spread of Communism and 
to prevent the movement recovering from the blow which it had been dealt 
by the arrest of its leaders; and there might also be the political advantage of 
convincing the general public that Communism was not the kind of move¬ 
ment that should receive the sympathy of nationalists. 3 Meantime, no action 
was contemplated against the latter. 

The trial of the Communist leaders was staged at Meerut, chosen as the 
venue in order to avoid a jury, who might jeopardize the chance of a conviction. 
The Congress, though on principle it did not believe in defence in British 
courts, promptly formed a defence committee, of which Jawaharlal was a 
member; and this committee engaged lawyers to appear for the defence. For 
the first time, and as a very special case, the Congress sanctioned Rs 1,500 
for the defence, while Jawaharlal sought financial and other assistance from 
abroad. Indeed for months there was a widespread belief among the public, 
shared by both Motilal and Jawaharlal, that Jawaharlal himself would soon 
be arrested. 4 In the long indictment of Communist activities made by the 
prosecution, the League against Imperialism was specially mentioned as one 
of the organizations inspired by the Communists; Jawaharlal’s correspondence 
with Virendranath Chattopadhyaya and others in Europe was regularly inter¬ 
cepted; 9 and the Intelligence Bureau and the Home Department attached 
great importance to a faked letter from M. N. Roy, in which Jawaharlal was 
described as the ‘liaison agent between Moscow and India’. 6 But after a careful 
examination of, his dossier, the prosecution concluded that there was insuf¬ 
ficient evidence against him. 7 A number of letters received by Jawaharlal 
from abroad were* cited by the procecution, but they could find no letters 
written by him; and though his book on Soviet Russia was placed before the 

1 Note of H.G. Haig, Home Secretary, and J. Crerar, Home Member, 4 January 1929, Home 
Dept. File 18/XVI Pol. and K.W. of 1928. 

* Note of Haig, 4 January 1929, Home Dept. Pol. File 179/29 of 1929. 

5 See Haig to J.W.A. Langford James, chief prosecution counsel, 29 April 1929, Home Dept 
10/IV/29 Pol. of 1929. 

4 See Jawaharlal to A.C.N. Nambiar, 11 July 1929, AICC File FD 20, part 11,1929. 

’Home Dfept. Pol. File 20/XI of 1929. * 

•Home Dept. Pol. File 18/VU/28, Appendix III to Notes. 

’J.P. Mitter, junior prosecution counsel in the Meerut case, in Tb a Sunday Standard, 21 
December 1969. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


m 

court, it was realized that a charge based on that alone could hardly stand. The 
magistrate trying the case served notice on Jawaharlal to produce all the letters 
received by him from certain persons abroad. Jawahaiial's first reaction, 
approved by Gandhi, was to refuse, on the principle that the prosecution should 
not be helped in any way. Howeyer, on second thoughts which were dearly 
encouraged by his father, he replied that he had thrown away or destroyed 
those letters which he had received in his personal capacity; his correspondence 
as general secretary of the Congress was to be found in the official files, but 
these he could disdose only with the permission of the Congress. Motilal was 
concerned that a further order would follow which would result in a search 
of the Congress offices and the court securing the papers it wanted, and the 
locking up of Jawaharlal for six months. To my mind Jawahar will only 
himself ridiculous by both helping the govt to the fullest extent he can and 
going to jail for it.* 1 But, in the event, Jawaharlal was only asked to certify 
that he had no personal correspondence in his possession. Jawaharlal did so, 
and |p avoid his being dted as a witness by the prosecution, Motilal advised 
the lawyers for the defence not to object to secondary evidence of those letters 
being produced. 2 Later, when the prosecution wished to call Jawaharlal as* 
a court witness, the magistrate agreed that Jawaharlal seemed to be the re- 
presentative in India of the League against Imperialism, and his evidence 
would probably be illuminating; but calling him would not be worth while as 
it would mean unreasonable delay, and he was anxious that the arguments 
should begin. 3 So Jawaharlal did not appear in the case, either as witness or 
as accused. 

The lade of direct evidence and the desire to isolate the Communists from 
the general nationalist movement and not Motilal’s alleged influence with 
the authorities, though 1 m was doubtless greatly relieved, would seem to be 
the real reasons for the Government's obvious reluctance to drag Jawaharlal 
into the net. Gandhi, perceptive as usual, saw this from the start. ‘It is quite 
like Jawahar’, he wrote to the worried father, ‘that he should give up smoking, 
a fine preparation to face Hailey. I do not know that Hailey will lay his hands 
upon Jawahar quite so easily as you think.* 4 Though attracted by the ideology 
of Communism, Jawaharlal was not involved in the activities of the Communist 
Party. Not, as was dear from the names of quite a few who had been arrested, 
that the Government had any qualms about involving the innocent. As 
Jawaharlal is reported to have remarked on his first visit to Meerut jail, ‘How 
little do these accused persons know about the Communist International. 

I know a lot more than they.’ 3 But the Government could secure little direct 
evidence implicating him, while the Communists themselves felt little accord 

'Motilal to Gandhi, 4 September 1929, Motilal Nehru papers. 

’Motilal to K.C. Chak ra va r ty, 10 September 1929, Motilal Nehru papers. 

*Tbo Bombay QbronicU, 13 November 1929. • 

4 To Motilal, 17 January 1929, Coiiactad Works, vol. 38, p. 361. 

’Muutffar Ahmad’s introduction in Communists CbaUanga Imperialism from tba Dock 
(Calcutta, 1967). 



126 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


with one whom they regarded as 'a timid reformist’. 1 The Communist assess¬ 
ment of Jawaharla! at this time was not left in doubt. A writer in the Comin¬ 
tern journal condemned the Independence for India League as superficial 
intelligentsia organization which in parts had already fascist tendencies’ and 
described Jawaharlal as a person ‘who promises all the blessings of socialism 
without a revolutionary struggle’. 2 Jawaharlal, wrote a British Communist, 
had 

formed an Independence of India League: and at the same time he is 
president of the Socialist League of Youth. The Independence of India 
League is a complete sham. The Socialist League of Youth is a more 
complete sham; it puts forward most wonderful slogans for Communism 
and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and takes no steps to achieve them. 
They are merely a means for getting support from the proletariat and 
for stemming the tide of the onward movement... It is dear that the 
British Government knows the difference between young Nehru and 
the Workers’ and Peasants’ party, and that the latter cannot look over the 
hedge, where Jawahar Lai Nehru can steal a horse. 3 


FIVE 

It was in this context that Jawaharlal found himself pitchforked by Gandhi 
and his father into the presidency of the Congress. Motilal had for long 
wanted his son to secure this high honour, and had discussed it with Gandhi 
even two years earlier. In 1927 Gandhi had not been enthusiastic and, after 
consulting Jawaharlal who was then in Europe, had decided in favour of Ansari, 
in the hope that the latter would improve rdations between Hindus and 
Muslims. 

• 

Things, as they are shaping in the Congress, confirm the opinion 
that it is not yet time for Jawaharlal to shoulder the burden. He is mo 
high-souled to stand the anarchy and hooliganism that seem to be grow¬ 
ing in the Congress, and it would be cruel to expect him to evolve order 
all of a sudden out of chaos. I am confident, however, that the anarchy 
will spend itself before long and the hooligans will themselves want a 
disciplinarian. Jawaharlal will come in then. 4 

The next year Motilal renewed his suggestion and Gandhi was agreeable, but 
on this occasion the leaders of the Congress in Bengal, where the session was to 

* Muzaffar Ahmed to P.C. Joshi, 9 March 1929, Meerut Conspiracy Case, Exhibit No. P. 304. 

* Communist International, May 1929. * 

*R. Pate Arnot, How Britain Ruiat India (London, 1929), pp. 29. 30. 

‘Gandhi to Motilal, 19 June 1927, CoUacted Works, vol. 34, p. 31. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


127 


be held, successfully insisted that Motilal himself should preside. Though the 
reasons given were local, the real objection, as Jawaharlal saw it, was not youth 
or jealousy but fear of his radical ideas. 1 In 1929, ten Congress committees 
voted for Gandhi, five for Vallabhbhai Patel and only three for Jawaharlal. 2 
The general feeling was that he was still unseasoned for the presidency. 
Jawaharlal himself was unwilling. 

My own personal inclination always is not to be shackled down to any 
office. I prefer to be free and to have the time to act according to my own 
indinations... I represent nobody but myself. I have not the politician’s 
flair for forming groups and parties. My one attempt in this direction — 
the formation of the Independence for India League last year — wasa hope¬ 
less failure so far as I was concerned ... Most people who put me forward 
for the Presidentship do so because they want to keep someone else out. 

I am thelesserevil. This kind of negative backing is hardly good enough... 

If I have the misfortune to be president you will see that the very people 
who put me there, or many of them, will be prepared to cast me to the 
wolves. 3 

But Gandhi wrung consent out of him and then announced that the crown 
should be worn by Jawaharlal. Older men had had their innings, and it was but 
right that the young should be led into battle by one of themsdves. Gandhi 
added, with a candour that was not flattering to his victim, that his relations 
with the younger man were such that the latter’s being in the chair was as good 
as Ik himself being in it. 4 Again Jawaharlal begged Gandhi not to press his 
name,J while Motilal, much as he desired his son’s election, pointed out to 
Gandhi that forcing Jawaharlal on the country against its will was unfair to 
both Jawaharlal and the country. * But Gandhi had made up his mind, and on 
29 September 1929 the AICC reluctantly elected Jawaharlal to preside over 
the next session at Lahore in December. 

So circumstances, and Gandhi’s will, were too strong for Jawaharlal. ‘I 
have been quite dear in my own mind that my election as President would 
reduce my effectiveness in many directions. But fate has willed it otherwise 
and I fed in spite of my sdentific spirit and outlook that after all we are to 
some extent playthings of fate.’ 7 From the viewpoint of the older leaders, there 
was a great advantage in having in the chair the malleable founder of the inde¬ 
pendence movement; his opinions underwrote the genuineness of their inten* 


*To Syed Mahmud, 30 June 1928. 

* See AICC File G 100 for 1929-30. 

UiMhitU to Gandhi. 13 July 1929. 

4 Article in Young IndU, 1 August 1929, reprinted in CoUtcfd Works, vol. 41, pp. 239-41. 

* Telegram to Gandhi, 21 August 1929. Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya P.S. 13496. 

* 21 August 1929, CoUsctod Works, vol. 41, p. 305n. 

T To S.A. Brelvi, 7 October 1929. AICC File G 40(ii), Part m, 1929. 



136 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


tion to start civil disobedience, even while they could be confident that he 
would be amenable, if need be, to Gandhi’s persuasion. On the other hand, 
Jawaharlal’s colleagues in the League against Imperialism expected that he 
would use his position to split the Congress and carry the country with a fully 
revolutionary programme, i Only Jawaharlal knew his predicament, that he 
would be torn between his loyalty to Gandhi and the Congress organization 
on the one side, and his ideological leanings on the other. As he wrote to an 
old friend, ‘I am afraid I shall have my work cut out for me to avoid losing all 
my cheerfulness and light-heartedness.’ 2 

The testing-time was not long in coming. Jawaharlal was getting ready for 
civil disobedience. ‘Already the blood tingles in the veins and the call to the field 
of action becomes louder and louder.’ 3 But the lines of battle were suddenly 
blurred by the Viceroy’s statement, on his return from Britain at the end of Octo¬ 
ber, that the British Government would meet representatives of British India 
and the Indian States for securing the greatest possible measure of agreement 
for the final proposals to be submitted to Parliament and that the natural issue 
of India’s constitutional progress was the attainment of Dominion Status. This 
in itself meant nothing, but Gandhi was convinced of Lord Irwin’s sincerity 4 
and associated the Congress with the Liberals and others in what he regarded as 
a reciprocation of this sincerity. The Delhi manifesto offered co-operation to the 
British provided the Government adopted a policy of general conciliation, politi¬ 
calprisoners were granted a general amnesty, progressive political organizations 
were adequately represented at the conference with the Congress being given 
predominance, and it was understood that the conference was not for discussing 
when Dominion Status was to be established but to frame a scheme of a Domi¬ 
nion constitution suitable for India’s needs. 

Despite these provisos, however, the manifesto marked a retreat by the Con¬ 
gress. Far from preparing for a struggle for independence, or even from insisting 
on a full acceptance of the Nehru Report, it was, under Gandhi’s guidance, 
thinking in terms of negotiations with the British Government without the 
latter making any precise commitments beforehand. Jawaharlal fought hard, if 
he could not secure rejection of the Viceroy’s proposals, at least to stiffen the 
terms offered by the Congress: but he failed, and then, to the surprise of his 
friends, signed the manifesto. Subhas Bose, who had refused to sign, saw in this 
the triumph of Gandhi’s personality over Jawaharlal’s principles. ’Jawaharlal 
has now given up Independence at the instance of the Mahatma.’ 9 In fact, Jawa¬ 
harlal had not changed his views but was persuaded to sign by appeals to his 
sense of discipline. It was urged that as a member of the Working Committee 

l See,e.g.,V. Chattopedhyaya to Jawaharlal, 28 August 1929, AICC File F.D. l(ii). Part 1,1929. 
>To Shivaprasad Gupta. 1 October 1929, AICC File F.D. 1 <ii), Part III, 1929. 

» To Master Tara Singh, 10 October 1929, AICC File G 93 of 1929. 

4 Article ip Young India, 7 November 1929. * 

>To Mrs C.R. Das, 3 November 1929, S.C. Bose, Corraspondanca 1924-32 (Calcutta, 1967), 
p. 403. 












11 British rule in India: the Prime of Wales receiving gifts from the Maharajah 


of Kolhapur, 11)21 









THjE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


129 


and general secretary he was bound to carry out the wishes of the majority of the 
members. But having done so, he resigned both his membership and the secre¬ 
taryship, 1 and seriously considered abdicating from the presidency. *1 am 
myself a believer in discipline. And yet I suppose there can be too much of dis¬ 
cipline. Something seems to have snapped inside me evening before last and 
I am unable to piece it together.' 2 * 4 

However, Gandhi, Motilal, Ansari and others persuaded Jawaharlal to hold 
his hand, mainly on the ground that he could rely on the British not to accept 
the four provisos stipulated by the Congress; 3 and on 19 November the Work¬ 
ing Committee, while confirming the Delhi manifesto, revised Gandhi’s draft 
resolution to say, obviously to placate Jawaharlal, that it should be clearly 
understood that this confirmation would only hold till the next session of the 
Congress.4 Jawaharlal was greatly relieved. 'It is clear enough that there is not 
an outside chance of the British Government acceding to the four conditions 
laid down, so that even moderate Congressmen will have no alternative left 
except to stick to independence.’ 5 By giving some rope to those who favoured 
a compromise, the ground for the coming struggle'Was being better prepared. 
The Government, even if they could not accept the Nehru Report, could still 
perhaps have retained Gandhi's co-operation by some gesture such as the release 
of prisoners; 6 for to Gandhi, as Hailey observed, 7 Dominion Status was not 
a constitutional objective but a frame of mind, ‘a general kind of political kiss- 
in-the ring’. But imagination was not among the virtues of Irwin’s Government, 
and by the middleof December Gandhi was thinking in terms of befog in prison 
by January. 8 When he and Motilal met the Viceroy along with Sapru, Jinnah 
and Vithalbhai Patel on 23 December, the break was dear. Gandhi announced 
that unless the establishment of Dominion Status could be presumed as an 
immediate result of the conference he could not attend; not Parliament but 
India ought to frame India’s future. He added that he doubted the sincerity of 
British purpose broadly, though he recognized that of individuals; and the 
Viceroy replied that there was obviously no common ground. 9 The focus of 
attention now shifted to Lahore. 


1 To President AICC 4 November 1929. AICC File G-I17 of 1929. 

* To Gandhi, 4 November 1929, reprinted itt Collacttd Works, vol. 42, Appendix O, p. 516. 

* Gandhi's telegram 6 November and letter, 18 November 1929, CoUactad Works, vol. 42, 
pp. 101 and 181, respectively; Ansari to Jawaharlal, 7 November 1929, Ansari papers, Jamie 
Millie; Motilal to Jawaharlal, 7 November 1929, Motilal Nehru papers. 

4 ThoLaadtr, 20 November 1929. 

•To S. Srinivasa Iyengar, 20 November 1929, AICC File G 1JL7 of 1929. 

•Sapru to Irwin, 25 November (after meeting Gandhi) and Hailey to Irwin 4 December 1929. 
Halifax papers, I.O.L. MssJSur C 152, vol. 25. 

? Hailey to Irwin, 4 December 1929, Halifax papers, vci. 23. 

* See his letter toRamanand Chatterjee, 16 December 1929, CoUactad Works, vof. 42, p. 285 

* Minutea of conversations drafted by Private Secretary to Viceroy, Sapru papers, 119. 



130 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


SIX 

Jawaharlal had, therefore, been vindicated. He had had his way by yielding in 
the first instance. The hope of the officials that the Viceroy’s statement might 
split the Congress 1 had been defeated. But though Jawaharlal^ nationalist 
followers in India now had no grievance, he had still to contend with his radical 
friends abroad. Convinced by the frequent references to the League against Im¬ 
perialism in the Central Assembly during the debates ori’fhe Public Safety Bill 
and by the proceedings at Meerut that the Government was making a dead set 
against the League, Jawaharlal took much trouble during the summer of 1929 
to prove to the public that the League was not a Communist organization, even 
though many Communists belonged to it, but rather an association to establish 
contacts between all movements throughout the world which supported the 
struggle against imperialism. If a broader and more international vision was 
gradually animating the Congress, this was the direct consequence of its asso¬ 
ciation with the League. Communists were undoubtedly the strongest opponents 
of imperialism and as such their co-operation was welcome to all nationalists. 
They need not be treated as untouchables. Co-operation with them — as with 
imperialist powers other than the British like the United States — was possible 
when interests coincided, though this co-operation should be on one’s own 
terms. But Jawaharlal was certain that in no sense did Communists dominate 
the League. Nor was the Congress, which was merely associated with the 
League, bound by every resolution or programme of that organization. 

This confidence of Jawaharlal was shaken by the end of the year when he 
heard that the Communists had taken over the central apparatus of the League 
and muzzled non-Communists like James Maxton. Clearly he himself would 
have ik> place in the League, and the organization as he had conceived it, the 
grand all-party alliance between the forces of national freedom and social equal¬ 
ity, had collapsed. So it caused him no great concern that those now in charge 
of the League disapproved of his acceptance of the Delhi manifesto. 

It is a fundamental political error to think that unity in the Congress is 
more important than the vital interests of the masses. After having risen 
to be the undoubted leader of the youth of the country and to enjoy even 
the confidence of the working masses, you seem in a moment of inexpli¬ 
cable weakness and mental confusion to have left your followers in the 
lurch. 2 

Possibly Jawaharlal was rationalizing his weakness and proneness to what 
Subhas Bose termed 'sentimental politics’ into a claim to superior tactics and 

1 See, for example. Hailey to O’Dwyer, 4 October and 1 VDecember and to Irwin, 7 October and 
18 November 1929, Hailey papers, vol. 16. * 

*V. Chattopadhyaya to Jawaharlal, 4 December 1929. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


131 


to permitting events so to develop as to stress the unavoidainiity of a dash with 
the Government; but in doing so he was certainly not distressed by the rebukes 
of the Communists. Rather, he would seem to have been reinforced in his con¬ 
viction that the political struggle for freedom demanded the first priority, and 
that in this,the leadership of Gandhi was the most powerful individual factor. 
Future success seemed to him to lie in acceptance of this ipther than in co¬ 
operation with the Communists. And his first ill-fated experiment of working 
with the Communists suggested to him that equal co-operation with them was 
not to be too easily taken for granted. 

So the decks were dear, and Jawaharlal was free to act as he chose, neither 
held back by his moderate colleagues nor pushed off course by his erstwhile 
friends of the left. In the last week of November, before his gamble had paid off, 
he presided at Nagpur over the annual session of the All-India Trade Union 
Congress. Elected the previous year in his absence, Jawaharlal had agreed to 
serve because, although he had no experience of trade unionism, he realized the 
importance of awakening industrial labour to the national cause. But during his 
year in office fie could hardly devote himsdf to this effort in education. While 
the Government, by their legislation and summary arrests and trials, mounted 
a massive attack against the whole labour movement, the latter was riven by 
sharp differences between the Communists and the rest; and Jawaharlal had 
to toil hard — aftd, as it proved, in vain — merely to hold the movement to¬ 
gether. The moderates in the Trade Union Congress, led by the general secre¬ 
tary, N. M. Joshi, were anxious to isolate labour from political currents in India 
and abroad and to improve working conditions in industry by co-operating with' 
the Government. Jawaharlal, of course, reacted instinctively against this, and 
in consequence was regarded as acting in accord with the Communists. Jawa¬ 
harlal feared that a split was inevitable, but sought not to precipitate it. 1 How¬ 
ever, the advent to office of the British Labour Party in the summer of 1929 
strengthened the moderate trade unionists in their eagerness to co-operate, and 
increased the differences within the movement. Jawaharlal was requested by 
the radicals to accept the presidentcy of the largest railway trade union, that 
of the Great Indian Peninsular in Bombay, which was dominated by the Com¬ 
munists, and although he already had as much work as he could manage he was 
willing to consider acceptance if it would help in securing a compromise. 2 The 
fact that the C ommunis ts were criticizing Jawaharlal as one of the ‘dangerous 
enemies of labour’ 3 might have been expected to make his name acceptable to 
conservative trade unionists; but in fact the suggestion fell through. 

The criticism itself was obviously unjustified. Jawaharlal was primarily 
involved in politics, and his basic loyalty was to the Congress; and that was, of 

‘jawaharlal to C.B. John. 12 July 1929. AICC File P/20 of 1929. 

*To Johri, 23 August 1929, AICC File G 40. Part m of 1929 and to DU. Kulkarni, 10 
September 1929, AICC File 16 of 1929. * 

s Article in G.I.P. R*ilw*yma%, aee Jawaharlal’* letter to Kulkarni, 10 September 1929. 



132 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


course, far from being a purely labour organization. But in problems concerning 
the workers, there was no doubt as to where his sympathies lay; and in the strug¬ 
gle for trade union leadership, he threw his weight against the moderates. To 
the chagrin of these men, who wished to co-operate with the Royal Commission 
on Labour appointed by the Government, Jawaharlal publicly called for a 
boycott.! There was such acrimony that Jawaharlal thought of resigning the 
presidency, but decided that, with the year drawing to its dose, it was not 
worth while. 2 

It was in this atmosphere of dissension, with both sides so suspidous of each 
other that they sparred fiercdy even on such trivial issues as the dates of meet¬ 
ings, that the Trade Union Congress met for its annual session. Jawaharlal’s 
address was wholly acceptable to neither faction, but true to himself. He placed 
the responsibility for the miserable condition of the Indian worker on the system 
which was the natural outcome of capitalism and imperialism, and called on 
labour to join the national movement in its fight against imperialism even while 
it sought to recruit nationalists in its own struggle against capitalism. The real 
problem was the conquest of power, the overthrow of both the fordgn ruler and 
the exploiting employer, and the goal was a socialist order of sodety in which 
the interests of the workers were supreme and the sources of wealth were owned 
by the community and not by individuals. 

All this was most pleasing to the Communists in his audience, but then 
Jawaharlal conduded with the suggestion that the Trade Union Congress should 
affiliate itself to neither the Second nor the Third International. The Second 
International was disliked by Jawaharlal because it was mainly preoccupied with 
the fight not against capitalism but against Communism; but the Third Inter¬ 
national had for Jawaharlal its own drawbacks. Personally he was a staunch 
admirer of the general trend of policy in the Soviet Union; that country, despite 
all its heavy blunders and many sins, still held out, more than any other country, 
the bright promise of a better day to the world at large and to the worker 
espedally. 

With all my sympathy for the Communist view point, however, I must 
confess that I do not appredate many of their methods. The history of 
the past few years in China and elsewhere has shown that these methods 
have failed and often brought reaction in their train. To affiliate with the 
Third International must mean an adoption of their methods in their 
entirety. I do not think this is desirable for us. 

These sentences the moderates applauded. But if they saw in this rejection 
of the leadership of Moscow an indication that the president would support them 
in the wrangles of detail, they were soon disillusioned. Indeed, his only positive 

* Statement, 20 September 1929, S.W., vol. 3. pp. 41-2. * ' 

2 To Bakhale, 24 September 1929, AICC File 16 oI 1929. 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


133 


act shifted the bias of the whole session. For by his past in g vote Jawaharlal re¬ 
cognized the Gimi Kamgar (Red Flag) Union of the textile workers in Bomba/ 
as having a membership of40,000, thus giving it and the G.I.P. Railway Union, 
both controlled by the Communists, a majority, under the constitution of the 
Trade Union Congress, in the open sessions. Otherwise, he sat silent at the 
meetings of the Executive Committee while resolutions were passed rejecting 
the Nehru Report, condemning the Delhi manifesto, favouring independence 
as against Dominion Status, demanding the establishment of a workers' repub¬ 
lic and calling for affiliation with the League against Imperialism. The fact that 
he and the Congress were still committed to negotiations for Dominion Status 
does not seem to have bothered him, while his inner hesitations about the 
League found no expression. It was not so much that Jawaharlal saw his role as 
president to be akin to that of a figurehead as that, whatever his public posture, 
he privately approved of most of these decisions. He also made no strong effort 
tQ prevent the* secession of the moderates and the formation of a separate All- 
India Trade Union Federation. 

If at Nagpur Jawaharlal had to connive at the rejection of policies to which 
he was still officially committed, at Lahore at the end of the year he was utterly 
unshackled. Riding, with his sense of theatre, on a white charger in the Con¬ 
gress procession, he fitted to perfection, as Gandhi had prophesied, the role of 
the young Galahad of revolt. The Congress was by now committed to indepen¬ 
dence and to dvil disobedience. The Viceroy, it is said, 1 had at one stage 
considered banning the session, but finally decided not to interfere. Such action, 
even if ostensibly in the interests of maintaining law and order in the city, would 
have been foolhardy. There was, as an impartial eye-witness noted, no spirit of 
animosity to the British but a love of India, confidence in their leaders ‘and a new 
spirit of sacrifice dominant in their thought even to the point of suffering and 
loss'. 2 The same conclusion was reached by an English observer who was 
normally an ardent Imperialist: ‘The present movement is a deep all-India 
affair. It's no use pretending that it is the concern of the Indian “Intelligentsia” 
,.. Time and education can only intensify the feeling of thinking Indians for 
India: and the love for the idea of India is one of the finest, and also one of the 
most incalculable forces in the country.’ 3 Jawaharlal's speech was attuned to 
this atmosphere of defiance and rebellion. He had begun to draft his presidential 
address about the tenth of December, 4 but even then he could write with the 
full knowledge that the talks with the Viceroy had no prospect of success^ 

Jawaharlal put the Indian problem in its international context. The whole 
world was one vast question-mark, and every country and every people were in 


* A. r^mphtU Johnson, Viscount Halifax (London, 1941). p. 241. 

^ Report of Bally Kkmaitd, 8 January 1930, enclosure to Wedgwood Batin’s letter, 5 Mach 


1930, Halifax papers, Vpl. 6. . „ _ 

} J.L.Morisot from Lahore to Dr Norman Leys, 11 January 1930. T. Jones, WbOabaU Diary, 

voL 2 (London, 1969), pp. 238-40. 

4 See letters to Dr Gopichand, 6,10 and 14 December 1929, AICC FileG 100 of 1929-30. 



134 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


the melting-pot. It appeared to be a dissolving period of history, when the world 
was in labour, and out of her travail would give birth to a new order. In this Asia 
and even India would play a determining part, for the brief day of European 
domination was already approaching its end and the future lay with America 
and Asia. But if India had a message to give to the world, she had also much to 
learn and receive from other peoples. 

Then, reverting to India, Jawaharlal pointed out that though her social struc¬ 
ture had proved to be wonderfully stable, it had failed in one vital particular: it 
had found no solution for the problem of equality and in fact had deliberately 
based itself on inequality. But a solution based on the genius of the Indian people 
and on India’s thought and culture had to be found if the political and social 
structure was to have any stability and the discords between the various com¬ 
munities were to disappear. And this led Jawaharlal to plead for the faith and 
generosity which would remove fear and suspicion between the communities. 

... by right of birth I shall venture to submit to the leaders of the Hindus that 
it should be their privilege to take the lead in generosity. ’ That was not only good 
morals but often good politics and sound expediency. The time was coming soon 
when such labels as Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs would have little meaning* and 
when struggles would be on an economic basis. Till then it mattered little what 
mutual arrangements were made, provided only that barriers in the way of future 
progress were not built up. 

The British army of occupation, Jawaharlal went on, held India in its iron 
grip, and the whipof the master was ever ready to come down on the best of them 
who raised their heads. The answer to the Calcutta resolution had been clear 
and definite. Only by the greatest stretch of imaginatidh could the Viceroy’s 
statement be interpreted as a possible response, but he and others like him had 
signed the Delhi manifesto because even an outside chance of honourable peace 
had to be taken before launching on a national struggle. But now they had but 
one goal — independence, complete freedom from British domination, which 
alone could lead to world co-operation and an international community of 
equals. The British Empire was certainly not such a group; it could not be a true 
commonwealth so long as imperialism was its basis and the exploitation of other 
races its chief means of sustenance. In'any such group, India’s position was 
bound to be one of subservience. Out of imperialism and capitalism peace could 
never come, and because the British Empire Stood for these and based itself on 
the exploitation of the masses India could find no willing place in it. Many of the 
problems India had to face were the problems of vested interests, mostly created 
or encouraged by the British Government; and so long as the British Empire 
continued, in whatever shape, in India it would strengthen these vested interests 
and create more. 

The controversy about the relative merits of independence and Dominion 
Status was to Jawaharlal really a question about the conquest of power, and he 
did not think that any form of Dominion Status applicable to India would trans¬ 
fer real power. A test of this power would be the entire withdrawal of the alien 
army of occupation and of its economic control. India demanded the fullest 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


135 


freedom. They were very conscious of their weakness, but let no one underrate 
the strength of their resolve. There would be no turning back. A great nation 
could not be thwarted for long when once its mind was made up. 

‘I must frankly confess’, Jawaharlal continued, 'that I am a Socialist and a 
republican, and am no believer in kings and princes, or in the order which pro* 
duces the modern kings of industry, who have greater power over the lives and 
fortunes of men than even the kings of old, and whose methods are as predatory 
as those of the old feudal aristocracy.’ He acknowledged that the Congress, as it 
*was then constituted, might not be able to adopt a full socialistic programme, 
but the philosophy of socialism had gradually permeated the entire structure 
of society the world over, and almost the only points in dispute were the pace 
and the methods of advance. India too would have to go that way if she wished 
to end poverty and inequality, though she might evolve her own methods and 
adapt the ideal to her own genius. 

On the two particular problems of India, the minorities and the states, 
Jawaharlal had little that was startlingly new to say. He wanted the minorities 
to be given the fullest assurances that their culture and traditions would be safe. 
The princes were the products of a vicious system which would ultimately have 
to go. Only the people of the states could determine the future of those areas, 
and while the Congress was perfectly willing to confer with such rulers as were 
prepared to do so and to devise means for smoothing the transition, in no event 
could thepeopleof the states be ignored. But, as regards the problem of peasantry 
and labour, Jawaharlal asked the Congress to commit itself to ending the 
domination of any one class over another, and to draw up a programme of such 
changes as could be immediately put into operation. Paternalism and trustee¬ 
ship were both equally barren theories. The least that every worker in field or 
factory was entitled to was a minimum wage and humane hours of labour; and 
in the long.term the Congress should strive for workers’ control of industry on 
a co-operative basis and for a system of peasant proprietorship. 

The immediate problem, however, was the conquest of power, and the forg¬ 
ing of sanctions to enforce the national will. The Congress had not the material 
or the training for organized violence, and individual and sporadic violence was 
a confession of despair. 

The great majority of us, I take it, judge the issue not on moral but on 
practical grounds, and if we reject the way of violence it is because it pro¬ 
mises no substantial results. But if this Congress or the nation at any 
future time comes to the conclusion that methods of violence will rid us 
of slavery then I have no doubt that it will adopt them. Violence is bad, 
but slavery is far worse. 

Gandhi himself had said that it was better to fight than to refuse to fight out of 
cowardice. But except in times of organized revolt, all mass movements must 
necessarily be peaceful. The basic idea of non-co-operation must remain, but 



136 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


JawaharlaJ did not think it wise to declare a boycott of schools and law courts 
at the very start. The programme should be one of political and economic boy¬ 
cott, the reduction of all points of contact with the British Government. This 
would release energy and direct attention to the real struggle, which should take 
the shape of non-payment of taxes and, where possible, general strikes. It was 
now an Open Conspiracy, which everyone should join, to free the country from 
foreign rule. 

The presidential address shows both the strength and the weakness of 
Jawaharlal at this stage. His impatient and full-blooded eagerness for freedom 
was manifest. He had no use for political compromise. He wished to eject the 
British from India and thereafter cut his country off from the British Empire. 
In the campaign of civil disobedience which was to begin he accepted.the leader¬ 
ship of Gandhi, but made it clear that he accepted non-violence as a technique 
rather than as a moral end in itself, and did not rule out the adoption of violent 
methods at any future time. There was still very much of the romantic in 
Jawaharlal; he was still, beneath the added maturity and sophistication, the 
emotional nationalist of the early twenties. The impact of ideology to which he 
had been exposed during his stay in Europe in 1926 and 1927 could be dearly 
seen, but it was not deep absorption. With courage he announced that he was 
a socialist and a republican, but it was courage tinged with apology. The social- 
ism which he envisaged was clearly of a mild and timid variety, and he spoke of 
India evolving her own methods and adjusting it to her traditions. There was 
little here of forthright Marxism or of the scientific socialism of which he had 
heard so much in Europe. He was groping more in the direction of Utopian, 
Gandhian socialism,.though he went on to criticize the concepts of trusteeship. 
Similarly, while he realized that the basic problem in India was an economic 
one and communal troubles were artificial, he spoke of finding an interim solu¬ 
tion which would be typically Indian. The confusion of thought was probably 
the result of a dislike of precise choice, an instinctive rductance to abandon 
Indian ways even while his mind turned away from them, and the feeling of a 
lack of immediacy about these matters. They all had to give way to the conquest 
of power, and for this the Congress was the obvious instrument. He added 
almost in the same breath as his assertion of his personal credo that he did not 
expect the Congress, with its predominantly middle-class composition, to agree 
with him or to adopt a revolutionary programme. His loyalty to the Congress 
being unreserved, this could only mean that, while he would not abandon his 
principles, he would be willing to keep them in abeyance. His extremism in 
objectives did not carry with it an intensity of purpose and method. So, while 
the leader-writers of the British and the Indian press threw up their hands in 
horror at this enthronement by the sedate Congress of a seeming revolutionary, 
for Gandhi therewas no dismay. He did not forget that the author of this radical 
address rfas also a signatory of the Delhi manifesto and tl&t to Jawaharlal 



THE CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE 


137 


discipline was more important than revolution and political freedom took 
priority over economic and social change. There was little to fear from a man 
whom Gandhi described as a confirmed socialist who wanted for his country 
only what it could manage, a practical statesman who tempered his ideals to suit 
his surroundings. 1 On the other hand, it was worth having in the chair a figure 
of glamour and integrity who would keep captive within the Congress his wide 
following among the students and the intelligentsia. During the next ten years, 
no single individual did more to build in the Congress an awareness of economic 
issues; but Jawaharlal was also the best shield of the Congress against left-wing 
groups and organizations. 


i Young India. 9 January 1930. 




Action — and Anti-Climax 


After the Lahore Congress, however, Jawaharlal* could push aside these 
nagging problems of the gap between thought and practice and devote himself 
happily to action. He had, at a moving ceremony on the banks of the Ravi, 
unfurled the flag of independence; and on New Year’s Eve he danced round 
the flagpole. 1 The Congress now urged its members to work exclusively 
towards the attainment of independence. It also authorized the AICC, when¬ 
ever it deemed fit, to start a programme of civil disobedience, including the 
non-payment of taxes, in selected areas or all over the country and under 
whatever safeguards it considered necessary; but in fact this meant that 
full direction in the tactics of struggle was left to Gandhi. 

While Gandhi brooded over the best means of initiating the battle, Jawahar¬ 
lal, as president, was engrossed in mobilizing the forces, though he expected 
to be arrested at any moment. In fact, the Punjab Government had suggested 
prosecuting Jawaharlal for his Lahore address, but the Government of India 
preferred to wait and watch developments, leaving the initiative to the 
Congress. 2 * So Jawaharlal was free to organize the celebration throughout 
India of 26 January as Independence Day, when everyone was called upon to 
take the independence pledge drafted by Gandhi and Jawaharlal. The latter 
had directed that this should be done in the morning, at the time of the 
unfurling of the national flag, with a procession and a public meeting later 
in the day; 9 but Gandhi vetoed processions and speeches. He was anxious not 
to precipitate a crisis till he was ready to commence civil disobedience. 4 
The Government, on their part, as anxious to avoid a clinch, did not 
prohibit the meetings. On the actual day, the response seemed to the Congress 
spectacular, while the Government preferred to believe that outside the 

1 To A. C. Bombwal. 5 June 1963, Nehru papers. 

2 Chief Secretary Punjab Government to Home Secretary, 3 January 1930, and Home Secretary 
to all Local Governments, 30 January 1930. Home Dept. Pol. File 98 of 1930; Note of Home 
Secretary, 27 January 1930, and Home Secretary to Chief Secretary, Punjab, 30 January 1930. 
Home Dept. Pol. File 65 of 1930. 

* Statefnent, 6 January, The Tribune, 8 January 1930. * 

4 Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 12 January 1930, AICC File 26 of 1930. 


138 



ACTION—AND ANTI CLIMAX 


139 


Punjab, the United Provinces, Bombay and Delhi there had been little 
enthusiasm. 1 

With the Government refusing to act on their own, with Gandhi still inert, 
and with both sides satisfied with the result, Jawaharlal was free to rnnrinw 
the work of consolidation in anticipation of the big struggle. The inriA>n» at 
Bombay on the 26th, when some mill-workers sought to displace the natinnal 
tricolour with the red flag, coming in the wake of continuous efforts by the 
League against Imperialism to ridicule the Congress and its leadership, dearly 
infuriated Jawaharlal. ‘It seems to be a ddiberate policy of Gommunists to be 
offensive. As a matter of fact there are very few real Gommunists in India. 
Many people who pose as such are British agents.* 2 He informed the League 
and its supporters in India in no uncertain terms that the Congress would not 
allow its ranks to be weakened by the Communists. While the Congress was 
willing to co-operate with Communists or to be assodated with any anti¬ 
imperialist organization, in no event would it take orders from the League or 
be associated with it if that were going t0 function as a purely Communist 
organization. Never had the Congress been, more advanced in its views, both 
political and social, and to attack its leaders without the least knowledge of 
conditions in India at a moment when they had begun a great revolutionary 
struggle was in effect to hdp the British Government. Jawaharlal also re¬ 
quested the League to accept his resignation from its Executive Council if the 
position of non-Cocnmunists in the League were not clarified. 3 

Having done what he could to answer the Communist critics, Jawaharlal 
sought to ensure the support of the minorities, and especially the Muslims, 
for the Congress cause. Leading Muslim Congressmen, including Ansari, 
Tassaduq Sherwani and Khaliquzzaman (but with the honourable exception 
of Azad), disliked the non-co-operation campaign,* and gave priority to the 
building of communal harmony. In the Working Committee, which met on 
15 February, Syed Mahmud asserted that the Muslims as a whole were indif¬ 
ferent to the struggle and he feared that civil disobedience would rapidly, with 
official encouragement, degenerate into Hindu-Muslim riots. Gandhi was re¬ 
ported to have replied that he realized this danger but it could not be helped. 
They had to march ahead, as there was no other alternative. 5 Till now they had 
failed in achieving Hindu-Muslim unity because they had been working on 

1 Statement of Jawaharlal, 28 January, Tb§ Tribune, 30 January 1930; Home Department's 
telegram to Secretary of State, 3 February 1930, cited in S. Gopal, Tb* Victroyalty of Lord 
Irwin (Oxford, 1937), p. 33. 

1 To Edo Fimmen, 4 March 1930. 

9 To Secretaries, League against Imperialism, 30 January 1930. 

4 See Ansari to Sherwani, 6 January, and to Gandhi, 10 and 13 February 1930, Khaliquzza m a n 

to Ansari, 1 March 1930; and Sherwani to Ansari, 3 March 1930, Ansari papers; M. Desai, 

Maulona Abut Kalom Axad (Indian edition, 1943), p. 40. 

* Mahmud to Ansari, undated but written after meeting of Working Committee, Ansari 

s 

papers. 



140 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


wrong lines; they should seek it on an economic basis and in the course of the 
fight for freedom. This would also sterilize the third party, the British. 1 But 
Jawaharlal was more sensitive than Gandhi or his father to the fears of the 
minorities and recommended assurances that under no circumstaQces would 
any coercion or repression of these communities be tolerated and, in fact, 
favoured treatment in economic matters would be guaranteed. Political repre¬ 
sentation should also be on economic lines, as this would fit in far more with 
modern conditions and do away automatically with communal electorates. The 
Nehru Report had lapsed, but its non-controversial parts were still binding on 
the Gongress; and Jawaharlal hoped that its role in the fight for freedom would 
convince all of its bona fides . 2 

Meanwhile, the Working Committee authorized Gandhi to start civil dis¬ 
obedience as and when he desired, and advocated, once the mass movement 
had started, a boycott of law courts and schools. By now Gandhi had at last 
seen his way ahead, and decided to march to the sea and violate the salt laws. 
Jawaharlal had not been enamoured of the eleven points earlier put forward by 
Gandhi. Prohibition, reduction of land revenue, military expenditure and high 
salaries, abolition of the salt tax, lowering of the exchange ratio of the rupee, 
licences for firearms, tariffs on foreign textiles, reservation of coastal shipping, 
a political amnesty and abolition of the secret police had seemed to him to 
comprise a tame definition of independence. He himself had been thinking in 
terms of public ownership of the principal industries, peasant proprietorship, 
annulment of agricultural indebtedness, a minimum wage, a steeply graduated 
income tax, high death duties, and no indirect taxation. 3 But law-breaking was 
invigorating in itself, and his support for Gandhi now was without any mental 
reservation. ‘How I wish I could join your gallant band or at least could see it 
start off bravely on the morning of the 12th.’ 4 Gandhi’s march to the sea at 
Dandi, with a small group of tough and disciplined men and women, has a high 
place, as fact and as legend, in the history of the Indian freedom movement 
and, indeed, of freedom in the world. The challenge gripped the imagination in 
India and beyond, and the refusal of Irwin’s Government to arrest Gandhi in 
the belief that the march would evoke no response showed how little they were 
aware of the true situation. Thousands lined the route, large meetings were 
held at every halting-place, and many village and district officials resigned, 
while the rest of India was enthralled by every detail of Gandhi’s progress. 
Jawaharlal with a few friends went down to Gujarat and marched with Gandhi 
for one stage, and the impression left on him was profound and permanent. 
Over twenty years later he wrote; 3 

1 Gandhi to Ansari, 16 February, and Motilal to Ansari, 17 February 1930, Ansari papers. 

3 The Problem of Minorities', 14 March 1930, reprinted in Young India, 13 May 1930. 

)Resolution at meeting of U P. Congress Committee, 26 February 1930, The Laadtr, 1 March 
1930. * * 

* Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 7 March 1930. 

*30 June 1931. Foreword to Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 1 (Bombay, 1931). 



ACTION-AND ANTICLIMAX 


141 


Many pictures rise in my mind of this man, whose eyes were often full of 
laughter and yet were pools of infinite sadness. But the. picture that is 
dominant and most significant is as I saw him marching, staff in hand, 
to Dandi on the Salt March in 1930. He was the pilgrim on his quest of 
truth, quiet, peaceful, determined and fearless, who would continue that 
quiet pilgrimage regardless of consequences. 

After this experience it was not perhaps to be expected that, whatever the 
ideological and temperamental strains, Jawaharlal would ever completely break 
away from his leader. 

As the Government had not arrested Gandhi, Jawaharlal and other Congress¬ 
men could only wait impatiently till he reached the sea and collected salt before 
themselves launching a mass campaign of civil disobedience by violating the 
salt laws. Jawaharlal appealed especially to the young to be ready to jump into 
the fray, 1 and persuaded the Congress committee in his own province to look 
ahead and organize wherever possible a campaign for non-payment of land 
revenue or rent. 2 He toured intensively in the villages and was filled with confi¬ 
dence by the spirit among the peasants. 

There is no doubt that India is awake and astir and we are going to give 
a good fight to the British Government. The Government will no doubt 
try its utmost to break us. But it is quite likely that in attempting to crack 
the nut the cracker itself may break. Somehow I cannot help thinking that 
the days of the British Empire are numbered now and that it is going to be 
our privilege and good fortune to help to end it. 3 

On 6 April, Jallianwala Bagh Day, Gandhi manufactured salt and Jawaharlal 
called on the country to go ahead with mass civil disobedience. He himself 
took charge of the campaign in Allahabad district.*As there was no possibility 
here of manufacturing salt, technical breaches were organized for inviting 
arrest. On the 9th he sold packets of contraband salt in the city* and the next 
day he and his wife led a large proces&on and collected salt from a special kind 
of earth brought in for the purpose. T have never seen Allahabad quite so 
excited.’ 4 But the U.P. Government, though authorized by the Government 
of India to arrest Jawaharlal if need be, 5 declined to do so on this occasion 
because, in what Jawaharlal termed ‘an amazingly idiotic’ 6 communique, it 
concluded that salt had not been manufactured but brought in bottles. There- 

1 ‘Inquilab Zindabad', 24 March 1930, published in Young Indio, 3 April 1930; ‘The AICC, 
23 March 1930, published in Young India, 27 March 1930. 

2 The Leader, 19 March 1930. 

’To Roger Baldwin, 4 April 1930. 

*To Sitla Sahai, 11 April 1930. 

’Home Department telegram to Governor U.P., 4 April 1930. Home Dept. Pol. ♦ile 249 and 
JCW of 1930. 

«To Syed Mahmud, 11 April 1930. 



142 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


after Jawaharlal organized the collection of salt in various parts of the city 
as well as in vehicles, making salt in them and selling it with appropriate 
songs. More worrying to the Government was his activity in the Rae Bareli 
district and the formation of associations among the tenants for non-payment 
of rent. 1 On the 14th, while on his way to Raipur to attend a local Congress 
conference, Jawaharlal was arrested at Cheoki, a few miles outside Allahabad, 
tried in Naini jail and sentenced to six months’ simple imprisonment for 
assisting in the manufacture of salt on 11 April. 

Great Day!' Jawaharlal wrote in his pocket diary the day the prison gates 
shut on him. He was placed in solitary confinement in a barrack reserved for 
dangerous prisoners and surrounded by a circular wall nearly fifteen feet high. 
To Jawaharlal this gave a greater sense of captivity than any rectangular en¬ 
closure; for, apart from creating a feeling of being closed in, it cut off a good 
bit of the sky in the day and the stars at night — the sight of which was one of 
Jawaharlal’s chief pleasures in prison. ‘What a terrible waste of brick and 
mortar,’ he wrote in his diary, 2 ‘just to deprive people of their liberty! A very 
decent, large-sized house could be built out of the materials of my particular 
wall only.’ 

Jawaharlal had been placed in the ‘A’ class, which meant that once a fortnight 
he could have one interview, write one letter and receive one. As a special 
concession, he was allowed to sleep outside his cell, but his bed was chained to 
the wall to prevent it beinj^used for scaling the wall. He could also receive two 
weeklies, one in English and the other in Hindi, but no daily newspapers. A 
fellow-prisoner was deputed to cook for him, and he was in addition permitted 
to receive food and fruit from home. He was also allotted some servants to work 
the punkha fan. But Jawaharlal chafed at these privileges, especially as news 
reached him that others in prison for salt satyagraha were being treated harshly. 
So he dispensed with the punkha boys, and wrote to the jail superintendent, 
much against his father’s wishes, that he did not desire any special treatment. 3 
Told in reply that it was always open to him not to utilize these privileges, he 
returned some sweets sent from home and asked that no more fruit be sent. 

Even the weekly budget of news that trickles through the massive walls 
and iron gates of Naini prison, by means of the Hindi Bharat, is enough 
to give some idea of happenings outside. Frequent firings, assaults, 
martial law, flogging of boys, imprisonment of women and so on and so 
forth denote a state of affairs that is very far from normal, and in this siate 
it is difficult for me to accept with pleasure dainty articles of food. The 
very sight of these dainties has the reverse of an agreeable effect on me. If 
Naini prison prevents me from doing something when barbarities are 

bailey to Hirtzel, 8 May 1930, Hailey papers, vol. 19. 

1 Entry 1# April 1930. * 

*4 May 1930. 



ACTION—AND ANTI CLIMAX 


143 


being committed all over the country, at least I cannot hold high festival 
here. 1 

He decided to have two light, simple meals and no more, and as a result often 
went hungry. 

Worse than the hunger, however, was the boredom. Life in prison was about 
as uneventful as that of the average turnip. 

The object of jail appears to be first to remove such traces of huma¬ 
nity as a man might possess, and then to subdue even the animal element 
in him so that ultimately he might become the perfect vegetable! Soil- 
bound, cut off from the world and its activity, nothing to look forward 
to, blind obedience the only ‘virtue’ that is instilled, and spirit con¬ 
sidered the great sin — is it any wonder that the prisoner approximates 
to the plant? 2 

To evade this ennui, Jawaharlal organized his life to a rigorous schedule. 
Up with the dawn, after a run of about a mile beside the main prison wall and 
a brisk walk for the same distance, Jawaharlal spent the remainder of the day 
mostly in spinning, weaving and reading. Since at first he was not allowed a 
charka, Jawaharlal, keen on some form of manual labour, took up newar weavk 
ing and continued it even later. But as a disciplined Congressman his main 
interest was in hand-spinning. 9 

Jawaharlal was allowed only six books at a time, and there was some 
uncertainty as to whether this included reference works and dictionaries and 
whether a multi-volume work counted as one book or more. So Jawaharlal 
had to give up the idea of continuing his letters to Indira, tracing the history 
of man. In 1928, when she was in Mussoorie and he was wandering in the 
plains, he had written to her giving in brief outline the origins of the earth, 
the beginnings of life and human prehistory. He had got as far as the forma¬ 
tion of classes, the development of organized religion and the coming of the 
Aryans, when he had been forced by the stress of public affairs to discontinue. 4 
Now, in prison, though time was not lacking, he needed more books and 
probably even missed the inspiration: my mind was too full of the making 
of history, as it was being made from day to day in India, for me to think of 
the dead past.’ 5 But he read much and made copious notes; and the books he 
read disclose the spreading range of his interests. Spengler, Bukharin and 

‘To his father, 28 May 1930. 

‘To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 25 June 1930. 

5 During this term of six months he spun over 30,000 yards of yam on the charka and nearly 
750 yards on the tahli {• hand spindle). 

4 Letters from a Father to bis Daughter (Allahabad, 1929). 

5 Preface to second edition, October 1931. * 



144 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Russell’s ABC of Relativity were gutted, with Maurois’s Ariel and Disraeli 
and Romain Rolland’s Jean-Christopbe (all in French), Lloyd George’s speeches, 
Shakespeare and an anthology of French poetry as light relief; and the 
interest in Indian and Asian history was maintained. “I seldom read the 
notes again but I had a substance of that book in my memory. # I had to think 
of what the book meant, put it down and that became for me a library of 
reference.’ 1 

Jawaharlai’s isolation was never complete. It was broken from the start 
by the presence of numerous convict warders and orderlies, ostensibly intended 
to attend on him but also used to keep a watch on him, and not allowed to 
mix with other prisoners lest they carry messages. But in fact a large number 
of other warders and servants also came daily for darshan and to discuss 
swaraj. Convicts smuggled in flowers, and his punkha coolie, who was not a 
convict, brought him a few little mangoes almost daily. ’They are not up to 
much,’ wrote Jawaharlal, much moved, ‘but the gift is worthy of the Gods. 
The man is very poor.’ 2 Officials of the jail and the town also called on him 
frequently. A month after his arrest, another Congressman arrested for civil 
disobedience was placed in the same barrack. But it was the arrival of Motilal 
Nehru and Syed Mahmud on 30 June that disrupted the placid routine of 
Jawaharlal’s life. Looking after his father became now his main preoccupation, 
till both father and son were soon drawn, even from within jail, into political 
negotiations. 

Jawaharlal, despite the taboo on discussion of politics at interviews and the 
denial of newspapers, had been kept fairly well and quickly informed of events 
outside by the warders and later arrivals in prison. ‘ Peshawar occurrences' 
runs the entry in the pocket diary for 23 April, revealing that the solitary 
prisoner had heard and been thrilled by the knowledge that the Government 
had virtually lost control of that city. What particularly delighted Jawaharlal 
was the fact that the inhabitants of the N.W.F.P. were predominantly Muslim, 
and by their revolt had belied the foreboding that the Muslims would keep aloof 
from the movement. The news of the spread and intensification of civil dis¬ 
obedience was i ndeed so exciting that Jawaharlal fretted inhis idleness and could 
not sleep. On 5 May he heard that Gandhi had been arrested in far-off Bombay 
a few hours earlier, and was well pleased. 'C a marche bien. It is full-blooded war 
to the bitter end. Good.’ 3 Nothing, he thought, would be more unfortunate than 
any premature compromise. 

This attitude ensured from the start that the effort of the professional media¬ 
tors, Sapru and Jayakar, to negotiate a settlement between the Government and 
the Congress was bound to fail. Jawaharlal held all Liberals in contempt and 
minced no words in his diary: 4 

'Speech to the Foreign Press Association, New Delhi, 20 March 1956. 

2 Diar$ entry 2 May 1930. * 

'Diary entry, 5 May 1930. 

4 31 May 1930. 



ACTION—AND ANTI-CLIMAX 


145 


Some of the moderates are waking up, but some behave like old women — 
weeping and howling and feeling terribly oppressed about everything! 
The Leader is evidently among the weeping widows. If they have not got 
gumption enough to do anything why do they not shut up? It is enough to 
sicken one to hear them sing the praises of Irwin and Benn and co! It is 
difficult to imagine a greater dope at the political game than the moderate 
in India. Nothing could condemn British rule in India more than the 
amazing product of it! 

So he was taken aback when some slack statements to a British journalist by 
Gandhi and Motilal were picked up by the two leading Liberals as a basis for a 
settlement at atime when both civil disobedience and the Government's attempts 
to crush it were in full fury. Armed with some general platitudes from the 
Viceroy, they saw Gandhi in Yeravda jail and found him in what they felt to be a 
co-operative mood. In fact, however, while Gandhi sounded accommodating 
on the constitutional issue, he had clearly not given his whole mind to it and 
insisted that Jawaharlal's should be the final voice 1 So the peacemakers pro¬ 
ceeded to Naini prison to interview the Nehrus. 

Lot of time was wasted in listening to what Irwin said and Jinnah did and 
Fazl-i Husain intrigued. Nothing important or hopeful. Bapu’s 2 note 
disappointing although it is dear that even that will not be acceptable to 
the Viceroy. We have not suggested anything. Have said that without 
full consultation with colleagues, especially Gandhiji, we cannot make 
any suggestion. We have not committed ourselves in any way although we 
have hinted at a stiff attitude. I have been worried however for last two or 
three days. I wish we had definitely stopped all talk of 'peace'. It is harmful 
and diverts attention. There is no peace anywhere in sight. 3 

However, the impression of theover-optimistic negotiators was very different. 
Sapru reported to the Viceroy.' 4 

Much to our agreeable surprise we found Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in 
quite a reasonable frame of mind yesterday. Both he and his father gave 
us a very patient and courteous hearing. On the constitutional issue 
however we did not find our task with them so easy as we had found 
with Mr. Gandhi, whereas* on the question of salt and the 11 points of 
Mr. Gandhi on which he had laid so much stress at' Poona we did not 
find them in complete agreement with Mr. Gandhi. 

1 Gandhi to Motilal, 23 July 1930, Tba Bombay Cbronicla, 6 September 1930. 

2 Gandhi was addressed as 'Bapu' or 'father' by Jawaharlal and many others. 

5 Diary entry, 1 August 1930. Fazl-i Husain leader of the Unionist party in the Punjab and at 
this rim* mwnhw of the Viceroy's council, was a frank protagonist of Muslim communal ism. 

4 28 July 1930, Sapru papers 147. 



146 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


So, despite a letter 1 from Jawaharlal to Gandhi given them to deliver, in 
which Jawaharlal made dear that he and his father had not been persuaded 
by Gandhi’s approach to the constitutional issue and that he himself wished 
to continue the campaign, Sapru persuaded the Viceroy to transport the 
Nehrus to Yeravda for consultations with Gandhi. Though Jawaharlal had 
not been very keen, Motilal had said that they had no objection, 2 and a special 
train sped them across the country to see Gandhi. Meanwhile, Jayakar, who 
had taken the letter to Gandhi and seen him alone, was confident that Gandhi 
was anxious for a settlement. 3 

But the talks of Gandhi and the Nehrus with Sapru and Jayakar came to 
nothing. The Congress stated its terms precisely and stiffly to be a complete 
national government with the right of secession and reference of all British 
claims to an independent tribunal. These terms would obviously not be accept¬ 
able to the Government; and though the indefatigable Sapru and Jayakar 
continued their ‘silly peace negotiations’ 4 and shuttled between Simla, Naini 
and Poona, no one shared their illusory hopes of a compromise. What, indeed, 
struck the Secretary of State was ‘Gandhi's deference to Jawaharlal and Jawa- 
harlal’s pride in what had been achieved as well as his declaration of belief in 
non-violence. It was the apparent pride which depressed me, because it did not 
show the spirit of a beaten man.' 3 

A few days later, Motilal was released on grounds of ill-health, and 
Jawaharlal’s own term of six months was drawing to a dose. But the U.P. 
Government had no intention of leaving him at large for long. 6 Nor did 
Jawaharlal expect it. Released on 11 October, he promptly resumed the Con¬ 
gress presidency, thereby, as the organization had been outlawed; rendering 
himself liable to artest, and he then directed all the provincial committees 
to launch a fresh offensive. The manufacture of salt and the boycott of British 
goods, especially cloth, which formed the backbone of the movement, should 
be vigorously sustained, and in addition efforts should be made to initiate 
no-tax campaigns as in Gujarat. 7 

. It is clear that India, big as it is, is not big enough to contain both the 
Indian people and the British Government. One of the two has to go and 
there can be little doubt as to which this is going to be... we are in deadly 
earnest, we have burnt our boats, we have taken the great resolve and 
there is no going back for us. 8 
•28 July 1930. 

*Sapru to Jayakar, 8 August 1930, Sapru papers J 16. 

3 Jayakar to Sapru, 4 August 1930, Sapru papers J 15. 

"Hailey to General Shea, 15 August 1930, Hailey papers, vol. 19. 

3 Wedgwood Benn to Irwin, 3 September 1930, Halifax papers, vol. 6. 

6 Hailey, Governor, to Crerar, Home Member, 2 October 1930, Home Dept. Pol File 2 37/III of 
1930. b 

7 Circular to provincial Congress committees, 14 October 1930. 

"Speech at Allahabad, 12 October 1930. 



ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX 


147 


In his own province, where agricultural prices had been on a steep decline 
throughout the year, a no-tax campaign would obviously meet with a favour¬ 
able response; and Jawaharlal announced that the district and town Congress 
committees would shortly organize non-payment of land revenue, rent and 
income-tax. 1 Though, on the face of it, this involved all sections of society, 
landowners, tenants and professional classes, in the political struggle against 
the Government, basically it was a call to the peasant tillers not to pay rent 
to the landlords; and its explosive nature lay in its rousing class conflict and 
spreading it to the countryside. The next day he was arrested, tried for sedition 
and incitement to manufacture of salt and non-payment of taxes, and sentenced 
to two years’ rigorous imprisonment plus five months in default of fines. He 
had been out of prison for less than ten days. 

Denied the artistry of action, 2 Jawaharlal reverted to the regular tenor 
of Naini life. A pain in the shoulder prevented him from much spinning and 
newar weaving. But the insatiable reading was taken up again. He re-read 
Radhakrishnan’s Hindu View of Life, and made notes from, among others, 
Trotsky, Shaw, Maeterlinck, Kropotkin and Keyserling. He also recommenced 
his letters to his daughter, basing himself on his memory and his notebooks, 
for by now it was clear that ahead lay many years in prison — indeed he would 
only be able to write in prison — and if he hoped for the help of reference books 
he would never write at all. But his sense of wonder had led him to amass a 
great deal of odd information. Over these letters Jawaharlal took much trouble, 
collecting his thoughts on paper and then organizing them lucidly to suit a girl 
of thirteen. The handling of the language was easy, but his style had not quite 
settled down and occasionally there was a trace of affectation. The letters dealt 
with the histoty of man. Like Raleigh and Condorcet, Jawaharlal wrote a history 
of the world while sitting in prison. Each letter was devoted to one theme or 
development; and the whole, starting with Mohenjo-Daro and ancient Greece 
and ending with the writer’s own times, was spread over nearly three years. 
The letters showed, when published as Glimpses of World History, a unity 
of outlook and a command of fact which would have done credit to any pro¬ 
fessional writer; and that they were written with no research assistance of any 
kind and as an escape from the monotony of jail made the work an astonishing 
achievement. 

The news of the celebration of his forty-first birthday all over the country on 
16Novemberthrilledhim.‘JawaharDay! Arrests — convictions — lathi charges 
all over the country!' 3 About twenty million people had participated in 384 
cities and villages (including Colombo); the police had opened fire in one 
place and carried out lathi charges in 26 others; one person was killed, about 
1,500 were wounded and 1,679 were arrested. So the morale of the movement 

'Speech at Lucknow, 18 October 1930, The Tribune, 21 October 1930. 

*See letter to Dhan Gopal Mukherji, 17 October 1930. * 

J Diary entry, 16 November 1930. 



148 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


was obviously still high, and Jawaharlal gave some thought to its future. A 
revolutionary dynamic, even in politics, could only be maintained by the goal 
of an economic revolution and by the rousing of a mass revolt. 

* 

Ultimately, that is theonly thing that will tell. In spite of the great success 
of our movement we have not yet come within reasonable distance of 
moving the masses in a revolutionary sense. There is sympathy but no 
more. Gradually, if we do not look out, even this sympathy will get less 
and less. 1 

From this point of view, a no-tax campaign was vital and some attention should 
be given to defining its objective. The battle-cry of an economic programme 
was a far more powerful one for the peasant than that of political swaraj alone, 
and the object of a no-tax movement should be economic advance and not the 
release of a few leaders. Even the idea of a Constituent Assembly to settle the 
political future of India, which struck Jawaharlal at this time, could not be 
expected to rouse the kisans. In May 1929 the national body, following in the 
steps of the U.P. Congress, had accepted that the poverty and misery of the 
Indian people was due not only to foreign exploitation but also to the economic 
structure of society which required ‘revolutionary changes’. Thanks to Jawa 
harlal the Congress was acquiring, if not a socialist viewpoint, at least an 
economic dimension. But no thought had been given to these ‘revolutionary 
changes'. The Congress, in the middle of a war, could not be expected to draw 
up a definite economic and agrarian programme, but it should at least formulate 
some tentative ideas. Jawaharlal thought of some, 'not', as he said, ‘from a 
purely socialistic standpoint, but from a Congress viewpoint with some lean¬ 
ings towards socialism’. Big zamindaris should be acquired by the State, with 
compensation to all except those who had sided with the British and against 
the national movement, and replaced by peasant proprietorship and large state 
farms, where major experiments could be tried by the cultivators to whom 
they would be jointly leased. There should be also an inheritance tax and a land 
tax which would be at a flat rate of 25 per cent of the agricultural income above 
a certain minimum and up to a certain limit, and beyond that graduated like 
the income tax. Tenants should have rights of occupancy, purchase, transfer, 
improvement and inheritance, and a ceiling should be placed on rent. The time 
might not be ripe for a radical agrarian programme for the whole of India, and 
leading Congressmen would not agree to it; but the U.P. could take the lead. 
While there was no point in needlessly irritating the zamindars and the capital¬ 
ists and adding to one’s enemies in the middle of a great fight, where a choice 
had to be made between two positions the Congress should without fear back 
the masses — the kisans , the landless people and the petty zamindars — for 
they weje the vital groups. The Congress was wise in abiding precipitation 

* Notes probably written in October-November 1930. 



ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX 


149 


of the dass conflict, but it should always be remembered that such a conflict 
was there and could not be wholly ignored. The ultimate ideal should be dear* 
cut in their minds; it need not be advertised but it need not be kept secret either. 

These ideas, very similar to the U.P. manifesto of 1928, were, as Jawaharlal 
was well aware, by no means revolutionary; but even their attainment was 
poised in his eyes on the continuance of a revolutionary struggle, and to that 
extent he was racing far ahead of reality. Even from within prison he and his 
companions sought to resist, and for the first time Jawaharlal contravened the 
jail rules by organizing a three-day fast in protest against the flogging of political 
prisoners and their harsh treatment in other jails. He was vasdy delighted, too, 
by the news of his wife’s arrest on New Year’s Day and by her message on that 
occasion: ‘1 am happy beyond measure and proud to follow in the footsteps 
of my husband. I hope the people will keep the flag flying.’ But generally, as 
Jawaharlal was compelled angrily to recognize, spirits were flagging and there 
was a mood for compromise. 

Unhappily the hartal age inaugurated by the Mahatma and the Con¬ 
gress has had some evil effects. It has resulted in continuous hartals in 
the heads and brains of some people. The upper storey has been locked 
up and the key is missing. It is a sad and deplorable result, but I suppose 
we must all bear up with this additional affliction. 1 

It was in this context of fatigue that the British Government sent out 
seductive messages suggesting a settlement. The first session of the Round 
Table Conference had made dear that it was futile to discuss Indian problems 
with anyone except the Congress: ‘no Indian delegation’, wrote the corres¬ 
pondent in India of The Times, ‘without a three-quarter line composed of 
Gandhi on one wing, the two Nehrus in the centre, and Malaviya or Patel on 
the other, can possibly be looked on as representative.’ 2 The Viceroy also came 
round to the recognition that logically there were only two alternatives: to 
govern without consent or to make terms with Gandhi. The concept of the 
knock-out blow being futile, there had to be some settlement. 3 On 17 January 
1931 the Viceroy, in the new, Christian style of imperialism, appealed to Gandhi 
for co-operation on a basis of mutual trust; and two days later the Prime Mini¬ 
ster, Ramsay MacDonald, offered provincial autonomy, responsibility of the 
central executive to a federal legislature with some safeguards for minorities 
during a period of transition, and reforms in the existing constitution pending 
final decision on permanent changes. The thought that these siren voices might 
strike a 'response in the Congress drove Jawaharlal almost frantic. All such 
statements, he pleaded with his father, even if they offered full independence, 

*To hit father, 28 December 1930. 

J Letter to his editor, 12 September 1930, The History of the Times, 1912-1948, (ft. ii (New 
York, 1952). p. 877. 

5 Irwin to Wedgwood Bean, 5 September and 3 November 1930, Halifax papers, vol. 6. 



150 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


should be ignored and the fight carried on; but, in fact, MacDonald’s state¬ 
ment amounted to nothing. ‘The British Government are past masters in the 
art of political chicanery and fraud, and we are babes at their game.’ In even 
dreaming of a compromise the Working Committee would be* playing with 
fire — fire which might consume the country at no distant date — and lower¬ 
ing the morale of the people. ‘Some people may be tired. There are also some 
people who have got the iron into their souls and who will go through hell if 
necessary before giving in to an ignoble compromise.’ The Government should 
be made to realize that the fight would go on not for months but for years if 
necessary and the Congress would not give in except on its own terms. ‘The 
day we convince the enemy that we are immovable like the Himalayas and 
as difficult to crush, that nothing in the world can make us bend — that we shall 
put up with all that they may inflict on us — that day the enemy will crumple 
up.’ The larger world-situation also demanded that Britain make peace with 
India. 1 

Motilal, however, was dying, and could give no guidance to the Working 
Committee, whose members had now been released. Gandhi was unwilling 
to reject the Government’s overtures out of hand both because he sensed a 
kindred spirit in the Viceroy, and because he believed that the war-weariness 
was more widespread than Jawaharlal was willing to recognize. The latter was 
prepared to overcome the staleness in the towns by stirring up the rural areas, 
but this did not appeal to Gandhi. Out of time, therefore, with the mood of his 
leader, and deeply stricken by his father’s death on 6 February, Jawaharlal 
made no decisive contribution to the discussions. Trained to conceal his 
emotions, he continued to attend all the meetings of the Working Committee. 
But the undemonstrativeness could not hide the depth of his grief. Jawaharlal’s 
personality was still incomplete and lacking in an assured centre. He was a man 
in the process of becoming, and therefore greatly dependent on his strong 
family background and on the support of a powerful father. His mother had 
no influence over him. The differing attitudes of father and son on many poli¬ 
tical issues, the gradual shift of Motilal to a viewpoint closer to Jawaharlal’s 
and the many legends woven round his ambitious and spoiling love for his 
son, cannot detract from the fact that his was the weightier influence. For 
long after Motilal’s death, Jawaharlal felt the lack of his sheltering wisdom, 
and doubtless this deprivation did much to reinforce his dependence on Gandhi. 

Just at this moment, however, Gandhi’s ways were wholly alien to him. 
The negotiations with the Viceroy, carried out by Gandhi on his own, and the 
settlement which resulted, seemed to Jawaharlal a total and unwarranted 
surrender. He still had not understood that Gandhi was no different from the 
Moderates in his basic strategy of negotiating with the British for concessions; 

he only sought to build up greater mass pressures in his favour.* ‘All these 
• * 

‘Two undated letters to his father, clearly written in January 1931. 

*For an analysis of this, see Bipan Chandra, ‘Elements of Continuity and Change in Early 
Nationalist Activity*, paper read at the Indian History Congress, December 1972. 



ACTION-AND ANTI-CLIMAX 


151 


forms of action', in Fanon’s words, 1 'serve at one and the same time to bring 
pressure to bear on the forces of colonialism, and to allow the people to work 
off their energy.’ Assuming that the Congress was committed to the position 
Gandhi and the others had taken up at Yeravda the year before, 2 and expect¬ 
ing, till almost the very end, 3 the talks to break down, the actual terms came to 
Jawaharial as a severe jolt. Gandhi had agreed to discontinue civil disobedience 
in return for a partial amnesty limited to those not charged with violence, and 
permission to picket peacefully and to manufacture salf under certain con¬ 
ditions; and he committed Congress to take part in the Round Table Con¬ 
ference to consider a scheme of federation and responsibility with safe¬ 
guards 'in the interests of India* for such matters as defence, external affairs, 
the position of minorities, financial credit and the discharge of obligations. 
This was a far cry from the demand for independence and the right to secede, 
and even from the position taken up by the Congress in the talks with Sapru 
and Jayakar in the summer of 1930. Nor had Gandhi stood firm on the 
demands for a general amnesty, an inquiry, into police excesses, which to 
Jawaharial was preliminary to any participation in the Round Table Con¬ 
ference, 4 the return of all immovable property which had been attached, and 
the unlimited right to collect salt. 

Thousands of poor people are pledged to eat only tax-free salt or salt manu¬ 
factured by themselves. Hundreds have during the past eight months 
bled for vindicating the right. The leaders are involved in the pledge 
taken by the people. Humiliation of the people and their leaders and invita¬ 
tion to break their pledge is hardly the way to approach peace. 3 

It appeared to most members of the Working Committee, and above all to 
Jawaharial, that Gandhi had been outwitted and, in return for some empty 
phrases which recognized the indispensability of Congress in any Indian 
settlement, had yielded on every crucial issue and ignored the long-term 
objectives. But Gandhi threatened to retire if his settlement were repudiated 
and demanded personal loyalty even if not approval. Jawaharial was in tears 
and more aware than ever that the loss of his father was more than a personal 
one. Never had Motilal’s clear-sightedness and ruthlessness in negotiation 
been more needed. ‘Always’, he recorded in jail a year later, ‘when thinking 
of the truce people start guessing what might have happened if father had 
been there and there appears to be a general consensus that events would have 
taken a very different turn. Foolishly I said so in Delhi a few hours after the 
truce. How Bapu was pained at my remark!’ 6 

1 Op. dt., p. 52. 

2 See his continents to t journalist, 18 February, Tb a Tribum, 22 February 1931. 

’‘Hie long conversations are at last drawing to a dose and we have to prepare again for jail or 
nonet This is all to the good.' Jawaharial to Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 28 February 1931. 

4 See his undated note which dearly was written at this time, AICC File G 6(KW)(iJsl931. 

’Ibid. 

‘Prison diary, 4 March 1932. 



152 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


However, despite his disappointment, at the Congress session at Karachi 
Jawaharlal moved the resolution ratifying this settlement. It has frequently 
been suggested that Gandhi secured this by agreeing, in turn,‘to a resolution, 
drafted by Jawaharlal and revised by him, committing the organization to 
provide in any future constitution for not only the basic civil liberties, adult 
suffrage and free primary education, but also ‘real economic freedom’. But the 
argument that in return for his acceptanceof the political compromise Jawaharlal 
was given a recognition of socialist objectives is defeated by the list of fundamen¬ 
tal rights incorporated in the resolution. In industry, economic freedom meant 
only a living wage and proper conditions of work, liberation from serfdom or 
conditions bordering on serfdom, decent treatment of women workers, pro¬ 
hibition against the employment of school-going children, the right to form 
trade unions and the establishment of machinery for settling disputes by 
arbitration. The state should control mineral resources and the key industries. 
These could not constitute part of the ‘revolutionary changes' which the Cong¬ 
ress had accepted in 1929 as being necessary. But in agriculture the position 
was even worse. The.Karachi resolution stipulated no more than a substantial 
reduction of land revenue and rent with total exemption only for necessary 
periods in the case of uneconomic holdings, a progressive tax on agricultural 
income above a certain level and a graduated inheritance tax. There was no 
reference to the abolition of landlordism or the socialization of land or even 
the annulment of at least a portion of the rural debt. On the other hand, much 
of Gandhi’s eleven pointsof 1930was included — reduction of civil and military 
expenditure, exclusion of foreign cloth and yam, prohibition, abolition of the 
salt tax and lowering of the exchange ratio of the rupee. 

Obviously, therefore, this resolution was no sugar on the political pill. There 
was nothing socialistic about it. Only the secret police could have believed that 
M. N. Roy, who was present at Karachi, had helped in drafting this resolution, 
which he later denounced as confused, compromising with foreign imperialism 
and native feudalism and ‘an instrument of deception’. 1 Jawaharlal too was 
aware that this resolution did not go even as far as his earlier efforts, from 1928 
onwards, at drafting an economic programme which would have some meaning 
for the peasants and workers of India. But he sponsored it as it formed at least 
one more step taken by the Gongress, however haltingly, not on the road to 
socialism but towards the recognition of the need for an economic policy. It 
indicated ‘that our national movement is gradually turning towards the left. 

I think this is a desirable development and that this in itself will help the fuller 
development of an advanced ideology in groups. It will provide the background 
out of which that ideology can develop.’ 2 

So the resolution on fundamental rights in itsdf did not compensate for the 
loss of ground suffered because of the political settlement; and if Jawaharlal 

» * 

1 J.P. Haitbcox, Communism and Nationalism in India (Princeton, 1971), pp. 190-91. 

2 To Onkar Nath Verma, 2 December 1933. 



ACTION-AND ANTICLIMAX 


153 


publicly supported the latter, it was because such conduct was in consonance 
with both his policy and his character. Once the settlement had been reached, 
Jawaharlal, ‘lonely and almost uninterested’ as Gandhi described him, 1 in¬ 
formed his colleagues that he was unable to accept or reconcile himself to the 
references to safeguards and reservations. But he added: ‘I do not desire, how¬ 
ever, that any impediment should be placed in the way of those who interpret 
the words differently from me and who propose to extract independence out of 
them. Truce having been proclaimed by the Working Committee, I trust all of 
us will honour it and carry out the directions of the W.C. in regard to it.’ 2 In 
other words, Jawaharlal resented the conclusion of this agreement but was 
not going even to offer to resign, as he had done in 1929, and intended to abide 
by the settlement. But the contradiction between his mental attitude and his 
decision to conform was not complete. It was not the case of a middle-aged 
fledgling who believed in extremism and acted in moderation. As Jawaharlal 
saw it, the settlement was undoubtedly a self-inflicted defeat. But he would not 
have agreed with Irwin’s claim, at a private meeting of the Conservative Party 
after his return to London, that he had built a breakwater against the great 
agrarian forces which were being harnessed by Jawaharlal by ensuring the loyalty 
of the older politicians who were on the side of ‘conservatism’. 3 No permanent 
damage had been done to Indian nationalism. Gandhi had not broken, but only 
ignored, the logic of the struggle for freedom; that struggle, in fact, could only 
end with the attainment of independence. So this was no peace but only a truce. 
The temporary phase was bound to pass sooner rather than later, and the fight 
recommence; and then once again the nation would require the leadership of 
the man who had called a depressed people to life and action. Till then, in the 
period of neither peace nor war, it was Jawaharlal’s duty to keep the spirit of 
battle alive, to respect the cohesion of the party and to abide by the leadership of 
Gandhi. The fears of the Brftish Government 4 that he might split with Gandhi 
and cariy on civil disobedience on his own showed how little they knew him. 
As he advised a young Congressman: 

• 

We cannot afford to get excited in politics. We must preserve our balance 
and not rush into any action without proper consideration. Such action 
as we take should not be individual as far as possible. If we do so we lose 
the benefit of collective action and of an organization. 3 


‘See Gandhi’s handwritten note to Jawaharlal, AICC File G 6(KWXi) 1931. 
Undated note, AICC File G 6<KW)(>) 1931. 

’Lord Butler, The Art of tb* Possibh (London, 1971), p. 41. 

4 Wedgwood Benn to Irwin, 25 March 1931, Halifax papers, vol. 6. 

’To Anjani Kumar, 21 July 1931. AICC File G 59 of 1931. 



11 


Agrarian Crisis 

in the United Provinces 


Jawaharlal’s speeches, immediately after the announcement of the settlement, 
were, somewhat to Gandhi's embarrassment, 1 bellicose. He called on Congress¬ 
men to retain the war mentality, for the time wa'fc sure to come when they would 
have to fight again; meanwhile, they should abide by the agreement which 
their leader had reached, and exploit it fully in such matters as picketing of 
liquor shops, manufacture of salt, boycott of foreign cloth and preaching of 
swadeshi. 2 There was also scope for more important activity in the sensitive 
areas of Gujarat and the United Provinces, where the movement of 1930 had 
developed into rural no-rent campaigns. That in Gujarat had been the more 
successful, but it was also the more easily called off, for it had been primarily 
a political effort in a small area no larger than half a district in the U.P., with 
relatively well-to-do cultivators responding to the call of Gandhi and Vallabh- 
bhai Patel to pay nothing until the Government cancelled a summary enhance 
ment of the revenue. The authorities were forced to acknowledge that the 
assessment had been carelessly arrived at, and, after the settlement, the chief 
issues were the restoration of lands which had been confiscated and the re¬ 
instatement of officials who had been dismissed. But the situation was very 
different in the United Provinces. Here, between the Government and the 
cultivators, there was an intermediate class of about 160,000 landlords, but the 
fragmentation of land was such that the vast majority of these landholders paid 
less than Rs 100 a year in land revenue. But if the landlords were for the most 
part impoverished, the condition of the tenants was relatively much worse. 
Pressure on land was continuously increasing, and rents paid by the tenants 
were enhanced far more rapidly than the revenue payable by the landowners to 

1 See the Viceroy’s record of interview with Gandhi, 19 March 1931, Collected Works, vol. 43 
(Delhi, 1971), p. 313. 

2 Speeches at Lucknow, 8 March, The Leader, 11 March 1931; Allahabad 9 March, The Leader, 
12 March *931; Bombay 13 March, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 March 1931. 


134 




AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


1)3 

the Government. Between 1900 and 1931 rents had increased by Rs 669 lakhs 
while land revenue had increased by only Rs 75 lakhs. Agricultural prices, 
already low by January 1930, fell by December by about 50 per cent and were 
lower than at any time since 1901; and the yield was not sufficient even to cover 
the rising costs of production, let alone to enable payment of rent. Added to this 
was a series of bad harvests since 1927. Nearly 40 per cent of the peasants and 
the poorer zamindars were sunk in debt. Two years after the agrarian riots of 
1921, life tenure was given statutory recognition in Avadh (Oudh), and a simi¬ 
lar statute was passed in 1926 in Agra. But this acceptance of tenancy right 
had its darker side, in that rents were stabilized at a time when they were high. 
But there were no occupancy rights in Avadh; conditions were slightly better 
in the Agra districts, but evictions were widespread throughout the province, 
the landlords being eager to evict occupancy tenants. 

The agrarian question, therefore, in the United Provinces was much more 
an economic than a political one; and even after the truce of March 1931 there 
were many instances of landlords and the police acting together in evicting and 
harassing tenants in order to extract rents. Some villages were even reported 
to have been deserted by the inhabitant* out of fear. 1 Jawaharlal was under the 
impression that while Gandhi had assured Irwin that even if he did not attend 
the Round Table Conference he would not resume civil disobedience so long 
as the Conference was sitting, he had made it clear that this assurance did not 
apply to any local economic struggle that might be forced upon the Congress. 2 
There is nothing to this effect In the official record but it is confirmed by 
implication; and it was explicitly stated in Gandhi’s later correspondence, in 
August, with the Government. So in March 1931, as the slump in prices con¬ 
tinued and even the rabi (spring! crop was a failure, the whole scope of the 
movement in the United Provinces was changed, as Gandhi described it, 3 
from one for non-payment of rent to one purely for seeking economic relief. 
Tenants were advised to pay what was possible, which in general appeared 
to be 50 per cent by occupancy tenants and 40 per cent by statutory tenants, 
provided the landlords gave receipts for the full amount. The Congress 
organizations in the tebsils acted as qgents of the peasants in negotiations 
with the landlords, and Jawaharlal met some senior officials of the U.P. Govern¬ 
ment, while the provincial Congress committee opened an office at Lucknow 
to deal with the Government and deputed Govind Ballabh Pant to be 
in charge. 4 

The Government, however, though they recognized the economic distress 
and realized that there was nothing objectionable in the attitude of the Congress, 
feared that its mediation would strengthen its hold in the rural areas and refused 

‘Jawaharlal to Jagdiah Praaad, Chief Secretary UP., 11 March cod to Maharai Singh, Commis¬ 
sioner, Allahabad division, 9 April 1931. Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XVI and K.W. of 1931. 

M utobiagnpby, p. 299. 9 

* Letter to a.—*«n«, Home Secretary, 23 March 1931, CoUoctsd Works, vol. 45, pp. 334-5. 
4 Afr*ri$»Ditknss tntbo XJnUtd Provinces, report of the UP. Coogrem Sub-Committee (Luck¬ 
now, 1931), p. 46. 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


150 

to recognize that the Congress had any role in this matter. It seemed to them 
more than a matter of prestige. 

Jawaharlal and his school have of course a great influence locally, and 
there is no doubt that they have for a long time been bitten with the idea 
of making a kind of Soviet organization of peasant workers, which will 
first of all abolish the landlord and then possibly Sovietize Government. 
The procedure now adopted is well chosen and difficult to meet. Congress 
announces that it is really a peasant trades union and cannot desert the 
tenant in his hour of stress. It no longer pursues the no-rent campaign as 
a political measure, but it demands the right to judge as between landlord 
and tenant and to decide what rent the latter can pay. The landlords are 
thoroughly unhappy, and we ourselves find it difficult to meet the new 
position without recourse to ordinances, which might break up the Delhi 
settlement. 1 

Knowing Gandhi’s keen desire to make the settlement a success, they sought 
to drive a wedge between him and Jawaharlal. In this they were not wholly un¬ 
successful. Emerson reported that Gandhi fully accepted the position that it 
was wrong to refer to the settlement as a truce* to talk about a future war, to 
refer to Government as an enemy and to exploit the settlement as a victory for 
Congress. ‘He was very loyal to Pandit Jawaharlal, but, I gathered, did not regard 
it as altogether improbable that he would take his own line sooner or later.’ 2 
Gandhi, in fact, was frightened by the officials with the bogy of a class war 
being let loose by Jawaharlal. He liked the idea of Congress tebsil committees 
acting on behalf of the tenants, but disapproved of advice to withhold payment 
of rent even in part, the appointment of Congress tehsildars and attacks by 
tenants on zamindars . 3 He even, to the Government’s delight, practically 
withdrew the claim of the Congress to be an intermediary between the Govern¬ 
ment and the people. 4 

Jawaharlal’s health at this time being on the verge of collapse, he had to take 
a holiday, and while he was in Sri Lanka and southern India, Gandhi was in 
charge of the U.P. problem. This appeared to be the chance for the Government 
to press home their advantage, and to get Gandhi to throw in his weight against 
his ‘wild men'. 5 Hailey, back as Governor by the end of April after being present 

1 To Sir Findlater Stewart of the Indian Office, 25 April 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 20. 

3 Emerson’s report of his interview with Gandhi, 19 March 1931, CoUoetod Works, vol. 45, 
Appendix IX. 

5 Emerson's report of his interview with Gandhi on 6 April 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XI 
of 1931. 

4 Crerar, Home Member, to Hailey, 6 May 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 20. 

’The phrase was that of Willingdon, the new Viceroy; letter to Haitey.*R9 April 1931, Hailey 
papers, vol.- 20. 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


137 


in London for the Round Table Conference, was wiser than most other officials 
in Lucknow, and realized that the economic crisis was real and it would not do 
merely to coerce and harass the tenants to pay rents. Remissions of revenue of 
about Rs 67 lakhs wen announced, with parallel reductions of rent for the rabi 
harvest of about Rs 220 lakhs. But, though in remitting revenue the Govern¬ 
ment went back to the level of 1901, rents were taken back only to the level of 
1913-16, and the remission amounted to only about two annas in the rupee. 
If rents also had been pushed back to 1901, the talukdars % the traditional allies 
of the Government, would have lost heavily and the Government were not 
willing to contemplate this. This was hardly adequate remission even for current 
rents — nothing was said about arrears or the kbarif (autumn) harvest — and 
many district officers and most of the zamindars pointed this out. 1 Landlords 
were practically unable to collect any rent at all in Barabanki, Rae Bareli and 
parts of Lucknow and Pratabgarh districts; and the situation was not much 
better in parts of Agra, Meerut and Allahabad districts. But the U.P. Govern¬ 
ment were prepared at this stage to do no more. On the other hand, the Divi¬ 
sional Commissioners were ordered to provide police assistance to landlords 
in carrying out the ordinary processes of eviction and distraint. 2 This seemed 
the only way of smashing the almost total hold which the Congress had acquired 
in some districts, and of retaining the loyalty of the talukdars. And the pretence 
of conciliation, however minimal, seemed a sufficient backdrop for talks with 
Gandhi. 

The Home Secretary, Emerson, met Gandhi at Simla in the middle of May. 
Gandhi was not prepared to accept that the Congress had no right to intervene 
at all in the relations between the* Government and the tax-payer; even if it was 
not a recognized intermediary, it had a role to play as the poor man’s friend in 
advising him on rent matters. But he roundly condemned pressure being 
brought on landlords, direct appeals not to pay, the proposal of a general 50 
per cent reduction of rent and any refusal to pay less than what was within the 
individual’s capacity. He was then invited to meet Hailey at Naini Tal to discuss 
details, and the spectre was presented to him of tenants refusing to pay any rent 
and resorting to violence if pressed by landlords. When he suggested an inquiry 
into the exact pitch of rents so as to ascertain if payment was practical, Hailey 
replied that this would involve such a delay in collections that Government 
could not agree . 3 The Governor was mo shrewd to press Gandhi to any precise 
commitment, but that Gandhi had been sufficiently won over was shown by 
the manifesto he issued immediately after the interview. Ignoring the resolution 
of the U.P. Political Conference passed a few weeks earlier that the rents should 
on no account exceed those prevailing at a time when agricultural prices were 

t H«iky toCrerar, S May 1931. Home Dept. Pol. File 33/XI of 1931. 

2 Chief Secretary's circular to Commissioners, 7 May 1931, ibiil. 

> Emerson’s note of discussions with Gandhi, 13, 14, 13 and 16 May 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 
33/IX of 1931; Hailey’s noteof discussions, 20 May 1931, Home Dq*. Pol. 33/XI cl 1931. 



158 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


what they were at this time, Gandhi called upon the tenants to pay all the rent 
they could as early as possible, and in no case less than 8 annas in the rupee in 
the case of statutory and non-occupancy tenants and 12 annas in the case of 
occupancy tenants — more than what the U.P. Congress had recommended. 
He added that the tenants should certainly not listen to advice to pay no rent at 
all or resort to violence. 1 

Fortified by Gandhi’s half-hearted support of the kisans , the Government 
now forced the pace and, without openly denouncing the settlement, set about 
breaking up the alliance of the U.P. Congress and the tenantry as well as the 
Congress organization in the countryside. If the Congress built up an influence 
in the rural areas such as they already had in the towns, in any future campaign 
of civil disobedience they would have the whole population behind them; and 
serious as Bardoli had been, it would appear insignificant compared to any 
no-rent campaign which might develop, encompassing the whole of the United 
Provinces. Administration would practically come to an end, it would be impos¬ 
sible to maintain law and order or even a semblance of government, and right in 
the heart of India 49 million people would be entirely out of hand. That was why 
it seemed important to Hailey and other perceptive officials not only to destroy 
the potential of the Congress in the countryside but to ride Gandhi off the 
United Provinces. This was doubtless one major reason why the Government 
were anxious that Gandhi should have no opportunity for reconsidering his 
position and should be encouraged to attend the Round Table Conference in 
London. 

It is, I think, the mercy of Heaven that they have concentrated on a tehsil 
in Bombay when they might have been playing havoc with six or seven 
million tenants in the United Provinces. I do not mean that all of them 
are thoroughly discontented, but there is quite enough rack-renting and 
bullying by landlords in some of the districts to make a very fine field for 
agitation. Jawahar Lai and his friends have done and are doing their best, 
but of course they lack the halo which surrounds the unprepossessing poll 
of the Mahatma. 2 

So when Jawaharlal came back to the U.P. in the middle of June, he found 
the situation and atmosphere much worse than in March. The talukdars were 
terrorizing the peasants with the help of the police, Congress volunteers were 
being beaten up in many places, and even activity such as peaceful picketing, 
permitted by the settlement, was in places banned by overenthusiastic district 
authorities. Jawaharlal had no intention of submitting meekly to this, despite 
letters from Gandhi, 3 seen in the mail by the authorities, deploring the element 

1 23 Mct 1931. * 

> Hailey to Haig, 10 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22. 

*20 and 24 June 1931. 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


159 


of violence in the Congress ranks and urging him not to break any law himself 
but to seek an interview with the Governor or with Emerson. ‘On your side’, 
Gandhi wrote to a U.P. Congressman, 1 ‘it is all well, so l ong as you hold the 
kisans in check. But Jawaharlal’s presence must now ease the situation. He has 
no difficulty in dealing with the kisans and restraining them.’ As much in reply 
to Gandhi as to the Government, Jawaharlal said that the Government were 
breaking the truce and using the zamindars to crush the kisans, and the Con¬ 
gress would have to take drastic action in reply. Talukdars who preferred to 
bask in official sunshine rather than to be on friendly terms with their tenants 
had no place in India, and those who were guilty of oppression would have to 
answer for it before the nation. 2 

Jawaharlal was too loyal to Gandhi to accept, even to himself, that his leader 
was weakening their case, and he dutifully sought an interview with Hailey, 
which, however, was not granted. But he took the view that what Gandhi had 
asked the tenants to pay was not the minimum but the maximum and this need 
not be paid if it entailed debt and sale of cattle and ploughs, or if the kisans were 
ill-treated. 3 The U.P. Congress set up commissions of inquiry to visit the 
districts and ascertain details of official and zamindari repression. For their 
part, the U.P. Government claimed that they were prepared to grant no further 
remissions and were even willing to consider the arrest and prosecution of 
Jawaharlal for his support of the tenants or even for organization, of peaceful 
picketing in Allahabad. 4 It is difficult to believe that Hailey, who was perhaps 
the shrewdest of his generation of civil servants in India, was serious about this, 
and it was probably intended to keep the' Government of India, of which in 
Willingdon’s time he had no high opinion, 3 from making any concession on 
the U.P. to Gandhi. For such a stupid step as the arrest of Jawaharlal would 
clearly have served to push Gandhi too far. However keen he might have been, 
as the authorities at Simla thought, to maintain the settlement and proceed to 
London he could hardly have done so with one of his chief lieutenants in prison; 
and an open war with the Congress at this stage could hardly have been of advan¬ 
tage to the Government. But fortunately, from their viewpoint, Jawaharlal left 
the U.P. to attend a meeting of the Working Committee and then accompanied 
Gandhi to Simla. There Gandhi suggested to the Viceroy and his officials that 
the district authorities should fix the amount of revenue and rent to be collected 
after consultation with Congress workers, but if this were not acceptable to the 
Government, at least a detailed inquiry to enable temporary adjustments should 
be ordered. The Government of India were williug to consider this, but it was 
veotedbytheU.P. Government Jawaharlal also, on this occasion, met a number 

*ToMohanlal Sauna, 13 June 1931, Colltct§d"Works, vol. 46 (Delhi, 1971), p. 384. 
a Speeches at Delhi, 22 June, TkrBombty CkronkU, 29 June 1931 and at Lucknow 26 June 1931. 
s Speeche* at Ree Bareli, 23 June, Tb» L$ad$r, 3 July and Soram 5 July, Tbt Pionctr, 3 July 1931. 
« Chief Secretary U JP. to Home Secretary, 30 June and 2 July, and Governor's telegram to Home 
Member, 20 July 1931. Home Dept. Pol. 33/XVI end K.W. 1931. 

3 See Hailey to Dawaoa, 7 June, and to Findlater Stewart, 13 June 1931, Hailey paper!, vol. 21. 



160 


JAWAHAJRLAL NEHRU 


of official including the Viceroy. ‘ Jawaralalal [sic] I also saw for a short time, 
quite a nice man to talk to, much more practical than G.’, recorded Willingdon 
with silly condescension. 1 

Jawaharlal’s serious conversations were with Emerson, who .was impressed 
by his genuine concern about the economic depression, which was limiting 
opportunities for constructive work and social reform. He made no secret of 
the fact that landlords had no place in his scheme of things, but he intended to 
buy them out rather than confiscate their estates, and even this only when the 
Congress party came constitutionally into power, and not as the result of a 
peasants’ revolt. In the U.P., he said, the Congress was acting merely as the 
organization of the kisans and advising them on what rents they should pay or 
none at all. Indeed, according to Emerson himself, it was he who took the offen¬ 
sive in these discussions and Jawaharlal who was moderate. Emerson contended 
that the Government would never have concluded the settlement if they had 
had any idea of the agrarian programme which the Congress would undertake 
in the U.P. and, when asked by Jawaharlal what the Congress should do if the 
kisans came to them with their grievances, replied naively that the Congress 
should refuse to intervene. Pressed by Jawaharlal as to what he would say if a 
peasant who had been evicted wished to till hisjand rather than leave it fallow, 
Emerson seems to have replied that he would sdhply refuse to answer him. 
Obviously this was not going to convince Jawaharlal or deflect him from his 
line of action, but it was dear that he was no hot-headed revolutionary. 

He was not prepared to admit that Congress activities had generally 
been objectionable, but was less uncompromising in this matter than 
Mr. Gandhi... The Pandit seemed to me to appredate more dearly than 
Mr. Gandhi the complexity of the problem, and while of course he was 
naturally anxious to get from the local Government some concession in 
regard to existing collections, he probably realised that this was imprac 
ticable. He was more concerned with a permanent solution or, at any rate, 
alleviation. 2 

In a sense, of course, these conversations were unreal, because both Jawahar¬ 
lal and Emerson were perceptive enough to see that, whatever the short-term 
bargains and haggles, there could be no final settlement between an imperialist 
Government and a Congress committed to independence. As Emerson recog¬ 
nized, even if Gandhi gave a hint to Jawaharlal to slow down Congress activities 
in the U.P. and even if Jawaharlal wished to do so, drcumstances would 

‘To Hailey, 22 July 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 21. That Willingdon could often (and not just on 
this occasion) get Jawaharlal’i name wrong is but ooe Indication of his general flippancy and light¬ 
heartedness in public affair*. 

3 Emerson’s note on discussions with Jawaharlal, 19 and 20 July 1931, Home Dept., Pol. 33/23 
of 193 l/JawahariaT* account (though the officials ate not named) is to be*iound in Autobiography, 
pp. 284 and 303. 



15 Jawaharlal, 1929 


Hi /V procession in Madras, 
1928, supporting a boycott 
of the Simon Commission 









1 7 fa waharlal and Kamala 
leading a procession against 
the Salt 'lax in Allahabad, 
1930 


18 Police disperse < rowels 
on the Wadala Salt Pans, 
1930 




r 


19 Followers of Gandhi in 
prison at Vcravda. near 
Poona, 1930 


I 


% 


r 

\ 

20 An election in Bombay, ( 
1930; some of the 
demonstrators clashing 
with police 










agrarian crisis in the united provinces 


161 


probably prove too strong for him. On return to Lucknow Jawaharlal met the 
Chief Secretary and urged that as the season for collection of rents was over 
and tenants had already paid 9 to 12 annas or more in the rupee, further collec¬ 
tions should be suspended and coercive processes stopped. This would immedi¬ 
ately relieve the tension and produce the proper atmosphere for an inquiry into 
future adjustments. But the Government, on the plea that rents had earlier been 
deliberately withheld, insisted that the process of collection should continue 
longer than in normal years. So evictions continued, and attempts were made 
to secure new tenants for these holdings. Congressmen in particular were 
penalized for taking an interest in these matters, and such tenants as declared 
themselves against the Congress were given special remissions. 1 

Jawaharlal, supported by Tassaduq Sherwani, himself a zamindar and 
president of the U.P. Congress committee, and Pandit Malaviya, by no stretch 
of the imagination a radical, reported all this to Gandhi, who sought clarifica* 
tion from Hailey and received a soft but evasive answer. Gandhi made no speci¬ 
fic demands, Hailey was only too anxious to keep the U.P. in the background of 
controversy, and the Working Committee was not keen to have a breakdown of 
the settlement and the cancellation of Gandhi’s journey to London on such an 
explosive, dass-ridden issue. 2 It was Bardoli and coercive processes there 
which the Committee put in the forefront, and Jawaharlal did not embarrass it 
by making the U.P. crisis a test case. Asked by Gandhi for a definite answer as 
to whether he should dedine to attend the Conference because of the U.P., 
Jawaharlal and his colleagues from the province replied that although there 
were sufficient instances in the U.P. of a breach of the truce, they would tty to 
see that conditions improved and they did not want the U.P. to stand in the way 
of Gandhi going to London; 3 For Jawaharlal realized that though he himself 
favoured the abolition of landlordism, his colleagues in the Working Committee 
(not exduding Gandhi) were unwilling to recognize, whatever their theoretical 
commitments in earlier resolutions, even the possibility of marked sodal and 
economic change. The crisis in the U.P. was real enough, and conservatives 
like Sherwani and Malaviya could not shut their eyes to it; but the Congress 
leaders from other parts of India had no wish to take up a problem which might 
open the door to unpredictable forces, and preferred to confront the Govern¬ 
ment on the safer ground of Gujarat. On this, however, a last-minute agreem e nt 
was reached, and Gandhi sailed for England, leaving Jawaharlal to deal with 
the U.P. 

Indeed, even before Gandhi’s departure, Jawaharlal appears to have decided 
that on the U.P. problem his guidance was unsafe. The U.P. Government set 

* jawaharlal's tetters to Jagdish Prasad, 29 and 30 July and 1 August 1931, AICC File G. 118 
of 1931 and 31 July 1931, AICC Fife G40(KW)(Ui) of 1931; report of UP. Government for the 
second half of July 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 18/7/31. 

a See Puraahottam Das Tendon's comments on the Working Committee meeting, Tbg Ltadtr, 

9 August 1931. 

*JawaharlaTs speech at Allahabad, 20 August, Tbt Ltadtr, 22 August 1931. 



t )A WAHARLAL A THRU 

162 

up a committee to consider future agrarian policy and invited Govind Ballabh 
Pant to serve on it. Gandhi, when consulted, advised that Pant should agree, 
but his advice was ignored and Pant declined to serve till he had received the 
approval of the U.P. Congress committee. 1 Clearly Jawaharlalk normal and 
ostentatious loyalty to his leader did not now exclude an occasional exercise of 
quiet defiance. The official committee recommended a complicated system of 
reduction of rents on the basis of the fall in prices, but never more than 50 per 
cent and never below the average rentals for 1901-05. They would also not be 
reduced if their rise could be shown to be the result of causes other than the rise 
in prices, such as irrigation or the use of improved seeds. 2 The Government 
accepted this recommendation, which would result in a reduction of Rs 4.1 
crores^outof a total cash rental of Rs 18 crores. But the actual implementation 
of this cumbrous scheme depended on a host of minor revenue officials, sus¬ 
ceptible to local pressures and the influence of zamindars. Evictions, issue of 
processes and arrests of Congressmen continued as before, though ‘more quietly 
and without fuss’. 4 There were about 5,000 evictions in Allahabad district 
alone, while in Muttra district over 2,000 processes were issued in August. 
There were more ejectments, sales of property and cases and convictions of 
ejected tenants for trespass in the ten months from October 1930 to July 1931 
than in the twelve months of the previous revenue years 1928-29 and 1929-30. 5 
Officials both at Simla and at Naini Tal counselled Jawaharlal to be patient 
and give them time to reinstate the tenants, 6 but in fact there was never any 
intention of doing so. The argument that there should be no evictions for non¬ 
payment of rent was regarded by the U.P. Government as untenable and tanta¬ 
mount to granting proprietary rights to the tenants. 7 They were prepared, on 
the other hand, for any organization by Jawaharlal of defensive direct action — 
that is, civil disobedience — in the last resort, a course which the Congress 
had made known to the Government that it kept open to itself. 8 So, although at 
this time the Central Government adopted a posture of friendliness and seemed 
to wish to strengthen the efforts of the Congress to maintain the settlement, 9 

the U.P. Government did not even pretend to do so. Gandhi’s suggestion 10 to 

* 

1 See Jawaharlal's telegram to Gandhi and Gandhi’s reply, 15 August 1931. 

2 Letter of Revenue Secretary U.P. to district officers, 24 August 1931, The Leader, 12 October 
1931. 

5 A crore is ten millions, or one hundred lakhs. 

4 Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 1 September 1931 - 

5 See table on p. 163: enclosure to letter from Chief Secretary, U.P. to Home Secretary, Govern¬ 
ment of India, 26 October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 

* See Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 5 September 1931- 

7 Fortnightly report of the U.P. Government for the second half of August 1931, Home Dept. 

Pol 18/8/31. 

* Jawaharlal’s interview in The Bombay Chronicle, 31 August 1931, and circular to provincial 
Congress committees, 31 August 1931, A1CC File P-1/1931. 

* E.C. Midville, Private Secretary to Viceroy, to Jawaharlal, 28 August 1931, AICC File 
G7/19&. 

<o Letter, 28 August 1931. 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


163 


Statement showing ejectments etc . in the United Provinces 


Revenue year 
1928-29 
(1 October 1928 
to 30 September 
1929) 


Revenue year Revenue year 

1929-30 1930-31 

(1 October 1929 (1 October 1930 
to 30 September to 31 July 1931) 
1930) 


(1) Number of arrears of 
rent suits 

271,919 

340,249 

288,465 

(2) Number of ejectments 
ordered for arrears 

42,280 

53,421 

64,076 

(3) Area from which eject¬ 
ment actually took 
place (in acres) 

117,517.874 

149,071.254 

189,362.960 

(4) Number of applica¬ 
tions for surrender 
or relinquishment 

25,182 

26,188 

94,800 

(5) Number of cases in 
which property was 
actually sold after 
distraint 

8,880 

10,897 

13,337 

(6) Number of cases under 
Section 447, Indian 
Penal Gode, against 
ejected tenants for re¬ 
entering or attempting 
to reenter their hold¬ 
ings, and number of 
convictions, vide Sec¬ 
tion 95 of the Agra 
Tenancy Act 

Cases 

818 

982 

1,054 

Gonvictions 

284 

267 

345 


Hailey to send for Jawaharlal was coldly ignored. It was not that an open con¬ 
frontation with the Congress was desired, but the hope was that if Jawaharlal 
and the U.P. Congress were pushed to extreme courses, in Gandhi’s absence 
Jawaharlal's rivals, who had no wish to revive civil disobedience, might gain 
the upper hand, and the organization itself might split up. 1 

Sensing that the Government of India were, at least as far as the U.P. was 
concerned, at this time less belligerent than the Local Government, Jawaharlal 

1 Hailey to Frank Brown, 9 August, and to Gen. Shea, 29 August 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 21. 




164 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


got Patel, as president of the Congress, to write to them to intervene. 1 But 
nothing happened, and meantime the general attitude of the Government of 
India also stiffened. There were shooting outrages at Hijli detention camp in 
Bengal, the salt concession in the whole area covered by the Salt Range in Shah- 
pur district in the Punjab was withdrawn, and Congressmen were arrested in 
large numbers in that province. In the U.P. itself, evictions and harassments 
continued, and men and women were beaten up for the recovery of such petty 
arrears as two or five rupees. 2 Yet, under Jawaharlal’s guidance, the U.P. 
Congress committee did not consider the request of the Rae Bareli district 
committee for permission to start civil disobedience, but instead called on all 
its branches to refrain from any such action for the time being. 3 The committee 
appointed by the U.P. Congress to inquire into the agrarian situation, which 
also reported at this time, publicly denied that the Congress was opposed to the 
zamindars or wished to countenance a class war. 4 Jawaharlal had no wish to 
embarrass Gandhi in London or his colleagues in the Working Committee; nor 
was the organization on a war footing. 

Touring the district, Jawaharlal found the conditions varied, depending 
on the particular attitudes of the local officials. He was more interested in ascer¬ 
taining the facts than in exploiting them. Even the U.P. Government conceded 
that his speeches were less open to objection than usual*. 3 But, on the whole, 
the situation was grim. The kisans, losing all hope of redress from the Govern¬ 
ment or the Congress, were desperately raising money to avoid eviction and the 
loss of their crops. They sold their cattle, dumped their grain on the markets 
thus further reducing its price, and borrowed from moneylenders and paid not 
only the current rent in full but often some arrears and heavy costs. Those who 
had been evicted paid very muchmore to recover their land than if they had paid 
the full rent without any remission at the start, and in the process they lost their 
occupancy rights and became life tenants. 6 Moreover, these direct transactions 
were regarded by the authorities as mutual arrangements between the landlords 
and the tenants which dispensed with the need for remissions. To deter 
Jawaharlal from visiting villages in Gonda district, where there were serious 
allegations of harassment, ditches were dug across the road; and in Bahraich 
district, to prevent attendance at Jawaharlal’s meetings, the kisans were 
directed to stay in their villages on the particular dates to receive their remis¬ 
sion slips. 7 In many districts the peasants were informed that these remissions 

* Patel to Emerson, 15 September 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 

2 Jawaharlal to V.N. Mehta, Commissioiier, Allahabad Division, 23 September 1931, AICC 

File G40(KW)(iii)/1931. 

J The Leader, 23 September 1931. 

* Agrarian Distress in the United Provinces, pp. 49-50. 

’Fortnightly report of U.P. Government for the first half of October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 
18/10/31^ * 

^Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 16 October 1931. 

iTbe Leader, 14 October 1931. 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


163 


would be cancelled if the rent for the current kharif ct op was withheld for over 
a month. It was only when rent had been fully paid, moreover, that any objec¬ 
tions of the tenant regarding the rent would be considered. But it was obvious 
that money once paid would never be returned, and dearly the purpose was to 
terrorize the peasant into paying all he could. In Allahabad district, the popula¬ 
tion had increased over the years, while the cultivated area had dedined, so that 
the pressure on holdings, already uneconomic, was acute. The kharif crop was 
also wdl bdow average because of untimdy rains. But heedless of these con¬ 
siderations, as well as of the public opinion to which the district was exposed, 
the Collector, R.F. Mudie, granted remissions for 1931 of only Rs 9.3 lakhs, 
out of a total cash rental of Rs 37 lakhs for both the kharif and rabi crops, as 
against Rs 11 lakhs in 1930 for the rabi crop only, 1 on the ground that there 
were a large number of occupancy tenants whose rents had not been raised in 
recentyears. The Collector also contended that the rental demand in 1913-16 had 
been the same as in 1901, the base year selected by the U.P. Government, and 
on this wrong premiss, assumed without checking or publishing the figures, 
further reduced the remissions. 2 So the remissions were only 17 per cent or 
2 annas 7 pies 3 in the rupee, although the prices of cereals had fallen by 33 per 
cent, and grain formerly worth a rupee was now worth only seven annas. 

Jawaharlal was at last forced to contemplate a no-rent campaign. ‘Thus the 
outlook for the tenant’, he wrote to the Chief Secretary, ‘is about as black as it 
could wdl be and there seems no way out. If the Government policy is enforced 
he is doomed to even greater suffering than he has passed through. We have 
been anxiously considering this and the Allahabad District Congress Gommittee 
have felt that they can be no parties to this continuous oppression of the kisan 
leading to his economic death.’ So it might become necessary to advise the 
tenantry to withhold payment of rent till a satisfactory solution was found. 
Though they did not wish to take any decision, involving such far-reaching 
consequences, without the fullest consultation, there seemed no other way. 
But they were convening a representative kisan conference to consider this 
question, and also communicating with the provincial and the All-India 
Congress. 

I regret gready that such a step should be contemplated by them, specially 
at a time when Gandhiji is attending the Round Table Conference. But 
the question of payment or non-payment is an urgent issue and cannot 
await the deliberations of the Round Table Conference or the return of 
Gandhiji. We have tried to avoid raising any issue which might lead to 

iThough for 1930 the U.P. Government had sanctioned remissions of Rs 12.3 lakhs, the Col¬ 
lector granted only Rs 11 lakhs. 

•Press interview of Collector of Allahabad, 140ctober, Tb*L**d»r, 16 October 1931; Jawahar 
lad to Jagdiah Prasad, 13 October 1931 (two letters), AICC File 34, Part 1II/1931. | 

• A pie was one-twelfth of an anna. 



166 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


friction and we shall continue to do so. But the fates seem to be against 

this. 1 

Jawaharlal also brought the crisis to the notice of the Viceroy and of Gandhi. 
The Government of India merely referred his letter to the U.P. Government, 
while Gandhi authorized Jawaharlal to do as he thought fit. 2 Both the Allahabad 
district committee and the kisan conference recommended the cessation of pay¬ 
ment of rents, 3 ‘It is war,’ Jawaharlal was reported as having said, ‘war now and 
ever till the end of our lives. ’ 4 What exasperated him as much as tenancy wrong 
in the U.P. was the shabby treatment to which Gandhi was being exposed in 
London. 

By now the Government of India were ptepared for a fight. ‘Jawarlalal [sic] 
seems to be on the warpath again and Gandhi’s last speech when he evidently 
lost his temper and let himself go makes one feel one will be busy again ere 
long’. 3 But at this stage it was the U.P. Government that hung back. Hailey 
felt that Jawaharlal was bluffing, and that the telegraphic correspondence with 
Gandhi was as much meant for the official censor as for themselves. 6 Yet the 
Governor was not willing to call the bluff. Mudie was transferred from Allaha¬ 
bad, an error in his calculation of the remissions was acknowledged and a further 
one lakh was sanctioned, and the Congress leaders were invited to a discussion 
with the officials concerned. This enabled the Working Committee to postpone 
a firm decision and refer the recommendation of the district committee to the 
U.P. committee, with the final approval or veto of a no-rent campaign vesting 
in the president, Patel. 7 

The talks, however, came to nothing, the official side refusing to discuss the 
proposals of the Congress for further rental reductions, cancellation of arrears, 
revocation of ejectments and lowering of interest on money owed to money¬ 
lenders. Any modifications of the decisions already announced were regarded 
as impracticable, and nothing more than further information about present 
policy was offered. 8 The U.P. Congress committee, still reluctant to have a con¬ 
frontation in which the tenants would obviously suffer most, offered to renew 
negotiations. 9 But there was not even a remote chance of these succeeding, for 
the authorities were determined to yield no ground; the only question for them 

1 Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 15 October 1931, AICC File 54, Part 111/1931. 

2 Jawaharlal to E. C. Midville, P.S.V., 16 October 1931 and Emerson to Jagdish Prasad, 21 
October 1931, Home Dept. Pol. 33/36 of 1931; Jawaharlal’s cable to Gandhi, 16 October 1931, 
and Gandhi's reply, 19 October 1931. 

2 Tb a Leader, 19 and 25 October 1931. 

4 The Tribune, 25 October 1931. 

2 Willing don to Hailey, 22 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22. 

6 Hailey to Crerar, 24 October, and to Stewart, 28 October 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22; Jagdish 
Prasad to Emerson, 26 October 1931. Home Dept, PoL 33/36of 1931. 

2 29 October 1931, The Leader, 31 October 1931. * 

•Jawaharlal to Jagdish Prasad, 3 November 1931, AICC File G/25 of 1931; Hailey to Crerar. 
9 November 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 

’T. A. K. Sherwani to Chief Secretary, 3 November 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


167 


was whether the charade of discussion should be gone through. The Central 
and Local Governments believed that this would have the advantage of strength¬ 
ening the forces within the Congress against Jawaharlal. 

As you say in your letter, Jawaharlal himself is probably in favour of an 
immediate declaration of Civil Disobedience if he can get sufficient sup¬ 
port from other Congress leaders. He has always objected to the Delhi 
pact; he is clearly disgusted that Congress ever consented .to appear at 
the Round Table Conference; and he is of course inordinately vain and 
desirous of attracting to himself the limelight which has hitherto shone 
on Gandhi and to a certain extent on Patel. 1 

In fact, this assessment was inaccurate as well as prejudiced. Jawaharlal was as 
disinclined as any other Congress leader to start a no-rent movement, primarily 
because of the absence of Gandhi. He now, unlike in 1921, understood the 
basic nature of the peasant problem; he knew that it was a part of the class war; 
but he preferred to project it as an aspect of the struggle against the British, and 
even in this he sought to avoid battle. But the option was being gradually re 
moved. The Government expressed their willingness to parley, but made it 
clear that there would be no reconsideration of principles. Meantime, collec¬ 
tions for the current season were due to commence on 15 November, and the 
U.P. Congress committee, with the authorization of Patel, directed the kisans 
of Allahabad district to withhold payment of rent and revenue while negotia¬ 
tions were pending. 2 

There was logic in this, for it was pointless to pay rent and revenue while the 
whole question of the quantum was under discussion. But the Government 
utilized this resolution to call off the discussions. Indeed, the Government of 
India, in Hailey’s words, ‘took fire’ 3 and wanted him to move against the 
Congress with all his forces and without dday. The Congress and its affiliated 
bodies should be outlawed, the Instigation Ordinance re-promulgated and the 
leaders arrested. 4 With the Conservatives back in power in Britain and the 
second Round Table Conference a failure, the Government of India had dearly 
dedded to turn their backs on Irwin’s settlement; and the harsh Bengal Ordi¬ 
nance and the drastic policy favoured in the U.P. were both parts of a general 
return to a policy of repression. Willingdon and Emerson went to Lucknow to 
speed up matters, but Hailey refused to be hustled. The Round Table Confer¬ 
ence had still a fortnight to run, the payment of rents had been ddayed by late 
rains and would not start on any large scale until 1 December, and the Congress 
had served no clear-cut challenge. So, in the U.P. at any rate, there continued 

‘Hailey to Crerar, 9 November 1931, ibid. 

*7*Ae Ltadtr, 18 November 1931. 

•To de Montmorency, 3 December 1931, Hailey paper*, vol. 22. 

4 Crerar to Hailey, 16 November 1931, Home Dept. PoL File 33/36 of 1931. 





JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


what Jawaharlal described as an impossible situation. ‘Peace we can understand 
and war we are not unused to, but this hybrid state we cannot understand. 1 The 
Congress had received private information from Delhi that the Government 
of India were spoiling for a fight , 2 but yet there was no action in*the U.P. 

Qearly, however, this was only a temporary lull. The days of the truce were 
obviously numbered, and Jawaharlal and his colleagues braced themselves for 
the struggle which they had sought so hard to postpone. ‘If we are to die, we 
shall die after a fight. I do not want a'half-way settlement or a half-way fight.’ 3 
He expected to be arrested within a few days, and had no hope of seeing Gandhi 
on his return. 4 Indeed, the Pioneer, which had access to official sources, 
referred to the possibility of deportations, 5 and Willingdon would certainly 
have done this if he could. 'One thing I do regret very much in all this business 
and that is we have no power of deportation out of India. It would be an enor¬ 
mous advantage if we can take hold of 15 or 20 of these leaders, send them right 
away to the West Indies or somewhere instead of having to keep them under 
surveillance in some Province or other.’ 6 

On 6 December the district Congress committees in Rae Bareli, Btawah, 
Kanpur and Unao, in addition to Allahabad, were authorized to commence 
their no-rent campaigns. 7 Payment of rent in these districts came to an almost 
complete standstill, 8 other districts were also lining up, and it was clear that 
once the movement started it would spread throughout the province. The 
U.P. Government secured the permission of the Government of India to arrest 
Jawaharlal if he toured any of these districts. 9 However, though Jawaharlal 
did visit some of these districts, nothing was done. Hailey knew that his case 
was weak and, despite the impatience of the authorities at Simla, remained 
‘cold-footed’. 10 Unlike in the previous year, this no-rent campaign had no 
obvious political overtones and was motivated, and justified, by economic 
causes. In many European countries there would have been hesitation in pena¬ 
lizing such agitation, and repressive action would alienate moderate opinion 
in India and abroad. Nor, unlike the Government of India, did he now believe 
that the Congress under Jawaharlal was determined to force the issue in 
Gandhi's absence. ‘It is not unlikely that the Congress really desire to wait till 

‘Speech at Calcutta, 17 November, The Tribunt, 19 November 1931. 

1 Autobiography, p. 309. 

3 Speech at the kisan conference at Allahabad, 23 November, The Leader, 27 November 1931. 

« To Patel, 26 November 1931, AICC File G 60 of 1931; to Syed Mahmud, 27 November 1931. 

5 27 November 1931. 

4 Willingdon to Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State, 13 December 1931, Templewood papers,, 
I.O.L. Mss, Eur. E. 240, vol. 3. 

7 The Bombay Chronicle , 7 December 1931. 

■Fortnightly Report of U.P. Government for the first half of December 1931, Home Dept. 
Pol. 18/12/31. 

9 U. P. Government's telegram and reply of Government of India, 7 December 1931, Home 
Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 

>oTo de Montmorency, 3 December 1931, Hailey papers, vol. 22. 


/ 



AGRARIAN CRISIS IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 


169 


Gandhi’s return before precipitating matters.’ 1 So, to strengthen their case, 
the U. P. Government lowered the water rates, introduced a bill to secure 
tenants from eviction if they paid two-thirds of the arrears due for the pre¬ 
vious four years, and offered to consider immediate measures to protect tenants 
against debts which had become overdue owing to the fall in prices. 

Then, at last, Hailey decided to strike. What ultimately determined his 
action was not so much the spurring from Simla as the fear that the situation 
might slip out of control and if Gandhi, on his return, decided to support the 
agitation, no rent or revenue at all could be collected. 2 Even then, he toned down 
the Ordinance drafted by the Government of India 3 and issued it together 
with what was really a long apologia. It was contended that the Congress had 
utilized the economic crisis to increase its following among the kisans , that 
the spirit of the truce had never been respected and that Jawaharlal had 
preached class warfare. 4 Under the Ordinance which, even as modified, was 
drastic enough, action was now taken against Congressmen. Notices were 
served on Jawaharlal and other leaders prohibiting them from speaking or 
writing in support of the campaign; and Anand Bhawan, along with many 
Congress offices, was searched. Jawaharlal’s own arrest was delayed because 
he was away on tour in Bombay and the Karnatak. 

Even at this stage, the Congress was in no mood for a general campaign 
of civil disobedience. The Secretary of State, Sir Samuel Hoare, found Gandhi 
in London as well disposed as could be expected. He contemplated no imme¬ 
diate general renewal of civil disobedience, and promised before taking any 
such step to communicate with Hoare and Willingdon — 'the satisfactoiy part 
about the interview was the genuine friendliness of the old man.’ 5 In Bombay, 
Patel, the Congress president, publicly offered to let any impartial judge, or 
even Irwin, decide as to which party had broken the settlement, and Jawaharlal 
suggested an inquiry by any Indian or European judge appointed by the Govern¬ 
ment. 6 On his return to Allahabad Jawaharlal was served with a notice not to 
leave the city without official permission and the U. P. Provincial Conference, 
scheduled to be held on 26 December, was banned. Still the Congress struggled 
to avoid battle, and postponed the conference. 7 But Jawaharlal himself was 
arrested on 26 December for violating the order restricting him to Allahabad. 
The local magistrate had thought that this restriction had merely been to 

fortnightly report of U.P. Government for the second half of November 1931, Home Dept. 
Pol. File 18/11/31. 

a Hailey to Verney Lovett, 14 December 1931, and to Irwin, 2 January 1932, Hailey papers, 
vols. 22 and 23, respectively. 

’Hailey to Emerson, 11 December 1931, Home Dept. Pol. File 33/36 of 1931. 

Statement issued by the U.P. Government, 14 December 1931. 

’Hoare to Willingdon, telegram 7 December and letter, 10 December 1931, Templewood papers, 
Box 11 and vol. 1, respectively. 

Speeches at Bombay, 13 December, The Bombay CbronieU, 16 December 1931. 

7 Tba Leader, 25 December 1931. 



170 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


prevent Jawaharlal’s furtherance of the no-tax agitation in his home province, 
and had informed the Government that he was willing to allow Jawaharlal 
to proceed to Bombay if informed of this by Jawaharlal. 1 Though Jawaharlal 
gave no formal notice of this, it was known that he was leaving Allahabad 
in order to welcome Gandhi on his return from London and not to promote 
the no-rent campaign; but the U.P. Government ordered his arrest. He was 
arrested and taken off the train at Iradatnagar station, and sentenced a week 
later to two years’ imprisonment. He was also fined Rs 500, and for realizing 
this amount a car registered in the name of his daughter was attached. 

The arrest of Jawaharlal soon appeared as not just a provincial matter but 
partof ageneral offensive against the Congress. Willingdon and his Government 
believed that Irwin had made an error in negotiating with the Congress and 
signing a truce, and they had no intention of repeating it. The Viceroy was 
‘perfectly clear as I have always been that Gandhi is a sort of Jekyll and Hyde, 
and while he may possibly have his saint-like side, on the other he is the most 
Machiavellian bargaining little political humbug I have ever come across.’ 2 
When Gandhi sought an interview with the Viceroy, he was asked first to 
repudiate his colleagues and to agree not to discuss Bengal, the U. P. and the 
North-West Frontier, where also a number of stern ordinances had been 
imposed and Abdul Gaffar Khan arrested. These were terms which Gandhi 
obviously could not, and was not expected to, accept; and when the Working 
Committee decided on a resumption of civil disobedience, Gandhi, Patel and 
other leading Congressmen were arrested. The ‘shock tactics’ 3 of the Govern¬ 
ment of India surprised almost everybody. The Secretary of State was dot too 
happy but supported the man on the spot, 4 who, on his own admission, was 
‘becoming a sort of Mussolini in India’. 9 This time, however long it might 
take, the back of the Congress was to be broken. ‘We can, in my opinion,’ 
wrote the Home Member after twelve months of repression,’ do without the 
goodwill of Congress, and in fact I do not believe for a moment that we shall 
ever have it, but we cannot afford to do without the confidence of those who 
have supported us during the long struggle against the Congress.’ 6 So the 
policy of seeking to destroy the nationalist movement was to be continued, 
and Jawaharlal would obviously remain one of its prime targets. His ambition 

‘Fortnightly report of the U.P. Government for the second half of December 1931, Home 
Dept. File No. 18/12/31 Poll. 

2 Willingdon to Hoare, 10 January 1932, Temple wood papers, vol. 3. 

’Hailey to de Montmorency, 17 January 1932, Hailey papers, vol. 23. Surprisingly, however, 
even a friend of the Congress-like Edward Thompson at this time supported Government policy. 
‘But Congress last December was an insolent and intolerant faction.' A LttUr front India (London, 
1932), p. 41. 

4 Home to Willipgdon, 31 December 1931 and 8 January 1932, Templewood papers vol. 1. 
’Willingdon to Hoare, 26 December 1931, Templewood papers, vol. 3. 

‘Note oFH. G. Haig, Home Member, 28 December 1932, Home Dept Pei File 31/97/32. 



agrarian crisis in the united provinces 


171 


was believed to be some form of Leninism, the establishment of a Leninite 
directorate. 1 ‘Jawahar Lai is a fanatic. There are threatenings of an attempt 
to revive a no-rent campaign in the U.P. Jawahar Lai Nehru is the author 
of that policy and his release would obviously give it a definite stimulus.’ 2 


tHalter <o H««, 28 .*1» C.S. ftewta*. 20 OcK*«r 1932, papan. vote. 23 

and 23, respectively. 

3 Haig, op. dt. 



12 

In and Out of Prison 


Clearly, therefore, this was going to be a long spell in jail for Jawaharlal and 
now, for the first time, prison life began to tell on him. He had trouble with 
his teeth, and his general condition was poor. He began to run a temperature 
in the evenings, but for months the jail superintendent would neither try 
to diagnose the cause nor permit examination by other doctors. Ultimately, 
after Jawaharlal’s transfer to another jail, Dr Bidhan Roy and Dr Ansari were 
permitted to see him and it was found to be a recurrence of pleurisy on the 
right side. Gradually Jawaharlal shook it off, but meanwhile had to forgo his 
running and exercises and even walks, and content himself with sunbaths. 

His living conditions too were, at the start, such as made for relative dis¬ 
comfort. He was first placed in Naini jail, and then, after a few weeks, trans¬ 
ferred to Bareilly where both environment and men were vile. His barracks 
were at least six feet below ground level, which meant that the surrounding 
walls were over twenty-four feet. ‘The wall which faces me’, he wrote to his 
daughter, 1 ‘must bear some relation, in height at least, to the Great Wall of 
China!’ Further, for the first time since Nabha, not only the ward but the bar¬ 
racks also were locked at night. The fortnightly interview with his family was 
spoilt by the close supervision of not only the jailor, but of a policeman who 
took notes. His companions also, with the exception of Govind Vallabh Pant, 
irritated him. So generally Jawaharlal fretted. ‘On the whole I have not been 
able to settle down this time as I have done in the past. Perhaps a slight touch 
of ill-health — perhaps my transfer — perhaps my missing my old compan¬ 
ions — perhaps a certain want of satisfaction with things, and happenings 
in general — perhaps so many other things!’ 2 

This malaise was worsened by other events. In April his mother was beaten 
in a lathi charge and badly injured. The old lady was full of courage and 
spirit. ‘I am proud to have been beaten with sticks for the cause of my mother¬ 
land . . . While being beaten I thought of you and your father and did not utter 

1 Letter, 26 March 1932, Glimpses of World History (Bombay, 1967), p. 58. 

1 Diary Aitry, 4 March 1932. 


172 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


173 


a sigh... The mother of a brave son is also somewhat like him. It was only a 
lathi — had it been a gun I would have bared my chest.’ 1 But it added to the 
intense despair of Jawaharlal. Then, because, at an interview in jail with Ranjit 
Pandit, Indira had shown him a school report of his children, the jailor insulted 
Jawaharlal’s mother and wife who were also present, and the Government 
ordered that they could not interview Jawaharlal for a month. This roused 
Jawaharlal to bitter anger, and he declined to have any interviews even after 
the month was over; for on no account, as he put it, was he prepared to take 
the slightest risk of further insult to his mother and wife. 2 It was not till early 
in 1933, after a break of eight months, that he began, on Gandhi’s persuasion, 
to see visitors again. 

The self-denial of interviews, whi>h formed the sole relief in the boredom 
of prison, robbed life of the excitement of anticipation. 

The days and the weeks and the months pass by one after the other, merg¬ 
ing into each other, and there is little to distinguish one from the other. 
And the past looks like a blurred picture with nothing standing out. 
Yesterday takes one back to the day of one’s arrest, for in between is a 
blank with little to impress the mind. It is the life of a vegetable rooted to 
one place, growing there without comment or argument, silent, motion¬ 
less. And sometimes the activities of the outside world appear strange and 
a little bewildering to one in prison; they seem distant and unreal — a 
phantom show. So we develop two natures, the active and the passive, two 
ways of living, two personalities, like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. 3 

In June 1932 Jawaharlal was transferred to Dehra Dun jail. Here the climate 
was pleasant and the jail buildings not severe. The superintendent, an Irishman 
whose name deserves to be remembered, Captain Falvey, had been a pupil of de 
Valera, and he did what he could to alleviate conditions. Jawaharlal was even 
permitted to take his walks outside the prison gates. But all this could not dimin¬ 
ish the inner turmoil. Indeed, on hearing of the savage treatment df political 
prisoners in other jails in the United Provinces, Jawaharlal felt ashamed of the 
better conditions of his own prison life, and he invited the Government to give 
him the same treatment as the others. 4 

Jawaharlal was concerned, too, about his wife and mother roughing it out on 
their own and his two sisters languishing in jail; but it was the thought of his 
growing daughter that frequently came strongly to him and filled his mind. It 
was because letters to her brought her image close to him that he continued writ¬ 
ing his neat little essays, taking her stage by stage through the human past, even 
though they could not be sent to her and had to be kept aside for a later date. 

1 Letter (in Hindi) to Jawaharlal, 16 April 1932. • 

* To the Superintendent, District Jail, Dehra Dun, 11 July 1932. 

’Letter to Indira, New Year's Day 1933, GUmptss, p. 491. 

4 Letter to the Superintendent, District Jail, Dehra Dun, 16 November 1932, 



174 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Jawaharlal was no professional scholar writing within a clearly defined and 
balanced framework. Taking, as he described it, centuries at a stride and seeing 
continents at a glance, he rushed past what he found dull and lingered at points 
where his interest was aroused. He was, for instance, fascinated by the great men 
of history — and not necessarily the men of virtue and idealism. Genghis Khan 
and Napoleon take up as much space as Asoka, Leonardo or Lenin, Strength, 
even in cruelty, commanded his attention. This was to be expected of someone 
who was never happier than when under the influence of stronger characters. 
But it was also the product of a temporary sense of loss. Jawaharlal himself 
throve on action, and, forced in jail to .action, he glamorized the vigorous 
performances of others whatever their results. 

In the preface written on 1 January 1934, he commented that ‘even as I was 
writing theletters my outlook on life changed gradually. Today if I had to rewrite 
them, I would write differently or with a different emphasis. ’ He would probably 
have qualified the ultimate belief that history tells of growth and progress and 
of the possibility of an infinite advance for man. 

History is not pleasant. Man, in spite of his great and vaunted progress, is 
still a very unpleasant and selfish animal. And yet perhaps it is possible to 
see the silver lining of progress right through the long and dismal record 
of selfishness and quarrelsomeness and inhumanity of man. 1 

He might have toned down too his glorification of certain individuals. But 
otherwise he retained all his life the half-liberal, half-Marxist view of history 
which holds the book together. The story of man was one connected whole, and 
the only history that could be properly written was the history of the world. It 
was the product not of individuals or national peculiarities but of world forces, 
and developments in different countries told basically the same tale. Even the 
‘superficial sketches’ which he had ‘joined together by a thin thread’ 2 and which 
dealt mostly with Europe and Asia were intended to establish that history was 
not what was achieved by leaders or governments but what happened to peoples, 
and this was the result of the interplay of ideas, economic interests and social 
relations. Though he made no deep analysis, he broadly believed that the class 
which controlled the means of production was the class that ruled, and that the 
history of man was the history of class conflicts and social struggles. To grasp 
this was to secure the ability both to understand the past and to face the future 
with confidence and to be prepared for effective action. 

The intellectual acceptance of history as the result of impersonal world 
forces for which no individual could be blamed or applauded, led Jawaharlal to 
criticize the imperialist system rather than the British and to strive to consider 
even issues pertaining to India impartially as a scientist examining facts. Jawa¬ 
harlal codld not jump out of his skin. He was a sensitive Asian nationalist, and 

1 Letter, 1 January 1933, Glimpses, p. 491. 
a Lettey 9 August 1933, Glimpses, p. 985. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


175 


hard as he tried to be fair to the British, a certain impression of ‘nagging* crept 
in, 1 especially when he was dealing with matters that had nothing to do with 
India. But he was wary of nationalism as ‘an unreliable friend and an nnsafp 
historian’, 2 and dwelt on the shortcomings of his own people as much as those 
of their rulers. He had, since his return from Europe in 1927, shown an acute 
distaste for institutional worship. He continued to admire the great Hindu scrip¬ 
tures. The Bbagavad Gita was ‘that jewel of a poem’; and as for the Ramayana 
and the Mababbarata — ‘Who but the greatest of men could have written 
them?’ 3 But they impressed him more as literature and historical testimony 
than as revelation. He disliked temple-going, was scornful of ritual and regarded 
prayers as morbid. But, writing in the early ’thirties when the memory of the 
Kanpur riots in which his friend Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi had lost his life was 
still fresh, he was particularly concerned with the savagery committed in the 
name of religion. It was important to release India from the chains of the com¬ 
plex ideology of custom, convention and superstition. He was at pains to tell his 
fellow-countrymen that Islam did not believe in religious persecution and a man 
like Mahmud of Ghazni, whom most Indians regarded as an arch-iconoclast, 
was in fact no more than a successful soldier. He had come to India to conquer 
and loot, and would have done so whatever religion he had belonged to. The best 
of Indian culture was a synthesis; this had badly frayed and should be rebuilt on 
the securer foundations of freedom and social equality and in consonance with a 
better world order. 

When Jawaharlal was too tired to write, there were always books. Fortunately 
there was no restriction this time on the number he could read and keep, and 
he was also allowed newspapers and journals without restriction. So apart from 
The Statesman and the Pioneer, he read the Living Age, the Manchester Guar¬ 
dian Weekly, the New Leader, the New Republic, the Modem Review, the New 
Statesman, the Nation and the Spectator; and his reading lists show that he was 
as well read and up-to-date as any leisurely person of cultivated tastes in London 
or New York. For the authors include Toynbee, Maurice Dobb, Leonard Woolf, 
Tawney, Laski, Louis Fischer, Julian Huxley and H. G. Wells as well as Sven 
Hedin, Tagore, Charles Morgan, Maurois, Lowes Dickinson and L. A.G. Strong. 
They not only, as Jawaharlal said, saved him from tedium and depression; they 
also kept him intellectually sensitive and vigorous. 

So Jawaharlal settled down to jail routine and was irritated by talk of the 
release of all political prisoners. He even turned roundly on a fellow-prisoner 
who talked of parole for medical treatment. ‘I have almost brought myself to the 
frame of mind when a ten year sentence of imprisonment will make little dif¬ 
ference! Life outside under present circumstances has little attraction, so why 
should jail frighten?’ 4 The occasional nostalgia for la douceur du vtvre — 

1 E. Thompson's letter to Jawaharlal, 3 May 1937 A Bunch of Oid Letters, pp. 733-40. 

2 Letter, 14 December 1932, Glimpses, p. 437. 

* Letters from e Father to his Daughter (1972 ed.K p- 80. 

4 Jail diary, 10 March 1933. 



176 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


pleasant surroundings, good friends, agreeable women, interesting conversa¬ 
tion — was quickly smothered by the distaste for the bickerings in the family 
and the petty rivalries in the Congress and its downhill slide and, above all, by 
the growing alienation from Gandhi and his methods. The problem of the 
Harijans and the question of their entry into temples engrossed*Gandhi to the 
extent that he pushed the main issue of British rule to the background. Gandhi’s 
fast in 1932 in protest against the Communal Award treating the Scheduled 
Castes as a separate community for purposes of elections was a sharp shock. 
The thought that Gandhi might die, and for such a minor reason, and that the 
only remaining protective force in his life might be removed, knocked Jawaharlal 
for a time off balance. ‘My little world in which he has occupied such a big place, 
shakes and totters, and there seems to be darkness and emptiness everywhere 
... Shall I not see him again? And whom shall I go to when I am in doubt and 
require wise counsel, or am afflicted and in sorrow and need loving comfort?’ 1 
He wept, with mixed anguish of anger and love for a man who could precipitate 
such a crisis so wantonly, and with bitterness towards a people who could let 
their heroes risk death in such a way. Gandhi, amid his own travail, sensed this 
reaction and sent Jawaharlal a reassuring telegram which helped, along with 
the news of the fast having been broken, to restore Jawaharlal’s stability. How¬ 
ever, the whole episode drove him further on his inner resources. His existence 
was based wholly on mind, emotion and memory. Sitting alone for hours that 
seemed unimaginably long, he was frequently immersed in nostalgia. His father 
he missed deeply and, as his mind went back to him again and again, he felt 
shelterless. 


If father had been alive! How my mind wanders unconsciously and dwells 
on him and how empty I feel at the thought that he is not there. For months 
and years we lived far from each other — when I was in Europe — but it 
did not matter so much. Always one had the feeling that he was there and 
one could always go to him for help and counsel. Now there is an 
emptiness... 2 


And in another moving and candid entry he reveals how close to the surface 
was this ache for his father: 


I was reading the newspaper — There was an account of a ceremony of 
unveiling a bust or statue of father’s at the Hindu Boarding House in 
Allahabad. Hirday Nath Kunzru did the unveiling. I glanced casually at 
what he said, but I did not see anything. To my surprise, and quite un¬ 
awares, my eyes were full of tears. 3 

1 Letter. 15 September 1932, Glimpsts, pp. 337*8. 

3 Diery entry, 4 March 1932. 

* Diary entry, 18 August 1932. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


177 


The next year, Gandhi undertook a purificatory fast and again plunged Jawa* 
harlal, along with millions of his countrymen, into an emotional crisis. Gandhi 
realized this from afar, and wrote a chatty letter which was meant to soothe. The 
two telegrams Jawaharlal sent in reply indicate his bewilderment and dread of 
personal loss. ‘What’, wired Jawaharlal in his first mood of petulance, ‘can I say 
about matters I do not understand. I feel lost in strange country where you are 
only familiar landmark and I try to grope my way in dark but 1 stumble. What¬ 
ever happens my love and thoughts will be with you.' But as the hours passed, 
he felt that he owed Gandhi a more cheerful message, and that evening he wired 
again: ‘Now that you are launched on your great enterprise may I send you again 
love and greetings and assure you that I feel more clearly now that whatever 
happens it is well and whatever happens you win.’ 1 

At the commencement of the fast the Government released Gandhi, who 
suspended civil disobedience for six weeks. This was a shock to Jawaharlal, but 
his mind, still numbed by the fear of Gandhi’s death, accepted it. However, once 
the ordeal was over, Jawaharlal was able to see Gandhi with a much clearer 
vision than at any time before or since. For a short while the blinkers fell. He 
realized that Gandhi’s attitude was sheer revivalism against which cool thinking 
had no chance. Gandhi's political actions were often guided by an unerring in¬ 
stinct, and, fortified by this, he did not encourage others to think. He himself, 
as he frequently asserted with pride, was satisfied with the next step and had 
given no precise thought to the long-term objective. The emphasis on God and 
faith, the acceptance of the existing social order, the stress on compromise, the 
reliance on lieutenants who were proclaimed reactionaries — all these jarred on 
Jawaharlal, and his love for Gandhi could not conceal from him that he was 
drifting further and further away from his leader. ‘I am getting more and more 
certain that there can be no further political co-operation between Bapu and me. 
At least not of the kind that has existed. We had better go our different ways. 
My way will keep me in jail. That is dull work and depressing, but perhaps it is 
as well.’ 2 Obviously a stiff battle between rival loyalties awaited him outside, 
and, not relishing this prospect, he did not look forward to his release. But 
coincidentally, just as he had finished the last of his letters to his daughter, he 
was transferred to Naini jail and, a week later, on 30 August, twelve days before 
he was due to be out of prison, he was released. His mother was seriously ill, the 
province was quiet, the Congress, with Gandhi’s assistance, had seemed to have 
succeeded in tying itself into knots, and Jawaharlal himself was (erroneously) 
believed by the Government to be in favour of giving up civil disobedience. From 
his letters, read by the censors, it was gathered that he had no dear plan as to 
what he intended to do, and the world history he was writing was expected to 
keep him busy for some time. So, all points considered, the U.P. Government 

‘Telegrams, 8 May 1933. 

*Diary entry, 18 July 1933. 



178 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


(in Hailey’s absence, since he was in London) felt it could take the risk of releas¬ 
ing him; and the Government of India approved. 1 

Jawaharlal’s comment, on emerging from jail, that he attached little impor¬ 
tance to the swadeshi and Harijan movements, the reports of his talks with his 
colleagues in the U.P. and his statements to the press that India*S primary prob¬ 
lem was economic and a new structure of society was inevitable raised expecta¬ 
tions that he would formally break away from Gandhi and the old Congress and 
form a new party with independence as its goal. 2 There was certainly little in 
common between the public attitudes of Jawaharlal and of Gandhi. The younger 
man, while in jail, had made a wide study of international affairs, and saw India 
as a part of the pattern of world forces — the failure of capitalism, the rise of 
Nazism, the growth of dictatorial tendencies even in England 3 and the United 
States, and the shaping struggle between fascism and communism. There was, 
as Jawaharlal saw it, an inevitable, universal swing, not necessarily to the Soviet 
model but towards the general lines of the Soviet conception. Fundamentally 
the choice before the world was between some form of communism and some 
form of fascism, and he was all for the former. There was no middle road; one 
had to choose between the two, and Jawaharlal unhesitatingly chose the com¬ 
munist ideal. From this time dates the intense dislike of fascism, which was 
never to leave him, and the conviction that, while communism would have to 
adapt itself to changing conditions and different countries, its basic ideology, 
general oudook and scientific interpretation of history were sound. The affinity 
to the left, born of the visit to Europe in the ’twenties and nourished by reading, 
was confirmed by the rival philosophies that had spawned in Italy and Germany. 4 

In India, the effort of the British to protect not merely their own vested in¬ 
terests but also thoseof their allies, th ezamindars, the princes and the capitalists, 
had not to Jawaharlal a chance of success because it went against the broad eco¬ 
nomic forces determining the future of the world. But nationalists, on their 
part, could not possibly hope to confine themselves to a replacement of foreign 
by home interests and seek to avoid the disturbance of class divisions and the 
social status quo. A socialist state was a concomitant of independence, and if an 
Indian Government took the place of the British and kept all the vested interests 
intact, this would not even be the shadow of freedom. The Gongress, as the 
spearhead of the Indian nationalist movement, needed a new ideology which was 

1 Mieville, P. S. V., to Hailey, 29 June 1933, Blunt, Finance Member, to Hailey, 13 August 
1933, Nawab of Chhatari, acting Governor, to Hailey, 26 August 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26. 

2 Statement at Kanpur, 1 September, The Leader , 3 September 1933; interview in the Pioneer 
1 September 1933; statement to the press, 4 September, The Ladder, 6 Septeember 1933; report 
of Banaras correspondent, 11 September, Th* Leader, 13 Sept em ber 1933. 

* Jawaharlal was apparently not alone in thinking this. ‘I believe’, wrote Hoare to W illin gdon 
of Winston Churchill, 'that at the back of his mind he thinks that he will not only smash the Govern¬ 
ment but that England is going Fascist and that he, hr someone like him, will eventually be able 
to rule Inlia as Mussolini governs North Africa.’ 6 April 1933, Tempiewood papers, vol. 3- 

4 T* J. T. Gwynn, 2 November and 27 December 1933; statement dll the press, 17 December 
1933. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


179 


oriented to economic priorities and world conditions. This was an urgent task, 
for the impoverished peasants, whose drill-sergeant was hunger, were being 
driven to seek immediate relief. 

Roast lamb and mint sauce may be a tasty dish for those who eat it, but the 
poor lamb is not likely to appreciate the force of the best of arguments 
which point out the beauty of sacrifice for the good of the elect and the 
joys of close communion, even though dead, with mint sauce. 1 

There had to be a fundamental change of regime, politically, economically and 
socially, and the three were inextricably linked. British imperial rule had to be 
destroyed, the autocracy of the Indian states had to be ended, the whole land 
system had to be changed, industry brought under public control and all wealth 
shared. Each was a part of a total problem. 

These ideas were all far removed from the outlook of Gandhi, who was seek¬ 
ing to renew peace negotiations with the British and to convert his countrymen, 
through fasts, to better social behaviour. His were the politics of intuition, 
requiring no argument or logic; Jawaharlal followed the path of reason, applying 
the laws of history and change. The break seemed inevitable, and as Jawaharlal 
went to Poona to confront his leader, also just released from prison, even he 
probably prepared himself for it. But he could not forget that, intermeshed as 
was the crisis, the most important front was the political one; and till the British 
had been expelled there could be little advance towards socialism. To combat 
economic wretchedness with the State power obstructing them was a hopeless 
waste of energy. But in this political struggle, Gandhi’s leadership, however 
wayward, still seemed indispensable; and Congress was still the most militant 
organization in India. He himself was the quintessential upper-class figure, and 
even his radicalism, modelled on European example, seemed at times to him 
no more than a product of his deep-seated class sense, a de haul en bas posture. 
So both leader and party were necessary to him, and it was not just the springs 
of personal loyalty and affection which proved once again too deep to permit 
release. Jawaharlal. face to face with Gandhi after two years, publicly affirmed 
his continuing acceptance of Gandhi’s leadership, and letters were exchanged 
in which Jawaharlal stated his position in terms which were easy for Gandhi to 
approve. The objective of independence included full control of the army and 
of foreign relations as well as financial and economic control, vested interests 
had to be ‘devested’ as gently and as rapidly as possible, the Round Table Con¬ 
ference was a futile effort, and the problem of Indian freedom could not be 
separated from vital international issues. Indeed, the clash of viewpoint was 
reduced almost to the ridiculous by Jawaharlal laying emphasis on his divergence 
from Gandhi on such paltry issues as to whether individual civil disobedience 

'Whither India? These three articles, written in October 1933, provide the clearest exposition 
of Jawaharlal's views at this time. 



180 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


was different in kind from mass civil disobedience, and secrecy in action was 
never desirable; and Gandhi closed the discussion by declaring that the differ¬ 
ences were only temperamental and confusion had been created by Jawaharlal's 
tendency to be repetitive. 1 A few months later, Gandhi confidently gave 
Jawaharlal ‘power of attorney’ to state the policy of the Congress and was frank 
in his justification. 

1 do not think that Jawaharlal's own views are yet sufficiently crystallized 
to make any fundamental departure from Congress policy likely. He is a 
firm believer in socialism, but his ideas on how best the socialist principles 
can be applied to Indian conditions are still in the melting pot. His com¬ 
munist views need not, therefore, frighten anyone. 2 

This failure to break with Gandhi was, of course, a disappointment to Jawa- 
harlal's radical supporters, and when he followed up his correspondence with 
Gandhi by stating that he was perfectly happy with the way in which the struggle 
was being conducted and saw no need to summon a meeting of the AICC, 3 even 
his friends were driven to protest. For all his rhetoric he had no new policy and, 
seemingly, no use for democracy either, for he refused to consult othef 
Congressmen. 

The fact is that Pandit Jawaharlal and his friends are themselves com¬ 
pletely out of touch with the realities of the situation. Alternatively, we 
should have to suppose that they are purposely deluding themselves into 
the belief that the present policy has succeeded, which, of course, is un¬ 
thinkable ... No useful purpose is served by putting before Indians a 
radical economic policy, without telling them how to implement it.. . 

If Pandit Jawaharlal, in the face of the present appalling situation, has 
nothing better to offer us but the repetition of old shibboleths and the as¬ 
sertion that he, and he alone, is in touch with Congressmen and the masses 
it is dear that the reins of leadership, however regretfully, will have to be 
taken up by others, who will restore the Congress to its pristine power as 
the premier political influence in the country. 4 

What Jawaharlal’s critics had failed to understand was that once he had dedd- 
ed not to break with Gandhi and the Congress, it was out of character for him 
to lead a rebellion from within. However sharp his expression of disagreement 
in private conversation, to the outside world he was determined to accept Con- 

1 Jawaharlal'sstatement to the press, 11 September, Tba Laadtr,16 September 1933; Jawaharlal's 
letter, 13 September and Gandhi’s reply, 14 September 1933. 

2 Interview in the Madras Mail, 22 December 1933. 

* Interview in Tba Bomba,y CbronicU, 18 September 1933. 

* Editorial, ‘Save, the Congress’, in Tba Bombay Cbronieta, 19 Se p te m be r 1933. 



IN ANb OUT OF PRISON 


181 


gress policy and decisions and interpret them in as favourable a manner as pos¬ 
sible. 1 His loyalty might at some time snap; but while it lasted it was firm. Ups 
and downs were inevitable in a broad national movement and the lull to which 
he was now committed could best be used in hard thinking about methods and 
objectives. It was idle to expect the Congress as constituted to become a full- 
fledged socialist organization, but there was every hope of its becoming more 
and more socialistic. ‘I do not see why I should walk out of the Congress leaving 
the field clear to the social reactionaries. Therefore, I think it is up to us to re¬ 
main there and try to force the pace, thereby either converting others or making 
them depart.’ A time might come, sooner rather than later, when the new ideas 
might cause a split in the Congress; but till then advantage should be taken of 
the national movement and it should be pushed as far as it could go. The Con¬ 
gress should be led out of the backwaters of pure politics by socialist elements 
who, rather than forming independent and sterile study centres, could exploit 
the Congress programme of mass action. For although ideologically backward, 
the Congress was still the most advanced revolutionary organization in the 
country and what was required was to give it a new orientation rather than to 
abandon it. Separate organizations for promoting the interests of workers or 
peasants were desirable, but not political organizations counter or parallel to 
the Congress. ‘There is a great talk of the socialist party or the like but I am 
convinced that much of this talk is merely meant to cover ineffective action 
and also as a means of self-aggrandisement.’ 2 

The plan to give Congressmen courses of instruction in ideology assumed 
that he would remain out of jail, and about this Jawaharlal was rightly not opti¬ 
mistic. Within a week of his release he was expecting to return. Prison was a 
part of the day’s work, and he would clearly be back soon ‘to muse on the earthly 
paradise and the various bars, of iron and of the spirit, which prevent us from 
reaching it’. 3 In fact, as time passed, he longed for prison. Life outside, in an 
atmosphere of repression, was suffocating. Conditions, in some places like 
Bengal, were more humiliating than elsewhere, but in fact all Indians were 
caught and being crushed in the mill. Indeed, suggested Jawaharlal, it would be 
simpler, instead of a variety of ordinances and orders and rules, to have a com¬ 
prehensive enactment abolishing all schools and colleges and suppressing all 
newspapers and books, and laying down that every Indian must consider himself 
in prison (‘C Class), salute the Union Jack every morning and sing the British 
national anthem at divine service twice a day; ‘and the afternoons might 
be profitably devoted to listening to an inspiring address on the virtues of 
British rule’. 4 


iSee, for example, letter to Kapil Dave Maiaviya, 10 September 1933. 

*To Abdur Rahim, 30 October and C. Mascarenas, 10 November 1933; to M. R. t/jfuoi, 19 
December 1933, Maharashtra Government file of intercepted letters. 

»To Aldous Huxley, 3 September 1933. 

^ — natural and political*, statement to the press, 31 January 1934. 



182 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


So throughout the country the choice was becoming clear, and it was not 
possibletooptout. ‘lam quite clear as to what I should do and this gives me peace 
of mind. 1 have been perfectly prepared to go back to prison' from the day of my 
discharge. Now, I am not only prepared but I am eager to do so. My instinct tells 
me that I must take a step forward and instinct in this matter is a safe guide for 
me.' 1 The seizure of his shares worth about Rs 20,000 by the Government rid 
him of what he regarded as a liability and he followed it up by selling the family 
jewellery at a nominal price. Jawaharlal, unlike Gandhi, was encumbered by 
complex thought, but in the matter of worldly goods he was becoming as much 
of a political ascetic. 

But while he was out, he sought to keep up the struggle, even if at a lower 
pitch, for the only alternative was a compromise wkh imperialism, and this was 
unacceptable not only to him personally but manifestly to the Indian people. 
Travelling round the country, Jawaharlal was convinced that never, at any rate 
since 1857, had there been such extraordinary bitterness against the Govern¬ 
ment and such a passionate desire tc be rid of it. 2 So he concentrated on the 
sustenance of the struggle, and declined to be distracted by such side shows as 
village uplift and the Harijan movement. ‘This kind of safe and pious activity 
can well be left to old ladies.’ 3 It was a question not merely of time and energy 
but of creating a psychological atmosphere. The national fight had to continue, 
and it would be strengthened by making it a social and economic fight for the 
masses and purging it of Hindu and Muslim communalism. 

Jawaharlal had till now deliberately ignored the growth of the communal evil 
in Indian politics in the hope that public attention could be diverted from it by 
emphasis on the positive aspects of the national struggle. Hunger, poverty and 
exploitation had nothing to do with religion. But the time now appeared to have 
come for a frontal attack on communalism as a cover for political reaction. 4 In 
language which even Gandhi regarded as too fierce, 5 he condemned the Hindu 
Mahasabha for its reactionary and anti-national policy of co-operation with the 
Government and support of vested interests. 6 The Hindu communalists wanted 
no basic change of the political and economic structure, and sought official 
favours to augment their own position. This criticism applied equally, of course, 
to Muslim communal organizations, and Jawaharlal recognized that they were 
as anti-national and reactionary in every sense of the word. 7 But he rebuked 
them in milder terms. Fear was justified, or at least understandable, in a minority 
community which was economically and educationally backward; and commu¬ 
nalism bom of fear had to be exorcized and not just brushed aside. ‘Honest com- 

1 To Sri Prakass, 11 January 1934, Sri Prakasa papers. N.M.M.L. 

* To H. K. Hales, M. P., 9 November 1933. 

9 Statement to the press, 12 January 1934. 

* Interview in The Leader, 21 November 1933; toS. A. Bielvi, 3 December 1933- 

* To Jawaharlal, 27 November 1933. a 

* Speech at Banaras, 13 Novem|>er, The Hindu, 14 November 1933; statement at Allahabad. 
22 November, The Tribune, 24 November 1933. 

7 Interview in the Pioneer, 18 November 1933. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


183 


munalism is fear; false communalism is political reaction.’ In Jawaharlal’s 
understanding, there were shades of both in Muslim communalism. Moreover, 
while the Congress had drawn into its ranks most of the vital elements of Hindu 
society, the communalists were the dominant and politically clamorous group 
among the Muslims. No other organization had so far arisen which could suc¬ 
cessfully challenge their claim to speak for the Muslims, and their aggressively 
communal character gave them an advantage over the large number of nation¬ 
alist Muslims in the Congress. 1 

Obviously Jawaharlal had no illusions about organizations which worked 
under theleadership of so feudal and reactionary a figure as the Aga Khan. Their 
activities at the Round Table Conference, where they stymied all efforts by 
Gandhi to confront the British Government with an agreed solution on the com¬ 
munal problem, were but the latest testimony to their narrow upper-class base 
and commitment to subordinate collaboration with the Imperial power. The 
only way to ascertain the wishes of the Muslims was to ask them to elect re¬ 
presentatives to a Constituent Assembly on the widest possible franchise but, if 
necessary, on the basis of separate electorates. Then economic demands would 
undoubtedly get their rightful priority and the communal problem would be 
found to be an insubstantial ghost. But, in the meantime, in what could be 
interpreted as an apologia for Muslim communalism, he came close to recogniz¬ 
ing the hold of communal parties on the Muslim community and justifying their 
attitudes. He always, like Gandhi, took the line that it was for the Hindus, as the 
majority community, to make concessions while the communal problem lasted. 
This in itself, despite the call to magnanimity, assumes a communal approach, 
however subconscious. The argument is based on the belief that the majority 
community is a privileged one, and the minority community has reason to be 
communal. It was true that Jawaharlal had not carefully probed this issue, and 
was irritated by the Mahasabha’s criticisms of Gandhi and the Congress and its 
open wooing of the Government. But even so, the implication that there was 
something to choose between Hindu and Muslim communalism was dangerous 
in its possibilities. 

However, all these public activities were not to be for long. The Government 
were as anxious as Jawaharlal to get him back in prison as soon as possible. They 
saw in the conversations with Gandhi not the dialogue between master and 
disciple, which it Was, but a Machiavellian attempt to organize forces to greater 
effect against the British. Gandhi, it was believed, would tour the country, 
ostensibly to promote his Harijan schemes but really to sow the seed of further 
activities in regard to civil disobedience, while Jawaharlal, whose socialism had 
become ‘redder’, would seek to strengthen peasant support, particularly in the 
United Provinces, with a programme of expropriation of the landlords. ‘The 
one real danger that we have at the present moment in regard to our political 
future’, reported the Viceroy, ‘is the fear lest Jawaharlal Nehru should start a 


1 Interview, 29 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 2 December 1933. 



184 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


secretive propaganda in the villages on purely socialistic and communistic lines, 
for this might be a very troublesome thing to deal with. ’ The U.P. Government 
had little doubt that Jawaharlal’s main object was to organize the masses and 
‘inoculate them with the virus of Communism*. The result would be^ according 
to the Director of the Intelligence Bureau, that for the next civil disobedience 
campaign Gandhi would have raised a huge Harijan army and Jawaharlal a host 
of stalwart agriculturists. 1 The Bengal Government went further, and publicly 
stated that Jawaharlal was carrying on his revolutionary agitation under the 
guise of anti-untouchability activities and with the money collected for Harijan 
work. 2 

All this was beside the mark, for Gandhi made it clear that only those Con¬ 
gressmen who were too weak to court arrest or had lost faith in civil disobedience 
should join the Harijan movement, and forbade its use to strengthen the poli¬ 
tical activities of the Congress or its hold on the people. As for Gandhi and 
Jawaharlal acting in concert, Andrews called on the Home Member and assured 
him that Gandhi was not in sympathy with Jawaharlal’s views. 3 Regarding the 
allegation about Jawaharlal’s duplicity, he, a year later, while in England, sharply 
protested,and the Bengal Government were forced, with ‘an ignominious 
crawl’, 4 to withdraw it. ‘British officialdom in India’, commented the Manches¬ 
ter Guardian , 5 ‘seems to be suffering from a bad attack of stupidity . . . The 
charge to anyone who knew anything of Nehru was ridiculous; one might as 
easily imagine Savonarola robbing a till.’ But talk about a two-pronged offen¬ 
sive by the Congress was wishful, for it justified the attitude of unqualified 
hostility to the party which the Government had adopted since 1932 and had 
no desire to change. 6 

Jawaharlal’s activities in particular were made to sound dangerous enough 
to require his speedy return to prison. All Local Governments were authorized 
to arrest him if opportunity arose not on some minor issue but on a serious 
charge which would involve a substantial sentence. 7 ‘My one hope is that 
Jawaharlal is such a temperamental person that he may go off the deep end 
before long and we shall be able to get him back into jail, which is really the 
safest place for a person with his political views.’ 8 What worried the Govern- 


‘Willingdon to Hoare, 18, 24 and 29 September 1933, Templewood papers, vol. 6; Hailey 
to Chhatari, 26 September and to Clay, 29 September 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26; notes of Home 
Department in Home Dept. Pol. File ^/8/33; note of D.I.B., 16 February 1934, Home Dept. 
Pol. File 4/4/34. Appendix to Notes I, India and Communism (compiled in the I.B. 1933), pp. 
218-19. 

2 Bengal Administration Report for 1934-5. 

3 Haig’s record of interview with Andrews, 26 October 1933, Home Dept. Pol. File 169 of 
1933. 

♦Ellen Wilkinson to Jawaharlal, January 1936. 

* 9 January 1936. 

‘Haig's «iote, 15 November 1933. Home Dept. Pol. File 169 of 1933. 

7 Home Secretary to all Local Governments, 26 September 1933, reprinted in Tba Civil Dis 
obtdianct Movement 1930-1934 (Govt, of India confidential publication, 1936), pp. 88-9. 

■ •Wiliyigdon to Hoare, 29 September 1933, Templewood papers,* vol. 6. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


185 


ment now was not so much Jawaharlal’s efforts in the rural areas as the impact 
of his writings and speeches on the lower middle classes. These were in grave 
economic distress and might well respond to his call for a new revolutionary 
ideology. ‘You can never tell how far an emotional people will be captured 
by programmes of this nature; your own De Valera seems to me a man some¬ 
what like J. L. N. I certainly see no other leader at the moment who is likely 
to have an equal following, for the rest of India will never follow a Bengali.’ 1 
If he broke the Congress and led a movement of his own it would be serious 
enough; but even more menacing was the possibility that, as Gandhi had 
hinted, 2 he might cease to stress his leanings towards communism and merely 
call upon the Congress to give attention to economic problems. His open 
renunciation of the no-rent campaign 3 suggested that this was likely; and 
this spurred the Government to action. 'Honestly, I think he is much better 
put out of the way, and I only hope that the Courts will convict him and give 
him a satisfactory sentence.’ 4 In December the Chief Commissioner of Delhi 
was asked to consider if Jawaharlal could be arrested for a speech denouncing 
British exploitation and the feudal autocracy of the Princes. But, while the 
Delhi authorities agreed that the speech was most objectionable, they had 
no great hopes of a successful prosecution. 3 All Local Governments were 
then ordered once again to examine Jawaharlal’s speeches carefully with a 
view to prosecution on some serious charge involving a substantial sentence 
of imprisonment. 6 The speech to the Trade Union Congress at Kanpur in 
December calling for the overthrow of British imperialism seemed to the 
Home and Law Members to be as strong a case as they were ever likely to 
get, and the U.P. Government were pressed to prosecute. ‘The Government 
of India regard him as by far the most dangerous element at large in India, 
and their view is that the time has come, in accordance with their general 
policy of taking steps at an early stage to prevent attempts to work up mass 
agitation, to take action against him.’ 7 Hailey, however, though he was keenly 
aware of Jawaharlal’s growing influence, was hesitant to act, and ultimately 
it was the Bengal Government which agreed to bell the cat. On his visit to 
Calcutta in January, Jawaharlal had in forthright terms condemned the 
vulgarity of imperialism and stressed that there was no half-way house between 
nationalism and imperialism. He had also sharply rebuked the terrorists for 
adopting a futile and out-of-date policy. But the Government had no use for 
such an ally against terrorism. Jawaharlal was arrested at Allahabad on 12 

to J. T. Gwynn, 6 November 1933, Hailey papers, vol. 26. 

3 Gandhi’s interview In Madras Mail, 22 December 1933: see also Hailey to Irwin, 19 January 
1934, Hailey papers, vol. 27. 

»Statement at Allahabad, 26 December, Tba Tribuna, 29 December 1933. 

« Willlngdon to Hoare, 30 January 1934, Templewood papers, vol. 7 . 

> Notes of Home Secret ar y and Home Member, 13 December 1933 and letter of thief Com¬ 
missioner, 18 December 1933. Home Dept. Pol. 4/1/34. 

* Home Secretary to all Loral Governments, 22 December 1933, ibid. 

7 Home Secretary to Chief Secretary U. P.. 19 January and Home Member to Governor U. P. 

21 January 1934, ibid. % 



186 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


February and brought down to Calcutta, tried for sedition and sentenced on 
16 February to two years' simple imprisonment. 

individuals’, said Jawaharlal in court before he was silenced, ‘sometimes 
misbehave in this imperfect world of ours; so also officials and those in power. 
Crowds and mobs of people also lose control of themselves sometimes and 
misbehave. That is regrettable. But it is a terrible thing when an organized 
Government begins to behave like an excited mob; when brutal and vengeful 
and uncivilized behaviour becomes the normal temper of a Government.’ 
Undoubtedly the Government of India at this time, believing that it had the 
Congress by the throat, was out for a kill. Repression and savagery were un¬ 
abashed and believed to be successful. As the one man among the leaders who 
was neither cowed nor shaken in nerve was jawaharlal, the authorities stalked 
him till they once more had him behind bars. Back for a Test cure’ in his 
‘other home’, 1 this time the central jail at Alipore in Calcutta, he reverted 
to the routine of prison life and adjusted himself to living in a small cell and 
bare barrack yard, with a clerk sentenced for embezzlement as his only com¬ 
panion. The days pass, and so do the nights, and so we carry on. How soon 
one gets used to a particular mode of life!’ 2 The Bengal authorities did not 
encourage reading and writing, and for some time, after he had exhausted 
the novels in the prison library, the only book Jawaharlal had was a German 
grammar. This was later set right. But he never settled down in Alipore and 
was relieved when, early in May, he was transferred to the familiar barrack 
in Dehra Dun jail. 

Throughout these months, the news from outside was depressing. The 
ill-health of his mother and wife was a constant source of worry; and political 
news was no more cheerful. Gandhi's statement in April withdrawing civil 
disobedience was a heavy blow. ‘It marks an epoch not only in our freedom 
struggle but in my personal life. After 15 years I go my way, perhaps a solitary 
way leading not far. But meanwhile there is prison and its lonely existence.’ 3 
An undated, incomplete note obviously written at this time indicates that 
Jawaharlal was being driven once more to the recognition that he had come 
to a parting of the ways. There was hardly any common ground between him¬ 
self and Gandhi, and he had been wrong in subordinating their differences in 
a larger loyalty to the cause of national freedom. ‘Our objectives are different, 
our ideals are different, our spiritual outlook is different and our methods 
are likely to be different.’ The Congress was now aggressively anti-socialist 
and, in its acceptance of constitutionalism, politically more backward than 
it had been even in the heyday of the Swarajist party. Gandhi’s statement 
withdrawing civil disobedience, the reasons given and the general outlook 
displayed ‘seemed to me to be an insult to the nation, to the Congress and 

to any person with a grain of intelligence. I felt with a stab of pain that the 
!• 

1 See telegrams to Gandhi and to hi* daughter, 13 February 1934. % 

*To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 1 March 1934. 

9 Diarf entry, 13 April 1934. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


187 


cords of allegiance that had bound me to him for many years had snapped.' 
The concentration on non-political issues and the personal and self-created 
entanglements which led Gandhi to desert his comrades in the mM dle of 
the struggle were amazingly casual and likely to be fatal to the movement. 

In August, when Kamala’s condition took a turn for the worse, the U. P. 
Government let Jawaharlal out of prison, and he took this opportunity, in 
what even Willingdon, who had seen a copy made by the police, described 
as ‘this very human document', 1 to pour out his heart to Gandhi. The abandon¬ 
ment of civil disobedience had been bad enough, but the reasons given by 
Gandhi and his suggestions for future work had astonished him. 

I Had a sudden and intense feeling that something broke inside me, a bond 
that I had valued very greatly had snapped. I felt terribly lonely in this wide 
world. I have always felt a little lonely almost from childhood up. But 
a few bonds strengthened me, a few strong supports held me up. That 
loneliness never went, but it was lessened. But now I felt absolutely alone, 
left high and dry on a desert island. 

The decisions that followed the termination of civil disobedience, such as 
the approval of the formation of a parliamentary oarty and the contesting of 
elections, had been shock after shock, allowing his mind and feelings no peace 
or rest and making prison life a greater ordeal for his nerves than at any time 
before. What was happening was not a setback, common enough in all great 
struggles, but a spiritual defeat and surrender of ideals. The Congress had 
become a caucus where opportunism flourished and the Working Committee's 
resolution condemning socialism showed such astounding ignorance of even 
the elements of the subject that it was painful to read it and realize that it 
might be read outside India. ‘It seemed that the overmastering desire of the 
Committee was somehow to assure various vested interests even at the risk 
of talking nonsense. 12 

Apart from this private letter, which Gandhi did not take seriously, 3 Jawa¬ 
harlal responded to the Government’s gesture and took care to keep away 
from political activity. However much he might have sympathized in private 
with the criticism nude by his follower, Rah Ahmad Kidwai, of the Congress 
leadership, he publicly dissociated himself from it. The proclaimed socialists 
in the Congress, who in May, as a counter-blast to the milk-and-water pro¬ 
grammes of the parent body, had formed the Congress Socialist Party, had 
not concealed that they sought and drew inspiration from him. They believed 
that they were echoing his ideas in hailing the Congress as potentially the 

1 To Howe, 24 September 1934, Temple wood papers, vol. 7. 

2 To Gandhi, 13 August 1934. The resolution had denounced confiscation and claj» war as 
contrary to the creed of non-violence and committed the Congress to no more than a ‘wiser and 
juster use of private p rope r ty' and ‘a healthier relationship between capital and laboRr'. 

J'Jawabarial's explosion is not so dangerous ss it sounds. He only exercised his right to let off 
steam. 1 believe he is now quiet,* Gandhi to Patel, 19 August 1934, quoted in K. Dwarfcadaa, 
Indio r Fight for Froodam (Bombay, 1966), p. 444. 4 



188 


JAWAHARLAL NRHRU 


greatest revolutionary force in the country and seeking to combine the national 
struggle with socialism. 1 The decision to keep the Socialist Party within the 
Congress was also modelled on Jawaharlal’s precedent of the Independence 
for India League. Yet Jawaharlal refused, while out of prison, tcf give them 
any encouragement. 2 He shared the socialist outlook; but there was no truth 
in the claim 5 that he was fully in agreement with the decision to form the 
party. He considered the step premature and likely to divert attention from the 
immediate issue of political independence. The socialists had no support 
among the people, and it was more important to push the Congress as a whole, 
however slowly, towards acceptance of economic objectives than to nurture 
the doctrinaire views of a handful of individuals. Jawaharlal had a radical 
rather than an ideological mind. The precedent of the Independence for India 
League was not a happy one. It can be argued that Jawaharlal was giving up 
too easily, that while he had a socialist vision derived from Europe he lacked 
the stamina to formulate specific programmes suited to India and promote 
the strenuous work of forming cadres and establishing an organization — 
in other words, that he lacked a 'revolutionary perspective’. 4 Such criticism 
is balanced by the fact that, however disappointed with Gandhi and the Con¬ 
gress, Jawaharlal was still certain of their indispensability in the struggle to 
expel the British; nor could he regard the motley crowd of Marxists, Fabians, 
Gandhians and orthodox Hindus who led the Congress Socialist Party with 
anything but ‘amused contempt’. 3 

The U.P. authorities, however, feared that the Socialist Party, which was 
the ’greatest menace to peace in the rural areas’, had about fifteen centres in the 
province, very few of which were really active; but they would all receive a tre¬ 
mendous fillip when Jawaharlal came out of jail. 6 The Government of India 
feared the release, especially on the eve of the elections to the Central Assembly, 
of the one person they had cause to worry about and of whom they had made a 
bogy man — ‘the high priest of Communism’. 7 So it was made clear that no re¬ 
mission of his sentence could be considered, 8 and after eleven days, when his 
wife’s health slightly improved, he was taken back to prison. But this time he 

1 A chary a Narendra Deva’i presidential address at the first session of The Socialist Party Con¬ 
ference, reprinted in Socialism and the Notional Revolution (Bombay, 1946), pp. 5-29. 

2 To Sampurnanand, 22 August 1934, Sampurnanand papers, National Archives of India. 

» Jsyaprakash Narayan to Rajendra Prasad, 25 July 1934, # U.P. CI.D. File PPF-J 25. 

* SuhhasBose, Tbt Indian Struggle (Calcutta, 1964), p.'336. 

’Sampurnanand, Memories end Reflections (Bombay, 1962), p. 72. It might be added that 
M. N. Roy was also against the formation of a separate socialist party within the Congress because 
it would exclude the left wing from leadership and continue the dominance of the conservative 
elements in the party. 

•Noteof the U.P. CLD. on revolutionary affairs in the province 1934, U.P, CI.D. File No. 
PPF N.26. 

2 See .U.P. Government's publicity pamphlet 'Communistic Likes and Dislikes’, Home Dept. 
Pol. File 7/13/34. 

'Answer of Secretary of State in House of Commons, 16 July 1934. Hoar! had wished to say 
that* could be no remission 'at the present time' but deleted die proviso at the instance of the 
Government of India, Home Dept. Pol. File 27/19/34. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


189 


was lodged in Naini jail, and allowed out once or twice a week to see Kamala. 
Then, in October, when she was moved to a sanatorium at Bhowali, Jawaharlal 
was transferred to the nearby jail at Almora. 

The illness of his wife pushed all else to the background. Over the years their 
relationship had matured from indifference to a deep attachment. Often in jail 
his mind wandered to her, and he sat waiting for her letters and looking forward 
to her interviews. ‘Felt greatly cheered’, runs a characteristic diary entry, ‘at 
seeing her. I am much too fond of her!' 1 Now, with her at death’s door, he be¬ 
came a bundle of nerves, and more to take his mind off the crisis than anything 
else, he set to work feverishly drafting the work which was to be his greatest 
literary achievement. He began in June 1934 the writing of his life story and 
finished it on 14 February 1933. So a massive manuscript of 976 pages was 
dashed off in less than nine months. First called In and Out of Prison, it was 
later published with the bare title, An Autobiography. 

Tagore, Andrews, Sapru and a host of lesser men, as well as the nationalist 
press as a whole, and Attlee, Lansbury and other leaders of the Labour Party in 
Britain, none of whom had any sympathy with Jawaharlal’s political views, 
pleaded for magnanimity and a full release. But to set him free in India seemed 
to the Government of India out of the question, for they saw no reason to believe 
that Jawaharlal would ‘behave well’, that is, refrain from political activity. Jawa¬ 
harlal himself was too proud a man and too committed a nationalist to ask for 
special favours. Even when let out of prison in August, he had declined to give 
any undertaking to the Government. 2 Now, while thanking the U.P. Govern¬ 
ment for the various courtesies being shown to him, he asked for no more. 

Quite frankly I fed that the U.P. Government has gone very much out of 
its way to meet an individual case and I am somewhat embarrassed by 
this special consideration. It would be wrong and absurd to expect the 
Government to vary State policy because of individual cases. Personal 
reasons cannot and should not interfere with principles and larger issues. 

I have myself endeavoured to act in that way, and if I may say so without 
impropriety, I thoroughly appreciate that Government cannot do so. 3 

When an advocate of Allahabad petitioned the High Court for his rdease and 
followed it up with a memorial to (he Government, Jawaharlal promptly repu¬ 
diated this unauthorized intervention in his personal affairs. He had told 
Kamala in August that he might be released in December, after the elections. 4 
Disappointed in that, he counted the days and weeks till the end of his sentence 
but sought no concessions. 

* 9 April 1934. 

> Letter to District Magistrate, 12 August 1934. 

* Tojagdish Prasad, Home Member, U. P., 3 November 1934. 

4 Diary entry, 30 April 1935. 



190 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


icj. *~Uc v *' 4 *- ^ 

<w_ ««•» “»4r ■**-/ 

I 

a -* v ^ ^ 

SJL~M£. ~r£+'-* • 

Part of a page from Jawaharlal’s prison diary 


The treatment at Bhowali did Kama!a little good and it was decided that 
she should go to Europe. For the first time, Jawaharlal had to worry about 
money. He had an annual income, derived from book royalties and such shares 
as were still left to him, of about nine thousand rupees, and with this he had to 
run a large establishment at Anand Bhawan, pay heavy medical bills and arrange 
for the passages by sea and the stay in Europe. 1 It was probably at this time that 
a member of the Birla family, the wealthy financiers, hearing of his difficulties, 
offered to pay him a fairly substantial monthly allowance, such as they provided 
to many leading Congressmen; but Jawaharlal expressed his surprise at the 
suggestion and sharply declined the offer. 2 He mustered such savings as he had 
and made the arrangements, and Kamala sailed, with Indira and a doctor in at¬ 
tendance, in May. The Government of India were unwilling to remit Jawa¬ 
harlal’s sentence on condition that he left India with his wife for Switzerland, 
for that in itself would encourage the socialist wing in the Congress and dispirit 
officials and loyalists. 3 The hope was that, with the official retirement of 
Gandhi from the Congress in September, the party would become moderate 
and constitutional under the leadership of Patel and Rajagopalachari. For this 
the socialists would have to be kept under, and nothing would facilitate this 
more than the retention of Jawaharlal in prison. 4 

In a way, this was not unacceptable. Kamala was anxious to brave the jour¬ 
ney, not only for a change of climate and in hopes of a cure, but because dose 
proximity to Jawaharlal was at this time jarring on the nerves of both. Mutual 
dependence caused its own frictions. In 1933, while on a visit to Jawaharlal in 
Dehra Dun jail, Kamala had called on a Bengali lady sanyasinL They had not 

1 See note on income and expenditure, 14May 1939. 

* Letter to U. N. Dhebar, 7 June 1937, Nehru papers. 

* Telegram to Secretary of State, 10 November 1934, Home Dept. Pol. File 38/7/34. 

4 See Wjjllingdon to Hoaie, 22 October 1934 and 3 May 1933, TempJewood papers, volumes 
7 and 8, respectively. 



IN AND OUT OF PRISON 


191 


talked much, but Kamala felt a profound sense of peace. She later visited this 
lady several times and her influence grew. 1 Jawaharlal pretended not to mind, 
but such a development was alien to his own nature; and he also resented the 
intrusion of another. 

What a child K is! That irritates me often enough and yet I think that is 
partly her charm. How my moods change when I think of her. How much 
she means to me and yet how little she fits in or tries to tit in with my 
ideas. That is really the irritating part, that she does not try, and so she 
drifts apart. 2 

With Kamala and his daughter in Europe, Jawaharlal felt lonelier than ever 
in jail. He had now no major writing task to divert his mind, and though he set 
himself to writing articles in English and Hindi and reading a large variety of 
books, these could not subdue his emotional tension. He became a prey to 
nightmares and tears and, what was so rare with him, began to lose his very 
interest in life. All these years, his dedication to India’s freedom had kept him 
going even when his personal affairs had been a shambles. As he had once told 
a senior British official in the halcyon 'twenties, his only ambition had been to 
be buried in the foundations of free India. 3 But now he despaired even of that. 
The Congress had become a cautious, almost loyalist body, more frightened of 
communism and a class struggle than inimical to the British; Subhas Bose, in 
exile abroad, fancied himself as a future fascist dictator, and Gandhi gave all 
his attention to such problems as the relative merits of cows milk and buffalo s 
milk. ‘Even Bapu) wrote Jawaharlal perceptively in his diary, ‘he is either a 
non-co-operator or a full-blooded co-operator. The fire or a sofa — though a 
sofa is hardly the correct place for him. He can think only in extremes — either 
extreme eroticism or asceticism. Was it not Aldous Huxley who said that the 
ascetic was the counterpart of Eton Juan?’ . 4 Nor did the masses of India, indulg¬ 
ing in wild communal rioting, seem to deserve better. ‘What a disgusting, sav¬ 
age people we are. Politics, progress, socialism, communism, science — where 
are they before this black religious savagery?’ 5 There were very few oases of 
intellect and character in the arid waste of Indian humanity, and doubts arose 
in his mind as to whether anything could be done with this material. To crown 
it all, the news from Europe of Kamala was depressing. She had stood well a 
complicated operation in Berlin for the removal of lung adhesions but, far from 

* Draft Second Volume of Autobiography (hereafter DSVA) written in Dehra Dun jail 1941. 
This draft was later rejected by him as not suited for publication; but parts of it were incorporated 
in The Discovery of India. 

2 Diary entry, 19 March 1935. 

s Sir William Duke to Motilal, quoted in Motilal to Jawaharlal, 18 March 1928, Motilal Nehru 
papers. 

* 30 April 1933. 

’Diary entry, 17 April 1935. 



192 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


recuperating, was losing heart. ‘She is slipping away and the thought of it is 
unbearable, hellish.’ 1 A verse jotted down in his diary 2 sums up his heartbreak 
and loneliness: 


Sad winds where your voice was; 
Tears, tears where my heart was; 
And ever with me 
Child, ever with me 
Silence where hope was. 


1 Diary entry, 28 August 1933. 
*9 June 1933. 



13 


Death of Kamala Nehru 


On 2 September the doctor cabled Jawaharlal as well as the Government that 
Kamala’s condition was critical, and his sentence was suspended to enable him 
to proceed at once to her bedside. ‘So this is the end’ he wrote in his diary; but 
even at this moment his dignity did not fail him. He asked for clarifications, and 
was told that his movements would be unrestricted in India till his departure 
as well as in Europe, but if he returned before his sentence expired in February 
1936 he would be imprisoned again. 1 He was also requested not to make any 
political speeches before departure. On these terms, which did not infringe his 
honour, Jawaharlal left Almora for Allahabad and took the first available flight 
to Europe. 

Kamala was in a clinic in Badenweiler in the Black Forest in Germany, and 
Jawaharlal found her condition changed very much for the worse. However, he 
still thought there was an even chance of a slow recovery. Keeping away 
from the Nazis and only asserting his viewpoint by patronizing Jewish shops, 
Jawaharlal spent his time nursing his wife, correcting the proofs of the 
Autobiography and meeting the odd visitor — Andrews, Subhas Bose, Raja Rao. 
But the long hours in hospital were oppressive, and as he observed long after, 
‘I found that life affecting me powerfully, as it was.affecting much more the 
patients themselves. Since then I have never advised anyone to stay too long in 
a clinic.' 2 Kamala too, in addition to the physical ravages of her illness, was 
giving way to the psychological strain. She was anxious to get back to Switzer* 
land and Jawaharlal therefore moved her early in 1936 to a clinic in Lausanne. 
‘There is no immediate crisis’, he reported in January, ‘but there is a kind of 
continuing semi-crisis and certain complications appear to have set in due 
largely to extreme weakness. Her heart is not as good as it was. This present 
state cannot continue for long. It will either grow worse or better within the 
next three or four weeks at most.’ 3 Her condition fluctuated daily, and 

1 Press statement, The Bombay CbronicU , 5 September 1935. 

’To Jayaprakash Narayan, 28 July 1952, Nehru-papers. 

5 To Rajendra Prasad, 23 January 1936, AICC file G43 (KW)(i) 1935. 


193 



194 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Jawaharlal clutched at momentary glimmers of recovery. But there was really 
no hope, and at 5 a.m. on 28 February she died. 

Kamala’s short life — she was not thirty-seven when she died — was over¬ 
cast with acute pain and suffering. Born in a social milieu much humbler than 
that of the Nehrus, she was faced from the start with the resistance of some of 
her husband's family, who treated her as an intruder from the otitside world 
into their exclusive relations with Jawaharlal. Smart, snobbish and insensitive, 
they led her to feel that she did not belong, made Jawaharlal a poor wife — 
and was plain and dowdy into the bargain. Fine-grained and high-spirited, Kamala 
was continually humiliated in her deepest feminine instincts, and con¬ 
sequently developed a growing sense of futility. 

Nor, in these early years of tension and repression, were Kamala’s relations 
with Jawaharlal cloudless. Theirs was not love in spring. He did not suspect 
her distress and fear of inadequacy, and after .1920 was so engrossed in public 
affairs that the result was emotional reluctance. It is curious how little she 
figures in his jail diaries of the 'twenties. Different in temperament and up¬ 
bringing, deliberate adjustment was required from both sides and a special 
effort from Kamala to raise her personality to his level, if their marriage was to 
succeed. But from the start she was dogged with sickness. Their daughter, 
Indira, was born in November 1917; but thereafter her health slowly slid down¬ 
hill. Tuberculosis was first diagnosed in 1919 and, despite varied treatment and 
a long stay in Europe, took firm root. In 1925 a son was born prematurely and 
after two days; and three years later she suffered a miscarriage. 

" ‘Added to this were the strains of national politics, with the family often scat¬ 
tered, Jawaharlal for long stretches in prison and the house frequently searched 
and property attached. It was no wonder that not only did her health sharply 
deteriorate, from about 1932, but she became increasingly neurotic. 1 

Yet, despite all these stresses and disadvantages, Kamala s life was, in its 
own way, one of happiness and achievement. Never a simpering consort, she 
slowly rose above her surroundings and grew in mind and character till she could 
derive joy and companionship from her married life. The moody self-pity and 
death-wish, induced by being bedridden for months at a time, were shaken off. 
Illness was no longer stagnation but an impetus to energy. That she had not 
received a regular education was a handicap she felt sorely. 'Today in this world 
only the educated are honoured. People do not want to talk to those who are 
uneducated; indeed dose relatives and even husbands do not wish to talk to 
them. Under such conditions the lives of the girls become unbearable; and then 
will it be a life or a curse?’ 2 This disadvantage too she surmounted in her own 
life;buttheeducMtonofwon^il became to her a part of the struggle for freedom. 

1 The facts about Kamels Nehru’s health are derived front Jawaharlal’s note on the subject written 
for the doctors .in May 1935. 

3 To Syed Mahmud froth Geneva, 4 November 1926, original in Utdu. 



DEATH OF KAMALA NEHRU 


193 


‘Daily I grow more determined that on my return, taking your wife along with 
me, I shall urge Indian women to have faith in God and fight for their own 
freedom — and educate their daughters so that they may not be in trouble 
like us and may be able to win independence for their country and end Hindu* 
Muslim conflict.’ 1 

It was more than mere faith in God and works of charity in the Ramakrishna 
Mission and similar institutions which gave her strength and scope for service. 
She was formally enrolled into the Mission as a lay follower, 2 but did not adopt 
the life of a recluse. Social action of a more exciting kind called her, and she 
trained herself not only to endure the separations from Jawaharlal but to parti¬ 
cipate in the struggle. Though ill, her courage never failed. Oik of Jawaharlal’s 
keenest experiences of satisfaction was when she was arrested in 1931 and went 
to jail with a statement which was an unconscious blend of self-confidence and 
commitment to him. Even during her last months, the impression she left on 
Palme Dutt was of a woman of strength and perception: ‘a wonderful person’, 
with enormous directness, clarity of political vision and burning desire to 
serve — and with such influence over her husband that Palme Dutt was con¬ 
vinced that‘with her death some of his backbone went out of him.’ 3 

Gradually, as time passed, their relationship had matured. His early lack of 
serious interest was replaced first by a light-hearted, protective loyalty and then 
by a commitment which was stronger than passion and warmer than considera¬ 
tion. In Sri Lanka in 1931 they had discovered each other again, and realized 
that their marriage had neither broken nor tarnished. Stricken by his past 
neglect, he allowed Kamala to move slowly from the fringes towards the centre 
of his life, till, by the end, as even the unimaginative police department recog¬ 
nized, he was a ‘devoted husband’. 4 Many women, drawn by his charm or driven 
by snobbery, made claims on him and, especially after Kamala’s death, sought 
to thrust themselves into his life; and he did not always firmly resist their gross 
ardours. Yet, despite occasional dalliances, Kamala was the only woman who 
ever meant anything to him; and he kept her image unsullied. ‘Kamala five 
years’ runs the single-line entry in his pocket diary on 28 February 1941. He 
kept in his bedroom or his jail cell, along with her photograph, a small portion 
of her ashes, and requested that they be mingled with his own after his death. As 
far as he was concerned, the wound of her death never healed; but, of course, 
the wounds which do not heal are usually those which have remorse festering 
in them. 

So, over the years, Kamala had evolved an equal human relationship with her 
husband. Writing two years after her death, Jawaharlal acknowledged that she, 

'To Syed Mahmud from Brighton, June 1927, original in Urdu. 

3 P. Kalhan, Kamala Nabru (Delhi, 1973). p. 83. 

3 Interview with the author, 20 November 1969. 

4 Note of H. Williamson, Director, Intelligence Bureau, 27 September 1935, Home Dept. Pol. 
4/7/33. 



196 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


his father and Gandhi were the major personal influences in his life. ‘My wife 
influenced me considerably in many ways, though unobtrusively.’ 1 A serious, 
deeply moral, intense figure, she was a champion of Women’s Lib long before 
that became a slogan and a movement, 2 and had she lived might well have had a 
career akin to that of Eleanor Roosevelt. If a successful struggle foe self-aware 
ness and self-emancipation is the true testof greatness, then Kamala ranks among 
the greatest of the Nehrus. 

Messages of condolence swamped him, from the Secretary of State and the 
Viceroy as well as from humble Congress workers add friends in various parts 
of the world. ‘How shall I console you’, wired Gandhi, ‘all our hearts with you. 
God give you peace love Bapu’. Another message is also worthy of remembrance. 
‘You will not’, wrote Naomi Mitchison, ‘have made the mistake of importing 
human qualities like justice and mercy into the universe: one has to go to deeper 
principles less easy to understand.’ These were no routine messages, for to 
Jawaharlal the loss was severe. The child-wife he had married on his father’s 
directive had become in twenty years a brave and true comrade whose death 
left him lonely and desolate. 3 

The publication of Jawaharlal’s Autobiography in the spring of 1936, only 
a few weeks after the death of Kamala, gave the world an inkling of his nature 
and enabled it to share his sorrow. All the reviews in Britain, including those in 
Conservative journals, immediately recognized the book’s importance and 
quality. It was not surprising that friends like Ellen Wilkinson, Edward Thomp¬ 
son and H. N. Brailsford hailed it as a basic utteranceof one of the few great men 
of the time; but even those who disapproved of Jawaharlal’s politics commended 
it. The life, the man, the witness, all seem to have imposed a paralysing humility 
on the critics. Any understanding, wrote The Economist, 4 of the last fifteen 
years in India was incomplete without reading it; Sir Stanley Jleed thought it an 
exceptional book; 3 ‘a book to read’, said The Timesp ‘however much one may 
disagree with the outlook of the author.’ It was an essential document of the 
period, a key to the ideas and politics of a whole new world. Here was a man who 
spoke and thought in the language of modernity and reason, whom, unlike 
Gandhi, the West could understand, a man like‘themselves who happened to 
find himself on the other side. His individual vision was of general interest and 
universal value. In this, the first important first-hand account of the modern 
phase of Asian nationalism, Jawaharlal showed that in India it was a civilized, 
responsible movement that owed as much to the principles of European revolu¬ 
tion and the liberalism and nonconformity of Britain as to the Indian context. 

'Note for John Gunther, 16 March 1938. 

2 On this point she was clear-sighted even about Gandhi: ‘there is no one else like Gandhi in the 
world, but as regards women’s rights he is no better than other men.’ Letter to Jawaharlal (in Hindi), 

9 October 1932. 

5 See his statement to the press, 17 March 1936; The Discovery of India (Calcutta, 1946), p. 40. 
4 U July 1936. 

*The Spectator, 15 May 1936. 

‘28 April 1936. 



Death of kamaia nehru 


1*7 

So the Autobiography, despite being a long and serious book, became a best¬ 
seller and within weeks ran into many editions — though unfor tunately lor 
Jawaharlal his publisher. The Bodley Head, soon after went into liquidation. 1 

The book was characteristic of Jawaharlal. It was honest and introspective. 
Standing almost outside himself he commented frankly on the society and age 
in which he lived, on the people he had known and on his own mental develop¬ 
ment. The book is not a wooden narrative of events; nor is it, like Gandhi's auto¬ 
biography, a part of confessional literature. Jawaharlal was too undemonstra¬ 
tive, too repelled by any trace of exhibitionism* to interest the world primarily 
in himself. Indeed the Autobiography is in one sense a tour do force in that, after 
over 600 dose-knit pages, his privacy remains unbroken. It is a reverie on the 
context into which he had been thrown, and of his reactions to it. If a portrait 
of a personality, wistful, complex and of indrawn tension, caught in its own inte¬ 
grity, is gradually built up, it is almost as a by-product. But what Jawaharlal did 
set out to tell was of the Indian condition and of British rule, which hurt both 
his feelings and his intelligence by forcing the large majority of his countrymen 
to live in sordid and brutal drcumstances. The reader found himsdf in the pre¬ 
sence of great moral and historical issues as seen through the eyes of a refined 
and humane man. 

What further helped to gain a wide audience for the Autobiography was its 
prose style. It was a dear, fluent bode, ‘an excellent substitute for a novel’, 2 
written with terse, nervous elegance and control of phrase and with a wide know¬ 
ledge of English writing, old and new. It showed a mind of intdlectual and moral 
quality, freeof diche emotions, but attractively replete with half-tones, subtleties 
and diffidences. In later years, Jawaharlal often spoke of the Autobiography as 
having ‘dated’. It has, of course, ‘dated’ in the sense that it deals with a period 
that is deed. But the book has not lost its freshness as a piece of craftsmanship 
and as the expression of a sensitive human being. 

Moreover, Jawaharlal wrote with detachment. There was sdf-scrutiny and 
self-criticism but no self-pity. The hardships he had opted for were taken for 
granted. The attempt was not at self-justification but at justification to himsdf. 
Estranged from his own people by being soaked in the exploiter’s culture, he was 
a mixed-up being, yearning for roots and struggling to work out his own destiny. 
Tortured by doubt, impressive in his indecision, agonizing over all rides of every 
question, always asking to what end was the long, wearying struggle, heprovided 
a picture of warm am] vulnerable humanity.. Jawaharlal made no daim to be 
exceptional; rather, he was a natural disciple with a taste for heroes. He dupg 
to those who would determine his intdlectual uncertainties. Motilal and Gandhi 
are the chief characters in the book, and he recognized how much he owed to 
them and depended on them, even while he was dear-sighted, espedally about 

1 Soooafter liquidation, anew administratkm took over The Bodley Head, and from then on regular 

royalty payments were made to Nehru'• account. * 

l Tb* St*Usm«n (Calcutta), 10 May 1936. 



198 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Gandhi’s limitations. The bond of mutual confidence between him and Gandhi 
was also seen as an iron corset, supporting but confining. He confessed to his 
repeated display of weakness at critical moments, to his frequent surrender of 
judgment to personal loyalties, to his dedication to purpose and principle rather 
than to doctrine and definition. * 

Jawaharlal was not strong in analytic thought and the book provides no pro¬ 
found ideas or philosophy. Such ideas as he had were intellectual impulses rather 
than logical constructions. Even his Marxism was vague and confused, for his 
ideology was to a large extent based more on sympathy than on conviction. But 
hebore witness to a passionate commitment to nationalism, though in no narrow 
sense, to an awareness of world forces, and to a total personal integrity. Bom 
to wealth and an easy life, he had been forced by the situation into the world 
outside. A heterogeneous character with great inner resources and of infinite 
mood, aware of natural beauty and in love with mountains, capable of responding 
toevery side of life, yet he had preferred to spend years in prison. Fastidious and 
lonely by instinct, he had taken to politics and become indifferent to all else 
because he cared about the human scene and was disturbed by the ugliness and 
stupidity of the world. The deep personal affections he could give he had almost 
stifled. His sense of the essential pushed private life to the background, and led 
to a conscious withholding of emotion. Out of the pages of the Autobiography 
rises, almost, it would seem, against Jawaharlal’s will, the story of the slow 
development of what was by the end a happy marriage; and its tragic close was 
revealed in the six brief words of the dedication, ‘To Kamala, who is no more*. 

The whole book was written in jail at a time when writing was at once a dis¬ 
cipline, an indulgence and a solace. But there is no bitterness against the British. 
The book was not abrasive; it had no rant or claptrap. Jawaharlal's quarrel was 
not with the foreign ruler but with systems — with imperialism, with capital¬ 
ism, with the social evils of religion. Such bitterness and contemptuous wit as 
he does disclose he reserves for some of his fellow-Indians. The Liberals who, as 
he thought, concealed behind platitudes and compromises a low-minded oppor¬ 
tunism, came in for sharp derision. Gandhi, who read the book in manuscript, 
suggested that these portions be revised; 1 but Jawaharlal left them as they were. 
The Liberate were naturally resentful, it is an insufferable book’, wrote Jayakar 
to Sapru, 2 ‘full of self-laudation .. . There is nothing in that book which is 
illuminating or exalting ... the vapourings of a half-baked politician.’ Right- 
wing Congressmen, whose thinking and attitudes were alien to him, Jawaharlal 
had tended to ignore. There is no mention, for example, throughout the book, of 
Rajagopalachari. Their reaction was summed up in the review by K. M Munshi, 
who described Jawaharlal as being scarcely in tune with the ‘soul of India’ 
(whatever that might be) and criticized him for having time and again destroyed 
the possibility of immediate gains by insisting on independence and socialism. 3 

‘MaMtevaDeui to Jawaharlal, 11 December 1955. 

*21 May 1936. Sapru papers. 



DEATH OF KAMALA NEHRU 


199 


But most Indian readers, drawn from the middle classes, were able to identify 
themselves with Jawaharlal in his expression of the hopes and obstacles of a 
whole generation. 

After his wife’s death, Jawaharlal returned to India, resisting, on the way, 
the blandishments of Mussolini who sent a personal message of sympathy and 
sought to inveigle Jawaharlal into an interview while in transit at Rome airport. 
’It was a most embarrassing and ticklish affair but I survived it with a display of 
extreme tact and firmness.’ 1 He brought back Kamala’s ashes and immersed 
all — but the few he retained — at the Sangam in Allahabad. ‘Despite his courage, 
Pandit Jawaharlal was visibly moved as he immersed the ashes in the waters 
of the two mighty rivers.’ 2 

Jawaharlal sought to smother the inner emptiness in work. Many years 
later he wrote to a friend who had suffered a like bereavement, ‘those who 
have had similar experiences, and I am one of them, can understand to some 
extent the sorrow that comes to one. The only way to deal with it, so I found, 
is to apply oneself with greater earnestness to the causes for which one 
has stood.’ 3 But the emotional strain was never far below the surface. 4 


1 Letter to Krishna Me non, quoted in Marie Seton, Panditji (London, 1967), p. 88. 

J AICC letter No. 40, dated 12 March 1936. 

*To Keith Marvin, New York, 24 February 1962, Nehru papers. 

4 There is a moving description of Jawaharlal at the end of the Lucknow session of the Congress 
in April 1936, which gives some idea of the stress. ‘While speaking in Hindi, tears appeared in the 
eyes of Pandit Jawaharlal, who sat down immediately. He wiped the tears, but the colour of his face 
did not change for some minutes and he was not aware that two or three people were addressing him. 
He did not seem to be aware that he was replying to questions put to him. He rushed to his tent and 
fell asleep .a few seconds later.' The Bombay Chronicle, 13 April 1936. 



14 


Leading the Party 


During Jawaharlal’s absence in Europe he had been elected president of the 
Congress for 1936. The decision was, as usual, primarily that of Gandhi. The 
main issue before the Congress was whether they should contest the e^ctions 
and accept office in the provinces under the new Government of India Act. 
Jawaharlal’s views on the subject were well known. He regarded the Act as 
deliberately designed to strengthen all the vested and reactionary elements in 
India, and acceptance of office under this Act would be a retrogade step which 
might well lead to the disintegration of the Congress and obstruction of a civil 
disobedience campaign at any early date. Gandhi too seems to have been of this 
view, despite the persuasion of JRajagopalachari and Ansari, and therefore was 
keen that Jawaharlal should once again accept the responsibility, even if it meant 
that many senior leaders would feel unable to follow his leadership. ‘Your 
presidency is the lightest thing that could have happened for the country.’ 1 
The Working Committee accepted Gandhi’s suggestion as the only way of avoid¬ 
ing bitter controversy. The new constitution of the Congress would enable 
Jawaharlal to pick his own committee, and even those who could not support 
him agreed to stand by and give his policies a fair and unobstructed trial. 2 

In Europe, Jawaharlal’s hostility to the Act and his radical tendencies had 
been strengthened. He paid short visits to England in November 1935 and 
January 1936, when temporary improvements in Kamala’s condition permitted 
him to leave her bedside. He had not wanted to do Sb, for his mind rebelled 
against social relations with those responsible for the nightmare years of oppres¬ 
sion in India. 9 But Gandhi encouraged him to go. 4 

Unlike in Paris, where he happily discussed Hinduism with Malraux and 
conditions in Russia with Gide, in London he could not avoid politics. He de¬ 
clined to meet any member of the British Government and took no initiative in 

'Gandhi to Jawaharlal. 3 October 1933. 

2 Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 22 September and 13 October 1933; Mahadeva Desai to Jawaharlal 
6 Septe m ber 1933. 

5 See hi* letter to Agatha Harrison, 23 September 1933. 

4 Gandhfto Jawaharlal, early in 1936 

e 


200 




LEADING THE PARTY 


201 


meeting anyoneother than a few personal friends. Even so, his few days in London 
were crowded with talks with politicians of every variety. What impressed 
Jawaharlal was the personal friendliness 1 as well as the general boredom over 
the Indian question. The presence of a representative from Scotland Yard by 
his side from the moment he landed at Dover constantly reminded Jawaharlal, 
even if he were inclined to forget, that he was in a sense a ticket-of-leave man with 
part of a sentence still hanging over him. But the British public gave him a warm 
welcome. There wasgeneral and great appreciation of him as a man. The reporter 
for The Tribune was lyrical. 

When the man stepped out of the train there was almost a hush. I saw a 
beautifully featured pale face, cast in a classic mould; certainly one of the 
most dignified and truly aristocratic faces I have ever seen. I heard a soft 
and mellow voice. I felt, as everybody who has ever met him must feel, 
that Jawaharlal is a Presence and in an immeasurable degree much more 
than a politician. 2 

The modesty of Jawaharlal, his lack of bitterness and his commitment to 
ideals, the sadness of mien born of imminent sorrow and past suffering, the 
difficulty he- experienced in even articulating his speeches after nearly four 
years in jail, the dazzlement by the light after long darkness, made a deep impact. 
‘Few in the House of Commons seemed to care’, wrote Hannen Swaffer in John 
Bull, ‘but when you went there the other day, one of the world’s bravest spirits — 
one embodied in your slight retiring frame — was within the walls of the Palace 
of Westminster . . . Although you were heard by only a few people in England, 
you left behind you a great inspiration. If all the reformers in this country were 
as calmly valiant as you, a new hope would dawn in the minds of oppressed 
millions.’ But Jawaharlal knew that smiles, good humour and personal approval 
did not carry far. Even the members of the Labour Party, by and large, with all 
their theoretical dislike of imperialism, moved in its orbit and felt powerless 
to step out of it. It did not therefore seem possible to avoid conflict with the 
British, and all one could hope for was a little more civility in ordinary life and 
less brutality in battle. 3 So he was more at ease talking to intellectuals and 
literary figures than to politicians. The discerning account of Jawaharlal in 
London, provided by Leonard Woolf, makes this dear. 

I liked Nehru very much as a man; he was an intellectual of the intel¬ 
lectuals, on the surface gentle and sad. He had great charm and, though 

1 Even to this, however, there were exceptions. A. G. Fraser, principal of the Achimota College 
in what was then the Gold Coast, invited Jawaharlal to dinner at his dob. The secretary of the club 
objected to Jawaharlal appearing in the public dining room. Fraser resigned from the dub and 
arranged thedinner in a private room in a hotel. See Jawaharlal’s note to Secretary-Generfl, Ministry 
of External Affairs, 29 May 1994, Nehru papers. 

2 16 November 1935. 

3 Note on a visit to England, 22 February 1936. 



202 


JAWAHARLAt NEHRU 


there was a congenital aloofness about him, I had no difficulty in talking 
to him. It was a rather strange and inconclusive conversation. I had 
thought and still think that he had intended to discuss politics and, in 
particular, Imperial politics from the Labour'angle with me. And in a 
vague way we did talk politics, the problems of India and Ctylon; 
but it was pretty vague and somehow or other we slipped into talking 
about life and books rather than the fall of empire or empires . . .* 

The most lasting impression on Jawaharlal was made not by any Englishman 
but by Krishna Menon, whom he then met for the first time. 'He is very able 
and energetic and is highly thought of in intellectual, journalistic and left wing 
labour circles. He has the virtues and failings of the intellectual.’ 2 

However, it so happened that at Lausanne Jawaharlal met by chance Ben 
Bradley, who was also a patient at the dime, and Palme Dutt who had come 
to see Bradley. Palme Dutt and Jawaharlal spent three days together, and the 
British Communist found the ‘Professor’, as Jawaharlal was known in Comin¬ 
tern circles, very receptive. He agreed that the Congress was, on the whole, 
moving towards the right, but was himself willing to work in dose collabora¬ 
tion with the communists. He was not well read in Marxism but was persuaded 
of its validity and emotionally indined toward it. He also had a deep admiration 
for the achievements of the Soviet Union. Russia was the land of the future. 
‘With all its defects and mistakes and ruthlessness, it is taking visible, vital 
shape there, stumbling occasionally but ever marching forward.’ 3 He hoped 
that some variation of the political and economic systems prevalent in Russia 
would extend to India, but he was not prepared to have this by coercive methods. 
‘I do not want India to be drilled and forced into a certain position, because 
the costs of such drilling are too great; it is not worth while; it is not desirable 
from many points of view. ’ 4 Gvil liberties were to Jawaharlal of absolute value, 
and the communists had to reckon with this. Jawaharlal was not a MarxistJn 
the normal senseof the word. He accepted the Marxist interpretation of history 
and its vision of a classless society, but he certainly did not believe in revolu¬ 
tionary dictatorship. Conditioned under Gandhi, he hated violence even if he 
did not in theory reject it, and stood for democratic and peaceful though not for 
constitutional means. But with these reservations, Jawaharlal, according to 
Palme Dutt, promised that he would, as president of the Congress, do all he 
could to promote the Communist Party in India, and he even gave a series of 
specific undertakings as to what he would try to do. 9 

1 Downhill AU tba Way (London, 1967), pp. 230-32. 

J To Rajendra Prasad, 22 November 1935, Home Dept. Pol. File 1/2/36. 

‘Foreword toM. R. Masani's book Soviet Sidelights, 25 February 1936. 

‘Talk toihe Indian Conciliation Group in London, 4 February 1936, reprinted in India and tba 
World (LoTdon, 1936), p. 259- * 

‘Palme Dutt’s interview with the author, 20 November 1969. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


203 


The communists, of course, were now in a mood to co-operate with the 
Congress. In 1931 Jawaharlal, ‘a candidate well placed for becoming the Indian 
Kerensky’, 1 had been expelled from the League against Imperialism. ‘Jawaharlal 
Nehru’, ran the resolution, ‘has become traitor to the cause of the emancipa¬ 
tion of the people of India from the British imperialist yoke; it [the League] 
stigmatises his desertion to the camp of counter-revolution before the broad 
masses of India and expels him from its ranks,’ In subsequent years, as part of 
the policy of refusing to work with bourgeois nationalist parties, the com¬ 
munists had condemned him vehemently for his ‘left reformism’ and as one of 
‘the most dangerous enemies in the struggle for independence’. Bradley himself 
had criticized Jawaharlal for trying to stem the rising peasant movement with 
vague talk of socialism and communism. 2 But by the summer of 1933 there 
had been a shift in Soviet and international communist policy. The call was now 
for popular fronts. In India, said Dimitrov, speaking at the seventh congress 
of the Third International, the communists had to support, extend and parti¬ 
cipate in all anti-imperialist mass activities, not excluding those under national 
reformist leadership. The interview given by Jawaharlal over two years before, 
declaring that the choice lay between communism and fascism and he preferred 
the former, was now reported with approval. 3 

The details of what the communists hoped for from Jawaharlal in India can 
be discerned in an article by Palme Dutt and Bradley. 4 It was conceded that 
the Congress was the principal mass organization of diverse elements seeking 
national liberation in India: but it was not yet the united front of the Indian 
people. To achieve this, its constitution, programme and leadership would all 
have to be revised and strengthened. Workers’ and peasants’ unions and other 
such organizations should be brought into the joint struggle either in a united 
front or by collective affiliation to the Congress. The constitution of the Con¬ 
gress should be amended to permit such collective affiliation at the local, district, 
provincial and national levels, and joint bodies should be set up immediately. 
There should also be provision for greater initiative of the rank and file within 
the Congress in place of the hierarchical structure dominated by the Working 
Committee. Centralized direction was of course vital in a struggle; but it ought 
to be based not on personal dictatorship but on democratic centralism. The 
dogma of non-violence was a weakness which should be omitted from the Con¬ 
gress creed; but while a sharp ideological struggle should be conducted on this 
question, it was not so important that it should be allowed to split the national 
front. The elections should be fought jointly by the front in such a way as to 
provide sufficient representation for the left-wing elements and to enable the 
demands of the masses to be clearly expressed. The chief demand, the positive 

* Saperov in the Bolsbtvik in 1930, quoted in Druhe, op. cit., p. 303. 

* The Background in India', Labour Monthly, March 1934. 

9 IntemationalPress Correspondence, 4 January 1936. 

4 Palme Dutt and Bradley, The Anti-Imperialist People’s Front in India’, Labour MoMbly, March 
1936. 



204 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


slogan of the front, would be for a Constituent Assembly freely elected by uni 
versal suffrage. 

It is dear that this artide was written after the talks with Jawaharlal at 
Lausanne, and stated what Palme Dutt and Bradley bdieved to have been ac¬ 
cepted by Jawaharlal as the common programme for which he would strive. He 
was for a joint front against imperialism; indeed, he regarded the Congress under 
Gandhi as already in essence such a front which only required to be widened. 
He also continued to favour a Constituent Assembly; 1 and the communists, 
reversing their earlier condemnation of this idea, 2 now accepted this. But he was 
not ready to abandon Gandhi’s leadership or the method of non-violence. Quite 
apart from its ethical aspect, non-violence had helped to preserve India from 
civil conflict and to tone down indigenous opposition to the national movement. 
The concession in the article of Dutt and Bradley that, though non-violence was 
outmoded, its rejection was not a fundamental issue, was obviously made with 
Jawaharlal’s attitude in mind. Asfor Gandhi, as Palme Dutt reports it, 9 Jawahar¬ 
lal had confessed that he felt in his nature an aristocrat; he was sorry for the 
Indian people, it moved his heart to see them turn to him for guidance, but he 
lacked the common touch and could not get as close to them as Gandhi did, 
though even Gandhi was not of the masses. This, according to Jawaharlal, was 
the source of his tremendous deference to Gandhi; and his audience doubtless 
recognized that, by its very nature, it could not be set aside for intellectual 
reasons. There is corroborative evidence of this overwhelmingly emotional 
mood of Jawaharlal at this time. He condemned imperialism for its horrors, its 
indecency and vulgarity as much as for its exploitation, and appreciated Gandhi 
above all for the psychological transformation he had wrought in the Indian 
people. 4 In an article written at about this time in answer to Indian left-wing 
criticism of Gandhi, Jawaharlal contended that Gandhi had played a revolu¬ 
tionary role in India because he had reached the heart of the masses while groups 
with a more advanced ideology had functioned largely in the air. 9 

Now the Congress awaited Jawaharlal’s guidance. Till his return to India, 
no major decisions had been taken, and the party, as Gandhi described it, was 
'literally tacking’. 6 It was for Jawaharlal to end this policy of ‘non-action and 
non-thought’. 7 Meeting Gandhi and senior Congressmen before the session at 
Lucknow, Jawaharlal found considerable support for office acceptance; and 
he was isolated in the Working Committee. 8 But embarrassment to him was 
avoided by shelving any firm decision on an issue which would only arise after 

> Note on a Constituent Assembly for India, 25 February 1936. 

1 See Adhikari's thesis February 1934, Impncor, vol. 14, no. 40, 20 July 1934. 

* Interview with the author, 20 November 1969. 

* See his letters to Lord Lothian, 9 December 1935and 17 January 1936. 

*Mahatma Gandhi , 20 January 1936. 

•To Jawaharlal, 22 September 1935. , 

T To Rajeulra Prasad, 20 November 1935, Home Dept. Pol. 1/2/36. 

•To Sye&Mahmud, 5 May 1936. 

/ 



leading the party 

the elections. Meantime, reflecting Jawaharlal’s new ideas derived in Europe, 
the Working Committee agreed that it was desirable to develop closer associa¬ 
tion between the masses and the Congress organization so that they might take 
their full share in the shaping of Congress policy. It was also decided that the 
Congress constitution should be revised to make it a joint front of all anti- 
imperialist elements and enable closer co-operation with organizations of pea¬ 
sants and others. 1 These resolutions, along with that opposing India’s participa¬ 
tion in any imperialist war, jvere drafted by Jawaharlal and, as he wrote later, 
increased his confidence in himself. There was nothing very new in substance, 
but they hinted a new orientation, and generally a more emphatic and radical 
tone was adopted. 1 2 They also delighted the socialists; and the fact that 
Jawaharlal, though he abstained from formally joining the Congress Socialist 
Party, was ‘now a socialist in the full sense of the term,’ 3 gave the socialists 
great hopes of increasing their influence in the Congress. Jawaharlal might 
think that they themselves had not adequate support among the masses to talfp 
over the Congress organization, but he would certainly not allow the Congress 
to become a mere parliamentary body. The Congress was ‘in a rut due to idiotic 
ideas of certain people’, and it should be given a new direction by socialist 
permeation. 4 

However, it soon became clear that the socialists had overestimated both 
Jawaharlal’s influence as president and his commitment to them. There was 
not the faintest suspicion of socialism in any of the resolutions. Despite 
Jawaharlal’s open opposition the Subjects Committee approved of the Working 
Committee’s resolution discarding proportional representation in elections to 
Congress offices, thus eliminating any chances the socialists might have; and 
this was only set right by the full session of the Congress. 5 He spoke in favour 
of non-acceptance of office, for the revolutionary as against the reformist 
mentality, but would not support the socialist amendments committing the 
Congress to this position because of his desire to prevent a split. 6 Jawaharlal 
clutched at the avoidance of a decision in his own mind and in the party. He 
believed that, while making his own position dear, he should not push the issue 
to breaking-point. He had been long away, cither in prison or abroad; the 
hunger for office had grown among his colleagues and could not be just wished 
off the scene; and Gandhi, though out of tune with this mood, was unwilling 
to battle with it. Jawaharlal could, in the future, use the office of president to 

1 Resolutions to be placed before the Lucknow Congress, The Bombay Chronicle, 26 March and 
8 April 1936. 

*DSVA,pp. 40-41. 

* Message to the AlMndia Socialist Conference at Meerut, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 January 
1936. 

4 See the report of the viewpoint of socialist leaders at Lucknow, The Bombay Chronicle, 6 April 
1936. 

* The Bombay Chronicle, 11 and 14 April 1936. 

6 Tbe Tribune, 12 April 1936. 



206 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


strengthen the radical forces and win the party round, but a direct collision at 
this stage held no hope of success. To seek satisfaction merely in brave ideas 
was the way of facile intellectual opportunism. The true socialist was no 
armchair politician but a man of action, utilizing his philosophy and scientific 
outlook for achievement. The immediate task was the elections, anti this could 
be used to widen the base of the national movement and develop mass contacts. 
Indeed, the only thing to be said in favour of the 1935 Act was that it created 
a wider electorate. To divide the Congress at this stage on a remote issue and 
weaken its prospects at the polls seemed foolish tactics. Jawaharlal did not 
face up to the fact that electoral success and the opportunity of forming 
ministries would in themselves further weaken the position of those in the 
party of his way of thinking. It would have been far easier to secure a commit¬ 
ment to non-acceptance when the lure of office was not immediate. Postpone¬ 
ment, by the very nature of the situation, transferred the advantage to the 
other side. 

In his presidential address Jawaharlal, as was now to be expected of him, 
analysed the world situation and India’s place in it. Two vast groups faced 
each other; decaying capitalism, imperialist and fascist, on the one hand and 
the progressive forces, socialist and nationalist. On the other. British im¬ 
perialism in India also, though still powerful, was showing signs of decay and, 
in its desire to hold on, was developing an increasingly fascist mentality. 
The growing intensity of repression required no elaboration, but worthy of 
special mention was the tremendous deprivation of civil liberties. All this only 
steeled Jawaharlal to a greater resolve to end this infamy and to have nothing 
to do with those willing to compromise with such a rule. But in the national 
movement itself there was a spirit of disunion, a malaise, a stress on petty, 
internal conflicts. Middle-class leadership was inevitable, but it easily tired if 
it did not draw strength and inspiration from the masses. The Congress should 
be not only for the masses but of the masses; only then would it really be for the 
masses 

So Jawaharlal argued for the forming of new links which would permit the 
growth of mass consciousness within the Congress, and the revision of the party 
constitution for this purpose. The real problem was to join together all the anti¬ 
imperialist forces in the country, to forge a broad front comprising the mass 
elements as well as the great majority of the middle classes. The primary com¬ 
mittees should be made living organizations, as in the account of Soviet Russia 
given by the Webbs, and organizations of producers such as trade unions and 
peasant associations should be affiliated to the Congress or brought into full 
co-operation withit. The Congress could have a corporate as well as an individual 
membership. There was no near prospect of direct action or civil disobedience, 
and the elections could be used to carry the message of the Congress to the people. 
The removal of social and economic burdens and the convening of a Constituent 
Assembl y to frame a constitution formed the minimum programme, and these 



LEADING THE PARTY 


207 


could not come through the Government of India Act or the legislatures con¬ 
stituted under it. To accept office under the Act which they had rejected was to 
stand self-condemned, to slide back to static futility and revive the old sterile 
creed of reformism. National honour and self-respect could not accept this 
position, for it would inevitably mean co-operation in some measure with the 
repressive apparatus of imperialism and partnership in the exploitation of the 
Indian people. The price of office acceptance was surrender. It would be a 
descent into a pit from which the Congress would find it difficult to come out. 
The sole purpose of entering the provincial assemblies should be to create 
deadlocks so as to kill the proposals for federation and make the working of the 
Act impossible. 

The address had been written on 31 March, when Jawaharlal had not known 
for certain the strength of feeling in the party in favour of office acceptance. 
That he should have stuck to the written text even after he had virtually been 
voted down showed courage; but it also made dear how wide a gulf stretched 
between the president and his followers. The speech, as a whole, mirrored the 
contradictions in Jawaharlal’s outlook and the weaknesses of his political posi¬ 
tion. He affirmed his Marxist approach, his recognition of the Indian problem 
as a part of the world problem of capitalist imperialism. The laws of historical 
development had to be grasped to realize the organic connection of events and 
changes. “Let us try to develop the historic sense so that we can view current 
events in proper perspective and understand their real significance.’ The only 
key to the solution of the world’s problems, and of India’s problems, lay in 
socialism, ’and when I use this word I do so not in a vague humanitarian way but 
in the scientific, economic sense.’ But immediatdy, in the very next sentence, 
he moved away from the precise Marxist attitude. ’Socialism is, however, some¬ 
thing even more than an economic doctrine; it is a philosophy of life and as such 
also it appeals to me.’It was not merely the ending of poverty, of vested interests 
and private property, but a change in instincts and habits and desires, a new 
civilization such as was being fashioned in Soviet Russia. But it was not just a 
communist utopia, modelled on the Russian example and to be achieved by any 
means. The socialist approach in India would have to be adapted to the Indian 
conditions and speak in the language of the country. Socialism was to Jawaharlal 
more a tendency than a definable body of doctrine. He was always critical of 
the Indian communists for their imprisonment within the walls of dogma and 
for their rigid adherence to the Soviet example. ’For you,’ he frequently told 
them, ‘history begins with 1917.’ There was much that had happened in the 
Soviet Union which pained Jawaharlal greatly and he avoided the word com¬ 
munism because in the general understanding it signified Soviet Russia. He 
was a libertarian Marxist, whose idea of socialism encompassed at every stage 
a large and irreducible measure of civil liberty. A belief in democracy was the 
coreoi his socialist attitude. He rejected any mechanical view of human nature 
and looked forward to a socialist society which, by removing economic and social 



JAWAHARLAL NfiHRU 


20 # 

inhibitions and obstacles, would provide greater scope for individuality. It was 
this understanding of socialism which underlay his presidential address; and 
immediately after the Congress session he established an Indian Civil Liberties 
Union on non-party lines, with members of all shades of political opinion and 
even from outside politics. What was happening in many parts of India was 
beyond the limits of ‘common decency’ and it was the duty of every public- 
spirited citizen to protest. For when civil liberties were suppressed a nation lost 
all vitality and became impotent for anything substantial. 1 

The details of his programme for action were also not framed wholly to please 
the socialists, let alone the Marxists and communists. He made it clear that he 
would not, as president, seek to impose socialism on the Congress, even though 
it ‘is a vital creed which I hold with all my head and heart’. He would like the 
Congress to become a socialist organization but he accepted that the majority 
in the party were not prepared to go that far; and he would not force the issue 
on what was basically a nationalist organization and thereby create difficulties 
in the struggle for independence. Socialism was to him a personal matter; he 
therefore saw no role for himself in the Congress Socialist Party; and as president 
of the Congress Party he would, without compromising his beliefs, function as 
a political leader, leading the niajority the way it wanted to go. He cast himself 
in the mould of Blanqui: ‘I am their leader, therefore I must follow them.’ And, 
above all, he had no intention, as he had made clear in Europe to Bradley and 
Palme Dutt, of moving away from Gandhi; and the address ended with the 
customary paean to him. 

It is true that Jawaharlal advocated the two chief proposals now being com¬ 
mended by the communists — the formation of a joint anti-imperialist front, 
and the affiliation to the Congress of trade and peasant unions. This gave the 
Communist Party much satisfaction. ‘In his presidential address Nehru’s anti¬ 
imperialist voice stammered on some vital points yet it was full-throated on 
several others, it was a clearer anti-imperialist call than had ever been made from 
the Congress chair. ’ 2 But even here the implementation was to be very different 
from what the communists expected. Jawaharlal’s idea of a joint front was not 
solely an alliance of the Congress with political organizations ideologically to the 
left of it. He was thinking as much of the Congress drawing to its side groups 
which were more conservatively inclined, as at the time of the boycott of the 
Simon Commission in 1928, and spoke of it as seeking to become 'an All-Parties 
Conference in permanent session’.* He was willing to co-operate with anybody, 
irrespective of ideology, who was opposed to imperialism; and within a few days 
of the Lucknow session he beganr negotiations with Pandit Malaviya, whose 


‘Speech at Allahabad, 11 May, The Bombay Chronicle, 12 May and talk in Bombay, The Bombay 
Chronicla, 18 May 1936. 

Statement of the Politbureau of die Central Committee of the Communist Party of India, 24 
July 1936b 

*Speedj it Bombay, Tbs Bombay Chronicle, 19 May 1936. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


209 


outlook in politics was frankly communal, for an electoral alliance with his 
Nationalist Party. 1 Jawaharlal’s general indifference to communal issues and 
his belief that they would be submerged once the emphasis was shifted to 
economic matters affecting the common people enabled him to ignore the 
communal tinge in organizations which were otherwise opposed to the British 
and were prepared to join him in the campaign for civil liberties. As for the 
affiliation of peasant and worker associations, this was watered down by the 
Working Committee to the constitution of a small committee to consider the 
promotion of closer contacts between the Congress and the masses; and this 
in turn became the need to grant greater responsibilities to the primary com¬ 
mittees of the Congress so as to make them living bodies. 2 

So left-wing forces had cause to be disappointed with the Lucknow Congress. 
Jawaharlal’s speech was heart-warming, and his personal standing in the party 
and the country was second only to that of Gandhi. But he had not even sought 
to assert thestrengthof his position. He had, at the end of the session, considered 
resignation and informed the delegates that having sat on a high pedestal for 
three days he was now going back to oblivion. But he later decided not to precip- 
>r:atc matters. So it was the ‘old guard’ which had been successful. It had been, 
as Satyamurti, the Congressman from Madras, gloated, the triumph of 
Gandhism over socialism. 3 G. D. Birla crowed: 4 

Mahatmaji kept his promise and without his uttering a word, he saw 
that no new commitments were made. Jawaharlalji’s speech in a way was 
thrown into the waste paper basket because all the resolutions that were 
passed were against the spirit of his speech ... He could have caused a 
split by resigning but he did not... Jawaharlalji seems to be like a typical 
English,democrat who takes defeat in a sporting spirit. He seems to be out 
for giving expression to his ideology, but he realises that action is impos¬ 
sible and so does not press for it. 

As Gandhi himself observed in a letter 5 which was seen by Jawaharlal, their 
ways were different and Gandhi accepted hardly any of Jawaharlal’s methods. 
He would strain every nerve to avoid a class war; so perhaps would Jawaharlal 
but he did not think it possible to avoid it. ‘But though Ik is extreme 
in his presentation of his methods, he is sober in action ... Whatever he does, 
he will do it nobly. Though the gulf between us as to the outlook upon life has 
undoubtedly widened, we have never been so near each other in hearts as perhaps 
we are today.’ 

1 Letter to M. M. Malaviya, 20 April, and statement to the press, 22 June 1936. 

2 Circular to prov. cong. Committees, 14 May 1936. 

’ The Bombay Chronicle , 16 April 1936. 

4 To Purushottamdas Thakurdag, 20 April 1936. Purushottamdas Thakurdas papery File 177. 
N.M.M.L. Emphasis in original. 

*To Agatha Harrison, 30 April 1936. 



210 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Jawaharlal consolidated the victory of his exponents by selecting, out of 
fourteen members of the Working Committee, no less than ten who disagreed 
with him, disapproved of socialism and were inclined towards office acceptance. 
Subhas Bose was in prison; and only three members, Narendra Deva, Jaya- 
prakash Narayan and Achyut Patwardhan, were socialists. Even they owed 
their appointment not to Jawaharlal but to Gandhi, who thought these socialists 
would be useful in weakening the support which the terrorists commanded 
among the younger generation; and these three were selected on the ground 
that they were socially acceptable.* Jawaharlal thought it vulgar and inappro¬ 
priate to thrust his views, however deeply held, on a party in which he and his 
followers were in a minority, and created for himself what was in many ways the 
role of an ineffective president. Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, devoted to Jawaharlal and 
sharing his views but not a member of the Socialist Party, was expected to replace 
Acharya Kripalani of the right wing as general secretary; he was not even 
included in the Committee. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, the only member of the old 
Working Committee who had on occasions joined Jawaharlal in opposing office 
acceptance, was now dropped. Nor, surprisingly, was any woman included. The 
three socialist members realized that they would have little influence in the 
Committee, but agreed to serve out of personal loyalty to Jawaharlal. 2 

Powerful as the presidential address was as an attack on imperialism, the 
Government felt that they would be unable to sustain a prosecution on it. In 
the months that followed, while Jawaharlal toured the country addressing 
scores of meetings and ‘simultaneously carrying on war at various fronts’, 3 the 
authorities, regarding him as ‘a potential danger of the first magnitude’, 4 
followed him round with their notebooks seeking carefully but in vain for any 
statement that would justify his arrest and ensure a long sentence. Instead, 
they had to console themselves with the thought that his preaching of socialism 
was weakening the Congress and this would be reflected in the elections. 5 
‘Indeed we should keep him in cotton wool and pamper him, for he is unwittingly 
smashing the Congress organization fiom the inside.’ 6 This hope was again 
to be belied. But the Government were right to the extent that his speeches 
frightened jnany in the Congress and outside. He started what was virtually 
a country-wide election campaign in Bombay with a bang. The Congress was 
contesting the elections and entering the assemblies in order to combat the 
Act and render it unworkable. As to how this should be done, there was as yet 
no agreement; but he himself was convinced that acceptance of office would 
weaken their movement. The first and immediate issue was political, the 

Author's interview with Achyut Patwardhan, 3 April 1970. 

1 See statement of the executive committee of the Congress Socialist Party, 16 April, The Bombay 
Chronic la, 17 April 1936. 

’To Ellen Wilkinson, 13 June 1936. 

4 Home Secretary to all Local Govts.. 19 August 1936, Home Dept. Pol File 4/13/36. 

’Home f <ept. Pol. Files 4/4,4/6,4/14,4/13,4/23,4/32 and 4/34 to 4/96 of 1936. 

‘G error of Madras to Horne Member, 20 April 1936, Home Dept. Pol. File 4/6/36. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


211 


development of a revolutionary mentality for the attainment of independence. 
He believed that socialism was inevitable for the solution of India's prime 
problem of poverty and degradation but he had no wish to force the issue. If he 
talked about it now, it was solely to educate the people so that they would be in 
a better position to decide when the issue came up. Socialism — and here Jawa- 
harlal’s divergence from the communists was dear — could not be imposed on 
India. Violence was abominable to him and he hoped that socialism would be 
attained with the support of the vast majority and the least harm to anyone. 
Compensation should be paid, though not in full, at least partially, to propertied 
and vested interests. However, there might be upheavals if resistance to eco¬ 
nomic progress developed, and he doubted if the rich in India were wise enough 
to avoid this . 1 

Such unhesitant exposition of his intellectual and emotional commitment to 
the socialist ideal naturally roused resentment. Bombay was the heart of ‘big 
business’ and there were reactive tremors to ‘the storm of communism ’ 2 that 
was passing over the city. Twenty-one leading businessmen issued a manifesto 
condemning Jawaharlal’s ‘destructive and subversive programme’ which, ac¬ 
cording to them, would create disorders and impede the achievement of self- 
government . 3 Jawaharlal’s reply was vigorous. 

I have hardly mentioned socialism except incidentally, but I have laid 
stress on the amazing poverty of our people, the vast unemployment of 
our peasants and workers and middle class, on the progressive deteriora¬ 
tion of all classes except the handful at the top. That has been my sin in 
the eyes of that handful. But that is the only future that comes before my 
eyes when I think of India. I cannot rid myself of it, try as I may. It is not 
a pleasant picture. I do not like it, and as I see it, sometimes my blood 
freezes within me and sometimes it boils with indignation that such things 
should be . 4 

He accused Indian capitalists of creating Indian fascism, which was the ally 
of British imperialism. Their attack on his socialist views was merely a facade 
for attacking the Congress and the national movement. As the Congress be¬ 
came increasingly a lower-middle-class and mass organization, the upper strata 
of Indian society were drawing closer to the foreign rulers. As the struggle for 
freedom grew more intense, one was either for or against; there was no room 
for third parties or a middle course. Indian capitalists had supported the Govern¬ 
ment in seeking to repress civil disobedience and break the boycott. They had 
defended the ordinances, they had reached agreements with foreign textile 
interests and they had sent their representatives to those sessions of the Round 

■ ‘Speeches end statements at Bombay, The Bombay Chronicle, 16 and ‘a Mmv 1 <HA 
2 Sir Cowasji Jehangir in The Bombay Chronicle, 28 May 1936. 

* Manifesto of the 21', The Tribune, 20 May 1936. 

« Reply to Critics!, The Tribune, 9 June 1936. 



212 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Table Conference which had been shunned by the Congress. For them to speak 
now of their share in the national movement and of his weakening it was there¬ 
fore an impertinence . 1 

The more intelligent among the businessmen realized that to promote a 
public debate with Jawaharlal was to invite humiliation. ‘You have rendered 
no service to your caste men. It is curious how we businessmen are so short¬ 
sighted . . . It looks very crude for a man with property to say that he is opposed 
to expropriation in the wider interest of the country .’ 2 It would be obviously 
far more effective to strengthen the opposition to Jawaharlal within the Con¬ 
gress. Jawaharlal had been unfair to the Indian capitalist class in castigating 
them as allies of the British imperialists. Though heavily dependent on them, 
the Indian capitalists had not been their junior partners. They had, on the other 
hand, supported the non revolutionary, right-wing elements in the anti¬ 
imperialist camp; 3 and they now looked to these men to deal with Jawaharlal. 
They left it to Vallabhbhai Patel and others to remind the president of the party 
that he represented a very small section of minority opinion and had no mandate 
to make such a severe onslaught on the ideological hegemony of propertied 
interests. Patel, Rajendra Prasad and Rajagopalachari objected as strongly to 
Jawaharlal’s speeches in Bombay as any of the capitalists , 4 and appealed to the 
grand master Gandhi, who called on Jawaharlal for an explanation. They could 
not openly object to his crusade for socialism, but they criticized his under¬ 
rating of khaddar and his suggestion that the responsibility for not including 
women in the Working Committee was not his. Jawaharlal replied that, though 
technically he was responsible for the decision, the Committee as it took shape 
was not of his making; and Gandhi retorted that he was not satisfied with the 
answer . 5 Yet, on the main issue, Jawaharlal was unrepentant; and he toured 
the Punjab making the same points with equal vehemence. The political battle 
for independence was the first priority, but after freedom was won, socialism 
was bound to come. ‘The whole economic structure will crash and there will be 
upheavals which no human power can avert, the capitalist system will go and 
along with it the British Empire, this is how I visualise the happenings of the 
next ten years .’ 6 

The public response was enthusiastic. ‘I am being attacked and criticized’, 
wrote Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon , 7 ‘by a variety of people, Big Business, Lib¬ 
erals, Responsivists, some Congressmen and of course our beloved Government. 

1 Speeches and interviews, The Bombay Chronicle, 19,20,21 and 23 May 1936. 

*G. D. Birla to Walchand Hirachand, one of the signatories of the manifesto, 26 May 1936. 
Purushottamdas Thakurdas papers, File 177. 

} See Bipan Chandra, ‘The Indian capitalist class and imperialism before 1947" (1972). 

4 See Vallabhbhai Patel to Rajendra Prasad, 29 May 1936, Maharashtra Govt, records—inter¬ 
cepted letters. 

’ Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 25 May and Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 29 May 1936. 

6 Speech at Lahore, 2 June, The Tribune, 3 June 1936. 

7 18 Jujf'e 1936. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


2 n 


And yet behind all this lies the fact that wherever I go I get a prodigious Welcome 
and the response is such that it puts out the critics. It is a tiring business to carry 
on warson numerous fronts and there are few to help. But Icarryon. The process 
is not without its exhilaration.' But at Wardha, when the Working Committee 
met in the first week of July, Jawaharlal was plainly rebuked by Gandhi and the 
others. Rajendra Prasad, on behalf of the right wing, wrote to Jawaharlal 
criticizing him severely and the latter offered to resign and submit the dispute 
to the AICC for discussion. Today there is no loyalty of the spirit which binds 
our group together. It is a mechanical group and on either side there is a sense of 
suppression and that, as every student of psychology knows, results in all 
manner of undesirable complexes, both individual and social.’ But Gandhi 
pulled him up for arrogance, intolerance and lack of a sense of humour. 'You 
are in office by their unanimous choice but you are not in power yet. To put you 
in office was an attempt to find you in power quicker than you would otherwise 
have been.’ Jawaharlal should therefore cease wrangling and the 'tragi-comedy’ 
he was playing and not destroy himself by moving openly into opposition . 1 

Jawaharlal meekly submitted and publicly acknowledged his responsibility 
for the exclusion of women from the Committee . 2 Objection having also been 
taken to his appointment of young socialists in the AICC office, his enthusiasm 
for building up the central office was checked. His speeches also were thereafter 
all in a lower key, and lacked, as Jayakar gleefully reported to Sapru, 'the trium¬ 
phant freshness * 3 of his earlier performances. He now gave greater emphasis 
to the part which the Congress had played in involving the peasants in the national 
movement, and made claims for the party and its leader which he himself could 
not have seriously believed. The Congress was not, ol course, socialistic, but 
it no longer ignored economic issues; and whenever a conflict of interests 
emerged it was always willing to sacrifice the interests which clashed with 
those of the masses. The socialist outlook, which the Congress had been stress¬ 
ing since Gandhi took it over, helped in the political struggle by clearing the 
issues and strengthening the role of the masses. These bore reserves of power 
and a deep unrest, a hunger that gnawed and required satisfaction; and it was 
because the Congress promised to provide the satisfaction that the people came 
in their thousands to hear its leaders. No socialist imagined that socialism 
could have any place in India before political freedom had been established. 
Indeed, no longer stressing the inevitability of socialism, Jawaharlal accepted 
that after independence socialism could come only if India were ripe for it and 
the great majority of people desired it. Those who believed in socialism could 
not assume an attitude, of superior knowledge and make of themselves a sect 
apart. Their correct understanding of history and of social change was not 

1 Jawaharlal to Gandhi, 5 July 1936; Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 8 July, 13 July and 30 July 1936. 

2 Tb» Bombay Cbronicl*, 7 July 1936. 

9 8 July 1936, Sapru papers. 



214 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


enough; they had to justify themselves in other ways and seek to win over to 
their way of thinking others in the Congress and the country at large. 1 

If Jawaharlal gave way to the pressure of the right wing, it could not have been 
for the personal reasons which Gandhi elaborated. By now Jawaharlal was as 
indispensable to the Congress as the party was to him. He commanded, even 
before his election tours gave him a wide popular appeal, the support of large 
sections of radical youth who, but for him, would have left the Congress for left- 
wing parties. Even the Congress Socialist Party might have broken away from 
the parent body. Throughout India there were men and women who, along with 
nationalist feeling, had developed a conscience on economic matters, who saw 
in Jawaharlal the spokesman of their viewpoint, and who, because of him, 
followed the lead of the Congress even if they did not belong to it. He was, 
too, the only Indian politician who had an international audience, and it was 
he who secured for the party recognition on the world stage. Had Jawaharlal, 
therefore, insisted in the summer of 1936 on resigning the presidency, it 
is difficult to believe that Gandhi and his followers would have been short¬ 
sighted enough to let him do so. But it was not just that it did not lie in 
Jawaharlal’s nature to precipitate such a conflict and to safeguard his political 
chastity at the price of weakening the nationalist organization. The psycholo¬ 
gical hankering to follow Gandhi and the ingrained loyalty to the party were only 
part of the explanation. Jawaharlal knew that there was no working-class leader¬ 
ship or even an alternative elite leadership available; and so long as this was 
the case, it would be disastrous to weaken the Congress. And, as ever, his col 
leagues took advantage of this. 

Meantime, as the mimic war of the elections drew nearer, Jawaharlal gave 
it increasing attention. The election manifesto of the Congress, largely drafted 
by him, 2 rejected the Act of 1935 and the Communal Award that went with it. 
The only purpose of sending Congressmen to the legislatures was to seek to 
end the Act; but how this was to be done, and whether office should be accepted 
or not, would be considered after the elections. The economic programme of 
the Congress remained in essence the resolution on fundamental rights passed at 
Karachi: land reforms, reduction of rent and revenue and an equitable adjust¬ 
ment of the burden on agricultural land, and reasonable standards of living 
and of working conditions for industrial labour. Jawaharlal excluded any reflec¬ 
tion in the manifesto of socialist doctrine. His weakness he justified to himself 
by the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War and the rapid drive to a world war 
which made it all the more necessary to see the Indian problem in perspective 
as part of the world struggle and concentrate on the fight against imperialism. 
Before criticizing him, it should be remembered that the socialist members of 
the Working Committee also raised no objection to the manifesto and did not 
seek to include in it such objectives as the abolition of landlordism or the 

1 Article! on ‘Congress and Socialism', The Bombay Chronicle, 20 and 31 July 1936; statement on 
the Punja| peasantry, 12 August, The Tribune , 13 August 1936. 

2 See AICC File G 71 of 1936. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


215 


nationalization of key industries. On the other hand, Narendra Deva was 
delighted with the manifesto, which had been revised overnight by Jawaharlal 
as desired by Narendra Deva himself, 1 and he commended it to the AICC as 
a revolutionary and not a reformist document. 2 

Jawaharlal’s right-wing colleagues were naturally elated. ‘I was charmed’, 
wrote Rajagopalachari to Gandhi, who had not been present at the Working 
Gommittee session which ratified this document, ‘with the manner in which 
Jawaharlalji got through the Working Gommittee. All the business was done 
exceedingly well and everyone was pleased.' Vallabhbhai Patel was equally 
satisfied. 

We have been getting on beautifully this time. The smooth and harmo¬ 
nious working reminds me most forcibly of the Working Gommittee 
meetings before 1932. It has been more like a gathering of family mem¬ 
bers than a formal committee meeting. We have just finished and within 
half an hour the AIGG will meet. The manifesto was prepared and passed 
almost unanimously all co-operating with the utmost confidence and 
trust. I cannot speak too highly of Jawaharlal. He has done wonderful 
work, and has been burning the candle at both ends. We found not the 
slightest difficulty in co-operating with him and adjusting ourselves to 
his views on certain points. I have an impression that he is also satisfied. 3 

% 

Whether, as claimed, Jawaharlal was equally satisfied is doubtful. But he 
made no public grievance of the clipping of his wings. If he realized that, though 
he was president, he was being steadily forced to continue the retreat which 
had begun at Lucknow, he did not disclose it even to his closest friends and 
threw all his energies into the winning of the elections. This was the first of 
his national campaigns, covering the Indian village network by train, plane, 
car, bicycle, cart and steamer, on horse, dephant and camel, and on foot. Once 
he even ran for half a mile to reach a meeting-place, the crowd following him. 4 
On another occasion the audience was so packed that he had to walk on their 
shoulders, and later fdt ashamed for having done so with his shoes on. 5 But 
such actions had little effect on his popularity. His frequent losses of temper 
were short-lived and patently without malice. 6 There was a degree of sponta¬ 
neity and aggressive vitality in his behaviour which, combined with his ‘actor’s 
presence', endeared him to the people. 

‘See his article, 'Favourite of Fortune', in Nehru Abbinandan Grantb, pp. 108-9. 

*Tbe Tribune, 23 August 1936. 

J Letters to Gandhi communicated to Jawaharlal by Mahadeva Desai, 26 August 1936, AICC File 
G 85(1) of 1936. 

4 The Bombay Chronicle, 26 January 1937. 

* Lai Bahadur Shastri’s article in Zakaria, A Study of Nehru, pp. 150- 51. 

6 Francis Watson provides an eye-witness account of %uch an occasion at the Congress session in 
1939. ‘As though toensure that I should not overlook the item, my neighbour in one cithe prelimi¬ 
nary ses s i on s , some three or four rows from the front, heckled the platform in a yescendo of 



216 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Day after day the programme began at dawn and went on till late at night, 
and on one occasion without a break for twenty-four hours. He drew strength 
from the bain de multitude, made himself receptive to the impressions and 
thoughts roused by the thousands he met as well as by the diverse contexts in 
India, and yet snatched the odd hour to read Huxley’s Eyeless in Gaza and live 
for a while another life. ’It is an exhausting business and yet I find a strange 
relief in it from the politics of committees and individuals. I seem to feel a little 
nearer to reality and I suppose the enthusiasm and the crowds cheer me up.’ 1 
His speeches were impersonal, with little reference to individual candidates. 
He talked about the common problems of the Indian people — poverty, debt, 
foreign rule — made them think of India as a whole, explained the party 
manifesto, and promised nothing except unceasing struggle till freedom was 
won. He spoke in simple terms but treated his audience as mature. Many of 
them were little interested in &11 this, and came merely to see for themselves 
the god-like figure of whom they had heard so much. Gandhi was one of them, 
but Jawaharlal was the glamorous prince. Yet in the eyes of a few there was a 
responsive gleam. A British official, reporting to his superiors, has given a vivid 
description of Jawaharlal on these tours. 

In spite of his unattractive Congress dress and cap the Pandit looked a 
thorough gentleman and an impressive figure. He is about the only good- 
looking Indian as I have seen in a Congress cap and appears sturdy and 
vigorous. He used no notes whilst he was talking and did not wear 
spectacles. He has a good deep voice and rams home his arguments merely 
by working his right forearm. He does not ’intone’ like so many Indian 
public speakers, but at the same time addresses his audience in rather a 
scolding manner. He certainly does not go out of his way to flatter them. 

It is easy for a European to follow his Hindustani, partly because he uses 
simple words and phrases, and partly because he talks it with what I can 
only describe as an English accent .. The Pandit is by far the most 
attractive public speaker whom I have heard in India, and there is no doubt 
that his manliness, frankness and reputation for sacrifice attracts a large 
public. 2 

It was obviously senseless to make a change in the Congress presidency 

Panditji-baiting questions until Panditji, projecting himself from the dais like a rocket and 
landing more or less in my lap, shrivelled the offender with his wrath, demanded his pass, tore it up 
and in seconds cast the whole meeting into uproar. When 1 crawled out under a collapsed corner of 
the canvas, the Congress volunteers in their blue shorts v'ere still trying to tranquillize the shouting 
tangle of patriots. It was some hours later that 1 had a chance of talking to Nehru alone and enquired 
the cause of the disturbance. He gave me a puzzled frown, “What disturbance?" he asked, and we 
passed to other matters.* Tba Trial of Mr. Gandhi (London, 1969), p. 21. 

> To Agatha Harrison, 3*September 1936. ^ 

2 Report ofi he District Magistrate, Multan, after hearing Jawaharlal on 28 July 1936, Home Dept. 



LEADING THE PARTY 


217 


in the middle of the campaign, and Jawaharlal was re-elected to preside over the 
Congress session at Faizpur in December 1936. He reiterated in his address what 
were by now familiar views — that the primary issue was political freedom, that 
socialism helped to analyse the situation and provided the only future solution 
to economic problems, and that the Indian.struggle was but part of a titanic 
conflict which gripped the world. He felt the latter even more strongly than 
before, for the civil war in Spain which had broken out since the Congress 
last met, was to Jawaharlal, as to so many intellectuals in the West, a matter 
of personal involvement. But on the, other hand, deep in the throes of election¬ 
eering, he tended to give less urgency to socialism. It was world peace and free 
democracy in India which were now the prime objectives. 1 But his colleagues in 
the Congress had little time for these visions. They were concerned solely with 
the polls and what would follow. Jawaharlal repeated that the Congress was 
contesting the elections in order to rally the masses and not in search of con¬ 
stitutionalism or a barren reformism; to him the cornerstone of Congress policy 
was still the demand for a Constituent Assembly. The Act had to be wrecked 
so that they could write on a clean slate, but this could be done not so much by 
action within the assemblies as by mass struggle. 

The long tirade against office acceptance, however, was not taken seriously 
by the audience. Jawaharlal was a useful standard-bearer, whose energy, eloqu¬ 
ence and popularity were assets in winning votes. These the Congress party- 
managers exploited, without paying much heed to his ideas, which could be 
defeated after the polling was over. The token protest of a hartal on 1 April, 
when the new Act would come into force, had little meaning. More signi¬ 
ficant was the decision to summon a convention of all Congressmen who had 
been elected. Jawaharlal might regard it as a preparation for a Constituent 
Assembly, 2 while the Viceroy was convinced that the object was to improve 
Congress discipline as a prelude to refusal of office and preparation for civil 
disobedience. 3 Both were credulous. Though called ostensibly to consider how 
to refuse to work the Act, any such convention of legislators could be expected 
todisplay an eagerness for office; and to summon such a meeting was to promote 
a decision to that effect. Indeed, the magnitude of the triumph of the Congress 
at the polls, a victory for which no single individual had been more responsible 
than Jawaharlal, strengthened the forces against him. The Congress had con¬ 
tested 1,161 of the 1,585 seats and won 716. It had a clear majority in 6 of the 
11 provinces and was the largest single party in three others. 

Jawaharlal believed that there had been a change in Congress thinking since 
the Lucknow session. Then, acceptance of office was a dead certainty: now, it 

‘Presidential address at Faizpur, December 1936, reprinted in Eighteen Months in Mia, 
pp. 72-98. 

a President's circular to all provincial Congress committees, 2 January 1937. 

’Linlithgow to Zetland, 15 February 1937, Zetland papers. LO.L Mss. Eur. D 609, »ol. {4. 



218 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


seemed a very doubtful proposition. ‘Tiy to imagine’, he wrote to Krishna 
Menon, 1 who, living in London, was critical of Jawaharlal’s failure to suppress 
the ‘hobnobbing with ministerialism’. ‘what the human materia] is in India. 
How they think, how they act, what moves them, what does not affect them. It 
is easy enough to take up a theoretically correct attitude which has little effect 
on anybody. We have to do something much more important and difficult, and 
that is to move large numbers of people, to make them act, and to do all this 
without breaking up the Congress. I must say that the results of the last six 
months have been quite extraordinary.’ But to his chagrin, immediately after 
the declaration of the resuhs many Congressmen thought and spoke in terms 
of ministries. The ostensible objective of contesting the elections, wrecking 
the Act, was hardly remembered, lost in arguments about the spoils of office. 
Such behaviour seemed to him not merely an abdication of purpose but so 
foolish and lacking in self-respect and political sense that he took hold of the 
debate in the U.P. and forced through a resolution in the provincial Congress 
committee against acceptance of office. Then, moving to Delhi for the crucial 
meetings of the Working Committee and the convention of legislators, he 
asserted that what the electors had said was in effect, ‘To hell with this Con¬ 
stitution.’ 2 In the presidential speech for the convention, drafted and made 
public well in advance, he argued that the electors had given notice to British 
imperialism to quit, and the Act should therefore ‘go, lock, stock and barrel, 
and leave the field dear for our Constituent Assembly’. Till such an Assembly 
met there could be nothing but conflict and struggle, and the narrow issue of 
office acceptance hardly arose. To co-operate was to submit to imperialist 
dictation and to share the odium of exploitation. 3 

Gandhi’sown inclination was to support Jawaharlal, but he responded to the 
overwhelming mood of the party. The Working Committee described the resul ts 
of the elections as a condemnation and rejection of the Act, impressed on all 
Congressmen that the fundamental policy of the party was to combat and seek to 
end the Act, and then, without a trace of logic or embarrassment, authorized 
acceptance of office if the leaders of the party in the assemblies were satisfied 
that while the ministries acted within the constitution the Governors would 
not interfere. M. N. Roy was at this time Jawaharlal’s neighbour in Delhi, and 
his record of Jawaharlal’s reaction has the ring of truth. 

On the third day, late in the afternoon, he walked in and threw himself 
on the bed, a broken man, nearly on the point of ciying. ‘I must resign’ he 
said. I enquired, ‘Why? Have they rejected your draft?’ ‘No,’ he exclaimed 
in impotent rage; ‘they have accepted the whole damn thing, supple- 

'*28 September 1936. 

2 Speech at Delhi, The Bombay Chronicle, 15 March 1937. * 

. * f r f , J , ^ nti “ ,addr «' s « All-India Congress legislators convention, March 1937, Eighteen Months 



leading the party 


219 


merited by a short paragraph dictated by Gandhiji, which invalidates 
the rest of the resolution’. 1 

He did not, it is needless to say, resign, but with his firm sense of discipline, 
accepted defeat. While he had not changed his views he would, ’like a humble 
soldier’, loyally abide by the resolution which had been adopted. The time might 
come when he would wish to resign, for no man could lead an army who did not 
know the way; but that time was not yet, and till then the Congress should 'hold 
together, push together, fight together and win together’. 2 It was theoretically 
feasible to accept office not in order to cooperate but to work for revolutionary 
charge. However, Jawaharlal still thought it possible that the assurances sought 
from the Governors would not be given, and, therefore, Congress ministries 
might not be formed. 3 At first, this was the case. The Governors ignored the 
Congress majorities and called on men defeated in the elections to take office. 
Jawaharlal denounced this as the culmination of the growth of the fascist spirit 
in the British Government in India, 4 and the Viceroy seriously considered his 
arrest. 3 Jawaharlal could see no room for compromise and was confident that 
even the moderate elements in the Congress would be forced to recognize that 
the conflict inherent in the Act had taken immediate shape. 6 But the Congress 
resolution had left the initiative for securing assurances to the leaders of the 
provincial parties; and Rajagopalachari, the leader of the Congress party in 
Madras, exploited the opportunity. A self-proclaimed political ascetic who, in 
the ’twenties, had led the opposition to Das, Motilal Nehru and the Swarajists, 
Rajagopalachari had now quiedy put himself in line for the Chief Ministership 
in Madras and was determined to take office. Enjoying Gandhi’s confidence and 
ignoring Jawaharlal, who was first put out of action by a mild attack of typhoid 
and was then away in Burma and Malaya, Rajagopalachari negotiated with Lord 
Erskine, the Governor of Madras. While he had commended office acceptance 
to the convention of legislators as a means of wrecking the Act, 7 he assured 
Erskine that ‘there was a real chance toget rid of the Civil Disobedience mental¬ 
ity for good, and that it would be a thousand pities if the chance was missed’. 
In London, Halifax in the Cabinet was in favour of some gesture which would 
help Rajrgopalachari and othersof his way of thinking; 9 but Zetland and Linlith¬ 
gow saw no need for it. They made speeches which sounded accommodating 

1 M. N. Roy, ‘Jawaharlal Nehru’, Twntiotb Cantury, February 1952. 

3 Speeches at the convention of legislators, 19 March, Tba Bombay Cbroriela, 20 March 1937. 

’Letter to K. T. Shah, 27 March 1937. 

4 Statement to the press, 28 March 1937. 

’Linlithgow to Zetland, 2 April 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14. 

•To Agatha Harrison, 18 April, to H. G. Alexander, 21 April, to H. N. Brailsford, 22 April, and 
to Stafford Cripps, 28 April 1937. 

7 Tba Bombay Cbroniclt, 20 March 1937. 

•Erskine's telegram to V iceroy, 11 June 1937, Erskine papers I.O.L. Mss. Eur. D. 596, vol. 8. 

’Zetland to Linlithgow, 3 and 9 May 1937, reprinted in Zetland, Essayax (Londok 1956) 



220 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


without conceding anything of substance. However, alarmed by Jawaharlal’s 
repeated assertions, both abroad and on his return to India, that the funda¬ 
mental struggle between nationalism and imperialism could not be submerged 
and an Act which protected imperial and other vested interests and petrified the 
misery of millions would have to go, they kept ready an ordinance in the improb¬ 
able circumstance of the Congress breaking off negotiations and starting civil 
disobedience. 1 But, in fact, they had assessed their counterplayers correctly. 
The Working Committee, overruling Jawaharlal, decided that even though no 
assurances had been given the Congress should accept office. The majority were 
so anxious for a quick decision that they were unwilling even to refer the matter 
to the AICC. As Jawaharlal ruefully commented, the question was being con¬ 
sidered the wrong way; not what are the reasons for accepting office, but office 
must be taken and therefore reasons have to be found for it. 2 But in sight of the 
prize, Rajagopalachari and the right wing were not to be diverted by such 
arguments. A few days later, Congress ministries were formed in six provinces. 


1 Zetland to Linlithgow, 5 July 1V37, Zetland papers, vol. 8. * 

Proceedings of the Working Committee, 5 to 9 July 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936. 




THvmdrum' 



15 


Out of Tune with the Congress 


Again, Jawaharlal loyally accepted the decision. ‘Every decision of the Working 
Committee is the right one. Just as the King can do no wrong, the Working 
Committee also can do no wrong.’ 1 Acceptance of office, he announced, seem¬ 
ingly more to convince himself than others, did not mean acceptance of the 
slave constitution, but was primarily a means to fight the imposition of federa¬ 
tion. If they remembered this, the risk of getting involved in petty, reformist 
activities would be lessened. So, to be loyal to the spirit underlying the decision, 
Congressmen should not lose their sense of perspective and should carry on 
their work outside the legislatures with even greater energy. 2 But such loyalty 
could not conceal that in his heart Jawaharlal hated it all. The Congress had 
moved away from almost everything that it had stood for in his eyes, and had 
become a responsivist, constitutional organization, avid for the minor loaves 
and fishes of office. So Jawaharlal virtually went into retreat. Though still the 
president of the party, he did not serve on the parliamentary board which sought 
to guide and co-ordinate the working of the ministries. He took no serious 
interest in the composition of the Governments, not even that in his home state, 
the United Provinces. It is necessary to state this, because years later the charge 
was made by Maulana Azad that the leaders of the Muslim League in the U.P. 
had agreed to co-operate with the Congress in return for two seats in the Cabinet, 
but Jawaharlal had whittled down the number to one and thereby destroyed the 
agreement reached by Azad. ‘Jawaharlal’s action gave the Muslim League in 
the U.P. a new lease of life. All students of Indian politics know that it was from 
the U.P. that the League was reorganized. Mr Jinnah took full advantage of 
the situation and snuted an offensive which ultimately led to Pakistan .’ 3 

Such severe criticism from so authoritative a quarter cannot lightly be set 
aside. Even if Jawaharlal had been responsible for the decision to exclude the 
representatives of the League in 1937, it is obviously too superficial to trace 

1 Message to the Associated Press, Tba Bombay Cbroniclt / 8 July 1917. 

3 The Decision to Accept Office', 10 and 20 July 1937 Eigbtaan Months in India, pp. 248*34. 

* Mauvna Azad, India Wins Freedom (Calcutta, 1967 edition), pp. 143-3. 


222 



223 


OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 

i 

the growing influence of Muslim oommunalism to one such single event. But 
did Jawaharlal in fact decide in this manner? Azad’s memoirs, prepared under 
his instructions by Humayun Kabir, were published in January 1939 after his 
death. The manuscript was shown to Jawaharlal, who asked Kabir not to make 
any changes. 1 He also referred to the criticism at a press conference but in very 
general terms, merely remarking that Azad had thought too much sometimes 
in individual terms and not in terms of the historical forces at work. 2 His loyalty 
to the memory of an old colleague was too strong to permit him to rebut 
the charge in detail. The result has been the entrenchment of a myth, and its 
frequent repetition even in scholarly accounts of this period. 

However, the facts are very different. When Jinnah took up again in 1936 
the leadership of the Muslim League, he was still a nationalist who had no wish 
to support, or rely on, foreign rule. Indeed his aloofness, brittle ability and anti¬ 
imperial attitude made him as disliked by the British as any Congressman. ‘Of 
all the Indians I have met’, Hoare wrote to Willingdon, ‘I think I have dis¬ 
liked Jinnah the most. Throughout the Round Table discussions he invariably 
behaved like a snake, and no one seemed to trust him. I greatly hope that he is 
not getting a following among the Muslims.’ 3 But Jinnah had no use for mass 
politics. His idea was to revert to the pre-Gandhian period and to form once 
more an alliance of elite politicians acting together to wrest concessions from 
the British. He had been the chief architect of the Lucknow Pact of 1916 be¬ 
tween the Congress and the League, 4 and his hope now was for another similar 
understanding. He therefore secured the election as president of the League not 
of a loyalist contender but of Sir Wazir Hasan, a retired judge of Lucknow 
whose family had close links with the Congress leadership in the U.P. The 
election manifesto of the League drafted by Jinnah was very similar to that of 
the Congress, and in the League parliamentary board there were representatives 
of Muslim organizations, such as the Jamiat-ul-Ulema, which supported the 
Congress. In all his speeches in 1936 Jinnah stressed his nationalism and com¬ 
mitment to freedom; 3 and in August he and Jawaharlal spoke from the same 
platform at the All-India Students Conference in an atmosphere of personal 
cordiality. 

Yet Jinnah’s tactics had never a chance of success. The Congress, and Indian 
politics as a whole, had moved far since the nascent days of 1916. The premiss 
of the Lucknow Pact, that the Congress and the League were two communal 

1 Letter to Humayun Kabir, 1 April 1958, Nehru papers. 

* Report of press conference, Tb a Hindu , 8 February 1959. 

* 5 April 1934, Templewood papers, vol. 4. 

4 H. F. Owen, ‘Negotiating the Lucknow Pact’, Journal of Asian Studios, May 1.972, pp. 561 *87. 

* For example: ‘Whatever 1 have done, let me assure you there has been no change in me, not the 

slightest, since the day when I joined the Indian National Congress. It may be I have been wrong on 
some occasions. But it has never been done in a partisan spirit. My sole and only object has been the 
welfare of my country. I assure you that India's interest is and will be sacred to me and nothing will 
make me budge an inch from that position.' Speech-at Lahore, report e d in the Civil and Military 
Gaxotta, 3 March 1936. I 



224 


JAWAHARLAl NEHRU 


parties with political objectives and that they could form an equal partnership, 
was long dead. Certainly the Congress, which had mobilized the masses in a 
series of campaigns and established itself as a broad nationalist front, could not 
now be expected to agree that it was primarily a Hindu organization and would 
not seek toenlist the Muslim and other religious minorities in India. To Jawahar- 
lal in particular, critical of vested interests and emphasizing the basic problems 
of poverty and hunger from which the vast majority of the Indian people, what¬ 
ever their religion, suffered, the religious Elitism of Jinnah appeared medieval 
and obscurantist. Throughout the early months of 1937 he and Jinnah attacked 
each other in the press. When Jawaharlal stated that there were only two forces 
which mattered in India, British imperialism and nationalism represented by 
the Congress, Jinnah replied that there was a third party, the Muslims. Jawahar¬ 
lal brushed this aside as communalism raised to the «th power. Muslims could 
not be regarded as ‘a nation apart*; and the Muslim League represented a small 
group functioning in the higher regions of the upper middle classes and having 
no contacts with the Muslim masses and few even with the Muslim lower 
middle dass. The controversy soon descended to verbal slanging. Jinnah spoke 
of the Peter Pan who refused to grow up, ‘the busybody President’ who seemed 
‘to carry the responsibility of the whole world on his shoulders and must poke 
his nose in everything except his own business’. 1 On his part, Jawaharlal de¬ 
clared that there were Muslims in the Congress ‘who could provide inspiration 
to a thousand Jinnahs’. 2 He had no use for secret pacts with anybody, much less 
with Jinnah. 3 It is at this time that Jinnah seems to have developed a particular 
allergy to Jawaharlal, his exuberance and his socialist ideas. He even appealed 
over Jawaharlal’s head to Gandhi for an understanding on Hindu-Muslim 
relations, but was firmly rebuffed. 4 

The election results had their own lessons for both Jawaharlal and Jinnah. 
While the Congress had done spectacularly well in the general constituencies, 
in the482 seats reserved for Muslims it had put up only 38 candidates and won 
in 26. In eight provinces it had not put up candidates for these special seats at 
all, and most of its victories in such constituencies were in the NWFP, where 
Abdul GaffarKhan had given theCongress adecisive hold. On theother hand, the 
Muslim League had not contested all these 482 seats, and had won only 109 of 
them. It could not gain a majority even in the Muslim-majority provinces of 
the Punjab and Bengal. In the former, it was the Unionist Party, dominated by 
landlords, which won a majority, while in Bengal the single largest parties 
were the Congress and the peasants’ party led by Fazlul Haq. To Jawaharlal this 
suggested that the Congress had not done enough work among the Muslims, 
and that in the new ‘mass contact’ programme a special effort should be made to 
reach the Muslims. There was a widespread anti-imperialist spirit in the country 

1 The Bombay Chronicle, 19 January and 26 July 1937. 

* Ibid.. 10 February 1937. 

* Ibid.//16 February 1937. 

4 Gandhi's letter to Jinnah, 22 May 1937, cited by Jinnah, The Bombay Chronicle, 26 July 1937. 




24 With Gandhi, 1938 













27 Speaking on ‘Aid to Spain’ 
in Trafalgar Square, 1938 


28 Jawaharlal and Krishna 
Menon with General Lister, 
at Lister’s headquarters in 
Spain, 1938 
















OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


225 


and, apart from a microscopic handful at the top who were fearful of social 
changes, the Indian people as a whole were with the Congress. The party had 
therefore erred in not setting up more Muslim candidates. The younger genera¬ 
tion of Muslims and the Muslim peasants and workers were getting out of the 
rut of communalism and thinking along economic lines, and the Congress 
should set about organizing this latent support. ‘The Congress is supreme to¬ 
day so far as the masses and the lower middle classes are concerned. Even the 
Muslim masses look up to it for relief. It has hardly ever been in such a strong 
position.’ 1 The elections had gone some way to lay the ghost of communalism, 
and the Congress should follow this up by working among the Muslim intelli¬ 
gentsia and masses and rid India of communalism in every shape and form. Each 
provincial Congress committee should set up a special committee to increase 
contacts with Muslims and enrol more Muslim members. The central office of 
the Congress would also set up a separate department for this purpose. Notices 
should be issued in Urdu as well as in other local languages and wide circulation 
should be given to a new Congress journal being published in that language. 2 
.Gandhi disapproved of this ‘mass contact’ programme and preferred to proceed 
cautiously through constructive work among the Muslim masses by both 
Hindu and Muslim workers, but the Working Committee preferred Jawaharlal’s 
scheme. For it recognized that the Gandhian constructive programme no longer 
evoked enthusiasm, ami Muslims had absolutely no trust in Gandhi and con¬ 
sidered him their enemy. 3 

Jinnah’s diagnosis was very similar, but the lesson he drew was the opposite. 
The Muslim League had made a mistake in not organizing itself better for the 
elections and contesting all the seats reserved for the Muslim electorate. The 
Congress was becoming increasingly a mass party and striking out in new direc¬ 
tions. Were its approaches to the Muslim masses to prove effective, Jinnah and 
the League would be left high and dry. So, if the Congress were to take him 
seriously, it would be necessary to strengthen the communal feelings among the 
Muslims. The only possible answer to the Congress ‘mass contact’ programme 
was to make the Muslims submerge their economic interests in religious zeal. 
Then the Congress would be forced to deal with the League. The hold of Islam 
on the Muslim masses should be strengthened to provide the sanction for the 
demand of the Muslim upper and middle classes for jobs and security. 

It is against this general background that developments in the U.P. fall into 
place. In the elections, the chief opponent of the Congress was not the Muslim 
League but the National Agriculturist Party, an organization of landlords pro¬ 
moted by the Government to challenge the influence which the Congress had 
gained over the tenants. 4 The British attached greater importance to this party 

1 Jawaharlal to Stafford Cripps, 22 February 1937. 

* Circulars to provincial Congress committeer 31 March and 10 July 1937. 

* Proceedings of the Working Committee, April 1937, A1CC File 42 of 1936. 

«P.D. Reeves, ‘Landlords and Party Politics in the United Provinces, 1934-7’, in Low, fundings 
in Modern South Asian History, pp. 261-82. 



226 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


than to the Muslim League and did not hesitate to coerce Muslim talukdars to 
transfer their allegiance from Jinnah, ‘the arch enemy of the British raj’, to 
loyalists like the Nawab of Chhatari. 1 So the Congress and the League reached 
an informal, unspoken understanding in this province and avoided a conflict 
as much as possible. The question of Hindu-Muslim relations and of the recog¬ 
nition of Muslims as a separate third party, raised by Jinnah on an all-India level, 
did not apply in the U.P. Here the ipain issue was authority, landlordism and 
reaction on the one hand and tenant right on the other. In this contest, the 
Congress and the League made a joint effort to defeat the Government and their 
puppets. The parliamentary board of the League in the U.P. was an odd assort¬ 
ment of reactionaries, leaders of the Jamiat who supported the Congress, ex- 
Congressmen with personal affiliations to the Nehru family like Chaudhuri 
Khaliquzzaman, and many with no fixed attachments. The most energetic 
campaigner for the League was a leader of tht Jamiat, Maulana Husain Ahmad, 
who was very close to the Congress. Some candidates of the League would 
probably have stood as Congressmen if requested, and during his election tours 
Jawaharlal supported the League candidates if they were not obvious reaction¬ 
aries and the Congress was not contesting the seats. 

After the elections, the various elements in the parliamentary board of the 
League fell out. When in March the Congress refused to take office and a loyalist 
‘interim’ ministry was set up by the Government, Khaliquzzaman was asked to 
join it but refused. 2 However, another member of the League joined, and, 
though he was expelled from the board, some other members, including 
Maulana Husain Ahmad, resigned. At this stage Govind Ballabh Pant and 
Mohanlal Saxena, leading members of the U.P. Congress, not expecting their 
own party to take office in the near future, approached Khaliquzzaman to 
reinforce his decision not to join the ‘interim’ government and pressed him to 
return to the Congress. 3 It is possible, though they did not admit this, that they 
went even further and offered to form a pact with the League. The atmosphere 
then, born of a collective triumph over the Government and the latter’s efforts 
to thwart the decision of the elections, was conducive to this. Jawaharlal got 
wind of these overtures and warned Pant against any such agreement. 'I am 
personally convinced that any kind of pact or coalition between us and the 
Muslim League will be highly injurious. It will mean many other things also 
which are equally undesirable.’ 4 It is worth adding that Azad, who was staying 
with Jawaharlal at this time, was equally opposed to any such pact. 3 

Faced with this reprimand, the U.P. Congress abandoned any idea it might 

iThe Raja of Mahmudabad’s account of his interview with the governor of U.P. in 1936, ‘Some 
Memories', in C. H. Philips and M. D. Wainwright (eds.), Tba Partition of India (London, 1970), 
p. 384. 

2 C. Khaliquzzaman, Pathway to Pakistan (Lahore, 1961), pp. 134-3. 

1 Pant to Jawaharlal, 2 April 1937 ** 

4 Jawaharlal to Pant, 30 March 1937. 

’Jawaharlal to Abdul Walli, 30 March 1937. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


227 


have had of a pact with the League; but relations between the two parties con¬ 
tinued to be cordial. In a vacancy which arose in a Muslim constituency which 
had been held by the League, the board of that party in the U.P., despite Jinnah’s 
announcement that it should be retained by the League and. warning the Con¬ 
gress not to claim it, 1 decided to leave it to a leading Congressman, Rafi Ahmad 
Kidwai. Jinnah himself, however, was in favour of a coalition with the Con¬ 
gress, or, as he termed it, ‘a united front’. Now that the Congress was willing to 
accept office if it were satisfied on certain points, there seemed to him to be no 
substantial difference between the two parties. He was right to the extent that 
the Congress no longer even claimed to be a revolutionary organization and 
there was no difference on that score between it and the League. But the main 
hitch still remained, that any coalition with the League implied the Congress 
accepting a Hindu orientation and renouncing the right to speak for all Indians. 
For fear that Khaliquzzaman might go further than a coalition and agree to 
merge the League in the Congress, Jinnah came to Lucknow and authorized 
the continuance of negotiations on the basis of the maintenance of separate 
identities. 2 But this the Congress was not prepared to grant. When, towards 
the end of June, it became clear that the Congress would take office, Khaliquz¬ 
zaman and Nawab Ismail Khan again suggested a coalition. Khaliquzzaman 
seems to have gone even further and informed Azad that the League would 
accept any terms provided he and Ismail Khan were included in the Ministry. 3 
Jawaharlal was not enthusiastic, for a Congress ministry should undertake land 
reforms and he did not wish this to be precluded by any agreement with the 
League, which was influenced by zamindari interests. But Azad was attracted 
by the possibility of the League ceasing in the U.P. to exist as a separate group. 
He was in charge of the negotiations, being authorized by the Working Com¬ 
mittee to deal both with Congress affairs in the U.P. and Bihar and with Muslim 
representation in all the provincial ministries. He consulted Jawaharlal, Pant, 
Kripalani and Narendra Deva and it was decided to offer ministerships to 
Khaliquzzaman and Nawab Ismail Khan in return for acceptance of the Con¬ 
gress programme and the winding up of the Muslim League group and the U.P. 
parliamentary board. All Muslim League legislators should become full 
members of the Congress party and abide by its discipline; no Muslim League 
candidates should be set up in by-elections, and they should resign their offices 
or vacate their seats whenever the Congress decided to do so. 4 

These were stringent conditions which, if accepted, would have seriously 

1 The Bombay Chronicle, 19 March 1937. 

2 Z. H. Zaidi, ‘Aspects of Muslim League Policy 1937-47', The Partition of India, p. 256. 

2 Jawaharlal to Rajendra Prasad, 21 July 1937. In Khaliquzzaman's account of his meeting with 
Azad, he states that discussion centred only on two points: whether the League would resign office 
along with the Congress if at any time the Congress resigned (to which he agreed), and whether he 
would agree to another Muslim in place of Nawab Ismail Khan (which he refused) Pathway to 
Pakistan, p. 160. 

4 Jawaharlal to Rajendra Prasad, 21 July 1937; Khaliquzzaman, op. eit., p. 161. 



228 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


weakened the Muslim League in the U.P., although Khaliquzzaman and others 
were not asked to sever all connection with the parent Muslim League or speci¬ 
fically to take the Congress pledge. Khaliquzzaman agi'eed to all conditions 
except two: the winding up of the parliamentary board and tfle injunction 
against contesting by-elections. He himself was willing to accept even these but 
was not authorized to do so. However, he added, this might happen in any case. 
In fact, so eager was he to reach an agreement and take office that he offered to 
call a special meeting of the executive committee of the U.P. Muslim League 
to consider the question of by-elections. He also suggested that members of the 
League be given freedom of vote on communal matters. But Azad and Jawahar- 
lal insisted on full acceptance of the original conditions, and the negotiations 
brokedown. Neither at the time, nor even later during his life did Azad voice any 
regrets, either to Jawaharlal or in public. 1 

This account makes dear that while Jawaharlal was never happy about 
these opportunist, unprincipled bargainings with the League which had now, 
in the U.P., become a narrow upper-class organization, he had allowed Azad, 
Pant and Rafi Kidwai to do what they thought best. Certainly the discussions 
had not broken down on the question of one or two representatives of the League 
in the ministry, nor had Jawaharlal decided unilaterally that it should be one 
and not two. Whether, if the negotiations had succeeded, the country and the 
Congress would have benefited in the long run is debatable. Any agreement 
would in effect have accepted that politics were a matter of alliances between 
upper-class groups, betrayed all Muslims who thought in non-communal terms 
and abandoned the economic programme on which Jawaharlal had been laying 
so much stress. No such agreement could have endured, for the League had no 
long-term economic or social objectives. The only incentive where its leaders 
were concerned was the hope of office, and once this was»fulfilled the cracks 
were bound to widen. Indeed, the negotiations were throughout hollow and 
unreal, for alongside the parleys of Azad and Khaliquzzaman a by-election was 
being fought in a Muslim constituency where the new strategy of Jinnah was 
finding full play. Both the Congress and the League set up candidates, convert¬ 
ing it into a test election. Jawaharlal himself spent two full days in the consti¬ 
tuency, speaking as usual of economic and national interests, while the League 
raised the cry of ‘Islam in danger’. Jinnah issued an appeal in the name of Allah 
and the Koran, and Maulana Shaukat Ali spoke of civil war and called on the 
voters ’to crush the swollen head of Jawaharlal’. 2 Morey and bearded maulanas 
were in great demand. * Supporters of the League gave large donations to mos- 

1 In fact, he seems to have expressed his satisfaction. Edward Thompson reported a conversa¬ 
tion in October 1939: ‘We will not have in the Cabinet* said one leader who had a lot to say in what 
happened (and he was a Moslem), 'a man who was our comrade for twenty years and then ratted 
because he thought we were going to be beaten!' Enlist India for Fretdom (London, 1940), p.56 
The reference is clearly to Azad speaking about Khaliquzzaman. 

2 Fida Sherwani to Jawaharlal, 30 June 1937. * 

* Assistant Secretary U.P.P.C.C. to Rafi Kidwai, 6 July 1937, A1CC File G. 61/1937. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


229 


ques and madrasas, while the ‘interim* government assisted the League by arrest¬ 
ing Muslim workers of the Congress, i The League’s candidate was helped by the 
fact that he was a Malkani Rajput (a sect of Rajputs converted to Islam), and 
the caste panchayat decided to penalize any member who voted against him. 
This, along with the bigotry that had been aroused, ensured the defeat of the 
Congress candidate. It was the beginning of a new phase of Indian politics, in 
which communal rancour was to spread and embitter all relations. F(?r the 
first time in his career, Jawaharlal was the object of a hostile demonstration. 
On his way to a meeting in the constituency, his car was pelted with stones. 2 
In these circumstances, little importance can be attached to the talks with 
Khaliquzzaman, and no weighty consequences followed their failure. 

A few months after the formation of the first Congress ministries, the party 
also took office in Assam and the North-West Frontier, and all these ministries 
functioned for over two years. The eight ministries had to their credit consider¬ 
able achievements. Conciliation machinery was established in labour disputes, 
though in Bombay the effect was nullified by banning strikes and obstructing 
the growth of a genuine labour movement by the encouragement of unions 
promoted by employers and of occupational unions. In a few districts prohibi¬ 
tion was introduced, there was some improvement in the condition of Harijans, 
mass literacy campaigns were promoted, and steps were taken to spread primary 
education. The sight of men and women in khadi exercising authority also 
served to lift the morale not just of the party but of ordinary people. This was 
a particularly exhilarating experience in the North-West Frontier, home of 
the conservative Pathan, with its large Muslim majority, and which the British 
had for so long sought to seal off. But, on the whole, the record of the Congress 
ministries was, as Jawaharlal realized soon enough, static if not counter¬ 
revolutionary. 3 The worst cases were Bombay and Madras. There was no 
question now of taking office to combat the new Act; 4 the ministers worked in 
close co-operation with the Governors, and in carrying out minor reforms 
forgot the major issues. Soon after they took office, Jawaharlal, as Congress 
president, directed them to release all political prisoners. 3 Govind BaUabh 
Pant’s first act on taking charge in the U.P. was to sit down at his office table 
to write the order for their discharge. But K.M. Munshi, the Home Minister 
of Bombay, ‘if anything more royalist than the king,’ 6 ignored this directive. 
Keen to detain communist and left-wing leaders, he asked a surprised Viceroy 
toput the C.I.D. of Bengal in touch with his own C.I.D. to deal with communists 
in and around Bombay. 7 When Jawaharlal rebuked Munshi for his zeal in this 

1 Jawaharlal's statement to the press, 10 July, The Bombay Chronicle , 11 July 1937. 

* The Bombay Chronicle, 14 July 1937. 

» To Govind Bailabh Pant, 25 November 1937. A Bunch of Old Utters, pp. 256-7. 

* K. M. Munshi, Pilgrimage to Freedom (Bombay, 1967), vol. 1, p. 44. 

* President’s circular to Congress committees, 16.July 1937. 

* Note of R. M. Maxwell, Home Secretary, on Home Ministers Conference, 31 May 1939, 
forwarded to Governors by Viceroy, 15 June 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 16. 

7 Linlithgow to Zetland, 16 December 1937, Zetland papers, vol. 14. 



230 


JAWAHARLAL NEHJtU 


matter _ ‘You have already become a police officer’ 1 - Munshi appealed to the 
higher authority of Gandhi and continued as before. Jawaharla! protested in 
the Working Committee that Congress ministers appeared more concerned 
about the effect their actions would have upon the British Government than 
upon their own people; 2 but his arguments had no effect. The reliance which 
B.G. 'Kher, the Chief Minister, and Munshi placed on the Viceroy and fhe 
Governor, and the full reports they provided to the British of discussions and 
differences within the Congress, encouraged Linlithgow to promote the resti¬ 
veness of the Bombay ministry against central control. ‘My advice to you, for 
what it is worth,’ he wrote to Lord Brabourne, the Governor , 3 ‘would be, here 
as elsewhere, to play for time and to miss no chance of impressing Kher and 
his colleagues with a sense of their own importance and of the necessity for 
standing on their own feet. This sort of pressure from the Centre cannot last 
for ever.’ But Kher and Munshi were basically weak men who, however much 
they might ignore Jawaharlal, did not dare to defy Patel, who was responsible 
in the Working Committee for Bombay. If they were able to adhere to a right- 
wing -policy;, it was because this suited Patel. 

Tn Madras, however, Rajagopalachari was a law unto himself. He was too 
senior in the Congress hierarchy and too close to Gandhi to be answerable to 
anybody. He combined a contempt for his colleagues in the ministry and the 
Working Committee with an undue deference to the British Governor — a man 
of very average ability — and senior British officials. The result was ‘a negation 
and a reversal of fundamental Congress principles and policy’. 4 * Rajagopalachari 
ordered the police to shadow Congressmen, arrested Congress socialists, con¬ 
tinued the ban on the Independence pledge and demanded security from a 
socialist journal. When these matters were considered in the Working Com¬ 
mittee, Rajagopalachari stayed away and left it to Gandhi to defeat Jawaharlal’s 
proposal that the Congress ministries should secure the Committee’s approval 
before initiating such arrests and prosecutions. He invoked the Criminal Law 
Amendment Act, which the Congress had sharply denounced in earlier years, 
against anti-Hindi pickets; strong action, he told Erskine, paid in India and 
the British had been far too weak during the civil disobedience campaigns. * 
He intrigued with the Governor against his own party to prevent the formation 
of an Andhra province, 6 and when he took a month’s leave requested the 
Qovemor to take over much of his work as he trusted Erskine more than any 
of his colleagues. 7 He wished to recommend some of his supporters for knight- 


1 Pilgrimage to Frtedom, vol. 1, p. 49. 

2 Proceedings of the Working Committee, 14 tol7 August 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936. 

* 23 August 1937, Brabourne papers. I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F 97, vol. 8. 

4 Jawaharlal to P. Subbarayan, 21 November 1937. 

* Erskine to Brabourne, 23 June 1938, Erskine papers, vol. 13. 

* Erskine to Linlithgow, 4 April 1938, Erskine paper's, vol. 13. 

1 Erskine to Linlithgow, 24 April 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 13. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


231 


hoods and other titles, 1 and was ‘out-heroding Herod as a defender of the rights 
of the Services’. 2 Asked at a press conference about a proposed Coronation 
durbar, Jawaharlal replied that if the Government wished to avoid a clash 
between the Congress ministers and the Governors, the best way they could 
do it was to keep the King in England. 3 A few weeks later, Rajagopalachari 
assured the British that there would be no Congress boycott of a durbar or 
disturbance of any kind. 4 The conduct of Rajagopalachari, in short, was the 
epitome of all that Jawaharlal had feared would be the result of office accept¬ 
ance. ‘In fact,’ summed up Erskine, a diehard Tory himself, ‘he is even 
too much of a Tory for me, for though I may want to go back twenty years, 
he wishes to go back two thousand and to run India as it was run in the time 
of King Asoka.’ 3 

Jawaharlal’s general attitude, to the great disappointment of the left wing,6 
was to stand up loyally for the ministries in public and protect them from petty 
and petulant criticism; *we cannot agitate against ourselves.’ 7 But though 
he tried consistently to develop an atmosphere of friendliness towards the min¬ 
istries, he made it clear to them privately how much, he disapproved of their 
conformism. 8 ‘It is all very well to prevent one’s enemies getting dug in but 
the alternative of getting buried oneself is equally unpleasant.* 9 In the U.P. it¬ 
self he assisted Pant in dealing with labour troubles in Kanpur, controlling the 
students and facing the criticism of the provincial Congress committee that 
Pant was becoming ‘a second Chhatari’ 10 So vigorous was his support that 
both Gandhi and the British toyed with the hope of his taking over from 
Pant as chief minister. This only shows how little they had understood his 
mind and sentiment. The whole atmosphere in India was alien to him — the 
semi-loyalist activities of the ministries, the quarrels for jobs, the refusal to 
handle agrarian problems boldly, the suggestion that British troops might be 

1 Lumley, Governor of Bombay, to Erskine, 4 October 1938, reporting Kher’s account of conver¬ 
sation with Rajagopalachari, Erskine papers, vol. 20. 

* Brabourne, acting Viceroy, to Erskine, 2 July 1938, Erskine papers, vol. 13- 

* The Bombay Cbronicla, 13 August 1937. 

* Erskine to Linlithgow, 25 September 1937, sent by Linlithgow to Zetland, 30 September 1937, 
Zetland papers, vol. 14. 

» Erskine to Sir Geoffrey Bracken, 30 January 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 21. 

4 1 should confess moreover that his role in future cannot be of any decisive revolutionary impor¬ 
tance. Things are moving too fast for him and you should not be surprised if within a year or two 
instead of a United front we in India prepare for a civil war and like so many liberal intellectuals 
Nehru disappears from the scene. For die present, however, even parlour socialists have a contri¬ 
bution to make. I may add in passing that Nehru is easily one of the finest types of a gentleman one 
meets in any part of the world. He means well and wants to help us all.’ K. M. Ashraf to Phyllis 
Kemp, 9 August 1938, U.P. Govt. C.I.D. File P/M-83. 

7 Note on The AlCC and Congress Ministries, 4 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 11 Novem¬ 
ber 1937. 

4 See, for example, his letters to Rajagopalachari, 1 October and 4 November, to Subbarayan, 
21 November and to Pant, 25 November 1937. 

4 To Edward Thompson, 11 November 1937. 

to Report of the Governor, Sir Harry Haig, of conversation with Vijayalakshmi Pandit in letter 
to Linlithgow, 23 November 1938, Haig papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F115, vol. 7. 



232 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


necessary for the maintenance of internal security, 1 the justification by Con¬ 
gress members of the Central Assembly of the dispatch of Indian troops to 
China. 2 His main objection to federation as envisaged in the Act of 1935 was 
the inclusion of the feudal and autocratic elements in the Indian States, and 
he wished the Congress to support the popular movements in the States. But 
Gandhi himself objected to this and pulled up Jawaharlal in public for permit¬ 
ting a resolution in the AICC criticizing the Government in Mysore. Jawaharlal 
drafted a sharp rejoinder but refrained from publishing it. All this, however, 
jarred. So he virtually opted out of the day-to-day activities of domestic politics 
and was happier visiting the remote areas of Assam or the Frontier Province, 
writing a long tract on the language problem or indulging in a narcissist jeu 
d’esprit: an anonymous attack on the latent dictatorial tendencies in himself. 3 
‘This is’, he wrote to a friend urging him to prolong his stay in Europe, 4 ‘a 
dull country.’ 

Jawaharlal was more at ease and fully integrated in dealing with develop¬ 
ments outside India. The growing tension in the world sharpened his views. 
Fascism and imperialism were blood brothers and the freedom struggle in 
India was part of the general confrontation in the world. Freedom, like peace, 
was indivisible. ‘The frontiers of our struggle lie not only in our own country 
but in Spain and China also.’ 3 Even in the stress of the election campaign he 
did not forsake the international aspect of the Indian problem. In the final 
analysis, it did not matter much where fate had pitched one’s tent. His own 
lot was cast in India, and he could work most effectively there; but he always 
thought in terms of the larger world issues, tried to fit India into them and 
taught his audiences to do the same. Such interest and commitment would 
also enable the Indian people to play a part, however small, in international 
affairs and give them a voice in the councils of the world. When Italy attacked 
Ethiopia, he called for demonstrations throughout the country as an expres¬ 
sion of sympathy and solidarity with the Ethiopians. The people of India could 
give no substantial assistance, but they should at least express their determina¬ 
tion to stand together with victims of, imperialism elsewhere, especially as 
the British were making dear their support of Mussolini. 6 Similarly, with 
all his sympathy for the Jews, he believed that the Arabs were fighting British 
imperialism in Palestine. The Jews should not rely on British support but 
reach an agreement with the Arabs to safeguard their position in an indepen¬ 
dent Arab countiy. To Jawaharlal the British appeared to be exploiting the 
differences between Jews and Arabs in the same manner as they were promoting 

1 See Jawaharlal's letter to Asaf All, 3 August 1937. 

Statement to the press, 23 August 1937; Jawaharlal to Bhulabhai Desai, 12 September 1937. 

* ‘The Rashtrapati' by ChanaJcya, Modtm Rtvhw. November 1937. 

4 To Jal Naoroji, 30 August 1937. 

’Article in NationalHarold, 24 January 1939. This newspaper was started try Jawaharlal at 
Lucknow in the summer of 1938. 

‘Statements to the press, 3 and 8 May, and speech at Allahabad, 9 May 1936. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


233 


communal tension in India. 1 But imperialism had to be challenged wherever 
it appeared, and Jawaharlal organized a boycott of Japanese goods, a China 
relief fund and a medical unit for service in that country. 

However, it was the Spanish Civil War which dominated his attention. 
He felt, like every other sensitive liberal of the time, a personal commitment 
in this fighting. ‘From day to day I watch with almost painful anguish the 
development of the trouble in Spain.’ 2 For to him it was a battle not just between 
the Spanish Government and some rebel generals or even between fascism 
and democracy in Europe; the conflict was a much wider one, between the 
forces of progress and of reaction throughout the world, and the result would 
be of enormous consequence to men and women everywhere. The gates of 
Madrid had become ‘the symbols of human liberty’, 3 and Jawaharlal orga¬ 
nized the collection of funds for the dispatch from India of foodgrains and an 
ambulance unit. 

With this deep involvement in world issues, it was natural for Jawaharlal 
to think of a trip abroad in the summer of 1938. His mother had died, after 
a long illness, in January 1938; and, with his daughter at Oxford, he had no 
strong domestic attachment to hold him to India. The national movement 
was in reverse gear and at Haripura Subhas Bose had taken over the Congress 
presidency. Jawaharlal was pressed hard to become the general secretary 
but refused. He had even wished to step out of the Working Committee. He 
had been prevailed upon not to do so, but his interest was elsewhere, and in 
June, gleefully turning his back on India, he sailed for what to him were the 
vital centres of activity in Europe. ‘It is a curious puzzling world but I get on 
with it to some extent because I like unusual things happening and rather 
enjoy taking part in them.’ 4 

His own attitudes to the European crisis were clear. He felt that the dicta¬ 
tors would have to be halted in their aggression and a world war was in¬ 
evitable; but on no account would India help in such a war even against the 
fascist powers. The policy of appeasement was less of a surprise to him than to 
his-friends abroad, for India saw more of the imperialist than of the democratic 
face of the British Government. Though baffled and concerned, like any other 
left-wing sympathizer, by the trials in Russia, 5 he declined to lend his name 
to an appeal for an inquiry. He had close links in Britain with Stafford Cripps 
and his Socialist League and the Left Book Club and approved of their program¬ 
me of popular fronts and an alliance with Russia. Collective security was the 
answer, though, presumably as a sop to the method of non-violence which he 
supported in India, he declared that it was quite possible to control the aggres- 

1 Statement to the press, 21 September and speech at Allahabad, 27 September 1936; letter to 

* A. E. Shohet, 26 August 1937. 

3 To Ernst Toller, 10 August 1936. 

1 Statement to the press, 20 February 1937. 

4 To Rabindranath Tagore, 2 June 1938. 

* See letters to Krishna Menon, 22 May and 11 November 1937. 



234 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


sors by economic sanctions alone. 1 When, in February 1937, at the Left Book 
Club rally for world peace and against fascism at the Albert Hall, Victor 
Gollancz read out an unexpected telegram from Jawaharlal as a message from 
the people of India, there was deafening and repeated applause. 2 ^Though the 
Indian Government banned the entry of Left Book Cub books into India, a 
few managed to get through and were eagerly read. Jawaharlal thought of 
circumventing this ban by reprinting some of the books in India, but nothing 
came of the idea. 3 In the circumstances, it is incredible, if characteristic, to 
find Lord Lothian, who had corresponded at length with Jawaharlal and review* 
ed the Autobiography , writing to the Aga Khan in the summer of 1937 that 
Germany should be appeased; for otherwise Germany would try to make 
alliances with Italy and Japan directed against the Empire. ‘That will exactly 
suit Jawaharlal Nehru.’ 4 But no man of normal intelligence could have had 
any doubt as to Jawaharlal’s total commitment to the fight against fascism. 
For him the Left meant the struggle for freedom in India, a commitment to 
the traditions and aspirations of his own people, resistance to Nazism and 
fascism and a faith in the Russian revolution despite all its crimes and inade¬ 
quacies. He was anti-totalitarian as well as anti-fascist and hoped to blend 
civil liberties and the parliamentary system with economic progress such as 
Russia had achieved. 

En route to Europe Jawaharlal met Nahas Pasha and the leaders of the 
Wafd party at Alexandria, and then, on landing in Italy, set off immediately 
on the pilgrimage to Spain as the guest of the Republican Government. He 
spent five days at Barcelona on the eve of the Battle of the Ebro. He had his 
first experience of air raids, visited the front and was captivated by the charm 
and self-confidence of General Lister. Success, he thought, was bound to attend 
the armies of the Republic, created in the stress of war, with their informality, 
comradeship and dedication. They would triumph over the professionals and 
experts of the rebel troops, despite German ami Italian support and superiority 
in heavy armaments and aircraft, if only the British and French Governments 
did not deny the Republic food and munitions. An afternoon with the British 
and American battalions of the International Brigade filled him with longing 
to join them: ‘something in me wanted to stay on this inhospitable looking 
hill-side which sheltered so much human courage, so much of what was worth 
while in life.’ 3 Meetings with President Azana, Alvarez del Vayo, the Foreign 

1 Foreword to Foreign Policies of the Indian National Congress and the British Labour Party, by 
R. M. Lohia (AICC, 1938). 

2 V. Gollancz to Jawaharlal, 8 February 1937, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 215; John Lewis, The 
Left Book Club (London, 1970), p. 40. 

3 Lewis, op. cit., p. 73; correspondence between Mahmuduzzafar, secretary to Jawaharlal, and 
Gollancz, Home Dept. Pol. File 4/13/38. 

4 Lothian to the Aga Khan, 19 May 1937, Lothian papers, Edinburgh. I owe this reference to 

Mr Martin Gilbert. ^ 

* Article in the National Herald, 7 July 1939, reprinted in China, Spam and the War (Allahabad, 
1940), p. 78. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


235 


Minister, and ‘La Pasionaria’ rounded off the trip. Influenced by his own atti¬ 
tude in India, he was unhappy that the political revolution was being merged 
with drastic efforts at social change; 1 but this did not cloud his ardent desite 
that the Republican government should win. Jawaharlal returned from Spain 
convinced that the chief responsibility for the course of the war lay not with 
the rebels or even with the dictators but with the British Government, the 
French being completely under British influence. 2 As Zetland ruefully re 
ported after talking to him on the subject, ‘when I referred to the trouble 
there as a civil war he dissented and rather suggested that he regarded Franco 
as being supported almost entirely by foreign countries and having little 
Spanish following. He clearly takes a very biased view of the present situation 
in Europe and I do not think that any amount of reasoning would cause him 
to change his view.’ 3 

In England this time, Jawaharlal was, thanks to the Autobiography and 
the success of the Congress in the elections, an even better-known figure than 
before. He attributed the greater interest in him to the importance that attach¬ 
ed to what India might do in a world crisis; she had a tremendous nuisance 
value. 4 But the fact was that he now commanded greater stature in the world. 
He was accepted as the true representative of the Indian people and he moved 
in the mainstream of world opinion. He spoke at the Albert Hall and at 
Trafalgar Square under the auspices of the ‘Aid to Spain’ committee, and at 
a Left Book Club rally organized especially in his honour. There were lunches 
at the New Statesman (where Attlee was present but unnoticed) 3 and at the 
House of Commons, long conversations with Robert Vansittart and Tom 
Jones, and an afternoon with the Webbs. 

As a contrast 6 Nehru, the leader of the Indian Congress and his lovely 
daughter spent some hours here on Saturday with Ponsonby 7 to meet 
them. I had read and admired his autobiography and welcomed him 
warmly. He is the last word of aristocratic refinement and culture dedi¬ 
cated to the salvation of the underdog whether in race or class; but I doubt 
whether he has the hard stuff of a revolutionary leader. He is in theory a 
communist; but doubts the possibility of the complicated Soviet organi¬ 
zation among the mixed races of the Indian continent. ‘Between two 
worlds, one dead and one powerless to be born’ is a quotation which he 
recognized but did not agree with. He believes with fervour that a united 

1 Lord Brockway's oral testimony, 24 July 1967, N.M.M.L. 

* This account of JawahariaTs visit to Spain is based on his confidential note written for the Work¬ 
ing Committee, and the articles written a year later and reprinted in China, Spain and the War. 

» Zetland to Braboume, acting Viceroy, 5 July 1938, Zetland papers, vol. 10. 

* Note to the Working Committee, 30 July 1938. 

* Kingsley Martin, Editor (London, 1968), p. 10. 

* To a visiting American professor. 

v Arthur, first Lord Ponsonby, Minister in the Labour governments and a specialist jn foreign 
affairs. 



236 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


India can be born, is, in fact being born, largely owing to the teaching of 
Gandhi — whose power as a saint and a missionary he realizes and 
admires — but whose economic proposals he dismisses as romantic rem¬ 
nants of the past. Nehru is convinced that the freedom of the individual, 
as manifested in the presence of opportunity to live the good life, can¬ 
not be secured without the organization of the principal services and 
main industries deliberately for communal consumption and without 
the profit-making motive. Today the Indian people are too primitive for 
Soviet Communism. But they have been roused, not only by internal 
conditions of India but by the horror of the invasion of China by Japan 
and by their sympathy with other oppressed races. 1 

And recalling this meeting over two years later, Beatrice Webb recorded that 
they had been ‘struck more by his charm than by his force — he seemed too 
ultra refined to influence English official or politician! He is a subtle thinker; 
an agnostic, in respect of man’s relation to the universe and, through the study 
of the capitalist system, a convert to communism for India and in the western 
world . . .’ 2 

Jawaharlal also met the executives of the' Labour Party, the Communist 
Party and the National Council for Gvil Liberties. He even spent a weekend 
with Lothian and the ‘Qiveden Set’, and listened in silence to a tirade against 
socialism by Nancy Astor. George Padmore saw him to explain the problems 
of Africa. Jewish leaders called on him and put forward their side of the case, 
and Jawaharlal arranged for the settling in India of some Jewish refugees from 
Germany. The principal difficulty was the attitude of the Government of India, 
which insisted on guarantees of employment for life, which no provincial 
government or industrial firm was in a position to give. 

This time Jawaharlal, unlike on his previous visit to Britain, was willing to 
meet figures in the Government. Apart from talks with Halifax and Zetland, 
he met Linlithgow, then on leave in England. The Viceroy had, especially after 
the acceptance of office by the Congress, been anxious to meet him, and Gandhi 
had tried to arrange it. But Jawaharlal had had no wish to have any contact with 
the leading instrument of British imperialism in India, especially at a time 
when prisoners in the Andaman Islands were on hunger-strike. 3 Now the strike 
was over and Jawaharlal saw no objection to talking to the Viceroy on leave 
outside India. The conversation was general and there was no detailed 
discussion of Indian politics. 4 But as Jawaharlal recorded later, he told 

1 Entry for 3 July 1938, Beatrice Webb's diaries. Passfield papers, London School of Economics 
Library, vol. 52, pp. 78-9. 

2 24 September 1940. Beatrice Webb's diaries, vol. 34, pp. 173-6. 

* Viceroy’s report on interview with Gandhi, 4 August 1937, Haig papers, vol. 13s Gandhi to 
Jawaharlal, 4 August 1937, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 240; proceedings of the Working Com¬ 
mittee, 14-17 August 1937, AICC File 42 of 1936; Linlithgow to Zetland, 4 February 1938, 
Zetland papers, vol. 15. 

4 Glendevon, The Viceroy at Bay (London, 1971), p. 101; Jawaharlal's note for the Working 
, Committee, 30 July 1938. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


237 


Linlithgow then ‘that 1 gave England at the outside ten years before India was 
independent. I was not so far out.’ 1 All that the Viceroy could retort, as they 
parted, was that a wide gap separated them and they would look at each other 
across it. 2 

From London Jawaharlal went to Paris to address an international confer¬ 
ence on the bombing of civilian populations. Speaking after Lord Cecil, who 
had referred to the recent visit to France of the King and Queen of England, 
Jawaharlal said he spoke not in the name of kings or queens or princes but on 
behalf of hundreds of millions of down-trodden Indians. Fascism was a recent 
growth in the west, but they in India had known it for long under the different 
name of imperialism. If the aggressors of the day had to be checked, the aggres¬ 
sors of yesterday had also to be called to account. They were all deeply moved 
by the aerial bombing in Spain and China, but this was really no different from 
the British bombing on the North-West Frontier. 3 

The organizers of the conference forbade ‘La Pasionaria’ from speaking on 
the ground that she was a communist. When the delegates insisted on hearing 
her, the chairman adjourned the meeting. Ellen Wilkinson reconvened the 
meeting unofficially and called on ‘La Pasionaria’ to speak. She took the floor 
but two attendants seized her and carried her off behind the platform. 

Then Nehru walked on. Nobody would dare touch him. He was oriental 
dignity itself, olive-skin face, dream eyes, thin grey hair. But he was 
angry. Viscount Cecil wished to demonstrate that the Communists did 
not dominate the peace movement. Nehru wished to assert the right of 
free speech for Communists fighting Fascism . . . Nehru is not a Com¬ 
munist but in my many years in Russia and Europe I have rarely seen a 
truer revolutionary. 4 

The Nazi Government made informal approaches to Jawaharlal in the hope 
of inducing him to visit Germany as their guest. 5 In fact, Jawaharlal spent two 
days in Munich but as a private tourist and declined to meet any Nazi officials. 
He then went on to Prague, met Dr Ripka, the communist leader dementis 
and, accompanied by Werzel Jaksch of the German Social Democrat Party, 
visited the border areas. All his sympathies were with the Czech Government 
in their resistance to Hitler; and the encouragement given to him by the British 
Government, with its own class sympathies and leaning towards fascism, 
nauseated Jawaharlal. ‘The perfect description has been given by someone. 
It was the rape of Czechoslovakia by Germany with England and France hold- 

1 Note written on 24 October 1955, Nehru papers. 

* Jawaharlal to J. B. Kripalani, 27 July 1938. 

* Report in The Bombay Chronicle, 8 August 1938. 

4 Louis Fischer, Man and Politics (London, 1941), pp. 506-7. 

* Message of German Consul in Bombay conveyed through Shankar Rao Deo, see Jawaharlal to 
Shankar Rao Deo, 26 May 1938; J. G. Studnitz, German newspaper correspondent, to Jawaharlaf, 
25 June and 5 September 1938. 



238 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


ing her forcibly down!’ 1 Jawaharlal made it clear that when war came, as it' 
was bound to, the Indian people would not allow the British Government, 
whom they utterly distrusted, to take any decision for them. India would will¬ 
ingly throw her entire weight on the side of democracy and freedom; but Britain 
should first establish her bona fides by eliminating empire from India. 2 To add 
weight to his opinion, he urged the Working Committee to pass a resolution 
condemning Nazi attempts at aggression and stating emphatically that in event 
of war India could only be committed by a decision of her people. 3 

In September, at the height of the crisis, Jawaharlal was at Geneva, and was 
caught up in the tension. While the League of Nations was meeting peacefully 
and discussing every question but that of war and peace, the air was full of 
rumours; and Jawaharlal was swept to and fro, to cafes and press conferences, 
through the night. ‘Hello Prague? Hello Paris? Hello London? Is it peace or 
war?’ 4 Back in London he was fitted with a gas mask which he later presented 
to the Allahabad municipal museum, heard and was sickened by Neville Cham¬ 
berlain’s broadcast, and was present in the House of Commons to hear Cham¬ 
berlain announce that he was flying the next day to meet Hitler and Mussolini 
at Munich. Jawaharlal shared the general relief that war had been postponed. 
But he had no illusions about the attitude of the British Government, their 
anxiety to abandon Czechoslovakia and isolate Russia, their fear not of defeat 
but of victory, for that would have been a victory of real democracy. The weak¬ 
ness of England and France was their imperialism, and so the ending of impe¬ 
rialism was necessary even from the wider international viewpoint. Collective 
security could not function effectively so long as it had an imperialist base; and 
this made the freedom of India a vital factor in world politics. 

Unable to secure in time a visa to visit Russia, which might have enabled 
him to fulfil an old desire to take the overland route via the Central Asian 
republics, Jawaharlal returned to India by the end of the year, and was drawn 
again into domestic politics. No one in Britain, even when discussing India, 
had referred to Hindu-Muslim relations or regarded it as of great importance. 
But in India it could not be ignored. The refusal of the Congress to form coali- " 
tions with the League seemed to Jinnah to be a betrayal born of arrogance, and 
since then his policy had been clear. Acceptance of office by the Congress made 
it an easy target. He attacked it as a Hindu fascist body which was out, with the 
assistance of a few Muslim ‘traitors’, to destroy the Muslim minority. When 
Jawaharlal and other Congress leaders asked him repeatedly to specify in¬ 
stances, Jinnah, now fast beginning to show the mastery of obstructive tactics 
and skill in avoidance which were to dominate Indian politics for the next ten 

1 Article in National Herald , 3 October 1938. 

2 Letter to the Manchester Guardian, 8 September 1938. 

J To J.B. Kripalani, Secretary, AICC, 30 August 1938; note for Working Committee, 7 September 
1938; cable to Kripalani, 26 September 1938. * 

4 Article dated 21 September 1938 in the National Herald, reproduced in China, Spain and the 
War, p. 102. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


239 


years, steadily refused. He talked of the suppression of Urdu although Urdu 
was not the language only of the Muslims and Jawaharlal had clearly reiterated 
the Congress policy of developing Hindustani in both Urdu and Devanagari 
scripts as the national language. 1 He objected to the singing of Bande Mataram, 
ignoring the facts that that song had long rid itself of its Hindu antecedents 
and that the Congress, on Gandhi’s initiative, had decided that only the first 
two stanzas, which had no religious overtones, should be sung at public gather¬ 
ings. 2 But otherwise Jinnah would mention no particular grievances. It would 
indeed have been difficult for him to do so; for, as even the British Viceroy and 
Governors conceded, the Congress ministries took special care to avoid harm¬ 
ing Muslim interests. The documentary record of complaints published later 
by the League carried little conviction and explains why the League would not 
agree to the Congress proposal for an impartial inquiry. Sir Sikandar Hyat Khan, 
the premier of the Punjab and the most cool-headed of the League leaders, later 
toned down the charge of ‘atrocities’ committed by Congress governments to 
high-handedness of the majority community in some Congress provinces. 3 
When Linlithgow informed Jinnah that he had examined the position and 
could find no specific instances of oppression, all that Jinnah could say in reply 
was that the Hindus had ‘a subtle intention’ of undermining the Muslim posi¬ 
tion. 4 But this did not mean that Jinnah’s effort to create a legend of the Muslim 
community being trampled on by the Hindus was a failure. As the majority of 
Indians happened to be Hindu by religion, it was an easy slide from the fact of 
Congress ministries representing majority opinion to the suggestion of these 
ministries representing Hindu majority opinion. That the Congress was in 
office put it on the defensive, and the League’s successful myth-making was 
not the least of the unhappy consequences of office acceptance. Jinnah went 
round the country denouncing the Congress as anti-Islamic and promoted a 
drive to build up the organization of the League at the provincial and district 
level. The League was as committed on paper as the Congress to economic and 
social reforms and proclaimed the objective of full independence in the form 
of a federation of free democratic states. But the decision to convert the League 
into a mass party and the resentment of the ‘mass contact’ campaign of the 
Congress did not mean the overthrow of the League’s reliance on the upper 
classes. Indeed, the tenancy reforms proposed by the Congress brought many 
Muslim talukdars in the U.P. from the National Agriculturist Party into the 
League, and in the Punjab the link between the League and the Unionist Party 
was facilitated by support to rich agricultural producers. 5 ‘What’, Sikandar 


l Tbe Question of Language, August 1937, 

2 Statement of the Working Committee, 28 October, The Bombay Chronicle, 30 October 1937. 

3 Letter to Jawaharlal, 14 February 1939. 

4 Glendevon, op. cit., p. 137. 

* For Jinnah's assurances to Muslim landlords in the Punjab, see K.B, Sayeed, Pakistan,The 
Formative Phase (London, 1968), p. 93. 



240 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Hyat Khan said to Jawaharlal sometime in 1938, 'have I got in common 
with Jinnah? Nothing except’ (pointing dramatically at Jawaharlal) 'common 
opposition to you!’ 1 

Jinnah, in fact, was prepared to use every influence and interest to strengthen 
Muslim communalism, He frightened the wealthy by prophesying that one 
result of Congress policy would be class bitterness. 2 On the other hand, he 
encouraged Fazlul Haq of Bengal to support the peasants of that province 
against the zamindars not on an economic but on a communal basis; and Fazlul 
Haq agreed to this after failing to secure a coalition with the Congress. Jinnah 
also made overtures to the British, warning them that if they did not devote 
more attention to the Muslims there was a real risk that these would be driven 
into the arms of the Congress. However, if the British ‘protected’ the Muslims 
in the Congress provinces, the Muslims in return would ‘protect’ the British 
at the Centre. 3 But at this period the British were having a semi-honeymoon 
with the right wing of the Congress, and paid little heed to Jinnah. Linlithgow, 
in particular, had a poor opinion of Jinnah as a leader. 4 * Jawaharlal’s talks in 
London with Zetland and Linlithgow made the League suspicious, 3 and in 
desperation Jinnah sent A. R. Siddiqi and Khaliquzzaman to Europe in 1939 
to contact the German and Italian Governments. 6 

The Government of India ignored these efforts and set aside the Muslim 
mood of frustration to be exploited in any change of circumstance. But the 
Congress was baffled. Jawaharlal was willing to go so far as to consider, in any 
scheme of provincial redistribution, the grant to important groups and minor¬ 
ities of territories within which they could feel that they had full opportunities 
of self-development, without which a creative life was hardly possible. 7 He 
disliked the term ‘communal provinces’ but his scheme contained the germ of 
territorial redistribution on the basis of religion. But to concede Jinnah’s main 
demands, that the Congress should not approach the Muslim masses but should 
recognize the League as representative of Muslim opinion, was unthinkable. 
However, so long as the Congress was in office it could not ignore even uncor¬ 
roborated allegations of partisanship. One way out of this dilemma was to ap¬ 
proach the Muslim peasantry over the heads of the leaders of the League with a 
programme of economic change; but here Jawaharlal found that, with the Con¬ 
gress ministries not proceeding fast enough, the communal approach, however 


1 DSVA, p. 164. 

* Presidential address at the Lucknow session of the Muslim League, October 1937. 

* Reports of Jinnah's interviews, with Linlithgow in Linlithgow to Zetland, 9 September 1937, 
Zetland papers, vol. 14, and with Brabourne in Brabourne to Zetland, 19 August 1938, Braboume 
papers, vol. 61. 

4 See. for example, Linlithgow to Haig, 17 April 1939, Haig papers, vol. 3. 

’ Brabourne to Zetland, 21 July 1938, Zetland papers, vol. 16. 

4 Linlithgow to Zetland, 12 April 1939 and Zetland to Linlithgow 2 May 1939, Zetland papers, 
vols. 17 and 11, respectively. ^ 

7 See his draft concluding chapter written on 23 August 1937 for K.T. Shah’s book Federal 
Government. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE 'CONGRESS 


241 


‘hysterical’ and ‘medievalist’, 1 was successfully hampering efforts to draw the 
Muslim masses into the Congress. The other alternative was to take advantage 
of the League’s decision to widen its base and precipitate a conflict between 
the reactioriaiy outlook of its leaders and the needs of the Muslim masses. So 
Jawaharlal encouraged the holding of Muslim mass meetings demanding debt 
relief and abolition of the talukdari system in the interests of the Muslim 
kisans. 2 But these were long-term projects which hardly gathered any momen¬ 
tum in the context of extreme communal propaganda and violence. The League, 
which was promoting this activity, understandably rejected all suggestions by 
the Congress for consultation to promote communal harmony. The British 
police and magistrates also often did little to curb religious riots in order 
presumably to discredit the Congress ministries. If this were their objective 
they gained considerable success, for Hindu-Muslim rioting strengthened the 
anti-Congress feeling among the Muslim masses. Jawaharlal realized what this 
might finally mean. 

As you know I am overwhelmed with this sense of impending catastrophe. 

I find that few persons even among our leading politicians have this 
sense of tension and this premonition of approaching disaster. I fear we 
are rapidly heading for what might be called civil war in the real sense of 
the word in India. Our future conflicts are never going to be on the straight 
issue of Indian nationalism versus British imperialism. British impe¬ 
rialism in future is certainly going to play an important part in opposing 
us. But it will do so more from behind the scenes exploiting all manner 
of other groups to this end. 3 

Weakened by office and punched continuously by an enemy on whom it 
could get no hold, the Congress was now stricken by in-fighting at its highest 
level. Subhas Bose had, through long years of prison and exile, earned the suc¬ 
cession to Jawaharlal as president of the Congress in 1938. But, during his year 
of office, he took hardly any interest in problems of organization and gave no 
clear lead in many matters that came up before the Working Committee. More 
important, he could- not get on with Gandhi. This was not just difference of 
viewpoint. Jawaharlal differed with Gandhi just as much, but ‘we know that 
neither of us can do without the other, for there is a heart union between us 
which no intellectual differences can break’. 4 With Bose there was no such 
affinity, and when he announced early in 1939 that he would seek re-election, 
Gandhi encouraged the right wing of the Congress to set up its own candidate. 
But Bose won decisively and Gandhi acknowledged it to be his own defeat. 
However, this was only the beginning of the crisis. With his re-election Bose 

jawaharlal’s comments on the Muslim League session October 1937, Tb* Bombay Cbroniela, 
19 October 1937. 

jawaharlal's letter to Siddiq Ahmed Siddiqui, 8 September 1937. 1 
J To Sri Prakass, 13 August 1939. 

4 Gandhi in May 1939, quoted in Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 3, p. 93. 



242 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

believed that his hour as a charismatic leader had arrived. Impatient, wilful and 
endlessly ambitious, he decided to press home his victory. He ignored the fact 
that many local and regional factors for which he could take no credit had played 
a part in the election. He stressed only that there was widespread dissatisfaction 
with the older leaders and believed that he had been chosen to replace them. 
Incapable of the wider view, he tended to see most events in relation to his own 
career. A dedicated yet egotistic, complicated, ill-fated being, he lived out the 
fantasy of his life which ended in premature death; and there was something 
almost natural and inevitable in his loss of life in an air accident. The elements 
of tragedy were never absent from Bose’s destiny. 

Now, in 1939, riding on the crest of a wave, Bose launched a fierce struggle 
of will. He insinuated that the ‘old guard’ were conspiring with the Govern¬ 
ment to establish federation, announced that the ‘Right’ and the ‘Left’ were in 
confrontation and demanded the immediate issue of an ultimatum to the 
Government and the launching of a struggle. This was heady stuff. But Bose, 
though an instinctive fighter, had no ring-craft and he had underestimated 
Gandhi and his followers. They welcomed a break, and brought it about in 
their own way. Realizing that, despite Bose’s electoral victory, the majority 
in the Congress still preferred Gandhi’s leadership with its moderation, twelve 
leading supporters of Gandhi resigned from the Working Committee and then 
carried a resolution at the Congress session in Tripuri that Bose should nomi-. 
nate the new Committee in consultation with Gandhi and accept his advice. 
Gandhi, however, declined to co-operate, with the result that Bose had to resign 
the presidency. Then followed, step by step, his ostracism, his setting up of a 
new party, and his lone path, away from the Congress, during the war. 

In all this, Jawahadal’s attitude was individualistic and unwelcome to both 
sides. He disapproved of the manner in which Bose was being hounded out 
after winning an election, but he could not bring himself to support Bose. So 
he declined to sign the letter of resignation of the twelve members of the Work¬ 
ing Committee, but resigned on his own. Although some of his statements 
tended to be critical of Bose, at Tripuri he remained almost silent, tried in 
private discussions to patch up a compromise and urged Bose not to resign. 
When Bose insisted, Jawaharlal, while making clear his dislike of Bose’s action, 
declined to serve in the reconstituted Working Committee till the outbreak of 
war changed the situation. Such ambivalence Bose could not understand and 
this, more than the direct offensive of Gandhi and the others which drove him 
out of the fold, he found most difficult to forgive. ‘Nobody has done more harm 
to me personally, ami to our cause in this crisis, than Pandit Nehru. If he had 
been with us, we would have had a majority. Even his neutrality would have 
probably giVea$£&™ijority. But he was with the Old Guard at Tripuri. His 
open propaganda against me also has done me more harm than the activities 
of the twelve stalwarts. What a pity l’ 1 m 

‘Hose to his nephew, 17 April 1939, quoted in N.G. Jog, In Freedom 's Quest (Delhi, 1969), 
p. 158. 




OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


249 


To suggest that Jawaharlal had allowed Bose to be destroyed is, of course, 
to exaggerate absurdly. Bose had really destroyed himself. The logic of his 
attitude demanded his expulsion from the movement, and there was -no way 
back. But Jawaharlal’s seemingly erratic attitude certainly cries out for expla¬ 
nation. Some have hinted the simple, personal, petty answer of consistent 
opportunism. Jawaharlal, said Rajagopalachari long after these events, 1 had 
always been a worshipper of success. Applying this yardstick his behaviour in 
this crisis is easily understood; for Bose was a born loser. In Gandhian India, 
leadership could come only by gift, never by seizure. So Jawaharlal, it is alleged, 
preferred to remain in the Congress and by Gandhi’s side, a ‘safe’ militant who 
occupied as much of the central ground as possible while he awaited his destiny. 
Happy on the inside track, he allowed his only rival, on the outer rails, to be 
pushed off the course. 

This explanation is too easy. Personalizing clouds and distorts the issues. 
The quarrel between Bose and Gandhi was not, as Bose sought to make out, 2 
a straight fight between the Left and the Right. He hid been tardy in condemn¬ 
ing Germany, Italy and Japan, had in December 1938 met the German Consul. 
in Bombay, 3 had criticized Jawaharlal for supporting all lost causes such as 
China and Spain and was not enthusiastic about welcoming Jewish refugees 
from Europe. While his willingness to exploit the world situation to India’s 
benefit was not wrong in itself, he had, despite long years in Europe, no acute 
international sense. In India, while clamouring for struggle with the British 
and condemning office acceptance, he attempted to establish a coalition ministry 
in Bengal and sought the Governor’s assistance in this. 4 This again could taf 
justified on pragmatic grounds as strengthening the prospects of a satyagrahlk 
campaign, 3 but it weakened Bose’s ideological crusade. In fact, Jawaharlal was 
right in suspecting a weakness in commitment to anything broader than natitsgg; 
alism; nor could one have confidence in Bose’s judgment even in this narro^ 
field. He viewed most problems in too finite, clear-cut and limited a way. TM& 
distrust on Jawaharlal’s part of Bose’s approach strengthened the temptip^ 
mental dissimilarity which undoubtedly existed. The autobiographies of a* 
two men, published within a few months of each other, drive home the contsipf 
Bose’s book 6 lacks the intellectual grace and stature of Jawaharlal’s; the idfcaS 
are jejune and the prose without flavour. The book also shows a matter-of-fact 


•See N. Majumdar, ‘C.R. The Unfinished Century’, The Statesman, 27 December 1972. 

’Curiously, this idea is still prevalent, even among left-wing writers. Hiren Mukerjee describes 
Jawaharlal’s failure to heal the breach as ‘a major blemish on Jawaharlal's record’ and thinks history 
might have been different and brighter if Jawaharlal and Bose had, at this stage, together led left- 
wing forces. [The Gentle Colossus, Calcutta, 1964, p. 80). Mohit Sen regards it as a tragedy that 
the 'left nationalists’, Jawaharlal and Bose, could not unite. ( The Indian Revolution, New Delhi, 
1970, p. 35. 

*1 owe this information to Dr M. Hauner who has found evidence in Nazi records. 

4 Brabourne to Linlithgow, 19 December 1938, Brabourne papers, vd. 56. 

’Bose to Gandhi, 21 December 1938. 

*Tbe Indian Struggle (London, 1935). 



244 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


mind, and a muscular, sanguinary temperament, totally different to Jawahar- 
lal’s highly strung personality, plagued by introspection. 

Jawaharlal, therefore, could not be expected to side with Bose when battle 
was joined. He was particularly put off by the fact that Bose had#desired re- 
election and had induced even Rabindranath Tagore to lobby for him. 1 Bose’s 
eagerness, after the election, to precipitate a conflict also repelled him. With 
the world on the brink of war and a crisis in India impending, it was foolish to 
divide the Congress. The left-wing forces within the Congress were not strong 
enough to act on their own, and the party still needed Gandhi’s leadership. The 
socialists and the communists, who at first supported the challenge of Bose, 
were soon disheartened to find themselves in alliance with adventurist ele¬ 
ments out for selfish advantage; and Bose himself reduced the differences to a 
conspiracy against Bengal. ’For the moment Subhas has become a kind of a 
symbol of Bengal and it is quite impossible to argue with or about symbols.’ 2 
Jawaharlal, with his image of the Congress as a broad anti-imperialist front, 
had never been in favour of homogeneous committees in a sectarian sense; his 
idea of the Working Committee was of men with different views working to¬ 
gether with mutual confidence. So he resented Bose’s aspersions against his 
colleagues, but he also disliked the efforts to displace Bose, and in consequence 
refused to attach himself to either side. To the end he stood out of the intrigues 
of both groups and sought a settlement by dealing with the crisis as differences 
among' comrades within a movement. He tried to explain to Bose that any 
rebellion such as his could only be successful if it was rebellion within a dis¬ 
cipline; and he pleaded with Gandhi to make a friendly approach to Bose. 3 
But Gandhi was tougher than Jawaharlal and Bose less accommodating. 

In this cheerless Atmosphere two developments gave Jawaharlal comfort. 
The problem of the Indian States had thrust itself into the forefront of Indian 
politics and the Congress had decided to support the growing movement for 
civil liberties and responsible government. Gandhi himself went to Rajkot and 
forced concessions and British intervention by undertaking a fast. Jawaharlal 
was president for this year of the All-India States Peoples Conference, and he 
planned to co-ordinate the agitation in the various States and involve the rest 
of India as well. This should become the major issue in the struggle against the 
British, transcending the wrangles in the Congress and the controversy with 
the League, underlining the total unacceptability of federation as envisaged 
in the Act of 1935 and perhaps even leading to the resignation of the Congress 
ministries. 4 Though he was considerably hampered by Gandhi’s very different 

1 See A.K. Chanda, Tagore’s secretary, to Jawaharlal, 28 November 1938, A Bunch of Old 
Letters, pp. 299-300; and Jawaharlal to Chanda, 1 December 1938. 

2 To Krishna Menon, 4 April 1939. 

* For the important letters between Bose, Gandhi and Jawaharlal, see A Bunch of Old Loiters, 
pp. 307-7 5; Jawaharlal’sgeneral attitude on the crisis is explained in his articles in National Herald, 
later reprinted as a pamphlet, Where are we? (April, 1939). % 

4 Message to the ‘States People’, 3 February 1939; speech at Allahabad, 9 February, The Bombay 
Chronicle, 10 and 11 February 1939; presidential address at the All-India States Peoples Conference, 
13 February 1939. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


243 


approach of overtures to the rulers and acceptance of British arbitration, yet 
this was a field of action which Jawaharlal welcomed. 

The second congenial task was national planning. The concept of a planned 
economy was, even in Europe in the late thirties, still vague and ambiguous. 
But it was felt that only in Soviet Russia was there national planning in the red 
sense, with the whole economy geared to the production of plenty for human 
welfare and not driven by the profit motive or intended for efficiency in war. 
In other words, planning was a part of socialism. 1 Jawaharlal agreed with this. 
However critical he might be of the political aspects of the Stalin regime, he had 
been deeply impressed by the economic progress achieved by the Soviet Union. 

The argument about the success or otherwise of the Five Year Plan is 
rather a pointless one. The answer to it is really the present state of the 
Soviet Union. And a further answer is the fact that this Plan has im¬ 
pressed itself on the imagination of the world. Everybody talks of ‘plan¬ 
ning’ now, and of Five-Year and Ten-Year and Three-Year Plans. The 
Soviets have put magic into the word. 2 

He believed that India too had much to learn from the Soviet example. But to 
apply these lessons in a colonial economy and to consider planning in a country 
which was not yet free showed a bold and pioneering mind. This was the kind 
of work, long-term, adventurous and leading to socialism, which excited him. 
The fact that the Congress was in charge of many provincial administrations, 
whatever its political drawbacks, could be utilized for planning. Jawaharlal 
encouraged the Bihar and U.P. Governments, the two ministries with whom 
he exercised the greatest influence, to recruit experts from Europe and to get 
in touch with the League of Nations and the International Labour Organisation 
for the kind of assistance they had given to China. 3 Meantime, at a meeting 
of ministers of industry from the Congress provinces, it was decided to set up 
a National Planning Committee with Jawaharlal as its chairman. Jawaharlal 
took up the work with enthusiasm and constituted a committee with not only 
Congressmen but scientists, economists, businessmen and industrialists as 
well. The Congress ministries were represented; in addition Punjab, Baroda 
and Mysore agreed to send representatives, and contacts were established with 
the departments of the Government of India. A long questionnaire was drafted 
and widely distributed and nearly thirty sub-committees were constituted to 
make detailed recommendations on specific subjects. 

Jawaharlal’s own contribution, apart from holding the assorted crowd of 
planners together, was a dear statement of the general objectives of planning 
in India. To him planning was inevitably connected with a socialist economy 
within a democratic structure, but he had no wish to frighten away people by 
stressing the socialist aspect. The Congress had taken up planning because any 

'See G.D.H. Cole, Practical Economics (Pelican, May 1937). 

2 !.etier to Indite, 9 July 1933, Glimpses, p. 887. 

*To Syed Mahtnud apd to G. B. Pant, 1 October 1938. 



246 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


vital national movement was bound to interest itself in all aspects of national 
life, but the Congress itself was not committed to socialism. So what Jawahar- 
lal hoped to do was to lead his party and the Indian middle classes generally to 
socialism without their knowing it. Any attempt to dispense with*the middle 
classes and bring about a premature conflict on class lines would lead to chaos 
and possibly to prolonged inability to build anything. ‘The disruptive forces in 
the country seem to be growing in strength and it almost seems that we are 
going the way of China.’ 1 Jawaharlal had moved even further away from the 
doctrinal positions of the left wing and preferred a pragmatic, undefined 
approach. 

He was, therefore, deliberately imprecise in formulating the aim of planning. 
‘The ideal of the Congress is the establishment of a free and democratic state 
in India. Such a free democratic state involves an egalitarian society in which 
equal opportunities are provided for every member for self-expression and 
self-fulfilment, and an adequate minimum of a civilised standard of life is 
assured to each member so as to make the attainment of this equal opportunity 
a reality. This should be the background or foundation of our Plan.’ 2 A year 
later he was more forthcoming and acknowledged that the over-all objective 
was to socialize national life in all its many sectors. 3 Advantage could be taken 
of the Congress resolution of May 1929 that revolutionary changes, economic 
and social, were essential in India and of the clause in the 1931 resolution on 
fundamental rights that the state should own or control key industries and 
services, to start planning in the socialist direction. Private enterprise was not 
ruled out but it would have to be strictly controlled and co-ordinated to the 
general plan. The emphasis placed by the Congress on cottage industries did 
not exclude large-scale industries and any plan should provide for both; and 
increasingly the Congress would realize the importance of the latter. He 
rejected the Gandhian viewpoint that machineiy was evil in itself and resigned 
from the executive committee of the All-India Spinners Association. 4 For a 
country to turn its face against industrialization was to render itself a prey to 
the industrialized countries. Even the development of cottage industries 
required the control of political and economic power, and this could not be 
secured by a people dependent wholly on cottage industries. It was not large 
scale industry that brought injustice and violence but its misuse by capitalists. 
Private ownership and the acquisitive society encouraged competitive violence, 
and when replaced by a socialist society the advantages of large-scale indus¬ 
trialization and its co-ordination with cottage industries could be realized. The 
Congress had devoted more attention to small-scale industries not merely 
because all its members accepted Gandhi’s views on the subject. Large-scale 
industries were strong enough to look after themselves, and were also often in 
the grip of foreign vested interests. The cbarka and khaddaryjx the other hand 

1 To K.T. Shah, Secretary, National Planning Committee, 13 May 1939. 

Memorandum to National Planning Committee,.4 June 1939. 

* Note to National Planning Committee, 30 August 1940. 

4 TJo Shankarlal Banker, 24 February 1940. 



OUT OF TUNE WITH THE CONGRESS 


247 


created self-reliance and utilized the wasted man-power of India. 1 This made 
sense at a time when the Congress was a party of challenge, but it obviously 
would have to shift its approaches when it planned for a free India. 

The lack of sovereign authority was another road-block which on first sight 
was insuperable, for planning assumed independence and freedom from im¬ 
perialist control. Land reforms, for example, were urgently required, but 
neither peasant proprietorship nor co-operative or collective farming could be 
introduced so long as British rule prevailed. But while planning, in its full 
dimension, should be for a free India, steps could be taken immediately to 
develop national resources, increase the national wealth between two and three 
times within ten years, raise the standards of the Indian people and prevent the 
creation of fresh vested interests. This emphasis on concrete sftort-term steps 
such as improved nutrition, more clothing and better housing for every Indian 
over the next ten years had the further advantage of by-passing the theoretical 
and ideological differences among the planners. The immediate national objec¬ 
tive was stated to be self-sufficiency, planning for which might, apart from 
other benefits, help to weaken economic imperialism even before the British 
left India. 

The work of the National Planning Committee alarmed not so much the 
Government of India as the right wing of the Congress itseli The detailed 
explanations provided by Jawaharlal that planning did not mean the abandon¬ 
ment of khaddar and the destruction of cottage industries 2 carried hardly any 
conviction. The agreement which was gradually developing in the Planning 
Committee in favour of at least state control of industry and agriculture also 
roused opposition. Gandhi himself called on his followers to stay away from 
the Planning Committee. ‘I have advised you about Jawaharlal’s invitation.. 
In my opinion, the whole of his planning is a waste of effort. But he cannot be 
satisfied with anything that is not big.’ 3 He also wrote to Jawaharlal to complain. 

I have never been able to understand or appreciate the labours of the 
Committee. I do not know that it is working within the four corners of 
the* resolution creating the committee. I do not know that the W.C. is 
being kept informed of its doings. I have not understood the purpose of 
the numerous subcommittees. It has appeared to me that much money 
and labour are being wasted on an effort which will bring forth little or 
no fruit. These are my doubts. I seek light. 4 

What saved Jawaharlal from having to fight last-ditch actions was the 
outbreak of war. The fall in imports of textiles and the boycott of goods from 
both Britain and Japan increased the demand for hand-spun cloth. The war 
also gave a boost to industrial and other forms of economic development and 

‘To Krishna Kripalanl, 29 September 1939. 

^Proceedings of the Working Committee reported in The Bombay CbronicU, 28 June 1939. 

. *To Amrit Keur, 29 June 1939, quoted in A.H. Hanson, The Process of Planning (Oxford, 
1966), p. 28n. 

<Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 11 August 1939 A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 378-9. 



248 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


made planning seem all the more necessary. ‘If we had not had a planning com¬ 
mittee already we ought to have formed one.’ 1 A special sub-committee was 
created to consider the war situation and its repercussions oh the Indian eco¬ 
nomy. There was scope now, even from the point of view of war production, 
for promoting industrial development, while the impact of war or? agriculture 
emphasized the need for planning and state control on a countrywide scale. 
The over-production of sugar cane in the U.P., for example, could be dealt 
with, according to Jawaharlal, on the lines of Roosevelt’s New Deal, by the 
Government stabilizing prices and buying up surplus stock for distribution 
gratis to the poor. 2 But the Government of India refused to adapt themselves 
to the changing context. They were still anxious to assist foreign industrial 
interests and to leave agricultural problems to laissez-faire and cut-throat 
competition. 

By the summer of 1940, despite the tremendous disadvantages of lack of 
a common viewpoint among the planners, paucity of statistics and other data, 
and no immediate likelihood of implementation, seventeen sub-committees 
had presented final or interim reports. These covered not only technical pro¬ 
grammes of production* but also wider issues of distribution, social justice and 
social welfare. The sub-committee to which Jawaharlal probably attached the 
most importance was that on the condition and rights of women. The second 
stage of planning had now been reached. A comprehensive report, based on 
the suggestions of the various sub-committees, was taking shape. The Com¬ 
mittee met daily for a fortnight in May 1940 and again in June, under Jawahar- 
lal’s presidency and approved the general framework. Though there were 
various inconsistencies and frequent ambiguities of phrasing, the broad trend 
was in favour of state ownership or state control or a blend of the two. How¬ 
ever, political developments now took command. The Congress ministries, 
which had given the Planning Committee a purchase on the State, were gone. 
Jawaharlal himself was removed from the scene in October 1940 and the 
Government refused to permit him to deal with matters concerning the Plan¬ 
ning Committee while in jail. To keep the concept of planning before the public 
eye, Jawaharlal suggested publication of the reports of the sub-committees; 
but some other members of the Committee were not in favour. The matter 
was referred to Gandhi who vetoed publication. * 

Jawaharlal’s contribution to planning before 1947 has, therefore, to be 
considered a mere torso. Even so, it was path-breaking. The plethora of plans 
drawn up in various quarters during the war years and the setting up by the 
Government of India in rivalry of a department of planning with an industria¬ 
list from Bombay in charge all had their genesis in the work of the National 
Planning Committee. Jawaharlal had made India plan-conscious. 

•Jawaharlal to K.T. Shah, 18 September 1939. 

*To Rajendra Prasad, 4 August 1940. 

*K.T. Shah to P. Thakurdas, 21 April, A.D. Shroff to K.T. Shah, 23 April, and K.T. Shah to 
P. Thakurdas, 30 April 1941. Purshotamdas Thakurdas papers, File 220/1938-1949. 




The War Crisis 


When the war broke out, Jawaharlal was in China. Few people in India had 
approved of his going at a time when Europe was again approaching a crisis, 
and he himself had beep reluctant to leave India just then. But all plans had been 
made and it was difficult to back out. So he went to Kunming, Chungking and 
Chengtu but, before he could go to the north-west and meet Mao and the com¬ 
munists, he had to cut short his visit and return hurriedly to India. He liked the 
Chinese, who struck him ‘as a singularly grown-up people’, and he established a 
personal friendship with Chiang Kai-shek and his wife. He was much moved by 
the idea of visiting another Asian country with an old civilization and with 
which India had had centuries of contact; and as a result of the visit, ‘China has 
grown very near to me, and all my thoughts are mixed up with her.’ 1 In the new 
world order that was emerging, he was determined that India and China should 
work together; and this idea did not leave him till 1962. In fact, he thought in 
terms of an eastern federation in which India and China would be the senior 
partners, and called on his countrymen to plan and work for it. 2 

However, throughout the fortnight in China, he kept his sense of humour 
and balance. He did not fail to notice that the Kuomintang was not a very 
democratic body though it called itself such, and was unfavourably struck by 
the fact that every time the name of Chiang was mentioned at a public meeting 
the audience had to stand up in respect. 3 But the problems faced by India and 
China were so similar, since both were striving to build national power in order 
to gain national freedom, that he left a note with Chiang suggesting closer con- 
tarts between the two national movements and the development of a common 
outlook and policy on major international issues. 4 

On his return from China on 9 September, Jawaharlal found that Gandhi’s 
immediate reaction to the war had been, apart from abhorrence at the 

•To Madame Chiang Kai-shek, 17 December 1940. 

* The Eastern Federation’, article in National Harold, 28 October 1940. 

*See ‘Diary of a Journey’, reprinted in China, Spain and tha War. 

4 A note on the development of contacts between India and China, written at Chungking, 29 
August 1939. 


249 



250 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


triumph of violence, a spontaneous support of Britain. He had told the Viceroy 
that he viewed the war ‘with an English heart’ and, while he could not speak for 
his colleagues, personally was for full and unquestioning co-operation. At the 
thought of the possible destruction of the Houses of Parliament and West¬ 
minster Abbey, he had broken down. ‘I could not’, reported the Viceroy, ‘help 
myself being profoundly moved by the emotion which he showed during a con¬ 
siderable part of it [the interview]. . . His whole attitude could not have been 
better, and in his conversation he showed the same breadth of approach and the 
same disinclination to trouble about minor or subsidiary issues as I have always 
noticed in him.’ 1 In the U.P. the ministers seemed willing to give full co¬ 
operation in prosecution of the war, while in Madras the Governor had to 
restrain Rajagopalachari, on the outbreak of hostilities, from detaining all 
Germans and seizing their bank balances, ‘whereupon he commented that the 
English seemed to want to wage war according to High Court rules’. 2 

However, the Congress attitude to the war was formulated not by Gandhi 
or Rajagopalachari but by Jawaharlal, and his approach was less emotional. This 
was to be expected and should have been no surprise to the Government. For 
years Jawaharlal had been stating his viewpoint on the European crisis and by 
periodica] resolutions had been committing the Congress to it; and the mere 
involvement of Britain in war was not going to change it. He had been consist¬ 
ently opposed to fascism and Nazism and believed in some form of collective 
security to curb their continual aggression. If other Powers co-operated with 
the Soviet Union, the policy of peace would become unassailable. Neville Cham¬ 
berlain’s policy of appeasement, therefore, had filled him with disgust, and he 
held Britain primarily responsible for the collapse of Spain and the destruction 
of Czechoslovakia. India would be no party to this policy, which was an addi¬ 
tional and unanswerable argument for complete independence. His writings 
and speeches to this effect in Britain in 1938 seem to have evoked Winston' 
Churchill’s approval, for though Jawaharlal did not meet him, Churchill sent 
him a message of goodwill through a mutual friend a year later, on the eve of 
Jawaharlal’s departure to China. 5 

Jawaharlal’s analysis of appeasement was that the British Government were 
inspired by class interests and were more hostile to Soviet Russia than to Nazi 
Germany. While Britain had been the leader in introducing political democracy, 
she was socially backward and the strain of social conflict had been only lessened 
by the exploitation of her colonies. She was anxious to protect her own empire 
and for this purpose connived at Nazi aggrandizement. Even when British 
imperial interests had been threatened by the dictators and there was growing 
criticism of their foreign policy, the British Government, the most reactionary 

‘Glendevon, op. cit., p. 136; Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 
18; Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol, 5, p. 197. 

2 Haig’s telegram to Viceroy, 17 September 1939, Haig papers, vol. 7; Erskine's telegram to 
Viceroy, 3 September 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 17. 

*TbaDucov*ry of India, p. 439. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


231 


for generations, had continued to support Hitler and Mussolini, for their dislike 
of democracy and socialism was greater even than their attachment to empire. 
Even within Britain a fascist outlook was developing, and Jawaharlal believed 
that Chamberlain was following the road to internal fascism under cover of war 
preparations. 1 As for the opposition, the Labour Party did not seem to know 
its own mind and played an ineffective role, the pacifists in their eagerness to 
avoid war supported Hitler while the Independent Labour Party behaved worst 
of all and praised Chamberlain as a man of peace. 

The hope of the Chamberlain Government of protecting vested interests 
at home and abroad while Germany fell on Russia had been defeated by Russia's 
understanding with Germany. Even though Jawaharlal deplored the cynical 
opportunism which underlay it, he recognized the diplomatic reasons which 
had led Stalin to veer his policy. But the fact that Britain and Germany were at 
war with each other while Russia stood apart did not alter Jawaharlal’s general 
analysis of the situation and strengthened his attitude on non-participation 
by India. He had no trust in a Britain which still had Neville Chamberlain as 
Prime Minister. Fascism and imperialism werfe both parts of the same reac¬ 
tionary complex, and India was opposed to both. Jawaharlal’s views on this 
point had never been in doubt. In London in 1938, he had emphasized that the 
Indian people should themselves decide on participation in any war, and so 
long as they did not have independence they would regard any war in which 
Britain was involved as an imperialist war and an occasion to intensify their 
own national struggle. The fact that the British Labour Party found this difficult 
to understand only showed how a dormant imperialism coloured even its out¬ 
look. 2 He wrote a few months later: 

We want to combat Fascism. But we will not permit ourselves to be ex¬ 
ploited by imperialism, we will not have war imposed upon us by outside 
authority, we will not sacrifice to preserve the old injustices or to maintain 
an order that is based on them. We will not and cannot forget our own 
struggle for freedom for slogans which may souod pleasant to the ear but 
have little reality behind them or vague promises which have been broken 
often. 3 

It was for India to decide whether she would go to war. The Viceroy had now, 
without consulting representative opinion, taken that decision. But it was 

‘See his articles ‘The Hoax’ and ‘England's Dilemma', in the National Herald, 25 October 
1938 ai)d 31 May 1939, respectively. 

a F.Brodcway, 'A Talk with Jawaharlal Nehru’, TbeNewLeader, 1 July 1938. 

* ‘The Choice Before Us’, article in the Nationalteerald, 5 October 1938. 



252 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


absurd for a subject India to fight for the freedom of Poland. If India were to 
participate enthusiastically in the war, she would have to be granted freedom. 
One had to be free and democratic to fight for freedom and democracy. If Britain 
fought for democracy, her first task was to eliminate empire from India. The 
Indian people would not bargain or seek to take advantage of Britain’srtlifficulty; 
but whatever they did would have to be in accord with India’s freedom and 
dignity. 

The resolution of the Working Committee was on these lines. On the train 
to Wardha, Jawaharlal had prepared two drafts, and the Committee accepted 
a merged version after merely toning down.criticisms of the British and tighten¬ 
ing the prose. It rejected both Gandhi’s advice that there should be no demand 
for a statement of war aims and the suggestion of Subhas Bose that civil dis¬ 
obedience should be launched immediately. While condemning the Nazi attack 
on Poland, the Committee reaffirmed that India could not associate herself in 
a war said to be for democratic freedom when that freedom was denied to her 
and such limited freedom as she possessed had been taken away from her. The 
word of the British and French Governments, that they were fighting for demo¬ 
cracy and freedom, was not enough. If Britain fought for democracy, she should 
necessarily end imperialism in her own possessions and establish full democracy 
in India. A free democratic India would gladly associate herself with other free 
nations for mutual defence against aggression and for economic co-operation. 
The British Government were, therefore, invited to declare their war aims 
clearly and state how these would be applied to India and given effect to imme¬ 
diately, so that India could assume her proper role in the emergence of the new 
I world order. ; 

The author of the resolution, commented Gandhi, 1 was an artist, an ardent 
patriot who was also a humanitarian and an internationalist. Jawaharlal made 
clear the commitment of the Congress to an anti-fascist position and to national 
freedom in the larger world context. Theyears of continuing Nazi aggression 
in Europe were to him the basic cause of the war, and this knowledge was never 
clouded in his mind by the intensity of his dislike of British imperialism. .Even 
after the Government had rejected the Congress offer, he rebuked the editor of 
the National Herald for pro-German headlines and ordered the dismissal of 
the sub-editor responsible. 2 He wrote to Edward Thompson: 3 

i 

Some Congressmen tell you that it is not possible to make India enthu¬ 
siastic on your side. But I know that they are wrong — I would guarantee 
to do it myself. In the last war there was a doubt about your cause, and 
whenever you had a defeat there was rejoicing in the bazaars. In this war 
you will no doubt have setbacks, and some of them may be serious, and 


«* 


tTenduikar, Mahatma, vol. 5, p. 204. 

2 Private letter to the editor, National Harold, 27 October 1999. 
’Cited in E. Thompson, Enlist India for Fraadom! p. 48. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


233 


there will be the old temptation to rejoice. But everyone knows your 

cause is ‘just’. 

However, Jawaharlal was unwilling to be stampeded by sentiment as Gandhi 
had been. The war was clearly going to be a long one which in time would 
probably extend beyond Europe and involve the United States. So what was 
required of the Congress was to state the general attitude not only of the Indian 
nationalist movement but of all colonial peoples, and wait for the British 
Government to clarify their cause by appropriate action. His lack of faith in 
Neville Chamberlain’s Government was, it should be remembered, widely 
shared in Britain. The Manchester Guardian approved of the resolution. 
‘Nehru’, recorded Beatrice Webb in her diary, 1 ‘has called the British bluff, 
the pretence of fighting for political democracy and the rights of man.’ Stafford 
Cripps urged Jawaharlal not to accept anything short of conclusive action and 
to see to it that the Congress stood firm as a rock, 2 while Attlee counselled the 
British Cabinet to respond to the demand of the Congress with ‘imaginative 
insight’. 3 Even a considerable number of Conservative back-benchers pressed 
Zetland to reach an agreement with the Congress. 4 But the Viceroy had made 
up his mind that his present duty was neither to move even at snail’s pace along 
the path of constitutional progress nor to seek ways of harnessing India's enthu¬ 
siasm for democratic principles. He had no commitment to the Indian people, 
and even the tragedy of famine in Bengal caused him no concern. He was now 
a war Viceroy, 9 whose first objective was to make India a safe base for the me¬ 
chanical prosecution of the war, and to provide men and money. Every decision 
had to be judged soley by the extent to which it would promote an Allied victory; 
and Linlithgow lacked the imagination to see that wars are not won by guns 
and soldiers alone. In this projection the Congress, as guided by ‘a doctrinaire 
like Nehru with his amateur knowledge of foreign politics and of the inter¬ 
national stage’/' had no place. On the other hand, more importance should be 
given to the Muslim League; and the Viceroy thought that this would have 
the added advantages of appeasing the army, which was largely Muslim, and 
the tribal elements on the North-West Frontier. Linlithgow decided, therefore, 
to ignore Jawaharlal and to break with the Congress; ‘the present is probably 
a better opportunity than may present itself later’. 7 Sikandar Hyat Khan, though 
nominally a member of the League, had no wish to see Jinnah break up the 
Unionist Party in the Punjab, which was a party mainly of rural landed interests 

1 5 October 1939, Beatrice Webb diaries, vol. 53. p. 143. 

2 Letter to Jawaharlal, 11 October 1939. 

9 Zetland to Linlithgow, 16 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11. 

4 Idem, 20 December 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11. 

» Linlithgow's report of his conversation with W. Phillips, President Roosevelt's personal re¬ 
presentative, 19 February 1943. Transfer ofPowtr {H.M.S.0.1971) vol. 3, p. 689. 
a Linlithgow to Zetland, 18 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 

7 Idem, 21 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 



2*4 


}K?9i KHAKiAL NEHRU 


economic and not communal considerations. He therefore 
J L Vlrms that nothing should be done to inflate Jinnah or make him 
aivisfi&ttfc W lv M ., x n., t Respite this warning, Linlithgow sent for 

more difficult to deal with. • ministries be dismissed. 2 

Jinnah; and Jinnah asked that the Congress miniMi/co 

The Congress, in fact, at this time, despite the insistence m th£ resolution 
for some action by the Government to establish its bona fides, conveyed to the 
Viceroy that it would be satisfied with a declaration clearly stating that India 
would be free to determine her own destinies after the war. Jawaharlal was less 
impulsive on this occasion than Gandhi; but his preference for the Allies was 
no weaker. He made dear, even if only indirectly, his anxiety to assist personally 
to the full in the war effort, and wanted the association of persons like himself, 
who were representative of public opinion, with some form of a National War 
Council. If India and Britain waged war together as equal partners, with no 
formal legal changes, but with Indian leaders being taken into confidence and 
associated with decisions on such matters as the extent of India’s war effort, 
the raising of armies and industrial mobilization, this in itself would have 
removed most of the constitutional difficulties by the time the war had been 
successfully concluded. But it was hinted that Jawaharlal would not insist on 
even this. 3 

Zetland, the Secretary of State, approved of Jawaharlal’s proposals, 4 but 
by then it was too late. Desmond Young, the editor of the Pioneer, had rushed 
‘ to Delhi carrying Jawaharlal’s message; Linlithgow was half-convinced but 
Sir Gilbert Laithwaite, the Viceroy’s private secretary, brushed it off. 5 Gandhi 
himself was told, unbelievably, that the British Government would be most 
unwilling to define their war aims at this stage and had never committed them¬ 
selves in the least degree to fighting for democracy. 6 Jawaharlal began to lose 
hope of any reasonable arrangement, and his interview, along with Rajendra 
Prasad, with the Viceroy on 3 October confirmed his fears. The Viceroy made 
no secret of his ‘rather negative’ conclusions. The British Government could 
not ignore the Muslims and the Princes, and could make no specific commit¬ 
ment about Dominion Status till federation had been introduced. There could 
be no extensive expansion of the Executive Council or sharing of power with 
political parties in the central government. All he was prepared to do was to 
form a group consisting of a few members from the two houses of the central 
legislature with whom the Government would keep in touch on defence 
matters. 7 


1 Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 

2 Linlithgow's record of interview with Jinnah, 4 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 
’Haig's telegram to V iceroy reporting conversation with Mrs bandit, 19 September, and Des¬ 
mond Young’s report of conversation with Jawaharlal, 21 September 1939, Haig papers, vol. 
7; Viceroy's note on interview, with Gandhi, 26 September 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 

4 Zetland to Linlithgow, 9 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 11. 

1 D. Young, Try Anything Twice (London, 19631, pp. 243-6. 

6 Viceroy’s note on interview with Gandhi, 26 September 1939, Zetland g|pcrs, vol. 18. 
7 Jawaharlal’s note on interview with Viceroy, 3’ October 1939. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


255 


Yet Jawaharlal continued to pine for a gesture which would enable India to 
end a hundred years of hostility to Britain and ‘join in a struggle for freedom’. 1 
He even took the step, unusual for him, considering that he viewed events in an 
impersonal framework, of making a private appeal to Linlithgow. Ignoring the 
disappointing trend of his interview with the Viceroy, he acted on Gandhi’s 
suggestion that he explain developments in the U.P. and used the opportunity 
to touch on wider issues. , 

This letter, written in the train to Wardha, has grown long. But I want 
to add a few words to it and to tell you how much I desire that the long 
conflict of India and England should be ended and that they should 
cooperate together. I have felt that this war, with all its horrors, has 
brought this opportunity to our respective countries and it would be sad 
and tragic if we are unable to take advantage of it. None of us, in India 
or England, dare remain in the old grooves or think in terms of past con¬ 
ditions. But events are moving so fast that sometimes I fear that they will 
overtake our slow moving minds. There are all the elements of a Greek 
tragedy in the world situation today and we seem to be pushed along 
inevitably to a predestined end. You told me that I moved too much in 
the air. Probably you are right. But it is often possible to get a better view 
of the lie of the land from the heights than from the valleys. And I have 
wandered sufficiently on the solid earth of India and mixed with the 
people who labour there to think of India in earthly terms. 

May I say how much I appreciate your friendly courtesy to me? It was 
a pleasure to meet you for a second time, and whenever chance offers 
an opportunity for this again, I shall avail myself of it. But whether we 
meet or, as you once said, look at each other from a distance over a gulf 
that has not been bridged, we shall do so, I earnestly trust, with no trace 
of unfriendliness, and realizing the difficulties which encompass us 
and which compel us to pursue different paths. 2 

The two paragraphs justify full quotation, for they mark the only occasion, 
at any time from the Amritsar tragedy in April 1919 till Lord Mountbatten’s 
arrival in India in March 1947, when Jawaharlal broke through to a human 
level in his dealings with British officials. It is curious that the recipient of such 
warmth should have been Linlithgow, the least emotional of men, ‘heavy of 
body and slow of mind, solid as a rock and with almost a rock’s lack of aware¬ 
ness,’ 9 as Jawaharlal later bitterly described him. It is not so much that there 
was in Linlithgow a hidden vein of a finer quality that had struck a chord in 
Jawaharlal as that Jawaharlal was desperately anxious to find a way which would 

*Mesuge to Nows Chronic It, 5 October 1939. 

a To Linlithgow, 6 October 1939. 

*Tb* Discovtry of India, p. 437. 



256 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


enable the Congress to co-operate with the Government. So, though all reason 
weighed against it, he sought to reach out to the Viceroy. Awaiting a response, 
he pushed through, to the annoyance of the socialists, a resolution at the A1CC 
meeting, endorsing the stand taken by the Working Committee. India should 
for the present stand aloof, but if given the opportunity she should jgin the war. 
It was an imperialist war but might not continue as such; it would certainly 
create a new world order and if India played her part in the right direction she 
could influence this change for the better. But if the response were not forth¬ 
coming, there was no alternative to conflict with the British. ‘The next few 
weeks will probably make a big difference in India, this way or that.’ 1 

Within not weeks but days, however, there came the stinging British reply. 
Linlithgow had sent a friendly but non-committal answer to Jawaharlal’s 
letter, 2 and his public statement (eft no doubt that the Government had not 
revised their policy in the context of the war situation. The Viceroy stressed 
the differences among the Indian political parties, contended that no precise 
definition of war aims was as yet practicable, and was ready to say no more than 
that Britain was fighting to resist aggression. As for India’s future, attention 
was gravely drawn to the preamble of the Act of 1919, to the statement on 
Dominion Status in 1929 and to the virtues of the Act of 1935. At the end of 
the war, the British Government would be very willing to enter into consulta¬ 
tions as to any modifications of that’ Act that might be made with the agree¬ 
ment of all the vested interests in India; and in the meantime, a consultative 
group for war activities could be set up. 3 

Though Jawaharlal knew that his hope had been faint, yet his disappointment 
was intense. It had been made dear that Britain dung to her imperialism and 
was fighting to preserve it; and Indians were asked to shed their blood in order 
to strengthen their shackles. The statement showed the most amaziqg ignor¬ 
ance of India and of the temper of the Indian people. The Congress in turn could 
only say ‘an emphatic no’ to this and once more prepare to go into the wilderness. 
If one door, that of co-operation, was barred to them, they would open other 
doors. 4 * Jawaharlal was for the Congress declining to assist in the war effort 
and preparing for the resignation or dismissal of the provincial ministries, but 
the Working Committee went further and directed the Congress ministries to 
resign as a first step. 9 There had never been so much unanimity in all Congress 
drdes. 6 But the Government were still incapable of grasping the consequences 
of their mulishness, and sought to evade the conflict by relying on Gandhi’s 

1 To Frances Gunther, 13 October 1939. 

a 15 October 1939. 

* Speech, 17 October 1929, Indian Annual Register, 1939, vol. 2, pp. 384-9. 

4 The Answer', ‘What Britain Fights For’ and Twenty Years*, articles written for the National 
Harold 17, 18 and 19 October 1939; message to the Nows Chronicle, 18 October 1939. 

’Jawaharlal’s draft resolution, 21 October and Working Committee’s resolution, 22 October 
1939. 

6 To Krishna Menon, 21 October 1939. % 



30 Jawaharlal with 
M. A. Jinnah, 1946 



31 With Lord Mountbatten 
in Singapore, 1946 





34 With Lord Pethick- 
Lawreme, 19-16 






36 The Constituent Assembly, New Delhi, 8 February 1947: Jawaharlal moves 
the resolution for an independent sovereign republic 


37 Independence Day celebrations below the Red Fort, Delhi, 15 August 19-17 















THE WAR CRISIS 


257 


preference for unconditional co-operation. The subtlety of Gandhi's reactions, 
and his placing of this offer in the context of total non-violence, were beyond 
their comprehension. The Congress leaders were summoned to Delhi again and 
asked to reach an agreement with the League in the provinces, in which case 
the Government would be willing to create two or three more seats in the 
central Executive Council. To ensure that Gandhi accepted and was satisfied 
with this trivial change, the Government manoeuvred to secure Rajagopala- 
chari’s presence in Delhi to advise Gandhi. 1 But Gandhi, to the surprise of no 
one except the Government of India, refused to abandon the Working Com¬ 
mittee, and merely assured the Viceroy that he was anxious to avoid dvil 
disobedience. The sentence in Rajendra Prasad’s official letter to the Viceroy 
of 3 November, that till ‘the main and moral issue' about clarification of war 
aims had been dealt with the Congress could not consider any subsidiary 
proposal was, in fact, drafted by Gandhi. 2 

From the start of the war crisis, the Congress had hoped for a joint approach 
with the League to the British Government. Jinnah had been invited to the 
meeting of the Working Committee in September, but had declined. However, 
the Congress thought the idea worth pursuing. The League was also committed 
to independence, and it was this demand which the Government had spurned. 
So the Congress might utilize the urgency of the situation to secure priority 
for the political issue over communal differences. Jawaharlal met Jinnah 
informally early in October and thought the latter had not been totally immune 
to this suggestion. To humour Jinnah's vanity, Azad stayed away from the 
talks with the Viceroy. 3 Sikandar Hyat Khan rang up Azad to say that a compro¬ 
mise might be reached if the Congress recognized the League as an ‘important’ 
organization even if not the sole organization representing Muslim opinion. 4 
This was unobjectionable, and made an agreement seem ^possible. The day 
after Linlithgow’s statement, Jawaharlal wrote a friendly letter to Jinnah, 
offering to meet him again wherever it suited him to come to doser grips with 
their differences. 

I entirely agree with you that it is a tragedy that the Hindu-Muslim pro¬ 
blem has not so far been settled in a friendly way. I feel terribly distressed 
about it and ashamed of myself in so far as 1 have not been able to con¬ 
tribute anything substantial towards its solution ... With your goodwill 
and commanding position in the Muslim League that should not be so 
difficult as people imagine ... The Viceroy’s statement has been asto¬ 
nishing in its imperialist challenge to all of us I earnestly trust that 

‘See Viceroy's telegram to Erskine, 28 October, and Erskine's telegram to Viceroy, 29 October, 
and telephone message, 51 October 1939, Erskine papers, vol. 17. 

•See the draft of the letter in Rajendra Prasad papers, National Archives of India. 

•See Linlithgow to Zetland, 4 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 

^Jawaharlal to RajpAdra Prasad, 17 October 1939. 



258 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


you will also express your strong disapproval of the Viceroy’s statement 
and refuse to co-operate with him on the lines he has suggested. I feel 
strongly that our dignity and self-respect as Indians have been insulted 
by the British Government. They take us for granted as hangers-on of 
their system, to be ordered about when and where they will. * 

At the end of the month, Gandhi, Jawaharlal and Rajendra Prasad met Jinnah 
again. He was assured that the Constituent Assembly would be formed on the 
widest possible franchise and by agreement on communal representation, and 
that Assembly would frame full protection for the rights and interests of all 
minorities. Jawaharlal thought this had satisfied Jinnah. ‘And so the whole 
fabric of communal disunion as a bar to India’s progress, conjured up by the 
Viceroy, fades away and vanishes at the touch Of reason and reality.’ 2 He had 
found, he said later, 3 that he and Jinnah had a great deal in common in regard 
to the objective and this had brought them much nearer than they had been for 
years. 

These efforts worried the Government, who were relying heavily on the 
antagonism of the League to the Congress. The nationalist leaven-was bound 
to work in that body, particularly among its younger members, 4 while Jinnah 
was unpredictable, ‘and I had one or two rather anxious moments during the 
period when he, Jawaharlal and Gandhi were discussing the situation together’. 3 
But the Viceroy’s fear was short-lived. A Constituent Assembly elected on 
adult franchise and framing a constitution after the British had left held fin 
appeal for Jinnah, because the Muslim masses might well smother communal 
tendencies even in separate electorates. But Jawaharlal might have been led to 
believe that in their talks Jinnah had agreed to this, by Jinnah’s lack of real 
interest in this subject. He was still thinking in terms not of the future but of 
the immediate present, and trying to force the Congress to form coalition 
ministries with the League. In the talks, communal matters were only raised by 
him casually, but he was very keen on the Congress reversing its general policy 
and becoming again a liberal and moderate party. 6 Jawaharlal and the Con* 
gress may have temporarily forgotten that the League’s chief interest was jobs 
for the upper classes and felt confident that it would not oppose the freedom 
movement. But Jinnah's premiss throughout was that no alliance was possible 
with a politically advanced party. When, therefore, the Congress announced 
that its ministries would resign, h£ lost interest in these conversations. He had 

1 Jawaharlal to Jinnah, 18 October 1939. 

J The Right and the Wrong of It’, editorial in the National Herald, written by Jawaharlal, 

6 November 1939. 

* Statement to the press, 6 November, The Bombay Chronicle, 7 November 1939. 

4 Linlithgow to Zetland, 23 October 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. 

5 Idem, 18 November 1939, Zetland papers, vol. 18. ' 

•Note on Jinnah’s talks with Viceroy, 13 January 1940, Linlithgow to Zetland, 16 January 
1940, Zetland papers, vol. 19; Jawaharlal to Zakir Hussain, 23 Novembei iN 1939. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


259 


no wish to be involved in any agitation which the Congress might launch and 
was prepared to fall in line with the Government in order to secure concessions 
from them. To the Congress resolutions in the provincial assemblies on India’s 
attitude to the war, the members of the League were directed to move amend¬ 
ments asserting that democracy was unsuited to India. Fazlul Haq, the premier 
of Bengal, a volatile politician who at this time was passing through a phase of 
devotion to the League, challenged Jawaharlal to join him in a joint inquiry 
into atrocities committed by the Congress against the Muslims. Jinnah himself 
declined to sign a communique, drafted by Jawaharlal, stating that the Congress 
and the League had much in common on the political issue and the general 
objective; and, soon after the Congress ministries resigned in the first week of 
November, he called on all Muslims to celebrate a ‘deliverance day'. The chal¬ 
lenge of Fazlul Haq, which Jawaharlal had promptly accepted, was conveniently 
submerged in the demand for a Royal Commission which obviously the Con¬ 
gress could not accept as it implied acquiescence in British intervention in 
Indian affairs. Their suggestion of a reference to Sir Maurice Gwyer, the chief 
Justice of the Federal Court, held to interest for Jinnah. 

There was clearly no scope for further talks with Jinnah, and Jawaharlal 
called them off. Though he had, in the first shock of anger at the British atti¬ 
tude, made overtures to Jinnah, the failure of these efforts now caused him 
little concern. The ‘deliverance day' celebrations had been no great success, 
and the League seemed to be visibly weakening. The Muslim peasantry, 
particularly in the U. P., and industrial workers did not support it, and Jinnah 
was relying on the feudal and upper middle classes. 1 There was also no room 
for further negotiations with the Government. Zetland’s reference to the 
Congress as a Hindu organization which should reach a settlement with the 
Muslim League put a lid on all talks. 2 'Lord Zetland and his Government have 
put the final seal on this bill of divorce, and the gulf that separates us is wider 
than the many oceans that intervene between his country and ours.’ 3 The 
Congress would go its own way with no turning back or regrets. But that way 
was not clear. The resignation of the ministries was the beginning of ‘partial 
non-co-operation’, 4 but the next step was uncertain. Gandhi was firm that while 
the Congress could not co-operate with the British, it should not embarrass 
them in the prosecution of the war. Gvil disobedience should be begun only 
when it became inevitable because of some aggressive action by the Govern¬ 
ment, and the people were strong and prepared for struggle. As it was, in view 
of the hostility of the League, any such campaign would almost certainly de¬ 
teriorate into communal rioting. The Working Committee decided that the 

•To Stafford Cripps, 17 January 1940. 

1 Jawaharla! to Gandhi, 8 November 1939, on Zetland's speech of 2 November. 

* Lord Zetland's Apologia’, editorial in the National Harold, written by Jawaharlal, 19 November 
1939. 

4 JawaharlaI toE.M.S. Namboodripad, 22 December 1939. 



260 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


policy of non-co-operation should continue till the Government ceased to 
maintain their imperialist domination in alliance with the reactionary elements 
in the country. But, after slight wavering, the Committee returned to the 
Gandhian path. Stress was laid on non-violence and on the constructive pro¬ 
gramme as the only ways of preparing the country for civil resistance; and the 
Committee reaffirmed that it was inherent in every form of satyagraha that no 
effort should be spared to achieve an honourable settlement. 1 

For the present, wrote Jawaharlal, 2 all of us have to go through the valley 
of the shadow. But in some ways the darkness was much greater for him. He 
had never been happy about Stalin’s alliance with Hitler, and did not expect 
it to last long. There had been some justification for it in Russia’s need to pro¬ 
tect her own interests; it had strengthened Russia’s whip hand in Europe, kept 
her out of war, and halted Germany’s eastward drive. However, the partition 
of Poland had been bad enough; and now Russia had gone to war with Finland. 
This again, as Jawaharlal saw, could be justified as intended to stave off the 
possibility of Finland being used by other powers as a platform for attacking 
Russia. 3 Nevertheless, he did not conceal that the invasion had been a great 
shock to him. 4 Russia’s strength in the outside world lay in her principles and 
her idealism. The principles, for all he knew, might still be there, but the ideal¬ 
ism was wearing thin. Russia, the symbol to all progressive forces of hope 
and fulfilment, had descended from the pedestal on which her ardent champions 
had placed her, and bartered away her moral prestige and the support of so 
many of her friends for seeming political advantage. In a signed article, intended 
to correct the pro-Soviet bias of some editorials in the National Herald, Jawa¬ 
harlal recounted the gloom which had been cast on him by the purges within 
Russia and the too facile opportunism of Soviet foreign policy. By lining 
herself with the aggressor nations, and attacking a small democratic country, 
she was paying heavily and ’in a coin which cannot be counted, for it is made 
up of the wishes and ideals of innumerable human beings’. Stalin’s government 
had dealt themselves a severer blow than any combination of enemies could 
have.done and in the process injured the cause of socialism itself. 3 

In these circumstances, Jawaharlal looked to the United States. He had 
admired Roosevelt’s attitude in the Czech crisis, and what now gave him con¬ 
fidence was the belief that the burden of the future would ultimately fall on the 
United States. ‘India is far from America, but more and more our thoughts go 
to this great democratic country, which seems, almost alone, to keep the torch 
of democratic freedom alight, in a world given over to imperialism and fascism, 

1 Working Committee resolutions, 23 November and 22 December 1939. 

2 To Madame Chiang Kai-shek, 23 December 1939. 

*See his editorials in National Harald, ‘What is Stalin aiming at?* and ‘Russ|a and Finland’, 

14 November and 3 December 1939, respectively. 

* Press conference at Bombay, 13 December, reported in Tba Bombay Chroniclt, 16 December 
i939. ^ 

2 ‘What of Russia now?', article written on 16 January 1940 for the National Harald. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


261 


and violence and aggression, and opportunism of the worst type.* 1 But Soviet 
policy and action strengthened his acceptance of the Gandhian method. It was 
Russia’s failure to keep her means above reproach that had led to the ends 
being twisted to fit in with these means. This example of violence and oppor¬ 
tunism distorting objective impressed on him the necessity of relying on non¬ 
violence and ethical action in achieving a free India. It is difficult otherwise 
to comprehend his meek acceptance of the constructive programme as the 
next step to be taken after the abandonment of provincial office. He himself 
resumed regular spinning after a break of nearly four years. 

So, if Jawaharlal had laid down the Congress policy of non-co-operation, 
it was for Gandhi to implement it. His mind was preparing for a struggle, and 
he continually laid stress on discipline and non-violence. But he could not see 
his way ahead. Having said 'nothing doing’, 2 the Congress could do little more. 
There was no question of any compromise or manoeuvring, but there was also 
no desire to precipitate a conflict. Jawaharlal does not seem to have expected 
anything much to happen immediately, and was almost in a relaxed mood. He 
took slow trains as a diversion and was considering a trip in the summer first 
to Switzerland to see his daughter and then perhaps even to the United States. 3 

The world is in a curious muddle and we in India are also tied up in 
many knots. But there is no need to worry overmuch either about our 
personal affairs or about national affairs. When there is so much that is 
bad taking,place in the world, we can shoulder our own burdens, which 
are relatively light, more easily. 4 

The Government thought they were better placed. They had no intention 
of breaking the stalemate they had created. But they fancied, perhaps because 
Gandhi was guiding the Congress again and was reluctant to resort to civil dis¬ 
obedience, that a settlement on their terms was feasible. Linlithgow felt that 
despite Jawaharlal’s irreconcilable attitude, the general atmosphere was a 
good deal more conducive to an agreement than one could have hoped, while 
Harold Laski, with his access to official quarters, reported that India 'is a brighter 
spot. I think there is a good chance of Congress settling on the basis of Dominion 
Status at the close of the war plus representation in the Viceroy’s Council 
now. There is a long story behind this, but I feel better about the Indian pros¬ 
pect than for years.’ 5 The Viceroy reverted to his old, foredoomed policy of 
seeking to detach Gandhi from Jawaharlal. When he saw Gandhi early in 

1 'India’s Demand and England's Answer’, article written on 6 January 1940 and published in 
the Atlantic Monthly, April 1940. 

’Jawaharlal to the press at Bombay, 10 February,' The Hindustan Tjmas, 11 February 1940. 

* To Madame Chiang Kai-shek, 20 February 1940. 

4 To Syed Mahmud, 21 February 1940. 

’Linlithgow to Erskine, 22 January 1940, Erskine papers, vol. 16; Laski to Felix Frankfurter, 
30 January 1940, Laski papers. 



262 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


February, he flattered him, declared that Jawaharlal lacked Gandhi’s experi¬ 
ence, steady vision and control of utterance and said that he could not accept 
responsibility for his share of any agreement unless he had a firm assurance 
that Gandhi would direct the Congress. 1 This ridiculous attempt at low cunn¬ 
ing came, of course, to nothing, for beneath Gandhi’s courtesy ancj attachment 
to Britain lay a steely determination to press for India’s freedom. There was 
a shift in emphasis, in the resolution of 1 March of the Working Committee, 
from the importance of preparing for civil disobedience to the inevitability of 
such action as soon as organization permitted or circumstances demanded it. 
To avoid any blurring of issues, the paragraph in Jawaharlal’s draft condemn¬ 
ing Soviet action in Finland was omitted; and Jawaharlal himself seems to have 
been converted to the view that Russia’s error in attacking Finland should not 
divert attention from the actions of Britain and France, who were exploiting 
the Finnish war to weaken Russia, seeking to entangle her in a war in West 
Asia and converting the war in Europe into a side-show of the real battle against 
Russia, who was the one irreconcilable opponent of all forms of imperialism. 2 
The option of restricted or mass civil disobedience, suggested by Jawaharlal, 
was also deleted by the Committee; and to dispel suggestions that the Congress 
was prepared to compromise, the Committee reaffirmed that nothing short 
of complete independence — not even Dominion Status — and a constituent 
assembly would be acceptable. Only then would a permanent solution of the 
communal problem be possible, and the difficulty of the States, which was of 
British creation, disappear. * Gandhi and Jawaharlal favoured the issue of 
another resolution defining the content of sivaraj — deepening, as it were, the 
Karachi resolution on fundamental rights. They thought this would strengthen 
the Congress in the coming struggle; but as Patel, Azad and Rajendra Prasad 
disapproved, the idea was dropped. 

Jawaharlal, with the support of Azad, was for the early, if not immediate, 
commencement of civil disobedience. The question of preparation did not 
arise for it was not a matter of taking the offensive but of repelling the Govern¬ 
ment’s attack. They could not avoid the struggle by. sitting still. In Bengal 
the press was being stifled by censorship and demands for security, and large 
numbers of Congress workers were being arrested in various parts of the coun¬ 
try. The Government seemed to be tiying to see how much goading the Con¬ 
gress could bear. The possible hostility of the Muslim League should not be 
a deterrent to mass action. The Pakistan resolution passed by the League was 
a 'mad scheme’ which could not last a day and was beyond discussion. To con¬ 
sider it seriously would be to encourage diverse separatist and disruptive forces. 

1 Linlithgow to Zetland, 24 January, and note of conversation with Gandhi, 5 February 1940, 
Zetland papers, vol. 19. 

*‘On the Eve of Ramgarh’, editorial written by Jawaharlal for the National Harold, 11 March, 
and published 14 March 1940. 

*J awaharlal’s two drafts of 29 February 1940, and final resolution of 1 March 1940. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


265 


The communal problem was best shelved till the British leh India, because 
not only would the British base of that problem drop out but, if there were 
civil war, Jawaharlal could not envisage utilizing British assistance to suppress 
the Muslims. 1 

Gandhi was not convinced. He dare not, he said, start civil disobedience, 
because if he did, disobedience would remain and civil would disappear. Even 
in the Frontier Province discipline had cracked. The Congress should form 
satyagraba committees and prepare the people, but there was no hurry to launch 
the movement. Once it started, the Government would probably take no action 
and allow the League and other anti-Congress forces to complicate the situa 
tion. Patel agreed but suggested individual civil disobedience to avoid demora¬ 
lization, and Gandhi was willing to consider this either on a large scale or 
restricted to a few or confined only to him. 2 

Aware of the general trend of these discussions, the Government showed 
no concern. They did not take the demand for Pakistan seriously, but saw no 
reason to throw too much cold water on it, for it weakened the position of the 
Congress. On learning that Sikandar Hyat Khan was trying to get in touch with 
moderate Congress leaders so as to bring the Congress and the League together, 
Linlithgow cracked the whip and called him off. 3 The widening gulf between 
the two parties enabled the Government to abandon all efforts to reach a settle¬ 
ment. Nothing more seemed to be required than preparations to deal firmly 
and promptly with any form of civil disobedience. 4 I am not too keen to start 
talking’, commented the Viceroy, 9 ‘about a period after which British rule will 
have ceased in India. I suspect that that day is very remote and I feel the least we 
say about it in all probability the better.’ There could be no more revealing gloss 
on all the statements made by British authorities over the y$ars on their deter¬ 
mination to leave India. 

In contrast, Jawaharlal thought that the British empire was doomed, and the 
war had made this more certain than ever. But his enthusiasm for action was 
now dimmed by his sense of chivalry. Events in Europe took charge of devel¬ 
opments in India. The Nazi Blitzkrieg brought him in line with Gandhi. He 
had surmised that the war could not continue for long in its ‘phoney’ phase and 
the German advance did not rattle him. Rajendra Prasad, the Congress 
president, and Asaf Ali, a member of the Working Committee, issued hasty 

■'Discussions in the Working Committee, 16 to 19 Much 1940, Anand Bhavan papers, and 
16 to 19 April 1940, AICC File G 32 of 1940; Jawaharlal’s speeches at Allahabad, 13 April and 
at Poona 18 April 1940, The Hindustan Times, 15 and 20 April 1940, respectively. 

2 Discussions in the Working Committee, op. cit., Jawaharlal’s note of discussions. 15 April 
1940, Anand Bhawan papers; Gandhi’s article in Harijan cited in Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 5. 
p. 341. 

»P. Moon, 'May God be with you always', The Round Table, July 1971, p. 418. 

4 Linlithgow to Zetland, 5 April, 26 April and 3 May 1940, Zetlan^ papers, vol. 19; Zetland's 
report to War Cabinet, 14 April 1940, Glendevon, op. cit. pp. 168-9. 

* To Zetland, 5 April 1940, Zetland papers, vol. 19. 



264 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


statements pledging support to the British; but Jawaharlal recognized that from 
India's viewpoint there had been no real change. Neville Chamberlain's Govern¬ 
ment had gone, but a Cabinet with Winston Churchill and Leopold Amer> 
determining Indian policy was not likely to be more sympathetic to the national¬ 
ist viewpoint; 1 nor, despite its earlier attitude, could much be hoped for from 
the Labour Party. Therefore, while India had no wish to see the triumph of 
Nazism, she could not be expected to rally to the cause of a tottering imperialism 
which spoke with arrogance and in terms of domination. To contend that 
British rule was preferable to that of the Nazis was to accept that Indians were 
a helpless people whose only choice was between masters. The Congress should 
adhere to its policy and add to its strength by preparing for satyagraha but take 
no action so long as Britain was in peril. 2 

It was decided, as a demonstration of coolness, not to summon an emergency 
meeting of the Working Committee; but the policy as formulated by Gandhi 
and Jawaharlal was stated in a resolution, drafted by Jawaharlal, of the United 
Provinces Congress committee. As the British Government still thought in 
terms of empire and the picture of India was still one of British imperialism in 
action, so, whatever might happen in Europe and however deep the sympathy 
of India for the victims of aggression, there could be no change in India's atti¬ 
tude towards Britain. 3 But Jawaharlal opposed an amendment that civil dis¬ 
obedience should be started immediately on the ground that it was not worthy 
of the Congress to take advantage of Britain’s difficulties. 

‘It is heartening’, wrote the Manchester Guardian* ‘at this grave moment 
to have this knowledge, but since common danger has evoked this response, 
the Government of India should take advantage of it.’ But the authorities were 
unequal to this level of honour. Amery wrote of a possible partnership with 
Jawaharlal. ‘The new War Cabinet seems to be working well and the whole 
machine has been speeded up beyond recognition. Bevin is itiaking an admirable 
driver of the working man. I suppose there is no chance of enlisting Nehru as 
recruiter-in-chief?’ 3 But his first speech on policy was still in terms of possible 
revision of the Act of 1935. The Government were incapable of the magnanim¬ 
ity of the Congress, which with eveiy reverse suffered by the British became 
more generous and accommodating. In June the Working Committee announc¬ 
ed its disagreement with Gandhi’s faith in non-violence in all circumstances. 
While the struggle for freedom should remain non-violent, the Committee 
felt unable to apply the creed to national defence and absolved Gandhi from 

‘"Even as late as 1‘MOwhen I ventured to urge on L. S. Amery, who had just become Secretary 
of State for India, the need, as a pledge of our sincerity, to fix the latest date — one or two years 
after the end of the war, 1 suggested — for our leaving India, he refused even to discuss it.’Malcolm 
Darling, Apprentice to Power (London; 1966), p. 128. 

* Statement to the press, 10 May, The Hindustan Times, 11 May 1940; letters to Rajendrt 
Prasad and Maulana Azad, 16 May 1940. 

5 Resolution, 19 May 1940, U.P. P.C.C. papers, Lucknow. 

<22 May 1940. 

*To Linlithgow, 30 May 1940, Linlithgow papers, I.O.L. Mss. Eur. F. 12f, vol. 9. 



THE WAR CRISIS 

responsibility lot tVic programme and activity of the Congress. In other words, 
it the British made it possible, the Congress was willing to join in the fight in 
India's defence. Meeting again in the first week of July, the Working Com¬ 
mittee went even further. Setting aside on this occasion not only Gandhi but 
even Jawaharlal, the majority in the Committee did not insist on a declaration 
about independence by the British but offered to assist in defence if a fully 
national government were established. Jawaharlal argued that jto reduce acqui¬ 
sition of power to assumption of office and to seek to worm into it was to move 
along constitutional lines. Real power was the hold on the people, and this 
would be lessened by ‘office power’. This form of power, secured on terms dif¬ 
ferent from those laid down in earlier resolutions, would prove disastrous. But 
Rajagopalachari, the author of the proposal, wOn over Patel and Azad, and 
Jawaharlal agreed to abide by it. He was not convinced that this was the best 
way of serving India, but his concern for Britain swung him into acceptance. 1 

It had not been easy for Jawaharlal to keep his emotions out of the way, to 
differentiate persistently between the British people and British imperialism 
and think clear-sightedly about India’s own problem. He had always seen it in 
the context of world affairs and argued that an acceptance of India’s freedom 
was not only right and just in itself but would strengthen the Allied cause 
immeasurably. Even so, the skittling of the European countries by the German 
war machine had depressed him intensely. On the fall of France, he wrote 
one of his most moving articles, looking beyond Petain and Laval to another 
France: 

there must be one, for the heritage of a thousand years does not vanish 
in a night. That other France will rise again and assert the invincible 
spirit of freedom which made her great ... let us pay homage to the 
France of the Revolution, the breaker of the Bastille and of all the bonds 
that hold the human body and spirit captive. 2 

And so, though he believed that his colleagues were hustling themselves, he 
was willing not to assert his dissent. At the Working Committee he had declar¬ 
ed that, considering the mentality of the British Government, he would wel¬ 
come chaos if the alternative was association with that Government; but at 
Poona towards the end of the month, commending the resolution to the AICC, 
he acknowledged the merit of its offer. ‘It may be that the dancing star of inde¬ 
pendence may emerge out of chaos, but it may also be that nothing but black 
clouds may emerge out of chaos .’ 3 

The Congress, having offered a way out of the stalemate without compro¬ 
mising its basic position, awaited official reaction. The situation was bringing 


* Discussions in the Working Committee, July 1940, Anand Bbawan papers. 
2 Quatorze Julllet’, article published in National Herald, 16 July 1940. 

3 Report in The Hindustan Times, 29 July 1940. 



: ;.yi :; 

J hf$it (id** *** cooperation of the 

mittcrs m* wutiteigieaM bbare^mmhcascbnm 

^7Sm^ap^hari stretched the itsotutkm beyond mum* and inter- 
preted it as an offer to assist not only in defence but in the war effort as a whole. 
But the Government persisted in refusing to accept this opportunity. It was 
sol, as JawaharJal wrote, to see a great people so blind to everything except the 
narrow interests of a class, and risking everything but not taking the step which 
would put them right with the world and with the historic processes that were 
marching on with giant strides. Even now the independence of India stuck in 
the throat of the British Government, and they continued in the old lordly way, 
threatening their penalties and preaching their homilies. 1 They were still plac¬ 
ing their faith in the League as the prop of empire. The section of the Urdu press 
which was controlled by the League fed the Muslim masses with abusive mis- 
representation of the Congress. 2 Such propaganda was not without effect, 
enabling the British to rely on the communal problem and charge the Congress 
with being unrepresentative of total Indian opinion. The response of the 
Government therefore, when it came at last, was the usual stale anti-climax. 
They offered to appoint a few ‘representative Indians’ to the Executive Council 
and set up a War Advisory Council. The future constitution of India should be 
framed by a small body ‘representative of the principal elements in India’s 
national life’ — and these elements included the Princes and British com¬ 
mercial interests; and any decision of that body would be subject to the fulfil¬ 
ment of Britain’s obligations in India. ‘The whole thing’, commented Jawa- 
harlal, 3 ‘is fantastic and absurd and has not even the merit of decent phraseology 
about it.’ 

This ‘offer’, which was made almost simultaneously with the publication 
of an ordinance banning all volunteer organizations, left no doubt that the 
British attitude remained unchanged. As a result, the Congress resolutions 
died a natural death and there was no further need for intellectual debate as to 
when non-violence was obligatory and when it was not feasible. The Congress 
had been driven from its moorings by emotional reaction to Britain’s distress 
and the Nazi victories in Europe, but the British Government restored the old 
position. The travail of spirit and mental conflict was ended. 


There was a fear in some people’s minds that the British Government 
might be clever enough to take advantage of the situation. But they gave 

*'A Crumbling World’ and ‘What of Us?', articles in Notional Harold, 17 and 18 July 1940. 

2 e. g. Maulvi, an Urdu monthly published from Delhi, wrote (July 1940): ‘Atheists like Pandit 
lawaharlal Nehru who do not like even to swear in the name of God are placed in the forefront' 
when the issue is the construction of a slaughter house in Lahore, but when there is.any question 
relating to a mandir, or the language and customs of the Hindus, the same Pandit reveals him¬ 
self in his true colours as a staunch Hindu. He can, however, never tolerate that the Muslims 
shall also remain staunch Muslims. It is people of such low mentality who have disgraced the 
Congress and who are responsible for the separation of theMuslims from it.’^ 

*Press Conference at Bombay21 August, The Hindustan Timas 28 August 1940. 



267 


THE WAR CRISIS 

credit for intelligence where it was not due ... Nothing is more astonish¬ 
ing than the ineptitude of the British ruling class in England during the 
last few years, nothing with one notable exception. That exception is the 
Government of India. 1 

s 

Despite all the resistance and suspicion that had been built up over a long 
period, the Congress had sought to work with the British in their crisis of 
survival; and the offer had been contemptuously rejected. It was ‘the final 
breaking of such slender bonds as held our minds together, it means the ending 
of all hope that we shall ever march together’. 2 

The Congress had, therefore, been pushed back into the mood of civil dis¬ 
obedience. It accepted again the leadership of Gandhi and prepared for conflict. 
The Government of India, on their part, decided to strike at once and with the 
utmost vigour if faced by a challenge from the Congress and to destroy it as a 
political party. On the very day that the constitutional proposals were announc¬ 
ed, the Viceroy wrote to the Governors that he felt very strongly that the only 
possible answer to a ‘declaration of war' by any section of the Congress should 
be a proclaimed determination to crush that organization as a whole. 3 They 
believed that the Congress was losing its grip and had little support among the 
Muslims. The British Government agreed that immediate action to paralyse 
the movement was preferable to a policy of waiting to see how the movement 
developed and only wished to be consulted before any action was taken. 4 The 
Labour Party, which was now in the coalition government, supported this 
policy and disapproved of the attitude of the Congress. 3 

The Government, therefore, went ahead with the arrests of Congressmen 
and Jawaharlal expected to return at any moment to prison. As he cabled to his 
daughter in Switzerland, 6 an early resumption of the old pilgrimage was likely. 
He even courted it by wandering about the U.P. in the uniform of a Congress 
volunteer and advising the volunteer corps to continue its activities. But again 
Gandhi moved away from a head-on collision, because it was not in his nature 
to press the British Government at a time when they were themselves threaten¬ 
ed in their hoipe. All that he committed the Congress to was non-violence and 
a demand for freedom of speech to preach against participation in the war; 
self-imposed restraint could not be taken to the extent of self-extinction. The 
demand would be expressed by individual civil disobedience. The first to court 
arrest by making a public speech against support of the war would be Vinoba 
Bhave, and the second Jawaharlal. 

* ‘India in Travail’, Jawaharlal’s article in National HnnU, 9 August 1940. 

3 'The parting of the ways’, article written by Jawaharlal on 10 August 1940. 

* Letter of 8 August 1940, Home Dept. File 6/13/40-Pol. (I); History of the Civil Disobedience 
Movement 1940-41, Home Dept. File 3/6/42. Pol. II). 

♦Viceroy’s telegrant to Secretary of State, 11 September 1940, and Secretary of State’s tele¬ 
grams. 13 and 17 September 1940. Home Dept. File 3/13/40. Pol. (I). 

» Krishna Menon’s telegram to Jawaharlal on interview with Attlee, ibid. 

4 10 September 1940. 



268 


JAWAHAKLALmmv 


Even the Government of India could not argue that individual civil dis¬ 
obedience for asserting the right to free speech could justify drastic action. But 
they decided to arrest Jawaharlal even before he offered satyagraha. He was 
thought to be going faster than Gandhi, and to be one step ahead of him. Gandhi 
appeared to be determined to carry on with civil disobedience at a lew tempera¬ 
ture and in very small doses, but Jawaharlal seemed eager to push things to 
extremes. He had been touring the United Provinces drawing attention once 
more to agrarian grievances. His arrest might well upset whatever long-term 
plans Gandhi might have. The War Cabinet approved and, on its own, suggested 
that Jawaharlal be prosecuted on a substantive charge rather than merely kept 
in detention. 1 

Jawaharlal himself probably preferred this, for while he loyally accepted 
Gandhi’s decision about the manner and object of civil disobedience he could 
not have been greatly excited by individual satyagraha. The issue remained 
that of India and the war, and the goal was still independence; but the fight 
was being waged for the moment on a very narrow front. Jawaharlal was in an 
almost tranquil mood. His life was wrapped up in public affairs, and he had 
hardly any private life. An attractive personality brought him a large circle of 
friends and he had, when he cared to make the effort, a ‘knock-down’ charm. 
But throughout his life none of these friendships, with either men or women, 
impinged deeply on him; and his was a life of crowded loneliness. He could, as 
we have seen, be an emotional client; but he would seem to have been normally 
incapable of an equal relationship. This probably explains why in these years 
the men whom he allowed to get close to him were those, like Syed Mahmud 
and Sri Prakasa, who really had nothing to offer. His only deep attachment was 
to his daughter, and to her he was the ideal of perfection. His name for her, 
‘Indu-boy’, makes clear the effort at compensation for lack of a son, and he pro¬ 
bably thought of her as carrying on his work. But he never forced his affection 
or his will on her and,'while always willing to give advice when sought, never 
imposed his directives. So the thought of going under completely or at least 
for years did not worry him. 2 There were, to him, no separate causes left in 
the world, as all of them ran into one another, but his primary commitment 
was to India’s freedom and on that he was not prepared to compromise. His 
speeches to the peasants of his province were clear and calm. 

He was evidently moved. There was a sense of vast issues, of great deci¬ 
sions, of the call which might come to anyone at any moment. The 
multitude of listeners seemed to be in tune with the speaker'and seemed 
.to rise above themselves for the moment. There was a hush and a solem¬ 
nity which pervaded the atmosphere . . . And then he spoke, with a 

•Viceroy’s telegrams to Secretary of State 21 and 22 October 1940. Home Dept. Files 3/3/40 
■nd 3/13/40 Pol. (1), respectively; Amsry to Linlithgow, 23 October 1940, Linlithgow papers, 
vol. 9; Viceroy’s telegram to Governor of U.P , 31 October 1940, Home Dept. File 3/18/40 
Pol. (T). 

* To Syed Mahmud, 12 October 1940 and to Mrs Dorothy Enge, 27 October 1940. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


269 


quiver in his voice, of the dream that had made life worthwhile for him 
— the dream of the India of tomorrow. He developed this theme and the 
picture became a living and a glowing one. And then, suddenly, he grew 
sad. For twenty years and more, he said, he had seen this vision and sought 
to make it a reality. And yet when he saw the condition of the people 
round about him, their appalling poverty, their miserable environment, 
his heart misgave him. Was this all the result they had Obtained after 
twenty years travail and labour? Then again, he changed his mood and 
spoke triumphantly of the vast inner changes that had come over the 
people. They were poor still, and over-burdened with care and sorrow, 
but they had got rid of the fear that oppressed them and the hopelessness 
that enveloped their lives from birth to death. That was a mighty change 
which had brought them near to Swaraj. And now they stood on the 
threshold of the future, a future which would mean a changed world and 
a new India. What this new India would be he could not say. That would 
depend on their stout hearts and strong arms. Fate, Destiny, Karmal 
We were not going to be their slaves, but we would bend them to our will 
and make India after the picture in our own hearts. 1 

Hastening to Wardha to dissuade Gandhi from undertaking a fast unto 
death in protest against British obduracy, 2 Jawaharlal was arrested on 30 
October at Gheoki station on his way back to Allahabad and taken to Gorakhpur 
for trial. He declined to plead, stating merely that it was his particular function 
and privilege to spread disaffection against the British Government in India. 3 
But he read a long statement which, over twenty years later, still gave him 
satisfaction. 4 He pointed out that the reports of his speeches at Gorakhpur 
earlier in the month were scrappy, incomplete and often distorted; but this 
was not of importance. He stood by the policy of the Congress on the war and 
had in fact been chosen to give expression to it. It was monstrous that the Indian 
people should be thrust into a war without their consent; but the Congress had 
sought a way out which would be honourable to all parties concerned. There 
were very few persons in India, whether Indians or Englishmen, who had so 
consistently raised their voices against fascism and Nazism as he had done; 
but the actions of the British Government compelled the Indian people to resist 
to the uttermost. They had therefore decided to be no parties to this war ami 
to declare this to the world. 

It is not me that you are seeking to judge and condemn, but rather the 
hundreds of millions of the people of India, and that is a large task even 
for a proud Empire. Perhaps it may be that, though I am standing before 

’‘Jawaharlal reports himself'. National Hamid, 23 October 1940. 

*B. V. Kesfcar. ‘Alone with Gandhiji and Nehru', Illustrated Weakly of India, 30 May. 1971. 

5 Report of trial in Tba Hindustan Timas, 4 November 1940. 

*See letter to Mrs Dorothy Norman, 19 January 1962, Nehru papers. 



270 


JAWAHAXLALNBmv 


you on my trial, it is the British Empire itself that is on its trial before the 
bar of the world ... Individuals count for little, they come and go, as I 
shall go when my time is up. Seven times I have been tried and convicted 
by British authority in India, and many years of my life lie buried within 
prison walls. An eighth time or a ninth, and a few more years, rtlake little 
difference. But it is no small matter what happens to India and her mil¬ 
lions of sons and daughters. That is the issue before me, and that ultimate¬ 
ly is the issue before you, Sir. 1 

The district judge gave Jawaharlal what was intended to be a deterrent 
sentence of four years. The savagery surprised Whitehall and New Delhi as 
well as Sir Maurice Hallett, the Governor at Lucknow; but Hallett vetoed any 
change in the terms. However, Churchill directed Amery to telegraph at once 
to the Viceroy expressing the hope that the actual rigour of the sentence would 
be modified and Jawaharlal not treated like a common criminal. 2 Even this 
hope was unanswered. After a week in Gorakhpur jail, Jawaharlal was moved 
by stealth and under cover of night, in a railway compartment with shutters 
down and a car with curtains drawn, to his old quarters in Dehra Dun jail. There 
he remained, except for a week in Lucknow prison in April 1941, till his release 
at the end of the year. This time the Government had no intention of easing in 
any way the harshness of jail life. The Viceroy even reprimanded the superin¬ 
tendent of police who had arrested Jawaharlal at Cheoki for giving him dinner 
at his house before having him driven down to Gorakhpur. It was made explicit 
that no personal friendliness was to be shown or social relations developed. 3 
In jail he was allowed one weekly newspaper and six books at any one time, and 
he could have one interview, send one letter without enclosures and receive 
one every fortnight. There were also many petty harassments. He was not for 
some time permitted a washerman or a barber, a warder was fined for allowing 
a prisoner who had been discharged to say good-bye to Jawaharlal, and the 
prisoner himself was not allowed to collect ten rupees which Jawaharlal had 
given him for his fare home. Friends from outside were not allowed to send 
Jawaharlal packed lunches, and he could only receive, fruit if he happened to 
know the sender. On one occasion, fruit sent by an unknown well-wisher from 
Rawalpindi was sent back at Jawaharlal’s expense. When Jawaharlal wrote 
home asking his secretary to make a public announcement that no parcels or 
letters should be sent to him, this passage was blotted out by the censor. As he 
was to buy everything he needed through the jail staff (who wpre not known 
for promptitude) and get nothing from home, he was sometimes short even of 
toothpaste. He was directed, for the first time in his prison career, to give his 
thumb impression and he refused. He was, after a while, given all the letters 

‘Statement of 4 November 1940, reprinted in J. Nehru, The Unity of India (London, 1941), 
pp. 395-400. 

2 Amery to Linlithgow, 14 November 1940, Linlithgow papers, voi. 9. * 

> P.S. V. to Home Member, 19 November 1940, Home Dept. File 3/16/40/Pol. II). 



the war crisis 


271 


received from his daughter abroad, but the others were piled up in the office 
for weeks before Jawaharlal was told of them and asked to pick one. Permission 
to deal with the business of the National Planning Committee was refused. 
Papers pertaining to the Kamala Nehru Memorial Hospital were, after many 
months, exempted, but this delay had so held up work that Jawaharlal resigned 
the chairmanship. 1 His plan for sorting out his father’s letters was defeated by 
the authorities insisting that they would first have to go through these letters 
before sending them to him; for as they obviously would be unable to understate 
the significance of these letters, Jawaharlal dropped the proposal. The limit 
on the number of letters he could write was later withdrawn, but on condition 
that none of these was published in the press — which was absurd because, 
apart from Jawaharlal’s known aversion to giving any kind of undertaking, he 
was obviously in no position to give assurances about the behaviour of the 
recipients of his letters. In fact, Jawaharlal virtually gave up letter-writing and 
depended on interviews for keeping in touch with the outside world. Indira, 
who returned to India in May, took a cottage near Mussoorie; and this in itself 
made life a little pleasanter for Jawaharlal. 

He had sought no favours. On the other hand, after hearing reports of ill- 
treatment of political prisoners in the camp jail in Lucknow, he wrote to the 
jail authorities that even the few privileges he was receiving had become hate¬ 
ful to him and he might defy jail discipline and invite the consequences . 2 A les¬ 
ser man might have become personally embittered. But Jawaharlal accepted all 
this as part of his life and work without worrying about it. A sentence which 
he jotted down in his notebook at this time and was fond of quoting was that 
one could enjoy life perfectly only after resolving not to count the cost. What 
he understood by this was something very close to the teaching of the Gita ; 
one should face the risks and perils of the adventure of life without calculating 
either what it involved or what might be its results. By enjoyment he meant 
something much more than a round of eating and sleeping and amusing one¬ 
self; it was doing what one had to. ’All we can do’, he advised his daughter, 3 
’is to face our job and do it as well as we can and to remain tranquil in spite of 
shock and disaster.’ The certainties of moral and ethical, values which he had 
built around himself gave him serenity and strength. It is not surprising that 
though he had long ago moved away from the simple religious faith of the 
’twenties and had now no anchorage of scriptural or secular dogma, he carried 
about with him a tiny edition of the Gita. 

In this spirit, as soon as he found himself again in prison, he closed the 
various drawers of his mind which related to his activities outside and fell into 
the rhythm of jail life. The purpose was to prepare himself in body and mind 

*See letters to the jail superintendent, 2 January, 4 February, 24 February, 19 March, 29 July 
and 5 August 1941; to thelnspector-General of Prisons, 16 February and lOMarch 1941; Padmaja 
Naidu to Frances Gunther, 13 March 1941, Home Dept. File 3/31/40 Pol. (1). 

a To the Inspector-General of Prisons, 23 August 1941. 

^Letter, 18 November 1940. 



272 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


for his work on release and to store energy so that he might be able to squander 
it later. Spinning, reading, regular exercise and plenty of sleep formed the main 
planks of his existence. He spent considerable time in cleaning and washing 
up and even — though food never greatly interested him — helped in the cook¬ 
ing. But the chief physical activity was gardening. On arrival in Dehra Dun, 
for about a week he did nothing all day long but dig the rather stohy ground. 1 
He then planted some seedlings but seems to have over-watered them, for the 
results were not very successful. But he was joined in his cell in January by 
Ranjit Pandit, who brought a more expert touch to this effort; and soon the 
barrack garden, despite the high walls and lack of sun, could boast of a few 
dahlias and sunflowers. 

It was not, however, easy to forget about events in the world and only culti¬ 
vate his garden. Jawaharlal might ignore the unexciting progress of individual 
civil disobedience, but he could not shut out the war in Europe which was 
destroying the old order. Especially after the Nazi attack on the Soviet Union, 
he was infuriated by the British ineptitude which excluded him and his coun¬ 
trymen from participation in these developments. Though he had almost no 
private correspondence, he sent what were virtually long articles to British 
acquaintances, and in these his pent-up bitterness exploded. A perceptive mind 
like Beatrice Webb’s, unswayed by passing winds, could grasp the quality of 
India’s leaders. 

What is outstanding in the leadership of Gandhi and Nehru is the keen¬ 
ness and subtlety of intellect, the depth and refinement of the emotional 
life of these two men, compared not only to the brutality and ultra coarse¬ 
ness of Mussolini and Hitler, but even to the conventional outfit, in 
thought and feeling, of Churchill and Roosevelt. 2 

But most well-meaning British individuals and groups felt that the Congress 
had acted in a huff and forgotten the larger issues of the war in a narrow 
nationalism. They showed no real understanding of the Indian problem, and 
they certainly had no influence on the policy of their Government. But Jawa- 
harlal had never been surer of the rightness of any decision and, though he did 
not share Gandhi’s total pacifism, was entirely at one with him in the political 
decisions about the war crisis.^ 

Half-relaxed and half-resentful, determined not to worry and yet driven to 
exasperation by inactivity in a cataclysmic situation, Jawaharlal frequently set 
aside the present for thoughts of the future. But even more often his mind 
wandered back into the past. It was during this spell in jail that he began his 

‘See H. C. Bajpai, 'In the same cell with Jawaharlal Nehru', National Harold, 11 December 
1940. 

7 24 Septem b er 1940, Beatrice Webb diaries, vol. 34, p. 176. 

* To Col. Wedgwood 23 April and 21 November 1941; to Eleanor Rfcthbone, 22 June and 
9November 1941; and to Sir George Schuster, 2 December 1941. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


273 


journey into the five thousand years of India’s history. ‘We have undertaken 
many a voyage in time and space, as well as geographically in the present, for 
the discovery of India.’ 1 His election tours had woken him to the myriad 
aspects of India’s diverse unity; and to this was added an increasing apprecia¬ 
tion of India’s thought and culture. Earlier he had wanted to change his country 
and bring her abreast of the twentieth century. This aspiration never left him. 
But with it was now blended a pride in India’s achievement and a firm sense 
of his own basic Indian-ness. ‘It is a debt I can never repay; but it is an obli¬ 
gation that I cannot forget and which I shall seek to discharge to the end of my 
days.’ 2 

A further element in his mental ferment was the conscious increase in the 
intellectual influence of Gandhi and Tagore. The horrors of war drove him to 
a deeper acceptance of non-violence not merely as a political weapon for India 
but as perhaps the only promise for the future of man. There was a reversion 
in this respect to his attitude in the early ’twenties. Tagore, who died that 
August, had been very different from Gandhi, but he had also been basically 
of India’s soil, the inheritor and expositor of her wisdom. ‘Again I think of the 
richness of India’s agelong cultural genius which can throw up in the same 
generation two such master-types, typical of her in every way, yet representing 
different aspects of her many-sided personality.’ 3 

The result of these varied yet converging impacts could be seen when 
Jawaharlal, in the latter half of 1941, again took up serious writing. In 1940 
he had sent to the American publishers of his Autobiography a hurriedly 
written postscript, ‘Five Years After’. Now he set out to write a fuller version 
of a second volume of his autobiography. He drafted a few chapters but rejected 
them, using some of the material in the long work which he completed when 
again in prison. But he was more interested in the making of India than in his 
personal development. Even in his first draft he was often tugged- for long 
stretches by the pull of the past from an account of himself into flashbacks into 
India’s histoiy, and the factors which moulded her personality. This tendency 
became more pronounced in the second, larger effort which was published as 
The Discovery of India. 

Towards the end of the year the Government of India came round to the 
view that all Congressmen in jail, including Jawaharlal, could be released. 
Hallett, the Governor of the U.P., opposed Jawaharlal’s release because he 
thought it would demoralize the civil services and the Muslim League, while 
Winston Churchill thought any such general release would be ‘surrender at 
the moment of success’. But the War Cabinet supported the Government of 
India, with Churchill muttering something to the effect, ‘when you lose India, 
don’t blame me.’ 4 So Jawaharlal was out again on 4 December. 

*To Col. We4gwood, 23 April 1941. 

a To Eleanor Rathbone, 22 June 1941. 

*To Krishna Kripalani, 27 August 1941. 

4 Gtendevon, op. cit., pp. 208-12. 



274 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


His personal mood of bitterness against British policy seemed but a reflec¬ 
tion of the general hardening of Indian public opinion. There was a widespread 
conviction that the British were not only alien oppressors but the greatest 
disruptive force in India and the champion of all reactionary elements. Pro¬ 
fessor Coupland, visiting India at this time, thought that one particular incident, 
Churchill’s categorical announcement in September 1941 that the Atlantic 
Charter would not apply to India, had led to a spreading of a new and uncomfor¬ 
table suspicion of British intent even beyond nationalist circles. 1 On the other 
hand, the involvement of Russia and the United States and the spread of the 
war in Asia had altered the nature of the conflict. Jawaharlal had no hesitation 
in expressing publicly his hope that the progressive forces, as represented by 
Russia, the United States, Britain and China, would emerge victorious. But 
the Government of India continued their Rip Van Winkle policy. ‘It is very 
difficult’, commented Jawaharlal in exasperation, ‘for intelligent people to 
submit to the decisions of unintelligent people.’ 2 What was required to enable 
India to do what it wanted to do, join the war wholeheartedly on the side of the 
Allies, was ‘a pleasant psychological shock’ 3 establishing that the old order had 
changed in India as well; but of any such imaginative action the Government 
of India were wholly incapable. They were Asia’s men of Vichy, living in the 
past and looking backwards, clinging to their interests and afraid of the people. 

Jawaharlal was, therefore, keen that the Congress should not waver in its 
refusal to change its policy so long as the British gave no indication of anything 
more than remote assurances. Just as the British Labour Party had been in 
favour of the war but had declined to join Chamberlain’s cabinet, so the Con¬ 
gress, while expressing its support for the Allies, should not offer any positive 
collaboration. The offers of 1940, to assist in defence on certain conditions, 
should not be resurrected. ‘I am not a believer in revivalism either in religion 
or politics.’ 4 The party should hold together under Gandhi’s leadership and 
present an unshakeable front to the British while keeping in line with inter¬ 
national events. 9 But at Bardoli in Christmas week Rajagopalachari once again 
persuaded the Working Committee to set aside Gandhi and ignore Jawaharlal 
and offer the co-operation of a free India in the defence of the country on a 
national basis. Civil disobedience seemed to Rajagopalachari to have served its 
purpose; the people were exhausted and unless Congress did something defi¬ 
nite in this crisis its cause would suffer. Wisdom lay in making as much political 
progress as possible during the war. 6 

Jawaharlal attached hardly any importance to this resolution. As the 
British showed no sign of responding to the demand of the Congress, this was 

1 The Cripps Mission (Oxford, 1942), p. 22. 

2 Press conference at Lucknow, The Hindustan Timas, 10 December 1941. 

3 Message.to the News Chronicle, 11 December 1941. 

«Statement at Bombay, 17 December, The Hindustan Times, 18 December 1941. 

’To Sampurnanand, 14 December 1941. 

6 Jawaharlal’s notes of Working Committee meetings, 22 to 24 December 1941. 



THE WAR CRISIS 


273 


a mere theoretical exercise. No compromise was possible between imperialism 
and nationalism, and Rajagopalachari’s persistent suggestions of a settlement 
only added to the confusion. Gandhi, unwilling even to consider freedom at 
the cost of non-violence, formally withdrew from the organization. But he 
commended the resolution to the AICC and utilized the occasion to designate 
Jawaharlal formally as his chosen successor. 

Somebody suggested that Pandit Jawaharlal and I were estranged. It 
will require much more than differences of opinion to estrange us. We 
have had differences from the moment we became co-workers, and yet 
I have said for some years and say now that not Rajaji [Rajagopalacharil 
but Jawaharlal will be my successor. He says that he does not understand 
my language, and that he speaks a language foreign to me. This may or 
may not be true. But language is no bar to a union of hearts. And I know 
this—that when I am gone he will speak my language. 1 


*13 January 1942, Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 6, p. 43. 



17 


The Cripps Mission 


The Viceroy, having no wish to co-operate with the Congress, disliked the 
Bardoli resolution. He, therefore, saw to it that Reuters cabled the full text 
of Jinnah’s statement criticizing the resolution and urged Amery to give it the 
fullest weight in Britain and use it in the United States. ‘If, under pressure from 
liberal quarters in the United Kingdom, Rajagopalachari and his friends were 
able to stifle me in their close embrace, I feel quite sure that the Mahatma would 
emerge once again upon the stage to give tne coup de grace to British influence 
in India.’ 1 Meantime, the Japanese sweep drew closer to'India’s shores. Early 
in the year, Franklin Roosevelt thought that India was as good as gone. 2 In 
February Winston Churchill told the King that Burma, Ceylon, Calcutta and 
Madras as well as a part of Australia might fall into enemy hands. 3 Jawaharlal 
also realized that the British refusal to part with power was unrealistic in the 
face of the imminent fall of their empire in India. Whatever happened, British 
imperialism was doomed to collapse. It was more urgent, therefore, to plan for 
the confrontation of events than to hope for negotiations with the British. 
‘This war is our war. But you don’t understand; in this war Britain is on the 
other side. A Satyagraha had been called off because of the desire not to emba¬ 
rrass the British, whose allies were Russia, China and the United States; but 
there was no question of being merely passive if the Japanese stepped into 
India. Congress workers should spread out into the countryside and organize 
towns, wards and villages for every eventuality. Small units of about fifty 
houses eacn should be formed, and the residents mobilized to prevent panic, 
prepare for air raids, maintain law and order when control slipped from 
British hands, set up local co-operatives to ensure food supplies, encourage 
khadi, cottage industries and village handicrafts to enable local self-sufficiency. 

1 Linlithgow to Amery, 30 December 1941, Linlithgow papers, vol. 10. 

IW.D. Hassett, Off the Record with F.D.R. (New Brunswick, 1958), p. 28. 

* J. W. Wheeler-Ben nett, King George VI (London, 1958), p. 538. 

4 To Eve Curie, 22 March 1942, quoted in E. Curie, Journey among Warriors (London, 1943), 
p. 440. Emphasis in original. 


276 



THE CRIPPS MISSION 


27 7 


and resist the Japanese as best they could. What Jawaharlal appears to have 
had in mind was a fragmented war of attrition such as was taking place in 
China. The British had spurned the offer of the Congress to co-operate in the 
war, but in no case would the Congress bow before a foreign invader. They 
might not be able to push back armies but these armies would have to pass 
over their dead bodies. India would never accept the fate of France. 

The U.P. Government, oblivious to all that was happening, considered 
arresting Jawaharlal for his bitter references to the blindness and incompetence 
of the raj and his prophecy that the empire in India might not last six months. 1 
But even Linlithgow realized that there could not be a worse moment for 
taking such a step. 2 It was not Jawaharlal but the Japanese who were destroy¬ 
ing British prestige, and his repeated calls to resist any invasion could hardly 
be resented. In Calcutta he sought to allay fright and exodus, and in Allahabad 
he discarded his car for a bicycle to get in closer touch with the people. The 
elaborate black-outs and air raid precautions ordered by the Government were 
not only out of date but likely to increase panic: ‘it does no good to worry. That 
is the lesson which our people should be taught.’ 9 Marshal Chiang and his 
wife came to India, met Jawaharlal and Gandhi and, while unable to change 
Jawaharlal’s thinking, seemingly toned down his hostility to the British. The 
best comment on that visit was provided by Gandhi. 

He [Chiang] came and went without creating any impression, but fun 
was had by all. I would not say that I learnt anything, and there was 
nothing that we could teach him. All that he had to say was this: Be as 
it may, help the British. They are better than others and they will now 
become still better. 4 

The general alienation from the British bureaucracy increased when, after 
the fall of Rangoon on 7 March, reports came in of discrimination against 
Indian refugees on the long trek from Burma. At last the British Cabinet woke 
up to the urgency of the situation. For long, even with the enemy approaching 
the gates, Churchill, Amery and Linlithgow had had; as Jawaharlal expected, 
no intention of making any move to secure popular Indian support for the war. 
The very danger seemed to them an argument for doing nothing, for it was 
contended that this was no time for long-term objectives and that the introduc¬ 
tion of a hostile political element into the defence machine would paralyse 

action. 9 But there were other forces at work. Roosevelt told his wife that he 
• 

‘Hallett to Linlithgow, 17 February 1942, Home Dept. File 3/48/41*Pol (I), vol. 5, and 21 
February 1942; Transfer of Power, voL 1 (H.M.S.O., 1970), pp. 219-22. 

1 Linlithgow to Hallett, 24 February 1942, Home Dept. File 3/48/41-Pol. (I), vol. 5. 
i To GJ*. Hutheesing, 28 February 1942. 

4 To Vailabhbhai Patel. Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 6, p. 62. 

’Amery to Linlithgow, 7 January, Churchill to Attlee, 7 January and Linlithgow to Amery, 21 
January 1942. Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 13, 14 and 46, respectively. 



278 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


would have to compel the British to give Dominion Status to India, 1 and he 
urged Churchill with tact to do so. Chiang, after his visit to India, informed 
Roosevelt that if the British did not fundamentally change their policy it would 
be like presenting India to the enemy.’ 2 In Britain itself, the crisis had created a 
sudden interest in India among the back-benchers of Parliament, *and Attlee, 
condemning the ‘crude imperialism’ of the Viceroy, called for an immediate 
act of statesmanship. ‘To mark time is to lose India. ’ 3 The War Cabinet listened 
to Attlee rather than to Amery, and Churchill, characteristically, if only 
temporarily, getting into the swing of it, formulated a scheme for expanding 
the defence council in India, offered to broadcast to India recommending it, 
and even planned to fly out to Delhi. His ardour was dampened by Amery and 
Linlithgow, who protested that Churchill’s scheme was weighted qgainst the 
League and in favour of the Congress; but the idea of seeking a settlement in 
India had been accepted. ‘We have resigned ourselves’, as Churchill com¬ 
mented, 4 ‘to fighting our utmost to defend India in order, if successful, to be 
turned out.’ Attlee, strengthened by the entry of Cripps into the War Cabinet 
on 19 February, drafted the British proposals. Their main points were the 
convening after the war of a constituent assembly elected on a system of pro¬ 
portional representation by; freshly elected provincial assemblies, the recog¬ 
nition of the possibility of Pakistan by conceding the right of any province 
that was not prepared to accept the new Dominion constitution to retain its 
existing constitutional position, and the request for the collaboration, while 
the war lasted, of Indian parties with the British Government, who would 
continue to bear the full responsibility for India’s defence. 

Armed with this Declaration, Cripps flew to India to secure its acceptance 
by the Indian leaders. It was, as Amery explained to the less percipient Viceroy,* 
in essence a conservative, reactionary and limited offer. There would be for 
the time being only collaboration in defence, and in the future a Dominion 
constitution with possibly a partition of India. Nor had Cripps any authority 
to alter the text of the Declaration approved by the Cabinet. Yet he was hopeful 
of success. There was nothing in the Declaration to which the Congress could 
heartily respond. The idea of Dominion Status made men like Jawaharlal 
‘slightly seasick’ 6 while the suggestion of Pakistan was bound to cause alarm. 
But Cripps relied on his persuasive ability, his known goodwill for the cause 
of Indian freedom and, above all, his close friendship with Jawaharlal. In the 
winter of 1939 he had come to India ‘as a self-appointed Ambassador to treat 
with the Congress’ 7 and had been Jawaharlal’s guest; now, as the emissary 

1 26 December 1941, J. P. Lash, EUanor and Franklin (London, 1972), p. 669. 

* 24 February 1942, Foreign Relations of the United States 1942, vol. 1, pp. 605-06. 

* Memorandum to War Cabinet, 2 February 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 111. 

4 To Mackenzie King, 18 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 440. 

* Amery’s. telegram and letter to Linlithgow, 10 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 396 

and 403. * 

4 Jawaharlal quoted in Curie, op. cit., p. 441. 

7 Laski to Mr and Mrs Frankfurter, 7 December 1939, Laslci papers. 



THE CRIPPS MISSION 


279 


of the War Cabinet, he was confident of an agreement. What he failed to under¬ 
stand was that Jawaharlal liked him but had no high opinion of his judgment 1 
and that the fate of India was not an issue which Jawaharlal would be willing 
to determine at a personal level. 

From the start, Cripps’s negotiations in Delhi centred on the immediate 
transitory arrangements during the war, the Declaration being, in the phrase 
of the Viceroy’s entourage, ‘the wrapper round a pound of tea’, which was 
the control of the Government of India. The Viceroy insisted that this was 
a matter of which only he should decide the details, and he would be unwilling 
to alter the composition of his Executive Council if only one of the parties 
(i.e. the Congress) agreed to join. He feared that if the Congress secured official 
influence, the Muslims and other minorities would be antagonized, the war 
effort would be impeded and the ‘P6tainism’ of Gandhi and other elements 
in the Congress would gain ground. 2 Jinnah, however, surprised by the ex¬ 
tent to which the notion of Pakistan had been conceded? was willing to accept 
the proposals and saw no great difficulty in the interim arrangements. 3 There 
was no discussion throughout Cripps’s stay in India as to how many represen¬ 
tatives in the Government each party should be allotted. Jinnah has been so 
often criticized in this book that it is a pleasure to record that, on this critical 
occasion, he was guided by partriotism. 

The Congress disliked the provisions about a Dominion constitution rather 
than full independence, the representation of the Indian States in a constituent 
assembly by their rulers rather than popular representatives and, above all, 
the recognition of the idea of a partition. It was for the last reason that Gandhi 
opposed the Declaration and urged the Working Committee to reject ‘the 
post-dated cheque’. 4 In an undated letter to Jawaharlal, written at 2 a.m., and 
which we can place because it was .written on the back of a dentist’s bill dated 
27 March 1942. Gandhi declared that he was convinced that the offer could 
not be accepted. ‘It will ruin the country. If you hold the same opinion,, have 
a talk with Rajaji and take the final decision. If you and Rajaji think alike, then 
let us act accordingly.' The wording shows Gandhi’s intense dislike of the 
proposals, but it also makes dear that he did not expect the final word to be 
his. Both before and after March 1942, the Congress had frequently not hesi¬ 
tated to set aside Gandhi’s opinion, and on this occasion too they would have 
done so if necessary. Rajagopalachari was for such a step. He believed that 
the Congress should accept office without even examining the details of the 

Dedaration. Jawaharlal was away in Allahabad for the wedding of his daughter 
• 

1 See Jeweharlal to Mahadeva Oesai, 9 December 1939, A Bunch of O' * mors, pp. 402-03. 

2 Note by L. G. Pinnell, acting P.S.V., of conversation with F. F. Turnbull, an official who accom¬ 
panied Cripps, on 23 March 1942, Linlithgow papers, vol. 141, diary of the Cripps Mission. 

2 Cripps’s account of interview with Jinnah, 25 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 480. 

* The phrase has gone down into history as ‘a post-dated cheque on a crashing bank'; but it is now 
known that the second part, 'on a crashing bank*, was the addition of an enterprising journalist. 
See J. Hennessy's letter in The Spectator, 11 October 1969. 



280 MWAHttUL NEHRU 

on 26 March; but Azad, speaking for the Congress, emphasised the iopof. 
tance of effective control of defence by Indian representatives. He stated that 
this was far more important than the provision for non-accession of pro¬ 
vinces. 1 It was therefore dear that, however disappointed the Congress might 
have been with the long-term proposals and whatever Gandhi might think, its 
attention was concentrated on the need to mobilize the forces of the Indian 
people to meet the immediate crisis. 

However, as Rajagopalachari told Cnpps, * all depended on Jawaharlal. 
The latter was anxious to collaborate in the defence of India and if he were 
satisfied that the Dedaration enabled this, Gandhi could not have pressed 
his objection. So, on the eve of meeting Jawaharlal, Cripps secured Churchill's 
approval for rewording the paragraph on defence arrangements, and it was 
now affirmed that the task of organizing the defence of India must be the 
responsibility of the Government of India with the co-operation of the peo¬ 
ples of India. However, when he met Cripps Jawaharlal made no commit¬ 
ment, and Cripps concluded that Jawaharlal was willing to accept the 
Declaration but was beaten by Gandhi who was prepared to use any means 
to thwart the organization of India for war. 

This was a total misreading of the situation. Repeatedly in the years since 
the outbreak of war, the Congress had, despite Gsuidhi, offered its co¬ 
operation in defence. The very fact that discussions with Cripps were con¬ 
tinued even after Gandhi had made his attitude clear establishes beyond doubt 
the bona fides of the Congress. Indeed Gandhi left Delhi on 4 April in an 
almost sulky mood. 9 The Congress would have reached a settlement with 
Cripps if the arrangements for defence had been satisfactoiy. But the Viceroy 
stepped in, and toned down the co-operation in the military effort to mean 
merely the designation of an Indian to some office connected with the defence 
responsibilities, of the Government of India without in any way impinging 
upon the functions and duties of the Commander-in-Chief. 4 This was ob¬ 
viously inadequate and Cripps concluded that his mission had failed. As a 
final effort he suggested that Azad and Jawaharlal should meet the Com¬ 
mander-in-Chief, Wavell. 5 The Congress had already reached a decision 
rejecting the proposals not merely because of the objectionable nature of the 
long-term arrangements but for the failure to transfer responsibility for 
defence, to which the Working Committee attached the greatest importance; 
but Azad agreed that he and Jawaharlal would meet Wavell and the Congress 
refrained from publishing its resolution. 

1 Cripps’s account of interviews with Azad, 25 and 28 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, 
pp. 479 and 514. 

2 Cripps's account of interview with Rajagopalachari, 28 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, 
p. 512. 

2 Cf. his statement at a press conference before leaving Delhi: 'I must now live my message af 
non-violence. What is the use of my speaking when I cannot enforce my message In my own little 
way?' Quoted by B. Shiva Rao, ‘India, 1935-47’, In The Partition of Indio, p.^132 
4 Cripps to Azad, 30 March 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 363. 

* Idem, 1 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 598. 



the cripps mission. 


281 


On this basis, the talks continued. The War Cabinet was not in favour of 
associating a Congressman with defence responsibilities, but a more precise 
interpretation of the association of an Indian with defence could be consider¬ 
ed if the Congress desired it and the Viceroy could select ‘some suitable Indian’ — 
presumably a loyalist. 1 Cripps, eager for an agreement and now realizing that 
if he could satisfy Jawaharlal, Azad and Rajagopalachari on defence the 
opposition of Gandhi would not prevail, sought to interpret the Declaration 
to meet the requirements of the Congress. He himself preferred to transfer 
the defence ministry to an Indian, subject to a written convention that nothing 
would be done contrary to British policy; but knowing the opposition this 
would arouse in Delhi and London, he suggested the transfer to an Indian 
of such functions of the defence ministry as the Co m mander-in-chief con¬ 
sidered could be handed over safely and practically. A further safeguard was 
that 'under the new arrangement whereby the Executive Council will approx¬ 
imate to a Cabinet’ all important matters would be decided by the Council as 
a whole and not by any individual member. 2 It is dear from this letter that 
Cripps was thinking in terms of cabinet government in India as generally 
understood. He had also obviously spoken in these terms to Indian leaders. 
There is no reason to doubt Azad’s statement that at the very first interview 
Cripps had talked of a National Government functioning as a Cabinet, and the 
Viceroy’s position becoming analogous to that of the King of England 3 — 
a statement which Cripps never contradicted. In fact, at his first press con¬ 
ference on 20 March, he had recognized that the Executive Coundl could be 
turned into a Cabinet; 4 and on 4 April Azad wrote to Cripps that ‘the effectual 
control of the defence of India should rest with the Indian National Govern¬ 
ment’ 5 — the first time that the phrase was used in the correspondence. 
Linlithgow now saw another opportunity to intervene. He secured authority 
to write direct to the British Government on these matters, and made sure 
that Wavell would stand firm. 6 Wavell claimed to be working out details 
on the lines of Cripps’s proposal. 7 There is nothing in the published British 
documents to show what took place at Wavell’s interview with Jawaharlal and 
Azad, and the Congress leaders also refrained from talking about it. But in 
fact it was a disaster. 

When tea was cleared away, Wavell asked the Indian leaders to open pro¬ 
ceedings, and Pandit Nehiu spoke for some time. Briefly he wanted the 

1 Minute of War«Cabinet discussion and Churchill’s draft telegram to Cripps, 2 April 1942, 
Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 612-14. 
a Cripps to Churchill, 4 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 636*9. 

’Azad to Cripps. 11 April 1942, Transfer of Power, voi. 1, pp. 743-5. 

4 Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 547. 

’Azad to Cripps, 4 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 640. 

* Viceroy’s telegram to Amery and Amery's reply 2 April, and note of Viceroy's. Secretary, 

3 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 614-15 and 623. 

’ Telegram bo Churchill, 6 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 655. 



282 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Defence Member of Council to be an Indian in place of the Commander- 
in-Chief, who would become an executive adviser. He was asking for 
hundred per cent on Defence. When he had finished I imagined th'at 
some discussions, and, perhaps, bargaining would take place; Wavell 
perhaps offering something, Nehru conceding something until Some sort 
of compromise might be reached to form the basis of further discussions 
at a higher level. How far Wavell would go I did not know. To my intense 
astonishment Wavell said, ‘If that is your case there is nothing more to 
be said.’ There was dead silence. After a pause Wavell stood up and the 
Indian leaders rose to take their leave. 1 

The Cripps mission was by now beyond redemption, and the Congress had 
nothing to do with its failure. Cripps had got out of his depth, and Churchill, 
Amery, Linlithgow and Wavell made sure that he could not scramble back to 
land. The War Cabinet informed him that the character of the Viceroy’s 
Council could not be changed, and Cripps was obliged to agree with Linlith¬ 
gow and Wavell that nothing more would be done but transfer some non- 
essential functions of the Commander-in-Chief to an Indian Member. 2 But, 
in his letter to the Congress enumerating the nondescript defence matters 
which would be transferred to an Indian, he used the phrase ‘National Govern¬ 
ment’. 3 Considering that he knew by now that the Cabinet in London had 
rejected any such change, one can only conclude that he hoped that once the 
Congress came in without insisting on its understanding of what a National 
Government meant, he could use his authority in Britain to permit the Execu¬ 
tive Council to function as a Cabinet and that he could even, if need be, secure 
the replacement of the Viceroy. The standing of Cripps at this time in Britain 
was high; he was regarded almost as the alternative Prime Minister. With an 
Indian settlement under his belt, he could have overborne any resistance to its 
working. He wanted such a settlement for its own sake, for India was always 
dear to him. India was his second country, and even on his death-bed his 
thoughts were of her. 4 Here was an occasion when his conscience and his 
career were not at war. 3 But there was naiVety in his arrogance and a streak 
of innocence in his brilliance; and this enabled his adversaries to outmanoeuvre 
him. 

The final agony was drawn out by the eagerness of the Congress to find 
some way of reaching a settlement and the arrival of Louis Johnson, Roose¬ 
velt’s personal representative in India. Johnson, apparently with Cripps’s 

1 General G. N. Moles worth, Curfew on Olympus (London, 1965), p. 220. 

* Linlithgow to Amery, Amery memorandum, minute of India Committee, Cripps to Churchill 
and Amery to Cripps, all of 6 April, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 653-63. 

* Cripps to Azad, 7 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1 p. 683. 

4 Dame Isobel Cripps to the author, 2 December 1969. 

* ‘ The trouble is, his chest is a cage in which two squirrels are at war.^is conscience and his 
career.' Churchill to Stalin on Cripps, cited in Lord Moran, Winston Churchill: The Struggle for 
Survival (London, 1966), p. 74. 



THE CRIPPS MISSION 


283 


approval, asked Roosevelt to intercede with Churchill and, on Roosevelt 
declining to do so, himself began to mediate. 1 A defence formula was drawn 
up dividing the functions of the Indian Member and the Commander-in-Chief. 
WaveU first refused even to consider any such formula ‘because he is tired, 
discouraged and depressed and hates and distrusts Nehru’. 2 Later, WaveU 
and Linlithgow agreed to a demarcation which gave the Commander-in-Chief 
residuary powers. At the suggestion of Jawaharlal, Johnson and Cripps revised 
the formula to leave the residuary powers with the Indian Member and 
authorizing the British Government and not the Viceroy to allot any new 
function or settle any dispute regarding the allotment. 3 This approach recog¬ 
nized that the National Government would be responsible for the entire 
government of the country including its defence but, in view of the war, 
would delegate fuU control of military operations to the Commander-in-Chief. 
Linlithgow objected to the Congress being shown by an American any formula 
of which he was unaware, and regarded arbitration by the British Government 
as a serious invasion of his own powers. 4 Cripps’s justification was that die 
situation was getting hot and something had to be done; and Johnson thought 
that with these minor amendments the Congress would settle. In fact, the Work¬ 
ing Committee asked for illustrative lists of the functions of the Defence 
Minister and the Commander-in-Chief and, to avoid delay, authorized Azad 
and Jawaharlal to discuss these matters with Cripps. 3 There was now general 
expectation of a settlement. 6 Jawaharlal himself said later that he at this 
time estimated the chances of success at 7 5 per cent. 7 

Had ChurchiU and the War Cabinet backed Cripps, the Viceroy’s tantrums 
could have been ignored. But the Cabinet, fortified by Hopkins’s virtual dis¬ 
owning of Johnson and assurance to Churchill that Roosevelt would not 
interfere, 8 directed Cnpps to bring the whole matter back to its Declaration 
with only agreed amplifications and wanted a precise definition of the term 
‘National Government’. 9 They had no intention, as suggested by Cripps in 
one of his letters to Azad, of transferring the Home Department to Indian 
hands. When Cripps told officials in Delhi soon after his arrival that the 
Cabinet had quite made up its mind that India should have de facto Dominion 
Status and complete Indianization of the Executive Council except for 
defence, 10 he was guilty either of misunderstanding or, what was more, likely, 

1 Johnson to State Department, 4 April, State Department to Johnson, 5 April and Johnson to 
Roosevelt, 7 April 1942, Foreign Relations of tbe U.S. 1942, vol. I, pp. 626-9. 

2 Johnson to Statij Department, 9 April 1942, ibid,, p. 630.. 

* Ibid. For texts of formulae, see Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 699-700. 

* Note by the Viceroy, 8 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1,‘pp. 694-6. 

> See Jawabarlal’s note, AICC File G. 26 (Part I) of 1942. 

* The Hindustan Times, 9 April 1942. 

2 Press Conference 12 April, National Herald, 13 April 1942. 
a R. E. Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins (New York, 1930), vol. 2, p. 102. 

* Telegram, 9 April, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, pp. 707-08. 

H. V. Hodson, The Great Divide (London, 1969), p. 103. 



284 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


of self-deception. His threat to hand the matter over if he were not trusted 
was sharply repelled by Churchill, and Linlithgow was directly informed that 
there was no question of any convention limiting in any way his powers under 
the existing constitution. 1 

The luckless Cripps now quibbled. He drew a distinction between .national 
government and cabinet government, assuring the War Cabinet that he. had 
throughout emphasized that the existing legal and constitutional position must 
remain unchanged, and described a National Government loosely as one 
'mainly composed of representative Indians together with Viceroy and Gom- 
mander-in-Chief’. 2 On the other hand, he informed the Congress that the 
Viceroy would doubtless do all he could by means of appropriate conventions. 
With a co-operative Viceroy this might have worked. Indeed, Jawaharlal 
thought that if Linlithgow had talked to the Congress leaders and discussed 
with them how the Executive Council worked, a settlement might have been 
reached. 3 But Linlithgow had no desire to see Cripps succeed. 

In despair, Cripps appealed to Jawaharlal, as an old friend, to save him: 

Personal and private 
My dear Jawaharlal, 

Let me make a final appeal to you, upon whom rests the great burden 
of decision — a decision so far-reaching in its bearing upon the future 
relations of our two peoples that its magnitude is indeed portentous. 

We can and must carry our people through to friendship and co¬ 
operation — I in my sphere, you in yours. 

The chance which now offers cannot recur. Other ways may come if 
this fails but never so good a chance to cement the friendship of our 
people. 

Leadership — the sort of leadership you have — can alone accomplish 
the result. It is the moment for the supreme courage of a great leader to 
face all the risks and difficulties — and I know they are there — to drive 
through to the desired end. 

I know your qualities and your capacity and I beg you to make use of 
them now. 


Yours always 
affectionately, 

Stafford 4 

1 Crippsto War Cabinet, War Cabinet to Viceroy and Churchill to Cripps, all of 10 April, Transfer 
of Power, vol, 1, pp. 717, 720 and 721. 
a To War Cabinet, 10 April 1942, Transfer of Power, vol. 1, p. 716. 

’Report of Sir E. Villiers of conversation with Jawaharlal, 5 July 1942, Transfer of Power, 
vol. 2 (H.M.S.O., 1971), p. 690. * 

4 A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 468. 



THE CR1PPS MISSION 


283 


But Jawaharlal’s hands were bound - not by Gandhi or his co ll ea gues in 
the Working Committee but by Gripps’s own shifts of position. He told Cripps 
that there were limits beyond which he could not carry the Congress and the 
Congress could not carry the country; but Cripps would not believe him. 1 



TRAPEZE TRAGEDY ? 




Comment by Shankar, the cartoonist, on the Cripps Mission 


At this stage, a weaker man would have resigned. It is no discredit to Cripps 
that he did not. He was a minister in a war-time government when his country 
was in extreme crisis. Burma and the Andaman Islands were lost; the Indian 
Ocean was in enemy hands; the loss of the Calcutta area and the Orissa coast ■ 
was probable; and a Japanese landing in south India as part of a pincer opera¬ 
tion against Ceylon could not be ruled out. In such a context, Cripps’s attitude 
was in line with that of another great British socialist, Robert Blatchford: 
'When England is at war, I'm English. I have no politics and no party. I am 
English.' 2 So patriotic motivesjdoubtless led Cripps to stick to his post and to 
retract his commitments. He informed Johnson with embarrassment that he 
had to revert to the text of the original Declaration; and Jawaharlal and Azad 
were amazed, at their final interview with Cripps on 9 April, to find that all the 
searching for new formulae had been a waste of time and the phrase 'National 

1 Jawaharlal to Evelyn Wood, 3 June 1942. 

* Quoted in B. Sentmel, Imperialism and Social Reform (London, I960), p. 226. 



286 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Government ’now meant nothing at all. It was to be neither a free nor a cabinet 
government. 1 Ignoring all his earlier suggestions of a National Government 
and constitutional conventions, Cripps now stated that there could be no joint 
responsibility or any assurances that the Viceroy would not exercise his powers 
of intervention or veto. All that he now proposed was a slight vacation of the 
offer of August 194Q. Some popular representatives could be added to (he Exe¬ 
cutive Council, and if its members resented the Viceroy’s attitude, it was always 
open to them to resign 

The failure of the Cripps mission is not surprising. Both the War Cabinet 
(barring Attlee) and Linlithgow’s Government had no wish to see it succeed. 
Cripps’s method of negotiation was also not suited to this situation. He was a 
lawyer who stated hiscase powerfully and expected it to prevail. On this occasion, 
having handed over the Declaration, he could only urge the Congress to accept 
it. Both his technique and his brief left him no room for manoeuvre. His friends 
in the Congress were alienated. 

1 was surprised at his woodenness and insensitiveness, in spite of his 
public smiles. He was all the time the formal representative of the War 
Cabinet, in fact he was the War Cabinet speaking to us with a take it or 
leave it’ attitude. Always he seemed to impress upon us that he knew the 
Indian problem in and out and he had found the only solution for it. Any¬ 
one who did not agree with it was to say the least of it utterly misguided. 2 

On the other hand, his tendency to slur over differences in his anxiety to win 
over the Congress was exploited by his antagonists. What is clear is that the 
Working Committee, despite the attitude of Gandhi and its own dislike of the 
provisions for India’s future, took the stand that it was the present that counted 
and was willing to co-operate in defence if given the full opportunity. But Cripps, 
intensely disappointed at this setback to his hopes and his career, most unfairly 
made the Congress the scapegoat; and it is for this that he has to be severely 
faulted. He accused the Congress of suggesting a change in the constitution 
for the first time nearly three weeks after it had received the proposals and 
described the working by a convention of a nominated cabinet as a constitu¬ 
tional government as ’an absolute dictatorship of a majority'. This was. the 
first suggestion of any differences between the Congress and the League on 
this matter; for throughout the discussions there was no hint by any of the 
parties of any difficulty on this issue. For Cripps to allege at the end that, with 
deep communal divisions, ’an irresponsible majority government’ would be 
rejected by all minorities and was not possible, 3 was incredible and mischievous. 

*101111100 to State Depa r tment, 11 April 1942, op. cit., p. 631; Azad to Crippa, 10 April 1942, 
Transfer of Poumr, vol. 1, pp. 726-30. 

*Jawahaiiai to Evelyn Wood, 3 lone 1942. 

* Crippa to Azad, 10 April 1942, op. cit. 



THE CRIPPS MISSION 


287 


After his return from India, Cripps reported to the War Cabinet that Gandhi 
was determined to prevent an agreement at all costs not merely because of his 
devotion to non-violence but also because he feared loss of bis leadership to 
Jawaharlal or some other supporter of the war effort. He had, therefore, in a 
two-hour telephone conversation from Wardha on the afternoon of 9 April, 
ordered the Congress leaders to break oft negotiations, and Jawaharlal and 
Azad had come to Cripps that evening and chosen the question of a National 
Government as a better ground on which to do so than the defence question, 
which had been successfully settled. 1 Some sentences which Cripps drafted 
and later omitted from his broadcast to the United States on 27 July confirm 
how completely he had convinced himself that a fair offer had been rejected by 
an over-reaching Congress. Gandhi, he thought, was 'being led on by the shadow 
of his visions rather than by the substantial facts of the world situation’, and 
was threatening the extremes of pressure not only qgainst Great Britain but 
against the Indian minorities as well to win political power for his own party. 
As for the Congress, it was ‘a religious party’ representing not a political majo¬ 
rity but a permanent religious and racial majority to which the minorities had 
no wish to be subjected. 2 ’Had Congress accepted,’ Cripps wrote later to a 
Chinese friend, 3 'which but for Mr. Gandhi they would have done, the Indian 
question would have been well on the way to settlement.’ Thanks to Cripps, 
this interpretation has now become a part of conventional history. 4 It was this 
effort, so discordant with both his intellectual sharpness and his general charac¬ 
ter, to attribute petty motives to Gandhi and to prove the Goqgress, as Jawahar¬ 
lal said, ‘not only wrong but damnably wrong’ 5 that poisoned for a long time 
Cripps’s personal relations with Jawaharlal and, what was perhaps more impor¬ 
tant, made it more difficult for Jawaharlal in the coming months to prevent 
a direct collision between the Congress and the Government. 


1 Report to War Cabinet, 6 July 1942, Transfer of Power, voi. 2, p. 318. 

* See the first draft of his broadcast in the Cripps papers, Nuffield College Library, File 1143. 
>To Professor Tuan Sheng-chien, 19 February 1943, Cripps papers. File 690. 

* For example, Roy Jenkins: ‘Nehru, even Jinnah, were tempted. But Gandhi, who cared little 
about the threat of die new invaders, moved in and snatched the prospect of achievement away 
from Cripps.' The Times, 27 November 1972. 

’Press Conference, 12 April, Notional Herald, 13 April 1942. 




Collision Course 


Denied the chance to form a representative government which could, in Jawa- 
harlal’s words, light a spark in millions of hearts and offer unbroken resistance 
to the Japanese, Jawaharlal set about the second-best task of unofficial organiza¬ 
tion for self-reliance. There was no prospect of further negotiations with the 
British. The debris of the Cripps mission stood in the way of both parties, and 
neither was prepared to make a fresh move. But Jawaharlal announced that 
the Congress would continue its policy of non-embarrassment to the British. 
War production should not be impeded. He was dissuaded by Azad from broad¬ 
casting over All-India Radio on these lines, 1 but he promised Johnson that he 
would proceed to Calcutta to secure the termination of industrial strikes. ‘I shall 
have’, reported Johnson, 2 ‘his complete help; he is our hope here. I trust him.’ 
On the other hand, if the Japanese, invaded India they would be met not only 
with non-violent non-co-operation, but even, if necessary, with guerrilla war¬ 
fare and a scorched-earth policy. Jawaharlal made these suggestions knowing 
that they did not meet with Gandhi’s approval and that a large sector of natio¬ 
nalist opinion was so embittered by British attitudes that it was ready to stand 
aside if the Japanese moved into the country. 

Some people say Jawaharlal is a fool. He is unnecessarily antagonising 
the Japanese and the Germans. The Japanese will wreak vengeance on 
him when they come to this country. It is wiser for him to keep silent if 
he cannot actually speak well of the Japanese. I want to tell those who 
give me this advice that Jawaharlal is not the man who will keep quiet 
when he ought to speak. On the other hand, I can only reject such advice, 
which is essentially based on fear, with contempt. 3 

‘Azad, op. tit., p. 58. 

a Johnson to State Department, 11 April 1942, Foraign Relations of tb* Unitad Status, 1942, 
vol. 1, p. 631. 

‘Speech at Delhi, 7 April, Tb* Hindustan Timas, 8 April 1942. 


288 



COLLISION COURSE 


289 


In fact, he went further than merely demanding resistance to the Japanese, 
and declared that he would oppose even Subhas Bose (who had gone over to 
the Axis powers) and the Indian troops he had mustered, for this army was 
really no more than ‘a dummy force under Japanese control*. 1 

Gandhi warned Jawaharlal that his attitude was likely to break up the Con¬ 
gress leadership. 'If your policy is accepted, then the Committee should not 
remain as it is today.’ 2 He even forced Jawaharlal to withdraw his suggestion 
about guerrilla warfare and publicly exulted over it. 3 Unable to attend the 
Congress meetings at the end of the month, he sent a draft resolution and 
threatened to withdraw with his followers if his draft were not accepted. ‘The 
time has come when everyone of Us has to choose his own course. * 4 The failure 
of the Cripps mission had by itself restored the influence of Gandhi in the Con¬ 
gress command, and he was now convinced that the immediate step should be 
the withdrawal of the British from India. There was no purpose in even holding 
discussions with a Government which was willing to think in terms of a division 
of India. His draft resolution stated that Japan’s quarrel was not with India but 
with the British Empire. Britain was incapable of defending India and should 
withdraw. India would then be able to defend herself against Japan or any 
other aggressor, but the first step of a free India would probably be to negotiate 
with Japan. The Japanese should be assured that India bore no enmity to Japan 
or any other nation. But if Japan attacked India and the British had not with¬ 
drawn, the Indian people should offer complete non-violent non-co-operation 
to the Japanese and not place any obstacles in the way of the British forces. 
However, a scorched-earth policy should not go beyond the destruction of war 
material. 

This draft clearly moved away from the whole trend of Congress policy, 
since the beginning of the war, of sympathy with the Allies, and made the Indian 
people a passive partner of the Axis powers. His disgust with the Cripps Decla¬ 
ration blinded Gandhi to the grand design of Japanese imperialism. He assumed 
that the Axis powers would win the war and that a victorious Japan would 
make no demands on India. All this was too much for Jawaharlal and he made 
his opposition clear. Even a toned-down version of Gandhi’s draft, produced 
by his followers, was unacceptable to Jawaharlal, who resisted hot an odd detail 
or assertion but the .whole attitude of defeatism and sympathy with Japan 
which underlay this resolution. His own draft asserted, in consistency with 
the earlier position of the Congress, that while India had no quarrel with the 
people of any country, she was opposed to Nazism and fascism as well as to 
imperialism. If India were free she might have kept out of the war but her sym- 

1 Presa Conference at Delhi, 12 April, National Hamid, 13 April 1942. 

3 Gandhi to Jawaharlal, 13 April 1942, A Bunch of Old Litters, pp. 470-71. 

3 Jawaharlal's speech at Calcutta, 19 April, The Hindustan Times, 21 April 1942; Gandhi in 
Harijau, 26 April 1942. 

* Gandhi to Jawaharlal; 24 April, A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 474. 



290 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


pathies would have been with the victims erf aggression. Britain siKHild tkmdon * 
her hold on India, but the Congress repudiated the idea that freedom could 
come to India through foreign interference or invasion. Any attack on India 
should he resisted by non-violent non-co-operation, for the British had prevent¬ 
ed the organization of national defence by the people in any other way. 'If he 
[the Japanese enemy] wishes to take possession of our houses and our fields 
we will refuse to give them up even if we have to die hi the effort.’ A scorched- 
earth policy was not affirmed, but was implicit in the intention to fight to the 
last. 

There was a majority of 11 to 6 in the Working Committee for the revised 
Gandhi draft; but a few hours later, with the illogicality that lies at the heart of 
most democratic bodies, the Committee unanimously accepted Jawaharlal's 
draft. 1 So Jawaharlal had had his way. One can only assume that he had persuad¬ 
ed his colleagues to give one more chance to his policy of support to the Allies. 
Nothing could be expected directly from the British; but Jawaharlal placed his 
faith in the United States and China. In February 1942, Roosevelt had sent 
Jawaharlal a friendly message through Edgar Snow and invited Jawaharlal to 
write to him. 2 When the negotiations with Cripps broke down Jawaharlal 
wrote directly to Roosevelt in the hope of involving him in the Indian problem, 
and stated that there could be no further talks with the British ‘for the present’ 3 
— thus hinting that the door was not completely closed. Jawaharlal's hand, 
cabled Johnson to Roosevelt on the eve of the Congress meetings, 4 would be 
immensely strengthened if Britain, China and the United States could issue a 
joint statement on Pacific war aims assuring freedom and self-determination 
to India and resolving to defend India at all costs. Two days later, Madame 
Chiang forwarded to the President Jawaharlal’s views on the importance for 
defence of real identity between the state and the people. 3 After the Working 
Committee had accepted Jawaharlal’s draft, Johnson drew up one more for¬ 
mula, by which the Viceroy would have to do his utmost to persuade his Council 
before exercising his veto, and pleaded with his Government to secure its 
acceptance by the British. 6 

Roosevelt, however, refused to intervene. 7 Public opinion in the United 
States was, on the whole, satisfied that the British Government had done all 
they could to secure Indian support for the war effort, and that, it was Indian 


‘For the various drafts and the discussions in the Working Committee, see transfer of Powor, 
vol. 2, pp. 66-70 and 158-64. 

2 'When you get there and see Nehru, say hallo for me. 1 wish you would ask Nehru to write me 
a letter and tell me exactly what he wants me to do for India. You cin send it through our diplomatic 
pouch!’ E. Snow, Journey to tbo Beginning (London, 1959), p. 257. 

* 12 April 1942, A Bunch of Otd Letters, pp. 469-70. 

4 Foreign Retetions of the United Stetes 1942, vol. 1, pp. 638-9. 

’Ibid., vol. I, p. 639. 

6 Ibid., vol. 1, pp. 649-50. 

’Cable to Johnson, 8 May 1942, ibid., vol. I, p. 650. a 



COLLISION COURSE 


291 


^politicians who were intransigent. 1 Fortified by this attitude, the Government 
of Indiabecame even more aggressive. A ban was placed on the publication by 
newspapers of the Congress resolutions on the summary evacuation of areas, 
instances of misconduct of soldiers and the panicky and liiyfim i mtor y behav¬ 
iour of officials in Burma and some parts of India. These developments 
strengthened Gandhi’s position, and he could with much justice contend, in 
the sharp and prolonged private debate that now went on between him and 
Jawaharlal, that the latter s support for the Allies evoked no effective response 
in any quarter and served only to expose the Indian people to the assaults of the 
British. With war lapping India’s shores and the British administration both 
incompetent to defend India and preferring to lose India rather than mobilize 
popular support, the case for demanding British withdrawal became vastly 
stronger. When Jawaharlal returned after a fortnight in the mountains, he 
found the situation had so deteriorated that it would be difficult to abide by the 
policy of subordinating anti-British sentiment to the general policy of support 
to the Allies and resistance to the Japanese. Gandhi’s programme reflected 
widespread Indian bitterness against the British; and the fact that Gandhi took 
this line was in itself an objective factor in the situation which could not be 
ignored. As even the Viceroy recognized, ‘Gandhi is the biggest thing in India. ’ 2 
With the United States declining to interest herself directly in Indian affairs, 
China helpless and the British mounting a new offensive against not the 
Japanese enemy but Indian nationalism, Jawaharlal had only his world outlook 
to justify the resolution which he had prevailed upon the Working Committee 
to accept. His supporters were those whom he would rather have done without— 
the Communists, now a semi-loyalist party supporting a 'people’s war', and 
Rajagopalachari, strengthening the Muslim League by his willingness to accept 
the principle of Pakistan and weakening the Congress by seeking to form a 
provincial government in Madras. 

So, when Jawaharlal met Gandhi at the end of May, he was in no position 
to withstand a policy for which he had no enthusiasm. It was, of course, still 
important to him not to harm the cause of Russia, China and the United States, 
and he argued for this, as Gandhi later told the Viceroy, with ‘a passion which 
I have no words to describe’.* But he could invoke no argument more substan¬ 
tial than passion. Once Gandhi abandoned his pro-Japanese stance and conceded 
that after the British administration was withdrawn the Allied armies could 
remain in India and the first act of a national government should be the conclu¬ 
sion of a defence treaty with the Allies, there was no reason for Jawaharlal not 

1 One could say that as regards American opinion Cripps could not have done better.’ S. K. 
Ratcliff* from New York to Kingsley Martin, 4 April 1942, Kingsley Martin papers; M. S. Venka- 
trataani and B. K. Shrivastava, ‘The United States and the Cripps Mission', India Quarterly, 
July-September 1965, pp. 258-9. - 

* Author’s note in L. Fischer, A Waak with Gandhi (London, 1945). 

’Letter of 14 August 1942, Transfar of Powar, voi. 2, p. 703. 



292 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


to acquiesce in Gandhi’s policy. Even from the international viewpoint, help 
to China and advancement of the Allied cause, a total withdrawal of British 
power was necessary, for only then could the Indian people shake off their 
passivity and be totally involved in the war effort. As it was, there was too 
much indifference to British defeats to enable whole-hearted resistance to 
Japanese invasion if it came; nor could British authority be relied upon to push 
back the aggressor on its own. It was known that plans had been made for 
retreating from Bengal and Madras. A British withdrawal from India before 
the Japanese came was the only way to rouse the Indian people and prevent 
India going the way of Burma. Jawaharlal, more than most Congressmen, was 
guided by his antipathy to Nazi Germany, Japan and fascism, and sympathy for 
Russia and China; but even his attitude was, in the ultimate analysis, dictated 
by a strong sense of India's survival. 

It is a hateful notion that after five years of war, China should be defeated; 
it is a hateful notion that Russia, which represents certain human values, 
which means a great deal to human civilization, should be defeated. But, 
ultimately, naturally I have to judge every question from the Indian view¬ 
point. If India perishes, I must say — selfishly, if you like to call it — it does 
not do me any good if other nations survive. 1 

British presence implied not so much serious defence against the Japanese as 
the building up of forces working for the division of India. Jawaharlal was 
reluctantly dragged to the conclusion that the ending of British rule was the 
primary issue. If the Congress continued its policy of doing nothing to embar¬ 
rass the British, the popular will against the Government would be broken and 
that would break the popular will to resistance of the Japanese. On the other 
hand, if a spirit of resistance was built up against the British, that could be 
turned against the Japanese. ‘Personally’, he told the Congress committee of 
his province, ‘I am so sick of slavery that I am even prepared to take the risk of 
anarchy.’ 2 Gandhi could not have phrased it better. 

Gandhi, as usual, had no clear ideas as to the way in which the British could 
be induced to quit India. Jawaharlal was against a mass civil disobedience move¬ 
ment, but Gandhi thought in terms of such direct action after the public mind 
had been prepared for it and in such a manner as not to aid the Japanese, 'll you 
won’t join', Gandhi is reported to have told Jawaharlal, ‘Ill do it without you.’ 

It was also possible that out of local opposition in various plans to official 
harassments, a major conflict might take shape. But he had no wish to act 
precipitately and hoped for an interview with the Viceroy before taking any 

‘Press conference, 12 April, National Harold, 13 April 1942. 

1 National Harold, 2 Jane 1942. 



COLLISION course 


293 


, firm decisions. 1 In the meantime, Gandhi assured Chiang Kai-shek, 2 in a letter 
drafted by Jawaharlal, that the plan to secure British withdrawal was intended 
to enable India to look after herself and to help China to the best of her ability. 
Thanks to Jawaharlal, ‘whose love of China is only excelled, if at all, by his love 
of his country’, the Indian people were deeply committed to the Chinese cause, 
and an independent India would immediately sign an alliance with the Allies. 
A copy of this letter was forwarded by Jawaharlal to the United States Govern¬ 
ment. He added: 

It has been my earnest desire that India should cooperate to the fullest 
extent with China and America. Asia, or any other large part of the world, 
dominated by fascism or nazism is an intolerable thought to me, and I 
should like India to do her utmost to combat this. But the blindness and 
obstinacy of the British Government have created a situation of extreme 
gravity in India and I do not see wisdom dawning upon them in the near 
future. It would appear that they are determined to bring about a con¬ 
flict with the Congress and nationalist elements in India. Already many 
of my closest colleagues have been arrested and this process is continuing. 

It is possible that I might be arrested. It is possible also that the Congress 
might be temporarily crushed by severe repression. But the Indian people 
are not going to be coerced, much less won over, by these methods, .and 
the price to be paid by all concerned will be a heavy one. I have endea¬ 
voured with all my strength to avoid this conflict and this price. But the 
future appears to be dark. 3 

However, influenced probably by a message from Chiang Kai-shek, 4 who 
had prevented the publication of Gandhi’s letter to him and now requested the 
Congress to refrain from drastic action in view of the Allied reverses in Libya, 
the Working Committee adopted a resolution which surprised the Govern¬ 
ment by its mildness. The Congress pleaded with the British to relinquish their 
political power because India’s freedom was essential not only to India but to 
the security of the world. Resistance to aggression could only be built up in 
India if her people felt the glow of freedom. If such a withdrawal took place 
with goodwill, a stable provisional government could be established which 
would permit the stationing of Allied armies in India and co-operate with these 
powers in resistiqg aggression. The Congress wished to' take no hasty step or 

1 Jawaharlal to Lpuis Johnson, 4 June 1942, Fortign Rotations of tbs Unitad Stutos 1942, vol. 1, 
pp. 667-9: Fischer, A Wotk with Gandhi, pp. 78-9, 103 and 109*10; JeweharlaTs confidential 
note on talks with Gandhi, June 1942. 

2 14 June 1942, Transfar of Powar, vol. 2, p. 346. 

* To Lampton Berry of. the U.S. Mission in Delhi, 14 June 1942. 

4 S. H. Shen, Chinees Consul in Delhi, to Jawaharlal, 8 July 1942. 



294 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


embarrass the Allies in any way; but some risks had to be taken to avoid far 
greater risks, and if Britain rejected this appeal, the Congress would be reluc¬ 
tantly compelled to resort to a non-violent struggle under Gandhi’s leadership. 
Obviously to give time to the British Government to respond, the AICC was 
convened three weeks later, on 7 August 1942, to take a final decision. 

Both Gandhi and Jawaharlal stated publicly that there was no room left for 
further discussion. The Cripps proposals were outdated, and the British should 
recognize India’s independence and transfer complete power. The Viceroy and 
some senior officials would have to go, but the provisional Indian government 
would co-operate with the Allies and give the Commander-in-Chief full dis¬ 
cretion in military strategy and dispositions. 1 But, in contrast to the public 
postures, in private the Congress leaders still hoped for intervention by Roose¬ 
velt. Jawaharlal’s remark in his letter of 12 April to the President, that there 
would be no negotiations with the British 'for the present’, still held the field; 
and there seems no doubt that if Roosevelt had requested the Congress to renew 
talks with the British they would have done so. Jawaharlal informed a Chinese 
diplomat that he would accept the promise of Dominion Status on condition 
of a Chinese-American guarantee. 2 Maulana Azad, the president of the party, 
proposed discussions as to the arrangements for the duration of the war with 
Roosevelt as arbiter, provided the Allies as a whole recognized India’s right to 
independence. 3 This was very different to the proclaimed inflexibility of Gandhi 
and Jawaharlal, and was a virtual offer to renew talks on the basis of those 
with Cripps. Gandhi was at this time bitter with Azad, 4 presumably for thinking 
on these lines, and wanted him to be removed from the presidency; but if Azad’s 
offer had led to anything, Jawaharlal would certainly, despite Gandhi, have 
followed it up. 3 So hopeful was the United States mission in Delhi that, in 
Johnson’s absence, the officer in charge drafted a statement for Roosevelt’s 
approval guaranteeing India’s independence 'without prejudice to the principal 
elements in the national life of the country’ and offering to draw up an arrange¬ 
ment for an interim Government. 6 But nothing came of this, and so the Congress 
had, in Jawaharlal’s phrase, to plunge deliberately into the stormy ocean. The 
British Empire was a castle of cards, but its rulers would rather be knocked 
down, as in Burma, than allow their peoples to fight for their own freedom as 
well as that of others. India had no wi$h to be kicked about by either of the im¬ 
perialist powers, Britain and Japan, and to be able to deal effectively with the 

1 Report of JawaharlaTs interviews with Berry, 16 and 18 July 1942, Fonign Relations of tbi 
Untold Statis 1942, vol. 1, pp. 683-9. 

*T. V. Soong’s conversation in State Department, reported by Sir R. Campbell 1 to Foreign Office, 
12 August 1942, Transfir of Power, vol. 2, p. 674. 

* Report of the U.S. Mission in Delhi, 21 July 1942. Fonign Rotations of tbi Untold Stalls 
1942, vol. 1, p. 690. 

4 Gandhi to Jawahaslal, 13 July 1942. 

5 See his letter to Sampurnanand, 28 July 1942, Sampuraanand papers. 

*21 July 1942, Fonign Rilations oftba Untold Stalls 1942, vol. 1, pg». 690-94. 



COLLISION COURSE 


295 


latter one had to beginby getting rid of the former . 1 At Bombay the A1CC again 
appeakd to Britain and the United Nations to end British rule in India and 
promised explicitly to throw all the resources of a free India into the war. This 
freedom should be the prelude to the freedom of all other dependent peoples, 
and countries occupied by Japan should not be restored to their former masters. 
Gandhi was authorized to start a non-violent mass struggle on the widest' 
posable scale, a fight to the finish, but not immediately; and he announced 
that he would make every effort to see the Viceroy. 

The War Cabinet had, even in June, authorized the Viceroy to take quick 
and decisive action whenever it seemed necessary; 2 and in July Amery wanted 
to arrest Gandhi and the Working Committee as soon as its resolution had been 
passed. 3 However, the Government of India derided that the best moment to 
strike would be immediately after the AICC had ratified the resolution. 4 The 
Congress should then be decapitated by the arrest of its leaders and denial to 
them of access to their followers. The Cabinet wished Gandhi to be deported 
to Aden and the Working Committee to Nyasaland, and a warship stood by at 
Bombay for thispurpose. Butin India wiser counsel prevailed. Deportationwould 
be an unnecessary provocation of Indian opinion, and it would be sufficient 
to intern Gandhi at the Aga Khan’s Palace in Poona, and the Working Com¬ 
mittee in Ahmadnagar fort. This place had been used previously for State 
prisoners, was approachable only by a drawbridge and was surrounded by a moat. 

At 5 a.m. on 9 August, the police rounded up the leaders of the Congress 
in their homes. A special train took them first to a station outside Poona where 
Gandhi and his entourage were asked to alight. Just when the Working Com¬ 
mittee had agreed that the British knew how to do this sort jof thing well, 5 
there was a hitch. At Poona itself, where the train stopped contrary to sche¬ 
dule because a signal was against it, the crowd on the platform recognized 
Jawaharlal and ran towards him. When the police tried to stop them with a 
Jatbi-charge, Jawaharlal, ‘with remarkable agility’, jumped through the corridor 
window on to the platform. At least four policemen were required to overpower 
him and get him bade into the train. When they reached Ahmadnagar, the police 
officer apologized for what had happened and hoped that, as he had only been 
carrying out orders, Jawaharlal bore him no personal animosity. Jawaharlal 
assured him that he did not, but was still very angry over the latbi-charge. 6 

This was Jawaharial’s longest term in prison, for 1,040 days or over 34 
months, from 9 August 1942 to 15 June 1945. The twelve members lived 
together till March 1945, when the Working Committee was split up and the 

1 Speech et Bombay, 5 August, The Hindustan Timas, 6 August 1942. 

’Discussion in War Cabinet, 15 June 1942, Tnnsfar of Power, vol. 2,'p. 208. 

1 Amery to Churchill, 13 July 1942, ibid., voL 2, p. 376. 

4 Telegram to Secretary of State, 16 July 1942, ibid., voL 2, pp. 394-5. 

’Mira Behn, The Spirit’s PHgrimego (London, 19601, p. 240. 

^Report of F.E. Sharp, Dy. I. G. of Police, Bombay, 10 August 1942, Home Dept. Pol. (I) File 
3/21/42, vol. 42. 



296 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


members sent to jails in their own provinces. Jawaharlal, with Pant and 
Narendra Deva, was moved to Naini, then to Bareilly ami then again to Aim ora. 
For the first few days after their arrest, Gandhi and the Working Committee 
were cut off from any form of communication with the outside world. No 
letters, newspapers or interviews were permitted, and the public did not even 
know where these leaders had been interned. This policy was. later relaxed to 
the extent of allowing newspapers and two letters to, and four letters from, 
members of their families per week on strictly personal matters. This latter 
concession did not benefit Jawaharlal much, at the start, because his daughter 
ami sister Vijayalakshmi were both in U.P. prisons, and the U.P. Government, 
out of step with the central government for months, refused either to deliver 
letters from Jawaharlal which had been cleared by the Government of India 
or to forward, letters which Jawaharlal was entitled to receive. 1 Later, the 
prisoners were allowed books, but, for fear that uncensored information would 
reach them, these books were scanned for invisible writing. 2 After Jawaharlal 
and his colleagues had been for over two years in jail, in October 1944 the 
Government considered allowing interviews, but the prisoners of Ahmadnagar 
firmly refused them. After so many months of isolation, no interview for a 
few minutes could be satisfactory; and there was also a question of pride 
involved. 

I do not fancy being treated like a wild beast in a cage with occasional 
rope allowed so that I can move a few feet if I behave myself. I dislike 
being the plaything of others and to have my movements and my emo¬ 
tional life regulated by others. Where force prevents me from acting 
as I wish, I have to accept it, but I prefer to retain such freedom of mind 
and action as I possess. If it has been thought fit and proper to prevent 
us from seeing even those one cares for during these 2 V4 years or so, 
well and good; anyway perforce I had to adapt myself to it. But I see no 
reason why I should adapt myself to all the new vagaries of those who 
keep us in prison or stabilize myself in new positions. 3 

So they met no one except the prison officials. 

The other day, reading some of the old letters of Charles Lamb... I came 

across a couple of lines. We have yet the sight, he said: 

* 

Of Sun and Moon and star, throughout the yeqr, ' 
and man and woman. 

‘Home Department Pol. (I) File 3/21/42, vol. 42. 

2 See Under Secretary, Home Dept. Govt, of India to Additional Home Secretary, Bombay Govt., 
29/30 September 1943. Home Dept. Pol. 3/21/42 Pol. 1 1942-3, vol. 2. 

*To Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 23 October 1944. ** 



COLLISION COURSE 


297 


Yes, I thought, we have yet the sight of the sun and the moon and 
stars, and yesterday was sharedpurmma. In the early dawn, when I wake 
up, I see Jupiter peeping over the roof of a building; It is still dark then 
but it is the signal for getting up. In the evening Venus appears as the 
Evening Star. The night sky is slowly changing over and putting on its 
winter appearance. We have sight of all these and they never lost their 
freshness. But of the men we see the range is limited and I fear we grow 
less and less fresh to each other. And women? It struck me as an odd 
arresting fact that for nearly 26 months — for 785 days to be exact — I 
had not seen a woman even from a distance. Previously it was not so for 
even in prison we had interviews occasionally. And I began to wonder — 
what are women like? How do they look — how do they talk and sit and 
walk? 1 


There was little to do or look forward to. Jawaharlal’s diary entries abound 
with trivia: 


11 January 1943 
30 January 1943 

12 April 1943 

13 April 1943 
5 May 1944 


14 May 1944 
20 June 1944 


Felt unwell 

Sowed carnation seeds in box. New canvas shoes 
New canvas shoes 

Rain — rain — continuous rain! The monsoon 
The cat tragedy! Poor Chando hit inadvertently 
over head by cook —concussion of the brain. 
Hovering between life and death 
Cat Chando died in hospital 
New canvas shoes 


Forced into dose companionship, these Congress leaders, who had in 
common only dedication to a common cause and acceptance of Gandhi’s leader¬ 
ship, frequently found themselves in heated discussion, and by the time of 
their release some were hardly on speaking terms. Isolation for so long a period, 
punctuated with reports of the deaths of those dear to them — Ranjit Pandit, 
Azad’s wife — added to the normal rigours of imprisonment. To tone down 
these frictions and fraying of nerves, Jawaharlal organized a regular commu¬ 
nity life. Duties were allotted to each person and rotated every week. He 
himself did more than his share, supervising the cooking, preparing salads, 
nursing the sick, organizing badminton and volley-ball and taking charge of the 
gardening. To the latter in particular he devoted, especially in the early months, 
a great deal of*time, for it gave him a certain psychological satisfaction by pro¬ 
viding activity for his hands and body at a time when his mind had of necessity 
toliefallow.‘Beforeyourise,heisinthe garden — sowing, digging arid planting 
and pruning) watering and weeding* In the hot sun with his hat on and in the 

‘To Krishna Hutheesing, 3 October 1944, K. N. Hutheesing, Nobru’s Utfrs to bis Sistor 
(London, 1963), pp. 166*7. Sborodprnruimo is the night of the full moon in October. 



298 


JAWAHARLAL NSHfcU 


pouring rain with his raincoat, he is here, there and elsewhere.’ 1 Towards 
the end of their term Patel collected seeds from the flowers and Jawaharlal 
sorted them out and presented a box containing a packet of each to every 
prisoner. 

Of those with him in Ahmadnqgar,. Jawaharlal was closest to Azad, Asaf 
Ali, Syed Mahmud and Narendra Deva; but even from these he kept his dis¬ 
tance. With Mahmud he for some time shared a cell and nursed him when 
he was ill; but Jawaharlal was as startled as the rest when Mahmud secured 
his release by writing to the Viceroy disowning the Congress resolution. This 
no doubt drove Jawaharlal even more into himself; but with this inner solitude 
there came tranquillity. The dull routine of prison life became unimportant; 
the deprivations, though felt, were placed in perspective. When books and 
journals were allowed in, he had a fresh source of comfort, and on 13 April 
1944 he took up again the writing of the book which he had begun at Dehra 
Dun jail in 1941. Less than five months later, on 7 September 1944, The 
Discovery of India, running into a thousand hand-written pages, was finished. 

This is a great jumble of a book which bears the marks of haste and tension. 
It is repetitive, has many long quotations and, if Jawaharlal had had time to 
revise it on his release, would probably have been reduced to nearly half its 
length. There are some autobiographical chapters, written mostly in 1941. The 
account of Kamala’s death is moving in its -subdued yet intense sense of loss, 
but this section as a whole does not rise to the level of the Autobiography , if 
only because it is more impersonal, and weak in the attractively self-conscious 
nature of the earlier work. The chapters on the war years blend into a general, 
scathing account of British rule in India. The severe criticism is not so much 
unfair as uncharacteristic of Jawaharlal; but, as he acknowledged, he could 
not, for the time at least, take a detached view of British imperialism and was 
filled with repugnance for England. 

I have looked into my own mind from time to time and examined 
its almost involuntary reaction to events. I had always looked forward in 
the past to a visit to England, because I have many friends there and old 
memories draw me. But now I found that there was no such desire and the 
idea was distasteful. 1 wanted to keep as far away from England as possible, 
and Ihad no wish even to discuss India's problems with Englishmen. And 
then I remembered some friends and softened a little, and I told myself 
how wrong it was to judge a whole people in this way. I thought also of 
the terrible experiences that the English people had gone through in this 
war,of the continuous strain in which they had lived, of the loss of so many 
of their loved ones. All this helped to tone down my feelings, but that 
basic reaction remained. 2 

*B. P. Sitaraxnayya, Faatbars and Stonas (Bombay, 1946), pp. 392*3. Sfearsnayya was om at 
the prisoners at Ahmednapar. 

1 Tba Discovary of India, p. 495. % 



COLLISION COURSE 


299 


However, the core of the book is a long survey of India’s culture before 
the coming of the British. The dmtrast with the Glimpses is striking. Jawahar- 
lal is no longer primarily interested in social and economic change, in action 
and great men, or in Marxist analysis of class struggles. ‘I have grown more 
contemplative. There is perhaps a little more poise and equilibrium, some 
sense of detachment, a greater calmness of spirit.’ 1 He had not sloughed off 
his Marxism but there was now in his thinking an appreciation of the Vedanta, 
its idealism and its ethics. India’s culture in particular engrossed bin? He was 
fascinated by its continuity and seeming vitality and staying power. There 
appeared to him to be an unbroken chain from Mohenjo-Daro, which political 
fortunes could not destroy, and the result was a mellowness and a 
of the Indian spirit, a desire and a capacity to live and let live, an absorption of 
every fresh intrusion of foreign elements to form a new synthesis, a unity and 
stability which could only be explained by India’s ‘depth of soul'. So, in an 
astonishingly narrow nationalist tradition, he put together a version of India's 
cultural history derived from secondary sources and studded with tes timon ials 
from European observers. It was not just the hurry and the atmosphere in 
which the book was written but the theme itself which led to woolly writing. 
All his ideas about race, for example, make little'sense. 2 ‘We are an old race, 
or rather an odd mixture of many races, and our racial memories go back to 
the dawn of history’ 9 — just one of many meaningless sentences of which 
Jawaharlal himself would later have been ashamed^ 

Yet, if the book is lacking in analysis, elegance and dear thinking, it had 
a purpose. It sought to portray an emotional comprehension of Indian national* 
ism and to stress the necessity of revitalizing the Indian people. India’s past 
could be so depicted as to draw lessons for its future. Its continuity could only 
be explained by the fact that while the form often remained, the inner content 
was always changing* However, these sodal forms, like caste, had a limit of 
expansion and the result was a growing, strangling rigidity. Sodal conserv-, 
atism and poverty had been encouraged py alien rule and were the chief : 
characteristics of contemporary India; but if India became free and was true 
to herself, there was no cause for despair. The Discovery of India, written in 
the dark years of Indian nationalism, carried not a predse, scientific argument 
but a buoyant message. 


‘Ibid., p. 24. 

*SwD. D. Kottmbft review Iq Schueo omdSodoty, 1946, pp. 992*8. 
$ Tho Discovery of link « p. 95. 




Post-War Prelude 


Though the leaders of the Congress were aware, thanks to a leakage from official 
sources, 1 that the Government planned to arrest them immediately upon the 
passage of the resolution in Bombay, they made no arrangements for the func¬ 
tioning of the Congress after they had been removed from the scene. Gandhi 
was thinking vaguely in terms of a one-day general strike as a first step, and it 
was suggested that to avoid weakening of the war effort any such hartal should 
not apply to government offices and factories; 2 but no decision was taken. It 
was almost as if the Working Committee wished to escape to prison and to avoid 
decision at what Jawaharlal described as ‘the zero hour of the world'. Leaderless 
and unorganized, the sympathizers of the Congress rose in revolt in various 
parts of the country. The events of 1942 showed the depth of the national will. 
Communications, particularly in the United Provinces and Bihar, were cut and 
the war effort seriously impeded. The Government struck hard to crush this 
resistance. In August and September, 57 Vi battalions were employed in this 
activity, and there were killings in Bihar and eastern U.P. on a scale greater than 
even that in the Punjab in 1919. 3 In other parts of the country also there were 
instances of military and police savagery. The Whipping Act was revived and 
over 5,000 persons detained without trial. Even suspected sympathizing with 
the Congress was dealt with ruthlessly. Considered as the most serious threat 
to the raj since the revolt of 1858, it was handled with the same severity. Efforts 
were made to establish the responsibility of the Congress and, in particular, of 
Gandhi for these disturbances, and considerable publicity material-along these 
lines was issued. In fact, nothing could be proved. Hallett thought there had 
been a preconcerted central plan and oral instructions, and the intelligence 
system had definitely failed in not finding out the Congress plan*of campaign. 4 

t F. G. Hutchins, Spontaneous Revolution (Delhi, 1971), pp. 269-70. 

* Confidential note (in Hindi) for Working Committee, 4 August 1942. The authorship of 
the note is not dear. 

*D. A. Low, Uon Rampant (London, 1973), p. 164. 

* Hallett to Linlithgow, 9 September 1942, Hallett collection, LO.L. Mss. Eur. E.251, No. 38. 

% 


300 



POST-WAR PRELUDE 


301 


But if nothing was found it was because there was nothing to find. Linlithgow 
himself acknowledged this in private. 

My own judgement is that few things are more important in this country 
than that we should show to India, and to the world, that Congress was 
responsible for the rebellion. The weight of evidence is steadily growing, 
though it is true that we have not yet got the link between the campaign 
of violence and the Working Committee — though we have very nearly 
got it in the case of Patel. What I do feel is that the outside world is not 
getting the facts, and that it is essential that we should take steps to 
publicize the best case we can put together . . - 1 

Neither the lack of firm proof nor the denials of Gandhi and Azad 2 curbed the 
Government’s smear campaign. 

By October 1943 the back of the popular revolt had been broken. Gandhi 
wasreleased the nextsummeron grounds of health; but Jawaharlal and the other 
members of the Working Committee were kept in custody, as Amery had sug* 
gested on the morrow of their arrest, 3 till the end of the war. Meantime, the 
British consolidated their position in India. Amery thought in racist terms which 
would have done credit to Goebbels and Rosenberg. 

If India is to be really capable of holding its own in the future without 
direct British control from outside, I am not sure that it will not need an 
increasing infusion of stronger Nordic blood, whether by settlement or 
intermarriage or otherwise. Possibly it has been a real mistake of ours in 
the past not to encourage Indian Princes to marry English wives for a 
succession of generations and so breed a more virile type of native ruler. 
Perhaps all that may yet come about. 4 

This was too much even for Linlithgow, who preferred to ensure British rule 
for very many years to come by strengthening the Muslim League. Attempts 
within that party to weaken Jinnah's leadership continued to be discouraged. In 
1941 the Viceroy directed the Governor of the Punjab to dissuade Sikandar 
Hyat Khan from resigning from the League, and rejected Zafrulla Khan’s 
advice to split the League by appointing to the Executive Council Muslims who 
were unacceptable to Jinnah. 5 With this support, and with the Congress out 

1 Linlithgow to Hallett, 24 January 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 106, quoted in Transfer of 
Power, vol. 3. (H.M.S.O., 1971), p. 347n. 

1 For example Gandhi to Linlithgow, 29 January 1943, Transfer of Power, vol. 3, pp. 538-9; 
Azad to Linlithgow, 13 February 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 125. 

’To Linlithgow,' 10 August 1942, Transfer of Power, vol .2, p. 632. 

4 Amery to Linlithgow, 1 October 1943, Linlithgow papers, vol. 12. 

’Linlithgow to Amery, 1 March and 15 May 1941, Linlithgow papers, vol. 10. Zafrulla Khan 
was at that time a member of the Viceroy's council. 



302 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


of the way from 1942, Jinnah strengthened both his stature within the League 
and the League’s command of the Muslim masses. He was helped too by Raja- 
gopalachari, who canvassed for an agreement between the Congress and the 
League, and by Gandhi, who, after his release, gave Jinnah recognition by deal¬ 
ing with him on equal terms. Their talks came to nothing but enhanced Jinnah’s 
status. * 

More disturbing than the shortsightedness of these Congress leaders was the 
attitude of the Communist Party. After having supported the war effort from 
1941 in defiance of the nationalist tide, it was now willing to concede Pakistan. 
In contrast to Jawaharlal’s interpretation of the growing influence of the League 
as a reflection of the backwardness of the Muslim masses and their acceptance 
of feudal leadership, the Communists regarded the communal problem as one 
of multi-national consciousness. It was to them in essence a problem of the 
innumerable nationalities of India coming to life ’with the further course of 
bourgeois development’, and they discerned a democratic core in the demand 
for Pakistan. 1 

Jawaharlal and his companions, therefore, after they emerged from prison 
in June 1945, were naturally in a bitter mood. India had for nearly three years 
lain under virtually military rule. Collaborators, loyalist, communal and left- 
wing, had had their heyday at the expense of the national movement. Deep 
famine in Bengal had been regarded as low priority. Wavell, who had succeeded 
Linlithgow as Viceroy in October 1943, himself noted that the British Govern¬ 
ment’s attitude to India was ‘negligent, hostile and contemptuous to a degree 
I had not anticipated’. 2 Lord Mountbatten, in command in South-East Asia, 
diverted 10 per cent of the shipping at his disposal for import of foodgrains into 
India, but Churchill, who seemed to regard famine relief as ‘appeasement’ of 
the Congress, vetoed this, and reduced his shipping by 10 per cent. Mountbatten 
on his own transferred 10 per cent of his reduced shipping to food imports.* 
Corruption and blackmarketing ravaged the land. All this infuriated Jawahar¬ 
lal, and his speeches and interviews on release reflect this. India was to him 
comparable to the European countries freed from Nazi rule, with resistance 
movements emerging to the surface. 4 Though the Congress had not organized 
the 1942 rebellion, it delighted him that the people had not miserably submitted 
to repression but had, on their own, struck back. He demanded stern action 
against blackmarketeers and trials in open court of those guilty of atrocities 
against the people. 5 A statement of October 1945 charging members of the 
Executive Council with corruption and bribery led the Government of India 

‘See G. Adhikari, Pakistan and Indian National Unity (Bombay, 1942). 

‘Entry lor 20 October 1944, Wavell, Tba Viceroy's Journal, ed. P. Moon (Oxford, 1973), 
p 93- 

’Wavell, op. cit., p. 89; Mountbatten's interview with the author, 28 May 1970. 

4 Interview to the United Press of America, 21 June, The Hindustan Times , 23 June 1943. 

’Pressconference, 23 June, The Hindustan Times, 24 June 1943. 



POST-WAR PRELUDE 


303 


to consider his prosecution, and only the caution oi their legal adviser prevented 
them. 1 This was after Attlee had taken office as Prime Minister; but Jawaharlal 
would not have been surprised at the Government of India paying no heed to 
the proclaimed objectives of the Labour Party’s India policy. In 1942 the war 
against the Congress had been accepted by almost the entire British nation, and 
Jawaharlal saw nothing to choose between the Churchill Government and its 
successor. 

In our own day that curious group which has no fixed standards or princi¬ 
ples or much knowledge of the outside world, the leaders of the British 
Labour Party, have usually been the staunchest supporters of the exist¬ 
ing order in India. Sometimes a vague sense of uneasiness fills them at 
a seeming contradiction between their domestic and colonial policy, 
between their professions and practice, but, considering themselves 
above all as practical men of common sense, they sternly repress all these 
stirrings of conscience. 2 * 

Cripps in particular he could not forgive, and a welcoming cable went un¬ 
answered. 

Gandhi was at ihis time thinking in terms of another campaign of civil 
disobedience. 3 However, the Working Committee decided to permit its re¬ 
presentatives to attend the conference summoned by Wavell at Simla to consider 
the formation of an interim government. Jawaharlal was not one of the invitees 
but was present at Simla, a town which he hated for its atmosphere of official¬ 
dom, for part of the time; and there is a perceptive account of him at Viceregal 
Lodge. 

I felt he was gnawing some sorrow inside him. He seemed to me a seeking 
soul, happy to follow a track if he could conscientiously do so; and now by 
fate, or our unamiability perhaps, is made to oppose so that our unpleasant¬ 
ness and all must make it worse. He never relaxed the defensive for a 
minute. 4 

The outcome of the conference confirmed Jawaharlal’s suspicions of 
British motives, for Wavell acted as a total partisan of the Muslim League. 
The Congress, though it disliked the parity proposed by the Viceroy between 
the ‘Caste Hindus’ and the Muslims, accepted it as a temporary formula for the 
formation of an interim government at the Centre. So it submitted a panel of 
fifteen names, consisting of both Congressmen and non-Congressmen and 


1 Home Dept. File 33/26/45 - PoU (I). 

2 The Discovery oflnate, p. 293. 

* J. B. Kripalani, Gandhi His Life and Thought (New Delhi, 1970), p. 224 

4 Frey a Stark, Dust in the Lion's Paw (London, 1961), p. 248 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


504 

including three members of the League, from whom the Viceroy could make 
his selection for membership of his Executive Council. But the Congress could 
not expect fair play from Wavell, who never concealed his leanings towards the 
League. As he later told A. V. Alexander, he ‘had no conscious feeling that he 
had been partisan in favour of the Muslim League, but 1 could understand that 
as he had been Commander-in-Chief in India in 1942, he was bound to remem¬ 
ber that whilst the Muslim League were not politically active in his support, 
they did not, as the Congress Party had, organise the sabotage and destruction 
of his communications whilst he was trying to keep the Japs out of India. Con¬ 
gress had in fact acted as our enemies.’ 1 So in the summer of 1945, when the 
immediate fortunes of the League were unpromising and it could not control 
the ministries in any of the provinces where Muslims were in a majority — the 
Punjab, NWFP, Sind, Bengal and Assam — Wavell assisted the League by the 
first of his many acts of partiality. He not only conceded parity between ‘Caste 
Hindus’ and Muslims and between the Congress and the League but, going back 
on his word to Gandhi, 2 agreed not to select a Muslim belonging to the Con¬ 
gress. His offer to Jinnah was that, of the five Muslims chosen, four should be 
from the League and one from the Punjab Unionist Party. 3 This was virtual 
refusal to regard the Congress as a non-Hindu, secular organization, and ac¬ 
ceptance of Jinnah’s contention that it was as much a communal party as the 
League. But Wavell was unwilling to let down the loyalist Muslims outside the 
League and particularly those who had helped so greatly in the recruitment of 
soldiers in the Punjab. 

However, this was not acceptable to Jinnah, who insisted that all Muslim 

members should belong to the League and that, in an Executive Council so 

formed, the Muslim members should have a veto on all important decisions. 

These were demands which even Wavell could not accept; and, had he chosen, 

he could at this stage have deflated the League to manageable proportions. 

Jinnah was aware of this. ‘I am at the end of my tether’, he told the Viceroy; 4 

‘I ask you not to wreck the League.’ Wavell, instead of seizing this occasion to 

restore Indian politics to an even keel, enabled Jinnah to gain the full advantage 

of his obduracy by promptly abandoning his own proposals and dissolving the 

Conference. The offer of the Congress to join the Executive Council while 

leaving it open to the League to come in later 5 was ignored. Nothing could have 

made clearer that it was Jinnah’s wishes that mattered above all else. 

The League derived the fullest benefit of this in the elections for the central 

and provincial assemblies that were held at the end of the year. The Congress 

« 

|> 1 Alexander's diary of his visit to India, entry for 26 June 1946. A. V. Alexander papers, Chur¬ 
chill College Library, Cambridge. 

2 WaveH’s account of interview with Gandhi, 24 June 1945, Wavell, op. cit., p. 145. 

1 V. P. Menon, The Transfer of Power in India (paperback, Madras, 1968), p. 206i Wavell, 
op. cit, p. 154. 

* Viceroy’s account of interview with Jinnah, 9 July 1945, Wavell, op. cit., pp. 152-3. 

* Jawaharlal’s interview to the press. 11 July, The Hindustan Times, 12 July 1945. 



POST* WAR PRELUDE 


305 

was ill prepared for these elections. Its popularity among the masses was greater 
than ever, but its party machinery was out of gear, many of its supporters among 
the narrow electorate—about 30 per cent of the adult population—had not 
been registered, and its leaders at every level were tired, unenthusiastic and 
pulling in contrary directions. Jawaharlal did a little campaigning, but nothing 
like his effort of ten years before. The contrast with the vigour and dash of 
1936-7 was complete. Indeed, the elections of 1945 were in a sense unreal, 
for they could not reflect the despair and intense dislike of the Government 
among the people. On the other hand, the League improved its position as a 
result of the assiduous nursing of the separate electorates in the years when the 
Congress was outlawed, the ill-timed tactics of Rajagopalachari and Gandhi, 
the partisanship of Linlithgow and Wavell, and the support of the Communist 
Party. It was the last which distressed Jawaharlal the most. 

You must realise that it pains me to see the gulf that has arisen between 
the Congress and Communists in India. That gulf at present is wide and 
deep and has all the passions of three years behind it. That has nothing 
to do with communism and socialism, in favour of which there is con¬ 
siderable though rather vague sentiment. Still less has it to do with Russia 
for which there is great admiration, though no doubt tempered in many 
places by certain fears of present and future Soviet policy. The gulf has 
arisen because of internal policy in India and the fact that the Communists 
ran down popular leaders in India and, at a time when there was bitter 
conflict between nationalism and the imperialist structure, they appeared 
before the people as acting on the side of the latter. Whatever the inner 
motives and reasons, this public reaction is easy to understand. Politically 
the fact that has gone most against them and aroused the greatest resent¬ 
ment is their attitude on the communal question. They have become full- 
blooded supporters of Jinnah’s demands (unspecified and vague as they 
are) and in the name of Congress-League unity they demand a complete 
surrender by Congress to Jinnah. I have no doubt that they have worsened 
the communal problem by their attitude. Communists who have joined 
the Muslim League appear to be more rabid Leaguers than others. All 
this has been greatly resented. J hope that changed circumstances will 
gradually tone down these differences. 1 

In the provinces where Muslims formed a majority, the League did not secure 
a majority of votes. For instance, its vote in the Punjab was 46.56 per cent* in 
Sind 45*75 per cent, and in the NWFP 37* 19 per cent. But the seats gained by 


1 Jawaharlal to Palme Dutt from Gulmarg, 12 August 1945, Palme Dutt papers. There Is no 
copy of this hand-written letter in the Nehru papers and 1 am grateful to Mr Palme Dutt for per¬ 
mission to consult his file. 



306 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


the League were far more than were warranted by its vote. Except in the NWFP, 

where the Congress had a dear majority of 30 seats, including X9 Muslim 
seats, and the League only 1 7, the League secured all or most of the reserved 
Muslim seats. In the central assembly too it won every Muslim constituency 
with 86*6 per cent of the vote. Particularly striking was its success in provinces 
like Bombay and Madras, which till now had been relatively free of the com¬ 
munal fever but where now the League captured all the reserved seats. But it 
suffered from a tactical disadvantage in that in no province with a Muslim 
majority was it able to form a ministry with unquestioned backing in the 
assembly. In Assam, as in the NWFP, it was a Congress ministry which was 
sworn in; in the Punjab a coalition of Congress, the Unionists and the Akalis 
took office; in Bengal, the League ministry was dependent on European support; 
and in Sind the League was outnumbered by the Congress and its sympathizers 
and formed the government only because the Governor, with unconcealed 
partiality, called upon it to do so. 

Yet the League had cause to rejoice. It had demonstrated that it had a con¬ 
siderable following, especially in the urban areas. However unpractical the 
concept of partition and imprecise the notion of Pakistan, they had struck a 
response in the minds of many middle-class Muslims. Jawaharlal was still of 
the view that the League had not gathered real strength and was the creation 
of the wishful thinking of elderly British governors. When a test came, all 
Muslims would come flocking back to the Congress. ‘We will all march together 
and ask for independence together and there will be a united India and there 
will be no problem at all. n There could be no solution of the communal prob¬ 
lem so long as the British were in India; but once alien authority and inter¬ 
vention were excluded circumstances would force an agreement, because the 
only other alternative was large-scale fighting. But this was an ideal which 
neither the British nor the Muslim League would help to realize; and the Con¬ 
gress had to take into account the fact of the League’s electoral gains and work 
out its ideas of a constitutional settlement on this basis. There was no time any 
longer for ‘mass contacts’; nor, even if feasible, would the Government of India 
provide scope for them. Even before the elections. Wavell had been anxious not 
to rule out partition. He asked Attlee to alter a sentence, in his broadcast 
of 19 September 1945, which read'‘to work out a constitution which majority 
and minority communities will accept’ into ‘to join in a settlement which 
majority and minority communities . .. ’ Attlee refused. 2 But the results of 
the elections greatly strengthened the arguments for pandering to the League. 
Therefore, while insisting on the departure of the British and the summoning 
of a constituent assembly for free India, the Congress reluctantly recognized 
the right of any area to secede provided this was the clearly established will of 

1 Mr Woodrow Wyatt’s account of a conversation with Jawaharlal in January 1946, recorded 
in his oral testimony, N. M. M.L. 

2 Sec correspondence between Prime Minister and Viceroy in Attlee papers. University College 
Library, Oxford, Box 18. * 



POST-WAR PRELUDE 


307 


the inhabitants of that area and it did not result in the compulsion of any group 
qr community in that area. Jawaharlal hoped that, grafted the right to secede, 
the Muslims would not exercise it but rather use it to shed their fears. 1 Given 
a sense of freedom, the Muslim masses, at any rate, would realize the absurdity 
of Pakistan. A plebiscite should be held after British authority- was withdrawn 
from India and the Muslims would either not want to secede or, if they did, 
would quickly retract their decision. 2 But, especially after the elections, this 
was a forlorn thought. It is possible that to Jinnah himself Pakistan had never 
been more than a battle-cry. He never expected the British to leave 3 and exploit¬ 
ed the demand for a separate state to secure leverage against the Congress. But 
his followers, eager for power and excited by the prospect of a new state of their 
own, believed that it might now be theirs for the repeated asking and, far from 
subduing their demand, inflamed opinion in its favour. It was not possible to 
have a sovereign Pakistan which consisted of more than a part of the Punjab 
and a part of Bengal, and even this seemed to be ruled out by the demands of 
defence. So an independent Pakistan appeared a.fantasy; but the problem, as 
Jawaharlal reluctantly acknowledged, was one not so much of logical analysis 
as of psychological appreciation. 4 By the spring of 1946, with the Government 
of India encouraging the League and the Congress reconciled to the principle 
of secession, the frost had settled on all hopes of a free and united India. 

So, with the emphasis now on tactics, pace and procedure rather than on 
principles, events gathered momentum. The air was full of hate and passion, 
negotiations were the continuation of civil war by other means, and killing- and 
rioting became the accepted instruments of political manoeuvre. It was a sad 
finale to a nationalist movement which had prided itself on its methods of 
peaceful struggle, and there was probably a touch of escapism in Jawaharlal’s 
concentration at this time on two other issues outside the mainstream: the 
Indian National Army (I.N.A.) and relations with the neighbouring countries 
of Asia. 

The stoiy of the I.N.A. has been told often and at length. About 20,000 
Indian officers and men taken prisoner by the Japanese had responded to 
Subhas Bose’s call to form an army to wage war, alongside the Japanese, in the 
cause of India’s freedom. When the war ended, Bose had died in an aircraft 
accident, and the British intended to treat the captured I.N.A. men as guilty of 
treason. Jawaharlal himself had no doubt that the action of these men had been 
an error of judgment. Freedom could not be secured with the assistance of any 
foreign nation, and certainly not Japan, which had an inglorious record of 
aggressive imperialism. However, the soldiers of the I.N.A., some of whom he. 

1 See his draft note written at Gulmarg, 17 August 1945. 

* Interviews to the press, The Hindustan Timer, 4 and 7 April 1946. 

* Even in January 1946, Liaqat Alt Khan told the Viceroy that the British would have to stay in 
India for many-years, and the Muslims were not at all anxious that they should go. Wavell, op. 
cit., pp. 206-7. 

4 Jawaharlal to Stafford Cripps, 27 January 1946. 



308 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


met, seemed to him the pick of the Indian army, who had, for the most part, 
been inspired by the noblest motives. They had done the wrong thing for the 
right reason, and it was absurd for the British to charge them as traitors. There 
is always a case to be made for not putting on trial soldiers who collaborate with 
the enemy, 1 and the case is even stronger when the soldiers are colonial re¬ 
cruits, the best of whom believe that they have been given an opportunity to 
fight for national freedom. When, in an insensate mood, explicable only by. the 
mental decadence which comes over an imperial government in its last throes, 
the Government of India decided to stage a public trial, at the Red Fort in Delhi, 
of threel.N.A. officers, Indian public opinion was deeply stirred to an extent that 
surprised even Jawaharlal. It dramatized the old contest, England v. India, and 
all the major political parties, including the League, expressed themselves on 
the side of the National Army. Even serving soldiers of the Indian Army felt a 
wave of interest and sympathy. 2 As General Tuker wrote soon after, the I.N. A. 
affair, at its most acute, was ‘threatening to tumble down the whole edifice of 
the Indian Army ’. 3 Jawaharlal organized relief for the I.N.A. men and their 
dependants, harried eminent men and women who did not normally take an 
interest in politics to express their concern, set up an I.N. A. Defence Commit¬ 
tee of lawyers and himself put on once more, after over twenty-five years, his 
barrister’s gown and appeared in court. 

The other issue, always important to Jawaharlal and in which his interest 
had not been dimmed by the years of isolation in prison and the tragic situation 
in his own country, was the condition of Asia. With the defeat of Japan, the 
pressure on China had been relieved; and in the civil war which followed, 
Jawaharlal, despite old friendships, strictly refrained from taking sides. Of 
more direct concern was the question whether the old imperialist powers — 
the British in Burma and Malaya, the Dutch in Indonesia and the French in 
Indo-China — would be able to restore their former dominance. This was a 
general problem and Jawaharlal was keen that the Asian countries should help 
each other. He welcomed the idea of an Asian conference suggested by Aung 
San of Burma, 4 and was infuriated by the British use of Indian troops to support 
the French and the Dutch. Even worse was the attitude of the United States, 
which apparently, for its own purposes, was underwriting European imperial- 

*Cf. Mr Bernard Levin on American collaborators in Vietnam: ‘What, after all, will be gained 
by putting the alleged collaboratorson trial and, if 'hey are convicted, punishing them? Hie demands 
of strict justice will have been met; those who suffered will be able to see that those who evaded 
their own share of the suffering have not been allowed to get away with it; and a warning will have 
been given to any who might be inclined to do the same in future. I have to fay that it is not an 
impressive list. . . And it surely is possible, and it is even more surely right, to avoid the recri¬ 
minations and the shame, the anguish and the echoes, that such trials as are envisaged will cause.' 
The Times, 31 May 1973. 

J See Sir Claude Auchinleck, C-in-C, to Wavell, 26 November 1945, J. Connell, AuehinUck 
(London, 1959), p. 806. 

* Francis Tuker, While Memory Serves (London, 1950), p. 43. 

4Letter from Aung San, 13 December 1945, and Jawaharlal’s telegram, 26 December, and 
reply to Aung San, 27 December 1945. * 



POST WAR PRELUDE 


309 


ism in Asia. This could only ensure a continuing revolt of millions with a 
passion which even the atom bomb could not suppress, and end in a third 
world war. 1 

Jawaharlal himself wished to visit Burma, Malaya and Indonesia, to meet 
the nationalist leaders of these, countries, plan co-operative endeavour and 
inquire into the conditions of the Indians settled there. During the years of war 
these communities had been cut off from India; and now many of their leaders 
connected with the Indian Independence League and the I.N.A. had been thrown 
into prison. The Indian Congress had wished to send its representatives to these 
countries to make a first-hand report but the Government refused permission. 
The authorities in Burma and Java refused to let Jawaharlal visit these coun¬ 
tries. The British Military Administration in Malaya was willing to receive 
him, but even this permission was couched in humiliating terms. Jawaharlal 
was told that there would be 

no objection to your entry into Malaya provided that your visit concerns 
the relief of distress among Indians and is not for political purposes. The 
British Military Administration desire you to be informed that an official 
organisation for dealing with distress among all races in Malaya has been 
set up and state that you will be expected to co-ordinate your efforts with 
those of the Military Administration. They also wish you to know that 
transport facilities in Malaya at present are such that they will be unable 
to provide you with a car during your visit. 2 

Jawaharlal, as was to be expected, refused to go merely to function according 
to the will of the Military Administration. His main purpose was to alleviate 
the distress and sense of fear among the Indians in Malaya, and he was not 
prepared to abandon it if the authorities regarded it as political. 9 At this stage 
Lord Mountbatten, the Supreme Allied Commander stationed at Singapore, 
intervened. Cancelling the previous directive, he arranged for all facilities for 
Jawaharlal’s visit, and requested him to call on him at Singapore before starting 
his tour of Malaya. 4 Jawaharlal agreed, while making it clear that his stay and 
programme in Malaya would be organized by his Indian hosts. He refused to 
oblige the Government of India and ask the Indian community not to arrange 
a guard of honour of former I.N.A. soldiers on his arrival at Singapore, and 
went no further than suggesting that there be no procession or strikes of 
workers during his visit. 9 

1 Statement to the press, 15 October, The Hindustan Timas, 16 October 1945; and presidential 
address to the All-India States Peoples Conference, 31 December 1945, National Herald, 

1 January 1946. 

*1 etter from Secretary, External Affairs Department, to Jawaharlal, 25 January 1946. 

* Jawaharlal to Secretary, External Affairs Department, 31 January 1946. 

♦Secretary, Commonwealth Relations Department, to Jawaharlal, 28 February 1946. 

> Sri Prakass's telegram to Jawaharlal, 13 March 1946; Jawaharlal's telegrams to Sri Praicasa 
and N. Raghavan, 14 March 1946. 



310 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


On arrival at Singapore, Jawaharlal met Mountbatten, who, with anticipa¬ 
tion and a sense of drama, had arranged for Jawaharlal’s reception at the airport 
with all the courtesies due to a prime minister-designate. He received Jawaharlal 
at Government House and drove with him to a canteen for Indian soldiers, 
where Jawaharlal had his first encounter, a startling and unexpected one, with 
Lady Mountbatten. 

We arrived at the canteen and 1 met Lady Mountbatten there. We then 
moved in from the porch or portico to a room inside. Just then there was 
a wild rush of Indian soldiers, presumably wanting to see me. When we 
reached the room inside, Edwina Mountbatten was nowhere to be seen. 

I think I got up on a chair to have a look around. Soon Lady Mountbatten 
crawled out of the milling crowd. She had evidently been knocked down 
by the soldiers rushing in. That was an unusual introduction for us. 1 

There was at Singapore a small memorial to the I.N. A., built in a prominent 
place by the I.N. A. personnel. This had been repeatedly destroyed by the British 
authorities and repeatedly rebuilt. Mountbatten was anxious that Jawaharlal 
should not visit this memorial, not merely because it would give recognition to 
the I.N.A., but also for fear that a big function which attracted large crowds 
might give rise to a certain resentment among the Chinese and others. It has 
been suggested that Jawaharlal was so bewitched by Mountbatten on his first 
meeting that he abandoned his principles and his integrity and did not lay a 
wreath at the memorial. 2 In fact, Jawaharlal did not agree with Mountbatten 
that the Chinese would be annoyed by any tribute he paid to the I.N.A. Indeed, he 
had been pleasantly surprised to find that there had been some underground 
contacts between the Chinese resistance movement and the I.N.A. during the 
war years, the Chinese having recognized that the Indians, like themselves, 
were working for national freedom and co-operation with the Japanese was 
only incidental. 3 The only concession Jawaharlal made to Mountbatten was 
to avoid a public function. But he visited the memorial quietly and without 
announcement and platted some flowers there, 4 and this was immediately 
known to the local population. 

Mountbatten’s other request was that when Jawaharlal addressed the I.N. A. 
personnel, who were about 3,000, tH&y should not paradef as a regular army in 
uniform and with badges of rank, and die general public should not be present. 
Jawaharlal replied that nothing could be done about uniforms, as often this was 

t 

1 Jawaharlal to Dorothy Norman, 12 October 1963. D. Norman, Nabru: Tb a First Sixty Yaars 
(London, 1963), vol. 2, p. 221. 

1 Mountbatten, RafUctions on tbo Transfer of Powar and Jawaharlal Nabru (Cambridge, 1968), 
p. 3; Hodaon, op. dt., p. 203. 

^Statement to the press on return to India, 30 March, National Harold, 31 March 1946. 

4 Jawaharlal's report to President AiCC on viajt to Malaya, 28 Marcb 1946. 



POST-WAR PRELUDE 


31J 


the only set of clothes these men possessed. As for badges, generally they would 
not be worn but if they were, no objection could be taken. The function would 
also, as far as possible, be kept private though it was not practical wholly to 
prevent others from coming. In fact, as almost all the former members of the 
Indian army had been repatriated to India, only the civilian personnel of the 
I.N.A. were present and the problem of badgesdid not arise; but considerable 
numbers of the general public did attend. 

In his tour of Malaya, Jawaharlal was accompanied by two senior n ilitary 
officers attached to him by Mountbatten. Jawaharlal was not particularly 
anxious to have them but did not wish to appear discourteous by objecting to 
their presence. He told the local Indian population, who were attached to India 
and anxious to retain their Indian nationality, that those who had made their 
permanent residence in Malaya should adopt Malayan nationality, till, as 
Jawaharlal optimistically hoped, the time came when there would be a common 
nationality for India and all these regions of South-East Asia. His own visit, he 
felt, had had a good effect in cheering up the Indian community, improving 
their organization, drawing the Malayans, Indians and Chinese closer, toning 
down any political action that might be envisaged against Indians and opening 
up scope for an improvement of their economic prospects. 

Back in India after an enforced night’s halt in Rangoon, so that the weather 
thwarted the British and enabled him to meet Aung San, Jawaharlal was 
plunged back into discussion as to the political future. The ’stay-put attitude’ 1 
of the British Government, their refusal to come to terms with the demand 
of the Congress for independence by relying on the intransigence of Jinnah, 
and the League in turn assuming that intransigence was justified by the per¬ 
manence of British rule in India — all these calculations had been blown sky- 
high by the rumblings within the military base of imperialism. Early in 1946, 
the R. A.F. mutinied at several stations in India and refused to obey orders because 
of their grievances about such matters as rate of demobilization and pay; and 
this was followed by a hunger-strike of some members of the R.I.A.F. More 
serious was the naval mutiny in Bombay. On 19 February, about 3,000 ratings 
in the Royal Indian Navy hoisted the national flag on their ships and marched 
through the streets of Bombay. The result was that many industrial workers 
went on strike in sympathy. There was exchange of fire between British troops 
and the mutineers and disturbances which, according to the official report, 
were without parallel in the history of Bombay city. 2 While the Communists 
ami the Congress Socialists encouraged the mutineers to keep up their resis¬ 
tance, Patel and the 'old guard’ of the Congress at Bombay, acting in concert 
with the Government, sought to persuade the sailors to lay down arms. Jawa¬ 
harlal came to Bombay. Patel was thought to be none too pleased about this, 

jawaharlal to Krishna Me non, 2 December 1943. 

’Report of Home Dept. Bombay Govt., 6 March 1946. Home Dept. PoL 18/2/46-Pol. (I) of 
1946. 



312 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


but the Government lifted the ban on meetings to enable Patel and Jawaharlal 
to condemn the outbreak of mob violence. Both leaders, though with differing 
emphasis, urged the ratings to call off the mutiny, if only because they could 
not possibly hope to succeed; and within a week it was all over. 1 

Short-lived as were the mutinies of 1946, they finally convinced the British 
Government that the spring of the empire was broken. Satyagraha^m ay have 
harried the British conscience, the Labour Government may have believed 
as an article of faith that the British should withdraw from India, but it was the 
non-political events of early 1946 that made clear that the end of the raj was 
near. It was the irreversible loss of imperial power that provided the rationale 
for the decision of Attlee's Government to send out a special mission of three 
Cabinet Ministers to seek an agreement on the constitutional issue. How 
closely this decision to send a Mission was tied up with problems of military 
capacity and defence is shown by the fact that, at a meeting of the Prime Min¬ 
ister with the Cabinet Mission before its departure for India, it was resolved 
to make it a condition precedent to independence that India should, in addi¬ 
tion to undertaking her own defence, assist in the defence of the 'South East 
Asia area’. 2 But the occasion when this point could be put to Indian politicians 
never arose. 


i Patel to Jawaharlal, 22 February 1946; report of Bombay police, 25 February 1946, Home 
Dept. Pol. 5/21/46-Pol. (I) of 1946; report of Home Dept. Bombay Govt., 6 March 1946, Home 
Dept. Pol. 18/2/46-Pol. Ill of 1946. 

2 Auchinleck to Wavell, 9 March 1946, Connell, op. clt., pp. 830*32. 



20 

The Cabinet Mission 


On 24 March 1946 the Cabinet Mission arrived in Delhi. It was not a happy 
team. Cripps was easily the ablest of the three, had long experience of the Indian 
problem and a commitment to the future, while Pethick-Lawrence, though old, 
was, as even Wavell described him, ‘a sort of saint’ 1 with a sentimental attach¬ 
ment to India. But the third member, A. V. Alexander, found himself in deep 
waters. He was basically imperialistic in outlook, detested the idea of losing 
India, and was irritated by the feeling that he was being ignored by Cripps and 
not taken seriously by the Indian public. In consequence, he tended to oppose 
his two colleagues and to support Wavell, whose anti-Congress attitude had 
become even more pronounced after the Simla Conference. The Viceroy had 
expected the Congress to launch another mass struggle and had prepared for its 
violent suppression. He disliked and distrusted Gandhi who was beyond his 
comprehension; he could not help liking Jawaharlal, but could find no level of 
understanding. 

At the start, the Mission found that the leaders of the Muslim League, while 
insisting on the creation of Pakistan, had no clear idea as to what this involved. 
M. A. Ispahan! and the Raja of Mahmudabad, who were the first to meet the 
Mission, broke down under Cripps s cross-examination and could not explain 
how they could do without a central government for at least a small list of reserv¬ 
ed subjects such as external affairs, defence, communications and customs. 
Two days later Jinnah himself was unable to give a precise answer as to what 
he meant by Pakistan; 3 and all that his supporters in Bombay, U.P., C.P., and 
Madras — provinces where Muslims were in a minority — could say in favour 
of Pakistan was that they would then be treated better in India because of Hindu 
fear of reprisals on Hindu minorities in Pakistan. 4 The Mission, therefore, was 

* Chips, the diaries of Sir Henry Chsnnon (Penguin edition, 1970), entry on 3 September 1943, 
p. 302. 

2 Alexander diary, 2 April 1946. 

»Ibid., 4 April 1946. 

4 Hnd., 8 April 1946. 


313 



314 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


not impressed by Jinnah’s repeated assertions in public that there could be no 
compromise on the fundamentals of a sovereign Pakistan. They confronted him 
with the alternatives of a sovereign Pakistan with a reduced area or a non-sover¬ 
eign federation of six provinces within the Indian Union; and even Alexander, 
friendly to the League’s viewpoint, noticed that Jinnah’s reaction was evasive. 

I have never seen a man with such a mind twisting and turning to avoid 
as far as possible direct answers. I came to the conclusion that he is play¬ 
ing this game, which is one of life and death for millions of people, very 
largely from the point of view of scoring a triumph in a legal negotiation 
by first making large demands and secondly insisting that he should make 
no offer reducing that demand but should wait for the other side always 
to say how much they would advance towards granting that demand. 1 

However, if Jinnah and his followers were hazy in outlook, the leaders of 
the Congress declined to face up to the issue. The Mission invited Gandhi to 
come up from Poona to meet them, and asked the Congress to depute its repre¬ 
sentatives. Azad, as president, proposed to see them alone and convene the 
Working Committee only if he considered it necessary. This dismayed Patel, 
who felt that Gandhi was out of touch with Congress policy and Azad could not 
be trusted to convey Congress opinion. So hope was placed in Jawaharlal, just 
back from Malaya. 1 am afraid that things will go wrong if you do not find some 
way to meet at least Cripps in time and set the train on rails;’ 2 

Jawaharlal’s own mind was clear on the objective. The basis of negotiations 
with the Cabinet Mission should be the independence of India. These talks were 
not a continuation of those with Cripps in April 1942, nor would the Congress 
accept Dominion Status with power to secede later. The exact relationship be¬ 
tween India and Britain could be left over for future settlement, but it should be 
clearly understood that all such problems could only be considered on the present 
basis of independence. ’In effect the British Government should pass some kind 
of an Act of Abdication.’ The final authority to determine the constitution 
would be a Constituent Assembly, composed of delegates elected by the provin¬ 
cial assemblies according to proportional representation. If any province refused 
to participate or to elect delegates, it could be by-passed and left out for the time 
being; there should be no compulsion. This Constituent Assembly would draft 
an all-India constitution, but such questions as Pakistan would be settled either 
by the consent of the parties or by a plebiscite, on a precise and defined issue, of 
all the inhabitants of the area concerned. ‘It should be made deaf that the ques¬ 
tion of Pakistan (whatever predsely it might signify) will not be dedded by a 
mere majority of votes in the Constituent Assembly. ’ But time was the essence 

i Ibid., 16 April 1946. 

*Patel *o Jawaharlal, 2 1 March 1946. 



THE CABINET MISSION 


313 


of the whole problem, and there should be no delay in convening a Constituent 
Assembly and forming a provisional Central Government acting freely as a 
Cabinet with no obstruction from the Viceroy or the India Office. The Pr og r ess 
should not get entangled in long discussions about details. 1 

When Gandhi met the Mission he pressed, as a test of its sincerity, for the 
release of all political prisoners and the immediate repeal of the salt tax, and 
suggested that Jinnah be invited to form an' interim government. 2 Such sugges¬ 
tions which had no practical bearing on the immediate issue were regarded as 
characteristic of Gandhi; but more surprisingly, Rajagopalachari urged the 
Mission to insist on the adoption of democratic constitutions by the Indian 
States and advised the British Government not to impose a settlement on the 
Indian parties but to refer the issue of Pakistan to an international arbitration 
committee on which the Soviet Union was represented. 9 Neither Gandhi nor 
Rajagopalachari claimed to speak for the Congress; but even Azad, in his talk* 
with the Mission, laid emphasis not on constitution-making but on the transfer 
of real power to an interim government. 4 

This refusal on the part of the Congress to discuss any long-term plan was 
probably deliberate. Immediately after the elections, Rajagopalachari had sug¬ 
gested that it would be wise to devolve the initiative to the provinces. A resolu¬ 
tion should be tabled in each of the eleven provincial as-*»mhlj»s that the 
province was willing to join an Indian federation on certain basic principles 
and a minimum federal list. The positive answer of the NWFP and Assam would 
unsettle the League’s position; and if Bengal also agreed, that would finish the 
battle. 9 Jawaharlal’s mind was working on the same lines. He had advised Cripps 
that both the Constituent Assembly and the provisional Central Government 
should be formed in accordance with the suggestions of the elected Provincial. 
Governments. 6 He now instructed the Congress premiers to get together and 
appoint a small committee of constitutional experts to draft the general princi¬ 
ples of a permanent constitution. The same, or another, committee should 
consider the general problem of realignment of provincial boundaries. By 
separating from the Punjab the areas where the Hindus and Sikhs were in a 
majority and divesting Bengal of Burdwan and parts of the Presidency division, 
four provinces would be created — NWFP, West Punjab, Sind and East 
Bengal — where Muslims would be in a definite majority; and this might 
placate Muslim opinion to a considerable extent. 7 

1 J«w«htrial’s confidential note on impending conversations with Cabinet Mission, 13 March 
1946. 

1 Alexander diary, 3 April 1946. 

> Ibid., 12 April 1946. 

* Ibid., 17 April 1946. 

* Rajagopalachari to Jawahtrial, 26 February 1946. 

* 27 January 1946. 

7 Jawahariai's note of instructions to Congreas leaders in provinces, written sometime in April 
1946. 



316 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


With the two main parties unable or unwilling to make constructive sugges¬ 
tions on the future of India, the Cabinet Mission put forward proposals of its 
own. The scheme of Cripps to ask the Muslim members of the assemblies of 
Sind, NWFP, Punjab and Bengal to vote on separation was rejected by both- 
Jinnah and Jawaharlal. However, on 26 April, Jinnah expressed a preference 
for a three-tier federal union rather than a sovereign Pakistan with a reduced 
area; 1 and Azad repeatedly hinted at the possibility of some provinces coming 
together for certain subjects provided the compulsory link with the centre was 
not severed. 2 This encouraged the Mission to formulate a plan suggesting the 
establishment of a Union Government dealing with foreign affairs, defence 
and communications; two groups of provinces, one predominantly Hindu and 
the other predominantly Muslim, which would deal with all other subjects 
which the provinces desired should be dealt with in common; and the vesting 
of all residuary powers in the provinces. 3 To consider this plan, a conference 
of the leaders of the two parties was convened at Simla. When Dr Ambedkar, 
the leader of the Scheduled Castes Federation, which had, in the elections, won 
only 2 6ut of 151 seats, objected to his exclusion, Alexander advised him to 
become a Christian. 4 However, the Cabinet Mission left a memorandum to be 
passed on to the Constituent Assembly without disclosing its origin, suggesting 
that of the six Scheduled Castes representatives, two should be drawn from 
Ambedkar’s organization. 3 

The conference did not get off to a good start. Jinnah, while still harping on 
Pakistan — ‘surely the poor Mohammedans were entitled to one quarter of 
India’ 6 — attended. He shook hands with Jawaharlal and Patel but turned scorn¬ 
fully away from the preferred hands of Azad and Abdul Gaffar Khan. However, 
prospects soon brightened. It was implicit in Jinnah’s arguments that he was 
not thinking in terms of a sovereign state. He recognized that the Union execu¬ 
tive could deal with most matters referred to it though he felt there was no need 
for a Union legislature; and he inquired whether the constitution of the Union 
would be permanent or provision would be made for revision after a set period. 
Even before the conference met, the Congress had objected to compulsory 
groupings or sub-federations, and felt it would be wholly wrong to compel a 
province to function against its own wish. 7 There were Congress ministries 
in Assam and NWFP and the Congress could not possibly agree to the one 
being linked to Bengal and the other to the Punjab and Sind. This would 
virtually mean abandoning their supporters and handing these provinces over 

* Alexander diary, 26 April 1946. 

* Me non, op. cit., pp. 238 and 254. * 

i Pethick-Lawrence to Azad and Jinnah, 27 April 1946, Papers relating to the Cabinet Mission 
to India (New Delhi, 1946), p. 9. 

* Alexander diary, 15 April 1946. 

* Not* of India Office, 24 October 1946, Attlee papers, Box 4. 

•To Alexander, 29 April 1946, Alexander diary. 

7 Azad to Fethick-Lawrence, 28 April 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 9-10. 



THE CABINET MISSION 


317 


to the League. But at the conference, Jawaharlal pledged the Congress not to* 
exercise compulsion on the units to stay in an alMndia federation. Jinnah 
stated that if the Congress would accept the groups, the League would accept 
the Union. Jawaharlal said that while his position came near to that of Jinnah, 
any Union would be futile without a legislature and the provinces must decide 
for themselves about groupings; and to this Jinnah replied that he had fought 
for freedom equally with Jawaharlal and would be very glad to sit with him to 
discuss matters. 

Encouraged by this, the Cabinet Mission drew up on 8 May ‘Suggested 
Points for Agreement’ between the two parties. There should be an all-India 
government and legislature, both composed of equal proportions from the 
Muslim-majority and Hindu-majority provinces, and dealing with foreign 
affairs, defence, communications and fundamental rights. Residuary powers 
would vest with the provinces. ‘Groups of provinces may be formed’, and such 
groups could determine the provincial subjects they desired to take in common 
and set up their own executives and legislatures. Any province could after ten 
years call for a reconsideration of the terms of the constitutions of the Union 
and the groups. The Constituent Assembly would be elected by the provincial 
assemblies. The Assembly ‘will divide into three sections’, representing the 
Hindu-majority provinces, the Muslim-majority provinces and the States. The 
first two sections would meet separately to decide the provincial constitutions 
for their group, and if they wished, a group constitution; and thereafter it would 
be open to any province to change its group or remain outside any group. The 
three sections would then rejoin to draft a Union constitution, but every major 
point affecting the communal issue would require a majority of each of the 
two communities. 

That the Mission no longer insisted on groupings was clear. The Consti¬ 
tuent Assembly should divide into sections, but provinces might form groups. 
The Viceroy recognized this concession to the Congress. 1 Jinnah, too, under¬ 
stood this clearly and promptly protested. ‘In the new “suggestions” the question 
of grouping of provinces is left exactly as the Congress spokesmen desired in 
the course of discussions that have taken place hitherto, and is totally different 
from your original formula.’ 2 Pethick-Lawrence rejected this interpretation, 
and contended that the Mission had done no more than slightly simplify the 
original formula as a reasonable compromise. 9 This was quibbling; in fact the 
Mission, eager for agreement, made concessions to the Congress while pre¬ 
tending to the League that they had not. This equivocation only served to build 
up trouble for the future. 


*‘I went to bed unhappy all the same. I sympathise with the Muslims rather than with Congress, 
and I am not convinced that our document is quite fair to them.’ Diary entry, 7 May 19*46, Wavell, 
op. cit, pp. 260-61. 

TJinnah to Pethick-Lawrence, 8 May 1946, Paptrs rtlating to CaMwst Mission, pp. 13-16. 
*Pethkfc-Lawrence to jinnah, 9 May 1946, ibid., pp. 16-17. 



318 J^AHAMLAL NEHRU 

The Congress, of course, reiterated its position. All groupings should be 
optional, and this subject should be left open to decision by the Constituent 
Assembly. Constitution-making should begin with the Federal Union. If an 
agreement with the League favourable to the growth of a free and united India 
could not be achieved, an interim government should be formed at once and 
matters in dispute referred to an independent tribunal. 1 Immediately, Jawahar- 
lal suggested an umpire, and he and Jinnah retired to consider the proposal. 
Cripps was enthusiastic. 

I felt inordinately proud of my friendship with you yesterday afternoon 
and I do congratulate you and your colleagues upon their most statesman¬ 
like attitude. I pray that success may come to your labours and that you 
two may be hailed as the Saviours of India as indeed you will be if you 
succeed in coming to an agreement. 2 

The Congress prepared a list of possible umpires who were neither English nor 
Indian, and Cripps made various proposals: the selection of an Indian umpire 
by two arbitrators, of whom each side would nominate one, or requests to the 
United States, Canada, Australia, Eire, Sweden, China, the Soviet Union, the 
South American states, the Hague Court or the United Nations. But Jinnah 
soon denied that he had ever agreed to the principle of arbitration. 3 

After this, the two sides again reverted to rigid positions. Jinnah declared 
that the question of partition had been settled by the Muslim vote at the elec¬ 
tions, but he was willing to agree to the sovereignty of Pakistan being ‘delegated’ 
to a Union for three subjects provided that sovereignty was recognized in the 
form of a group. Even communications were now limited to those necessary 
for defence. To this Jawaharlal retorted that the Congress and the League were 
completely opposed to each other on the question of partition, and it was essen¬ 
tial to have a strong centre with control of many more subjects than the three 
basic ones. Alexander and Wavell were in sympathy with Jinnah, but to prevent 
public knowledge of the differences of opinion within the Mission, Pethick- 
Lawrence and Cripps vetoed Alexander’s suggestion that he see Jawaharlal 
alone. 4 But even Alexander was compelled to recognize the^next day, when the 
Congress formulated its position in writing, that it was nearer to a settlement 
than might have been imagined. While favouring a Centre with wide powers, 
the Congress accepted without qualification the Mission’s suggestion that 
‘groups of provinces may be formed and such groups may determine the pro¬ 
vincial subjects which they desire to take in common.’ 3 

1 Azad to Pethick-Lawrence, 8 May 1946, ibid., pp. 17-19. 

*Cripps to Jawaharlal, 10 May 1946, with the enclosed note. 

^Jawaharlal- Jinnah correspondence, 10 and 11 May 1946, Papers n Idling to Cabinot Mission, 
pp. 19-20. 

‘Alexander diary, 11 May 1946. 

3 Congress proposals 12 May 1946, Papors minting to Cobinot Mission, 21-2; Alexander 
diary, 12 May a946. 



The conierenc^tawwtt, c»v&4 nuke no hirthet $rogttss, and the Mission 
deriheh lo vsswft \\x 2WTV Mtex o\ftasitti\g tlhe Cabinet' s approval, delay in 

securing which had even led Pethick-Lawrence to consider resignation, 1 the 
Mission published its plan on 16 May. Partition, on the basis of either a large 
or a small Pakistan, was rejected. The Indian Union would deal with foreign 
affairs, defence and communications and have the powers necessary to raise the 
finances for these subjects. The idea of parity at the centre was dropped, but any 
major communal issue in the central legislature would require a majority of 
each community as well as an over-all majority. All other subjects and powers 
would vest in the provinces, which would be free to form groups, and each 
group could determine the provincial subjects to be taken in common. Any 
province could by a majority vote of its assembly tall for a reconsideration of 
the Union and group constitutions periodically after ten years. The Constituent 
Assembly would be elected by the provincial assemblies, with each province 
being allotted a number of seats proportional to its population and this number 
divided between the communities on the basis of their population. The members 
so elected ‘will divide up into three sections’ — Section A comprising Madras, 
Bombay, U.P., Bihar, C.P. and Orissa; Section B Punjab, NWFP and Sind; and 
Section C Bengal and Assam. Each section would draw up provincial constitu¬ 
tions and, if desired, a group constitution. Any province could elect to come 
out of any group in which it had been placed after the first general elections 
under the new constitution. The framing of the constitution would obviously 
take time; but an interim government having the support of the major political 
parties and in which all the portfolios were held by Indians would be set 
immediately. 2 

The Mission Plan was intended as a compromise, yielding some points to 
the Congress and some to the League in the hope that both would accept the 
whole even if not wholly satisfied. The idea of Pakistan as a sovereign state was 
rejected; and at the level of the Indian Union there was to be no weightage for 
the Muslims. Even in the elections to the Constituent Assembly the Muslims 
were not to have, as at the time, more seats than their numbers warranted. These 
were all concessions to the Congress. However, to make the Plan palatable to 
the League, Sections B and C, comprising the five Muslim-majority provinces, 
were created in the Constituent Assembly. But there was one major internal 
contradiction in the Mission Plan, which was to lead to disaster and which 
Cripps, at any rate, could not have failed to notice. Grouping of provinces was 
optional, but^ meeting of members of the Constituent Assembly by sections 
was compulsory. If a section met and decided on a group constitution, a pro¬ 
vince could opt out of the group only after the first general elections under the 
new constitution. In other words, grouping would in practice not be voluntary 
at all — unless the clause on optional grouping overrode that on compulsory 

‘Alexander diary, 13 May 1946. 

*For full text of Cabinet Mission Pin, see M. Gwyer and A. Appadorai, Sptscbts and Doem- 
msmtson tb*Indian Constitution, 1921-47 (Lqndon, 1957), vol. 2, pp. 577-84. 



(mty of actions. In fact, tecaose ofta tourneeg/fat Ay eh Qtiaa 

Mission to the league, of which the Congress was unaware, l that decisions 
in sections would be by a majority vote of the representatives of the provinces, 
it was the optional grouping clause which would be set aside; for the represen¬ 
tatives of NWFP in Section B and of Assam in Section C would always be in a 
minority. The Congress was, at the time and later, criticized for being ‘legalistic’ 
and raising such issues as the binding nature of the document, the priority of 
clauses and the interpretation of the Plan. But it was to the Congress a matter 
of urgent practical importance, for the NWFP in Section B had no desire to 
find itself forced into a group with other provinces in that section even for ten 
years, nor did Assam wish to be coupled with Bengal. 

Gandhi’s interpretation was that the Plan was a recommendation to the 
Constituent Assembly which could vary, reject or improve upon it. No province 
could be forced to belong to a group. 2 Azad also wrote to the Mission on the 
same lines and said that the Congress would try to get the Constituent Assembly, 
which would be a sovereign body, to remove the defects in the Mission Plan. 
The only limitation which the Congress recognized was that decisions on 
'certain major communal issues should be by a majority of each of the two 
communities. 3 Alexander and Wavell concluded that Gandhi was playing 
a deep game and that the real object of the Congress was to capture the 
interimgovemment, eliminate British influence and then suppress the Muslims 
and displace the Princes before any constitution was drafted. The British, said 
Alexander in his most pompous manner, had not been stampeded at Dunkirk 
and should not be stampeded now. 4 He and the Viceroy prevailed on Pethick- 
Lawrence not to permit Cripps to see Gandhi alone and without notes being, 
taken. But the Mission had to clarify its understanding of its Plan. So Pethick- 
Lawrence wrote to Azad that grouping was an essential feature of the scheme 
and it could only be modified by agreement between the two parties. As for the 
Constituent Assembly, there would be no interference with its discretion once 
it was formed and working on the basis of the various statements being made. 3 
In other words, the sovereignty of the Constituent Assembly would be limited 
by the terms of reference under the Plan. 

All this was dispiriting to Jawaharlal. Hopes of a settlement, on the basis of 
independence not in the future but at once, had been bogged down jn a morass 
of interpretation. Despite everything, the old spirit and the old approach of the 
British did not appear to have greatly changed. Even while the Cabinet Mission 
was negotiating in India, the officials decided to institute fresh trials of INA 
officers. 

1 Menon, op. at., p. 311. 

2 19 May 1946, Tendulkar, Mahatma, vol. 7, p. 117. 

* Azad to Pethick-Lawrence, 20 May 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 33*4. 

4 Alexander diary, 20 May 1946. 

»Pethick-Lawrence to Azad, 22 May 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, p. 34. 



TljB CABINET MISSION jji 

The dvil and military authorities of the Government of India function , 

Jin a mysterious way. This, I suppose, is their method of preparing India 

for the freedom to come. Whatever they may have in their minds they 
succeed remarkably well in irritating public opinion and making a dif¬ 
ficult situation even worse. 1 

In fact, the trials were soon abandoned, and Jawaharlal wrote a personal letter 
of thanks to the Commander-in-Qlief. 2 But this was indicative of foresight in 
General Auchinleck rather than of a general change in the official outlook. In 
the formation of an interim government, the Viceroy laid emphasis on the 
British Parliament's ultimate responsibility and the Governor-General's pre¬ 
rogatives, and references to independence were linked with legal difficulties. 3 
Wavell made no secret of his suspicion of the Congress, and thought that it 
intended to secure control of the centre and eliminate British influence in order 
to deal with the Muslims and the Princes with a high hand. 4 ‘Don’t lose heart', 
Pethick-Lawrence wrote to Jawaharlal, 3 ‘ir. the independent India to come out 
of the Constituent Assembly. I feel so much depends on your courage in helping 
to bring it to birth and in guiding its destinies when it is born.’ But whatever the 
long-term prospects, the attitudes of the Viceroy and the Government of India 
discouraged immediate confidence. 

There was also the whole problem of the Indian States, of special interest to 
Jawaharlal in his capacity, at this time, as president pf the All-India States 
People's Conference. It was difficult to believe that the widespread instances 
of repression in 'the States could occur without the support of the Political 
Department, for the maharajas and the nawabs were but shadows cast by the 
Paramount Power. Jawaharlal was for a friendly approach, urging the rulers 
to abandon autocracy and, where the lack of viability of their principalities was 
obvious, to merge them in the neighbouring province. There would then be 
left about twenty large States, autonomous units in the federation and with 
democratic governments under Princely figureheads. 6 

However, these sawdust autocrats, confident still of the support of the 
British, paid no heed. Reports continued to pour in from the various States of 
unwarranted firing, summary arrests, ill-treatment of prisoners and banning of 
popular organizations. These gave a touch of unreality to negotiations for 
British withdrawal from India. When Jawaharlal defied a ban oh his entry into 
Faridkot State, the local authorities quickly reached a settlement. But soon after, 

1 Jawaharlal’s statement to the press, 24 April, National Harald, 25 April 1946. 

>4 May 1946, Connell, op. tit., pp. 817-19. 

’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 21 May, Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 May, and Jawaharlal to Wavell, 25 
May 1946. 

4 Viceroy's 'Note for talk with Pandit Nehru’, 26 May 1946, Wavell, op. tit., pp. 278-9. 
’Pethidt-Lawience’s confidential and personal letter to Jawaharlal, 26 May 1946. 
6 Jawaharial’s presidential address to the All-India States People’s Conference, 31 December 
1943. 



322 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


a crisis developed in Kashmir. There a strong, non-communal, political orga¬ 
nization, the National Conference, had been built up by Sheikh Abdullah and 
other leaders, who, though Muslim by faith, shunned the Muslim League and 
were members of the Congress. Even the Political Department had to recognize 
that during the years 1937 to 1943 Sheikh Abdullah had broadened out his 
policy into one of sympathy with the Indian nationalist movement and gained 
the support not only of a large number of the Muslim working-dass element 
but also of nationalist-minded Hindus and Sikhs in Kashmir. 1 That, in a state 
with a Muslim majority and a Hindu ruler, popular feeling should lean towards 
the Congress greatly irritated Jinnah, and he persistently urged the Viceroy to 
appoint a‘strong Muslim’ — i.e. a communally minded Muslim — and, failing 
that, an Englishman, as prime minister of Kashmir. 2 The Political Department 
had no liking for the National Conference, but was unwilling to upset the 
Maharaja by insisting on a Muslim prime minister. They left it to him to deal 
with the National Conference, which, though no revolutionary body, irked the 
ruler by its very presence and made demands for responsible government and 
civil liberties. After the failure of secret attempts in March 1946 to merge the 
National Conference in the communal Muslim Conference and associate the 
whole with the Muslim League, the Kashmir Government arrested Sheikh 
Abdullah and the other leaders of the National Conference. This repressive 
action was specially provocative to Jawaharlal, for at the time of his arrest 
Sheikh Abdullah was on his way to Delhi to meet Jawaharlal at the latter’s re¬ 
quest. The Kashmir Government, complained Jawaharlal, seemed to be ‘bent 
on breaking and crushing the spirit of the people and are using their army as if 
they were occupying recently conquered enemy territory’.* His first impulse 
was to leave Simla for Kashmir to support his friends, but he curbed himself 
so as to give the Viceroy a chance to intervene and not to worsen the situation 
by disobeying any restraining order which might be served on him. But he made 
it clear that if there were no improvement in the situation, he would not, what¬ 
ever his other engagements, be able to keep away from Kashmir. 

By the middle of June, Jawaharlal felt he had waited long enough and 
decided toenter the State, along with some lawyers, to assist in Sheikh Abdullah’s 
defence. ‘For my part I am not in the habit of giving up a cause I have espoused 
or a comrade when he is in trouble.’ 4 On 13 June he informed the Maharaja 
that he would be arriving in the State four days later. Wavell asked Azad to 
dissuade Jawaharlal and himself urged him to desist — but in vain. The Viceroy 
then informed the Kashmir Government that any untoward incident involving 

i 

*A record of recent political events and tendencies in Kashmir prepared by the Political Depart¬ 
ment, 17 June 1947, Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 293(4) — G/ 43. 

2 See Jinnah to Linlithgow, 23 August and 20 September 1943, end to Wavell, 27 S eptember 
1943. Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 293(2) - G/ 43. 

’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 May 1946. 

* Statement to the press, 12 June 1946.' 



323 


THE CABINET MISSION 

jgvahafltl during the next ten dsys would se highly embarrassing for all-India 
reasons, and suggested that the trial of Sheikh Abdullah be postponed, in which 
case Jawaharial too might postpone his visit. But the Kashmir authorities 
refused and prepared to arrest Jawaharial on the border. The Maharaja offered 
to abdicate and his prime minister to resign if the Government of India com¬ 
pelled them to take no action against Jawaharial, and Wavell and the Political 
Department hastened to reply that no such pressure was being applied. 1 On 
the other hand, they informed the Cabinet Mission that in this very awkward 
and embarrassing situation there was nothing to be done but let events take 
their course. There could be no more striking testimony to the fact that misrule 
in the Indian States was made possible only by the permissive attitude of the 
Government of India and that the latter were willing to sacrifice all Indian 
interests to this. 

Jawaharial abided by his programme, and, on 19 June, was stopped by the 
Kashmir authorities at the State border. They served an externment order and 
organized black flag demonstrations. Jawaharial was in a high rage. He con¬ 
demned the extreme discourtesy shown him and the Congress organiza¬ 
tion and expressed scorn for the Maharaja’s official and military minions. He 
waited for five hours to give the State government time to reverse their orders 
and then informed the magistrate that he was crossing into Kashmir. 

During the past twenty-five years I have never obeyed a single order of 
the British Government in India or any Maharaja which came in my 
way . . . When once a course of action is taken Jawaharial never goes 
back, he goes forward; if you think otherwise then you don’t know Jawa¬ 
harial. No power on earth can prevent me from going anywhere in India 
unless I am arrested or forcibly removed. 2 

On stepping across the border, Jawaharial was arrested. The offer of the 
Kashmir Government to hand him over to the British Indian authorities was 
rejected by the Viceroy and the Political Department, who had no wish to be 
openly involved. The Government of India did nothing to prevent this episode 
jeopardizing the Cabinet Mission’s negotiations, nor did the Secretary of State 
and his colleagues exercise their authority to reprimand the Kashmir Govern¬ 
ment. In the event, it was the adjournment of the trial of Sheikh Abdullah and 
the insistence of the Working Committee which led Jawaharial to return to 
Delhi on the dear understanding that he would be back in Kashmir. 

Meanwhile, the discussions on the Mission Plan had continued. The ques¬ 
tion of the formation of an interim government mainly concerned the Viceroy, 
who by now had irritated not merely Cripps but even Pethick-Lawrence by his 

'Pol. Dept’s telegram to Resident Kashmir, 18 June, Resident's telegram to Pol. Dept., 19 June 
and Pol. Dept’s telegram, 19 June 1946. Gov.-Gen. Sectt. File 295<4) — G/ 43. 

*Note on Jawaharlal’s visit to Kashmir, 1946, prepared by his assistant. 



MAXIM NBHrij 

VIA 

attempts to control the letter's interviews.' Azad had the impression that the 
Viceroy had promised to /unct/on as a constitutional beau of State. Wsvell 
denied this but appealed to the Congress to place its trust in him rather than 
worry about assurances. In fact, he made it clear to the Mission that he would 
ra:her resign than function as a figurehead. He told Alexander that ‘with all 
the private interviews which had been going on, Sir Stafford Cripps in particular 
might have committed himself more specifically than the Viceroy would 
desire, and that of course if he was to be expected to carry on he must have some 
powers and that in certain circumstances he would of course have to ask them 
to get somebody else.’ 2 

As for the composition of the interim government, in his talks with Jinnah, 
Wavell committed himself to Congress-League parity and also not just to ‘Caste- 
Hindu’-Muslim parity as in 1945 but to Hindu-Muslim parity. Nor was the 
Viceroy now thinking of including Muslims other than die nominees of the 
League. Both at Simla in May, and again in Delhi on 3 June, he informed 
Jinnah that the interim government would consist of 12 members — 5 Con¬ 
gress, 5 League, one Sikh and one Indian Christian or Anglo-Indian.* The 
Congress rejected this and insisted on 8 Hindus, including a non-Congressman, 
end 5 Muslims, including a non-member of the League. Despite the protests 
of Alexander, who even threatened to leave for London the next day if any 
member of the Mission saw Gandhi alone, 4 Pethick-Lawrence met Gandhi, 
who gave the friendly advice that each side be asked to submit a list and the 
Mission select one of the lists. 

The Viceroy now suggested a formula of 6 Congress (including a Scheduled 
Caste representative), 5 League and 2 minority representatives. Rajagopalachari 
told the Mission on 15 June that the limit of Congress concession would be 7 
Congress Hindus (including a Scheduled Caste representative), 5 Muslims and 
2 minorities. Cripps was for accepting this but Wavell and Alexander insisted 
that the ‘Caste-Hindu’-Muslim parity should be maintained. So on 16 June the 
Mission announced a list of 14 names — 6 Congress Hindus (including a Sche¬ 
duled Caste representative), 5 Muslim Leaguers and 3 minority representatives. 

In case either party or both refused, the Viceroy would fdrm an interim govern¬ 
ment representative of those who had accepted the Mission Plan. 

On 6 June the Muslim League had announced its acceptance of the Plan 
'inasmuch as the basis and the foundation of Pakistan are inherent in the 
Mission’s plan by virtue of the compulsory grouping'. Now it was for the 
Mission to win over the Congress. Wavell informed Azad that grouping was 

1 Alexander diary, 3 June 1946. 

* Ibid. 

* Jinnah to Wavell, 8 June 1946, Papers relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 37-8. Wavell later 
realized that he might have erred in beginning with this formula, and also in not pressing Jinnah 
to agree to the appointment of a Congress Muslim. See his retrospect of the Cabinet Mission’s 
work, written on 1 July 1946, Wavell, op. dt., p. 313. 

4 Alexander diary, 11 June 1946. 



THE cabinet mission 


325 


not compiisor), and it was lot the representatives of provinces - m 
sections to decide whether or not they wished to form groups. 1 Some days 
Mer, Gandhi was given a more specific assurance, when he raised the question 
of Assam, that grouping was not an essential part of the scheme. 2 The Con¬ 
gress was, therefore, justified in adhering to its own interpretation of the Plan, 
and was now more concerned with the inclusion of a Congress Muslim in the 
interim government. The Mission, misled by Azad and Rajagqpalachari into 
believing that the Congress would not insist on this, blamed Gandhi for this 
development and rejected the demand. Jinnah now expected to be invited to 
join the interim government. Indeed, he had told Cripps of his specific desire 
to hold the defence portfolio. 5 Any hope that Jinnah’s acceptance of a portfolio 
without securing a full commitment to Pakistan might prove a turning-point 
was diverted by the reluctance of Cripps to allow the League alone to enter the 
government; Cripps had seen the danger of the latter policy, and he wanted the 
Mission, in these circumstances, to ask Jinnah on what conditions he would 
join. Wavell and Alexander objected, for — knowing Jinnah — they knew that 
this would be tantamount to inviting him to put forward unacceptable condi¬ 
tions. Cripps replied that if that happened a fresh approach should be made to 
the Congress, and he was prepared to resign if his suggestion were rejected 
without consulting the Cabinet. Cripps prevailed to the extent that the League 
was not invited to join the government: but on the other hand Alexander and 
Wavell vetoed Pethick-Lawrence’s willingness to accommodate the Congress 
on the question of including a non-League Muslim. Wavell also, in a letter to 
Jinnah, tacitly conceded the latter’s request that the Scheduled Castes be treated 
as one of the minorities in the selection of whose representatives the League 
should be consulted. This seems to have been done by the Viceroy on his own. 
initiative, but it served to alter his earlier formula of 6 Congress (including a 
Scheduled Caste representative) and 5 League into ‘Caste-Hindu-Muslim 
parity of 5-5. Even more important to Gandhi, it gave recognition to the claim 
that the Scheduled Castes formed a minority and were not Hindus. The sub¬ 
stance of this letter to Jinnah leaked to the press, and had to be released. 4 
When read along*with WaveU’s letter to Azad that the Congress would not be 
allowed to nominate a Muslim, it is not surprising that the Congress replied by 
refusing to join the interim government, while continuing to accept the long¬ 
term proposals as the Congress understood them. 9 


Wavell to Azad, 15 June, Papers relating to Cabin** Mission, p. 42. 

*See Wavell** diary entry lor 24 June, and his note of 25 June 1946, Wavell, op. cit., p. 303 and 
appendix VH, respectively. 

* Alexander diary, 12 June 1946. 

♦WaveU to Jinnah, 20 June 1946, Papars relating to Cabinet Mission, pp. 46-7. 

Wavell to Azad, 22 June, and Azad to Wavell, 23 June, and Congress resolution, 25 June 1946, 
ibid., pp. 48-52. 



21 


The Interim Government 


Seemingly satisfied with the response of the Congress, the Cabinet Mission 
left on 29 June, leaving it to the Viceroy to negotiate the formation of an in¬ 
terim government on the basis of the acceptance of the Mission Plan by both 
the major parties. Soon after, Jawaharlal was elected in succession to Azad 
as president of the Congress. Azad’s handling of the Congress case in the dis¬ 
cussions with the Cabinet Mission had merited no confidence, and there was 
general agreement that Jawaharlal shquld take over. Hindsight has led to 
much significance being read into his election, it being seen as part of 
the Gandhian technique to ease Jawaharlal into the prime ministership which 
was looming ahead and deprive Patel of what was his by virtue of his control 
of the party machine. But at that time no one saw it in that light. In the summet 
of 1946 the presidency of the Congress seemed to bestow immediate respon¬ 
sibility rather than imminent office. 

The new president summoned a meeting of the AICC in Bombay and secured 
its approval of the conduct by its leaders of the negotiations with the British 
Government. Both there and at a press conference a few days later, Jawaharlal 
reiterated, in sharp and emphatic terms, the Working Committee’s interpre¬ 
tation of the Cabinet Mission Plan. ‘We are not bound by a single thing except 
that we have decided to go into the Constituent Assembly.’ 1 What he meant 
was that the Constituent Assembly would be a sovereign body with whose 
procedures and decisions, once the. Assembly had been elected, the British 
Government could not interfere. The Assembly would meet in sections but 
it did not follow that there would be grouping. 

Obviously, Section A will decide against grouping. Speaking in bet¬ 
ting language, there was a 4 to 1 chance of the NWFP deciding against 
grouping. Then Group B collapses. It is highly likely that Assam will 
decide against grouping with Bengal, although I would not like to say 
what the initial decision may be, since it is evenly balanced. But 1 can say 

'Speech at the AICC 7 July, Tba Bombay Cbroniclt, 8 July 1946. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 

327 

with every assurance and conviction that there is going to be finally no 
grouping there, because Assam will not tolerate it under any circum¬ 
stances whatever. Thus you see this grouping business approached from 
any point of view does not get on at all. 1 

These statements were seized upon by Jinnah to withdraw the League’s 
acceptance of the Cabinet Mission Plan. He had never been happy about this 
commitment 2 from which he had failed to draw all'the advantage he had ex¬ 
pected; and he now charged the Congress with having circumscribed its own 
acceptance with so many conditions that it released him from his own pledge. 
The fact that, for once in its negative history, the League had bound itself to 
co-operate had roused such astonishment and expectation that Jawaharlal 
has been roundly castigated for helping Jinnah bade to his normal, obstruc¬ 
tive road. ’Now happened’, wrote Azad in his memoirs, 5 ‘one of those unfortu¬ 
nate events which changed the course of history ... he [Jawaharlal] is at times 
apt to be carried away by his feelings. Not only so, but sometimes he is so 
impressed by theoretical considerations that he is apt to underestimate the 
realities of a situation.’ More telling are Patel's ^views, expressed even at the 
time. Writing on the day Jinnah announced his withdrawal, Patel criticized 
Jawaharlal for often acting 

with childlike innocence, which puts us all in great difficulties quite 
unexpectedly... acts of emotional insanity and it puts tremendous strain 
on us to set matters right. His mind has been exhausted by overwork and 
strain. He feels lonely and he acts emotionally and we have to bear with 
him in the drcumstances. Opposition sometimes drives him mad, as he 
is impatient. 4 

« 

However, it is unfair to blame Jawaharlal merely because Jinnah used this 
as the chaqce to break out of the cage of acceptance. Jawaharlal was not acting 
in a mood of pique. To make clear that these were not casual statements, he 
reiterated his views in the following weeks. 5 His utterances were deliberate 
and in line with Congress policy. Jawaharlal and the Congress believed that 
the League derived its main sustenance from the support of the British and 
without this, whatever its successeson the elections, its tissue would weaken. 
That support had been withdrawn by the Cabinet Mission and Jinnah was 

1 Interview to tk press, 10 July, Notional Harold, 11 July 1946. 

*k is wM that Jinnah began to fret within hours of living his acceptance. M.A.H. bpahani, 
Qaida-Azam Jinnah as Iknaui him (Karachi, 1967), p. 209. 

>Axad, op. tit., pp. 138 and 143. 

4To D. P. Mishra, 29 July 1946, Sardor Petal's Corre sp o nde nce, 1943-30 voL 3 (A hm a dab ad, 
1972)»p p- 153-4 

’Speed) at Delhi, 21 July, interview at Lahore, 30 July, and speech at Allahabad, 1 August, 
The Hindustan Times, 22 July, 31 July and 3 August 1946, respectively. 



328 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


aware of it. The important thing now was to make it dear to the British that 
the Congress intended India to conduct hersdf as a fully independent sovereign 
state. Fair treatment to the minorities was the obligation of a free India and 
not enforceable by the British. Jawaharlal’s speech at the AICC and his state¬ 
ment at the press conference conveyed this message. When, after the press 
conference, one of those present said to him, ‘You have changed the entire 
basts of the agreement with England*, he smiled and replied, ‘I am fully aware 
of that .* 1 His reference to groupings and sections contained nothing new. 
The Congress, said Jawaharlal, would go into sections but groupings were 
optional; and this was in accordance with the Plan. The difficulty was created 
by the Mission’s unwarranted and clandestine assurance to Jinnah that a 
majority vote in a section would ensure compulsory groupings, and Jawaharlal’s 
assertion that a sovereign Constituent Assembly would settle its own pro¬ 
cedures dealt with this commitment effectively even if unknowirigly. That 
the Congress accepted the Cabinet Mission Plan in accordance with its own 
interpretation had been repeatedly asserted by the Working Committee both 
before and after Jawaharlal’s statements in Bombay in July. The Muslim 
League too had done the same and proclaimed that it accepted the Plan so as 
to be in a better position to work for a full Pakistan. It can, of course, be argued 
that, once the League was committed to the Plan, it would have been wise 
tactics for the Congress to adopt a low posture and give Jinnah no opportunity 
to withdraw from the Constituent Assembly. But it is difficult to-see the Plan 
as a conversion of Jinnah which had been set at naught by Jawaharlal. As 
Jawaharlal said later while commenting on Azad’s book, this was to think 
too much in individual terms and not in terms of the historical forces at work . 2 
Pakistan was not made inevitable by two statements of Jawaharlal. They, 
at the most, provided Jinnah with an opening. 

From Bombay Jawaharlal set off again for Kashmir. This visit, unlike the 
previous one, passed off quietly. Patel and Azad persuaded the Viceroy to secure 
the lifting of the ban on the entry of Jawaharlal, who promised not to raise any 
major issues or address any public meetings . 3 He attended Abdullah’s trial and 
had four long private interviews with him, but was unable to meet the Maharaja 
who pleaded illness . 4 Jawaharlal’s honour was now satisfied, and Kashmir 
faded, for the' time at any rate, into the background. As president of the 
Congress, all-India issues demanded his prime attention. On his way to Srinagar 
he had met Wavell in Delhi, and this seems to have been one of the rare occa¬ 
sions when the Viceroy and Jawaharlal attained a measure of rapport. Jawahar¬ 
lal said he did not wish to insist on any general inquiry into tne conduct of 

1 Louis Fischer's introduction to the American edition of Asad's book 11960k P- xvii. 

2 Statement at press conference, 7 February 1939, Tb* Hindu, 8 February 1939. 

2 Patel to Wavell, 8 July, and Azad to Wavell, 9 July 1946. Got. Gen. Sectt File 293(4X5/43; 
Wavell to Jawaharlal, 17 July and Jawaharlal to Patel, 20 July 1946. 

4 Jawaharlal's note on Kashmir, 12 August 1946. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 


329 


officials in 1942 and after, and would be satisfied with the retirement of some 
individuals. Wavell responded by offering, if the demand for a general inquiry 
were dropped, to direct Governors to discuss individual cases where there was 
well-substantiated evidence. Jawaharlal wrote on these lines to the premiers 
of Congress provinces, and the Government, which read these letters in the 
mail, was satisfied. 1 

Jawaharlal raised various other matters — the Governor's partisanship in 
Sind, the participation of Europeans in elections to the Constituent Assembly, 
judicial appointments in the U.P., the future of the Sikhs — and found the 
Viceroy willing to listen, discuss and explain. 2 Wavell, on his part, secured 
from Jawaharlal a public appeal to the employees of the postal department to 
call off their strike. 3 On the major constitutional issues also they seem to have 
reached some understanding; for the same day Jawaharlal wrote to the Premier 
of Assam not to confuse sections with groups and boycott the former, and the 
Viceroy wrote to Jawaharlal and Jinnah offering to form an interim government 
consisting of six Congress (including one Scheduled Caste representative), 
five League and three minority representatives. 

Jinnah replied on 31 July, two days after the League had revoked its accept¬ 
ance of the Mission Plan, rejecting the offer of five seats in the interim govern¬ 
ment. The Congress too had been unwilling to join until the status and powers 
of the interim government had been clarified and 'independence in action’ 
assured. 4 Wavell had regarded this as practically amounting to an ultimatum, 
almost a declaration of war, and prepared for a show-down with the Congress; 
but he was curbed by the Cabinet. 3 Now the vehemence of Jinnah’s attitude 
and the League’s threat of direct action made both the British and the Congress 
more anxious to push ahead. The Viceroy invited Jawaharlal as president of 
the Congress to submit proposals for the formation of an interim government, 
repeated his assurance that he would act constitutionally and asked Jawaharlal 
to consider an approach to Jinnah before submitting his proposals to the 
Viceroy. 6 The Congress accepted this offer but insisted on a public announce¬ 
ment of the Viceroy’s invitation before they sought Jinnah's co-operation, ‘We 
shall welcome that co-operation but, if this is denied us, we shall be prepared 
to go ahead without it.’ 7 

Such an announcement was made, and thereafter, armed with a resolution 
of the Working Committee that it accepted the Mission Plan in its entirety but 

1 Wavdl's note of interview with Jawaharlal, 22 July 1946, Viceroy's Sectt. File 1252(2) 
GG/1943; Jawaharlal to Congress premiers, 22 July 1946, AICC File 71/1946-47. 

2 See Jawaharlafs letters to Pant, Azad and Patel, 22 July 1946. 

*Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 July, and JawaharlaTs statement to the press, 23 July, The Hindustan 
Times, 24 July 1946. 

4 Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 July 1946. 

J Wavell, op. dt., p. 322. 

•Wavell to Jawaharlal, 6 August 1946. 

’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 10 August 1946. 



330 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


with its own interpretations to resolve the internal inconsistencies and fill the 
omissions, Jawaharlal met Jinnah. The talks failed as expected, for Jinnah 
would obviously not accept from the Congress what he had refused from the 
British. But it really seemed as if the British would ignore the League and work 
with the Congress on the basis, as Attlee had once suggested, that they could 
not allow a minority to place a veto on the advance of a majority, ‘I have just’, 
wrote Cripps to Rajagopalachari, had the news of Jinnah’s speech and action 
and 1 hope that his “bark will prove worse than his bite’’. Whether we shall now 
get the Constituent Assembly going or not I don’t know, but I very much hope 
so and I trust his withdrawal, if it takes place, will not lead to any stopping of 
the work by others. I still hope of course that the Muslims may join in when it 
comes to the time.’ 1 

The Government’s alliance with the Congress, however, went against 
Wavell’s grain, and the killings in Calcutta in mid-August saw him scurrying 
back to the policy of appeasement of the League. Jinnah had fixed 16 August 
•as the day for direct action, and H. S. Suhrawardy, the chief minister at the 
head of a League ministry in Bengal, declared it a public holiday in the province. 
Armed Muslim communal groups in Calcutta looted and murdered while the 
administration watched and the Governor took no action to call in the army. 
It was only after three days, when the Hindus and Sikhs took the law into their 
own hands and indulged in savage reprisals, that the army took charge; and 
even then the Bengal Government remained inactive. As the British com¬ 
mander observed later, ‘Neither, then [in August 1946], nor afterwards, did 
one member of that Government give me any real assistance in bringing order 
out of disorder.’ 2 The obvious answer was to dismiss the ministry,-and indeed 
Cripps had promised the Congress that this would be done in any such con¬ 
tingency as this. 3 But Wavell’s reaction was the opposite. He told Jawaharlal, 
who was for firm action against gangsterism, that he wished to send for Jinnah, 
and it was only the threat of the Congress to refuse to form an interim govern¬ 
ment if he did so that led him to desist. 4 Jawaharlal wanted a ministry of 15 — 
five ‘Caste Hindus’, five Muslims, one Scheduled Caste and four minority 
representatives — but as Wavell insisted on the number being 14, the Anglo- 
Indian representative was dropped. 3 

Jawaharlal insisted that this ministiy should function as a strong and stable 
government and not merely as a stop-gap arrangement till the League was will¬ 
ing to join. The Congress was anxious to have a coalition but this could not 

mean a surrender to the League. Jinnah could nominate his five representatives 

« 

'Cripps to Rajagopalachari, quoted in the latter's letter to Patel, 14 August 1946, Sadar Patti’s 
Correspondence, vol. 3, p. 38. 

2 Sir Roy Bucher to Jawaharlal, 13 November 1934, Nehru papers. 

3 See Patel to Cripps, 19 October 1946, Sardar Patel's Correspondence, vol, 3, pp. 131-2. 

^Jawaharlal to Cripps, 18 August, and to Wavell, 19 August 1946; Wavell to Jawaharlal,* 

19 August 1946. 

’Jawaharlal to Wavell, 20 August, and Wavell to Jawaharlal, 22 August 1946. 



the INTERIM (X>VB|tNMBNT 


331 


but not interfere with the nominations of the Congress, including a nationalist 
Muslim. Jawaharlal repeated that the only proper approach was to make rWt 

on their own even if this co-operation were denied. * 


Calcutta has been a horrible shock to you and to all of us. And yet may 1 
say that it has a personal significance for us which it cannot have even for 
you. Our friends ahd relatives are involved in these bloody murders, and 
our children and dear ones may have to face the assassin’s knife at any 
time. It is this grim reality that we face. We shall face it of course without 
shouting, but we are not going to shake hands with murder or allow it to 
determine the country’s policy. We shall still continue to reason with 
Hindu and Muslim and Sikh and others and try to win them over to the 
path of friendly co-operation, for there is no other way for the advance¬ 
ment of India. But we do not believe that co-operation will come out of 
appeasement of wrongdoing. 1 

Such firmness cowed the Viceroy for the time being. He announced the 
list of ministers and, in a broadcast, associated himself with the offer of the 
Congress to refer to the Federal Court all questions of interpretation of the 
Cabinet Mission Plan. But a visit to Calcutta and talks with a representative 
of the League revived Wavell’s persistent desire to do all he could to bring the 
League into the interim government. He sent for Gandhi and Jawaharlal, 
presented them with a draft committing the Congress to groups as well as sec¬ 
tions, and said he would not convene the Constituent Assembly unless the 
Congress made this declaration. He now brushed aside the suggestion of refer¬ 
ence to the Federal Court by asserting that the problem was not a legal but a 
practical one. But the Working Committee rejected what seemed to it a new 
effort at blackmail and Gandhi had the matter referred to London. 2 

Wavell had meantime to go ahead with the reconstitution of the Govern¬ 
ment, and on 2 September what the Congress liked to regard as the provisional 
national government was sworn in. Jawaharlal was vice-president of the 
executive council and held the portfolios of external affairs and Commonwealth 
relations. Now at last he seemed to have come to the end of a long and irregular 
road and to be able to move away from conflict and struggle to constructive 
effort. 'Too long have we been passive spectators of events, the playthings of 
others. The initiative comes to our people now and we shall make the history 
of our choiqp.# Jawaharlal organized his team to work as a Cabinet represen¬ 
tative of the people. Rajagopalachari was pulled up for informing not Jawahar- 

'Jiwihirlil's personal letter to Wavell, 22 August 1946. 

2 Letters of Jawaharlal and Gandhi to Wavell, 28 August 1946; Wavell to Jawaharlal, 29 August 
and Jawaharlal’s reply, 29 August 1946. 

*JawaharlaTs broadcast, 7 September, Nation*! Harold, 8 -September 1946, 



382 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


lal but the Viceroy of the date of his taking up his portfolio. 1 Wavell had to 
agree not to receive secretaries of departments, as was the custom till now, and 
to deal only with the members of his council. The Viceroy’s efforts to administer 
those departments whose members could not join at once were firmly resisted; 
and so was the Political Department’s attempt to supervise the visits of Jawa- 
harlal and his colleagues to the Princely States. 2 The members met informally 
every evening without Wavell to take decisions on major issues and agreed on 
no account to refer any matter to the Viceroy. When the British Government, 
in consultation with the Viceroy before Baldev Singh had taken over as defence 
minister, took steps to retain British troops in India while Indian troops were 
being demobilized, Jawaharlal, who came to know of it by seeing a chance 
telegram, sharply objected. This might have blown up into a crisis, for Wavell 
held that the question of stationing British troops affected vitally his responsibi¬ 
lity to the British Parliament; but a way out was found by asking Baldev Singh 
to look into the matter with the help of the Commander-in-Chief. 3 

More serious points of friction between the Viceroy and the interim govern¬ 
ment were the conduct of the Governors and the League ministries in Sind and 
Bengal. In the former province the Governor used every method to thwart the 
Congress and keep the League in office, while in Bengal the Suhrawardy 
Government, with the passive acquiescence of the Governor, behaved ‘essen¬ 
tially like the Hitler government in Germany during its early years . . . People 
who come from Bengal remind me forcibly of the refugees from the Hitler 
terror. I have never seen anything exactly like this in India before.’ 4 The 
authorities of both provinces were supported by the Viceroy and the British 
Government, and Wavell prevented the intervention of the central government 
on the ground that it could not interfere with provincial autonomy which fell 
within the personal purview of the Governor-General. 5 Jawaharlal demanded 
that his government’s views be forwarded to the Secretary of State and sharply 
rebutted Wavell’s feeble efforts at defending the action of the Governor of Sind. 
‘If what I consider a racket and a public scandal has your approval, then it is 
obvious that our standards and sense of values differ considerably. It would 
also appear that our objectives are different.’ 6 As for Bengal, violence was 
spreading in the districts with the government unable or unwilling to control it. 

Indeed I have come seriously to think whether it serves any useful pur¬ 
pose for me to be in the Interim Government if an important part of 

'Jawaharlal to Rajagopalachari, 30 August, and Rajagopalachari’s reply, 3 September 
1946. 

3 Wavell to Jawaharlal, 3 September, Jawaharlal’s two letters to Wavell, 4 September and Wavell 
to Jawaharlal, 3 September 1946. 

^Jawaharlal to Wavell, 18 September, and Wavell’s reply, 19 September 1946. 

‘Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 6 October 1946. 

5 Wavell to Jawaharlal 8 September 1946 
‘Jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 Septe m ber 1946. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 


333 

India sinks to barbarism or something much worse ... What is the 
good of our forming the Interim Government of India if all that we can 
do is to watch helplessly and do nothing else when thousands of people 
are being butchered and subjected to infinitely worse treatment? 1 

The case of the NWFP was entirely different. Here the Congress Party had 
a clear majority; and of the total Muslim votes cast in the elections, the Con¬ 
gress and Nationalist Muslim candidates had secured 208,896 and the League 
candidates 147,880. But so long as the Frontier Province, of which only about 
3 per cent of the population was non-Muslim, was outside the League’s control, 
Jinnah could not claim to be the unqualified representative of Muslim India, 
and Pakistan could be no more than a dream. So British officials set themselves 
to destroy the popularity of the Congress and rectify ‘the bastard situation'. 2 
Their first opportunity came when Jawaharlal decided to visit the NWFP. Tribal 
relations formed a part of his portfolio and he was anxious to make a first-hand 
appraisal. It was also obviously important for the leading figure of the Congress 
to undertake a flag march, as it were, and across terrain which had cast its spell 
over Jawaharlal. He was, as he told the Governor, Sir Olaf Caroe, himself 
regarded by many of his friends as being more than half a Pathan by nature. 
Caroe came to Delhi to dissuade Jawaharlal from visiting the province till after 
the League had joined the interim government, but Jawaharlal refused to post¬ 
pone his visit, and toured the province and the tribal areas in the middle of 
October. The League organized demonstrations against him and sent the 
Mulla of Manki for this purpose into tribal territory. Such activities directed 
against the Vice-President of the Viceroy’s Council should obviously have 
been taken serious note of; but Caroe was unwilling to restrain the Mulla and 
his men. His justification makes curious reading, i think that in the circum¬ 
stances, and given the fact that Nehru’s tour was obviously intended to push 
the Congress cause, it would have been wrong to put active restraint against 
the League’s propagandists going into tribal territory, and an attempt to do 
so would certainly have led to disturbances.’ 3 The result was that throughout 
his tour Jawaharlal faced hostile receptions and stone-throwing, which Caroe 
had no doubt had been organized by the League. Bruised, but fortunate not to 
have been killed, Jawaharlal completed his programme with courage. But the 
officials had succeeded in exploiting this visit to begin the weakening of Con¬ 
gress authority in the NWFP. As Caroe reported later, tongue in cheek, 

Most of our troubles were started when Nehru took tribal affairs under 
his wing and followed this up with his ill-starred visit. Before that time 

'Jawaharlal to Wavell, 13 October 1946. 

2 The phrase is Lord Ismay's. A. Campbell Johnson, Mission with Movntbatton (London, 
1931), p. 54. 

’Caroe to Wavell, 23 October 1946, Caroe papers. 



334 


JAWAHARLAL' NEHRU 


the Province was going along very nicely all things considered, but it 
was an impossible thing to do to bring these tribals under a Pandit. 
Practically all our frictions and tensions date from that time. 1 

There was no cause for surprise in this curbing by Wavell and his governors 
of the functioning of what was virtually a Congress government St the centre. 
‘Almost everywhere in India it has been obvious that governors and others 
favour the Muslim League as against the Congress. Some of them do it in¬ 
advertently and almost unconsciously; others do it deliberately and obviously 
and sometimes even twist the law to this end.' 2 Alongside this hampering of 
the Congress, frantic efforts continued to bring the League into the interim 
government. In this the Viceroy now had the full support of the Cabinet in 
London. Cripps urged the Congress to go as far as it could in conciliating the 
League. 

You know how earnestly — even if mistakenly sometimes — I have 
worked for Indian independence which I now see on the eve of accom¬ 
plishment if only Congress can have the statesmanship and magnani¬ 
mity to act the part of the strong man and givte way to the weak. The 
possibility is in your hands and unborn generations will hail the act of 
Congress now as the great decisive gesture for Indian freedom and 
self-government. 

It is not I am sure a question of hard bargaining now — that will get us 
nowhere, it is a question of supreme statesmanship and only you can 
solve the problem at this stage. 

Jawaharlal — with all my heart and mind I beg and pray that you may 
be guided to right action in this difficult moment. 3 

Wavell, working on the premiss that the convening of the Constituent 
Assembly was the prerogative of the Viceroy and not of the Government of 
India, was unwilling to take action until agreement had been reached with 
Jinnah on both the long-term plan and a coalition government. 4 Now, once 
again, was revealed the pertinence of Jawaharlal’s statements at Bombay in 
July on the sovereign nature of the Constituent Assembly and therefore the 
minimum amount of extraneous action in its procedures. The Viceroy started 
discussions with Jinnah who, having no wish to be left out of office, was willing 
to respond. The only point on which he now insisted was that the Congress 
should not nominate a Muslim in the government, and Wavell appealed to 
Gandhi and Jawaharlal to waive its right to do so for the sake of a settlement. 

‘Caroe to Mountbatten, 23 June 1947, Caroe papers. 

2 Jawaharlal to Caroe, 16 November 1946. 

J Cripps to Jawaharlal, 16 September 1946. 

Wavell to Jawaharlal, 13 September 1946. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 


335 


To this appeal was added a threat that if the Congress declined, the Viceroy 
doubted if he could allow the interim government to continue as it was. 1 
Pethick-Lawrence backed up Wavell and added that the League would have 
to be brought into the Constituent Assembly if that body was to be of any use. 2 

Resentful though they were of these pressure tactics, the leaders of the 
Congress realized that there would be some advantages in bringing in the 
League. If this were effected in such a way as to bind the League to a proper 
working of both a coalition government and the Constituent Assembly, it 
might lighten the tension in the country and put events back on an even keel. 
So Jawaharlal called on Jinnah on 5 October, and found him considerably 
toned down. Though Jawaharlal repudiated a formula unthinkingly accepted 
by Gandhi that the League had an unquestionable right to represent all the 
Muslims, Jinnah did not break off the discussions. Rather, he assured Jawa¬ 
harlal that he would never side with the British and would in no event permit 
the Viceroy to function as an umpire in any coalition government. In return 
Jawaharlal offered to have any fresh appointments of minority representatives 
considered by the whole Cabinet, to refer major communal issues, if necessary, 
to arbitration and, instead of rotating the Vice-Presidentship, to create an 
additional vice-chairmanship of the Cabinet co-ordination committee. 5 
These concessions seemed to satisfy Jinnah; but within hours he reverted 
to his usual attitude of refusing to reach any agreement with the Congress 
and relying on the British. He insisted on Gandhi’s formula and the exclusion 
of any Nationalist Muslim from the Government. The Congress replied thaf 
it could go no further than what had been offered by Jawaharlal, who added 
that he could never be a party to disowning the Muslims in the Congress. 
This was to him a personal as well as a national question of honour. 4 But 
discussions with Jinnah were resumed by Wavell. He accepted Jinnah’s 
nomination of five members including one person belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes, but without securing a precise commitment on the part of the League 
to the Cabinet Mission Plan, a renunciation of the League’s policy of direct 
action and a pledge to co-operate in the Government. Indeed the deliberate 
choice (apart from Liaqat Ali Khan) of second-rate diehard members of his 
party, and of a Harijan who represented nobody, established beyond any doubt 
that Jinnah’s sole aim was to share power and disrupt the interim government. 
But so eager was Wavell to destroy the control by the Congress of immediate 
authority that he brought the League in, despite Jawaharlal's repeated pro¬ 
tests, 5 unconditionally. It was among the most serious of Wavell’s many 
disservices to India. 

'Gandhi to Wavell, 27 September 1946. * 

1 Krishna Menon to Jawaharlal, 26 September 1946. 

^Jawaharlal'snotesof conversationswith Jinnah. 5 October, and letter to jinnah, 6 October 1946. 

4 }awaharUl to the Newab of Bhopal, 10 October 1946 

’See Jawaharlal's letters to Wavell, 13, 14. 15 and 23 October 1946. 



336 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Once the League had agreed to join the Government, Wavell asked the 
Congress to hand over either external affairs or home or defence. When the 
Congress refused to transfer any of these portfolios and offered only finance 
and commerce, the Viceroy decided that the home portfolio should be taken 
away from Patel and given to the League. At this all the members of the interim 
government decided to resign, 1 and the crisis was only solved by the League 
agreeing to take finance. On this basis the five nominees of the League were 
sworn in on 26 October. 

The working of the Congress-League government must be unique in the 
annals of modern administration. Each group met separately before a Cabinet 
meeting and there functioned in opposition to the other. This suited Wavell. 
He forgot the specific assurance he had given to the Congress that he would 
prevent any attempt to make the interim government a battleground of 
communal politics instead of an instrument for administering India. 2 He 
encouraged the League in its obstructive attitude by referring every major 
issue to the two sides for opinion rather than insisting on the government 
functioning as a team, and himself acted as umpire. 

Jawaharlal’s handling of external relations became one of the chief targets 
of the League’s attack. As the first step in building up an independent foreign 
policy unaligned to any Power, Jawaharlal had preferred to develop informal 
contacts rather than utilize British diplomatic representation. Acting as 
Jawaharlal’s personal envoy, Krishna Menon met Molotov, conveyed the 
new government’s earnest desire for friendly relations with the Soviet Union 
and sought assistance in foodgrains. 3 He also, stepping beyond his brief, spoke 
to Molotov about the possibility of Soviet military experts visiting India. This 
upset not only the Foreign Office and the Indian external affairs department but 
also some of Jawaharlal’s colleagues in the Congress; and Krishna Menon 
received the first of, over the years, very many mildly worded cautions from 
his chief. 

I want to make it clear that I have complete faith in you and I am quite 
sure that whatever step you will take will be taken after full consideration 
and with a view not to create any difficulties. So far as I am concerned, 
that is all right. But other people, who do not know you well, have also to 
be taken into consideration and hence I have suggested to you that you 
might bear these people also in mind. 4 

When the League came into the government, Jawaharlal had'to abandon his 
ideas of sending Menon to Moscow or appointing him as high commissioner 

jawaharlal to Wavell, 24 October 1946. 

3 See his own report of his interview with Patel, 12 June 1946, Wavell, op. dt., p. 291. 
3 JawSharlal’s letters to Molotov, 21 September and to Krishna Menon, 25 September; note 
to the Viceroy, 24 September 1946. 

4 To Krishna Menon, 13 October 1946. ^ 



THElNTBIttMOOV«Bf>ttaENT., 


337 


in London, for that post was technically attached to the commerce department 
administered by one of the representatives of the League. Menon to asked 
to «*V wttt Indian delegation to the United Nations. When the Leaane 

sought representation on that delegation, Jawaharlal replied that it 
l«e to alter the composition. However, the League, with facilities pro- 
vided by the Viceroy and the India Office, sens two representatives to the 
United States where they denounced the Congress, the Indian delegation to 
the United Nations and the working of the interim government. In the Cabinet 
and outside, the League expressed no views on foreign policy but merely 
repudiated Jawaharlal’s efforts and appointments and demanded the creation 
of Pakistan; and Wavell repeatedly called upon Jawaharlal to discuss even 
matters pertaining to his own department with Liaqat Ali Khan. 

More vital, of course, were developments in the various parts of India 
which were aptly described as being in a state of spontaneous combustion. 
‘Murder stalks the streets and the most amazing cruelties are indulged in 
by both the individual and the mob. It is extraordinary how our peaceful 
population has become militant and bloodthirsty. Riot is not the word for 
it — it is just a sadistic desire to kill. ’ 1 News of the slaughter of Hindus in Bengal 
percolated to Bihar and roused the local peasants to attack the Muslims. 
Gandhi and Jawaharlal urged the'Congress ministry to deal sternly with the 
guilty, and in this received the firm support of the Viceroy and the League, 
whose concern for the sanctity of provincial autonomy was presumably 
reserved only for Bengal and Sind. Jawaharlal and one of the League ministers 
in the central government toured Bihar and helped to bring the province under 
control. The army was called in, and rioting crowds dispersed by fire and, on 
a few occasions, by aerial bombing. Such firm and decisive action was possible 
only because of Jawaharlal’s initiative. 

His intervention, however, was in his personal capacity. The interim govern¬ 
ment itself could do, and did, little. It was riven by dispute and powerless in 
action. Matters came to a head on the question of convening the Constituent 
Assembly. It was scheduled to meet in December but the Viceroy and his 
advisers, ‘functioning more and more openly as if they were allied with the 
Muslim League,’ 2 wished to postpone it on the ground that the League had 
not yet accepted the long-term plan rather than to press Jinnah to reach an 
early decision. 3 Jawaharlal insisted that as the League was making clear that 
it would not accept the Plan it should not continue in the interim government. 4 
Attlee now decided to intervene and wanted the Congress, the League and the 
Sikhs to depute their representatives to London. The Congress declined 
to go as this was tantamount to reopening the whole question; nor did Jawahar¬ 
lal have much confidence in Attlee, who, as reported by Krishna Menon, not 

jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 11 November 1946. 

2 Idem, 17 November 1946 

1 jawaharlal to P.S.V., 13 and 16 November and P.S.V.'s reply, 16 November 1946. 

4 Jawaharlal to Wavell, 21 November 1946. 



338 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


only had shown ‘no warmth at all for the new government or for you personally’ 
but had made ‘no response to the message of goodwill’ and evinced ’certainly 
no anxiety or desire to be fraternal!’ 1 But Attlee now sent a personal message 
urging Jawaharlal to come and assuring him that there was no intention to 
abandon the Plan or the Constituent Assembly, and the Congress authorized 
Jawaharlal to go, if only because persistence in refusal would have been dis¬ 
courteous. 

The talks in London in December confirmed the misgivings of the Con¬ 
gress and served to strengthen Jinnah’s position. The British Government 
declared that, according to the Cabinet Plan, decisions in the sections would 
be by a simple majority vote. They urged the Congress to accept this view and 
suggested, as a sop, that it could be referred, along with other questions of 
interpretation, to the Federal Court by the Constituent Assembly. Jinnah was 
delighted. He had, with the help of the British, recovered much ground. The 
League had, after an initial setback, moved into the government and brought 
administration to a standstill without any commitment on the Mission Plan; 
and now the Congress was being pressed to abandon its position and accept 
an unfavourable interpretation of the Plan so that the League could be cajoled 
into attending the Constituent Assembly. Pakistan seemed to be in sight, and 
to make it a large and powerful state he sought the collaboration of the Sikhs. 
At a private session with Baldev Singh, the Sikh representative at the talks 
in London, he offered the Sikhs any guarantees they might require. ‘Baldev 
Singh, you see this match-box. Even if Pakistan of this size is offered to me I 
will gladly accept it, but it is here that I need your collaboration. If you persuade 
the Sikhs to join hands with the Muslim League we will have a glorious 
Pakistan, the gates of which will be near about Delhi if not in Delhi itself.’ 2 

The Constituent Assembly met as scheduled, on 9 December, but adjourned 
repeatedly without taking any controversial decisions or breaking up into 
sections so as to enable the League to make up its mind. To provide Jinnah 
with no substantial argument for declining to join, the Congress, while voicing 
its disapproval of the manner in which the British Cabinet had elaborated its 
Plan to suit the League, accepted this interpretation and gave up its proposal 
of a reference to the Federal Court. All that it now stipulated was that there 
should be no compulsion of a province and the rights of the Sikhs should not 
be jeopardized. If such compulsion were attempted, a province or a part of a 
province should have the right to take whatever action was required to give" 
effect to the wishes of the people concerned. 9 But Jinnah was still in a grand¬ 
iose mood. The Working Committee of the League declined to reconsider 
its decision, and asked the British Government to declare that the Cabinet Mis¬ 
sion Plan had failed and to dissolve the Constituent Assembly. 4 

‘Krishna Menon to Jawaharlal, 18 October 1946. 

* Baldev Singh to Jawaharlal, 19 September 193 3, Nehru papers. 

* Resolution of the A1CC, 6 January 1947. « 

4 Resolution of the Muslim League, 29 January 1947. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 


339 






340 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


So, by the end of January 1947, it became clear that no further negotiations 
and compromises were possible, and the efforts of the Congress in this direction 
had only resulted in confusing its followers and dividing its leadership. With 
the League adamant and the Princes taking their cue from it and avoiding 
a decision on joining the Constituent Assembly, with the virus # of communal 
rioting spreading across the face of northern India and the interim government 
helpless ,.therewas no* purpose in still hoping and discussing. The .League 
resolution was about as bad as it could be. Perhaps there was a virtue in it for 
it makes the position quite clear. 11 The Congress took the stand that the League, 
having rejected the Plan, should be told to leave the interim government. They 
had merely used it as a forum to harass the Congrpss and, with the Viceroy’s 
assistance, raised the communal issue at every step. Even the appointments 
of ambassadors had been held up because they had wanted every second post 
to go to nominees of the League irrespective of merit, and Wavell had supported 
them by suggesting that all appointments in India and abroad should be con¬ 
sidered by Cabinet committees. 2 This was hardly the atmosphere for the further¬ 
ance of Jawaharlal’s many ideas, such as the development of a'foreign policy 
which would show the world that the new India had iron in it and was not 
to be patronized or trifled with, the building up of the defence forces without 
any foreign element, the promotion of scientific research, the renewal of 
planning and the rapid industrialization of the country. 

On 5 February, nine members of the interim government — all except the 
five nominees of the League — wrote a joint letter to the Viceroy that in their 
opinion the League could not continue in the government. Jawaharlal followed 
this up eight days later by stating that if a quick decision were not given he 
and his colleagues would leave the government. The League,pf course, had no 
intention of resigning and Wavell, instead of pointing out to Jinnah that he 
was having the best of both worlds, still wished to press the Congress for 
further — and futile — concessions. But the British Government’s decision 
was different. Attlee announced that the British would withdraw from India 
not later than June 1948, handing over, if there were no government esta¬ 
blished by a fully representative assembly, to the central government or in 
some areas to existing provincial governments. He added that Wavell 
would be replaced by Mountbatten. 

Jawaharlal and the Congress welcomed this statement because, despite 
the clear hint that a Constituent Assembly without the representatives of the 
League would not be recognized, it seemed to show a way out qf the deadlock 
so created. That Assembly Gould continue to function for the areas represented 
in it and without the limitations imposed by the Mission Plan. The statement 
also implied a partition of the Punjab and Bengal, because eastern Punjab and 

jawaharlal to Gandhi, 9 February 1947. 

jawaharlal to Wavell, 23 and 31 January 1947. 



THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT 


341 


western Bengal were represented in the Assembly and had no intention of 
being cut off from the Indian Union. 'The truncated Pakistan that remains will 
hardlv be a gift worth having.’ 1 Economically and for defence it seemed im¬ 
practicable and Jinnah might well prefer joining the Indian Union on special 
terms. So the Working Committee passed resolutions along these lines and 
invited the League to a joint consideration of these issues. The Congress also 
decided not to press for the resignation of the League's nominees in the central 
government till the general situation had been clarified; and Jawaharlal made 
a personal approach to Uaqat Ali Khan. The British are fading out of the. 
picture and the burden of this decision must rest on allof us here. It seems desir¬ 
able that we should face this situation squarely and not speak to each other 
from a distance.* 2 But the League did not respond to these gestures. Liaqat 
Ali Khan made no response to Jawaharlal’s informal approach but introduced 
a wide-ranging budget without full discussions with his colleagues or even 
Jawaharlal on at least the general nature of his proposals. 

The League was also not prepared to discuss constitutional developments 
with the Congress even on the basis of partition. Jinnah embarked on a cruise 
in the Arabian Sea, while his henchmen continued to clamour for direct action, 
brought down the ministry in the Punjab and fomented an agitation in the 
Frontier Province. Jawaharlal decided to visit these provinces, but while at 
Lahore received a message from Wavell requesting him to proceed no further. 
This injunction he attributed to Sir Olaf Caroe and demanded his removal. 
'Am I to be prevented from performing my duty and shouldering the responsi¬ 
bility which has been cast upon me, because someone does not like me or does 
not approve of my going to the Frontier? ... It is an extraordinary position. 
Almost anyone can go to Peshawar but I must not do so, even for a brief and 
informal visit.’ 3 But no action was taken on his demand for Caroe’s dismissal 
before Wavell's departure a few days later. 


jawaharlal to Krishna Mcnon, 23 Februaiy 1947. 
jawaharlal to Uaqat Ali Khan, 9 March 1947. 

1 Jawaharlal to Wawell, 19 March 1947. 



22 


The Transfer of Power 


On 24 March 1947, Mountbatten was sworn in as Viceroy. Romantic myth 
has been built, not without encouragement, round his short term of office. 
Books have been written depicting the Prince Charming who appeared in the 
last scene of the Indian drama, dominated the British Cabinet and imposed his 
will on Indian politicians. ‘I was governing by personality.’ 1 Taking, we are 
told, firm hold of a crumbling situation, he decided to partition the country 
and effected it in just over four and a half months, thus solving a problem 
which had baffled statesmen in Britain and India for years. 

Mountbatten had, of course, great personal assets: good looks, links with 
royalty, a dazzling war reputation, a wife of charm and intelligence. But it is 
childish to suggest that these even helped to solve the Indian question by 
bemusing those concerned into accepting his solution. In fact, even before 
Mountbatten came to India, both the British Government and the Congress 
Party had come round to the view that there was no alternative to accepting 
Jinnah’s demand in some form or another. It was now an axiom of official 
British thinking not only in Delhi but in London as well that the Congress 
represented the Hindus and the League the Muslims. Cripps, for example, 
said of the 1946 elections: ’For the first time since the beginning of the war the 
full strength of the rival communities was made clear and it became apparent 
that Indians had ranged themselves substantially upon a communal basis 
behind the Congress and the Muslim League.’ 2 Attlee’s statement of 20 Feb¬ 
ruary clearly recognized that the Mission Plan was dead and the British would 
transfer authority, if need be, to governments other than that at the centre. 
Even the fixing of the date by which the British would leave would seem to 
have been Attlee's idea, and therefore one for which Mountbatten cannot take 
the main credit. It has been ingeniously suggested that it was Mountbatten 
who was most insistent on a firm date and decided that the best way to secure 

> Mountbatten's interview with the author, 28 May 1970. 

2 3 March 1947. Italics mine. In the original draft the word had bee n ‘parties’ but it was altered to 
‘communities* to leave no doubt about what was meant. Cripps papers, PUe 13. 

** 


342 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


343 


it was to impute it to the Prime Minister. 1 But perhaps it is best to rely in this 
matter on the testimony of Lord Ismay, who served on Mountbatten’s staff in 
India and, besides being well-informed, was if anything prejudiced in Mount- 
batten’s favour. Congratulating Attlee on the outcome of the Commonwealth 
Prime Ministers’ Conference when India, though a republic, was enabled to 
remain in the Commonwealth, Ismay wrote: 

It was a wonderful personal triumph for you — as was the original deci¬ 
sion to appoint a definite date for the handing over of power in India and 
to send Dickie [Mountbatten] as Viceroy. You have, if I may be so bold 
as to say so, ridden an absolutely consistent and far seeing line on India 
from the very outset. . . Anyway you have brought off a wonderful 
right and left, which history will certainly acclaim. 2 

The Congress Working Committee too had, early in March, reconciled 
itself to the partition of the Punjab and recognized that the same principle 
would also be applicable to Bengal. To Gandhi the unity of India was still 
important, but he had by now departed into the shadows. His role in the Con¬ 
gress was similar to that of a head of an Oxbridge college who is greatly revered 
but has little influence on the governing body. Jawaharlal and Patel had come to 
the conclusion that there was no alternative to at least temporary secession. 
Various psychological tensions seemed to them to have developed among the 
Indian people, and especially among the Muslims, and these could not be re¬ 
solved by reason or dealt with by force. To insist on the maintenance of the 
Indian Union could only mean continuing trouble. Even a very loose union 
seemed out of the question and efforts to sustain it could only result in weaken¬ 
ing the country and halting all social and economic progress. The total inability 
of the interim government to reach a decision on any major issue was powerful 
testimony in favour of division. So Jawaharlal and the Congress, while rejecting 
the two-nation theoiy, agreed to the separation of those parts of the country 
which wished to break away. Indeed, that might make it easier for reason and 
the compulsion of logic ultimately to prevail. There were some subjects like 
defence which, even after partition, would not of choice but of necessity have 
to be looked after-in common, and this might lead gradually back to a reintegra¬ 
tion of India. ‘I have no doubt whatever that sooner or lata* India will have to 
function as a unified country. Perhaps the best way to reach that stage is to go 
through some kind of a partition now.’ 3 It was wise to let events have their 
course for a while so that they might return on their own to the normal equi¬ 
librium. 'But of one thing I am convinced that ultimately there will be a united 

- * Hod son, op. dt., p. 194. 

2 Ismay to Attlee, 6 March 1949, Attlee papers, Box 6. 

»To K. P. S. Meoon, 29 April 1947. 



344 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


and strong India. We have often to go through the valley of the shadow before 
we reach the sun-lit mountain tops.’ 1 

Mountbatten’s task, therefore, was merely to work out the details and effect 
the partition demanded by the League and accepted by both the British Govern¬ 
ment and the Congress; and this the new Viceroy moved comigandingly to 
perform. Before Mountbatten’s arrival, Jawaharlal had been concerned by the 
inclusion in his staff of Ismay and Sir Eric Mieville, who had last been in India 
with Willingdon, but he was soon impressed by Mountbatten's goodwill, 
commonsensical directness and sense of urgency — all in such sharp contrast 
to Wavell’s dithering and prejudice. In the first few weeks of the viceroyalty, 
while Mountbatten went through the motions of consultations and seeking to 
breathe life into the Cabinet Mission Plan, Jawaharlal was content to be a mere 
spectator, 

He first gave all his attention to the Asian Relations Conference. The idea 
of such a conference had been in Jawaharlal’s mind from December 1945, and, 
after preliminary arrangements had been made, invitations were sent out in 
September 1946. It was to be a non-official conference representative of all 
shades of opinion in the countries of Asia (plus Egypt). So each country was 
requested to send a delegation of sixteen chosen by established institutions 
(where they existed) which were interested in world affairs; and these delega¬ 
tions were to be supplemented by four observers nominated by the government 
of the country and by distinguished scholars invited in their individual capacity. 
Convened in the uninhibited times before India was free and Jawaharlal was 
restricted by the requirements of official policy, the conference could hear the 
views of both the Kuomintang and the Communists, of the Arab League as 
well as the Hebrew University. The Soviet Central Asian republics were 
represented; and in addition the Soviet Union, along with Australia, New 
Zealand, Britain and the United States, sent observers. 

There was, in fact, an euphoric atmosphere about the Conference. Its main 
purpose was to enable the leaders of Asia, on the threshold of a new world, to 
meet. Not only controversial issues involving these countries, but even matters 
like defence and security which concerned powers outside Asia were excluded 
from the agenda, which listed only such innocuous subjects as national freedom 
movements, migration and racial problems, economic development and the 
status of women. But the agenda was the least important part of the conference. 
For ten days, from 23 March to 2 April, Delhi saw itself as the natural centre 
of a resurgent continent, conscious of its glorious past and forging links for the 
future. * 

Standing on this watershed which divides two epochs of human history 

and endeavour, we can look back on our long past and look forward to 

•To Brigadier (later General) Cariappa, 29 April 1947. 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


545 

the future that is taking shape before our eyes ... An Indian, wherever 
he may go in Asia, feds a sense of kinship with the land he visits and the 
people he meets .. . For too long we of Asia have been petitioners in 
Western courts and chancelleries. That story must now belong to the 
past. We propose to stand on our own feet and to cooperate with all others 
who are prepared to cooperate with us. We do not intend to be the play¬ 
things of others. 1 

Nothing came of the Asian Relations Organization set up by the Confer¬ 
ence, and no participant country acted on the resolution to set up national 
units of this Organization or academies of Asian studies. There was not even 
a second session of the Asian Relations Conference, though one may trace its 
influence in the origins of the Asian-African Conference hdd at Bandung 
in 1955. Yet Jawaharlal was satisfied with the Conference as the expression of 
anfemotion which he personally felt deeply. So to him the Conference was 

an amazing success from every point of view. 1 think we can definitely 
call it the beginnings of a new era in Asian history. All those who came 
from the four corners of Asia fdt the importance and significance of the 
occasion and went away duly impressed. Delhi did them well. India as 
a whole suddenly became conscious not only of all our neighbours but 
of Asia. We are all Asia-conscious at present. 2 

Even after the Conference, Jawaharlal took no active part in the constitu¬ 
tional discussions. ‘He is very tired mentally and physically’, commented Ismay 
after an interview with him, 9 ‘and he’s subject to emotion to an alarming degree. 
But he has courage and statesmanship of a sort.’ Convinced of Mountbatten's 
bona fides, his main objective at this time was merely to clear the way for the 
Viceroy to concentrate on the major problems by shelving or disposing of the 
minor ones.,He did not press for Caroe’s removal. He resolved the minor crisis 
which had developed on the eve of Wavell’s departure over the release of the 
members of the Indian National Army still in prison. This was the only issue 
on which the members of the interim government were united, and they were 
supported by the Legislative Assembly. Wavell, however, with the approval 
of the British Government exercised his veto. Normally any government could 
have been expected to resign, but the interim government was not a normal 
government. It is extremely doubtful if the representatives of the League, de¬ 
spite the comfnon viewpoint, would have joined the Congress in sod) a step. 
This probably also influenced Jawaharlal in yielding to Mountbatten’spressure 

1 JawaharlaTiinaugural address to the conference, 23 March 1947, r ep rin ted in Atkm H^Utkms 
(report of the p roc eed i n gs), New Delhi, 1948, pp. 20*27. 

a To Aaef All, 7 April 1947. 

*6 April 1947, R. Wingate, Lord Ismty (London, 1970), p. 133. 



346 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


and suggesting reference of all these cases to the Federal Court for advice. He 
was resentful of Jinnah’s insistence that he would.sign an appeal for communal 
peace only with Gandhi and not also with J. $. Kripalani, who had taken 
over the Congress presidency from Jawaharlal. Jinnah’s intent was clearly to 
imply that Gandhi represented Hindu India, and he, Muslin^ India — an 
approach unfair to Gandhi and contrary to the policy of the Congress. Yet 
Jawaharlal agreed to abide by Mountbatten’s decision and the appeal was 
issued by Gandhi and Jinnah alone. 1 

Jawaharlal, therefore, even to the detriment of his own party, gave the 
Viceroy full scope to work out the best way in which the country could be parti¬ 
tioned. Mountbatten and his advisers drew up a ‘Plan Balkan’, whereby power 
would be demitted to the provinces and they would be left to decide whether 
they would form any groups. 2 The plan was not shown in detail to the Con¬ 
gress leaders, and Jawaharlal knew only the general outlines. He certainly does 
not seem to have known that power was being transferred to the provinces, 
and was assuming that partition would involve no more than a division of the 
Punjab and Bengal. It has been stated that Mieville showed the draft proposals 
to Jawaharlal and had a satisfactory interview with him. 3 But the evidence is 
all the other way. ‘Neither I nor my colleagues of the Interim Government 
who were present at our meeting’, wrote Jawaharlal to Mountbatten on 1 May, 
‘know the full extent of the proposals that Lord Ismay is taking with him to 
London. But you have been good enough to keep me informed of the broad 
outlines of these proposals and I placed these before the [Working] Com¬ 
mittee ... I have not entered in this letter into any detailed consideration of 
all your proposals as we have not got them before us in their final form.' So, 
apart from reiterating that the Congress would accept the principle of partition 
based on self-determination as applied to definitely ascertained areas, Jawaharlal 
stressed only the unfairness of attempts to dislodge the Congress ministry in 
the Frontier province in order to make Pakistan a practical proposition. To 
yield to the demands of the League, backed up by terrorism and rioting, for fresh 
elections would be a surrender which would have far-reaching repercussions 
not only in the Frontier province but in the rest of India. 4 But far from putting 
down this violence and the policy underlying it, the Governor and sometrf his 
advisers wereencouraging the League; and Jawaharlal now hinted at resignation 
if Caroe were not removed. ‘I find it increasingly difficult to continue to be in 
charge of a Department which is responsible in some way for the activities of 
officials who function wrongly and are completely beyond my control.’ 9 
Mountbatten could have had no doubts about Caroe’s abuse of his position. 

jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 14 April, and MouYitbatten's reply, 13 April 1947. 

2 Hodson, op. cit., pp. 229-30. 

Mbid.. p. 293. 

4 Jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 17 and 26 April 1947. 

’Idem, 1 May 1947. 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


347 


it*, fow 

Jt tow CLlwt’, 4W^lt •■Ul 
dU{**V Ci^u *f fl* 

f **4{,4U* «ul tAct»m <C5* ♦'«*—«• ; 

toutoun. . j 'UCtx~+i *{<•*• 

•k^ C r> i.»« >>»<i i^ AtS»4!«»« j ^(v» Q*A * M ' •A • 

S^J*A VWJ0UA,U-J^ fc-O - '*•-*■ j 

ft m »\ tfc< Cv^ ^ . 

Dv ?v~~\ : —A «&*»*£*.. 

dL4*Jl*~<w 

3v WU£v : —*• T ^** > 

S«Ok«A. B«JQow 

^Ua ^ * wa - • ^■*^* / ' / 

fa, <•. ft . ft L.-44* •* 

K, R*f. • <?*>— 

SaJJt U.WC : H<*-Wr 

*$ v ft. R. Aw>UM*A. Lw 

Sk4 R. A. 5kiK^*KA.lA,t>^*~* 

$ v SU}«~** ; 

Su^ b. V. <5~y. ■• — 1 P ’~*’‘- 








Jawaharlal’s first Cabinet List 



348 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


The Governor openly acted on the premiss that ‘the Congress is not natural 
here’ and it was but proper that the province, sandwiched between the Punjab 
and the tribes, should have a League ministry. As the League lacked leaders in 
the province of the calibre of Abdul Gaffar Khan and his brother Dr Khan 
Sahib, the Congress premier, Caroe repeatedly urged the latter «to oust the 
Hindus in his ministry and sever his connection with the Congress 1 — advice 
which was hardly in keeping with the Governor’s constitutional position. But 
Mountbatten was not prepared, at this stage at any rate, to remove Caroe. 
Wavell’had advised strongly against it and the dismissal of a senior LC.S. 
governor at the request of half his government was not a step to be taken lightly. 
Moreover, on a visit to the Frontier province, Mountbatten seems to have been 
impressed by the mass demonstrations organized to establish the growing 
strength of the League. On the other hand, he protested against the agitation 
promoted by the Congress in various cities for the removal of Caroe, and Gaffar 
Khan’s public criticism of the Governor, as attempts to make him act under 
duress. 2 In fact, Mountbatten decided to adopt Caroe’s policy and make it 
acceptable to the Congress, when the time came, by getting rid of Caroe. He 
told Khan Sahib that he could only remove Caroe if the Congress agreed to a 
referendum; they could work out which they preferred. 3 

Even after Ismay had secured the Cabinet’s approval, with minor amend¬ 
ments, to Mountbatten’s Plan Balkan, Jawaharlal and Mountbatten continued 
primarily to discuss its application to the Frontier province. Jawaharlal was, 
on 10 May, Mountbatten’s guest at Simla. There the Viceroy wrote to him 
that instead of Governor’s rule or fresh elections in the NWFP, a referendum 
should be held on the issue of partition by an organization under the control 
not of the Governor but of the Viceroy. ‘1 will tell Caroe to tell Dr Khan Sahib 
that you are in general agreement with the procedure.’ Jawaharlal promptly 
denied this and refused to be hustled. This was a matter on which the Working 
Committee felt very strongly and had specifically directed Jawaharlal to convey 
its feeling to the Viceroy. All that Jawaharlal had agreed to was that the 
people of the Frontier province should be consulted before final decisions were 
taken, but it was very important when this was done and in what context, 
and any referendum would require the full concurrence of the provincial 
government. 4 

On the night of 10 May Mountbatten, acting on ’an absolute hunch’, gave 
Jawaharlal the complete text of the Plan Balkan as revised by the Cabinet. ‘The 
moment’, writes the chronicler of the Mountbatten phase in India, 'was a 
watershed in the history of three nations.’ 3 This is to overrate the importance 

1 Caroe to Mountbatten, 22 March and 7 April 1947, Caroe papers. 

3 Mountbatten to Jawaharlal, 6 May \1947. 

’Interview with the author, 28 May 1970. 

4 Mountbatten to Jawaharlal, 10 May, and Jawaharlai's reply o t the same date. 

’Hodaon, op. dfc, pp. 293-6. 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


349 


of the event if Jawaharlal was merely being shown again a text which he ha d 
already seen, but with some minor alterations. In fact, he was seeing the full 
text for the first time, and was so upset that he burst into Krishna Menon's 
room at 2 a.m., speechless with indignation. 1 That certain features of the Plan 
came as a complete surprise to him demands emphasis, for an understanding 
of JawaharlaTs reaction hinges on this. Jawaharlal places this beyond doubt 
in a note recorded by him at the time: 

At Simla 

On the 10th May night I was given some idea of the draft proposals as 
they had been sent to London. I considered them that night and early 
next morning I dictated a long note. As there was delay in typing this 
note and events were marching fast, I sent a brief hand-written letter to 
Lord Mountbatten. I kept no copy of this. This letter produced an imme¬ 
diate impression and led to a talk. Later I handed over to Mountbatten 
the typewritten note of 11/5. 


On the 11th afternoon it was decided to postpone the Conference called 
for May 17th to June 2nd. 

J.N. 

The hastily written note which he sent to Mountbatten shows signs of 
excitement and is in places incoherent. But it made clear that the Congress 
Would not accept the break-up of the Indian Union and the transfer of sover¬ 
eignty to the provinces. Any plan should start with the Union and the opting 
out of certain areas rather than a number of sovereign units coming together 
if they so desired. To jettison the basic conception of India and denude the 
Constituent Assembly of its significance was to yield to the League and ignore 
the views of all other sections of opinion in India. The 'preposterous' suggestion 
to settle the future of Baluchistan in accordance with the wishes of a few nomi¬ 
nated Sirdars, the insistence that the NWFP be given a fresh opportunity to 
reverse its decision to form a part of India and the refusal to apply to Sind the 
formula enforced on Assam that a Muslim-majority part of it should be attached 
to the contiguous seceding area were all intended as special favours to the 
League. The inevitable consequences would be to invite the Balkanization of 
India, provoke civil conflict ami add to violence and disorder, ensure a further 
breakdown of’the central authority and demoralize the army, the police and the 
civil service. The States would also declare themselves independent kingdoms, 
probably in subordinate alliance with Britain, and this would create an almost 

1 Mountbatten’s speech on the occasion of the third Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Lecture, 
London, 12 November 1970. 



350 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


unbridgeable gulf between the peoples of India and Britain. The public assur¬ 
ance to the tribes on the frontier that they could have treaties with whomsoever 
they liked was to invite them to profit by internal difficulties in India. 

Jawaharlal’s reaction surprised Mountbatten. He attributed it, as did Ismay 
later, to old suspicions of the British Government, and he believed that Jawa- 
harlal resented the mere fact that the Plan had been revised in London. 1 A later 
interpretation draws on psychology. Jawaharlal, it is said, was prone to amnesia; 
even while discussing partition he had been entranced by the vision of a united 
India, and at the moment of truth reacted violently. The development at Simla 
is seen as essentially an internal crisis in the mind of an emotional dreamer; 
Jawaharlal was unconsciously balancing two sets of attitudes, experiencing 
one of his unpredictable, moody interludes, at odds with himself and with 
others, rebelling against the fact that he, the revolutionary, was putting himself 
into the hands of the Viceroy and the British Government. 2 But this interpre¬ 
tation assumes that Jawaharlal had seen the full text of the proposals which 
Ismay took to London; and he clearly had not. In his eagerness to get things 
done, Mountbatten was inclined to wishful believing. ‘He’s a grand chap in a 
thousand ways but clarity of thought and writing is not his strong suit.’ 3 He 
had convinced himself that he had secured Jawaharlal’s approval of the Plan 
Balkan and interpreted Jawaharlal’s personal cordiality for whole-hearted 
acceptance of his scheme. But no doubt there was a gnawing sense of reality at 
the back of his mind and it was this which inspired his ‘hunch’. Jawaharlal, 
taken aback by the concept of fragmentation, had too much faith in Mount- 
batten's integrity to believe either that he had introduced this feature into the 
Plan or that he had failed to inform Jawaharlal of it. He assumed, therefor^, 
that it had been introduced by the British Cabinet and blamed them severely for 
it. This, and not the suggestion that he was so petty as to resent even minor altera¬ 
tions made in London, explains the language of his letter to. the Viceroy. ‘The 
relatively simple proposals that we had previously discussed now appeared in 
garb that HMG had provided for them in an entirely new context which gave 
them an ominous meaning .. . The picture of India that emerged frightened 
me . . . HMG seem to function in an ivory tower of their own isolated from 
realities in India . . . ’ 4 

Nor were Jawaharlal’s fears wholly unreal and theoretical. There were 
powerful forces at work seeking to break up India into a number of units. 
Suhrawardy put himself at the head of a movement to create an independent 
Bengal and gained the support of some influential Congressmen. In the NWFP 

1 Campbell Johnson, op. tit, p. 90; Hodson, op. tit., p. 297; Ismay, Memoirs (London, 1960), 
p. 421. 

2 H. Tinker, Experiment with Freedom (Oxford, 1967), p. 112; and ‘Jawaharlal Nehru at Simla 
May 1947’, Modern Asian Studies, October 1970, pp. 349-58. 

’Ismay on 23 April 1947, Wingate, op. tit., p, 153. 

4 This extract from Jawaharlal's handwritten letter (of which he kept no copy) of 11 May, is 
taken from Tinker's article, op. tit., p. 354. <* 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


351 


also, many Congressmen talked loosely of independence as. being preferable to 
being coerced into joining Pakistan. With the coming lapse of paramountcy 
the Political Department, over which the interim government had no control, 
was suspected by the Congress of encouraging the leading Princes to set them¬ 
selves up as independent rulers. 1 The Nawab of Bhopal and the Nizam of 
Hyderabad were known to be toying with the idea of independence, and the 
Dewan of Travanoore announced that this State would assume sovereign 
power. If the British Government had declared the Plan Balkan to be their 
policy, partition might well have expanded into fragmentation, and India as 
such ceased to exist. 

After Jawaharlal’srejectionof the Plan, Mountbatten, hurriedly plastering over 
hiscracked confidence, postponed his meeting with the Indian leaders scheduled 
for 17 May, and directed his advisers to recast the Plan to meet Jawaharlal’s 
main objection. The Constituent Assembly would continue to meet; and there 
would be a second Constituent Assembly for those areas which decided not to 
participate in the existing Assembly. The Punjab and Bengal would be parti¬ 
tioned if the representatives of either the Muslim-majority districts or the rest 
of the province desired it, and boundary commissions would be set up later to 
demarcate the boundaries on the basis of contiguous majority areas and other 
factors. It would not, however, be possible to provide a separate state for the 
Sikhs. Though Sylhet district was a part of Assam, as it was predominantly 
Muslim and contiguous to Bengal, a referendum should be held there to deter¬ 
mine whether it should also be divided. Sind would decide through its assembly 
which state to join, and an appropriate mechanism would be devised to enable 
British Baluchistan also to choose. The real problem was with the NWFP, the 
majority of whose representatives were already participating in the Constituent 
Assembly. Here democratic principles were frankly set aside to enable Pakistan 
to become a reality. ‘But it is clear, in view of its geographical situation, and 
other considerations, that if the whole or any part of the Punjab decides not 
to join the existing Constituent Assembly, it will be necessary to give the 
NWFP an opportunity to reconsider its position.’ So if the Punjab decided 
on partition, a referendum would be held in the NWFP under the aegis of the 
Governor-General and in consultation with the Provincial Government. 
Agreements with the frontier tribes would be negotiated by the appropriate 
successor authorities. As for the Indian States, British policy would continue 
as before and the Plan would not apply to them. 

This Plan was broadly acceptable to the Congress because it accepted the 
premiss that India was a continuing entity, with the separation of those areas 
the majority of whose inhabitants desired it. Jawaharlal and his colleagues were 
anxious too for quick and find decisions. Lahore was being gradually reduced 
to ashes while Calcutta prepared for another round of killings; but the admini- 

»Jawaharlal to Krishna Menon, 27 February 1947. 



352 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


stration was doing little to stem the spread and intensification of communal 
fury. 'We are at present living in the midst of crises and the situation is volcanic. 
The only comfort one can derive from it is that some solution must come soon. 
We have to face very hard realities now and the time for vague resolutions is 
passed. Definite choices have to be made and the choice is often ayery difficult 
one.’ 1 The first thing to be done was to effect an immediate transfer of power 
out of British hands, for British officials seemed neither willing nor competent 
to deal with the situation. Knowing that they would soon depart, many of them 
often showed little interest, while some appeared to derive satisfaction at the 
thought that India was going to pieces. 'The situation has become intolerable 
and all the evident goodwill of Mountbatten does not make it more bearable.' 2 
With no one assuming responsibility, there was mere drift from bad to worse. 
As Patel told the Viceroy, ‘You won’t govern yourself, and you won’t let us 
govern.’ 3 

Catching Jawaharlai in this mood, Mountbatten induced him not only, 
despite all his earlier reservations, to agree to a referendum in the NWFP, but 
also to accept Dominion Status. From the start the Viceroy’s objective had 
been to achieve a solution which would retain the Indian parties within the 
Commonwealth, and Jinnah, at one stage of the negotiations, sought to pro¬ 
mote the chances of Pakistan by offering to accept Dominion Status. But 
obviously the prime importance was attached to the attitude of the Congress. 
Patel, with his conservative tendencies, and Krishna Menon, with his Anglo¬ 
phile attitudes, saw eye to eye on this. But Jawaharlai, occupying a central 
position, was adamant in opposition. His position had not changed since the 
days when he had moved the independence resolution at Madras in 1927 and 
presided over the Congress at Lahore in 1929 which had resolved on civil 
disobedience if independence was not granted. Thereafter every year Indepen¬ 
dence Day had been celebrated; and in December 1946 Jawaharlai had moved 
in the Constituent Assembly the resolution that India should be an independent 
sovereign republic. His speech on that occasion reflected his bitterness with 
the British authorities for their rejection of the interpretation of the Mission 
Plan put forward by the Congress. In the following months Mountbatten’s 
personal friendship had made Jawaharlai less edgy but he had not altered his 
views on this subject. 

Under no conceivable circumstances is India going to remain in 
the British Commonwealth whatever the consequences. This is'not a 
question for me to decide or for any few of us to decide. Any* attempt to 
remain in the Commonwealth will sweep away those who propose it 
and might bring about major trouble in India. We must, therefore, 

1 Jawaharlai to S. Radhakrishnan, 14 May 1947. 

1 Jawaharlai to Vtjayalalcshmi Pandit, 22 May 1947. 

} Campbell Johnson, op. cit, p. 72. % 



THE transfer of power 


proceed on the assumption which is a practical certainty that India wifi 
fgy out of the British Commonwealth by the middle of next year. 

Friendly arrangements could be made with Britain on many matters, «nrlnrii*^ g 
defence, but only on the basis of independence. If British army officers threat- 
ened to leave, ‘I shall accept that without losing a night’s sleep.’ 1 It might 
immediately mean some weakness in the higher ranks, but in the long run 
it would build up India’s self-reliance as well as give reality to India’s indepen¬ 
dence. Severance from the Commonwealth would also in a sense strengthen 
India’s security, for Britain was incapable of defending India and the main 
result of being in the Commonwealth would be to drag India into Britain’s 
foreign commitments and animosities, while India herself was threatened by 
no major power. 2 

In May, however, Jawaharlal’s keenness for an early de facto transfer of 
power was exploited in favour of Dominion Status. In his note of 11 May he 
had suggested that even before the British withdrew, the interim government 
should be treated as a Cabinet with joint responsibility based 'upon full Domi¬ 
nion autonomy’; and if the League refused to accept this, its representatives 
Should be told to resign. Mountbatten at first agreed to this, subject to the 
Viceroy retaining his overriding power to safeguard the interests of minor¬ 
ities; but then, presumably because of Jinnah’s objection, he withdrew his 
consent. The Congress strongly objected and there was a fairly heated argu¬ 
ment. ‘Mountbatten, almost for the first time, took up an entirely contrary 
view and said that he thought we were unreasonable in insisting on this even 
to the point of breaking when it was only a question of two or three months.’ 
Jawaharlal and Patel replied that this was a vital matter and if they were asked 
once again to give in to Jinnah they would prefer to resign. But Mountbatten 
refused to yield and accused the Congress of wanting to crush the. League 
during the coming months, and possibly to interfere with the Muslim-majority 
areas to the League's disadvantage. In the end the Congress had to give way.’ 
It was finally dedded that, to enable a speedy transfer of power once partition 
was decided upon, there should be two Dominion Governments with a common 
Governor-General or two separate Govemors-General; and the armed forces 
would also be divided in accordance with the territorial basis of their recruit¬ 
ment. 

On the main clauses of the May Plan the Congress had little objection at 
this stage, except that they wished certain Hindu-majority areas in Sind to be 
given the right to secede from the province, and proposed the deletion of all 
reference to the Sikhs unless it could be said that the boundary commission 
would bear in mind their desire that as far as possible the majority of their 

>To Bakiev Singh, 14 April 1947. 

JIdem, 8 April 1947. 

*To Krishna Menon, 17 May 1947. 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


934 

community should be included in eastern Punjab. Mountbatten rejected the 
first suggestion on the ground that: it would open the way for the League to 
lay claim to little pockets elsewhere 1 — an argument which would have applied 
to Sylhet as well; but here again the Congress, now almost desperate for final¬ 
ity, did not pursue its case. On the question of the Sikhs, it was decked to make 
no reference to them at all. 

Seeing that the Congress was continually yielding and that Mountbatten, 
for all his personal liking for Jawaharlal, was not favouring the Congress, 
Jinnah continued to pitch his claim high. Despite his verbal message to 
Mountbatten that the Plan as it stood was acceptable to the League, he con¬ 
tinued — for the record, at any rate — to ask for more. The Constituent 
Assembly should be dissolved and two new Assemblies, for India and for 
Pakistan, should be convened; the Punjab and Bengal should not be parti¬ 
tioned; Calcutta should not be given to India, and, at the worst, should be 
made a free port; and the Congress ministry should not be consulted on a 
referendum - in the NWFP. Then, when Mountbatten was in London for 
consultations with the Cabinet, he publicly formulated a demand for a corridor 
between western and eastern Pakistan. It is unlikely that Jinnah expected 
anything more at this stage than what had been conceded in Mountbatten’s 
plan; but nothing was lost by playing this game of nerves. As Mi£ville com¬ 
mented, ‘it was all so disappointing to me and yet at the same time not wholly 
unexpected.’ 2 Jawaharlal’s reply to this claim was that Jinnah obviously wanted 
no settlement and Mountbatten’s plan should therefore be abandoned, the 
Cabinet Mission Plan imposed and the interim government treated as a Domi¬ 
nion government.^ 

Ignoring these demands of both sides, the Cabinet approved the plan as 
it stood, with only one major addition: that the date for the transfer of power 
could be brought forward* from June 1948 by conferring Dominion Status 
on one or two successor authorities even in 1947 Mountbatten presented 
this plan to the Congress and the League, secured their agreement to work it, 
and asked Jawaharlal, Jinnah and Baldev Singh to follow him and broadcast to 
the nation on the evening of 3 June. Jawaharlal’s effort was one of his out¬ 
standing performances. He was normally no orator but could, with genuine¬ 
ness and spontaneity, rise to the occasion. He stumbled along on the plains 
but was at home in the heights. His rhetoric was never over-blown, his prose 
never over-excited. He now spoke of the past nine months when the Congress 
had been in office at the centre, months of sore trial and difficulty, of anxiety 
and sometimes even of heartbreak. There was much on the credit side, for 
India had advanced nationally and internationally; but his mind was heavy 
with the thought of the tragedy and suffering which the Indian people had 

1 Jawaharlal to Mountbatten, 16 May, and Mountbatten ! reply of the tame date. 

iTo Jawaharlal, 22 May 1947. 

* Jawaharlal'! press statement, 29 May, and letter to Mldville, 25 May 1947. 



the transfer of power 

355 

undergone. It was with no joy that he now commended the proposals for 
session, though he had no doubt that this was the right course. It was an 
India united not by compulsion but by the free and willing association of a 
free people that they laboured for, and it might be that these proposals would 

enable them to reach such an united India sooner than otherwise and with a 
stronger foundation. 

We are little men serving a great cause, but because the cause is great 
something of that greatness falls upon us also. Mighty forces are at work 
in the world today and in India, and I have no doubt that we are ushering 
in a period of greatness for India. The India of geography, of history and 
tradition, the India of our minds and hearts, cannot change. 

It was with that faith that they should bury the bad past and make a fresh start. 

This was the appropriate blend of sadness and commitment, courage and 
magnanimity; and even a tough soldier like Ismay was moved. 

I hesitate to add to the number of papers that you have to read, but I must 
beg leave to send you my warmest congratulations on your splendid 
broadcast last night. It was, if I may say so, brave, generous and deeply 
moving; and I cannot imagine any words that are more likely to inspire 
us all to do our utmost in the days that lie ahead. I particularly liked your 
reference to ‘small men’ and ‘big causes'. It so exactly describes the feeling 
that I have entertained about my own unworthy self ever since I under¬ 
took my task. 

Believe me in gratitude, 
Yours very sincerely 
Ismay. 1 

It now remained only to implement the plan, to ascertain the wishes of the 
people in the areas concerned and to arrange for separation if it were desired 
by the majority. Curiously, Jawaharlal expected little trouble. He regarded 
the communal frenzy as a fever which would pass once the decision about 
Pakistan had been taken. He had too noble an idea of his countrymen to be¬ 
lieve that the desire to kill and torture, born of religious zeal, had any deep 
root in their nature. He was wrong, but so was everyone else in a position of 
responsibility at this time; and all were surprised and caught unprepared by 
the widespread and savage killings that disfigured India before and after parti¬ 
tion. After 2 June, Jawaharlal, in the belief that the present had been settled, 
thought mainly of the future. It was a difficult time but India would muddle 
her way through, and once they had settled down to the new order they should 
move fast. In these summer months Jawaharlal, for the first time since his 

> Ismay to Jawaharlal, 4 Jane 1947. 



356 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


release in 1945, was not caught up in the rush of events. The loss of certain 
parts of India seemed to him a temporary phenomenon which would soon 
right itself. This was a view shared even by Cripps. He also did not see the 
June Plan as a complete severance of the seceding areas, and advised Professor 
Morris-Jones, who was going out to India at the end of May as constitutional 
adviser to Mountbatten, to make a study of such joint organizations as the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire and the International Postal Union. 1 

Nor did Jawaharlal see partition coming soon. Once partition had been 
decided on, Mountbatten believed that if it were not done rapidly ‘the thing 
would have blown up under my hands’. 2 He had therefore announced, without 
any consultation with the Congress or the League, that the division would be 
effected and the two Dominion Governments come into existence by 15 
August. But Jawaharlal does not seem to have taken this in. He was still 
thinking in terms of the British leaving in June 1948, when alone India would 
attain full independence. Dominion Status was nothing more than an interim 
arrangement, ‘an ex gratia gift’ from the British, advantageous to them in 
the long run because it increased their prestige and helped to produce good¬ 
will. 9 Mountbatten tried to clear this confusion, 4 but obviously in vain; for 
even later Jawaharlal was writing ‘that from the 15th August onwards our 
Government will be a substantially free Government.’ A measure of British 
control over the Indian army would still continue, and even by 1 April 1948 
the Indian Government hoped to have ‘substantial’ — but presumably not 
full — control. 3 To Jawaharlal Dominion Status had never meant full in¬ 
dependence, and he had not now changed his views. So long as India was a 
Dominion, the interim phase was not for him over. It was only when, India 
had become a republic that she could be considered as fully free. 

In acting on the clauses of the plan creating Pakistan, the Congress was 
chiefly concerned about its betrayal of the NWFP. At the meeting of the Work¬ 
ing Committee which accepted the plan, Gandhi and Abdul Gaffar Khan were 
the only regular members who spoke against partition, and Gaffar Khan asked 
his colleagues to find out, as a small mercy, if the plebiscite in the NWFP could 
include the third alternative of independence as well. 6 The president of the 
party wrote accordingly to the Viceroy, and Gandhi took Gaffar Khan to meet 
Mountbatten. But Mountbatten refused to consider the suggestion and silenced 
the Congress by pointing out that it was Jawaharlal himself who had strongly 
objected to the grant of independence to any province. Jawaharlal had agreed 
to a referendum in the NWFP, as in Sylhet, as part of a larger pattern of con¬ 
sulting the people of the areas concerned; and the Congress could not retract. 

1 Professor W. H. Morris-Jones to the author, 11 March 1970. 

* Interview with the author, 28 May 1970. 

* To M. Chalapathi Rao, 6 June 1947. 

* Campbell Johnson, op. cit., pp. 116-17.' 

>To Amir Sjarifoeddln, Prime Minister of Indonesia, 6 July 1947. 

* Proceedings of the Wkg. Ctee., 2 June 1947, AICC File G 43<Part 1)71947; R. M. Lohia, 
Guilty Men of India's Partition (Hyderabad, 1970), p. 21, 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


357 


If they had, as the Viceroy pointed out to Jawaharlal, both their positions would 
become untenable. 1 A further complication was the lade of darity about the 
concept of independence. What the Congress leaders of the NWFP had in mind 
was apparently only a Pathan state enjoying full provincial autonomy within 
♦India, 2 but this was merely a confused way of demanding accession to India; 
and the confusion served to drag in issues of foreign policy and encourage 
Afghan irredentist ambition. The most striking feature of the negotiations for 
partition and the transfer of power in the summer of 1947 was the ambiguity 
on most of the vital issues. Was secession to be total or partial, would power bej 
handed over by the British wholly or only in a measure, and what were the impli¬ 
cations of a referendum in the Frontier province? — on none of these matters 
was there any dear understanding. The Congress, in its eagerness for finality, 
lost hold of certainty; and for this it could, to a large extent, blame Mountbatten’s 
tactics of stampede. Only two men were dear-sighted. Gandhi had an over¬ 
whelming sense of disaster, and Jinnah knew predsely what he wanted and 
where he was going. 

Jawaharlal urged the Khan brothers to abandon ideas of independence and 
to rally their forces to secure a majority vote on the straight issue of accession 
to India or to Pakistan. A number of offirials from the Governor downwards, 
who were antagonists of the Congress, had expressed their opinion that its 
chances were still fifty-fifty; and the party should be prepared to put it to the 
test. Even if the Congress lost by a small margin, it could renew the struggle 
♦later. 

Another factor to be borne in mind is the personality of the present 
Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. He is obviously playing and going to play an 
important part in various developments. I have no doubt about his sincer¬ 
ity and bona fides and his desire to do the right thing. To some extent he 
is naturally bound by the past and the present set-up; but he is trying his 
best to,go ahead in the right direction. He realizes the difficulties of the 
Frontier problem and wants to do everything in his power to solve them. 

I think he will prove helpful. He is convinced, however, that in the 
peculiar conditions that are arising in India now owing to possible 
secession of some parts, a chance must be given to the Frontier people to 
decide themselves by means of a referendum. He has definitely committed 
himself to this and he cannot get out of it without grave injury to his own 
prestige and impartiality. He would probably prefer to resign than to face 
such a situation. 3 

The only concession Mountbatten made to the Congress was to replace Caroe 
by General Lockhart. This ensured a fair election, and it is probable that if the 

t Mountbatten to Jawaharlal, 17 June 1947. 

* Khan Sahib to JawahtrU', 2 July 1947. 

J Javaharlal'a note on the poeitJon in the NWFP, 8 June 1947. 



358 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


Congress had accepted battle it would have polled a large vote. As it was, the 
provincial party decided to abstain, suggesting timidity and even a certain lack 
of integrity. Despite this, out of an electorate of 572,798, only 289,244 (5049 
percent) were in favour of Pakistan, with 2,874 against. This hairline majority 
in favour of Pakistan justifies Jawaharlal’s acceptance of a referendum, for the 
Congress might have won it or at worst lost very narrowly; and this would 
have exploded the case for Pakistan. In fact, the league was given a walk-over. 

The other problems created by the transfer of power and the process .of parti¬ 
tion were sorted out, though not without acute bickerings. A partition com¬ 
mittee representative of the two parties and boundary commissions with Sir 
Cyril Raddiffe as the chairman with the decisive voice were set up. But the 
relationship of the partition committee with the interim government, and the 
role of the interim government after the decision to divide had been taken, 
caused controversy. Jawaharlal proposed that the government work as two 
committees, each dealing with all subjects, one for India and the other for the 
future Pakistan. Mountbatten was willing to act on this sensible suggestion 
but Jinnah objected, and as the letter of the law was on his side nothing could 
be done and the administration continued to be ineffective. Jawaharlal was 
driven to offer his resignation, and this crisis was only averted by Mountbatten 
dividing the Cabinet as soon as the Indian Independence Act had been passed. 
The wording of this statute also caused concern, especially to Gandhi, who 
feared that it would grant recognition to the two-nation theory; and arrange¬ 
ments were made for its scrutiny before passage by the Indian leaders. 

The aspect of the future that was of chief interest to Mountbatten at this 
time was the possibility of ,his continuance as the governor-general of-both the 
new Dominions. As early as 17 May, Jawaharlal had agreed to this. Apart from 
his desire to oblige Mountbatten, he saw in this a means, however tenuous, of 
holding the old India together and enabling other ties to develop. Indeed, it is 
possible that Mountbatten did not provide in his plan for common councils or 
agencies, to which Jinnah might well have agreed, because he saw himself as 
the common link. But now, after the plan had been accepted, Jinnah refused 
to commit himself to a common governor-general and then put himself forward 
as governor-general of Pakistan, inviting Mountbatten to remain as an arbi¬ 
trator between the two countries. Mountbatten fumed and blustered but to no 
avail. 1 He had to content himself with the governor-generalship of India and 
chairmanship of the joint defence council. Even to the latter Jinnah gave his 
assent in terms characteristic of his method of functioning. *1 hqye considered 
your suggestion and wish to state that if you decide to accept the Governor- 
Generalship of the "Dominion of India" and if your future Government will 
permit you to act as an independent and impartial chairman of the joint defence 


1 C. Muhammed All, Tbs Emtrgtnc* of Pakistan (New York, 1967), p. 177; Hod son, Op. cit.," 
PP. 330-31. * 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


council, I would be glad to agree on behalf of the Dominion of Pakistan to your 
acting in this capacity.* This could hardly be called an invitation to serve as 
chairman. ‘You will note*, reported Mountbatten to the Secretary of State, 
'that Jinnah consistently refrains from committing himself in writing to asking 
me to do anything. He merely agrees in a form that implies that I asked for his 
agreement.* 1 

India’s decision to retain Mountbatten as governor-general did not, there¬ 
fore, help in the way Jawaharlal had expected; but in another respect it paid 
prompt dividends. Lahore continued to smoulder and there were ruraoursthat 
Calcutta would be set on fire once it was announced that it had been awarded to 
India. Some precautions were taken both in the Punjab and Bengal, though in 
no way adequate to the horrors that finally engulfed these provinces. But the 
full intensity of this savagery and large-scale migration still lay unexpected in 
the future. What worried the Congress at this time, was the conduct of the Indian 
States. The Political Department had always, but with added emphasis since 
the formation of the interim government, been shoring up the Princes in their 
autocratic pretensions and aspirations of sovereignty; and Jawaharlal had 
repeatedly to complain to Wavell and Mountbatten about this. But Wavell had 
refused to interfere; and the Political Department began to burn* records, wind 
up the Residencies and Political Agencies and transfer railways, cantonments 
and other government property. Hyderabad, a large state in the core of India, 
which since the’thirties had been seeking to increase its viability by securing 
access to the sea, 2 was now invited to acquire financial and industrial conces¬ 
sions in neighbouring principalities such as Bastar. Encouraged by all this, 
many of the Princes openly prepared for independence, the expansion of their 
armies and the acquisition of modem arms. One of them, Travancore, guided 
by a dewan of unbalanced ambition and vanity, declared that it would assume 
sovereignty on 15 August, nominated a representative at Delhi and appointed 
an agent to Pakistan. 

Jawaharlal held strong views on this subject of the States. He detested the 
feudal autocracy and total suppression of popular feeling, and the prospect of 
these puppet princes, with the encouragement of the Political Department, 
setting themselves up as independent monarchs drove him into intense ex¬ 
asperation. The whole policy of the Political Department was one of 'operation 
scuttle', with the deliberate intent of breaking up the unity of India and introduc¬ 
ing anarchy by the back door; and Jawaharlal was prepared to thwart this even, 
as he hinted to Mountbatten, by using force if necessary. 'It must be remembered 
also that the right of protection which the States possess will also go with 
paramountcy.* 3 In this matter even Mountbatten had little influence over him; 
On one occasion, arguing that paramountcy did not lapse but was inherited by 

1 Bocta Jlnnah's tetter and Mountbatten'* telegram are in Gov. Gen. Seen. File 38/19/GG 43. 

* See Lord Birkenhead, Wtlfr Monckton (London, 1969), PP- 116 end 221. 

5 To Mountbatten, 4 June 1947. 



360 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


the successor Government, he demanded that the Political Adviser to die 
Viceroy be tried for unlawful exerdse of his authority. 'In fact', wrote 
Mountbatten, 1 'as usual he completely lost control of himself.' 

Tojawaharlal the test case was Kashmir, Not only had he dose personal links 
with this State and the National Conference under Abdullah; it irked him that, 
despite his two visits in 1946, Abdullah and many of his colleagues remained 
in prison. So he planned to go there again, and Mountbatten’s effort to dissuade 
him made him only the more determined. 'For many months — ever since 
Mountbatten came —' he wrote to Gandhi, 2 ‘this question of your going or 
mine has been discussed and postponed. I have had enough of this business. 
This is not my way of doing anything. I hardly remember anything that has 
exasperated me quite so much as this affair... I shall go ahead with my plans. 
As between visiting Kashmir when my people need me there and being Prime 
Minister, I prefer the former.’ In fact, he did not go, Gandhi and Mountbatten 
going instead; but the Maharaja succeeded in evading a decision on accession 
to either India or Pakistan. 

However, apart from Kashmir, Hyderabad and Junagadh, all other States 
acceded to one or other of the two new Dominions before 15 August; and 
Mountbatten served India well in laying the bogy of independence. In view of 
the coming constitutional changes, he decreed that the Political Department 
should die a natural death and be replaced by direct relations between the States 
and the new Dominion governments. Patel took charge of the new States 
portfolio. He was essentially a man of government, unhampered by theoretical 
considerations. Though Mountbatten had a greater personal liking for Jawahar- 
lal, it is clear that he found it easier to work with Patel. From the stare they 
understood each other. At first, according to Mountbatten, Patel tried to bully 
him and demanded that hedismiss the chief commissioner of Delhi. The Viceroy 
replied that he would instead telegraph home his resignation and leave the next 
morning after publicly disclosing the cause of his departure. 3 Patel did not press 
the issue and thereafter the two worked well together. 

Patel’s willingness to reach agreements with the rulers and to give lower 
priority to popular representation facilitated Mountbatten’s task in securing 
the accession of the States on the three subjects of defence, external affairs and 
communications. It was Jawaharlal and his way of thinking which the Princes 
and their advisers resented, and by setting him aside Mountbatten made it easier 
for the Princes to accede. He even got Travancore to retrace its steps by sternly 
telling the dewan to 'be your age’ 4 and keep in line with all-India trends and 
the unanimous feeling of the people of Travancore. Working against the text 

1 27 June 1947, quoted in Hodson, op. dt., p. 363. 

2 28 July 1947, quoted in Pyarelal, Mahatma Gandhi Tha Lott Pbata (Ahmedabad, 1938), 
vol. 2, p. 334. 

* Mountbatten’s interview with the author, 28 May 1970. 

Idem. 



THE TRANSFER OF POWER 


361 


of the British Government's statement and disregarding their directive not to 
apply pressure on the States, 1 brushing aside the advice of the Political Depart¬ 
ment, countering the wishes of the Princes for, if not sovereignty, at least higher 
privileges, and ignoring Jawaharlal's desire to involve the people of the States, 
Mountbatten ensured the continuance of an integrated India but, in doing so, 
strengthened right-wing elements in Indian politics. 

It seemed that all was over now bar the shouting and the ceremonial. To the 
latter Mountbatten devoted considerable attention, and in his preoccupation 
with such detail was a true successor of Curzon. He invited Jawaharlal and 
Patel to drive on the great occasion either with him and his wife in the State 
carriage or in a semi-State carriage on their own; but he added to this invita¬ 
tion private advice that acceptance might weaken their political position. Jawa- 
harlal’s reply was characteristic. He said that ‘he would have hated not to have 
been asked, but would equally have hated to have had to accept.’ 2 

On 4 August Jawaharlal sent Mountbatten the names of the members of 
what would be the first Cabinet of free India. Though formed by the Congress, 
it was given the image of an all-party coalition by the inclusion of a loyalist, a 
leader of the Hindu Mahasabha, and Ambedkar, the extremist leader of the 
Scheduled Castes. It also, from the start, included Patel — a fact which would 
not require mentioning but for the story that Jawaharlal had decided to omit 
him but was persuaded by Mountbatten not to do so. 3 Were this so, Jawaharlal 
would have been lacking in not only integrity and loyalty but common sense; 
but the truth is very different. On 1 August Jawaharlal wrote to Patel formally 
inviting him to join. ‘This writing is somewhat superfluous because you are the 
strongest pillar of the Cabinet.’ Patel replied in the warmest terms. ‘My services 
will be at your disposal, I hope, for the rest of my life and you will have unques¬ 
tioned loyalty and devotion from me in the cause for which no man in India 
has sacrificed as much as you have done. Our combination is unbreakable and 
therein lies our strength.’ 4 Jawaharlal also utilized Patel’s services in recruit¬ 
ing other members of the Cabinet. 3 What lies behind the absurd story was that 
an unconfirmed rumour to this effect was carried to Mountbatten, but was not 
even mentioned by him to Jawaharlal when he saw that Jawaharlal was not only 
including Patel in the Cabinet but making him Deputy Prime Minister. 6 

At midnight on 14 August the Constituent Assembly met to usher in the 

> See Secretary of State’s telegram, 1 August, and Viceroy’s reply, 4 August 1947, Attlee papers, 
Box 7. 

a Mountbatten’s report at his staff meeting, 28 July 1947, Gov. Gen. Sectt. File 1446/33/ 
GG 43. 

*Hodson, op. dt., p. 389. 

s Jawaharlal to Patel, 1 August, and Patel’s reply, 3 August 1947. Sardar Patti's Cornspondanci, 
vol. 4, (Ahmadabad, 1972), p. 337. 

J Jawaharlal to Patel, 30 July 1947, ibid., p. 336. 

* Mountbatten to the author, 28 May 1970, and Mr H. V. Hodson’s letter to author, 3 June 1970. 



362 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


dawn of freedom. Jawaharlal once again made one of his most movingly approp¬ 
riate speeches and, in the process, coined an undyiqg phrase. 

Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes 
when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure} but very 
substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, 
India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but 
rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age 
ends, and when the soul of a nation long suppressed finds utterance. It 
is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to 
the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity. 

The next morning — The Appointed Day!’ as Jawaharlal had noted in his 
pocket diary — Mountbatten was invited to continue as Governor-General and 
he in turn swore in Jawaharlal as the first Prime Minister of a free India. For 
the next few days Delhi and India seethed with joyous excitement. Only Gandhi 
celebrated independence in Calcutta by fasting, and was not surprised when 
the country was overtaken by the disillusion which was round the comer. 



Biographical Notes 


Abdullah, Sheikh Mohammed (b. 1905). Organized the National Conference 
in Kashmir State in 1938; president of the All-India States Peoples Con¬ 
ference 1946; Prime Minister of Kashmir from 1948 to 1953, when he was 
dismissed and arrested; thereafter served long terms in prison assumed office 
again as Chief Minister of Kashmir in 1975. 

Aga Khan (1875-1957). Spiritual head of the Ismaili Muslims; was active 
in Indian politics till 1947, and a loyal supporter of British rule. 

Alexander, A. V., first earl Alexander of Hillsborough (1885-1965). Labour 
M.P. 1922-31 and 1935-50; First Lord of the Admiralty 1929-31, 1940-45 
and 1945-6; member of Cabinet Mission to India 1946; Minister of Defence 
1947-50; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1950-51. 

Alif Asaf (1888-1953). Barrister of Delhi and Congress Membfer of Central 
Assembly 1934-46; member of Interim Government 1946; Indian ambas¬ 
sador in Washington 1947-8; Governor of Orissa 1948-52; Indian ambas¬ 
sador in Switzerland, 1952-3. 

Alt, Maulana Mohamed (1878-1931). Interned 1915-19; a leader of the 
Khilafat agitation; in jail for sedition 1921-3; President of the Congress 
1923, but thereafter gradually moved away from the Congress.' 

Alt, Maulana Shaukat (1873-1938). Elder brother of Maulana Mohamed Ali; 
and like him served long terms in prison; helped to organize the Khilafat 
campaign and then drifted away from the Congress. 

Ambedkar, B. R. (1891-1956). Harijan leader and a signatory of the agreement 
of 1932 which .rejected separate electorates for the Harijans and enabled 
Mahatma Gandhi to end his fast; member of the Viceroy's council 1942-6; 
Law Minister in Nehru's cabinet 1947-5 L and one of the principal draftsmen 

, of the Indian constitution. 



364 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Amity, L. C. M. S. (1873-1955). Conservative M.P. 1911-45; First Lord of 
the Admiralty 1922-3; Colonial Secretary 1924-9; Secretary of State for 
India 1940-45. 

Andrews, C. F. (1871-1940). Came to India in 1904 as a member of the 
Cambridge brotherhood but left the mission nine years later;*a friend of 
Gandhi and Tagore and closely identified with the nationalist movement. 

Ansari, M. A. (1880-1936). Leading doctor of Delhi; participated in the home 
rule and Khilafat campaigns and organized a medical mission to*Turkey; 
president of the Madras session of the Congress in December 1927. 

Attlee, C. R., first earl (1883-1967). Labour M.P. 1922-55; Under-Secretary 
for War 1924; member of the Indian Statutory (Simon) Commission 1927- 
30; Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1930-31; deputy leader of the 
Opposition 1931-5 and leader 1935-40; Lord Privy Seal 1940-42; Deputy 
Prime Minister 1942-5; Prime Minister 1945-51. 

Azad, Maulana A. K. (1888-1958). Scholar and nationalist who served long 
terms in prison; President of the Congress 1923 and 1940-46; Minister for 
Education from 1947 to 1958. 

Baldev Singh (1902-61). Sikh leader; Minister in the Punjab 1942-6; member 
of the Interim Government 1946-7; Minister for Defence 1947-52. 

Banerji, S. N. (1848-1925). Entered Indian Civil Service 1871; dismissed 
1874; President of the Congress 1895 and 1902; left the Congress in 1918; 
Minister in Bengal 1921-3. 

Besant, Annie (1847-1933). Came to India in 1893 after a varied record of 
activity in Britain to serve the Theosophical Society of which she later be¬ 
came the president; started the Home Rule League during the First World 
War and was interned by the government; President of the Congress in 1917. 

Bhave, Vinoba (b. 1895). Disciple of Mahatma Gandhi, who chose him to 
inaugurate civil disobedience in 1940; after 1947 started the movement to 
donate land to the poor. 

Bhopal, Nawab of (1894-1960). Succeeded his mother 1926; Chancellor of 
the Chamber of Princes 1931-2 and 1944-7; transferred the administration 
of his state to the government of India in 1949- 

I 

Birkenhead, first earl(F. E. Smith)(1872-1930). Conservative M.P. 1906-19; 
Attorney-General 1915-19; Lord Chancellor 1919-22; Secretary of State 
for India 1924-8. 

Birla, G. D. (b. 1894). Leading industrialist who was on friendly terms with 
Mahatma Gandhi and many Congress leaders. * 



BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


3tt 

Bose, Subhas Chandra U897-VMH Educated in Cuttack, Calcutta and 
Cambridge; qualified for the I.C.S. but resigned in 1921; detained or exiled 
for long terms; President of the Congress 1938 arid 1939; resigned in 1939; 
escaped to Germany 1941; organized the Indian National Army in South- 
East Asia; died in an aircraft accident August 1945. 

Braboume, fifth baron (1895-1939). Conservative M.P. 1931-3; Governor 
of Bombay 1933-7; Governor of Bengal 1937-9; acting Viceroy 1938. 

Brockway, Fenner, (baron) (b.1888). For many years Secretary of the Inde¬ 
pendent Labour Party; attended the Congress session at Madras in 1927; 
rejoined the Labour Party in 1946. 

Butler, Sir Harcourt (1869-1938). Entered I.C.S. 1890; Foreign Secretary 
1908-10; member of Viceroy’s council 1910-15; Lieutenant-Governor of 
.the U.P. 1921-3; Lieutenant-Governor of Burma 1923-7; Chairman of the 
Indian States Committee 1928. 

Caroe, Sir Olaf. Entered I.C.S. 1919 and served in NWFP; Foreign Secretary 
to Government of India 1939*45; Governor of NWFP 1946-7. 

Cbbatari, Nawabof (b. 1888). Minister of Industries, U.P., 1923-25; Home 
Member U.P. 1926-33; Prime Minister of Hyderabad 1947. 

Crerar, Sir James (1877-1960). Entered I.C.S. 1900; Home Secretary, 
1922-7; Home Member 1927-32. 

Crtpps, Sir Stafford (1889-1952). Solicitor-General in the Labour Govern¬ 
ment 1930-31; expelled from the Labour Party for advocating a united front 
1939; visited India after the outbreak of war 1939; British ambassador in 
Moscow 1940-42; member of War Cabinet and deputed by it to India 1942; 
Minister of Aircraft Production 1942-5; President of the Board of Trade 
.1945-7;. member of Cabinet mission to India 1946; Chancellor of the 
Exchequer 1947-50. 

Dalton, Hugh (1887-1962). Labour M.P. 1924-31 and 1935-59; Minister 
of Economic Warfare 1940-42; President of the Board of Trade 1942-5; 
Chancellor of the Exchequer 1945-7. 

Das, Chitta Ranjan (1870-1925). Leading barrister of Calcutta; joined the 
Congress irj 1906; formed with Motilal Nehru the Swaraj Party within the 
Congress in 1922 to contest the elections; President of Che Congress in 1922. 

Emerson, Sir Herbert (1881-1962). Entered I.C.S. 1905; Home Secretary 
1930-33; Governor of the Punjab 1933-8. 



366 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Erskine, Lord (1895-1953). Assistant Government Whip in House of Com¬ 
mons 1932; Governor of Madras 1934-40. 

Gandhi, Mahatma (M. K.) (1869-1948). A barrister of Gujarat who trained 
Indians in South Africa to resist injustice by non-violent passivg resistance; 
on return to India in 1915 adopted same methods to resist British rule; 
assassinated by a Hindu fanatic. 

Gbose, Rash Behari (1845-1921). Lawyer of Calcutta and a leader of the 
moderates in the Congress; President of the Congress at Surat 1907, when 
the organization split, and again at Madras in 1908. 

Gidwani, A. T. (1891-1935). An educationist from Gujarat; was arrested 
along with Jawaharlal Nehru at Nabha in 1923. 

Gokbale, Gopal Krishna (1866-1915). The mo»t outstanding of the moderate 
leaders in the Congress; a teacher in Poona who soon became known for his 
well-documented and analytical speeches in the Bombay and Central Assem¬ 
blies; President of the Congress in 1905; founded the Servants of India 
Society in 1905. 

Haig, Sir Harry (1881-1956). Entered I.C.S. 1905; Private Secretary to 
Viceroy 1925; Home Secretary 1926-30; Home Member 1932-4; Governor 
of U.P. 1934-9. 

Hailey, Sir Malcolm, later first baron (1872-1969). Entered I.C.S. 1895; 
member of Viceroy’s council, 1919-24; Governor of the Punjab 1924-8; 
Governor of U.P. 1928-30 and 1931-4. 

Hallett, Sir Maurice (1883-1969). Entered I.C.S. 1907; Chief Secretary, 
Bihar and Orissa 1930-32; Home Secretary 1932-6; Governor of Bihar 
1937-9; Governor of U.P. 1939-45. 

Hag, Fazlul (1873-1962). Lawyer of Calcutta and member of Bengal Legislative 
Council 1913-20; President of the Muslim League 1916-21; Chief Minister 
of Bengal 1937-43. 

Hoare, Sir Samuel, later Viscqunt Templewood (1880-1959). Conservative 
M.P. 1910-44; Secretary of State for Air 1922-3 and 1924-9; Secretary of 
State for India 1931-5; Foreign Secretary* 1935; Home Secretary 1937-9; 
Lord Privy Seal 1939-40; British ambassador in Spain 1940-44. 

Husain, Sir Fazl-i (1877-1936). A lawyer of the Punjab and chief organizer of 
the Unionist Party; member of Viceroy’s council, 1930-35. 

Iqbal, Sir Mohamed (1876-1938). An influential Islamic philosopher and 
poet in Persian and Urdu. * 



BIOGRAPHICAL notes 


367 


If r£l^ n ; 'r Ha ««ax (1881-19WV Under-War, tor CoW 

1941-2, President oi the Board oi Education 1922-4,\932-5-, Minister lot 
Agriculture 1924-5; Viceroy of India 1926-31; Foreign Secretary 1938-40; 
British ambassador in Washington 1941-6. 


Ismay, first baron (1887-1965). Commissioned in British Army 1905; Military 
Secretary to Viceroy 1931-3; Chief of Staff to Winston Churchill 1940-45; 
Chief of Staff to Lord Mountbatten in India March-November 1947; 
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations 1951-2; Secretary-General 
of nato 1952-7. 


Ispahani, M. A. H. (b.1902). Businessman of Calcutta and member of 
Working Committee of Muslim League; Pakistan’s ambassador in the United 
States 1947-52. 


Jayakar, M. R. (1873-1959). Barrister and judge; leader of the Liberal Party 
who worked closely with Sapru. 

Jayaprakash Narayan (b. 1902). One of the founders of the Congress Socialist 
Party 1934; member of Working Committee of Congress 1936; after 1947 
was for some time a leading member of the Socialist Party. 

Jinnah, M.A. (1876-1948). A barrister of Bombay and President of the 
Muslim League 1916, 1920 and from 1934 till his death; a nationalist 
who later campaigned for the creation of Pakistan, of which he was 
Governor-General 1947-8. 

Jones, Thomas (1870-1955). Assistant and then Deputy Secretary of the 
British Cabinet, 1916-30; trusted friend of Lloyd George, Bonar Law and 
Baldwin. 

Khaliquzzaman, Chaudhuri (1889-1973). A friend of Jawaharlal Nehru and 
a prominent member of the Congress in the U.P. till 1937, when he joined 
the Muslim League. 

Khan, Abdul Gaffar (b. 1891). Congress leader of the NWFP; founded the 
‘Red Shirt’ volunteer organization ifi 1929; detained by the Pakistan Govern¬ 
ment from 1947 to 1955. 

Khan, Hakim Ajmai (1865-1927). Well-known physician of Delhi and Presi¬ 
dent of the Congress in {921. 

Khan, Liaqat Ali (1895-1951). General Secretary of the Muslim League from 
1936; member of Interim Government 1946-7; Prime Minister of Pakistan 
from 1947 till his assassination in 1951. 

Khan, Sahib (1882-1958). Brother of Gaffar Khan and personal friend of 



*68 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Jawaharlal Nehru; Cheif Minister of Congress ministries in NWFP 
1937-9 and 1945-7; Chief Minister of West Pakistan 1955-7; assassi n ated in 
1958. 

Kban, Sir Sikandar Hyat (1892-1942). Served in the First World War; revenue 
member of Punjab Government 1930-3 5; Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank 
of India 1935-7; Chief Minister and leader of Unionist Party in Punjab 
1937-42. 

Kher, B. G. (1888-1957). Solicitor and Congressman of Bombay; Chief 
Minister of Bombay 1937-9 and 1946-52; Indian High Commissioner in 
London 1952-4; Chairman, Official Language Commission 1955-6. 

Kbwaja, A. M. (1885-1962). A lawyer of Aligarh and a friend of Jawaharlal 
Nehru; joined the Congress in 1915 but retired from politics in 1926. 

Kidtvai, R. A. (1894-1954). A Congressman of the U.P. and a close associate 
of Jawaharlal Nehru; Minister in the U.P. 1937-9 and 1946-7; Minister in the 
central government (with short intervals) from 1947 till his death. 

Kripalani, J. B. (b.1888). General Secretary of the Congress 1934-46 and 
president in 1946; later resigned from the Congress. 

Linlithgow, second marquis (1887-1952). Chairman of Royal Commission on 
Indian Agriculture 1926-8; chairman of Joint Select Committee on Indian 
Constitutional Reform 1933; Viceroy of India 1936-43. 

Lothian, eleventh marquis (1882-1940). Editor The Round Table, 1910-16; 
Secretary to Lloyd George 1916-21; Parliamentary Under-Secretary for 
India 1931-2; Chairman of Indian Franchise Committee 1932; British 
ambassador in Washington 1939-40. 

Lumley, Sir Roger, later Earl Scarbrough (1896-1969). Cbnservative M.P. 
1922-9 and 1931-7; Governor of Bombay 1937-43; Lord Chamberlain 
1952-63. 

Mahmud, Syed (1889-1971). Lawyer of Patna and personal friend of Jawaharlal 
Nehru and his wife; Minister in Bihar 1937-9 and 1946-52. 

Mahmudabad, Raja of (1914-73). A landholder of the U.P. and member of the 
Working Committee of the Muslim League. 

Malaviya, K. D. A lawyer of Allahabad who worked for some time with Motilal 
Nehru. 

Malaviya, M. M. (1861-1946). President of the Congress 1909 and 1918; 
later developed a Hindu outlook in politics; founder of the Banaras Hindu 
University. * 

Menon, V. K. Krishna f 1896-1974). Secretary, India League in London 



BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


369 


1929-47 ; borough councillor St Pancras 1934-47; Indian High Commis¬ 
sioner in London, 1947-52; Minister without Portfolio 1956-7; Minister 
for Defence 1957-62. 

MUville, Sir Eric (1896*1971). Private Secretary to Viceroy 1931-6; Assistant 
Private Secretary to King GeorgeVI1937-45; member of Lord Mountbatten’s 
staff in India 1947. 

Montagu, E. S. (1879-1924). Secretary of State for India 1917-22; .visited 
India in 1918 and, with the Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, made proposals which 
formed the basis of the reforms of 1919. 

Mountbatten of Burma, first earl (b. 1900). Chief of Combined Operations 
1942-3; Supreme Allied Commander South-East Asia 1943-6; Viceroy of 
India March-August 1947; Governor-General of India August 1947-June 
1948. 

Munshi, K. M. (1891-1971). Home Minister of Bombay 1937-9; Union 
Minister of Food and Agriculture 1950-52; Governor of Uttar Pradesh 
1952-7; later joined the conservative Swatantra Party. 


Naidu, Sarojini (1879-1949). Poet and politician; President of the Congress 
in 1925; Governor of Uttar Pradesh 1947-9. 

Narendra Deva (1889-1956). First President of the Congress Socialist Party 
1934; member of Working Committee of Congress 1936; resigned from the 
Congress in 1948. 

Nehru, Motilal (1861-1931). Lawyer of Allahabad and President of the 
Congress in 1919 and 1928; founder with Das of the Swaraj Party within 
the Congress and leader of that Party in the Central Assembly 1924-6. 


O’Dwyer, Sir Michael (1864-1940). Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab 
1913-19; authorized in 1919 the imposition of martial law, which made 
possible the massacre at Amritsar. 

Olivier, first baron (1859-1943). Gvil servant in Colonial Office 1882-1920; 
Secretary, Fabian Society 1886-90; Secretary of State for India 1924. 


Pal, B. C. (1858-1932). One of the extremist leaders in the agitation against 
partition of Bengal 1905: editor in 1920 of Motilal Nehru’s newspaper The 
Independent; disagreed with Gandhi’s programme and left the Congress. 

Palme Dutt, R. (1896-1974). Member of executive committee of British Com¬ 
munist Party 1922-65; editor of Labour Monthly from 1921 till his death. 

Pandit, R. S. (1893-1944). A barrister of Rajkot who married Jawaharlal 



370 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTBS 


Nehru’s sister, Vijayalakshmi,- in 1921; a scholar who translated Sanskrit 
works into English while in prison during the non-co-operation campaigns. 

Panikkar, K. M. (1895-1963). Historian; tor a short while a Member of the 
Congress; thereafter served in the Princely States; after 1947 served as 
ambassador. * 

Pant, G. B. (1887-1961). Advocate of Allahabad; leader of Swaraj Party in 
U.P. Council 1923-30; severely beaten along with Jawaharlal Nehru at 
Lucknow in the demonstration against the Simon Commission, 1928; Chief 
Minister of U.P. 1937-9 and 1946-55; Union Home Minister 1955-61. 

Patel, Sardar Vallabhbhai (1875-1950). Congressman of Ahmadabad who 
organized the no-rent campaign in Bardoli 1928; President of the Congress 
in 1931; member of the Interim Government 1946-7; Deputy Prime Minister 
and Minister for Home, States, Information and Broadcasting 1947-50. 

Pattvardban, Achyut (b. 1905), Member of the Congress Socialist Party, 1934; 
member of Working Committee of Congress 1936. 

Petbick-Lawrence, first baron (1871-1961). Labour M.P. 1923-31 and 1935- 
45; Secretary of State for India 1945-7; member of Cabinet Mission to India 
1946. 

Prasad, Rajendra (1884-1963). Lawyer of Patna who joined Mahatma Gandhi 
in 1917; President of the Congress 1934,1939 and 1947-8; President of the 
Constituent Assembly 1946-50; President of India 1950-62. 

Rat, Lala Lajpat (1865-1928). A Congressman of the Punjab who sided with the 
extremists in 1907 and was imprisoned in Mandalay for six months; President 
of the Congress 1920; member of the Swaraj Party but later broke away to 
found the Nationalist Party; was beaten by the police in the demonstration 
in Lahore against the Simon Commission and died a few days later. 

Rajagopalacbari, C. (1878-1972). A lawyer from Salem in Madras who joined 
the non-co-operation movement in 1919; member of Working Committee of 
Congress 1922-42, 1946-7 and 1951-4; Chief Minister of Madras 1937-9 
and 1952-4; left the Congress in 1942 but rejoined in 1946; Governor ol 
West Bengal 1947-8; Governor-General of India 1948-50; Union Ministei 
without-Portfolio and then for Home Affairs 1950-51; founder of th< 
conservative Swatantra Party. 

Ram Chandra, Baba (1875-1950). A settler in Fiji who returned to the U.P 
after 1918 and organized the peasant movement in several districts. 

Reading, first marquis (Rufus Isaacs) (1860-1935). Solicitor-General 1910; 
Attorney-General 1910-13; Lord Chief Justice 1913-^1; ambassador in 
Washington 1918; Viceroy of India 1921-6; Foreign Secretary 1931. 



BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


371 


Roy, B. C. (1882-1962). Physician and Congressman of Calcutta; Chief 
Minister of West Bengal from 1948 till his death. 

Roy, M, N. (1893-1954). Left India in 1915 and participated in revolutionary 
movements in Mexico and Europe; attended Second World Congress oftiie 
Comintern in 1920; representative of the Comintern in China 1927; differed 
from the Comintern 1928; arrested on return to India in 1930 and sentenced 
to six years imprisonment; supported the British Government during the 
Second World War. 

Sampumanand (1891-1969). A Congressman of the U.P.; Chief Minister ol 
Uttar Pradesh 1955-60; Governor of Rajasthan 1962-7. 

Santanam, K. (b. 1895). Lawyer of Madras who joined the non-co-operatior 
movement in 1920; arrested with Jawaharlal Nehru at Nabha in 1923; joini 
editor of Hindustan Times 1943-8; Union Minister of State 1948-52. 

Sapru, Sir T. B. (1875-1949). Advocate of Allahabad; law member of Viceroy’s 
council, 1920-23; the most eminent of the Liberal leaders. 

Satyamurti, S. (1889-1943). Advocate and Congressman of Madras; member 
of Madras council 1923-30 and of Central Assembly 1935-43; served several 
terms of imprisonment in the non-co-Operation campaigns. 

Saxena, M. (1896-1965). Chief whip of Swaraj Party in U.P. council 1924-6: 
helped to organ ize boycott of Simon Comm ission i n Lucknow 1928; Secretary 
U.P. Provincial Congress Committee 1928-35; Union Minister for Rehabili¬ 
tation 1948-50. 

Sberwani, T. A. K. (d.1935). Landlord and barrister of Aligarh; President 
U.P. Provincial Congress Committee 1931. 

Siddiqi, A. R. A prominent member of the Muslim League in Bengal. 

Sitaramayya, B. Pattabhi (1880-1959). A leader of the Congress in Andhrs 
who took interest in the states peoples movement; President of the Congress 
1948; Governor of Madhya Pradesh 1952-7. 

Sri Prakasa (1890-1971). Contemporary of Jawaharlal Nehru at Cambridge: 
secretary, U.P. Provincial Congress Committee 1928-34; Secretary of the 
Congress 1927 and 1931; after 1947 served as Indian High Commissioner in 
Pakistan, Union Minister and Governor of Assam, of Madras and of 
Maharashflra. 

Suhrawardy, H. S. (1893-1963). Leader of Muslim League in Bengal; Ministei 
1943-5 and Chief Minister 1946-7; Prime Minister of Pakistan 1956-7. 

Tagore, Rabindranath (1861-1941). Poet, novelist, essayist and dramatisi 
Drimarilv in Bengali but also in English: recipient of the Nobel Prize foi 



372 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Literature 1913; was involved in India’s political and social problems and 
renounced his knighthood as a protest against the massacre at Amritsar. 

Tandon, Purushottam Das (1882-1962). A Congressman of Allahabad; 
Speaker, U.P. Assembly 1937-9 and 1946-50; President of the Cbngress 
1950 but resigned because of differences with Jawaharlal Nehru/ 

Tilak, Bal Gangadhar (1856-1920). Teacher in a coliege at Poona and editor 
of journals in English and Marathi; regarded as the leader of the extremists 
and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment; also wrote scholarly works in 
Indian history and philosophy. 

Vansittart, Sir Robert (1881-1957). Permanent Under-Secretary at the 
Foreign Office 1930-38; Chief Diplomatic Adviser 1938-41; determined 
opponent of Nazi Germany. 

Wavell, Sir Archibald, later first earl (1883-1950). Commander-in-Chief, 
Middle East 1939-41; Commander-in-Chief, India 1941-3; Viceroy of India 
1943-7. 

Webb, Beatrice (1858-1943). With her husband, Sidney Webb, a pioneer of 
research in social and industrial conditions; a leading figure in the Fabian 
Society and the British Labour Party. 

Wedgwood Benn, William, first viscount Stansgate (1877-1960). Joined 
Labour Party in 1927; Secretary of State for India 1929-31; Secretary of 
State foi Air 1945-6. 

Willingdon, first marquis (1866-1941). Governor of Bombay 1913-19; 
Governor of Madras 1919-24; Governor-General of Canada 1926-31; Viceroy 
of India 1931-6. 

Zafrulla Khan, Sir Mahomed (b. 1893). Barrister at Lahore 1916-35; member 
of Viceroy’s council, 1935-41; Judge of the Federal Court 1941-7; Foreign 
Minister of Pakistan 1947-54; Judge of the Hague Court 1954-61. 

Zetland, second marquis (1876-1961). Governor of Bengal 1917-22; Secre¬ 
tary of State for India 1935-40; biographer of Curzon and Cromer. 



Glossary 


Abtmsa : non-violence 

Anna : one-sixteenth of a rupee 

Baba: religious leader 
Bapu : father 
Begari : forced labour 

Brahmin : the highest, priestly, caste among the Hindus 

Chapati: flat unleavened bread 

Charka: spinning-wheel 

Crore : ten millions or one hundred lakhs 

Dal : lentils 

Darshan : sight of a person which is believed to be auspicious 

Ekka : horse-carriage 

Ekkawala : driver of a horse-carriage 

Gurdwara: Sikh temple 

Hartal : strike 

Hindustani Seva Dal: Indian volunteer corps 
Id: a Musliqi festival 
Jatha : squad 

-Ji: a suffix added to a person’s name to denote respect 


Karma : fate 



374 


GLOSSARY 


Khadi, Khaddar : cloth woven of handspun yarn 
Kharif: autumn harvest 

Khilafat: the agitation after the First World War to protest against the 
dismemberment of the Turkish empire. It lasted from 1919 to 1921. 
Kisan : peasant 

Kisan sabha : peasant association 
Ksbatriya : the second, warrior, caste among the Hindus 
Kumbh Mela : a festival held once in twelve years on the banks of the Ganga 
in Allahabad 

Lakh : one hundred thousand 
Lathi : baton 

Madrasa: Islamic school 

Majlis : society (of Indian undergraduates at Cambridge) 

.Maulana : a learned Muslim 

Nazarana : illegal cesses 

Newar : broad cotton tape used in making a bed' 

Panchayat : village council 
Panchayat raj : regime of village councils 
Pandal: tent 

Pandit: a learned Brahmin 

Pie ■: one-twelfth of an anna 

Punkha : ceiling fan worked by a pulley 

Rabi : spring harvest 

Rai Bahadur : a title given by the British Government to Indians 
Rishi : saint 

Sadhu : ascetic 
Sahayak: assistance 

Sanyasini: woman who has renounced the world 

Satyagraha : literally ‘truth force’; Gandhi’s technique of passive resistance 

Seva Samiti: social welfare association 

Shafad pumima : the night of the full moon in October 

Shikar : hunting 

Sir : lands held for personal cultivation 
Swadeshi : produced in one’s own country 
Swaraj: freedom 


Takli : a hand spindle 



GLOSSARY 



UiMtr : i landowner, particularly in Aval 
TsMri: therightsofatalukdar 
Usil : a revenue subdivision of a district 
Ttbsildur: official in charge of a tehsil 
Urn : police station 

Tiak Swaraj Fund: a fund started by the Congress in memory of Tilak in 
1920 for financing national servioe and the non-cooperation movements. 

Viiil: lawyer 

Imdsf : a landowner, particularly in Bengal 



Bibliography 


Manuscript Sources 

Jawaharlal Nehru Papers 

This book has been built round the letters, diaries and notebooks of Jawaharlal 
Nehru. These, from the start up to September 1946, are in the Nehru 
Memorial Museum and Library at Delhi. The letters have been arranged 
according to the correspondents, except (at the time of writing) for some 
letters and papers which have been recently transferred from.An and Bhawan, 
Nehru’s home at Allahabad. The letters and papers of the period after 
September 1946 are in the custody of Shrimati Indira Gandhi. These are 
in chronological order, except for correspondence with some leading 
personalities, which have been kept in separate files. 

Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 

Motilal Nehnl papers 
A. M. Khwaja papers 
Sri Prakasa papers 
Purushottamdas Thakurdas papers 

The files of the All-India Congress Committee 

These include the correspondence of the presidents and secretaries of the 
Indian National Congress, the minutes of the Working Committee and 
papers relating to organizational matters. The record is, however, in¬ 
complete, as, apart from other hazards, the party was frequently, during, 
this period, declared unlawful and its files seized by the police. Some files 
and proceedings of Allahabad municipality for the years 1923-3, when 
Nehru was chairman, have now been transferred to the N.M.M.L. 


376 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


377 


National Archives of India 

Sampurnanand papers 
Rajendra Prasad papers 

Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya 
The papers of Mahatma Gandhi 

Jamia Millia, Delhi 
M. A. Ansari papers 

National Library, Calcutta 
Sapru papers 

The papers of Sachidananda Sinha at Patna have also been consulted. 


Office of Uttar Pradesh Provincial Congress Committee, Lucknow 

The papers of the United Provinces Provincial Congress Committee for 
the years 1921-47. But most of the files of this committee have been lost. 


India Office Library, London 

Sir Harcourt Butler papers 

Reading papers 

Sir Malcolm Hailey papers 

Halifax (Irwin) papers 

Templewood (Hoare) papers 

Zetland papers 

Erskine papers 

Brabourne papers 

Sir Harry Haig papers 

Linlithgow papers 

Sir Maurice Hallett collection 


Mss. Eur. F. 116 
Mss. Eur. E. 238 
Mss. Eur. E. 220 
Mss. Eur. C. 132 
Mss. Eur. E. 240 
Mss. Eur. D. 609 
Mss. Eur. D. 596 
Mss. Eur. F. 97 
Mss..Eur. F. 115 
Mss. Eur. F. 125 
Mss. Eur. E. 251 


Trinity College Library, Cambridge 

Minutes qf the Magpie and Stump Debating Society 
Minutes of the Boat dub 


Churchill College Library, Cambridge 
A. V. Alexander papers 



378 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Nuffield College Library, Oxford 

Cripps papers (some only have been transferred) 

University College Library, Oxford 

Attlee papers (some only have been transferred) 

British Library of Political and Economic Science, London 
The diaries of Beatrice Webb in the Passfield papers 

Caroe papers, in the possession of Sir Olaf Caroe. 

R. Palme Dutt’s correspondence with Nehru, in the possession of Palme Dutt 
at the time of writing. 

Kingsley Martin papers and Harold Laski papers, at the time of writing in the 
possession of Miss Dorothy Woodman. 


Official records 

The records (mostly of the Home Dept. Political Series) of the Government 
of India in the National Archives of India. 

Thefilesof the Governor-General’s Secretariat in Rashtrapati Bhavan (formerly 
the Viceroy’s House) in New Delhi; but these files are not many, most of 
them presumably having been either removed by the Viceroys on their 
departure or destroyed. 

The file of intercepted letters of the years 1921-47 in the possession of the 
Maharashtra Government. 

The records of the United Provinces Government (home and revenue depart¬ 
ments) in the U.P. Government archives at Lucknow. 

The intelligence reports of the U.P. police which are in the custody of the 
U.P. government. 

Confidential Government of India publications: 

C. Kaye, Communism in India (1926) 

India and Communism (1933) 

The Civil Disobedience Movement 1930-34 (1936) 

History of the Civil Disobedience Movement 1940-41 (1942) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


379 


Published Sources 


Asian Relations: report of the proceedings of the Asian Relations Conference 
1947 (New Delhi, 1948). 

Bose S. C., Correspondence 1924-32 (Calcutta, 1967). 

Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi (Delhi, 1958- ). 56 volumes have 

been published so far. 

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1942, vol. 1 (published by the State 
Department, Washington). 

Nehru, J., A Bunch of Old Letters (Delhi, 1958). 

_ Letters to his Sister , ed. K.N. Hutheesing (London, 1963). 

Papers relating to the Cabinet Mission to India (New Delhi, 1946). 

Patel, Sardar, Correspondence 1945-50 (10 vols., Ahmadabad, 1971-4) 

Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru (Delhi, 1972- ). 6 vols., have 

been published so far. 

Speeches and Documents on the Indian Constitution 1921-47 ed. M. Gwyer 
and A. Appadorai (2 vols., London, 1957). 

The Transfer of Power, ed. P.N.S. Mansergh (H.M.S.O., 1970- ). 

4 vols.,, have been published so far. 

Wavell: The Viceroy's Journal, ed. P. Moon (Oxford, 1973). 


Newspapers and Journals 

AaJ (a Hindi newspaper of Delhi). 

The Bombay Chronicle (Bombay). 

The Hindu (Madras). 

The Hindustan Times (Delhi). 

The Independent (Allahabad, 1919*21). This newspaper, started by Motilal 
Nehru, contains articles and dispatches, signed and unsigned, by Jawaharlal 
Nehru. 

The Leader (Allahabad). 

National Herald (Lucknow). Jawaharlal Nehru started this newspaper in 
the summer of 1938. It carried his articles; he also wrote many of its 
editorials. 

Pioneer (Lucknow). 

The Tribune (Lahore). 

Young India and Harijan, weeklies edited by Mahatma Gandhi. 



380 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Oral testimony 

Names of those who have granted interviews to the author have been mentioned 
in the footnotes. The records of oral testimony in the Nehru Memorial Library 
of the following have also been found useful: 

Roger Baldwin 
Lord Brockway 
Kailas Kaul 
Sri Prakasa 
Woodrow Wyatt 


Secondary Works 

Many books and articles have been cited in the footnotes; only those that require 
more than a passing reference are listed here. 

Agrarian Distress in the United Provinces, report of the UP. Congress Sub- 
Committee (Lucknow, 1931). 

Ali, C. Muhammed, The Emergence of Pakistan (New York, 1967), 

Azad, A. K., India Wins Freedom (Indian edition, 1959, repr. Calcutta, 1967; 

American edition with introduction by Louis Fischer, 1960). 

Bayly, C. A., ‘The Development of Political Organization in the Allahabad 
Locality 1880-1925’ (Oxford D. Phil, thesis, 1970). 

Bipan Chandra, Elements of Continuity and Change in Early Nationalist 
Activity, Indian History Congress proceedings, 1972. 

- The Indian Capitalist Class and Imperialism before 1947 (Delhi, 1972) 

Lord‘Birkenhead, Walter Monckton (London, 1969). 

Bose, S. C., The Indian Struggle (London, 1935; Calcutta edition, 1964). 
Campbell-Johnson, A., Mission with Mountbatten (London, 1951). 

Chablani, S. P., and Chablani, P. (ed.), Motilal Nehru (Delhi, 1961). 
Chattopadhyay, G., Communism and Bengal’s Freedom Movement, vol. 1, 
(Delhi, 1970). 

Connell, J., Auchinleck (London, 1959). 

Coupland, R., The Cripps Mission (Oxford, 1942). 

Curie, E., Journey among Warriors (London, 1943). 

Desai, M., Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (Indian edition, 1945). 

- Day to Day with Gandhi (5 volumes, Banaras, 1970). 

Druhe, D. N., Soviet Russia and Indian Communism (New York, 1959). 
Fischer, L., Men and Politics (London, 1941). 

- A Week with Gandhi (London. 1943). 

Lord Glendevon,/ The Viceroy at Bay (London, 1971). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


381 


Gopal, S., The Viceroyalty of Lord Irwin (Oxford, 1957). 

Haksar, U, The Futute That Was (Delhi, 1972). 

Hodson, R V., The Great Divide (London, 1969). 

Hutchins, F. G., Spontaneous Revolution (Delhi, 1971). 

Lord Ismay, Memoirs (London, 1960). 

Jayakar, M. R.,. The Story of My Life (2 vols., Bombay, 1959). 

Jog, N. G., In Freedom's Quest (Delhi, 1969). 

Kalhan, P., Kamala Nehru (Delhi, 1973). 

Khaliquzzaman, G, Pathway to Pakistan (Lahore, 1961). 

Low. D. A., Lion Rampant (London, 1973). 

-(ed.), Soundings in Modem South Asian History (London. 1968). 

Mathur, R. D., British Polity towards the yolunteer Movement in India 
during the Non-Cooperation Campaign, Indian History Congress proceed¬ 
ings, 1970. 

Menon, V. P., The Transfer of Power in India (paperback, Madras, 1968). 
Molesworth, G. N., Curfew on Olympus (London, 1965). 

Lord Mountbatten, Reflections on the Transfer of Power and Jawaharlal 
Nehru (Cambridge, 1968). 

Munshi, K. M., Pilgrimage to Freedom (2 vols., Bombay, 1967). 

Musgrave, P. J., Landlords and Lords of the Land, Modern Asian Studies, 
July 1972. 

Nanda, B. R., The Nehrus (London, 1962). 

Narendra Deva, Socialism and the National Revolution (Bombay, 1946) 
Nehru, J., Soviet Russia (Allahabad, 1928). 

- Letters from a Father to His Daughter (Allahabad, 1929). 

- Whither India? (Allahabad, 1933). 

- Glimpses of World History (2-vol. edition, Allahabad, 1934). 

- An Autobiography (London, 1936; Indian edition, 1962). 

- India and the World (London, 1936). 

- The Question of Language (Allahabad, 1937). 

- Eighteen Months in India (Allahabad, 1938). 

- Where Are We ?( Allahabad, 1939). 

- China, Spain and the War (Allahabad, 1940). 

- The Unity of India (London, 1941). 

- The Discovery of India (Calcutta, 1946). 

Nehru Abbinandan Granth, presented to Nehru on his sixtieth birthday (New 
Delhi, 1949). 

Norman, Dt, Nehru: The First Sixty Years (2 vols., London, 1965). 
Personality and Power ( B.B.G publication, 1971). 

Philips, C. R, and Wainwright, M.D. (ed.). The Partition of India (London. 
1970). 

Pyarelal, Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase (2 vols., Ahmqdabad, 1958). 
Reeves, P. D., The Politics of Order’, Journal of Asian Studies (Feb. 1966). 



382 


bibliography 


Sayeed, K. B., Pakistan, the Formative Phase (London, 1968). 

Siddiqi, M. H., ‘The Peasant Movement in Pratapgarh, 1920’, Indian Economic 
and Social History Review (Sept. 1972). 

Sitaramayya, B. P., Feathers and Stones (Bombay, 1946). 

Snow, E., Journey to the Beginning (London, 1959). 

Stark, F., Dust in the Lion s Paw (London, 1961). 

Tendulkar, D. G., Mahatma (8 vols., Bombav. 1951; repr. 1961). 
Thompson, E., Enlist India for Freedom! ( London, 1940). 

Tinker, H., Experiment with Freedom (Oxford, 1967). 

‘Jawaharlal Nehru at Simla, May 1947’, Modem Asian Studies (Oct. 
1970). 

Tuker, F., While Memory Serves (London, 1950). 

Venkataramani, M. S., and Shrivastava, B. K., The United States and the 
Cripps Mission’, India Quarterly (July-Sept. 1963). 

Whitcombe, E., Agrarian Conditions in Northern India , vol. 1 (Los Angeles, 
1972). 

Wingate, R., Lord Jsmay (London, 1970). 

Woolf, L., Downhill All the Way (London, 1967). 

Zakaria, R. (ed.), A Study of Nehru (Bombay, 1959). 

Lord Zetland, Essayez (London, 1957). 



Index 


ABC of Relativity (by B. Russell), 144 
Abdullah, Sheikh M., builds national move¬ 
ment in Kashmir, 322; arrested, 322-3; 
328, 360 

Achimota College, 201n 
Aden, 295 

Adhikari, G.,204n, 302n 
Afghan delegation, 40-41 
Afghanistan, 41; Amir of, 41; 68, 357 
Africa, 101, 104, 178n, 236; South, 32 
Aga Khan, 183, 234. 

Aga Khan’s Palace (Poona), 295 
Agra: city, 17, 60n; division, 46, 155; 

district, 157 
Ahmad, Muzaffar, 125n 
Ahmad, Zahur, 90 
Ahmadabad, Gandhi’s trial at, 64, 84 
Ahmadnagar, Jawaharlal imprisoned in, 
295-9 

‘Aid to Spain’ committee, 235 
Ajmal Khan, Hakim, 92 
Akali Dal, 75; Sahayak Bureau, 83 
Akalis, spread of agitation, 74-5; Jawa- 
harlal’s interest in, 75-6, 78; and the 
Congress, 75, 79, 83-4; 306 ( see also 
Sikhs) 

Akbarpur, 53 and n 
Albert Hall (London), 234, 235 
Alexander, A. V. (Earl Alexander of 
Hillsborough), 304; member of Cabinet 
Mission, 313; on Jinnah, 314; advises 
Ambedkar, 316; supports Jinnah, 318, 
325; suspicious of Gandhi, 320; 324 
Alexander, Earl, of Tunis, 20 
Alexandria, 234 
All, Asaf, 263*298 
Aii, Maulana Mahomed, 59, 61, 83 
Ali, Maulana Shaukat, 61; on Akalis, 83; 
92, 228 

Ali, Maulana Zafar, 120n 

Ali, Mubarak, 17 

Aligarh: district, 59n; town 95 


Alipore jail, Jawaharlal in, 186 
Allahabad district: conference, 37; Congress 
Committee, 37,165,166,168; 46,48, 59; 
civil disobedience in, 141-2; 157, 162,165, 
166, 167 

Allahabad division, 64, 93 
Allahabad High Court, 17n, 29, 70, 169 
Allahabad Municipal Board, Jawaharlal 
elected chairman of, 71; Jawaharlal's 
activity as chairman of, 88-96 
Allahabad Seva Samiti, 35 
Allahabad town: Jawaharlal born at, 16; 
Congress session at, 17n; theosophy at, 
19; 20, 23, 28n; Jawaharlal returns to, 
29; 31 and n, 32, 35; Khilafat agitation 
in, 37; Jawaharlal’s speech at, 40; 42, 
46, 47, 49n, 51, 52, 59, 60, 61; Mortal 
in, 63; Jawaharlal active in, 65, 66, 71, 
79, 84; Congress Committee, 83; com¬ 
munal tension in, 86-7, 88, 89, 92, 94, 
95, 117n, 118, 141, 142, 146n, 159, 
16 In, 169,170,176,182n; Improvement 
Trust, 94; Jawaharlal arrested at, 185, 
185n, 189,193,199,208n, 232n, 233n, 
238, 263n, 269, 277, 279, 327n 
All-India Congress Committee (AICC), 42, 
57, 71, 72, 73, 76, 84, 122, 127, 138, 
180,213,215,220,232,256,265,275, 
294, 295, 326, 328 

All-India Congress legislators convention, 
218 

All-India Federation, 133 
All-India Radio, 288 

All-India Socialist Conference, 205n (see 
also Congress Socialist Party Conference) 
All-India Spinners Association, Jawaharlal 
resigns from, 246 

All-India States’ People’s Conference, 244, 
309n, 321 

All-India Students’ Conference, 223 
^Vll-India Trade Union Congress, 120; Jawa- 
* hartal presides over! 131-3; 185 


383 



384 


INDEX 


All-Parties Conference, 86, 112, 208 
Almora, 67; jail, Jawaharlal in, 189-92, 
296; 193 
Amarnath, 32 

Ambedkar, B. R., meets Cabinet Mission, 
316; 361 

America, 104, 134, 260, 293 
America, Latin (South), 101; United States 
imperialism in, 103-4, 318 
Americans, 90, 234, 235n, 273, 283 
Amery, L. S„ 264 and n, 270, 276, 277, 
278, 282, 295, 301 

Amritsar: massacre at, 35-7; 75, 83, 84, 
119, 255 

Anand Bhawan, 38; searched, 66, 169; 190 
Andaman Islands, 236, 285 
Andhra (province), 230 
Andren, Judge, 26n 
Andrews, C. F., 184, 189, 193 
Ansari, M. A., 72n, 87, 126, 129, 139, 
172 

Arabia, 68 
Arabian Sea, 341 
Arabic, 17 
Arab League, 344 
Arabs, 232-3 

Ariel (by A. Maurois), 144 

Aryan Rule in India (by E. B. Havell), 68 

Aryans, 143 

Asia, 21, 37; Central, 68, 238, 344; 101, 
103,104,106,144,174,196,249; West, 
262; 274, 293; South-East, 302, 311, 
312; 308, 309, 344, 345 
Asia and Europe (by Meredith Townsend), 
21 

Asian-African Conference, 345 
Asian Organization, 345 
Asian Relations Conference, 344-5 
Asoka, 174, 231 

Assam, 229,232,304,306, 315, 316, 319, 
320,325,326,327, 329, 349, 351 
Assembly, Indian Legislative (Central), 35, 
130, 188, 232, 345 
Astor, Nancy, 236 
Atlantic Charter, 274 
Atlantic Ocean, 99 

Attlee, C. R., 189, 235, 253, 267n; criti¬ 
cizes Linlithgow, 278; 286, 303, 306, 
312, 330, 337-8, 340; fixes date for 
transfer of power, 342-3 
Auchinleck, Sir C.,*312n, 321 
Aung San, 308, 311 
Australia, 110, 276, 318, 344 


Austro-Hungarian Empire, 356 
Autobiography, An (by J. Nehru), 16, 17n, 
24n, 27; written, 189; 193; published, 
196; reviewed, 196-9; 234, 235, 273, 
298 

Avadh (Oudh), agrarian conditions in, 42-6, 
50-53, 59, 154-5 

Azad, Maulana A. K„ 71, 139; criticizes 
Jawaharlal, 222-3, 327-8; and the Muslim 
League in U.P., 226-8; 257, 262, 265, 
266; negotiates with Cripps, 279-80, 283, 
285, 287; 288, 294, 297, 298, 301, 314, 
315, 316, 320, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326 
Azara, President, 234 


Babar, 68 
Badenweiler, 193 
Bahadurganj, 37 
Bahraich district, 164 
Baldev Singh, 332, 338, 354 
Baldwin, R., 101, 105n 
Ballia, 9In 

Baluchistan, 113, 349, 351 

Banaras, 19, 55, 114n, 178n, 182n 

Bande Malar am, 20, 239 

Bandung, 345 

Bannerjee, S., 70 

Barabanki district, 157 

Barbusse, H., 101 

Barcelona, Jawaharlal at, 234 

Bardoli, 121 and n, 158. 161, 274, 276 

Bareilly jail, Jawaharlal in, 172-3, 296 

Barisal, 23 

Baroda state, 245 

Bastar state, 359 

Bastille, 265 

Belfast, 22 

Belgaum, Congress session at, 95 
Bengal, 14; agitation against partition of, 
20-21; 70, 85; Students’ Conference, 
115n; 126, 164, 167, 170, 181, 224, 
229,240,243; famine in, 253,302; 259, 
262,292, 304, 306, 307,315, 316, 319, 
320, 326, 330, 332-3, 337, 340, 341, 
343, 346, 350, 351, 354, 359 
Bengal Government: on Jawaharlal, 184; 
arrest Jawaharlal, 185; 186; inactive dur¬ 
ing riots, 330 
Bengalis, 185, 190 

Benn, W. Wedgwood, 145; on Jawaharlal 
146 * 

Bergen, 26 



INDEX 


385 


Berlin: jawaharlal in, 99,106; 191 
Bernier, F., 68 

Besant, Annie: recommends tutor for Jawa¬ 
harlal, 18; initiates Jawaharlal into 
theosophy; 19; starts Home Rule League, 
32; 32n; Jawaharlal’s loyalty to, 33, 34, 
68 

Bevin, E., 264 

Bhagavad Gita , 19, 68, 173, 271 

Bharadwaja, 16 

Bharat, 142 

Bhargava, G., 63n 

Bhave, V., 267 

Bhiti, 61 

Bhopal, Nawab of, 331 
Bhowali, 189, 190 

Bihar, l2, 227; Government, 245; 300. 
319,337 

Birkenhead, first earl, 85, 113 
Birla, G. D., 190, 209, 212 
Black Forest, 193 
Blanqui, L., 208 
Blatchford, R., 285 
Bodley Head, The, 197 and n 
Bolshevism, 41, 49, 82, 108, 115 
Bombay, 14; Congress session at, 20; 
Mrs Besant expelled from, 33; 48n, 72, 
73,85,87,117n; Government, 120, 154, 
229-30; Presidency Youth Conference, 
120; 131, 133, 139, 144, 158, 169 and' n. 
190, 208n, 210, 211, 212, 229, 243, 
248, 260n, 26In, 266n, 295, 300, 306, 
311,313,319,326,328, 334 
Bose, S. C., 122, 123; on Jawaharlal, 128, 
130, 188 and n, 242; 191, 193, 210. 
233; breaks with Congress, 242-3: 
Jawaharlal's attitude to, 243-4; 252, 289. 
307 

Brabourne, fifth baron, 230 
Bradley, B., 202, 203, 204, 208 
Brahmins, 17, 31, 46, 53 
Brailsford, H. N„ 196 
Bridgman, R., 101 
Brighton, 18, 195n 

Britain: holds India in own interests, 13*15, 
101, 102, 113; 2T2; Jawaharlal's attach¬ 
ment to, 28; 37, 54, 62; Jawaharlal on 
rule of, 66, 145, 174-5, 298; 70, 76, 
82 ; 83; and Hindu-Muslim relations, 85, 
86; and Russia, 106, 107; 110, 111. 
116, 117, 119, 128, 129, 133, 136, 139. 
140, 146, 148, 150, 167, 176, 179, 181, 
183. 188, 189. 191. 196. 197. 198. 201. 


209, 223, 229, 230, 231, 234, 236,237, 
238, 240, 244, 250, 251, 253, 254, 255. 

262, 263, 264, 265,269, 272, 274,276, 
277, 278, 282, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 
292, 294, 295, 303, 306, 307, 308, 314, 
320, 328, 330, 335, 341, 342, 344, 349, 
350, 352, 353, 356, 357 (see also 
England) 

British colonies, 90 

British Empire, 134, 136, 141, 212, 234, 

263, 269-70, 289, 294 
British goods, boycott of, 94, 247 
British Government: dislike Congress, 15; 

21; encourage Sikhs, 74-5; spurn Swaraj¬ 
ists, 85; shadow Jawaharlal, 110; 123, 
126, 128, 129; appoint labour commis¬ 
sion, 132; and vested interests, 134; 139. 
141, 146; offer terms to Congress, 149. 
150; 153, 183, 200, 219, 230, 231: 
foreign policy criticized by Jawaharlal, 
233, 235, 237, 238, 250-52; 236; war 
policy, 254; 264, 266, 269, 272; 1942 
proposals, 278; 290, 293, 294, 302, 311, 
312, 315, 326, 332, 334; interpret 
Cabinet Plan, 338; 340, 342, 344, 345, 
348, 350-51, 354 (see also War Cabinet) 
British imperialism, 100, 102-3, 104, 105, 
120, 121, 130, 185, 203, 206, 211, 212, 
224, 232-3, 236, 241 

British Military Administration (Malaya), 
309 

Brockway, F. (later Lord), 23-4, 24n, 26n, 
101, 235n 

Brooks, F. T., 18-19 
Brooks, Sydney, 22 
Brussels, 100-104, 106, 107, 108 
Bucher, Gen. Sir R., 330 and n 
Bukharin, N., 107, 108, 143 
Burdwaun, 315 

Burma, 219,276,277,285,291, 292,294, 
308, 309 

Butler, Sir H., 49n, 50, 5In, 55, 62 
Butler, Sir J., 20 
ByrSn, Lord, 20 

Calcutta, 14, 4Sn, 58, 115; Congress ses¬ 
sion at, 120-22; 123, 134, 168n, 185, 
186, 276, 277, 285, 288, 289n; killings 
in, 330, 331; 351, 354, 359, 362 
Cambridge, 19,22; Jawaharlal at, 22-5; 26. 
28, 29 72, 97 

Cambridge Fabian Society, 24 and n 
Cambridge Union Society, 22, 24 



386 


INDEX 


Cambridge University Mounted Infantry, 25 
Campbell, Sir R., 294n 
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H., 21 
Canada, 110, 116, 318 
Caroe, Sir O.: on Jawaharlal’s tour of 
NWFP, 333-4; 341, 345, 346, 348, 357 
Casement, Sir R., 33 
Cawnpore, see Kanpur 
Cecil, Viscount, 237 
Central Provinces, 33, 58, 313, 319 
Ceylon, 202, 276, 285 (see also Sri Lanka) 
Chamberlain, N., 238, 250, 251,253, 264, 
274 

Champaran, 42 
Chattopadhyaya, V., 124 
Chauri Chaura, 64 and n 
Chengtu, 249 

Cheoki, Jawaharlal arrested at, 142, 269, 
270 

Chhatari, Nawab of, 226,‘231 
Chiang Kai-shek, Gen., 249, 277, 278, 293 
Chiang Kai-shek, Madame, 249, 277, 290 
China, 50n, 54, 101; Jawaharlal on India’s 
relations with, 102-3, 249; 104, 132, 
232,233,236,237,243,245,246; Jawa- 
harial visits, 249; 250, 274, 276, 277, 
290, 291,292,293, 294,308,318 
China, Great Wall of, 172 
Chinese (in Malaya), 310, 311 
Christian missionaries, 92 
Chungking, 249 and n 
Churchill, Winston, 104, 178n; sends 
message to Jawaharlal, 250; 264, 270, 
272, 273,274, 276, 277, 278, 280, 282 
and n, 283, 284, 302, 303 
Civil Disobedience Inquiry Committee, 70 
Civil Lines, Station (Allahabad), 18, 94 
Qementis, 237 
'Cliveden Set’, 236 
Colombo, 147 
Comintern, 107, 126, 202 
Commonwealth of Nations, 343, 352, 353 
Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ Confer¬ 
ence (1949), 343 
Communal Award, 176, 214 
Communist Party (British), 102, 236 
Communist Party (Chinese), 1021,103,104, 
344 

Communist Party (Indian), 107, 125, 202; 

and Jawaharlal, 207, 208, 305; 302 
Communist Party (Soviet Union), 107,108 
Condorcet, 147 

Congress, Indian National, 14, 18; first 


attended by Jawaharlal, 20; Surat session, 
23; controlled by Moderates, 32; Lucknow 
session (1916), 33; 34, 35, 37; supports 
non-co-operation, 38; and the peasants, 42; 
48; Nagpur session, 49, 51, 53; 52, 54, 
55, 56, 59, 60, 62; division in, 70-72; 
74; and Akalis, 75, 76, 79, 83-4; 81; 
Kakinada session, 82-5; 87, 88, 8$, 90, 
92,93; Belgaum session, 95; 98,100,102, 
103,104; and League against Imperialism, 
105-6, 130, 139; and the Communists, 
107, 124; Madras session, 110-12, 121; 
113, fl4, 116; boycotts Simon Com¬ 
mission, 117; Calcutta session, 120-22, 
123; organization improved by Jawaharlal, 
122-3; 125; Jawaharlal elected president 
of, 126-8, 200; Lahore session, 127, 
133-7, 138; 128, 131; prepares for civil 
disobedience, 138, 141; 146; economic 
views of, 148-9,152-3, 178-9, 185, 188, 
213-14; concludes truce, 149-51; Karachi 
session, 152-3; 154, 155, 156, 157, 176, 
177, 178; Jawaharlal’s loyalty to, 180-81; 
and Muslims, 183; 184, 186, 190, 191, 
196; Lucknow session (1936), 199n, 
204-9; 202, 203, 211, 21-2, 216; Faizpur 
session, 217; 218, 219, 220, 222, 2fb\ 
and the Muslim League, 224, 238-41, 
257-9; 229, 231; and the States, 232, 
244-5, 359; Haripura session, 233; 235, 
236; Bose breaks Hway from, 241-4; and 
planning, 245-8; on the war, 250-53, 
254, 256-7; 261, 263, 267, 269, 272, 
274, 277, 278; and Cripps Mission, 
279-87; 293, 300, 301; at Simla con¬ 
ference, 303-4; contests election, 305-6; 
accepts right of secession, 306-7; 311, 
313,314; and Cabinet Mission, 315-25 ff; 
326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332; in 
NWFP, 335, 348; 336, 337, 338, 340; 
accepts partition, 342, 344; and I.N.A., 
345; 346, 351, 352; accepts final Plan, 
353-4, 356, 357; 361 

Congress Inquiry Committee (Amritsar), 
35,36 

Congress Socialist Party: formed, 187; 
Jawaharlal stays away from, 188* 208; 
Conference, 188n (see also All-India 
Socialist Conference); 205, 210 and n, 
214, 311 

Congress Working Committee, 72; Jawahar¬ 
lal resigns from, 73, 128-9; 105, 113, 
122, 129, 139; authorizes civil dis- 



INDEX 


387 


Congress Working Committee, —contd. 
obedience, 140; 150,151,153, 159, 161, 
164,166,170; on socialism, 187 and n; 
200, 203, 204, 205, 209, 210, 212, 
213,214,215; approves office acceptance, 
218, 220, 222; plans mass contacts, 225; 
227, 230, 233, 235n, 236n, 238, 241, 
242, 243; resolution on war, 252; 256, 
257, 259-60, 262, 263, 264; offers co¬ 
operation, 264-5, 274; 279, 285, 286, 
289; decides to resist Japan, 289-90; 293) 
arrested, 295; 296, 300, 301, 303, 314, 
323, 326, 328, 329, 331, 341, 343, 346; 
on NWFP, 348, 356 

Conservative Party (British), 153, 167, 
196, 253 

Coupland, Professor Sir R., 274 
Criminal Intelligence Department, 55, 63n, 
229 

Criminal Law Amendment Act, 230 
Cripps, Dame Isobel, 282n 
Cripps, Sir Stafford: friend of Jawaharlal, 
233; approves of Congress attitude to 
war, 253; Mission to India, 278-87; 288, 
289, 290, 29 In, 294; Member of Cabinet 
Mission, 313; 315, 316, 318, 319, 320, 
323, 324, 325, 330, 334, 342, 356 
Crowborough, 26 
Curzon, first marquis, 20, 80, 361 
Cyrenaicism, 24 

Czechoslovakia: Government, 237; Jawahar¬ 
lal visits, 237; 238, 250,260 

Dalton, H., 24 
Dandi, 140, 141 
Darwin, Sir C., 22 

Das, C. R.: favours council entry, 70-73; 

and Gandhi, 84-5; death, 85; 92, 219 
Dehra Dun, 58, 65 

Dehra Dun jail: Jawaharlal in, 173-7, 186- 
89; 270-73; 190 191n, 298 
Delhi, 14, 17, 31; Jawaharlal’s marriage 
at, 32; 36,67,74,76,81,86,87; Political 
Conference, 115; 123n, 128, 129, 130, 
133, 134, 136, 139, 151, 159n, 167, 
168; Chief Commissioner of, 185, 360; 
218,254,257,278,279,280 and n, 281, 
283, 288n, 289n, 294, 308, 313, 322, 
323, 324, 327n, 328, 333, 338, 342, 
344, 345, 359, 362 
Delhi, New, 144n, 270 
del Vayo, A., 234 
Desai, M., 215n 


de Valera, E., 173, 185 
Devanagari script, 239 
Didar Singh, Sardar, 75n 
Dimitrov, 203 

Discovery of India, The (by J. Nehru), 
191n, 273, 298-9 
Disraeli (by A. Maurois), 144 
Dobb, M., 175 

Dominion Status: Jawaharlal opposed to, 
110-13, 121, 134; favoured by Motilal, 
112, 120-21; accepted by Congress, 122; 
Viceroy’s statement on, 128; 129, 133, 
254,255, 261, 262, 278, 283, 294, 314; 
accepted by Jawaharlal, 352-3; 354, 356 
Dover,- 201 
Dublin, 22 
Duke, Sir W., 191n 
Dunkirk, 320 
Dutch, 308 
Dwivedi, I. N., 48n 
Dyer, General, 35 and n, 36, 37 


East India Company, 85 
Ebro, battle of the, 234 
Economist, The , 196 
Egypt, 344 

Eire, 318 (see also Ireland) 

Eka movement, 57 

Emerson, Sir H., 155; meets Gandhi, 156, 
157; 159; meets Jawaharlal, 160; 167 
Empire Day, 92 
Engels, F., 49n 

England, 21, 22, 27, 34, 64; Jawaharlal’s 
fondness for, 66; 68, 82, 99, 103, 111, 
117, 119; Gandhi leaves for, 161; 178, 
184; Jawaharlal visits, 200-202, 235-7; 
231, 238, 255, 285, 298, 308, 328 (see 
also Britain) 

English language, 76, 142, 191 
Englishman, The , 68 
Erskine, Lord, 219, 230-31, 250 
Etah district, 39 

Etawah district Congress Committee, 168 
Ethiopia, Indian sympathy for, 232 
Europe, 13, 21, 31, 37, 68, 81, 82, 87; 
visited by Jawaharlal, 97-109,233-8; 110, 
111, 124, 126,134,136,168,174,175, 
176, 178,179,188,190,191,193,194, 
196, 200,205,208* 232,243,245,249, 
250,253, 260, 262,263,265,266,272, 
302, 308 

Eyeless in Gaza (by A. Huxley), 216 # ^ ^ 



388 


INDEX 


Fabianism, 24 
Fabians, 188 

Faizpur, Congress session at, 217 

Falvey, Capt., 173 

Fanon, F., 54n, 151 

Faridkot, 321 

Farruksiyar. 17 

Fatchpur, 37 

Federal Court, 259, 331, 338, 346 
Fimmen, E., 101 
Finland, 260, 262 
Fischer, L., 175, 23 7 
Fletcher, Sir W., 24 
Foreign Office (British), 336 
Foreign Press Association, I44n 
France, 237, 238, 262, 265, 277 
Franco, Gen., 235 
Fraser, A., 6, 201n 
Free Press Journal , 48n 
French Government, 234, 235, 252, 308 
French language, 98, 104, 144 
Fursatganj, firing at, 50-52 
Fvzabad: district, 43, 53, 55; 49; division, 
peasant disturbances in, 53, 56 

Gandhi, Mrs Indira, see Nehru, Indira 
Gandhi, Mahatma, 32; relations with 
Jawaharlal, 34, 40, 60-61. 64-5, 81-3, 
96-7, 109, 112, 114, 121-2, 127. 136-7, 
140-41, 153, 158-9, 161-2, 176, 177, 
178-81, 184, 185, 186-7, 191, 197-8, 
202, 204, 208, 209, 212-13, 231, 236, 
241, 261, 275; frames satyagraha pledge, 
35; on Amritsar, 36, 37; non-co-operation 
programme of, 37-9; organizes peasants, 
42; 46; visits Pratabgarh, 48-9; 51, 53, 
54, 55, 56, 58. 59; calls off civil dis¬ 
obedience, 64; 66,69,70,75,79; released, 
84; and Swarajists, 84-5; and Hindu- 
Muslim relations, 85-6, 139-40, 225; 87, 
92, 93, 95, 98: on League against Im¬ 
perialism, 105-6; Lenin’s view of, 106; 
favours Dominion Status, 111-13: 115, 
116; on latbi-dnzrge against Jawaharlal. 
119; at Calcutta Congress, 120-22; 125n: 
selects Jawaharlal as Congress president. 
126-8, 200; 128 9, 131, 135, 136: starts 
civil disobedience, 138, 139, 140-41: 
arrested, 144; meets Liberals, 145-6; 

, reaches settlement with Irwin, 149-51: 
154, 155; on agrarian problem in U.P., 
156, 157-8; talks with officials, 156, 157. 
159; leaves for England, 161; 164. 165. 


166,167,168, meets Hoare, 169; arrested 
on return, 170; 173; released, 177; 182, 
183, 184, 188, 190, 196n, 205, 209, 
210, 215, 216, 218, 219; rebuffs Jinnah, 
224; 230; and States, 232, 244; 236, 
239; and Bose, 241-4; and planning, 
246-8; and the War, 250, 252, 253, 254. 
255,256-7,259-60; meets Viceroy, 261-2; 
against civil disobedience, 263, 264; 265; 
for indiv-'dual civil disobedience, 267; 268, 
269, 272, 273, 274, 277; dislikes Cripps 
proposals. 279-87: attitude to Japan, 289: 
campaigns against British, 291-4; arrested, 
295; 296. 297, 300: released, 301; plans 
civil disobedience, 303; 305; disliked by 
Wavell. 313. 320; 314: meets Cabinet 
Mission. 315; on the Mission Plan, 320; 
324, 325, 326; and Wavell, 331, 334, 
335; 343, 346; on NWFP, 356; 357. 
358, 360; fasts in Calcutta, 362 
Ganga (riser), 16, 84 
Garibaldi (t>y G. M. Trevelyan), 21 
Garrett, H L O., 75n 
Geneva: Jawaharlal in, 98-9, 238; 194n 
George VI. 276 

German Social Democrat Party (Czecho¬ 
slovakia), 237 

Germany. 178, 193, 234. 236, 237. 240, 
243, 250. 251, 260, 263, 265, 288, 292, 
332 

Ghose, R. B., 29 
Gide, A.. 200 

Gidwani, A T.: with Jatvaharlrl in Nabha, 
76-9; 79. 83 
Gilbert, M., 234n 
Girni Kamgar Union, 133 
Gita, see Ilhagavad Gita 
Gladstone, W. F... 13. 14 
Glimpses of World Historv (by J. Nehru). 

68. 147, J74-5, 299 
Gokhale. G K., 21 
Gold Coast (Ghana), 20In 
Gollancz, V.. 234 and n 
Gonda disfiict. 164 
Gorakhpur. 7In, 269, 270 
Government of India Act (1919). 256 
Government of India Act (1935): jawaharlal 
criticizes, 200, 206. 207, 210, 214, 217, 
218, 219. 220; 229, 232, 244, 256, 264 
Great Indian Peninsular Railway Union, 
131; G.LP Railwayman , 131n; 133 
Greece 147 

Gujarat 42.121 ?r*4 n. 140. 146. 154, 161 




INDEX. 


399 


Gulmarg, 305n 
Gumba, 32 
Guru-Ka-Bagh, 75, 78 
Gwyer, Sir M., 259 

Hague, The, Gourt at, 318 
Haig, Sir H., 170, 171 
Hailey, H. R. C., 46 and n 
Hailey, SirMalcolm.onAkalis, 75; 119,125, 
129; on Jawaharlal, 156, 167, 185; on 
economic crisis in U.P., 156-7, 158, 166, 
167-9; meets Gandhi, 157; refuses to meet 
Jawaharlal, 159, 163; opinion of Willing- 
don, 159; writes to Gandhi, 161; 178, 
185 

Haksar, Urmila, 3 In 
Halifax, third earl, see Lord Irwin 
Hallett, Sir M., 270, 273, 300 
Haq, Fazlul, 224, 240, 259 
Hardoi, 57 

Harijans, 176, 178, 182. 183, 184, 229, 
335 

Haripura, Gongress session at, 233 
Harrow school: Jawaharlal at, 19-22; 28,30, 
72, 97 

Hasan, Sir W., 223 
Hatta, M., 100 
Hauner, Dr M., 243n 
Hebrew University, 344 
Hedin, Sven, 68, 175 
Heidelberg, Jawaharlal in, 99 
Hijli detention camp, 164 
Himalayas, 150 

Hindi, 30n, 31, 65, 90, 95, 142, 191, 
199n, 230, 300n 

Hindu, The , Jawaharlal’s articles in, 107-8 
Hindu Boarding House (Allahabad), 176 
Hinduism, 85, 200 

Hindu Mahasabha: criticized by Jawaharlal, 
182, 183; 361 

Hindus, 17n; relations with Muslims, 37, 
85-6,98, 126, 139-40, 182-3, 195, 238, 
257, 259; 60, 68; and Sikhs, 74-5; 83, 
84, 88, 134, 175, 188, 224, 266n, 304, 
313, 315, *16, 317, 322, 324, 325, 
330, 331, 337, 342, 348, 353 
Hindustan Hamara , 92 
Hindustani, 216, 239 
Hindustani Seva Dal, 115, 122 
Hindu View of Life, The (by S. Radha- 
krishnan), 147 
Hiraduuid, W., 212n 

Hitler, A„ 237, 238, 251, 260, 272, 332 


Hoare, Sir S. (Lord Templewood): meets 
Gandhi, 169; on action against Congress, 
170; 178n; on Jinnah, 223 
Holy Roman Empire (by J. Bryce), 68 
Home Department (Government of India): 
expels Jawaharlal from Mussoorie, 41; 
considers action against Jawaharlal, 123-4; 
283 

Home Rule, 34 

Home Rule Leagues, 32, 33, 42 
Hopkins, Harry, 283 
House of Commons, 201, 235, 238 
House of Lords, 80 

Houses of Parliament, 250 (see also West¬ 
minster Palace) 

Hunter Committee of Inquiiy, 36 
Husain, Sir Fazl-i, 145 
Husain Ahmad, Maulana, 226 
Huxley, A., 191, 216 
Huxley, J., 175 
Hyderabad, 14/351, 359, 360 

v 

Idylls of the King (by Tennyson), 68 
Imperial Assembly (1877), 14 
In and Out of Prison, see Autobiography 
Independence Day, 138, 352 
Independence for India League: established, 
113; purpose, 113-14; failure, 115-16; 
119, 120, 123, 126, 127, 188 
Independent, The : founded, 34; criticizes 
government, 35, 50, 51, 52; on Khilafat, 
37; closed down, 39; 47n, 48n, 55; pro¬ 
secuted, 61-2 

Independent Labour Party (British), 102, 
251 

India: held by Britain in own interests, 13; 
unified with British assistance, 15; 
nationalist activity in, 20; 21-2; and Ire¬ 
land, 22; 28,40; Afghan delegation in, 41; 
65, 68, 69, 73, 81, 82, 85, 88, 92, 93, 
97,98,99,100; on exploitation by British 
of, 101,102; and China, 102-3,249; 104, 
105; and Russia, 106,108; 109,110,112, 
114, 115, 116, 117,119, 120, 121, 129 
132, 133, 134, 135,136, 139, 141, 143 
144,145,146,148,150,152, 174,175, 
178,187, 188,191,193,196,197,199, 
201,202,204,205, 206,207,208,211; 
toured by Jawaharlal, 215-16; 218, 230, 
231,232,234,235, 236, 238, 243,244; 
planning for, 245-8J 250,"254, 255, 259, 
260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266,269. 
272, 273, 274, 278, 279, 282, 289, 291, 



390 


INDEX 


India, —contd. 

293,294,295 ; culture of, 299; 302, 308, 
311, 314, 316, 318, 320, 322, 323, 328, 
332, 337, 341, 342, 343, 345, 346, 349, 
350, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 360, 
362 

India Government of: support Indians in 
South Africa, 32; intern Mrs Besant, 33; 
take action against political agitation, 35; 
expel Jawaharlal from Mussoorie, 41; 
69; and Nabha administration, 77*80; 
116; consider arrest of Jawaharlal, 119-20, 
123*5; prosecute Communists, 124; take 
action against labour movement, 131; 
avoid action against Congress, 138-41; 
authorize arrest of Jawaharlal, 141; 144, 
145; on agrarian problem in U.P., 159, 
162, 1634, 166, 167, 168, 169; take 
action against Congress, 170; approve re¬ 
lease of Jawaharlal, 178; desire arrest of 
Jawaharlal, 184-5, 186; fear release of 
Jawaharlal, 188, 189, 190; consider 
arrest of Jawaharlal, 210; 211, 212; ban 
Left Book Qub, 234; 236; and • Jinnah, 
240, 242; 245, 247, 248; war policy, 
254, 256-7; strike at Congress, 267; re¬ 
lease Congressmen, 273; Jawaharlal bitter 
against, 275; take action against Congress, 
291, 295; 296; crush rebellion, 300-301; 
consider arrest of Jawaharlal, 302-3; 306, 
307; stage I.N.A. trial, 308; 311, 323 
Indian Civil Liberties Union, founded by 
Jawaharlal, 208 

Indian Civil Service, 23, 91, 348 
Indian Conciliation Group, 202n 
Indian Defence Force, 32, 33 
Indian Independence Act, 358 
Indian Independence League (Malaya), 309 
Indian National Army, 307-8, 309-11, 320- 
21, 345-6 

Indian National Service, 123 

Indian Ocean, 285 

India Office, 156, 315, 316n, 337' 

Indo-China, 308 
Indonesia, 308, 309 
Inner Temple, 25, 26 
Instigation Ordinance, 167 
Intelligence Bureau, 124, 184, 195n 
International, Second, 132 
International, Third, 107, 125, 132, 203 
International Brigade, 234 
International Congress against Colonial 
Oppression and Imperialism, 100-104, 
108 


International Labour Organization, 245 
International Postal Union, 356 
Iqbal, Sir M., 92 
Iradatnagar, 170 
Iran, 68 

Ireland, Jawaharlal visits, 22 a ^ s 9 Eire) 
Irwin, Lord (Earl Halifax): errs on Simon 
Commission, 116; statement on Domi¬ 
nion status, 128, 134; meets Gandhi, 
129; 133; avoids arresting Gandhi, 140; 
145; reaches settlement with Gandhi, 
149-51; 153, 155, 167, 169, 170, 219, 
236 

Islam, 175, 225, 228, 229, 239 
Islamic Institute, 23n 

Ismay, first baron, 333 and n; on date of 
transfer of power, 343; 344; on Jawa¬ 
harlal, 345; 346, 348, 350; to Jawaharlal 
on broadcast, 355 
Ispahani, M, A., 313, 327n 
Italy, 68, 178, 232, 234: Government of, 
240; 243 


Jaito, 76 
Jaksch, W., 237 

Jallianwala Bagh (Amritsar), 36, 65; Day, 
90, 141 

Jamiat-ul-Ulema, 223, 226 
Japan, 21, 83, 233, 234, 236, 243, 247, 
276; Jawaharlal plans to resist, 276-7, 
288-90; 285, 291, 292, 294, 295, 307, 
308 

Jaunpur, 46 
Java, 309 
Jawahar Day, 147 

Jayakar, M. R.: negotiates with Congress, 
144-6; J51, 198,213 
Jean Christopbe (by R. Rolland), 144 
Jehangir, Sir C., 21 In 
Jenkins, R., 287n 
Jews, 193, 232-3, 236, 243 
Jha, A., 18n 
Jha, G., 18 
Jharia, 120 

Jinnah, M. A.: boycotts Simdn Commission, 
116; 145, 222; resumes leadership of 
Muslim League, 223; early policy, 223-4; 
on 1937 elections, 224-5; and U.P. 
politics, 227-9; attacks Congress, 238- 
40; encouraged by British, 253-4, 301; 
negotiates with Congress, 257-9; 276, 
279,287n; gains following, 302;-support¬ 
ed by Wavell, 304, 3>8, 334-5; 305, 307, 



INDEX 


391 


J'Hinah, M.A.-co»td. 

311; meets Cabinet Mission, 313-14, 
316, 317, 318, 324; on Kashmir, 322; 
325; withdraws from Han, 327-8; 329, 
330, 333,335,337,338,340,341, 342, 
346, 352, 354, 357, 358; on governor- 
generalship, 358-9 
John Bull, 201 

Johnson, Louis, 283, 285, 288, 290, 294 

Johnston, W. J., 120 

Jones, T., 235 

Joshi, N. M., 131 

Journal da Geneva, 99 

Junagadh state, 360 

Juhu, 84 

Kailas (mountain), 68 
Kaira, 42 

Kakinada, Congress session at, 82-3 
Kamala Nehru Memorial Hospital, 271 
Kanpur (Cawnpore), 16, 18; hartal in, 63; 
86; district Congress Committee, 168; 
175, 178n, 185, 231 

Karachi: Congress session at, 152-3; 214, 
262 

Karnatak, 169 

Kashmir, 17n, 20, 32,68, 322-3; Maharaja 
of, 322,323, 328, 360; 328, 360 
Kashmiri Pandits, 17, 18, 31 
Kaul, Kailas, 60n 
Kaul, Kamala, see Nehru, Kamala 
Kaul, Raj, 17 
Kaul-Nehrus, 17 
Keats, J., 68 
Kerensky, A. F., 203 
Keyserling, H., 147 

Khaliquzzaman, C., 139; negotiates with 
Congress. 226-8, 229; 240 
Khan, Abdul Gaffar, 170, 224, 316. 348, 
356, 357 

Khan, Nawab Ismail, 227 
Khan, Liaqat Ali, 307n, 335, 337, 341 
Khan, Sir Sikandar Hyat, 239. 240, 253-4, 
257, 263, 301 
Khan, Zafrulla, 301 and n 
Khan Sahib, Or, 348, 357 
Kher, B. G., 230, 23 In 
Khilafat campaign, 37-8, 41, 48, 58-9, 64, 
75, 83, 85, 88 

Kidwai, R. A., 187, 210, 227, 228 
Kinnaird, Emily, 133n 
Kisau Congress, 49 
Kisan Hitkarini Sabbe, 47-8 
Knox, K. N., 91 


Koran, 68,228 

Kosambi, D: D., 299n 

Kripalani, J. B., 210, 227, 346 

Kropotkin, Count, 147 

Kshatriyas, 46 

Kumbh Mela, 84 

Kunming, 249 

Kunzru, H. N., 176 

Kuomintang, 102, 103, 104, 249, 344 

Kurmis (in Pratabgarh), 46 

Labour Government (British), 85, 235n, 
3.12 

Labour Party (British), 85,102; Jawaharlal’s 
poor opinion of, 111, 251,303; 131,189, 
201, 202, 236, 251, 264, 267, 274 
Ladakh, 268 

Lahore, 18, 36, 75, 117, 123n; Congress 
session at, 127, 129, 133-7, 138, 352; 
212n, 223n, 266n, 327n, 341, 351, 359 
Laithwaite, Sir G., 254 
Lajpat Rai, 117 
Lamb, Charles, 296 
Lansbury, G., 101 
Laski, H. J„ 175, 261, 278 
Lausanne, 193, 202, 204 
Laval, P., 265 

Leader, The, 32n, 34n, 48n, 68; advises 
Jawaharlal, 69-70; 145 
League against Imperialism: formed, 104; 
Jawaharlal elected to executive committee 
of, 105; and the Congress, 105-6; 120, 
124,125,128; criticizes Jawaharlal, 130- 
131,139; 133; expels Jawaharlal, 203 
League, Muslim:/in U.P., 222, 225-9 ff; 
Jinnah resumes leadership of, 223; ir. 
1937 elections, 224-5; attacks Congress, 
238-41; 244; British sympathy for, 253- 
254, 301, 303-4; Congress approach to, 
257-9; 262, 263, 266, 273, 278, 286, 
291; gains support, 302, 305; in 1945 
elections, 304-5; 307; supports I.N.A., 
308,345; 311, 313, 314, 315, 317, 318, 
319, 320, 322, 324, 325, 327,329, 330, 
331,332; in NWFP, 333,348; 334,335; 
in interim government, 336, 337; 338, 
340, 341,342,344,346,349,353,354, 
356 

League of Nations, 105, 238,245 
Left Book Club, 233, 234, 235 
Lenin, V. L, 82; on imperialism, 104; on 
Gandhi, 106; on national movements, 
106-7; Jawaharlal impressed fcy, 108-9, 
115, 174; 171 



392 


INDEX 


Letters from a Father to bis Daughter (by 
J. Nehru), 143, 175 
Levin, B., 308n 
Liberal Party (British), 21 
Liberal Party (Indian): Jawaharlai critical of, 
100, 144-5, 198; boycotts Simon Com¬ 
mission, 116; 128, 212 
Libya, 293 

Light of Asia (by E. Arnold), 68 
Lindbergh, C., 99 

Linlithgow, second marquis, 217; considers 
Jawaharlal's arrest, 219; 229; on Bombay 
ministry, 230; meets Jawaharlai, 236-7, 
239,240; on Gandhi’s reaction to the war, 
250; war policy, 253, 254; meets Jawa- 
harlal, 254; corresponds with Jawaharlai, 
255-6; 257, 258; meets Gandhi, 261-2; 
encourages League, 263; 276, 277, 278; 
attitude to Cripps Mission, 279-84ff, 286; 
291, 301, 302, 305 
Lister, Gen., 234 
Living Age, 175 
Lloyd George, D., 144 
Lockhart, Gen. Sir R., 357 
London, 20, 26; Jawaharlal’s stay in, 26-8; 
29,85,99,153,157,158,159,161,164, 
166,169,170,175,178; Jawaharlai visits, 
200, 201, 235-7, 337-8; 218, 219, 238, 
251, 281, 324, 331, 334, 342, 346, 349, 
350, 354 

London School of Economics, 26 
Lord’s Cricket ground (London), 26 
Lothian, eleventh marquis, 234, 236 
Lowes Dickinson, G., 175 
Lucknow, 21n; Congress (1916) at, 33; 
University, 47; Jawaharlal’s speech at, 49- 
50; 57,61; hartal in, 63; 65n; jail, Jawa¬ 
harlai in, 67,270,271; 86,97; Jawaharlai 
^/-charged in, 117-19; 120,121, 147n, 
155, 157; district, 157; 159n, 161, 167; 
Congress (1936) at, 199n, 204-9, 217; 
215, 223; Pact, 223 and n, 224; 227, 
232n, 240n, 270, 274n 

MacDonald, Ramsay, 75n, 149, 150 
Madras, 14,31; government, 33,229,230- 
231; 7In; Congress session at, 110, 111, 
113, 121, 352; 209, 210n, 219, 250, 
276, 291, 292, 306, 313, 319 
Madrid, 233 
Maeterlinck, M., 147* 

‘Magpie and Stump’ (Cambridge debating 
society), 22 


Mababharata , 175 
Mahmud, of Ghazni, 175 
Mahmud, Syed, 23n, 139, 144, 268, 298 
Mahmudabad, Raja of, 226 and n, 313 
Mahmuduzzafar, 234n 
Majlis (society at Cambridge). 23 
Malaviya, K. D., 78 and n, 9 j, 115n 
Malaviya, M. M., 35,42,47, 84,149, 161, 
208 

Malaya, 219,308; Jawaharlal’s visit to, 309- 
11; 314 

Malkani Rajputs, 229 
Malraux, A., 200 
Manasatovar (lake), 68 
Manchester Guardian, on Jawaharlai in 
prison, 69; on Bengal Government’s 
charge, 184; approves of Congress at¬ 
titude to war, 253, 264 
Manchester Guardian Weekly, 175 
Manki, Mulla of, 333 
Mao Tse-tung, 54, 249 
Marx, Karl: Jawaharlai influenced by, 101, 
136,174, 198, 202, 207; 103, 104, 115, 
188, 208, 299 
Malayan, 32 
Maulvi, 266n 
Maurois, A., 144, 175 
Maxton, J., 130 
Mears, Sir G., 70 

Meerut: trial at; 124; 125,130; district, 157; 
205n 

Menon, V. K. Krishna: meets Jawaharlai, 
202; 212, 218, 336, 337, 349, 352 
Meredith, George, 68 
Meredith Townsend, 21, 22 
Mexico, 101, 102, 103 
Milville, Sir E., 344, 346, 354 
Misra, G. S., 47 
Michison, Naomi, 196 
Modem Review, The, 68, 175; Jawaharlal’s 
unsigned article in, 232 
Mogul, 17 

Mohenjo-Daro, 147, 299 
Molotov, 336 
Montagu, E. S., 63n, 70n 
Montana (Valais), 99 
Morgan, C., 175 
Morison, J. L., 133n 
Morris, William, 24 
Morris-Jbnes, W. H., 356 
Moscow: Jawaharlai in, 107-8; 124, 132, 
336 * 

Mountbatten, first earl, 255; and famine in 



NDEX 


Bengal, 302; meets Jawaharlal in Singa¬ 
pore, 309*11; appointed Viceroy, 340; 
myth built around, 342*3; 344, 343; 
frames Plan Balkan, 346*31; revises plan, 
331; secures acceptence of Dominion 
Status, 332*3; 334; on referendum in 
in NWFP/356-8; on governor-general¬ 
ship, 358*9; and the States, 359-61; 
concerned With ceremonial, 361; sworn 
in as governor-general, 362 
Mountbatten, Countess, 310, 342 
Mudie, R. F., 165, 166 
Muenzenberg, W., 100, 101 
Muktesar, 76 
Multan, 216n 
Munich, 237,238 
Munshi, K. M., 198, 229-30 
Munshiganj, firing at, 50-52 
Muslim Conference (Kashmir), 322 
Muslim League, see League, Muslim 
Muslims, 17,21; relations with Hindus, 37, 
85-6, 98, 126, 139, 140, 182-3, 195, 
224-5, 238-41, 257; 48, 60, 64, 83, 84, 
88, 113, 116, 117, 134, 144, 145n, 
223, 229,253, 254,259, 263, 266, 267, 
279, 302, 304, 305-6, 307, 313, 315, 
316, 317, 319, 320, 321,322,.324, 325, 
330, 331, 333, 334, 335,337, 342, 343, 
349, 351, 353 

Mussolini, B., 82, 170, 178n, 199, 232, 
238, 251,272 

Mussoorie, 29; Jawaharlal expelled from, 
40-41; 46, 60n, 143, 271 
Muttra district, 162 
Mysore, 232, 245 

Nabha State: Jawaharlal enters, 74, 76; 
Jawaharlal arrested and tried in, 76-8; 
Maharaja of, 76, 79; Jawaharlal leaves, 
79-80; 83,89,172 

Nagpur: Congress session at, 49,51,53; 73, 
74; Trade Union Congress at, 131, 133 
Nahas Pasha, 234 
Naidu, Padmaja, 60n 
Naidu, Sarojini, 98 and n 
Naini jail, Jawaharlal in, 142*6, 147-50, 
172, 177, 189, 296 
Naini Tal, 61,67, 157, 162 
Nanak, Guru, 75 
Nankana, 75 
Napoleon, 174 

Narayan, Jayaprakash, joins Working 
Committee, 210 


m 

Narendra Deva, 188n; joins Working 
Committee, 210; 215,227,298 
Nation, 68 ,175 

National Agriculturist Party (U.P.), 225-6, 
239 

National Conference (Kashmir), 322,360 
National Council for Civil Liberties 
(London), 236 

National Harold, started by Jawaharlal. 

232 and n, 252, 260 
Nationalist Party, 209 
National Planning Committee, 245-8, 271 
Nazis, 178, 193, 234, 237, 238, 243n, 
250, 251, 252, 263, 264, 266, 269, 
272, 289, 292, 302 
Nehru, Ganga Dhar, 17 
Nehru, Indira (Mrs Indira Gandhi), 98, 
99, and n, 110, 143, 170, 173, 190, 
191,194,233,261,267,268, 279 
Nehru, Jawaharlal: early life, 16-19; initiated 
into theosophy, 19; at Harrow, 19-22; 
interest in politics, 20-22; extremism, 
22-3; conformism, 23-4; at Cambridge, 
22-5; joins Inner Temple, 25; adventure 
in Norway, 26; in London, 26-8; attach¬ 
ment to Britain, 28; practises law in 
Allahabad, 29; marriage, 30-32; adven¬ 
ture in Kashmir, 32; public activities, 
32-3; still moderate, 34; relations with 
Gandhi, 34, 40, 60^1, 64-5, 81-3, 87, 
96-7, 109, 112, 114, 128, 140-41, 150, 
153, 158-9, 161-2, 176, 177, 178-81, 
186-7, 191, 197-8, 202, 204, 208, 209, 
212-13, 236, 241, 261, 275; signs 
satyagraba pledge, 35; on Amritsar, 
35-37; on Khilafat, 37; supports non-co- 
operation, 37-40; expelled from Mus¬ 
soorie, 40*41; and peasants in U.P., 42-57 
ff; on non-co-operation in U.P., 58; 
replies to Government order, 6i-2; 
arrested (1921), 63; released (1922), 
64; arrested (1922), 66; speech at trial, 
66-7; jail life, 67-9, 76, 142-6, 147-50, 
172-7, 186-92, 270-73, 296-300; re¬ 
leased (1923), 69; rejects suggestion of 
ministership, 70; on Swaraj Party, 70-73, 
74; in Nabha, 74-9; does not return to 
Nabha, 79-80; Secretary of Congress, 
83-4; courts arrest at Sangam, 83-4; and 
Hindu-Muslim relations,' 85-7; 182-3; 
209, 224-5, 238*41; differences with 
Motilal, 87; Chairman of Afiahabgd 
municipality, 88-96; in Europe, 97-9; on 



394 


INDEX 


Nehru, Jawaharal, —contd. 
religion, 99; at Brussels Congress, 100- 
104; influenced by Marxism, 101, 104-5, 
108, 198, 202; on China, 102-3, 249; 
on 17. S. imperialism, 103-4; and League 
against Imperialism, 105-6, 130-31, 139; 
visits Russia, 106-9; opposes Dominion 
status, 110-13;, formulates economic 
programme, 114, 148-9; founds Inde¬ 
pendence for India League, 114-16; on 
Simon Commission, 116-17; lathi- 
charged, 117-19; arrest considered, 119- 
120,123-4;atTradeUnion Congress, 120, 
131-3; at Calcutta Congress, 120-22; 
and Meerut case, 124-5; communist view 
of, 126; elected Congress president, 
126-8, 200; signs Delhi manifesto, 128-9; 
presides over Lahore Congress, 133-7; 
prepares for civil disobedience, 138-9, 
141; arrested, 142;on talks with Liberals, 
144-6; released, 146; rearrested, 147; 
opposes settlement, 149-51; father's 
death, 150,151,176; at Karachi Congresr, 
152-4; and agrarian problem in U.P., 
154-71 ff; arrested, 169; released, 177; 
shares attached, 182; arrested, 184-5; 
on parole, 187-8; and the socialists, 188; 
and Kamala, 189, 190-91, 194-6, 198; 
in England, 200-202; and Communists, 
200-202,207,305; at Lucknow Congress, 
204-9; preaches socialism, 210-14; 
election campaign, 214-16; at Faizpur 
Congress, 217; on office acceptance, 
218-20; 222; and Jinnah, 223-4, 257-9; 
and U.P. politics, 226-9; and provincial 
ministries, 229-31; on the States, 232, 
244-5, 359-61; in Europe, 233-8; and 
Bose, 241-4; and planning, 245-8; visits 
China, 249; on the war crisis, 250-56; 
critical of Russia, 260-61; on civil dis¬ 
obedience, 261-4; sympathy for Allies, 
265; on British attitude, 266-7; expects 
arrest, 267-9; arrested, 269; released, 
273; on Congress policy, 274; plans to 
resist Japanese, 276-7, 288-90; and 
Cripps Mission, 280-87; writes to Roose¬ 
velt, 290; accepts Gandhi’s policy, 291-3; 
hopes for U.S. intervention, 294; arrested, 
295; 300, 301; bitterness on release, 302; 
arrest considered, 302-3; at Simla, 303; 
election campaign; 305; on elections, 
306-7; on I.N.A., 307-8, 320-21, 345-6; 
in Malaya, 309-11; and naval mutiny, 


311-12; 313; and Cabinet Mission, 314- 
315, 316, 317, 318; in Kashmir, 3 22- 
323; interprets Plan, 326-7; negotiates 
on interim government, 329-31; meets 
Jinnah, 330, 335; in interim government, 
331-4; on League joining government, 
334-5, 340; evolves foreign policy,336-7; 
341; accepts partition, 343-4; at Asia 
Relations Conference, 344-5; rejects Plan 
Balkan, 346-51; accepts Dominion Status, 
352-3; broadcasts, 354-5; on referendum 
in NWFP, 356-8; on Governor-general¬ 
ship, 358; forms cabinet, 361; sworn in 
as prime minister, 362 
Nehru, Kamaia (Kamala Kaul): married to 
Jawaharlal, 31-2; first sign of illness, 87; 
in Europe, 97-100; 110; arrested, 149; 
173; illness of, 186-92ff, 193; and 
Jawaharlal, 189, 190-91, 194-6, 198; 
leaves for Europe, 190; death, 194; 199, 
200, 298 

Nehru, Motilal: in Allahabad, 16-18; 
takes family to Britain, 19; 19n; on 
agitation in Bengal, 20-21; too moderate 
for Jawaharlal, 22-3; his hopes for 
Jawaharlal, 26; helps Jawaharlal in 
legal practice, 29; on Jawaharlal’s 
marriage, 30-31; 33. 34; founds The 
Independent, 34; and Amritsar Inquiry, 
34-6; dislikes non-co-operation, 37-8; 
52, 56, 61-2; arrested, 63; 67; supports 
council entry, 70-71; in Nabha, 77-8; 
79-80, 84-5; differences with Jawaharlal, 
87; 97, 98, 99, 100; visits Russia, 106; 
110; drafts constitution, 112-13; 115, 
116, 118; at Calcutta Congress, 120-22; 
124, 125, 126-7, 129, 140, 142; joins 
Jawaharlal in jail, 144; negotiates with 
Liberals, 144-6; released, 146; death, 
150; 151, 172, 176, 191n, 196, 197, 
219, 271 

Nehru, Swaruprani: dotes on son, 16; 30 
and n; 67, 150, 172-3, 177, 186; death, 
233 

Nehru Report, 113; debated by Congress, 
120-22; 128, 129,133, 140 
New Deal, 248 

New Economic Policy (Soviet), 108 
New Ireland, The (by S. Brooks), 22 
New Leader, 175 
New Republic, 175 
News Chronicle, 255n, 256n, 274n 
New Statesman, 68, 175, 235 




INDEX 


395 


New York, 175,199n, 291n 
New Zealand, 344 
Nizam (of Hyderabad), 351 
Northbrook, first earl of, 13 
North-West Frontier, 104,170,227, 253 
North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), 
113, 144; Government, 144; 224, 229, 
232, 263; Congress majority in, 305-6; 
315, 316, 319, 320, 326; Jawaharlal’s 
tour of, 333-4; 341,346,348; referendum 
in, 348, 351, 352, 354, 356-8; 349, 350 
North-West Provinces, 17n, 18 
Norway, 26 
Nyasaland, 295 

O’Dwyer, Sir M., 119 

Officers Training Corps (at Harrow), 19 

Olivier, Lord, 77, 80 

On Education (by B. Russell), 98 

Orissa, 285, 319 

Ostend, 99 

Oudh: Rent Act (1886), 43, 57, 61; Kisan 
Sabha, 48 (See also Avadh) 

Oxford, 25, 26, 233 


Pacific (Ocean), 290 
Padmore, G., 236 
Page, D., 23n 
Page Arnot, R., 126 

Pakistan, 222, 278, 279, 291, 302, 306, 
307, 313, 314, 316, 318, 319, 324, 325, 
328, 333, 337, 338, 341, 346, 351, 354, 
355, 356, 358, 359, 360 
Pakistan resolution (1940), 262, 263 
Pal, B. C., 23 
Palestine, 232-3 

Palme Dutt, R.: on Jawaharlal at Cambridge, 
23; on Kamala Nehru, 195; talks with 
Jawaharlal, 202-4; 208,305 and n 
Pandit, R, S., 173,272 
Pandit, Vijayalakshmi, 107, 23 In, 254n, 
296 

Panikkar, K. M., 83 

Pant, G. B.: ^/-charged, 118, 119; 155, 
162, 172, 226, 227, 228, 229, 231, 296 
Paris: Jawaharlal visits, 99, 200, 237; 238 
Parliament (British), 116, 117, 128, 129, 
'278, 321, 332 
‘Pasionaria, La’, 235, 237 
Patel, Vallabhbhai. 73,127,149,154,164, 
166, 167, 169; arrested, 170; 190; on 
Jawahatfal, 212, 215, 327 : 230, 262, 


263, 265, 298, 301, 311-12, 314, 316, 
326,328, 336, 343, 352, 353, 360, .361 
Patel, Vithalbhai, 129 
Pathans, 229, 333,357 
Patna, 33n 

Pattabhi Sitaramayya, B., 210, 297-8 and 
298n 

Patwardhan, A., 210 
Persian, 17 

Peshawar, 107, 144,. 341 
Pltain, Marshal, 265, 279 
Pethick-Lawrence, first baron: member of 
Cabinet Mission, 313; 317, 318, 319, 

320, 321, 323, 324, 325, 335 
Philby, St J., 22 

Phillips, W., 253n 
Pinnell, L. G., 279 
Pioneer , 21, 168, 175, 254 
Poland, 252, 260 

Political Department (Government of India), 

321, 322 and n, 323, 332, 351, 359-61 
Pollitt, H., 101 

Ponsonby, Lord, 235 

Poona, 84,120,145, 146,179, 263n, 265, 
295, 314 
Porter, Sir L., 55 
Postal Peons Union, 58 
Prague, 237, 238 

Prasad, Rajendra, 38n, 212, 213, 254, 257, 
258, 263 
Pratabgarh, 54n 

Pratabgarh district: agrarian unrest in, 43-9, 
53;127 
Pratap, 52n 

Presidency division (Bengal), 315 
Press Act, 32 

Prince of Wales, visit to India of, 61, 63 
Princes, Indian: dependence on British, 14; 
Jawaharlal on, 135, 185, 321; 254, 301, 
320,321,332,340,359,360-61 (see also 
Indian States) 

Public Safety Bill, 130 
Punjab, 35, 38, 41, 4a 65, 76, 93, 117, 
119, 139, 145n, 164, 212, 214n, 224, 
239 and n, 245,253,304,305,306, 307, 
315,316, 319, 340, 341, 343, 346,348, 
351, 354, 359 

.Punjab Government: on Amritsar Inquiry, 
36; oppose Akalis, 75; propose to arrest 
Jawaharlal, 138 

Queen's Club (London), 26 
Quetta, 37n 



396 


INDEX 


Raddiffe, Sir C, 358 
Radhakrishnan, S., 147 
Rae Bareli, 48; peasant disturbances, in, 
50-52; Jawaharlal at, 51-3; 142, 157, 
159n 

Rae Bareli, district conference, 60-61; Con¬ 
gress Committee, 164,168 
Raipur, 142 

Rajagopalachari, C„ 41; against council 
entry, 72, 73; 83, 190, 198; on Jawahar¬ 
lal, 212,215,243; resolved to take office, 
219,220; as chief minister, 230-31; 250, 
257, 265, 266, 274, 275, 276, 279, 280, 
291, 302, 305, 315, 324, 325, 330, 331 
Rajkot, 244 
Rajputs, 229 
Raleigh, Sir W., 147 
Ramakrishna Mission, 195 
Ramayana , 175 

Ram Chandra, Baba, 46, 53, 55 
Ramgarh (Bihar), 262n 
Ramgarh (U.P.), 61, 62 
Rangoon, 277, 311 
Rao, Raja, 193 
Rao Maharajsingh, 29 
Ravi (river), 138 
Rawalpindi, 270 

Reading, first marquis, 62 and n, 63; on 
Jawaharlal, 70; on non-co-operation, 72; 
85, 92-3 

Red Fort (Delhi), 308 
Reed, Sir S., 196 
Republican Congress, 113 
Reuters, 276 
Ripka, Dr, 237 
Risorgimeffto, 66 

Roads to Freedom (by B. Russell), 94n 
Rolland, R., 144 
Rome, 199 

Roosevelt, Eleanor, 196, 277 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 248, 253n, 260, 
272, 276, 277, 278, 282-3; sends mes¬ 
sage to Jawaharlal, 290; 294 
Rosenberg, 301 

Round Table Conference, 149, 151, 155, 
157, 158, 161, 165, 167. 179, 183. 
211-12, 223 
Rowlatt Bills, 35 
Roy, B. C„ 172 

Roy, M. N.: on national movements, 106-7; 

124, 152, 188n, 218-19 
Royal Air Force, mutinies, 311 
Royal Commission on Labour, 132 


Royal Indian Air Force, on hunger-strike, 
311 

Royal Indian Navy, mutiny of, 311-12 
Russell, B., 54, 98, 144 
Russia, Soviet (Soviet Union), 41,93, 100; 
and China, 103; 104, 10 s # Jawaharlal 
visits, 106-9; 115, 132,200; Jawaharlal’s 
admiration for, 202, 245; 206, 207, 233, 
234, 237, 238, 250; JawaharlaTs criti¬ 
cism of foreign policy of,,251, 260-62; 
274, 276, 291, 292, 305 
Russia, Tsarist, 21, 49 

Saharanpur, 36 

St John Ambulance Association, 32 
Sambhal, 85 

Sampurnanand, 72n, 188n 
Sangam (Allahabad). 84, 199 
Sanskrit. 18 

Santanam, K., with Jawaharlal in Nabha, 
76-9 

Sapru, T. B., 29, 32n, 62 and n; boycotts 
Simon Commission, 116; 129; nego¬ 
tiates with Congress, 144-6; 151. 189, 
198, 213 

Satyamurti, S., 209 

Savonarola, 184 

Saxena, M., 65n, 226 

Scheduled Castes, 176; Federation, 316; 

324,325.329,335,361 
Scotland Yard, 201 
Seditious Meetings Act, 59 
Shahpur district, 164 
Shakespeare, W., 144 
Shastri, L. B., 215n 
Shaw, G. B., 24, 147 
Shelley, P. B., 68 
Sherwani, T. A. K.,139, 161 
Shikarpur, 61 
Siddiqi, A. R., 240 
Sikh League, 75 

Sikhs: encouraged by British, 74-5; join 
Akali movement, 75; 76, 78, 83. 93, 
134, 315, 322, 324, 329, 330, 331, 337, 
338,351,353,354 (see also Akalis) 
Simla, 61, 62, 97, 110, 146, 157, 159, 
162, 168, 169; conference at, 303-4, 
313; 316, 322, 324, 348, 349, 350 
Simon, Sir J., 116, 118 
Simon Commission: boycotted, 116-17; in 
Lucknow, 117-19; 2Q$ 

Sind, 113, 304, 305, 306, 315, 316, 319. 
329, 332.337, 349, 351, 353 



INDEX 


397 


Singapore, Jawaharlal's visit to, 309-11 

Sinha, Sachidananda, 33n 

Sinn Fein, 22 

Sino-Soviet alliance, 104 

Sitapur, 57,65, 7 In 

Snow, E., 290 

Socialist League (Britain), 233 
Socialist League of Youth (India), 126 
Sokhta, Manzar Ali, 87 and n 
Soong, T. V., 294n 
Soram, 159n 

Soviet Russia (by J. Nehru), 106-7, 124 
Soviet Union, 272, 315, 318, 336, 344 
(see also Russia, Soviet) 

Spahlinger, Dr, 99 

Spain: civil war in, 214, 217, 232, 233; 

Jawaharlal visits, 234-5; 237, 243, 250 
Spectator, The, 175, 196n, 279n 
Spengler, O., 143 

Sri Lanka, 156, 195 (see also Ceylon) 
Srinagar, 328 
Sri Prakasa, 268 

Stalin, 103,107, 108, 245, 251, 260, 282n 
Stark, Freya, 303 and n 
States, Indian, 100, 128, 135, 179; Jawa- 
harlal on, 232. 244-5, 359-60; 262, 279, 
323, 332, 349. 351. 360-61 (see oho 
Indian Princes) 

Statesman, The, 175. 197n 
Stephani, Dr, 99 
Strong, L. A G., 175 
Suhrawardy, H. S., 330, 332, 350 
Sultanpur district, 43, 46 
Surat, 23 
Swaffer, H., 201 
Swaraj Bhawan, 16 

Swaraj (Swarajist) Partv: formed, 71-3; 74. 
84-5, 87, 96, 98, 100, 111, 116, 186, 
219 

Sweden, 318 
Swinburne, A. C., 68 

Switzerland: Jawaharlal in, 97-9; 190, 193, 
261, 267 

Sylhet district, 351, 354, 356 

Tagore, R., 175, 189, 244, 273 
Tajuddinpur, 55 
Tanda, 54n 

Tandon, P. D., 47, 88, 161n 
Tata's (Bombay firm). 87 
Tawney, R. H., 175 
Tennyson, Alfred, 68 
Thakurdas, P., 209n 


Thompson, Edward, 170n, 175 and n, 196, 
228n, 252-3 
Thompson, E. P., 24n 
Thompson, J. P., 36 
Tilak, B. G., 21 and n, 32, 33, 34,92 
Tilak Day, 92 
Tilak Swaraj Fund, 39, 65 
Tilak Vidyalaya (Allahabad), 28n 
Times, The, 149, 196 
Toller, E., 101 
Toynbee, A. J., 175 
Trafalgar Square (London), 235 
Travancore, 351, 359, 360 
Trevelyan, G. M., 21 
Tribune, The (London), 201 
Trinity College (Cambridge), 20; Jawaharlal 
at, 22-5; Boat Club, 25 and n 
Tripuri, Congress session at, 242 
Trotsky, L., 107, 147 
Tshushima, 21 
Tuker, Gen. Sir F., 308 
Tunis, 20 
Turkey, 37 
Turnbull, F. F., 279n 


Unao district Congress committee, 168 
Unchahar, 53 

Unionist Paitv (Punjab), 145n, 224, 239, 
253. 304. 306, 

Union Jack, 181 
tinned Nations, 318, 337 
United Provinces, 14. 29, 32; South Africa 
committee. 32; Provincial Conference, 
32, 81, 114n, 169; 33, 34; Political 
Conference, 34n, 36, 60, 86, 157; 37; 
Kisan Sabha, 42, 48; peasant unrest in, 
42-56 ff, 154-71 ff; Legislative Council, 
49n, 69; non-co-operation in, 58-64 ff; 
66, 71, 85, 95; Municipal Conference. 
95; 1*14; Simon commission visits, 
117-19; 123, 139, 148; 178, 183; 
ministry formed in, 222, 225-8; 229, 
231, 239,248, 250,255,259, 267,268, 
273, 313, 319, 329, 337 
United Provinces Congress committee: ap¬ 
proves non-co-operation, 38; organizes 
swadesbi movement. 60; prepares for civil 
disobedience, 63,64; 66, 72, 73, 83, 88, 
I40n, 141, l48-9; # on agrarian problem, 
155-71 ff; against office acceptance, 218: 
and the Muslim League, 226-8; 231, 264. 
296, 300 



398 


INDEX 


United Provinces Government, 37, 41, 50- 
51,58; consider action against Jawaharlal, 
61-2; 64, 66, 69, 92, 96, 97; and Simon 
commission, 117-19; arrest Jawaharlal, 
141-2, 146-7; agrarian policy of, 154-* 
171 ff; treatment of Jawaharlal in prison, 
173, 270-71; release Jawaharlal, 177-8; 
184, 185, 187, 189; support landlords, 
225-6; 245, 277, 296 
United States, 13,83,90,103*4, 178,253; 
Jawaharlal hopes for support from, 260, 
290,293, 294; 261, 274, 276, 287, 291, 
295, 308, 315, 318, 344 
Unity Conference, 86 
Upanishads , 19 

Urdu, 17, 31, 68, 90, 194n, 195n, 239 
266 

Vansittart, Sir R„ 235 
Vedanta, 299 

Viceregal Lodge (Simla), 303 
Vichy, 274 
Victoria, Queen, 14 
Vidyarthi, G. S., 175 
Vietnam, 308n 
Villiens, Sir E., 284n 

Wafd party (Egypt), 234 
War Cabinet, 264; sanctions arrest of 
Jawaharlal, 268; approves release, 273; 
and Cripps Mission, 278-87 ff; authorizes 
arrest of Working Committee, 295 (see 
also British Government) 

Wardha, 213, 252, 255, 269, 287 
Watson, F., 215n, and 216n 
Wavell, first earl: unhelpful attitude, 280- 
82, 283; assists Jinnah at Simla con¬ 
ference, 303-4; dislikes Congress, 304, 


313; 305, 306, 317n, 318; suspicious of 
Gandhi, 320, 321;' 322, 323; negotiates 
interim government, 324-5,328-9, 330- 
331; 332; brings League into government, 
334-5; 336, 337; replaced, 340; 341, 
344, 345, 348, 359 

Webb, Beatrice, 206; on meeting with 
Jawaharlal, 235-6; on Congress attitude 
to war, 253; on Gandhi and Jawaharlal, 
272 

Webb, Sidney, 206, 235 

Wells, H. G., 175 

West Indiesf 168 

Westminster Abbey, 250 

Westminister Palace, 207 

What I Believe (by B. Russell), 98 

Whewell Court (Trinity College), 24 

Whipping Act, 300 

Whitehall, 270 

Wilkinson, Ellen, 101, 184n, 196, 237 
Willingdon, first marquis, 156n; Hailey’s 
opinion of, 159; meets Jawaharlal, 159- 
160 and 160n; 167,168,169; on Gandhi, 
170; on Jawaharlal, 183; 184, 187, 223, 
344 

Wilson Johnston, 76-9 ff 
Wood, Dr J., 19 and n 
Woolf, L, 175, 201-2 
Workers and Peasants Party, 126 
Wyatt, W., 306n 

Yeravda jail, 87,. 145, 146, 151 
Young, D., 254 and n 
Young India, 56-7, 112 

Zetland, second marquis, 219; meets Jawa¬ 
harlal, 235, 236; 240, 253, 254, 259 
Zoji-la, 32 










