CHAPTER XVIII 


ON THE WAY HOME 


a n D h i sent apologies to persons and groups in almost every 



free country of the world; he could not visit them because 


VJ he had work to do in India, On the way home, he stopped 
for a day in Paris. Sitting on a table, he addressed a large meeting 
in a cinema theatre, and then took the train for Switzerland, 
where he stayed five days with Romain Rolland at Villeneuve, 
at the eastern end of Lake Leman. 

Rolland, whose Jean Christophe is a literary masterpiece of the 
twentieth century, had come under the influence of Count Leo 
Tolstoy, author of the finest novel of the nineteenth. Rolland 
made a shrewd comparison between Tolstoy and Gandhi. ‘With 
Gandhi/ he said in 1924, 'everything is nature — modest, simple, 
pure — while all his struggles are hallowed by religious serenity, 
whereas with Tolstoy everything is proud revolt against pride, 
hatred against hatred, passion against passion. Everything in 
Tolstoy is violence, even his doctrine of non-violence.’ 

Tolstoy was storm-tossed, Gandhi calm and equable. Gandhi 
could not have fled from his wife, or from anything. The market 
place in which he sat was crisscrossed by hundreds of millions of 
persons with their wares and carts and cares and thoughts, but 
he sat still and there was silence in him and around him. Gandhi 
would have suffocated in an ivory tower or on an Olympian 
height. 

Tagore was different. ‘But where am I in a great crowd, 
squeezed in at all sides?’ Romain Rolland quotes Tagore as say¬ 
ing. ‘And who can understand the noise I hear? If I hear a song, 
my sitar can catch the melody, and I can join the chorus, for I 
am a singer. But in the mad clamour of the crowd, my voice is 
lost, and I become dizzy.’ 

Rolland and Gandhi had never met before 1931. Rolland knew 
Gandhi from long conversations with Tagore and G. F. Andrews 
who had lived for fifteen years with Tagore. He had also read 
Gandhi. Like Tagore, Rolland was a singer. He was the author 


3i7 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


of books on Beethoven, Handel, Goethe and Michelangelo. He 
wrote a book on Ramakrishna, the Hindu mystic. 

Rolland regarded Gandhi as a saint. In fact, he wrote in his 
1924 biography of the Mahatma, ‘Gandhi is too much of a saint; 
he is too pure, too free from the animal passions that lie dormant 
in man.’ Rolland and Tagore were afraid of the evil in human 
beings. Tagore feared that when Gandhi lit bonfires of foreign 
cloth he would kindle uncontrollable emotions in men; Rolland 
agreed; Andrews agreed. 

This estimate omits Gandhi’s faith in the basic goodness and 
corrigibility of man which is the essence of Gandhi. In South 
Africa, Gandhi believed that the ordinary, illiterate, indentured 
labourer in a mine or on a farm could rise to the purity and re¬ 
straint required of a Satyagrahi. He trusted the peasants of back¬ 
ward Bardoli to resist provocation and violence. His trust exalted 
them. Gandhi did not regard nobility as a monopoly of the great 
man or the artist or the elite. Gandhi’s uniqueness lay in working 
with common clay and finding the soul-spark in it. 

Before Gandhi’s.arrival on December 5th, Rolland had received 
hundreds of letters connected with the Mahatma’s visit: an Italian 
wanted to know from Gandhi what numbers would win in the 
next national lottery; a group of Swiss musicians offered to 
serenade Gandhi under his window every night; the Syndicate of 
the Milkmen of Leman volunteered to supply ‘the King of India’ 
with dairy products during his stay. Journalists sent question¬ 
naires and camped around Rolland’s villa; photographers laid 
siege to the house; the police reported that the hotels had filled 
with tourists who hoped to see the Indian visitor. 

The two men, Gandhi sixty-two, Rolland sixty-five, met like 
old friends and treated one another with the tenderness of mutual 
respect. Gandhi arrived on a cold rainy evening with Miss Slade, 
Mahadev Desai, Pyarelal Nayyar and Devadas. The next day 
was Monday, Gandhi’s day of silence, and Rolland delivered a 
ninety-minute talk on the tragic moral and social state of Europe 
since 1900. Gandhi listened and pencilled some questions. 

On Tuesday, they discussed Gandhi’s trip to Rome. He wanted 
to see Mussolini and other Italian leaders as well as the Pope. 
Rolland warned him that the Fascist regime would exploit his 
presence for its sinister purposes. Gandhi said he would break 

318 


ON THE WAY HOME 


through the cordon they might throw around him. Rolland 
suggested that he put certain conditions. Gandhi replied that it 
was against his convictions to make such arrangements in advance. 
Rolland persisted. Gandhi said, ‘Then tell me, what is your final 
opinion on my plan to stop in Rome ? 5 Rolland advised him to 
stay with some independent persons. Gandhi promised and kept 
the promise. 

Rolland asked Gandhi to comment on his remarks about 
Europe. Gandhi said it showed him how vast had been Rolland’s 
suffering. Speaking English which Rolland’s sister translated into 
French, Gandhi said he had learned very little from history. ‘My 
method is empiric , 5 he explained. ‘All my conclusions are based 
on personal experience . 5 This, he admitted, could be dangerous 
and misleading, but he had to have faith in his own views. All 
his trust was in non-violence. It could save Europe. In England, 
friends tried to show him the weakness of his non-violent method; 
‘but even though the whole world doubt it, I will continue to 
believe in it 5 . 

The next two days Gandhi spent in Lausanne where he 
addressed a public meeting and in Geneva where he spoke m 
Victory Hall. At each he was heckled for hours by atheists and 
others. He answered them in perfect calm, ‘not a muscle of his 
face twitching 5 , Rolland wrote. 

On December ioth, they resumed their conversation. Rolland 
recalled Gandhi’s statement at Geneva: ‘Truth is God . 5 He gave 
Gandhi a brief sketch of his life, his childhood, how cramped he 
felt in the small French town, how he became a writer and 
struggled with the problem of the truth in art. ‘If it is correct 5 , 
Rolland said, ‘that “Truth is God 55 , it appears to me that it lacks 
one important attribute of God: joy. For — and on this I insist — 
I recognize no God without joy . 5 

Gandhi replied that he did not distinguish between art and 
truth. ‘I am against the formula, “Art for art’s sake”. For me, 
all art must be based on the truth. I reject beautiful things if, 
instead of expressing truth, they express untruth. I accept the 
formula “Art brings joy and is good” but on the condition I men¬ 
tioned. To achieve truth in art I do not expect exact reproductions 
of external things. Only living things bring living joy to the soul 
and must elevate the soul . 5 


3 X 9 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Rolland did not differ but he stressed the pain of searching for 
truth and for God. He took a book from his shelf and read from 
Goethe. Rolland later confessed that he thought Gandhi’s God 
found pleasure in man’s sorrow; Rolland was trying to modify 
this Gandhian view. 

They talked about the perils of another war. Tf one nation 
possessed the heroism to submit without answering violence with 
violence,’ Gandhi declared, ‘it would be the most effective lesson. 
But for this an absolute faith is necessary.’ 

Rolland: ‘Nothing should be done by halves, no matter whether 
it is bad or good.’ Rolland’s sister, Madeleine, and Miss Konda- 
chev, a Russian secretary, were taking notes. Neither recorded 
Gandhi’s reaction to this assertion. 

The last day, December nth, Rolland requested Gandhi to 
deal with some questions submitted by Pierre Monatte, the editor 
of a Paris magazine called The Proletarian Revolution . In response 
to one query, Gandhi asserted that if labour was perfectly 
organized it could dictate conditions to the employers; ‘labour is 
the only power in the world’. But Rolland interposed that the 
capitalists might divide the workers; there might be scabs; ‘then 
the conscious minority of labour must set up a dictatorship of the 
proletariat and force the mass of labour to unite in its own 
interest’. 

‘I am absolutely opposed to that,’ Gandhi affirmed. Rolland 
dropped the subject and quickly introduced several others: non¬ 
violence in relation to criminals, etc. etc., and ‘What do you call 
God? Is it a spiritual personality or a force.which rules over the 
world?’ 

‘God,’ Gandhi replied, ‘is not a person . . . God is an eternal 
principle. That is why I say that Truth is God . . . Even atheists 
do not doubt the necessity of truth.’ 

The last evening Gandhi asked Rolland to play some Beethoven. 
Rolland played the Andante from the Fifth Symphony and, as an 
encore of his own accord, Gluck’s ‘Elysian Fields’. 

The theme of the Fifth Symphony is considered to be man’s 
struggle with fate, man’s harmony with fate, the brotherhood of 
man. The second movement, the Andante, is melodious and 
suffused with tender lyrical emotions, quiet nobility and optimism. 
Rolland chose it because it came closest to his concept of Gandhi’s 

320 


ON THE WAY HOME 


personality. It is gentle and loving. In the Gluck piece one almost 
hears the angels singing to the strains of the flute. It is celestial 
music, full of purity and clarity. The Gita might be set to it. 

Rolland was frail and had just recovered from bronchitis, but 
he insisted on taking Gandhi and his party to the railway station. 
There they embraced, as they did when they first met; Gandhi 
pressed his cheek against Rolland’s shoulder and threw his right 
arm around Rolland; Rolland touched his cheek to Gandhi’s 
head. ‘It was the kiss of St. Dominic and St. Francis,’ Rolland 
said. 

The Italian government wished Gandhi to be its guest and 
made the corresponding preparations. Gandhi politely refused 
and stayed with General Moris, a friend of Rolland’s, who had 
lived in India. The day of his arrival, the Mahatma went to see 
the Duce. An official communique said the interview lasted 
twenty minutes. Gandhi’s companions recall that it lasted only 
ten minutes. Gandhi could establish no psychological contact 
with Mussolini. ‘He has the eyes of a cat,’ Gandhi said later; 
‘they moved about in every direction as if in constant rotation. 
The visitor would totally succumb before the awe of his gaze like 
a rat running directly into the mouth of a cat out of mere fright. 

‘I was not to be dazed like that,’ Gandhi testified, ‘but I noticed 
that he had so arranged things about him that a visitor would 
easily get stricken with terror. The walls of the passage through 
which one has to pass to reach him are all overstudded with 
various types of swords and other weapons.* Mussolini’s office, 
too, Gandhi noted, was hung with weapons, but, he added, ‘he 
keeps no arms on his person’. 

The Pope did not see Gandhi. Several members of Gandhi’s 
entourage thought the Holy Father might have been acting in 
deference to II Duce’s wishes, but they did not know. Some sug¬ 
gested that the interview failed to materialize not only on account 
of Mussolini’s relations with the Vatican but also because of 
Anglo-Italian relations; Gandhi, after all, was an anti-British 
rebel. 

Gandhi was taken to the Rome-Naples rugby match and to a 
parade of the young Balilla Musketeers where he was received 
with a salvo of cannon. He was more interested in the Vatican 

321 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

Library, and spent two happy hours in St. Peter’s. In the Sistine 
Chapel he stood before Christ on the Cross and wept. ‘One can¬ 
not help being moved to tears,’ he said to Mahadev Pesai. If he 
could have lingered ‘two or three months’ in the museums and 
observed the statues and paintings every day, Gandhi wrote to 
the ashram, he might have an opinion that was worth while. 
Even then, ‘I am hardly qualified as an art critic.’ 

Romain Rolland, however, had directed his attention to art. 
‘I do not think that European art is superior to Indian art,’ 
Gandhi boasted. ‘Both these arts have developed on different 
lines. Indian art is based entirely on the imagination,’ he wrote 
to a friend; he was probably recalling the Indian statues with 
many arms and heads. ‘European art is an imitation of nature. 
It is therefore easier to understand but turns our attention to the 
earth, whereas Indian art, when understood, tends to direct our 
thoughts to Heaven.’ 

Then he checked himself. ‘This is only for a person like you,’ 
he cautioned. ‘I attach no importance to these views. It may be 
my unconscious partiality for India or perhaps my ignorance that 
makes me say this.’ 

To Gandhi, art had to be spiritual. ‘True beauty’, he said in 
his autobiography, ‘consists in purity of heart.’ 

‘Jesus [he wrote in Young India ] was to my mind a supreme artist, 
because he saw and expressed Truth . . . But I know that many 
call themselves artists, and are recognized as such, and yet in 
their work there is absolutely no trace of the soul’s upward surge 
and unrest . . . True art is thus an expression of the soul . . . All 
true art must help the soul to realize its inner self. In my own 
case, I find that I can do entirely without external forms in my 
soul’s realization. I can claim, therefore, that there is truly suffi¬ 
cient art in my life, though you might not see what you call works 
of art about me. My room may have blank walls. And I may 
even dispense with the roof, so that I may gaze upon the starry 
heavens overhead that stretch in an unending expanse of beauty 
. . . Is a woman with fair features necessarily beautiful? . . . 
Socrates, we are told, was the most truthful man of his time and 
yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in Greece. To 
my mind he was beautiful because he was struggling after truth 
. . . Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and beauty and 

322 


ON THE WAY HOME 


goodness will then be added unto you . . . True art takes note 
not merely of form but also of what lies beyond. There is an art 
that kills and an art that gives life. True art must be evidence of 
the happiness, contentment and purity of its authors.’ 

Before Gandhi left Rome he sought out Tolstoy’s daughter. 
As he sat spinning on the floor of her apartment, Princess Maria, 
a daughter of the King of Italy, entered with a lady-in-waiting, 
and brought the Mahatma a large basket of figs. 

‘Her Majesty the Queen packed them for you,’ said the lady- 
in-waiting. 

Nobody exploited Gandhi’s presence for pro-Fascist purposes 
although the Giornale d'Italia did print an interview with him 
which he never gaye by a journalist he had never seen. Altogether, 
from Swiss border to the Italian heel, Gandhi spent forty-eight 
hours in italy. At Brindisi, he bade farewell to his two Scotland 
Yard men, but not to Professor and Mrs. Edmond Privat. 

The professor and his wife were friends of Romain Rolland and 
accompanied Gandhi from Villeneuve to the Italian frontier. As 
they were saying goodbye they remarked that they would like 
some day to visit India. Gandhi asked why they didn’t come 
along with him. They replied that they could not afford it. 

‘You probably think in terms of first and second class,’ Gandhi 
said, ‘but we only pay ten pounds each for our passage on deck, 
and once there, many Indian friends would open their houses to 
you.’ 

The Privats counted the money in their pockets and purse and 
decided to go. At Rome they bought bedding, sent telegrams to 
the University of Neuchatel, where the professor taught, that he 
would not be back for his lectures, and on December 14th boarded 
the S.S. Pilsna at Brindisi with the Gandhi party. Two weeks later 
they landed at Bombay. 

A mammoth crowd cheered Gandhi’s arrival on the morning 
of December 28th. ‘I have come back empty-handed,’ he told 
them, ‘but I have not compromised the honour of my country.’ 
That was his summary of how India had fared at the Round 
Table Conference. But things were blacker than he thought. 


M.G. 


x 


3*3 


 

