CHAPTER XII 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

I n the latter part of 1924, the world was subsiding into post¬ 
war ‘normalcy’. The Dawes Plan undertook to stabilize 
German economic and political conditions. The big European 
powers were granting diplomatic recognition to Soviet Russia. 
Except in south China, where Chiang Kai-shek had an alliance 
with Moscow, the threat of Bolshevism was on the ebb. Goolidge 
and complacency presided over America. England had experi¬ 
enced her first Labour government. The British Empire, seriously 
menaced in 1919-23 by Sinn Fein in Ireland and Near East 
revolts, was becalmed in stagnant waters. 

India, too, relaxed — and pursued the luxuries of division and 
inaction. The passions of the post-Armistice-post-Amritsar 
period were spent. Doubts and despondency had replaced faith 
and fighting spirit. Perhaps Gandhi’s non-violence dampened 
the ardour of belligerent nationalism. His twenty-one-day fast 
had failed. It impressed many and altered the attitude of some, 
but Hindu-Moslem tension continued unabated. 

Gandhi did not consider this a time for a contest with Britain. 
It was a time for mending home fences. His programme was: 
prepare morally for future political opportunities; concretely — 
Hindu-Moslem unity, the removal of untouchability and spread¬ 
ing the use of homespun or khadi or khaddar. In his propaganda 
for homespun, Gandhi charged the British with killing India’s 
village industries to help the textile mills of Lancashire. Otherwise, 
his writings and speeches during 1925, 1926 and 1927 were 
remarkable for an almost complete absence of denunciations of 
British rule. He more often criticized Indians. ‘I am not in¬ 
terested’, he said, ‘in freeing India merely from the English 
yoke. I am bent upon freeing India from any yoke whatsoever.’ 
For this reason, he could never get excited about participation in 
the legislative or municipal councils: ‘Swaraj’, he affirmed, ‘will 
come not by the acquisition of authority by a few but by the 
acquisition by all of a capacity to resist authority when it is 

247 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


abused.’ A few hundred Indians were elected to councils, and a 
few thousand Indians, mostly townspeople, enjoyed the franchise 
to elect them. In such circumstances, Indians might become 
tyrants unless the masses were taught to discard docility. 

The intellectuals remained unconvinced. ‘Though they like 
me personally’, he wrote, they ‘have a horror of my views and 
methods.’ He was not complaining; ‘I have simply stated the 
fact with the object of showing my limitations.’ 

Educated Indians, he stated, were splitting into parties. ‘I 
confess my inability to bring these parties together’, he wrote on 
September 2nd, 1926. ‘Their method is not my method. I am 
trying to work from the bottom upward,’ and he warned them 
that if they did not support his khadi policy ‘educated India will 
cut itself off from the only visible and tangible tie that binds them 
to the masses’. 

Gandhi put his trust neither in the once-hallowed tradition of 
Congress petitions and ‘prayers’ to British officialdom nor in the 
current Swaraj party’s desire to become parliamentarians and 
officials. Bu having failed to carry the conviction home, ‘I must 
no longer stand in the way of the Congress being developed and 
guided by educated Indians rather than by one like myself who 
had thrown in his lot entirely with the masses and who has 
fundamental differences with the mind of educated India as a 
body.’ 

An American clergyman once asked Gandhi what caused him 
most concern. ‘The hardness of heart of the educated,’ Gandhi 
replied. 

He still wished to influence the intellectuals, he confessed, ‘but 
not by leading the Congress; on the contrary, by working my way 
to their hearts, silently so far as possible, even as I did between 
1915 and 1919’. He regretted having been dragged into the 
political leadership of Congress; he was retiring from it. 

Loud protests rent the Indian air when he first announced his 
intention of doing so after coming out of jail in 1924. ‘I do not 
like, I have never liked,’ he said in reply, ‘this reliance on me for 
everything. It is the very worst way of managing national 
affairs. The Congress must not become, as it has threatened to 
become, one man’s show, no matter how good or great that one 
man be. I often think that it would have been better for the 

248 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

country and for me if I had served the full term of my imprison¬ 
ment.’ 

Nevertheless, he was persuaded to take the presidency of 
Congress for 1925; his friends argued that his aloofness would 
split Congress between those who followed his constructive 
programme and the Swaraj party which advocated political 
work in the councils. He exacted a price: the wearing of khadi as 
a strict condition of membership in the Congress party; where 
possible, Congress members should spin each day. 

Someone said his retirement from politics would cost him his 
moral authority. ‘Moral authority’, was the unequivocal retort, 
‘is never retained by an attempt to hold on to it. It comes without 
seeking and is retained without effort.’ 

In truth, his moral authority was increasing irrespective of 
anything he did or did not do. It was fed by the Indian soil and 
Indian mentality. Throughout 1925 he travelled, continuously, 
across the 1500-mile width and the 1900-mile length of India, 
visiting most provinces and many native states. He no longer 
lived nor travelled like a poor man, he wailed; his co-workers 
made him travel in a second-class compartment instead of third 
where forty or fifty perspiring people sat squeezed together in an 
unpartitioned space. He acquiesced because in third class he 
could not write his articles, or rest, or take an occasional nap. 

Wherever he went, he was besieged by hordes. ‘They will not 
leave me alone even when I am taking my bath,’ he wrote. At 
night, his feet and shins were covered with scratches from people 
who had bowed low and touched him; his feet had to be rubbed 
with vaseline. His deification had commenced. In one place he 
was told that a whole tribe, the Gonds, were worshipping him. 
‘I have expressed my horror and strongest disapproval of this 
type of idolatry more than once,’ he wrote. ‘I claim to be a mere 
mortal, heir to all the weaknesses that human flesh betrays. It 
would be infinitely better that the Gonds should be taught to 
understand the meaning of my simple message than that they 
should indulge in a meaningless deification of me which can do 
no good either to them or to me and can only intensify the 
superstitious nature of such simple people as the Gonds.’ 

Even mere veneration seemed superfluous to him. ‘I am no 
Mahatma,’ he cried out. ‘My Mahatmaship is worthless,’ he wrote. 

249 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


But the Mahatma was powerless; he had to be a Mahatma. 
Many regarded him as a reincarnation of God, like Buddha, like 
Krishna; God descended temporarily to earth. From the moun¬ 
tains, from the plains, from far-off villages, people came to have a 
glimpse of him, to be sanctified if the eye or, much better, the 
hand, touched him. Audiences were so large that he would 
address them standing in front of them, then go to the right side, 
the rear and the left side, always hoping that they would remain 
seated on the ground and not stampede towards him. Many times 
he was in danger of being crushed to death. 

At Dacca, in Bengal, a man of seventy was brought before 
Gandhi. He was wearing Gandhi’s photograph around his neck 
and weeping profusely. As he approached the Mahatma, he fell 
on his face and thanked Gandhi for having cured him of chronic 
paralysis. ‘When all other remedies failed,’ the poor man said, 
‘I took to uttering Gandhiji’s name and one day I found myself 
entirely cured.’ 

‘It is not I but God who made you whole,’ Gandhi rebuked 
him. ‘Will you not oblige me by taking that photograph off 
your neck?’ 

Intellectuals too were not immune. One day, Gandhi’s train 
stopped with a jerk; somebody had pulled the emergency cord. It 
developed that a lawyer had fallen out of the train, head first. 
When picked up he was unhurt. He ascribed it to being the 
Mahatma’s fellow traveller. ‘Then you shouldn’t have fallen out 
at all,’ Gandhi laughed. But wit was lost on the devout. 

Women, even Hindu women, sometimes sat on their haunches 
behind a screen when they listened to Gandhi at meetings. Just 
as Moslems, Christians and even untouchables have borrowed the 
institution of caste from Hindus, so Hindus have in places suc¬ 
cumbed to Islam’s purdah or segregation of women. But when a 
woman came to Gandhi with her face hidden, he said, ‘No purdah 
before your brother,’ and she immediately dropped her veil. 

Gandhi was an incurable and irresistible fund raiser. He found 
special relish in stripping women of their jewellery. 

‘The army of my sweethearts is daily increasing,’ fie exclaimed 
during a tour. ‘The latest recruit is Ranibala of Burdwan, a 
darling perhaps ten years old. I dare not ask her age. I was 
playing with her as usual and casting furtive glances at her six 

250 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

heavy gold bangles. I gently explained to her that they were too 
heavy a burden for her delicate little wrists and down went her 
hand on the bangles. 9 

Ranibala’s grandfather encouraged her to give Gandhi the 
bangles. 

‘I must confess I was embarrassed, 5 Gandhi recalled as he told 
the story. ‘I was merely joking as I always do when I see little 
girls and jokingly create in them a distaste for much ornamenta¬ 
tion and a desire to part with their jewellery for the sake of the 
poor. I tried to return the bangles. 9 

But her grandfather said her mother would consider it an ill 
omen to take them back. Gandhi agreed to keep them on one 
condition: she was not to ask for new ones. 

That day he addressed a ladies 9 meeting in the same town. He 
told them about Ranibala. T got quite a dozen bangles and two 
or three pairs of earrings, all unasked. Needless to say, they will 
be used for khaddar. . . . 

T notify all the young girls and their parents and grandparents, 9 
Gandhi announced gayly, ‘that I am open to have as many 
sweethearts as would come to me on Ranibala’s terms. They will 
be handsomer for the thought that they gave their prized orna¬ 
ments to be used for the service of the poor. Let the little girls of 
India treasure the proverb, “Handsome is as handsome does. 99 9 

Still touring, he came to Bihar. At Kharagdeha, reached by a 
branch railway and then a twenty-six-mile journey by car, the 
programme began with a ladies’ meeting. ‘Hitherto, 9 Gandhi 
reported, ‘I have restrained myself from criticizing the heavily 
ornamental decoration of some of my fair audiences, oppressive 
though it has appeared to me. But the bangled arms from wrist 
practically to elbow, the huge thick nose-rings with about a three- 
inch diameter which could with difficulty be suspended from two 
holes, proved beyond endurance, and I gently remarked that this 
heavy ornamentation added nothing to the beauty of the person, 
caused much discomfort, must often lead to disease and was, I 
could plainly see, a repository of dirt. 9 

Gandhi feared he might have offended the ladies. But when he 
had finished speaking they crowded around him and brought him 
money, and many handed him their ornaments. He hoped Indian 
women would dispense with ‘these articles of personal furniture 9 , 

251 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Wearing his homespun loincloth, a radiant smile and, usually* 
sandals (sometimes he went barefoot), he would stride with long, 
easy steps to the speaker’s platform and make his appeal. While 
the train waited during his meeting at a whistle stop in Bihar, 
Gandhi made a one-minute speech: ‘I have come here to do 
business,’ he said artlessly, ‘to collect money for the spinning 
wheel and khadi and to sell khadi. Who knows, this may be my 
last visit to Bihar. Let me do as much business as I can.’ With 
that, he moved among the listeners asking for ‘ringing testimony’ 
of their devotion to homespun. The people rang the tin bowl with 
their copper and nickel mites; 526 rupees were collected. (The 
rupee was one shilling and fourpence.) Then he took an armful 
of homespun cotton cloth, or loincloths, or women’s saris and sold 
them for as much as he could get. Mahadev Desai, his first 
secretary, Devadas, his youngest son and other members of his 
group did likewise. 

It was the custom to present him with a purse collected before 
his arrival in larger towns. A purse might contain several hundred 
or even several thousand rupees. At the same time, ceremonial 
addresses of devotion were given to him. Many of these exquisitely 
executed documents were enclosed in silver caskets. ‘Expensive 
caskets are not required,’ he admonished one committee, ‘for I 
have no use for them, nor. have I any room to keep them in.’ He 
tried selling a casket to the people who gave it to him and not 
only did they not mind, they paid lavishly for it. So he made a 
habit of personally auctioning off such caskets; one brought 
1001 rupees. He did the same with floral garlands thrown around 
his neck. Why kill flowers unnecessarily, he argued, when they 
could ‘garland 5 him with a ring of yarn. Yam garlands became 
an Indian custom. 

‘Bania’, Gandhi’s friends called him with amazement. He was 
the shrewd, successful businessman, but his income and profits 
were never for himself 

An American friend asked me to get him the Mahatma’s 
photograph with a personal inscription. I found a photograph 
in the ashram, explained the request and asked him to sign. 

‘If you give me twenty rupees for the Harijan Fund,’ Gandhi 
said with a smile. 

‘I’ll give you ten.’ He autographed it. 

252 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

When I told Devadas, he said, ‘Bapu would have done it for 
five.’ 

In 1924, 1925, 1926 and 1927, the popularizing of khadi 
possessed Gandhi’s mind. Each issue of the weekly Young India 
devoted several pages to lists of persons and the exact number of 
yards of yarn they had spun. Some spinners gave the yarn to the 
fund which gave it to villagers, others wove their own. Gandhi’s 
Sabarmati Ashram was manufacturing simple spinning wheels, 
but in 1926 the manager announced that they had more orders 
than they could fill. Schools were giving courses in spinning. At 
Congress meetings, members would open a small box like a violin 
case, take out a collapsible spinning wheel and spin noiselessly 
throughout the proceedings. Gandhi had set the fashion. 

Some of Gandhi’s closest friends accused him of khadi extrem¬ 
ism; he exaggerated the possibility of restoring India’s village 
industries and overestimated the benefits that might accrue even 
if he were successful; this was the machine age; all his energy, 
wisdom and holiness would not avail to turn back the clock. 

C A hundred and fifty years ago,’ Gandhi replied, ‘we manu¬ 
factured all our cloth. Our women spun fine yarns in their own 
cottages and supplemented the earnings of their husbands . . . 
India requires nearly thirteen yards of cloth per head per year. 
She produces, I believe, less than half the amount. India grows 
all the cotton she needs. She exports several million bales of 
cotton to Japan and Lancashire and receives much of it back in 
manufactured calico, although she is capable of producing all the 
cloth and all the yarn necessary for supplying her wants by hand¬ 
weaving and hand-spinning . . . The spinning wheel was pre¬ 
sented to the nation for giving occupation to the millions who had, 
at least for four months of the year, nothing to do . . . We send out 
of India sixty crores [six hundred million] (more or less) of rupees 
for cloth. . . .’ 

Many intellectuals sneered at khadi. The stuff was coarse, they 
said. ‘Monotonous white shrouds,’ some mocked. ‘The livery of 
our freedom,’ Jawaharlal Nehru replied. ‘I regard the spinning 
wheel as a gateway to my spiritual salvation,’ Gandhi said. 

Gandhi was trying to bridge brain and brawn, to unite city and 
town, to link rich and poor. What greater service could he per¬ 
form for a divided country and an atomized civilization? To help 

253 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


the underdog, Gandhi taught, you must understand him and to 
understand him you must at least sometimes work as he does. 
Spinning was an act of love, another channel of communication. 
It was also a method of organization. ‘Any single district that 
can be fully organized for khaddar is, if it is also trained for 
suffering, ready for civil disobedience. 5 Thus, khadi would lead 
to home-rule. 

Gandhi asked townspeople and villagers to spend an hour a 
day at the wheel. ‘It affords a pleasant variety and recreation 
after hard toil. 5 Spinning does not replace other reforms; it is in 
addition to them. But he stressed them less than spinning. 

‘For me, 5 Gandhi reiterated, ‘nothing in the political world is 
more important than the spinning wheel. 5 One of India’s greatest 
intellectuals, with a brain as keen as Gandhi’s and as habitually 
sceptical as Gandhi was normally naive, enthusiastically sup¬ 
ported the Mahatma’s khadi contentions. Chakravarty Rajago- 
palachari, the famous Madras lawyer, was second only to Gandhi 
in his sanguine expectations from the nationwide use of home- 
spun. ‘Khadi work is the only true political programme before 
the country, 5 he declared on April 6th, 1926, in the textile-mill 
city of Ahmedabad. ‘You are living in a great city. You do not 
really know the amount of poverty that has overtaken the country 
called India. As a matter of fact, in India there are thousands and 
tens of thousands of villages where men do not get more than 
2 \ rupees a month. There is no use shedding tears for them if we 
won’t wear a few yards of khadi which they have manufactured 
and want us to buy so that they may find a meal. If our hearts 
were not made of stone we would all be wearing khadi. Khadi 
means employment for the poor and freedom for India. Britain 
holds India because it is a fine market for Lancashire. . . .’ 

Motilal Nehru also took to wearing khadi; he peddled it in the 
streets as Gandhi did. Intellectuals might scoff, but khadi began 
to have a fascination for them and from the mid-1920s, home- 
spun became the badge of the Indian nationalist. A propagandist 
for independence would no more dream of going into a village in 
foreign clothes or foreign cloth or even in Indian mill cloth than 
he would think of speaking English at a peasant meeting. Apart 
from its economic value, which has not proved decisive, homespun 
was Gandhi’s peculiar contribution to the education of political 

254 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

India: he made it physically conscious of poor, uneducated, non¬ 
political India. Khadi was an adventure in identification between 
leadership and nation. Gandhi was prescribing for a disease which 
plagued independent India and most independent countries. 
He knew that the tragedy of India’s history was the canyon be¬ 
tween the gold-silver-silk-brocade-jewel-elephant splendour of 
her palaces and the animal poverty of her hovels; at the bottom of 
the canyon lay the debris of empires and the bones of millions of 
their victims. 

The work exhausted Gandhi. Three or four stops a day for 
meetings, a different place to stop every night, heavy correspond¬ 
ence which he never neglected, and unnumbered personal inter¬ 
views with men and women who sought his word on the biggest 
political problems and their smallest personal difficulties — all in 
the great heat and humidity — wore him down. In November 
1925, therefore, he undertook a seven-day fast. 

India worried about him and protested. Why a fast? ‘The 
public will have to neglect my fasts and cease to worry about 
them,’ Gandhi stated. ‘They are part of my being. I can as well 
do without my eyes, for instance, as I can without fasts. What the 
eyes are for the outer world, fasts are for the inner.’ He would 
fast whenever the spirit moved him. The result, to be sure, might 
be disastrous. ‘I may be wholly wrong,’ he admitted. ‘Then the 
world will be able to write an epitaph over my ashes: “Well 
deserved, thou fool.” But for the time being, my error, if it be 
one, must sustain me.’ This was a personal fast; ‘this fast has 
nothing to do with the public’. It is said ‘I am public property 
. . . So be it. But I must be taken with all my faults. I am a 
searcher after truth. My experiments I hold to be infinitely more 
important than the best-equipped Himalayan expeditions.’ He 
was trying to scale the spiritual heights; he thought fasts conduced 
to mental ascendancy over the body. 

Gandhi’s fast brought him a tide of requests for his views on 
fasting; even in India his frequent abstentions from food were 
unusual. He gave his response in a Young India article. ‘With 
apologies to my medical friends’, it read, ‘but out of the fullness 
of my own experience and that of fellow-cranks, I say without 
hesitation, Fast (1) if you are constipated, (2) if you are anaemic, 
(3) if you are feverish, (4) if you have indigestion, (5) if you have 

255 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


a headache, (6) if you are rheumatic, (7) if you are gouty, (8) if 
you are fretting and foaming, (9) if you are depressed, (10) if 
you are overjoyed, and you will avoid medical prescriptions and 
patent medicines. 5 His patent medical prescription for every¬ 
thing was fasting. c Eat only when you are hungry , 5 he added, ‘and 
when you have laboured for your food. 5 

His highest weight after being discharged from prison in 
February 1924, he wrote in the same article, was 112 pounds. 
He was down to 103 pounds when he started the fast. In the 
seven days he lost nine pounds but regained it quickly. Physically, 
he said, he lost nothing either from this fast or from the twenty- 
one-day fast in 1924. 

Water during fasts nauseated him without a pinch of salt or 
bicarbonate of soda or a few drops of citrus juice. He never 
suffered any pangs of hunger during the fast; in fact, ‘I broke it 
half an hour later than I need have. 5 He spun every day and 
attended the daily prayer meetings. The first three days of the 
fast, he wrote, ‘I worked practically from four in the morning 
till eight in the evening, 5 doing articles, answering letters, giving 
interviews. On the fourth day, his head ached. He accordingly 
abandoned work for a day; on the seventh day ‘I was able to 
write with a steady hand my article on the fast. 5 

The article furnished nine rules for fasting; he himself broke the 
first which was ‘Conserve your energy both physical and mental 
from the very beginning, (2) You must cease to think of food while 
you are fasting, (3) Drink as much cold water as you can . . . 
(4) Have a warm sponge daily, (5) Take an enema regularly dur¬ 
ing fast. You will be surprised at the impurities you will expel 
daily, (6) Sleep as much as possible in the open air, (7) Bathe in 
the morning air. A sun and air bath is at least as great a purifier 
as a water bath, (8) Think of anything else but your fast, (9) No 
matter from what motive you are fasting, during this precious 
time think of your Maker and of your relation to Him and His 
other creations and you will make discoveries you may not have 
dreamed of. 5 

It was for these discoveries that he fasted. 

Gandhi’s year as president of Congress was now ended and at 
Cawnpore, in December 1925, he relinquished the gavel to Mrs. 
Sarojini Naidu, mistress of lyric words. Gandhi then took a vow 

256 


FUNDS AND JEWELS 

of a year’s ‘political silence’. ‘At least up to twentieth December 
next,’ he announced in Young India of January 7th, 1926, ‘I am 
not to stir out of the ashram, certainly not out of Ahmedahad’ 
across the river. Body and soul needed rest. 

The Swaraj party, which had sent its people into the legislative 
councils to obstruct the British government, veered slowly towards 
a measure of co-operation. A dissident group, headed by M. R. 
Jayakar and N. G. Kelkar, who believed in still more co-operation 
with the British, but less with the Moslems, split off from the 
Swarajists and formed the Responsivist party. It leaned towards 
the Hindu Mahasabha, a religious political party. In December 
1925, the Moslem League session at Aligarh, attended by Jinnah, 
Mohamed Ali and Sir Ali Imam, moved in the direction of 
religious politics. Gandhi had hoped to unite India for nationalist 
liberation. But she was splitting at her religious seam. Political 
India, Gandhi found, was ‘disrupted and demoralized’. It seemed 
a good time for silence. ‘Silence’, he quoted, ‘is the true language 
of cosmic adoration.’ 


257 


 

