CHAPTER XX 


WITHOUT POLITICS 

T he ‘Epic Fast’ enabled Gandhi to break through a thick, 
high wall into the immense neglected field of social reform. 
Many of his friends were unhappy because he allowed him¬ 
self to be ‘sidetracked’ into welfare work for Harijans and peasants. 
Politicians wanted him to be political. But to Gandhi vitamins for 
villages were the best politics and Harijan happiness the highroad 
to independence. 

Social reform was ever his favoured activity. ‘I have always 
held’, he declared on January 25th, 1942, in Harijan , ‘that a parlia¬ 
mentary programme at all times is the least of a nation’s activity. 
The most important and permanent work is done outside.’ He 
wanted the individual to do more so that the State would do less. 
The more work at the bottom, the less dictation from the top. 

Gandhi’s revulsion against government was indeed so strong 
that he promised in the April 27th, 1940, Harijan not to partici¬ 
pate in the government of free India. He would do his share, he 
said, ‘outside the official world’. He was too religious to identify 
himself with any government. 

This being Gandhi’s philosophy, he depended for the success of 
his social reform work on special-purpose voluntary organizations 
with many active members. 

In February 1933, Gandhi, still in prison, had started the 
Harijan Sevak Sangh, a society to help Harijans, and Harijan , a 
new weekly which replaced Young India , suspended by the Govern¬ 
ment. On May 8th, he undertook a three weeks’ fast for self¬ 
purification and to impress the ashram with the importance of 
service rather than indulgence; the presence of an attractive 
American woman visitor had caused some backsliding. The first 
day of the fast the Government released him. It seemed certain, 
after the physical agony of the seven days of the ‘Epic Fast’, that 
twenty-one days without food would kill him. And Britain did 
not want a dead Gandhi within prison walls. 

He survived. 


349 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Why was the short fast almost fatal and the other, three times 
as long, easy to endure? During the former, he negotiated inces¬ 
santly and was consumed by a desire to remove the taint of 
untouchability; his body burned simultaneously. In the twenty- 
one-day fast, spirit and mind were relaxed. His little body was 
the creature of a powerful will. 

As a gesture of friendship to the Government for his release, 
Gandhi suspended for six weeks the civil disobedience campaign 
which had commenced in January 1933. On July 15th he asked 
Willingdon for an interview. The Viceroy declined. On August 
1 st, Gandhi proposed to march from Yeravda, where he had been 
residing, to the village of Ras. That night, he was arrested with 
thirty-four ashramites, but released three days later and ordered 
to remain in the city of Poona. Half an hour later, he disobeyed 
the order, and was arrested again and sentenced to a year’s im¬ 
prisonment. He commenced to fast August 16th, was removed to 
hospital in a precarious condition on August 20th, and uncondi¬ 
tionally released on the 23rd. He nevertheless regarded himself 
as serving the year’s sentence and announced he would not resume 
civil disobedience before August 3rd, 1934. 

Until 1939, except for a month’s silence to catch up with his 
work and several long periods of physical breakdown, Gandhi was 
completely at the disposal of the organizations he had founded 
for mass welfare and education. He gave Sabarmati Ashram to 
a Harijan group and established headquarters in Wardha, a small 
town in the Central Provinces. From there, on November 7th, 
1933, he commenced a ten-month tour for Harijan welfare; he 
visited every province in India without once going home to relax 
or rest. 

On January 15th, 1934, a large section of Bihar province 
suffered a severe earthquake. Gandhi interrupted his tour and 
visited the stricken area in March; he walked barefoot from 
village to village, comforting, teaching and preaching. The earth¬ 
quake, he told the public, ‘is a chastisement for your sins’, chiefly 
‘the sin of untouchability’. Such superstition angered Tagore and 
other enlightened Indians; the poet denounced the Mahatma. 
‘. . . physical catastrophes’, Tagore declared in a statement to 
the press which he first sent to Gandhi, ‘have* their inevitable and 
exclusive origin in certain combinations of physical facts ... If 

350 . 


WITHOUT POLITICS 

we associate ethical principles with cosmic phenomena then we 
shall have to admit that human nature is morally superior to the 
Providence that preaches lessons in good behaviour in orgies of 
the worst behaviour possible ... As for us, we feel perfectly secure 
in the faith that our sins and errors, however enormous, have not 
enough force to drag down the structure of creation to ruins . . . 
We who are immensely grateful to Mahatmaji for inducing by 
his wonder-working inspiration a freedom from fear and feebleness 
in the minds of his countrymen, feel profoundly hurt when any 
words from his mouth may emphasize the elements of unreason 
in those very minds. . . .’ 

Gandhi was not shaken. ‘There is an indissoluble marriage’, 
he replied, ‘between matter and spirit.. . The connection between 
cosmic phenomena and human behaviour is a living faith and 
draws me nearer to God.’ The moment Gandhi invoked God 
there was no arguing with him. In effect, the overzealous 
Mahatma was harnessing God to his propaganda chariot; he was 
Aijuna using Krishna as charioteer to fight for the common people. 

Gandhi’s paramount compulsion was to help the poor, and 
since Gandhi and Gandhi’s God were partners, the Mahatma 
enlisted the Almighty in the task. ‘To a people famishing and 
idle’, he wrote, ‘the only acceptable form in which God can dare 
appear is work and promise of food and wages.’ 

‘India lives in her villages, not in her cities,’ he wrote in Harijan 
on August 26th, 1936; and several issues later, ‘When I succeed in 
ridding the villages of their poverty, I have won Swaraj . . .’ The 
idea that Gandhi favoured poverty is fiction; he merely urged 
select idealists to serve the people through self-abnegation. For 
the nation as a whole, ‘No one has ever suggested that grinding 
pauperism can lead to anything else than moral degradation,’ 
which is the last thing he wanted. Gandhi insisted that ‘If we do 
not waste our wealth and energy, the climate and natural re¬ 
sources of our country are such that we can become the happiest 
people in the world,’ which is what he did want. 

Gandhi decried the extreme of pauperism and the extreme of 
wealth. 

Between 1933 and 1939, Gandhi allowed few matters to deflect 
him from welfare work. It was not smooth sailing. On June 25th, 
1935, at Poona, in the heart of the late Tilak’s Maratha country, 

35i 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


a Hindu suspected of opposing equality for Harijans threw a 
bomb into a car thinking mistakenly that the Mahatma was in 
it. Shortly thereafter, a Gandhi supporter belaboured an anti- 
Harijan with a lathi. Gandhi fasted seven days in July 1934 to 
do penance for both. 

On October 26th, 1934, the All-India Village Industries Asso¬ 
ciation was launched with Gandhi as patron and Gandhi’s 
millionaire industrialist friends as backers. 

At village meetings and in Harijan , Gandhi was now giving the 
farming population rudimentary instruction about food. ‘Milk 
and banana make a perfect meal, 5 he wrote. Harijan of February 
15th, 1935, contained an article by Gandhi entitled ‘Green Leaves 
and their Food Value’ in which he reported, ‘For nearly five 
months I have been living on uncooked foods. The addition of 
green leaves to their meals will enable villagers to avoid many 
diseases from which they are now suffering.’ He devoted another 
article to the debate on ‘Cow’s Milk versus Buffalo’s’, and still a 
third to the supreme Indian problem: rice. In his booklet, Key to 
Health , and elsewhere, Gandhi gave warning against machine- 
polished rice. Polishing removes an overcoat rich in vitamins, 
especially B 1? he explained; lacking those vitamins, Indians, for 
most of whom rice is the chief staple food, are subject to numerous 
debilitating diseases, notably beriberi which means ‘I cannot’. 
Hand-pounded rice, Gandhi explained, retains the vitamin-rich 
coating. 

At other times, Gandhi expatiated on the nutritional value of 
the mango kernel and the groundnut or peanut. Peanuts were 
politics to him, as political as primaries. Repeatedly, too, he gave 
detailed information on how to prepare animal manures and how 
to cure snake bites and malaria. 

Gandhi knew that the improvement of seed, the proper use of 
fertilizer and the proper care of cattle could solve basic political 
problems. Many a civil war in Asia might have been prevented 
by an additional daily bowl of rice per person. 

Gandhi also paid attention to non-agrarian aspects of village 
life. ‘We have to concentrate on the village being self-contained, 
manufacturing mainly for use,’ he wrote in Harijan on August 29th, 
1936. ‘Provided this character of village industry is maintained, 
there would be no objection to villagers using even the modern 

352 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


machines and tools that they can make and afford to use. Only 
they should not be used as a means of exploiting of others.’ 

In Harijan of July 26th, 1942, Gandhi described the ideal 
Indian village: Tt is a complete republic, independent of its 
neighbours for its vital wants, and yet interdependent for many 
other wants in which dependence is a necessity. Thus every 
village’s first concern will be to grow its own food crops and cotton 
for its cloth. It should have a reserve for its cattle, recreation and 
playground for adults and children. Then if there is more land 
available, it will grow useful money crops, thus excluding . . . 
tobacco, opium and the like. The village will maintain a village 
theatre, school and public hall. It will have its own water works 
ensuring clean supply. This can be done through controlled wells 
and tanks [reservoirs]. Education will be compulsory up to the 
final basic course. As far as possible, every activity will be con¬ 
ducted on a co-operative basis . . .’ To this modest blueprint, 
which, however, seemed like a sketch of Heaven to India’s per¬ 
manently underfed farmers, Gandhi added another wild dream: 
electricity in every village home. 

Did Gandhi advocate a land reform for India which would 
give landless or land-poor peasants the redistributed estates of the 
big landlords? 

In the January 2nd, 1937, issue of Harijan , Gandhi wrote, ‘Land 
and all property is his who will work it’; but he admitted the land¬ 
lords into that category though he knew that the landlord class 
included a large percentage of absentee owners, intermediaries, 
agents, moneylenders and other unproductive elements. 

‘I cannot picture to myself a time when no man shall be richer 
than another,’ Gandhi said. ‘Even in the most perfect world, we 
shall fail to avoid inequalities, but we can and must avoid strife 
and bitterness. There are numerous examples extant of the rich 
and the poor living in perfect friendliness. We have but to 
multiply such instances.’ 

Gandhi would have done it by ‘trusteeship’. 

In Bengal once, Gandhi was the guest of a landlord who served 
him milk in a gold bowl and fruit on gold plates. 

‘Where did he get these golden plates from?’ Gandhi said to 
himself. 

‘From the substance of the peasants,’ Gandhi answered. ‘Where 

353 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

their life is one long-drawn-out agony, how dare he have these 
luxuries?’ 

Gandhi spared his host, but he shared these thoughts with a 
meeting of landlords in 1931 and added, ‘Landlords would do 
well to take time by the forelock. Let them cease to be mere rent 
collectors. They should become trustees and trusted friends of 
their tenants . . . They should give the peasants fixity of tenure, 
take a lively interest in their welfare, provide well-managed 
schools for their children, night schools for adults, hospitals and 
dispensaries for the sick, look after the sanitation of the villages, 
and in a variety of ways make them feel that they, the landlords, 
are their true friends taking only a fixed commission for their 
manifold services.’ 

‘Exploitation of the poor can be extinguished,’ Gandhi wrote in 
Harijan on July 28th, 1940, ‘not by effecting the destruction of a 
few millionaires, but by removing the ignorance of the poor and 
teaching them to non-co-operate with their exploiters. That will 
convert the exploiters also.’ 

Gandhi reminded the peasants and workers of their power. 
‘There is in English a very potent word, and you have it in French 
also,’ he said. ‘All the languages of the world have it — it is “No” 

. . . Immediately Labour comes to recognize that it has got the 
choice of saying “Yes” when it wants to say “Yes”, and “No” 
when it wants to say “No”, Labour is free of Capital, and Capital 
must woo Labour.’ The worker can strike; the peasant can refuse 
rent. 

Nevertheless, he declared in Young India of October 7th, 1926, 
‘capital and labour need not be antagonistic to each other’. 

But the passage of time and all Gandhi’s persuasiveness pro¬ 
duced few trustees. No report of‘voluntary abdication’ by a land¬ 
lord or millowner reached Gandhi before the day of his death. 
No one answered his 1929 appeal to the ‘model landlord’ to 
‘reduce himself to poverty in order that the peasant may have the 
necessities of life’. 

Gradually, therefore, Gandhi’s economic views changed. He 
continued to advocate class collaboration. But as he moved nearer 
the end of his life and further from the nineteenth century, he 
sought new means of removing poverty. He became reconciled 
to more state participation in economic affairs. He wanted the 

354 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


law to help in the levelling process. Equality grew more attractive. 

In Harijan of July 31st, 1937, Gandhi noted that British income 
surtaxes amounted to 70 per cent. ‘There is no reason why India 
should not go to a much higher figure. 5 And, he added, ‘Why 
should there not be death duties?’ In an article published April 
13th, 1938, he went still further: ‘A trustee has no heir but the 
public.’ The millionaire’s wealth should go to the community, 
not to his son who would only lose morally by inheriting material 
riches, Gandhi declared. 

One of the first acts of a free India would be to give grants to 
the untouchables, he said, out of the pockets of ‘the moneyed 
classes’. And if the rich complain, ‘I shall sympathize with them, 
but I will not be able to help them, even if I could possibly do so, 
because I would seek their assistance in that process, and without 
their assistance it would not be possible to raise these people out 
of the mire.’ 

In 1941, and again in 1945 in his Constructive Programme , Gandhi 
warned the Indian capitalists. ‘A non-violent system of govern¬ 
ment’, he wrote, ‘is clearly an impossibility so long as the wide 
gulf between the rich and the hungry millions persists. The con¬ 
trast between the palaces of New Delhi and the miserable hovels 
of the poor labouring class nearby cannot last one day in a free 
India in which the poor will enjoy the same power as the richest 
in the land. A violent and bloody revolution is a certainty one 
day unless there is a voluntary abdication of riches and the power 
that riches give, and sharing them for the common good.’ 

The response was nil. 

‘The power that riches give’ troubled him. He began to search 
for means of diffusing it. ‘Key industries, industries which the 
state needs’, he wrote on June 28th, 1939, ‘may be centralized.’ 
He was opposed, however, to concentration of economic power in 
the hands of the Government. He therefore added, ‘But supposing 
the state controlled paper-making and centralized it, I would 
expect it to protect all the paper that villages can make.’ Power 
houses, he wrote, should be owned ‘by village communities or the 
state’, preferably by the villages. 

‘What would happen in a free India?’ I asked Gandhi in 1942. 
‘What is your programme for the improvement of the lot of the 
peasantry?’ 

M.G. 


Z 


355 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

‘The peasants would take the land,’ he replied. ‘We would not 
have to tell them to take it. They would take it.’ 

‘Would the landlords be compensated?’ I asked. 

‘No,’ Gandhi'said. ‘That would be fiscally impossible.’ 

An interviewer told Gandhi that the number of textile mills was 
increasing. ‘That is a misfortune,’ he remarked. Better that 
textiles be made in the homes of the millions of partially employed 
peasants. 

‘God forbid’, Gandhi exclaimed in Harijan on January 28th, 
1939, ‘that India should ever take to industrialism after the manner 
of the West. The economic imperialism of a single tiny island 
kingdom [England] is today keeping the world in chains. If an 
entire nation of three hundred millions took to similar economic 
exploitation, it would strip the world bare like locusts.’ 

Nor did Gandhi regard the mere multiplication of material 
wants and of objects to gratify them as the highroad to happiness 
or godliness. He drew no line between economics and ethics. 
‘An economics’, he said in Harijan of October 9th, 1937, ‘that 
inculcates Mammon worship, that enables the strong to amass 
wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal science. 
It spells death. True economics . . . stands for social justice’ and 
moral values. Gandhi knew that people with full refrigerators, 
crowded clothes closets, cars in every garage and radios in every 
room may still be psychologically insecure and unhappy. ‘Rome,’ 
he said, ‘suffered a moral fall when it attained high material 
affluence.’ ‘What shall it avail a man if he gain the whole world 
and lose his soul?’ Gandhi quoted. ‘In modern terms,’ he con¬ 
tinued, ‘it is beneath human dignity to lose one’s individuality 
and become a mere cog in the machine. I want every indivi¬ 
dual to become a full-blooded, fully developed member of 
society.’ Next to God, Gandhi’s supreme being was man the 
individual. He accordingly regarded himself as ‘the born 
democrat’. 

‘No society can possibly be built on a denial of individual free¬ 
dom. It is contrary to the very nature of man,’ Gandhi wrote. ‘Just 
as man will not grow horns or a tail so he will not exist as a man 
if he has no mind of his own.’ Therefore, ‘democracy is not a 
state in which people act like sheep’. 

Gandhi disliked the word ‘tolerance’ but he found no substitute. 

356 





WITHOUT POLITICS 


‘For me,* he said, ‘every ruler is alien who defies public opinion .. . 
Intolerance betrays want of faith in one’s cause . . . We shut the 
door of reason when we refuse to listen to our opponents or, having 
listened, make fun of them. 

‘Always keep an open mind,’ he admonished. 

There could, however, be no democracy without discipline. ‘I 
value individual freedom,’ he wrote, ‘but you must not forget that 
man is essentially a social being. He has risen to his present 
status by learning to adjust his individualism to the requirements 
of social progress. Unrestricted individualism is the law of the 
beast of the jungle. We must learn to strike a mean between 
individual freedom and social restraint.’ It could be done by 
self-discipline. If the individual did not discipline himself the 
state would try to discipline the individual, and too much official 
discipline kills democracy. 

‘We cannot learn discipline by compulsion,’ Gandhi affirmed. 
A dictatorship can exact obedience; it can implant the habit of 
robot compliance; it can, by fear, convert man into a cringing, 
kowtowing pigmy. None of that is discipline. 

Gandhi discouraged the notion that democracy meant economic 
freedom at the expense of personal liberty, or political freedom 
without economic freedom. ‘My conception of freedom is no 
narrow conception,’ he declared in Harijan of June 7th, 1942. ‘It 
is coextensive with the freedom of man in all his majesty. 

‘If the individual ceases to count, what is left of society?’ he 
asked. To those who argued that dictatorships reduce illiteracy, 
he replied, ‘Where a choice has to be made between liberty and 
learning, who will not say that the former has to be preferred a 
thousand times to the latter?* 

Democracy means majority rule, Gandhi agreed. But, ‘In 
matters of conscience,’ he said, ‘the law of majority has no place; 
... it is slavery to be amenable to the majority no matter what its 
decisions are.’ 

Nor was freedom Gandhi’s highest law. ‘Not even for the free¬ 
dom of India would I resort to an untruth,’ he said. ‘We do not 
seek our independence out of Britain’s ruin.’ 

Gandhi’s hostility to violence and untruth, his objection to the 
omnipotent State which embodies both, and his economic ideas 
made him anti-Communist. 


357 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


‘India does not want Communism, 5 Gandhi said as early as 
November 24th, 1921. 

‘All Communists are not bad, as all Congressmen are not angels, 5 
Gandhi declared on January 26th, 1941. ‘I have, therefore, no 
prejudice against Communists as such. Their philosophy, as they 
have declared it to me, I cannot subscribe to. 5 

The Communists sent spokesmen to convert him. But his in¬ 
stincts led him to reject their teachings. 

‘I am yet ignorant of what exactly Bolshevism is, 5 he wrote on 
December 1 ith, 1924. ‘I have not been able to study it. I do not 
know whether it is for the good of Russia in the long run. But I 
do know that in so far as it is based on violence and denial of 
God, it repels me ... I am an uncompromising opponent of 
violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. 5 

In 1926, he received some enlightenment and declared, ‘Let 
no one think that the people in Russia, Italy and other countries 
are happy or are independent. 5 

In 1927, Shapuri Saklatwala, an Indian Communist who was a 
member of the British House of Commons, appealed to Gandhi 
to forsake his mistaken ways and join the Communists. Gandhi 
replied to the ‘impatient comrade 5 in Young India of March 17th, 
1927. ‘In spite of my desire to offer hearty co-operation, 5 the 
Mahatma said, ‘I find myself against a blind wall. His facts are 
fiction and his deductions based upon fiction are necessarily 
baseless ... I am sorry, but we stand at opposite poles. 5 

Communists accused him of consorting with capitalists and 
taking their money. He did not reply that Communists were 
tarred with the same brush. He said he took money from the rich 
to help the poor. He consorted with capitalists to convert them. 
He consorted with Communists as often as they wished to come. 

‘You claim to be Communists, 5 he said to one group of Com¬ 
munists, ‘but you do not seem to live the life of Communism. 5 
Then he berated them for their discourtesy in debate. On another 
occasion, he attacked their lack of scruples. ‘I have it from some 
of the literature that passes under the name of Communist litera¬ 
ture, 5 he wrote in Harijan on December 10th, 1930, ‘that secrecy, 
camouflage, and the like are enjoined as necessary for the accom¬ 
plishment of the Communist. 5 This repelled him. 

Was Gandhi a Socialist? 


358 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


The Communists call themselves Socialists. The full name of 
Hitler’s Nazi party was National Socialist Workers’ Party, and 
Mussolini spoke of his regime as ‘proletarian’. The French Radical 
Socialists are mild and middle class. Socialism is an overworked 
word. 

Gandhi read Karl Marx’s Capital in prison and remarked, ‘I 
think I could have written it better, assuming, of course, that I 
had the leisure for the study he has put in.’ If Gandhi meant the 
style he was certainly right. But Gandhi was no Marxist; he did 
not believe in class war. 

Minoo Masani, Indian author and India’s first Ambassador to 
Brazil, asked Gandhi’s opinion of the programme of the Indian 
Socialist Party. Gandhi replied in a letter dated June 14th, 1934. 
‘I welcome the rise of the Socialist Party in the Congress,’ the 
Mahatma wrote. ‘But I can’t say I like the programme as it 
appears in the printed pamphlet. It seems to me to ignore Indian 
conditions and I do not like the assumption underlying many of 
its propositions which go to show that there is necessarily antagon¬ 
ism between the classes and the masses or between the labourers 
and capitalists, such that they can never work for mutual good. 
My own experience covering a fairly long period is to the contrary. 
What is necessary is that labourers or workers should know their 
rights and should also know how to assert them. And since there 
never has been any right without a corresponding duty, in my 
opinion, a manifesto is incomplete without emphasizing the 
necessity of performance of duty and showing what duty is.’ He 
invited Masani and friends for a discussion. 

Gandhi opposed the Socialists for their class-war doctrine, and 
he condemned them when they used violence. Yet as he observed 
disturbing trends, he became more pro-Socialist and more favour¬ 
ably disposed to equality. ‘Today’, Gandhi wrote in the June isf, 
1947, Harijan , ‘there is gross economic inequality. The basis of 
socialism is economic equality. There can be no rule of God in 
the present state of iniquitous inequalities in which a few roll in 
riches and the masses do not get enough to eat. I accepted the 
theory of Socialism even while I was in South Africa.’ His, 
however, was a moral Socialism. 

If India were to carry out most of Gandhi’s numerous economic 
prescriptions the result, two or three decades after his death, 

359 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


might be an economy pivoting on a fully employed, self-governing 
village enjoying maximum self-sufficiency and minimum mechan¬ 
ization; a city where capitalists and municipal, provincial and 
federal governments shared industry and trade; strong trade 
unions and co-operatives; and one-generation capitalists whose 
wealth, since they could not bequeath it, would revert to the 
community. 

Gandhi’s loyalty to truth exceeded his loyalty to political dogma 
or party. He allowed truth to lead him without a map. If it took 
him into an area where he had to discard some intellectual baggage 
or walk alone without past associates, he went. He never impeded 
his mind with stop signs. Many groups have claimed him. But 
he was the private property of none, not even of Congress. He 
was its leader for years, yet at the Congress convention in Bombay 
in December 1934, having immersed himself in Harijan and 
peasant uplift work, he ceased to be a dues-paying member, let 
alone an officer, of the Congress party. ‘I need complete detach¬ 
ment and absolute freedom of action,’ he said. 

Gandhi’s individualism meant maximum freedom from outward 
circumstances and maximum development of inner qualities. His 
antagonism to British rule was part of a larger antagonism to 
fetters of all kinds. His goal was Gita detachment, in politics as in 
religion. 

Gandhi’s intellectual receptivity and flexibility are characteris¬ 
tics of the Hindu mind. There is a Hindu orthodoxy but it is not 
characteristic of Hinduism. In Hinduism it is the intensity and 
quality of the religious zeal, not so much its object, which con¬ 
stitutes religion. 

In 1942, when I was Gandhi’s house guest for a week, there was 
only one decoration on the mud walls of his hut: a black and 
white print of Jesus Christ with the inscription, ‘He Is Our Peace.’ 
I asked Gandhi about it. ‘I am a Christian,’ he replied. ‘I am a 
Christian, and a Hindu, and a Moslem, and a Jew.’ 

‘All faiths’, Gandhi wrote in From Teravda Mandir in an un¬ 
intended definition of religious tolerance, ‘constitute a revelation 
of Truth, but all are imperfect, and liable to error. Reverence for 
other faiths need not blind us to their faults. We must be keenly 
alive to the defects of our own faith also, yet not leave it on that 
account, but try to overcome those defects. Looking at all 

360 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


religions with an equal eye, we would not only not hesitate, but 
would think it our duty to blend into our faith every acceptable 
feature of other faiths. 5 

That paragraph is a portrait of the Gandhi mind: he was the 
conservative who would not change his religion, the reformer who 
tried to alter it, and the tolerant believer who regarded all faiths 
as aspects of the divine. He was loyal yet critical, partisan yet 
open-minded, devout yet not doctrinaire, inside yet outside, 
attached yet detached, Hindu yet Christian, yet Moslem, yet Jew. 

Next to Hinduism he was most attracted by Christianity. He 
loved Jesus. Hindu bigots even accused him of being a secret 
Christian. He considered this ‘both a libel and a compliment — a 
libel because there are men who believe me to be capable of being 
secretly anything ... a compliment in that it is a reluctant acknow¬ 
ledgment of my capacity for appreciating the beauties of Chris¬ 
tianity. Let me own this. If I could call myself, say, a Christian 
or a Moslem, with my own interpretation of the Bible or the 
Koran , I could not hesitate to call myself either. For then Hindu, 
Christian and Moslem would be synonymous terms. I do believe 
that in the other world there are neither Hindus, nor Christians 
or Moslems. 5 

Gandhi was more specific, however, in an address at the 
Y.M.C.A. in Colombo, Ceylon, in 1927. ‘If then, 5 he said, ‘I 
had to face only the Sermon on the Mount and my own inter¬ 
pretation of it, I should not hesitate to say, “Oh, yes, I am a 
Christian. 55 . . . But negatively I can tell you that much of what 
passes as Christianity is a negation of the Sermon on the Mount. 
And please mark my words. I am not at the present moment 
speaking of the Christian conduct. I am speaking of the Christian 
belief, of Christianity as it is understood in the West. 5 

Many Christian missionaries came to Gandhi often, and he had 
long friendly talks with Dr. John R. Mott, Bishop Fisher who lived 
in India for years, and others. But Gandhi frowned on proselytiz¬ 
ing, whether by Christians, Hindus, or Moslems. He said, ‘I do 
not believe in people telling others of their faith, especially with a 
view to conversion . . . Faith does not permit of telling. It has to 
be lived and then it is self-propagating. 5 

S. K. George, a Syrian Christian of India and lecturer at 
Bishop’s College, Calcutta, wrote a book entitled, Gandhi's Chal - 

361 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


lenge to Christianity and dedicated it ‘To Mahatma Gandhi who 
made Jesus and His Message real to Me’. The Reverend K. 
Mathew Simon, of the Syrian Orthodox Church of Malabar, 
India, writes of Gandhi, ‘It was his life that proved to me more 
than anything else that Christianity is a practicable religion even 
in the twentieth century.’ This suggests how relevant Gandhi is 
to the problems of our times. 

Gandhi presented a perplexing problem to Christians in India: 
he was the world’s most Christ-like person yet not a Christian. 
‘And so,’ exclaims E. Stanley Jones, ‘one of the most Christlike 
men in history was not called a Christian at all.’ Missionaries 
frequently tried to convert him to Christianity. (He, speaking 
softly, tried to do the same for them.) But why enrol a saint in 
a church? 

Gandhi protested that the missionaries fed the starving and 
healed the sick in order to convert them to Christianity. ‘Make us 
better Hindus,’ he pleaded. That would be more Christian. 

Christianity has had a good effect on Hinduism. ‘The indirect 
influence of Christianity has been to quicken Hinduism into life,’ 
Gandhi asserted. The fact that the missionaries’ richest recruiting 
field was the embittered Harijan community may have awakened 
some Hindus to the necessity of supporting Gandhi’s Harijan 
work. And Gandhi probably had a good effect on Christianity. 
Dr. E. Stanley Jones says, ‘God uses many instruments, and he 
may have used Mahatma Gandhi to help Christianize unchristian 
Christianity.’ 

Gandhi never tried to convert Christians to Hinduism. 

Although Gandhi was a Hindu reformer and welcomed the 
play of outside influences on Hinduism, he departed from Hindu 
customs and beliefs with reluctance. In 1927, Devadas fell in love 
with Lakshmi, the daughter of Rajagopalachari, and wanted to 
marry her. But Rajagopalachari was a Brahman and Gandhi a 
Vaisya, and members of different castes should not marry. Nor 
should young folks choose their mates; marriages are arranged by 
parents. But the man and maid persisted, and finally the illus¬ 
trious fathers agreed to sanction the union if the couple still 
wanted one another after five years of separation. So Devadas, 
who was born in 1900, and Lakshmi waited five painful years 
and married with pomp in Poona on June 16th, 1933, in the 

362 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


presence of both happy fathers. Gandhi’s wedding gift was a 
hymn book and garland of yarn which he had spun. 

The conservative traditionalist and the radical iconoclast 
merged in Gandhi into a tantalizing unpredictable mixture. The 
Mahatma’s successful assault on untouchability produced the 
most revolutionary change in Hinduism’s millennial existence. It 
would seem that the corollary of the abolition of untouchability 
was the abolition of caste, for if one mingled with outcasts surely 
the barriers between the higher castes should crumble. Yet for 
many years Gandhi defended caste restrictions. 

Defending the four Hindu castes, Gandhi said in 1920, T con¬ 
sider the four divisions to be fundamental, natural and essential.’ 
‘Hinduism’, he wrote in Young India of October 6th, 1921, ‘does 
most emphatically discourage interdining and intermarriage be¬ 
tween divisions . . . Prohibition against intermarriage and inter¬ 
dining is essential for the rapid evolution of the soul.’ 

The same man said, ‘Restriction on intercaste dining and inter¬ 
caste marriage is no part of the Hindu religion. It crept into 
Hinduism when perhaps it was in its decline, and was then prob¬ 
ably meant to be a temporary protection against the disin¬ 
tegration of Hindu society. Today those two prohibitions are 
weakening Hindu society.’ This was on November 4th, 1932. 

In 1921, the prohibition of intermarriage and interdining was 
‘essential’ to the soul; in 1932, it was ‘weakening Hindu society’. 

Even this, however, was not Gandhi’s final position. Having 
broken with the orthodox tradition, he characteristically continued 
to travel further and further away from it, and on January 5th, 
1946, he declared, in the Hindustan Standard , ‘I therefore tell all 
boys and girls who want to marry that they cannot be married at 
Sevagram Ashram unless one of the parties is a Harijan.’ Earlier, 
lie had refused to attend a wedding unless it was an intercaste 
marriage. 

From 1921 to 1946 Gandhi had gone full circle: from utter dis¬ 
approval of intercaste marriages to approval of only intercaste 
marriages. 

He had opposed marriages between religions. But he came to 
favour those too. He congratulated Dr. Humayun Kabir, a 
Moslem writer, on taking a Hindu wife, and approved of B. K. 
Nehru’s marrying a Hungarian Jewess. 

363 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

Caste is as deeply ingrained in India as the family is in the 
Western world. Yet Gandhi could change his views on it. In 
later years, his ideas on celibacy also moderated. In 1935, Pro¬ 
fessor J. B. Kripalani, a disciple of Gandhi who had first met the 
Mahatma at Shantiniketan in 1915 and again in Ghamparan in 
1917, fell in love with a Bengali girl and wanted to marry her. 
Gandhi summoned the girl, Sucheta, and tried to dissuade her. 
‘Marriage will ruin him, 5 he said. It would weaken his concentra¬ 
tion on social problems. Gandhi advised her to marry somebody 
else. 

A year later, however, Gandhi called Sucheta and gave his 
approval to the marriage. ‘I shall pray for both of you, 5 he said. 
Subsequently, he treated her as a daughter. 

In the ashram, too, Gandhi became more tolerant of marriage 
and stopped insisting that marriages be sexless. 

As a crusader, Gandhi had to be positive about his opinions. 
As a devotee of the truth, he had to be able to change them. He 
sometimes defended his position with a persistence that seemed 
immodest; yet he also altered it, when necessary, with a complete¬ 
ness that embarrassed his followers but never him. Though he 
usually tried to prove his consistency, he admitted his inconsis¬ 
tencies. He could be adamant and softly yielding. He dictated to 
Congress in one period and left it to its fate and follies in another. 
Tremendous power was at his command but it often remained 
unused; in very crucial issues he bowed to the wishes of opponents 
whom he could have broken with a crook of a finger. He had the 
might of a dictator and the mind of a democrat. Power gave him 
no pleasure; he had no distorted psychology to feed. The result 
was a relaxed man. The problem of maintaining an impression 
of omniscience, infallibility, omnipotence and dignity never 
occupied him. 

Part of every leader’s equipment is a wall. It may be high and 
made of brick and a battalion of guards or it may consist of an 
unanswered question and an enigmatic smile. Its purpose is to 
lend distance and awe and to obscure frailties and secrets. There 
was no wall around Gandhi. ‘I say without the least hesitation,’ 
he once declared, ‘that I have never had recourse to cunning in all 
his life.’ His mind and emotions were even more exposed than 
my body. 


364 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


‘My darkest hour’, Gandhi wrote in Harijan of December 26th, 
1936, at the age of sixty-seven, ‘was when I was in Bombay a few 
months ago. It was the hour of my temptation. Whilst I was 
asleep I suddenly felt as though I wanted to see a woman. Well 
a man who had tried to rise superior to the instinct for nearly 
forty years was bound to be intensely pained when he had this 
frightful experience. I ultimately conquered the feeling, but I 
was face to face with the blackest moment of my life and if I had 
succumbed to it, it would have meant my absolute undoing.’ 
Most people are incapable of such nudity and many would think 
it unnecessary. But it is the supreme manifestation of life without 
a wall. He wanted the world to know him, all of him; less than 
that would not have been the truth. And he told the truth about 
his inner struggles and outer contacts so that others might learn 
from them. ‘As I have all along believed that what is possible for 
one is possible for all, my experiments have not been conducted 
in the closet, but in the open,’ Gandhi asserted. To say this 
sounds somewhat boastful; not to say it would have meant sup¬ 
pressing an inspiring message. 

Gandhi was the eternal teacher. He accordingly made himself 
accessible to all. The accessibility was not only complete, it was 
creative. 

In the 1930s, a young Indian named Atulananda Ghakrabarti 
wrote a pamphlet on the increasingly envenomed Hindu-Moslem 
problem. He of course sent a copy to the Mahatma. Usually a 
prominent person in any country limits his exertion in such cases 
to the sending of a formal, polite acknowledgment. Gandhi read 
the brochure and wrote the unknown author a detailed criticism 
of its ideas and proposals. He also referred to minor matters. For 
instance, ‘At page 151, you say India is “thousands of miles wide”. 
Is it? As a matter of fact not more than 1500. Then you have 
not given the dates to your quotations in the appendix except in 
one case . . . And think of the spelling mistakes. Unpardonable! 
But the book should serve a useful purpose in spite of the defects, 
if you have adhered to the truth.’ 

Encouraged by this unexpected attention, Atulananda asked 
whether he could come and live in the ashram for a while. Gandhi 
invited him and he stayed for several weeks. They became friends 
and corresponded regularly thereafter. Atulananda kept sending 

365 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


his articles to Gandhi for comments; he suggested a culture league 
to bring Hindus and Moslems together. In one reply, dated 
August 3rd, 1937, Gandhi wrote: 

Dear Atulananda, I hope your daughter is well and wholly out ot 
danger. I have gone through your articles carefully. I still do 
not see light. It seems to me that no culture league will answer 
the purpose you and I have in view. It has got to be done by indi¬ 
viduals who have a living faith and who would work with mis¬ 
sionary zeal. Try again, if I have not seen what you see in your 
proposal. I shall be patient and attentive. I want to help if I can 
see my way clear. 

Yours sincerely, 

M. K. Gandhi 

The letter was written by hand in ink on a small sheet of hand¬ 
made paper. 

Atulananda continued to concentrate on the Hindu-Moslem 
tension and suggested a book about it. Replying by postcard on 
June 17th, 1939, the Mahatma said, ‘The disease has gone too 
deep for books to help. Some big action is necessary. What I do 
not know as yet, Sincerely, M. K. Gandhi.’ 

Gandhi was in correspondence with many thousands of persons 
in India and elsewhere. In most cases, a letter became the seed 
of a prolonged personal relationship; he remembered members 
of the correspondent’s family and mentioned them by name. 
Originally approached on a general political or religious question 
he would soon be asked for advice on private matters. He was a 
motherly father to multitudes. 

In August 1947 Gandhi was in Calcutta coping with one of 
the ugliest crises in Indian history. City streets were running with 
Hindu and Moslem blood. One morning, Amiya Chakravarty 
came to see him. Amiya had been the literary secretary of Tagore. 
A cousin who was very dear to him had just died of an illness, and 
for comfort he wanted to share his sorrow with the Mahatma. He 
stood close to the wall in a corner of Gandhi’s room; Gandhi was 
writing. When he lifted his head, Amiya stepped forward and 
told him of his cousin’s passing. Gandhi made a friendly remark 
and invited him to the prayer meeting that evening. When Amiya 
arrived in the evening, Gandhi handed him a slip of paper and 

366 


WITHOUT POLITICS 


whispered, ‘It came straight from the heart so it may have some 
value.’ The note read: 

Dear Amiya, I am sorry for your loss which in reality is no loss. 
‘Death is but a sleep and a forgetting.’ This is such a sweet sleep 
that the body has not to wake again and the dead load of memory 
is thrown overboard. So far as I know, happily there is no meeting 
in the beyond as we have it today. When the isolated drops melt, 
they share the majesty of the ocean to which they belong. In 
isolation they die but to meet the ocean again. I do not know 
whether I have been clear enough to give you any comfort. Love, 
Bapu. 

'■'N 

The fact that he cared would have been comfort enough. He 
cared for one little person in the midst of his cares for the whole 
nation. He was convinced that politics is worth less than zero un¬ 
less it is an integral part of the everyday life of human beings. 
Gandhi’s unwalled existence was directed to the welfare of man¬ 
kind through concern for green vegetables in village diet, the 
aching heart of a bereaved relative, the choice of a girl’s husband, 
a mud pack for a sick peasant and an author’s spelling. Nobody 
rises above such little things; they constitute life; nobody lives in 
the rarefied air of isms and theological principles. 

Over a long period of years, Gandhi’s daily post averaged a 
hundred letters, often with enclosures. He answered about ten 
of them himself by hand, dictated the replies to some, and in¬ 
structed his secretaries how to answer others. No communication 
remained without a response. In numerous instances, where the 
correspondent did not object, Gandhi replied in Harijan. His 
weekly contributions to that magazine invariably took him two 
days of solid work. These too he wrote by hand; very rarely he 
dictated them. 

All the remainder of his long day he gave himself to visitors. 
Ashram members had their personal and general problems; 
workers in the organizations which Gandhi had established for 
Harijan and peasant welfare, the popularization of khadi, the 
development of a nationwide language, and for Indian-sponsored 
education wanted guidance; journalists wanted interviews; 
foreigners asked his views on every variety of subject; and, always, 
whether he was in politics or, as in the 1933 to 1939 period, 

367 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


officially withdrawn from politics, the great and small leaders of 
the Indian national movement sought his advice, approval and 
support. A few times in his life he spoke on the telephone. 
Usually, his conversations were face-to-face. It was not difficult 
to obtain an appointment with him. Except with a few important 
Indians or Englishmen, an interview might be attended by ten 
or more persons, but active participation was limited to Gandhi 
and the interviewer. Mrs. Margaret Sanger, birth-control advo¬ 
cate, visited Gandhi in December 1935; Yone Noguchi, the 
Japanese author, in January 1936; Lord Lothian, the British 
statesman, spent three days in Gandhi’s village in January 1938. 
The list of the Mahatma’s non-Indian guests looked like an inter¬ 
national Who’s Who. Outsiders felt that their sojourn in India 
was incomplete without a visit to Gandhi. 

They were right; he came as near being India as one person 
could be. He called himself a Harijan, Moslem, Christian, Hindu, 
farmer, weaver. He wove himself into the texture of India. He 
had the gift of identification with large masses and with many 
individuals. He aimed to free India the hard but lasting way: by 
freeing the human beings of India. This would be more difficult 
than political liberation from England. How could it be done? 
T can indicate no royal road for bringing about the social revolu¬ 
tion,’ he wrote in 1945, ‘except that we should represent it in 
every detail of our lives.’ Gandhi’s battlefield, therefore, was the 
hearts of men. There he made his home. He knew better than 
anybody how little of the battle had been fought and won. Yet 
without the social revolution in man’s daily conduct, he said, ‘we 
will not be able to leave India happier than when we were born*. 
The social revolution could not produce a new man. A new type 
of man would make the social revolution. 


368 


 

