CHAPTER XXIII 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 

W H a t an unhappy country! That was my first impression 
of India in May 1942, and the impression was deepened 
by my two months’ stay. Rich Indians were unhappy, 
poor Indians were unhappy, the British were unhappy. 

One did not have to be in India for more than a few days to 
realize how abysmally poor the people were. American and many 
European farmers would consider it bad for business to keep their 
livestock in accommodation as unhealthy as the tenements I 
visited with Dr. Ambedkar in Bombay; hundreds of thousands 
lived in them. Gandhi was fully dressed compared to the naked¬ 
ness of peasants one saw in villages. The vast majority of Indians 
are always, literally always, hungry. 

‘The expectation of life,’ says the 1931 British official census 
report on India, is ‘26.56 years for females and 26.91 for males.’ 
The average person born in India could look forward to only 
twenty-seven years of life. 

According to British figures, one hundred and twenty-five 
million Indians contracted malaria annually and only a few 
could afford a grain of quinine. Half a million Indians died of 
tuberculosis each year. 

Climate is only part of the explanation; an Indian community 
had a death rate five times higher than a neighbouring British 
settlement. 

Despite disease and mortality, India’s population was increasing 
by five million each year. This was the biggest problem of the 
nation. In i92i ? India had 304,000,000 inhabitants; in 1931, 
338,000,000; in 1941, 388,000,000. In the same twenty years the 
area under cultivation was practically stable and industry did not 
appreciably expand. The poorer the country the higher the birth 
rate. The higher the birth rate the poorer the country. 

The British in India stressed their achievements. But they did 
not deny the cankers. They blamed the Hindu religion and 
Moslem backwardness; Indians blamed England. It was an 

392 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


atmosphere in which work and life were becoming increasingly 
unsatisfactory for the British. 

Englishmen whose families had made India their career for 
more than a century knew that there was no future for them here. 
India did not want them and they sensed it and were sad. Sir 
Gilbert Laithwaite, the Viceroy’s private secretary, and Major- 
General Moles worth, Assistant to Wavell as Commander-in- 
Ghief, bicycled to and from work under the hot Indian sun to save 
petrol though they had cars and drivers. Many of the British were 
good men, but India preferred to be ruled by bad Indians. 
Governing unwilling India was no longer ‘fun’; the British 
officials were as sick of India as India was of them. Twenty years 
of Gandhi’s non-violence had destroyed their faith in the future 
of the Empire. 

A typical New Delhi university student delivered a passionate 
diatribe against Britain. I said to him, ‘Tell me, since you dislike 
the British so violently, would you want Japan to invade and 
conquer India?’ 

‘No,’ he replied, ‘but we Indians pray that God may give the 
British enough strength to stand up under the blows they deserve.’ 

Some Indians went to the length of preferring Japan to England. 

No Indian party or group was supporting the war except the 
Communists. After Hitler invaded Russia in June 1941, they 
supported Britain, and the British imperialists in India supported 
them but did not relish the unnatural liaison. 

I heard Nehru address a hundred thousand in Bombay. The 
Communists formed a heckling island in the vast ocean cf brown 
faces and white clothes. ‘This is a people’s war,’ they chorused. 

‘If you think it is a people’s war go and ask the people,’ Nehru 
shouted. That and the public’s hostile reaction silenced them. 
They knew he told the truth and the British knew it too. 

‘I would fight Japan sword in hand,’ Nehru declared, ‘but I 
can only do so as a free man.’ 

India could have been held if it had had no freedom, just as a 
dictator can rule by complete suppression. But the moment 
Nehru was free enough to say he was not free, India’s freedom was 
inevitable. That is why Gandhi always insisted on freedom of 
speech as the irreducible minimum. The British administrators 
in India saw this even when London did not. 


393 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


‘We will be out of here two years after the war ends/ Sir 
Reginald Maxwell, Home Member in the Viceroy’s Council, told 
me in his home at dinner. He was in charge of police and internal 
order, and the Indians hated him, but he had no illusions because 
to him Empire was a daily grind while to Churchill it was 
romance. 

The Viceroy said to me, ‘We are not going to remain in India. 
Of course, Congress does not believe this. But we will not stay 
here. We are preparing for our departure.’ 

When I reported these opinions to Indians they did not believe 
them. They argued bitterly: Churchill and many lesser Churchills 
in New Delhi and the provinces will obstruct independence or 
vitiate it by vivisecting the country. 

Nehru said to me, ‘Gandhi has straightened our backs and 
stiffened our spines.’ 

You cannot ride a straight back. 

Independence was near. But the present was so black that few 
could see the future. History had stood still so long in India that 
nobody foresaw how fast it was about to move. Indians resented 
the stagnation; it gave them a sense of frustration. 

In Bombay I talked to J. R. D. Tata, the head of the big steel- 
chemicals-airlines-textiles-hotels trust. His father was Parsi, his 
mother French; he speaks excellent English and French and is 
intelligent and cultured. He said he was unhappy because 
strangers ruled his country. On his desk stood several brightly 
polished two-inch anti-tank shells which a Tata mill was making 
for the British — and a plastic plaque of Mahatma Gandhi. 

An American general stationed in India said ‘the British are 
like a drop of oil in a bucket of water’. 

The Viceroy talked about Gandhi. ‘Make no mistake about it,’ 
he asserted. ‘The old man is the biggest thing in India . . . He 
has been good to me ... If he had come from South Africa and 
been only a saint he might have taken India very far. But he 
was tempted by politics. Make no mistake. His influence is 
very great.’ 

Gandhi, he said, was now contemplating some kind of civil 
disobedience campaign. ‘I have been here six years,’ Lord Lin¬ 
lithgow declared, ‘and I have learned restraint. I sit here until 
late in the evening studying reports and carefully digesting them, 

394 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 

I will not take precipitate action. But if I felt that Gandhi was 
obstructing the war effort I would have to bring him under con¬ 
trol . 5 He struck the desk with his hand and the four telephones 
tinkled. 

I said it would be bad if Gandhi died in jail. 

T know , 5 the Viceroy agreed. ‘He is old, and you know you 
can’t feed the old man. He is like a dog and can empty his 
stomach at will... I hope none of this will be necessary but I 
have a grave responsibility and I cannot permit the old man to 
interfere with the war effort . 5 

Nehru was going down to Sevagram to consult the Mahatma 
about the contemplated civil disobedience action. I asked him to 
arrange an interview for me. Soon I received a telegram reading: 
‘Welcome. Mahadev Desai . 5 

I got out of the train at the small town of Wardha, was met by 
an emissary from Gandhi and slept on the roof of a Congress 
hostel; all night the orange-white-green Congress flag played a 
Morse code in the breeze. Early in the morning, I took a tonga 
with Gandhi’s dentist for Sevagram. (A tonga is a one-horse, 
two-wheel vehicle in which passengers sit behind the driver with 
their backs to the horse.) I tried to make him talk about Gandhi’s 
teeth. He talked about British politics. 

The tonga stopped where the dirt road met the village. There 
stood Gandhi. He said, ‘Mr. Fischer , 5 with a British accent and 
we shook hands. He greeted the dentist and turned round and I 
followed him to a bench. He sat down, put his palm on the bench 
and said, ‘Sit down . 5 The way he sat down first and the way he 
touched the bench with his hand was like saying, ‘This is my 
house, come in . 5 I felt at home immediately. 

Each day I had an hour’s interview with Gandhi; there was 
also an opportunity for conversation at meals; in addition, I 
walked with him once or twice a day. I usually arrived for the 
morning constitutional while he was still sitting on his bed in the 
open air eating mango pulp. Between spoonfuls he plunged into 
serious discussion. Breakfast finished, he accepted a towel and a 
long, rectangular, narrow-necked, corked bottle of water from 
Kasturbai and washed his hands before starting on the stroll 
across nearby fields. Kasturbai, with sunken face, straight mouth 
and square jaw, seemed to listen attentively, but I did not hear 

395 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


or see her say a single word to her husband during the entire 
week, nor he to her. At meals and prayers she sat slightly behind 
his left shoulder fanning him solicitously. She always looked at 
him; he rarely looked at her, yet he wanted her nearest to him 
and there appeared to be perfect understanding between them. 

During walks, Gandhi kept his arms on the shoulders of two 
young girls or boys but moved forward with long quick strides 
and kept up a rapid conversation without losing breath or, appar¬ 
ently, tiring. The walk lasted not less than half an hour. When he 
returned I was ready for rest and leaned against a post while he 
continued to speak. 

Gandhi was well built, with fine muscular bulging chest, thin 
waist, and long thin firm legs, bare from sandals to short, tight 
loincloth. His knees were pronounced bulges and his bones wide 
and strong; his hands were big and the fingers big and firm. His 
chocolate-coloured skin was soft, smooth and healthy. He was 
seventy-three. His fingernails, hands, feet, body were immaculate; 
the loincloth, the cheesecloth cape he occasionally wore in the 
sun, and the folded, moistened kerchief on his head were bright 
white. Once a drop of yellow mango juice stained his loincloth 
and he scratched it intermittently during an hour. 

His body did not look old. He did not give one a feeling that 
he was old. His head showed his age. His head was large, wide 
at the top and tapering down to a small face; big ears extended 
away from it abruptly. His upper lip, covered with a black-and- 
white stubble moustache, was so narrow that it almost met the 
fat, down-pointed nose. The expression of his face came from his 
soft and gentle eyes, the sensitive lower lip which combined self- 
control with strength and showed suffering, and the ever-present 
smile revealing naked gums. (He wore his dentures only for 
eating and took them out and washed them in public; he wore 
gold-rimmed bifocals; he shaved his face every day with a straight 
razor, but sometimes one of the men or women disciples shaved 
him.) 

His facial features, with the exception of his quiet, confident 
eyes, were ugly and in repose his face would have been ugly, but 
it was rarely in repose. Whether he was speaking or listening, it 
was alive and registering actively. He spoke with a low, sing¬ 
song, undistinguished voice (many Indians have the same sing- 

396 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 

song when they speak English) and he gestured eloquently, but 
not always, with the fingers of one hand. His hands were beautiful. 

Lloyd George looked like a great man. One could not help 
seeing that Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt had stature and 
distinction. Not Gandhi. (Nor Lenin.) Outwardly he had noth¬ 
ing remarkable about him; perhaps the lower lip. His personality 
was in what he was and what he had done and what he said. I 
felt no awe in Gandhi’s presence. I felt I was in the presence of a 
very sweet, gentle, informal, relaxed, happy, wise, highly civilized 
man. I felt, too, the miracle of personality, for by sheer force of 
personality, without an organization — Congress was a loose 
organization — or government behind him, Gandhi had radiated 
his influence to the far ends of a disunited country and, indeed, to 
every corner of a divided world. He did it not through his writ¬ 
ings; few people anywhere had read his books, and his articles, 
though known abroad and republished widely in India, were not 
the source of his hold on people. He reached people through direct 
contact, action, example and loyalty to a few simple, universally 
flouted principles: non-violence, truth, and the exaltation of 
means above ends. 

The big names of recent history: Churchill, Roosevelt, Lloyd 
George, Stalin, Lenin, Hitler, Woodrow Wilson, the Kaiser, 
Lincoln, Napoleon, Metternich, Talleyrand, etc., had the power 
of states at their disposal. The only non-official figure comparable 
to Gandhi in his effect on men’s minds is Karl Marx whose dogma, 
however, was a prescription for a system of government. One has 
to go back centuries to find men who appealed as strongly as 
Gandhi did to the conscience of individuals. They were men of 
religion, in another era. Gandhi showed that the spirit of Christ 
and of some Christian fathers, and of Buddha and of some Hebrew 
prophets and Greek sages, could be applied in modern times and 
to modern politics. He did not preach about God or religion; 
he was a living sermon. He was a good man in a world where 
few resist the corroding influence of power, wealth and vanity. 
There he sat, four-fifths naked, on the earth in a mud hut in a 
tiny Indian village without electricity, radio, running water, or 
telephone. It was a situation least conducive to awe, pontification, 
or legend. He was in every sense down-to-earth. He knew that 
life consists of the details of life. 


397 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

‘Now put on your shoes and hat,’ Gandhi said. ‘Those are two 
indispensable things here. Don’t get a sunstroke.’ It was no° 
with practically no shade except inside the huts, which were like 
heated ovens. ‘Come along,’ he said in a friendly tone of mock 
command. I followed him to the common dining hall which 
consisted of two long walls of matting connected by a third back 
wall of the same material. Where one entered, the building was 
open to the elements. 

Gandhi sat down on a cushion near the entrance. At his left 
was Kasturbai, on his right Narendra Dev, an Indian Socialist 
leader whom the Mahatma had undertaken to cure of asthma. I 
was Dev’s neighbour. There were about thirty diners. Women 
sat apart. Several bright-eyed, brown-faced youngsters, between 
the ages of three and eight, were opposite me. Everyone had a 
thin straw mat under him and a brass tray in front of him on the 
ground. Male and female waiters, members of the ashram, moved 
noiselessly on bare feet, depositing food on the trays. A number of 
pots and pans were placed near Gandhi’s legs. He handed me a 
bronze bowl filled with a vegetable stew in which I thought I 
discerned chopped spinach leaves and pieces of squash. A woman 
poured some salt on my tray and another gave me a metal tumbler 
with warm water and another with warm milk. Then she came 
back with two little boiled potatoes in their jackets and some 
soft, flat wheatcakes baked brown. Gandhi handed me one hard, 
paper-thin wheatcake from a metal container in front of him. 

A gong sounded; a robust man in white shorts stopped waiting 
on the trays, stood erect, closed his eyes leaving only a white slit 
open — it made him look blind — and started a high-pitched chant 
in which all others, including Gandhi, joined. The prayer ended 
with ‘Shahnti, Shahnti, Shahnti’ which, Dev said, means ‘Peace’. 

Everyone started eating with their fingers, fishing out the veget¬ 
able stew with a wheatcake folded in four. I was given a tea¬ 
spoon and then spme butter for the cake. Gandhi munched busily, 
stopping only to serve his wife, Dev and me. 

‘You have lived in Russia for fourteen years,’ was his first politi¬ 
cal /remark to me. ‘What is your opinion of Stalin?’ 

I was very hot, and my hands were sticky, and I had commenced 
to discover my ankles and legs from sitting on them, so I replied 
briefly, ‘Very able and very ruthless.’ 

398 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


‘As ruthless as Hitler?’ he asked. 

‘At least.’ 

After a pause, he turned to me and said, ‘Have you seen the 
Viceroy?’ I told him I had, but he dropped the subject. 

‘You can have all the water you want,’ he told me. ‘We take 
good care that it is boiled. And now eat your mango.’ I began to 
peel it and several people, Gandhi too, laughed. He explained 
that they usually turned it in their hands and squeezed it to make 
it soft and then sucked on one end, but he added that I was right 
to peel it to see whether it was good. 

Lunch was at eleven and dinner just before sundown. Kurshed 
Naoriji, a member of the ashram and granddaughter of Dadabhai 
Naoriji, brought my breakfast — tea, biscuits or bread with honey 
and butter and mango — to the mud-walled, bamboo-roofed 
guest hut where I lived. 

At lunch on the second day, Gandhi handed me a tablespoon 
for the vegetable dish. He said the tablespoon was more com¬ 
mensurate with my size. He offered me a boiled onion from his 
pot. I asked for a raw one instead; it was a relief from the flat 
food of the menu. 

At lunch on the third day, Gandhi said, ‘Fischer, give me your 
bowl and I will give you some of the vegetables.’ I said I had eaten 
the mess of spinach and squash four times in two days and had 
no desire for more. 

‘You don’t like vegetables,’ he commented. 

‘I don’t like the taste of these vegetables three days running.’ 

‘Ah,’ he exclaimed, ‘you must add plenty of salt and lemon.’ 

‘You want me to kill the taste,’ I interpreted. 

‘No , 5 he laughed, ‘enrich the taste.’ 

‘You are so non-violent you would not even kill a taste,’ I said. 

‘If that were the only thing men killed, I wouldn’t mind,’ he 
remarked. 

I wiped the perspiration from my face and neck. ‘Next time 
I’m in India . . .’ Gandhi was chewing and seemed not to have 
heard me so I stopped. 

‘Yes,’ he said, ‘the next time you are in India. . . .’ 

‘You either ought to have air-conditioning in Sevagram or live 
in the Viceroy’s palace.’ 

‘All right,’ Gandhi acquiesced. 

399 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


He encouraged banter. One afternoon when I came to his hut 
for the daily interview, he was not there. When he arrived he lay 
down on his bed. ‘I will take your blows lying down,’ he said, 
inviting questions. A Moslem woman gave him a mud pack for 
his abdomen. ‘This puts me in touch with my future,’ he said. 

I did not comment. 

‘I see you missed that one,’ he noted. 

I said I had not missed it but thought he was too young to 
think about returning to the dust. 

‘Why,’ he declared, ‘you and I and all of us, some in a hundred 
years, but all sooner or later, will do it.’ 

On another occasion he quoted a statement he had made to 
Lord Sankey in London; ‘Do you think,’ he had said, ‘I would 
have reached this green old age if I hadn’t taken care of myself? 
This is one of my faults.’ 

‘I thought you were perfect,’ I ventured. 

He laughed and the eight or ten members of the ashram who 
usually sat in on the interviews laughed. (He had asked me 
whether I objected to their presence.) ‘No,’ he declared. ‘I am 
very imperfect. Before you are gone you will have discovered a 
hundred of my faults and if you don’t, I will help you to see them.’ 

Usually the hour’s interview began with his finding the coolest 
place in the hut for me to sit. Then with a smile he would say, 
‘Now’, inviting ‘blows’. As the hour was about to end he would, 
with an unerring time sense, look at his big ‘dollar’ watch and 
proclaim, ‘Now, your hour is up.’ He was minutely punctual. 

One day when I was leaving his hut after a talk, he said, ‘Go 
and sit in a tub.’ I wondered whether that was the Indian 
equivalent of ‘go sit on a tack’. But crossing the sun-baked 
hundred yards between Gandhi’s hut and the guest hut, the heat 
made the inside of my head feel dry and I decided that sitting in 
a tub would be a very good idea. In fact I thought I could 
improve on it. Adjoining the one living-room-bedroom of the 
guest hut was a small water room with cement floor on which 
stood a variety of pots, pitchers, tubs and bowls; an old woman 
kept them filled with water. Six or seven times a day I would 
step into this bathroom, slip off the two pieces of clothing and 
sandals I wore, and take a standing splash bath with the aid of 
a cup. 


400 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


The worst ordeal of the day was typing the complete record of 
my conversations with Gandhi and others in the ashram, and with 
Nehru who came for two days of that week. After five minutes I 
was tired and wet all over with perspiration. Stimulated by 
Gandhi’s suggestion to sit in a tub, I placed a small wooden 
packing case in one of the tin wash-tubs filled with water, put a 
folded Turkish towel on the packing case, then set a somewhat 
larger wooden packing case just outside the tub and placed my 
portable typewriter on it. These arrangements made, I sat down 
on the box in the tub and typed my notes. At intervals of a few 
minutes, when I began to perspire, I dipped a bronze bowl into 
the tub and poured the water over my neck, back and legs. By 
that method I was able to type a whole hour without feeling 
exhausted. The innovation stirred the ashram to mirth and jolly 
comment. It was not a glum community. Gandhi saw to that. 
He made eyes at the little children, provoked adults to laughter 
and joked with all and sundry visitors. 

I asked Gandhi to be photographed with me. ‘If a photographer 
is around by accident,’ he replied, ‘I have no objection to being 
seen in a photograph with, you.’ 

‘That,’ I said, ‘is the biggest compliment you have paid me.’ 

‘Do you want compliments?’ he inquired. 

‘Don’t we all?’ 

‘Yes,’ Gandhi agreed, ‘but sometimes we have to pay too dearly 
for them.’ 

During the week he inquired whether I knew Upton Sinclair, 
Dr. Kellogg, the food specialist of Battle Creek, Michigan, and Mrs. 
Eleanor Roosevelt. But I noticed no general curiosity. He focused 
his attention on issues which he could affect and on questions 
put to him. 

I said I had been told that the Congress party was in the hands 
of big business and that he himself was supported by Bombay 
millowners. ‘What truth is there in these assertions?’ I probed. 

‘Unfortunately they are true,’ he affirmed. ‘Congress hasn’t 
enough money to conduct its work. We thought in the beginning 
to collect four annas from each member per year and operate on 
that. But it hasn’t worked.’ 

‘What proportion of the Congress budget,’ I pressed, ‘is covered 
by rich Indians?’ 

401 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


‘Practically all of it,’ he admitted. ‘In this ashram, for instance, 
we could live much more poorly than we do and spend less 
money. But we do not and the money comes from our rich friends. 5 

(There is a famous quip attributed to Mrs. Naidu, which 
Gandhi enjoyed tremendously, to the effect that ‘it costs a great 
deal of money to keep Gandhiji living in poverty 5 .) 

‘Doesn’t the fact that Congress gets its money from the moneyed 
interests affect Congress politics? 5 I asked. ‘Doesn’t it create a 
moral obligation? 5 

‘It creates a silent debt, 5 he stated. ‘But actually we are very 
little influenced by the thinking of the rich. They are sometimes 
afraid of our demand for full independence . . . The dependence 
of Congress on rich sponsors is unfortunate. I use the word 
“unfortunate 55 . It does not pervert our policy. 5 

‘Isn’t one of the results that there is a concentration on national- 

i 

ism almost to the exclusion of social and economic problems? 5 

‘No, 5 he replied. ‘Congress has from time to time, especially 
under the influence of Pandit Nehru, adopted advanced social 
programmes and schemes for economic planning. I will have 
those collected for you. 5 

Most of the money for the maintenance of Gandhi’s ashram and 
of Gandhi’s organizations for Harijan and peasant uplift and the 
teaching of a national language came from G. D. Birla, million¬ 
aire textile manufacturer at whose house in New Delhi the 
Mahatma sometimes, lived. Birla first saw Gandhi in 1920 in 
Calcutta. On Gandhi’s arrival at the railway station, Birla, then 
a young broker, and several friends unhitched the horses of the 
Mahatma’s landau and pulled it through the streets. Birla became 
a devotee. He did not agree with some of the Mahatma’s policies, 
but that did not matter; Gandhi was his ‘father 5 , he says. Had 
Birla believed in the spinning wheel he would have had to close 
his mills, but he did not believe in it. After the death of Birla’s 
wife, he never remarried and became a Brahmachari; that was 
probably part of the bond between him and Gandhi. Gandhi 
first went to Birla’s house in 1933 for ten days. Subsequently, he 
stayed a number of times for shorter or longer periods. Often, 
however, Gandhi preferred to make his headquarters in the Delhi 
Harijan colony near Kings way; his upkeep there cost Birla fifty 
rupees a day. The ashram, including its hospital and dairy, cost 

402 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


Birla an estimated fifty thousand rupees a year and he supported 
it after 1935; never kept accounts of what he gave Gandhi. 
But Gandhi wrote out in his own hand every smallest item of 
expenditure and presented it to Birla who tore it up before Gandhi’s 
eyes without examining it. In addition, Birla backed many wel¬ 
fare institutions in which Gandhi was interested. His outlay for 
Gandhian enterprises ran into millions of rupees. Gandhi’s friend¬ 
ship gave Birla prestige and satisfaction and perhaps even business 
advantages, for he learned many political secrets from the 
Mahatma. But had the occasion demanded, Gandhi might have 
led a strike of Birla’s mill workers, as he did in the case of his 
friend and financial backer, Ambalal Sarabhai of Ahmedabad. 
Gandhi was tolerant of capitalists even when he opposed capitalist 
exploitation; he was equally tolerant of Englishmen after die 
turned against the British Empire. He would undoubtedly have 
stayed in Churchill’s house. He was too sure of his purity and 
purpose to think he could be contaminated. To Gandhi nobody 
was an untouchable, neither Birla, nor a Communist, nor a Hari- 
jan, nor an imperialist. He fanned the spark of virtue wherever 
he discovered it. He allowed for the diversity of human nature 
and the multiplicity of man’s motives. 

Early in the week I spent at the ashram in June 1942, it became 
obvious that Gandhi was determined to launch a civil disobedience 
campaign with a view to making England ‘Quit India’. That was 
to be the slogan. 

Gandhi felt that unless England purged herself by leaving 
India the war could not be won and the peace could not be won. 

One afternoon, after Gandhi had talked at length about the 
reasons that were prompting him to start civil disobedience against 
the British government, I said, Tt seems to me that the British 
cannot possibly quit India altogether. That would mean making 
a present of India to Japan; England would never agree, nor would 
the United States approve. If you demand that the British pack 
up and go bag and baggage, you are simply asking the impossible; 
you are barking up a tree. You do not mean, do you, that they 
must also withdraw their armies?’ 

For at least two minutes Gandhi said nothing. The silence in 
the room was almost audible. 

‘You are right,’ Gandhi said at last. ‘No, Britain and America 

cc m.g. 403 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


and other countries too can keep their armies here and use Indian 
territory as a base for military operations. I do not wish Japan to 
win the war. But I am sure that Britain cannot win unless the 
Indian people become free. Britain is weaker and Britain is 
morally indefensible while she rules India. I do not wish to 
humiliate England.* 

‘But if India is to be used as a military base by the democracies, 
many other things are involved. Armies do not exist in a vacuum. 
For instance, the western allies would need good organization 
on the railroads.* 

‘Oh,’ he exclaimed, ‘they could operate the railroads. They 
would need order in the ports where they received their supplies. 
They could not have riots in Bombay and Calcutta. These matters 
would require co-operation and common effort.* 

‘Could the terms of this collaboration be set forth in a treaty of 
alliance?* 

‘Yes,* he agreed, ‘we could have a written agreement. . . .’ 

‘Why have you not said this?* I asked. ‘I must confess that when 
I heard of your proposed civil disobedience movement I was 
prejudiced against it. I believe that it would impede the prosecu¬ 
tion of the war. I think the war has to be fought and won. I see 
complete darkness for the world if the Axis wins. I think we have 
a chance for a better world if we win.’ 

‘There I cannot quite agree,* he argued. ‘Britain often cloaks 
herself in the cloth of hypocrisy, promising what she later does not 
deliver. But I accept the proposition that there is a better chance 
if the democracies win.* 

‘It depends on the kind of peace we make,’ I said. 

‘It depends on what you do during the war,’ he corrected. ‘I 
am not interested in future promises. I am not interested in 
independence after the war. I want independence now. That 
will help England win the war.* 

‘Why,’ I again inquired, ‘have you not communicated your 
plan to the Viceroy? He should be told that you have no objection 
now to the use of India as a base for Allied military operations.’ 

‘No one has asked me,’ he replied weakly. 

Several of Gandhi’s most intimate disciples were unhappy over 
his readiness to tolerate British and other armed forces in India. 
They felt his statement to me a serious blunder. He himself 

404 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


admitted publicly that he had changed his mind. ‘There was 
obviously a gap in my first writing,’ he said in Harijan shortly 
after my interview with him. ‘I filled it in as soon as it was dis¬ 
covered by one of my numerous interviewers. Non-violence 
demands the strictest honesty, cost what it may. The public have 
therefore to suffer my weakness, if weakness it be. I could not be 
guilty of asking the Allies to take a step which would involve 
certain defeat. . . Abrupt withdrawal of the Allied troops might' 
result in Japan’s occupation of India and China’s sure fall. I had 
not the remotest idea of any such catastrophe resulting from my 
action. . . .’ 

Before I left the ashram Mahadev Desai asked me to tell the 
Viceroy that Gandhi wished to see him. The Mahatma was 
prepared to compromise and perhaps to abandon the projected 
civil disobedience movement. In New Delhi, later, I received a 
letter from Gandhi for transmission to President Roosevelt. The 
accompanying note said, characteristically, ‘If it does not com¬ 
mend itself to you, you may tear it to pieces.’ 

He was malleable. ‘Tell your President I wish to be dissuaded,’ 
he told me. He was deeply convinced, however, that India should 
be granted self-government during the war; if the anti-Axis 
powers did not understand this he would call it to their attention 
by a civil disobedience campaign. ‘Your President,’ Gandhi 
declared one afternoon, ‘talks about the Four Freedoms. Do they 
include the freedom to be free?’ 

Gandhi felt that the democratic position on India was morally 
indefensible. Roosevelt or Linlithgow could dissuade him by 
changing the position. Otherwise he had no doubts. Nehru and 
Azad did. Rajagopalachari had resigned from the Congress 
leadership because of his differences with the Mahatma. Gandhi 
could not be shaken. He convinced Nehru and Azad. Nehru 
had considered the foreign and domestic situation inopportune. 
‘I argued with him for days together,’ Gandhi reported. ‘He 
fought against my position with a passion which I have no words 
to describe.’ Nehru’s personal contacts, Gandhi explained, ‘make 
him feel much more the misery of the impending ruin of China 
and Russia ... In that misery he tried to forget his old quarrel 
with [British] imperialism’. But before Nehru left the ashram 
‘the logic of facts’, as Gandhi put it, ‘overwhelmed him’. Indeed, 

405 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Nehru became such a staunch supporter of the proposed civil 
disobedience campaign that when I asked him subsequently in 
Bombay whether Gandhi ought to see the Viceroy, he replied, ‘No, 
what for?’ Gandhi was still hoping for an audience with Linlithgow. 

I left the ashram on June ioth in the car that took Azad and 
Nehru to the Congress hostel in Wardha. Several hours later, the 
car returned to Sevagram to fetch Gandhi for further consulta¬ 
tions with the two Congress leaders. At three in the afternoon, 
Gandhi entered the hostel alone. Three-quarters of a mile from 
Wardha the car had broken down. Gandhi got out and walked 
the distance in the broiling Indian afternoon June sun. When he 
reached the house he was in a gay mood; if he suffered from 
fatigue it was not noticeable and must have retreated before the 
pleasure of being able to comment on the unreliability of ‘these 
new-fangled technical achievements of the industrial age*. 

He had great charm. He was a remarkable natural pheno¬ 
menon, quiet and insidiously overwhelming. Intellectual contact 
with him was a delight because he opened his mind and allowed 
one to see how the machine worked. He did not attempt to express 
his ideas in finished form. He thought aloud; he revealed each 
step in his thinking. You heard not only words but also his 
thoughts. You could therefore follow him as he moved to a con¬ 
clusion. This prevented him from talking like a propagandist; he 
talked like a friend. He was interested in an exchange of views, 
but much more in the establishment of a personal relationship. 

Even when evasive Gandhi was frank. I was asking him about 
his dreams of the post-independence India. He argued back and 
forth. ‘You want to force me into an admission,’ he said, ‘that 
we would need rapid industrialization. I will not be forced into 
such an admission. Our first problem is to get rid of British rule. 
Then we will be free, without restraints from the outside, to do 
what India requires. The British have seen fit to allow us to have 
some factories and also to prohibit other factories. No, for me the 
paramount problem is the ending of British domination.’ 

That, obviously, was what he wanted to talk about; he did not 
conceal his desire. His brain had no blue pencil. He said, for 
instance, that he would go to Japan to try to end the war. He 
knew, and immediately added, that he would never get an 
opportunity to go and, if he went, Japan would not make peace. 

406 


MY WEEK WITH GANDHI 


He knew too that his statement would be misinterpreted. Then 
why did he make it? Because he thought it. 

Gandhi asserted that a federal administration would be un¬ 
necessary in an independent India. I pointed out the difficulties 
that would arise in the absence of a federal administration. He 
was not convinced. I was baffled. Finally he said, ‘I know that 
despite my personal views there will be a central government.’ 
This was a characteristic Gandhi cycle: he enunciated a principle, 
defended it, then admitted with a laugh that it was unworkable. 
In negotiation, this faculty could be extremely irritating and time- 
wasting. In personal conversation, it was attractive and even 
exciting. He himself was sometimes surprised at the things he 
said. His thinking was fluid. Most persons like to be proved 
right. So did Gandhi. But frequently he snatched a victory out 
of an error by admitting it. 

Old people are prone to reminiscences. Lloyd George would 
commence to answer a question on current events and soon be 
talking about his conduct of the first World War or a campaign 
for social reform early in the century. At seventy-three, Gandhi 
never reminisced. His mind was on things to come. Years did 
not matter to him because he thought in terms of the unending 
future. Only the hours mattered because they were the measure 
of what he could contribute to that future. 

Gandhi had more than influence, he had authority, which is 
less yet better than power. Power is the attribute of a machine; 
authority is the attribute of a person. Statesmen are varying 
combinations of both. The dictator’s constant accretion of power 
which he must inevitably abuse, steadily robs him of authority 
Gandhi’s rejection of power enhanced his authority. Power feed 
on the blood and tears of its victims. Authority is fed by service 
sympathy and affection. 

One evening I watched Mahadev Desai spin. I said I had been 
listening carefully to Gandhi and studying my notes and wonder¬ 
ing all the time what was the source of his hold on people; I had 
come to the tentative conclusion that it was his passion. 

‘That is right,’ Desai said. 

‘What is the root of his passion?’ I asked. 

‘This passion,’ Desai explained, ‘is the sublimation of all the 
passions that flesh is heir to.’ 


407 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


‘Sex?’ 

‘Sex and anger and personal ambition . . . Gandhi is under his 
own complete control. That generates tremendous energy and 
passion.’ 

It was a subdued, purring passion. He had a soft intensity, a 
tender firmness and an impatience cotton-wooled in patience. 
Gandhi’s colleagues and the British sometimes resented his 
intensity, firmness and impatience. But he retained their respect, 
often their love, through his softness, tenderness and patience. 

Gandhi sought approval; he was very happy when the great 
Tagore agreed with him. But he could defy the whole world and 
his political next-of-kin. 

Gandhi was a strong individual, and his strength lay in the 
richness of his personality, not in the multitude of his possessions. 
His goal was To be, not To have. Happiness came to him through 
self-realization. Fearing nothing, he could live the truth. Having 
nothing, he could pay for his principles. 

Mahatma Gandhi is the symbol of the unity between personal 
morality and public action. When conscience dwells at home but 
not in the workshop, office, classroom and market-place, the road 
is wide open to corruption and cruelty and to dictatorship. 

Gandhi enriched politics with ethics. He faced each morning’s 
issues in the light of eternal and universal values. He always 
distilled a permanent element out of the ephemeral. Gandhi thus 
broke through the framework of usual assumptions which cramp 
a man’s action. He discovered a new dimension of action. Un¬ 
confined by considerations of personal success or comfort, he 
split the social atom and found a new source of energy. It gave 
him weapons of attack against which there was often no defence. 
His greatness lay in doing what everybody could do but doesn’t. 

‘Perhaps he will not succeed,’ Tagore wrote of the living 
Gandhi. ‘Perhaps he will fail as the Buddha failed and as Christ 
failed to wean men from their iniquities, but he will always be 
remembered as one who made his life a lesson for all ages to 
come.’ 


408 


 

