CHAPTER VII 


THE HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN 

INDIA 


hroughout the last thirty years of his life, from 1918 



to 1948, Mahatma Gandhi fought three major battles: the 


JL battle with himself, the battle with Indians and the battle 
with Britain. 

From remote antiquity to modern times, India has been invaded 
twenty-six times. The British invasion was the last. Until the end 
of the fifteenth century, all of India’s conquerors came overland 
and all, except Baber, approached through what is now Russian 
Turkestan, crossed the Hindu Kush where the passes are from 
12,000 to 16,000 feet above sea level and then filed through the 
narrow Khyber Pass to the Suleiman mountain range and the 
banks of the Indus and beyond. 

Semiramis, Queen of Assyria, sent an army into India via 
Turkestan twenty-two centuries before Christ. Cyrus of Persia 
repeated this performance in 530 b.c. North-west India remained 
under Persian domination (Indians probably fought the Greeks 
at Marathon) until Alexander the Great of Macedon swept out 
of Greece at the head of an army of 40,000 men, quickly subdued 
Syria, Egypt and Palestine, defeated Persia at Arbela, marched 
to the Oxus and Samarkand and then, climbing the Hindu Kush, 
entered India in 326 b.c., at the age of thirty. After a nineteen 
months’ stay, Alexander, a pupil of Aristotle, left for home, taking 
with him several Indian philosophers. He died two years later 
in Babylon. 

The Greeks, and subsequently the Romans, carried to the West 
the achievements of Indian science. The so-called ‘Arabic’ 
numerals were invented in India. The zero is an Indian concept. 
An Indian brain likewise evolved the present world-wide system 
of numeral placement: the system whereby a one with a four after 
it is fourteen and a four with a one after it is forty-one. 

Attracted by the wealth and mystery of India, more fabled 


182 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


conquerors, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadir Shah and others, 
added their scratches to Indian history and withdrew with loot 
and lore. 

On July 8th, 1497, five years after Columbus in three Spanish 
vessels discovered America, Vasco da Gama in three Portuguese 
ships, the largest of which displaced 150 tons, anchored off the 
south-west shore of India. Thus began the first seaborne invasion 
of India. 

The Papal bulls of 1493 and an agreement with Spain gave 
Portugal, then a world power, a Catholic monopoly in south¬ 
east Asia. That did not prevent the Dutch from establishing 
several lucrative trading posts in India early in the sixteenth 
century. The French followed a few years later. They sent home 
pepper, cinnamon and other spices. 

England hesitated to encroach on the formidable Portuguese. 
Instead, since they had wool to sell which torrid southern Asia 
did not need, the British searched for a north-west passage through 
North America and a north-east passage around northern Europe 
to the colder regions of China. But when this quest proved vain, 
England, emboldened by her victory over the Spanish Armada in 
July 1588, dared to defy Portugal, Spain’s confederate, and dis¬ 
patched her first expedition into the Indian Ocean in 1591. 
Despite the war with Spain and Portugal, other British expedi¬ 
tions followed. The peace signed with these nations increased the 
traffic and intensified the commercial competition. 

An East India Company was formed in London in 1600; its 
renewed charter of 1609 gave it a British trade monopoly in Asia 
unlimited in time and space. 

War greased the wheels of business. The Dutch, vigorous and 
aggressive and supported by all the military might of the home¬ 
land, took the offensive against Portuguese settlements in India 
and, with British co-operation, achieved considerable success. In 
1625, an Anglo-Dutch fleet defeated the Portuguese. The victors 
divided the spoils. 

In 1642,, England abandoned the Dutch and became Portugal’s 
ally. As reward, British merchants won unhampered trade 
facilities with all Portuguese possessions in Asia except Macao. 
Ten years later, Britain went to war with Holland in Europe and 
Anglo-Portuguese forces fought the Dutch in India. At the 

183 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

cessation of hostilities in 1654, Britain extended her power in 
India at Holland’s expense. 

Wars, intrigues with Indian provincial warlords, and shrewd 
trading filled the coffers of the East India Company and en¬ 
hanced its power. In the first half of the seventeenth century, 
England was importing cotton piece-goods, indigo, drugs, lac, 
sugar and carpets from India. Indian calicoes were a special 
favourite with British housewives. In return, the Company 
brought to India broadcloth, industrial metals and gold. In 1668, 
the Company received from the British King the former Portu¬ 
guese possession of Bombay with its magnificent undeveloped 
harbour. With royal assent, a similar British position was estab¬ 
lished on the eastern coast at Madras. Feuds between the Moslem 
or Mogul emperors of India and the warlike Maratha Hindus of 
south-central India, in the area centring on Poona, east of Bombay, 
enabled the Company to proclaim the fusion of money-making 
and imperialism; it announced in December 1687, that it proposed 
to create such civil and military institutions ‘as may be the founda¬ 
tion of a large, well-grounded, sure English dominion in India 
for all time to come’. 

The accretion of British power moved with accelerated speed. 
The process was simple: early in 1749, for instance, Prince Shahji, 
native potentate of the state of Tanjore, on the south-east coast, 
was dethroned by a rival; he offered the British a town called 
Devikottai at the place where the Coleroon River empties into 
the Bay of Bengal ‘on condition’, says The Cambridge History of 
India , ‘of their helping him to recover the throne’. After a few 
days of siege, Devikottai surrendered. ‘The English kept it with 
the country belonging to it; and as for Shahji,’ the British 
chronicle notes, ‘no one thought of restoring him to his throne.’ 

Anybody wronged by the British was wooed by the French and 
vice versa. When Nawab Siraj-ud-daula, exploiting the dis¬ 
integration of Mogul power at Delhi, took control of Bengal, the 
British tried to prevent him from getting too strong. In one 
indecisive skirmish he defeated a force of Europeans and im¬ 
prisoned some of them overnight in the Black Hole of Calcutta, 
where an unknown number perished. But on January 2nd, 1757, 
a young British officer named Robert Clive retook Calcutta and 
forced Siraj-ud-daula to accept humiliating terms. The nawab 

184 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


accordingly conspired with the French. The British Admiral 
Watson thereupon threatened him: T will kindle such a flame in 
your country’, the Englishman wrote, c as all the water in the 
Ganges shall not be able to extinguish.’ Sobered by these hot 
words, the Moslem ruler shrank into a passivity that facilitated 
the expulsion of his French allies from strategic Bengal areas. 
But the nawab remained and so did some French advisers. An 
insurrection, coinciding conveniently with the British attack, 
enabled Colonel Clive with 800 English and 2220 mercenary 
Indian troops to rout the nawab’s army of 50,000 at Plassey on 
June 23rd, 1757. Siraj-ud-daula was executed and his rival, 
necessarily a complacent British puppet, replaced him. The entire 
province of Bengal was now a British colony. With a frankness 
born of impunity, Clive wrote to Robert Orme, T am possessed 
of volumes of material for the continuation of your history, in 
which will appear fighting, tricks, chicanery, intrigues, politics 
and the Lord knows what.’ It was all politics. 

Warren Hastings, the Governor-General of Bengal, continued 
the policy of British expansion through armed force, enforced 
tributes and dynastic conspiracies. His trial in England, which 
lasted from February 1788 to April 1795, showed that the British 
administration in India was neither scrupulous nor incorruptible, 
nor concerned with the welfare of Indians. 

Gradually, by means mostly foul but considered normal in that 
age and place, the British established themselves throughout the 
length and breadth of the vast Indian subcontinent. In some 
areas, the East India Company ruled directly through its officials. 
Elsewhere it stood close behind the thrones of Hindu maharajas 
and Moslem nawabs who pliantly subserved the politics of British 
empire-building. 

The Portuguese had been confined to a few ports. The Dutch 
had been ousted. French power, though still considerable, was 
waning. In 1786, Mirabeau, the French revolutionary, urged the 
Russian Czar to help France by invading India. Napoleon’s 
offensive against Egypt was conceived as the first step towards the 
destruction of the British in India. When the Corsican’s campaign 
in the eastern Mediterranean collapsed he wrote to Emperor 
Paul I in St. Petersburg urging him to march on India and 
promising men and supplies. Paul agreed and sent instructions 

185 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


to General Orlov, ataman of the Don Cossacks. ‘All the wealth of 
India will be yours as a reward for the expedition,’ he wrote. 
Russia ‘would acquire treasure and commerce and strike the 
enemy in the heart’. The enemy was Britain. ‘I am enclosing all 
the maps I have,’ the Emperor added. ‘They go only to Khiva 
and the Oxus.’ 

Later, Paul sent another map by special courier. General 
Orlov, however, never got beyond the Urals. Paul was myster¬ 
iously murdered and the Russo-French alliance lapsed. But in a 
few years it was renewed, and when Napoleon met Paul’s suc¬ 
cessor, Alexander I, at Tilsit in East Prussia in 1807, they planned 
an assault on India. There is a letter in the Russian archives 
penned by Napoleon to Alexander on February 2nd, 1808, in 
which the Corsican proposed the formation of a Russo-French 
army to conquer India. ‘England will be enslaved’, Napoleon 
predicted. He promised Stockholm to Russia as a reward for her 
efforts against England in Asia. 

These were idle dreams. The French in India were soon limited 
to a few maritime dots and when, in 1818, the British crushed the 
great Maratha empire in south-central India, the last organized 
challenge to British rule vanished. The rest was a clean-up 
operation. 

While India was being subjugated, the invention of the spinning 
jenny in 1764, Watt’s perfected steam engine in 1768 and the 
power loom in 1785 were converting England into a maker and 
exporter of textiles. Indian cotton goods were no longer wanted 
in Britain; on the contrary, Britain exported textiles and other 
factory products to the people of India who, in 1800, numbered 
approximately 140,000,000. 

India’s industries consequently languished; Indian treasure 
flowed to the British Isles as profit or plunder. Indian handicrafts 
suffered too. India was transformed into a purely agrarian 
country whose villages, overcrowded by the influx of unemployed 
townsmen, could not produce enough food. According to a 
British source, the deaths from famine in India between 1800 and 
1825 were one million; between 1825 an d I ^5°> four hundred 
thousand; between 1850 and 1875, fi ye million; and between 
1875 and 1900, fifteen million. 

Engineered by wit and violence, England’s annexations in 

186 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


India in the latter part of the eighteenth century and the first 
quarter of the nineteenth left many disgruntled and dispossessed 
native rulers. British attempts to introduce law and order and 
an equitable system of taxation further irritated innumerable 
persons nursing innumerable wounds. Widespread economic 
stringency intensified the general unrest. Only a spark was needed 
to produce a flame. India had not yet become totally docile, nor 
had the British learned the technique, which they subsequently 
mastered, of firm yet smooth and barely visible administration. 

It was 1857, and a Hindu prophecy declared that on the 
centenary of the Battle of Plassey in 1757 British rule would 
perish. A war, officially called the Mutiny or the Sepoy Mutiny, 
broke out. The immediate impetus was the distribution among 
Indian troops of British-made cartridges, greased with cow or pig 
fat, which had to be bitten before being loaded into rifles. Since 
a Hindu must not touch cow fat and a Moslem must not touch 
pork the provocation was perfect and Indian army units rebelled. 
But the British authorities admitted that the Bengal Indian force 
was ‘a brotherhood’ closely identified with the hungry villages, 
and the same bond connected all sepoys in British uniform with 
the ragged, hungry peasants. 

Numerous regiments ro£e; one seized Delhi. Moslems took the 
lead, but all communities assiduously annulled innovations 
introduced by the British. Rail and telegraph lines were cut. 
Both sides committed numerous murders. Indian soldiers killed 
their British officers, and at Benares, ‘rebels, suspects and even 
disorderly boys’, says The Cambridge History of India , ‘were executed 
by infuriated officers and unofficial British residents who volun¬ 
teered to serve as hangmen’. Much blood also flowed in pitched 
battles and sieges. 

The mutiny was unplanned, unco-ordinated, leaderless and 
hopeless. Inevitably, after many months, the British, aided by 
loyal Indians, suppressed it. With the restoration of peace, the 
East India Company, ‘upon which’, according to The Cambridge 
History , ‘all parties in England agreed in throwing the blame of 
the Mutiny’, was abolished. In 1858, Queen Victoria assumed 
the government of India and appointed Lord Canning her first 
Viceroy. For eighty-nine years thereafter, until August 15th, 
1947, India was a colony of the British Empire. 

187 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


The blood-and-plunder period was ended. England’s ideals of 
clean government filtered into the British administration of 
India. The British watered some deserts and improved com¬ 
munications. Many British officials, after twenty or thirty years’ 
service in India, felt at home in India and like foreigners when 
they went home to England. They were devoted to India. 
They ate out their hearts and ruined their health coping with 
difficult problems. 

The British in India, however, were a fifth caste, the first caste. 
They interdined with Indians perfunctorily and intermarried 
seldom. The British were the super-Brahman-Kshatriyas; all 
Indians were ‘untouchables’. The British were in India, never of 
India. They were like teachers who keep the class quiet and 
teach the children to read, write and reckon and to march in 
twos, but who do not really teach the children anything, nor 
help them, because they regard themselves as animal trainers and 
the children as nasty animals. 

The British were masters in somebody else’s home. Their very 
presence was a humiliation. Despite the best intentions of the 
best among them, their every act was a humiliation. Then they 
complained, with pain, that Indians were ‘ungrateful’. The 
complaint was a measure of the lack of understanding. 

The British never deciphered the palimpsest which is India. 
They merely read the inscription on the surface: India was a 
weak, dirty, backward country, with some fine monuments to be 
sure, and some superior brains, but generally inferior, and Asiatic. 

Even if the British had converted India into a land flowing with 
milk and honey they would have been disliked. Imperialism, like 
dictatorship, sears the soul, degrades the spirit and makes in¬ 
dividuals small the better to rule them. Fear and cowardice are 
its allies. Imperialism is government of other people, by other 
people, and for other people. What the subjects gain, be it ever 
so great, is only the by-product of efforts on behalf of a distant 
master. 

The requirements of British prestige hurt Indian pride. All 
the visible manifestations of the British regime — the ceremonial 
pomp, the isolated cantonments or villas where the British dwelt, 
and the use of English — told the Indians that they were a subject 
race. Subjection stimulated a desire for liberation. 

188 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


That is why colonial administration never is, and never can be, 
successful. History has known no good colonizers. Every empire 
digs its own grave. Imperialism is a perpetual insult, for it 
assumes that the outsider has the right to rule the insiders who 
cannot rule themselves; it is thus arrogant nationalism and 
inevitably begets an opposing nationalism. 

Alien rule thwarts the native lovers of power. The British 
could never forget the Mutiny. ‘After all,’ Lord Linlithgow, the 
British Viceroy, said to me in 1942, ‘we are the occupying power. 
Ever since the Mutiny we have hesitated to put arms into the 
hands of Indians.’ Decades after the Mutiny, when the British 
were secure enough in their power to share it, the share of Indians 
was small. Real power — the authority to decide, appoint, recall 
and spend — lay with the British. No matter how high an Indian 
rose in the government service he remained a British hireling. 
His power was not merely severely restricted; it lacked one of the 
sweetest concomitants of power: popularity; for the more the 
British trusted him the more his own people rejected him. 

Unloved and unwanted, the British found it dangerous to 
arouse too many expectations of self-government and inconvenient 
to kill too many hopes for it. Hence, all the eighty-nine years of 
British rule constitute a series of oscillations between bold promises 
and disappointing performances. When the Queen took over from 
the Company in 1858 she announced that ‘as far as may be’ 
Indians would be given responsible posts in government. But 
Lord Lytton, Viceroy from 1876 to 1880, wrote in a secret report, 
‘Since I am writing confidentially, I do not hesitate to say that 
both the government of England and of India appear to me up to 
the present moment unable to answer satisfactorily the charge of 
having taken every means in their power of breaking to the heart 
the words of promise they have uttered to the ear.’ 

This was the complaint by a man who, unfettered by London, 
would have done better. But the Indians naturally regretted the 
breach of faith even more keenly than the Queen’s first officer 
in India. 

When the demand for broader participation in local govern¬ 
ment and for redress of grievances grew more insistent, Lord 
Dufferin, Viceroy from 1884 to 1888, intending to direct upper- 
class discontent into an artificial canal, sired the Indian National 

189 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Congress; subsequent Viceroys blessed it. Even if they had 
foreseen that a callow Indian law student in London in the late 
1880s would make Congress an instrument of the downfall of 
British rule, they could not have helped themselves. The history 
of the British rule in India is a record of retreats, more graceful in 
some Viceregal quinquenniums than in others, but always 
enhancing Indian strength. Torn between their political sagacity 
and their power lust, the British yielded as much of the appear¬ 
ance of power as circumstances required and as little of its 
substance as conditions permitted. 

Many times, for instance, Indians had been promised equality 
of employment in the I.C.S. (Indian Civil Service), which was 
the British administration of India. ‘After eighty-two years of 
equality,’ H. N. Brailsford remarks sarcastically, Englishmen held 
95 per cent of the posts in the I.C.S. in 1915. In 1923,*he declares, 
using accepted figures, Indian participation was still only 10 per 
cent. 

Jealous of her power, England feared the Indians. Conscious of 
their white skins and racial superiority, the British scorned the 
Indians. 

Fear, and the administrator’s natural wish to administer with 
maximum facility, impelled the British to adopt the approved 
imperialistic tactic of Divide and Rule. Since the Moslems played 
the leading role in the Mutiny and were thought to harbour 
dreams of empire, the British at first preferred the Hindus to the 
Moslems. When unrest and political ambition stirred the Hindus, 
the British used the Moslems against the Hindus. 

Similarly, Britain divided the country between British India, 
governed directly by England, and native India, governed in¬ 
directly by England but directly, and ostensibly, by Indian princes. 
It was a cynical device, avowed as such by Lord Canning on 
April 30th, i860; he wrote, ‘It was long ago said by Sir John 
Malcom that if we made all India into zillahs [or British districts] 
it was not in the nature of things that our empire should last 
fifty years; but that if we could keep up a number of native states 
without political power but as royal instruments, we should exist 
in India as long* as our naval supremacy was maintained. Of the 
substantial truth of this opinion I have no doubt; the recent 
events make it more deserving of our attention than ever.’ In the 

190 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


twentieth century, these royal instruments without political power 
numbered over five hundred and fifty. With that number of 
puppets the British thought they were secure. 

Professor Rushbrook Williams, a brilliant Englishman who 
often served as official intermediary with Indian princes, wrote in 
the London Evening Standard of May 28th, 1930, ‘The situations of 
these feudatory states, chequerboarding all India as they do, are a 
great safeguard. It is like establishing a vast network of friendly 
fortresses in debatable territory. It would be difficult for a general 
rebellion against the British to sweep India because of this net¬ 
work of powerful, loyal, native states.’ 

Nothing could be more clear. 

Lest India become strong enough economically to break from 
the Empire, and in order, too, to help British industries in the 
motherland, Indian industries were discouraged and Indian 
shipping and shipbuilding were officially restricted. Education 
was not designed to train a technical staff for industry nor a 
professional class to serve the country. With a population of 
approximately 380,000,000, India, in 1939, had only 1306 
students of agriculture, 2413 of engineering, 719 of veterinary 
science, 150 of technology, 63 of forestry and only 3561 in medi¬ 
cine, in her colleges and universities, according to the official 
Statistical Abstract for British India . 

In 1939, India, with three times the population of the United 
States and two-thirds the area, had 41,134 miles of railway track, 
compared with 395,589 miles in the United States. India pro¬ 
duced 2,500,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electric energy in 1935; 
the United States, 98,464,000,000 kilowatt-hours. 

These conditions were not the sole fault of the British; Indians 
shared the blame. But Indians blamed everything on the British. 

Indians delight in criticizing, and autocrats detest criticism. 
‘All opposition’, writes Sir Valentine Chirol, a British authority on 
India, ‘even in the shape of criticism which it can treat as mere 
waste of breath, is distasteful to an autocracy and apt to be 
regarded even as pregnant with sedition, and the British officials in 
India honestly believed in an autocratic form of government 
though they tried to make it as paternal as possible.’ 

British paternalistic autocracy irritated some Indians and 
embittered others. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, 

191 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Indian terrorists began to operate in Bengal and other areas. 
Terror invited repression which provoked more terror. 

One school of British politics wished to meet Indian hostility 
with blood and iron; a second school wished to mollify it with 
reforms. Each of these had its counterpart inside the Indian 
National Congress. 

The British autocrats did not help the Indian moderates. Late 
in the nineteenth century, Field-Marshal Lord Roberts, well 
known in India, said, ‘It is this consciousness of the inherent 
superiority of the European which has won us India. However 
well educated and clever a native may be and however brave he 
may have proved himself, I believe that no rank which we can 
bestow upon him would cause him to be considered an equal by 
the British officer.’ 

Such racialism bred implacable enemies and embarrassed the 
moderates. The liberal lawyers, publicists and capitalists retained 
their control of Congress, but not everybody was in Congress. 
Boys were hurling bombs. Young men with degrees from Oxford 
and Cambridge were rejecting the West. East is East and West is 
West, and if the twain cannot meet, they said, it is because East 
was slave and West was master. 

In Toward Freedom , an autobiography, Jawaharlal Nehru 
writes that in 1907, at seventeen, when he had just gone to 
Cambridge from Harrow, he was an extremist. In fact, speaking 
of the Indian students, he says, ‘Almost without exception we 
were Tilakites or Extremists. 5 

Bal Gangadhar Tilak, known as ‘Lokamanya 5 or ‘Respected by 
the People 5 , played a key role in the development of the Indian 
independence movement and in Gandhi’s life. 

Tilak was a high-degree Brahman, a Chitpawan Brahman, 
from Poona in the land of the Marathas, the last Indian folk to be 
conquered by the British. The Marathas are highlanders who 
many times in their history descended into the lowlands, notably 
into Gandhi’s homeland Gujarat, to dominate the less bellicose 
peoples of the plains. Once, these fighting Hindus captured 
Moslem Delhi; they remained foes of Islam. 

Tilak inaugurated an annual festival to celebrate King Shivaji 
(bom 1627, died 1680) who brought new triumphs to the Maratha 
empire. He wrote a most scholarly commentary on the Gita and 

192 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


defended every orthodox tenet and practice of Hinduism, includ¬ 
ing child marriage. He branded as a puppet any Indian who 
worked for the British. He exposed the emptiness of British 
concessions to Indian home-rule aspirations. 

Tilak’s fierce imprecations, the British charged, stirred a young 
Ghitpawan Brahman to assassinate a British official on June 27th, 
1897, the day of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee, and Tilak 
was condemned to two years in prison. Liberated before the end 
of his term, he resumed his Hindu-religious agitation which, 
while aimed at the British, did not, to say the least, improve 
relations between Hindus and Moslems. 

Hindu passions continued to simmer. Indian nationalism found 
food in numerous events at home and abroad: the hollowness of 
British reforms nurtured it and so did the Japanese defeat of the 
Russians in the 1904-05 war (the first time a coloured nation 
defeated a white one), the 1905 Russian revolution and the rise 
of the Young Turks. 

In 1904 Lord Curzon, considered by some the greatest Viceroy 
of India, decreed the partition of the province of Bengal. This 
act may have been the beginning of the end of British rule in 
India; Indians always mention it as a British atrocity. Curzon, 
despite his monumental ability and industry, was a bureaucrat, 
autocrat and aristocrat. He lived close to his files and far from the 
people. Bengal had a population of over seventy million and 
Curzon divided it the better to administer it. But the bisection 
was on religious lines: the Moslem area was separated from the 
more powerful Hindu area. Bitterness knew no restraint. Curzon 
was accused of anti-Hindu prejudice and of trying to put the 
Moslems under a debt which they would have to pay in the coin 
of submissiveness. 

These and similar charges were directed at Curzon until he 
left India towards the end of 1904. Bengal answered the partition 
with assassinations. In the land of the Marathas, Tilak whipped 
his followers into a frenzy. In both provinces British goods were 
boycotted; in both, Gandhi always found his most stubborn 
enemies. 

Gandhi and Tilak were opposites. Gandhi was a quiet public 
speaker, Tilak the consummate orator. Gandhi was wedded to 
non-violence; Tilak justified violence. Gandhi fostered Hindu- 

193 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Moslem amity; Tilak favoured Hindu supremacy. Gandhi 
respected means; Tilak pursued ends. Tilak’s work bore bitter 
fruit. 

The 1906 annual session of Congress met in Calcutta, then the 
capital of India as well as of Bengal. It demanded a reversal of 
the partition, supported the anti-British boycott and resolved in 
favour of self-government for India. 

Lord Minto, Curzon’s successor, let it become known in 1906 
that he was contemplating reforms which would give Indians a 
bigger voice in the provincial legislatures and more jobs in govern¬ 
ment offices. But the Tilak extremists were not mollified. Violence 
continued in Bengal and Maharashtra and spread to the Punjab. 
At the 1907 Congress session in Surat, moderates and extremists 
threw sandals at one another. After the fray, the Tilakites with¬ 
drew from the Congress, leaving the lawyers in control. 

The reforms drafted by Lord Minto, with the assistance of 
John Morley, Secretary of State for India in London, were 
introduced in 1908 and 1909. They extended Indian participa¬ 
tion in the all-Indian and provincial legislative councils and in 
provincial executive councils as well. One Indian joined the 
Viceroy’s executive council. But Morley made it clear, in the 
House of Lords debate in December 1908, that ‘if it could be said 
that this chapter of reforms led directly or indirectly or necessarily 
up to the establishment of a parliamentary system in India, I, for 
one, would have nothing to do with it’. More Indians sat on 
legislative councils and they talked more, but they had no more 
power, for the councils themselves had no power; their function 
was consultative. 

Any joy which Indians might have derived from the Minto- 
Morley reforms was soured by a concomitant measure: the intro¬ 
duction of separate electorates. In 1906, a Moslem deputation 
led by the Aga Khan waited upon Lord Minto and urged that in 
all future elections Hindus vote for Hindu representatives and 
Moslems for Moslem representatives. Nationalist historians have 
branded this interview as a ‘command performance’ rehearsed 
and conducted under Minto’s baton. Whatever the facts, Minto 
and Morley granted the Moslem request, and in 1909, separate 
religious electorates, embellished with a device enabling Moslems 
to obtain more than their proportional number of seats (weight- 

194 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 

age, this was called), became a permanent Indian institution 
whose mischief was incalculable, for it made religious differences 
the decisive factor in every political contest. The central political 
problem in India was to bridge the gulf between Hindus and 
Moslems; this widened it. 

However, the first though not lasting effect of the separate 
electorates was to bring more Moslems into the Congress party. 
Prominent among them was Mohamed Ali Jinnah. 

In 1911, the new King, George V, and Queen Mary, visited 
India amid fantastic pomp. The King announced the removal of 
the capital to Delhi and the annulment of the partition of Bengal. 
Nevertheless, and though Tilak had been sentenced for sedition in 
November 1907 to a long term of imprisonment and was ailing 
in Mandalay, acts of personal terror continued; in 1912 Lord 
Hardinge, the Viceroy, narrowly escaped death by a bomb. 

The outbreak of war in 1914 found some Indians loyal, some 
disloyal and few enthusiastic, but many ready to serve in the 
British Army. More than half a million Indians fought for England 
in France, Flanders, Palestine and on other fronts. Indian princes 
and commoners distinguished themselves in combat on the ground 
and in the air. 

Tilak had returned from exile in 1914 and pledged loyalty. 
Gandhi returned from South Africa, via London, in January 
1915 and recruited for the British Army. But idleness and the 
Irish rebellion at Easter, 1916, were too much for Tilak’s fiery 
spirit and he burst forth into a passionate anti-British campaign 
in favour of home-rule. His companion agitator, who if anything 
excelled him in oratory and vituperation, was Mrs. Annie Besant. 
They were vigorously assisted by Sir G. P. Ramaswami Aiyar and 
by Mohamed Ali Jinnah. 

The Indian earth rumbled with the noise of the volcano beneath 
it. Not only the politicians, but the soldiers and even the peasants, 
felt that the blood Indians were shedding in Britain’s battle should 
be recompensed. On August 20th, 1917, accordingly, Edwin S. 
Montagu, Secretary of State for India, announced in the House of 
Commons that British policy envisaged ‘not only the increasing 
association of Indians in every branch of the administration, but 
also the granting of self-governing institutions with a view to the 
progressive realization of responsible government in India as an 
N M.G. 195 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

integral part of the British Empire’. This was interpreted as 
being a pledge of Dominion Status. 

Tilak thought that on occasions it might be desirable to occupy 
positions of power within the state apparatus. He once sent 
Gandhi a cheque for fifty thousand rupees as a bet that-he could 
recruit five thousand Marathas for the British army if Gandhi 
extracted a promise from the Viceroy that some of the enlisted 
personnel would receive officers’ commissions. Gandhi returned 
the cheque. He did not like betting. And he felt that if you do 
something you do it because you believe in it and not for what you 
hope to get out of it. 

The war closed victoriously in November 1918. Trouble did 
not wait long; it came early in 1919. 

Tilak had been interned again in August 1918. Mrs. Besant 
was also under arrest. Shaukat Ali and Mohamed Ali, brothers 
and powerful and prominent Moslem leaders, had been impri¬ 
soned during the war. Secret tribunals had been sentencing people 
in all parts of India. Many newspapers were muzzled by war¬ 
time censorship. These measures evoked great bitterness. But 
with the coming of peace, the country expected the restoration 
of civil liberties. 

Instead* a committee headed by Sir Sidney Rowlatt, who had 
come from England to study the administration of justice, issued 
a report on July 19th, 1918, which recommended, in effect, a 
continuation of the war-time rigours. The Congress party fiercely 
denounced the Rowlatt findings. In February 1919 a bill em¬ 
bodying them was nevertheless offered by the Government to the 
Imperial Legislative Council. Gandhi attended the debate and 
appreciated the attacks levelled by Indian members against the 
bill but, since a majority of the Council consisted of British 
government officials, its passage, after what Gandhi called the 
‘farce of legal formality’, was assured. 

Gandhi, just recuperating from dysentery and from an opera¬ 
tion for fissures necessitated by it, decided that the impending 
government legislation was ‘unjust, subversive of the principle of 
liberty and destructive of the elementary rights of individuals on 
which the safety of the community as a whole and of the State 
itself is based’. 

Assuming that the bill would be enacted, Gandhi began pre- 

196 


HISTORY OF BRITISH RULE IN INDIA 


parations for civil resistance on the pattern of his victorious effort 
in South Africa. Though still so weak that somebody had to read 
his speeches, he travelled to many cities laying the groundwork 
for a gigantic, nation-wide Satyagraha campaign designed to 
induce the Government to withdraw the repressive legislation. 
Meanwhile, he appealed to the Viceroy by letter and through the 
press not to approve the law. 

On March 18th, 1919, the Rowlatt Act became the law of the 
land. An electric shock ran through India. Was this the com¬ 
mencement of Dominion Status? Was this the reward for the 
blood shed in the war? 

The next day, Mahatma Gandhi, who had come to Madras for 
a meeting, said to his host, C. Rajagopalachari, ‘Last night the 
idea came to me in a dream that we should call on the country to 
observe a general hartal.’ A hartal is a suspension of economic 
activity: shopkeepers do not open for business, employees do not 
report for work, factories stay shut, ships are not loaded or un¬ 
loaded. Gandhi urged that hartal day be a day of ‘fasting and 
prayer’ and of ‘humiliation and prayer’. Thereafter Satyagraha 
would unfold according to circumstances; resisters might, for 
example, buy and sell proscribed books, or manufacture salt in 
contravention of the law which made its production a state 
monopoly. 

The hartal was Gandhi’s first act against the British government 
of India. Indeed, it was his first political act in India. His 
intervention on behalf of the Champaran sharecroppers had 
unintentionally involved him in friction with a British court. 
But now he deliberately appealed for a nation-wide demonstra¬ 
tion against the British authorities. It was the beginning of his 
twenty-eight years of struggle against British rule in India. The 
end of the struggle was the end of British rule. 


i97 


 

