CHAPTER XXV 


JINNAH AND GANDHI 

M ohamed Ali Jinnah, who considered himself 
Gandhi’s opposite number, lived in a large, crescent¬ 
shaped marble mansion from which a classic flight of 
marble stairs and a series of carefully moulded terraces led down 
to the sea at Bombay. He had built it during the second World 
War and he apologized, when I saw him in 1942, that it was still 
inadequately furnished. His little study, however, and other 
parts' of the great house on Malabar Hill revealed the cultured 
and opulent touch. 

Jinnah was over six feet tall and weighed nine stone. He was 
a very thin man. His well-shaped head was covered with thick, 
long, silver-grey hair brushed straight back. His shaven face was 
thin, the nose long and aquiline. The temples were sunken and 
the cheeks were deep holes which made his cheekbones stand out 
like high horizontal ridges. His teeth were bad. When not speak¬ 
ing, he would pull in his chin, tighten his lips, knit his big brow. 
The result was a forbidding earnestness. He rarely laughed. 

Jinnah wore a knee-length straw-coloured tunic, tight white 
Indian trousers that clung to his bony legs and black patent- 
leather pumps. A monocle dangled from a black cord. He often 
dressed in European clothes. He was, wrote George E. Jones 
in the New York Times of May 5th, 1946, ‘undoubtedly one of the 
best dressed men in the British Empire’. 

Jinnah, the first child of a rich skins, hide and gum-arabic 
merchant, was bom on Christmas Day 1876 —seven years later 
than Gandhi — in the Kathiawar peninsula, Gandhi’s birthplace; 
his native language was Gujarati. ‘Jinnah’ is a Hindu name; the 
family were recent converts to Islam. Jinnah was a Khoja Mos¬ 
lem. Many Khojas carry Hindu names and maintain the Hindu 
joint family system. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, 
the Khojas attempted to return to Hinduism but were rebuffed. 

Hinduism and Mohammedanism are dissimilar religions, but 
Hindus and Mohammedans are far less dissimilar. Most Moslems 


425 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


of India are converted Hindus, converted by the invading Arabs, 
Afghans and Persians who began thrusting into India during the 
eighth century. Jinnah said converted Hindus were 75 per cent 
of the Moslem community; Nehru put it at 95 per cent. In parts 
of India, Moslems worship in Hindu temples. There are castes 
among some Indian Moslems. In many areas, Hindus and Mos¬ 
lems are indistinguishable from one another in appearance, 
costume, customs and language. Hindi and Urdu, the predom¬ 
inant tongues of Hindus and Moslems respectively, are written 
with different scripts and the former has absorbed more Sanskrit 
words while the latter uses more Persian words, but Hindus 
understand Urdu and Moslems understand Hindi. Hinduism is 
an insidious, emotional religion, native to India, which clings to 
the descendants of those who were converted to the Koran by the 
sword. Religious leaders have succeeded in widening the gulf 
and poisoning the relations, yet ties remain. Jinnah, Gandhi, 
Nehru, the Viceroy, Wavell and all the British officials, Hindus 
and Moslems one met in India agreed that Hindus and Moslems 
lived peacefully side by side in the villages — and the village is 
80 per cent of India. In the Indian Army, moreover, Hindus, 
Moslems, Sikhs, Christians, in fact all religions and races, ate, 
slept, trained and waged war side by side without friction. 

I suggested to Jinnah that religious hatreds, nationalism and 
boundaries plagued humanity and had caused the war; the world 
needed harmony, not new discords. 

‘You are an idealist,’ he replied. T am a realist. I deal with 
what is. Take, for instance, France and Italy. Their customs and 
religion are the same. Their languages are similar. Yet they are 
separate.’ 

‘Do you want to create here the mess we have in Europe?’ I 
asked. 

T must deal with the divisive characteristics which exist,’ he said. 

Jinnah was not a devout Moslem. He drank alcohol and ate 
pork, which are un-Islamic acts. He seldom visited the mosque 
and knew no Arabic and little Urdu. In his forties, he went out¬ 
side his religion to marry a Parsi girl of eighteen; when his only 
child, a beautiful daughter, married a Parsi turned Christian, fye 
disowned her. His wife left him and died shortly thereafter in 
1929. In the remaining years, his sister Fatima, a dental surgeon 

426 


JINNAH AND GANDHI 

who looked like him, was his constant companion and adviser. 
‘Moslem women are the real force behind their men,’ she 
said. 

Early in his career, Jinnah tried to unite Hindus and Moslems. 
On returning from London where he studied law at Lincoln’s 
Inn, and after establishing a lucrative practice in Bombay, he 
threw himself into politics. Addressing the Moslem League in 
1917 on the alleged threat of Hindu domination, he said, ‘Fear 
not. This is a bogey which is put before you to scare you away 
from the co-operation and unity which are essential to self- 
government.’ 

Jinnah was once a leader of the Congress party. ‘I have been 
in this movement for thirty-five years,’ he said to me in the first of 
two interviews at his home. ‘Nehru worked under me in the 
Home-Rule Society. Gandhi worked under me. I was active in 
the Congress party. When the Moslem League was organized I 
persuaded Congress to congratulate the League as a step towards 
Indian freedom. In 1915, I induced the League and Congress to 
meet at the same time in Bombay so as to create the feeling of 
unity. My goal was Hindu-Moslem unity. The British, seeing a 
danger in such unity, broke up an open meeting. The closed 
sessions, however, continued. In 1916, I again persuaded the two 
organizations to meet simultaneously in Lucknow and was 
instrumental in bringing about the Lucknow Pact in which both 
agreed on elections and weightage. So it was until 1920 when 
Gandhi came into the limelight. A deterioration of Hindu- 
Moslem relations set in. In 1931, at the Round Table Conference, 
I had the distinct feeling that unity was hopeless, that Gandhi did 
not want it. I was a disappointed man. I decided to stay in 
England. I did not even go back to India to sell my possessions 
but sold them through an agent. I remained in England until 
1935. I took U P law practice before the Privy Council, and con¬ 
trary to my expectations, I was a success. I had no intention of 
returning to India. But each year friends came from India and 
told me of conditions and told me how much I could do.. Finally, 
I agreed to go back.’ 

He had been speaking breathlessly, with excitement. He 
paused, puffed on his cigarette. ‘I tell you all this,’ he continued, 
‘to show that Gandhi does not want independence. He does not 

427 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


want the British to go. He is first of all a Hindu. Nehru does not 
want the British to go. They want Hindu raj.’ 

Writing ‘In Memory of Jinnah 5 , in the London Economist of 
September 17th, 1949, a correspondent, who knew Jinnah well, 
declared that while Jinnah was practising law in London someone 
‘repeated to him that Nehru, whom he despised and hated, had 
imprudently said at a private dinner party that “Jinnah was 
finished 55 . Outraged, Jinnah packed up and sailed back to India 
at once just to “show Nehru 55 . . . To Cleopatra’s nose as a factor 
in history one should perhaps add Jinnah’s pride 5 . 

George E. Jones, the New York Times correspondent who inter¬ 
viewed Jinnah several times, writes in his book, Tumult in India , 
‘Jinnah is a superb political craftsman, a Machiavelli in the amoral 
sense of that description . . . His personal defects are a somewhat 
hostile reserve, conceit and a narrow outlook . . . He is an ex¬ 
tremely suspicious man, who feels that he has been wronged many 
times in his life. His repressed intensity borders on the psychotic. 
Withdrawn and isolated, Jinnah is arrogant to the point of 
discourtesy. . . .’ 

Jinnah withdrew from the Congress party just when Gandhi, 
backed by the masses, ousted the rich lawyers from control. He 
never liked Gandhi. At public meetings in those days, he would 
refer to Gandhi as ‘Mr. Gandhi 5 which most Indians regarded as 
less respectful than Mahatma or Gandhiji; yet when members of 
the audience protested he persisted. Later, after he returned to 
India and became the undisputed leader of the anti-Congress 
Moslem League, he zealously guarded his prestige. In 1939, upon 
the outbreak of the war, the Viceroy invited Gandhi and Jinnah 
to the palace. Gandhi offered to come to Jinnah’s house to fetch 
him. Jinnah welcomed that appearance of an obeisance. But he 
refused to go in Gandhi’s car. They both rode in his. Subse¬ 
quently, when they conferred, Jinnah insisted that the meetings 
take place in his home. Gandhi, who was completely indifferent 
to such considerations, gladly complied. 

Vanity, jealousy and dislike undoubtedly 'play a major role in 
politics. Some of the great political feuds of history were personal 
before they became political. The Hindu-Moslem problem, to 
be sure, would have existed Jinnah or no Jinnah. His intensity 
and hates blew on the coals and brought forth flames. 

428 


JINNAH AND GANDHI 

Apart from Jinnah, all the leading figures in his Moslem League 
were large estate owners and landholding noblemen. They 
watched the rising tide of peasant discontent with mounting 
concern. In the North-west Frontier Province, the Congress 
party, led by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the ‘Frontier Gandhi 5 , 
was a popular movement of Moslem peasants directed against 
Moslem landowners. In the United Provinces, Moslem and Hindu 
peasants made common cause against Moslem and Hindu land¬ 
lords. 

The landlords who financed the Moslem League used religion 
to divide Moslem from Hindu peasants. 

Owing to Islamic precept, the bulk of Moslem wealth was 
invested in land instead of trade or industry. Hindu and Parsi 
business men often preferred to engage their own co-religionists. 
Mohammedans, moreover, encountered considerable difficulty in 
entering government employ; their education was usually inferior 
to that of Hindus, Parsis and Christians. The Moslem urban 
middle class, which began to emerge in the twentieth century, 
looked to Jinnah to get them British government jobs, and he did 
so by persuading the authorities to establish quotas for Moslems 
irrespective of qualifications. 

The Moslem upper class (the landlords) and the Moslem middle 
class were ready for Jinnah. But they needed the peasantry for 
numbers. They soon discovered that they could win it by arousing 
religious passions. The formula was Pakistan, a separate Moslem 
state. Such a state would be officered by Moslems and in it Hindu 
and Parsi firms would be at a disadvantage. The landlords 
believed they had less to fear from a country they controlled 
than from an independent, liberal, secular India where a land 
reform that would dispossess them was expected to be one of the 
first pieces of legislation. 

One hundred million compared to three hundred million 
Hindus, the Moslems could never hope to win a political majority 
unless religious aims ceased to dominate politics. The separate 
religious electorates, introduced by Lord Minto in 1909, militated 
against such a consummation. In a number of districts, however, 
— the North-west Frontier, Punjab, Sind, Baluchistan, Kashmir 
and Bengal — Moslems formed a majority. Pakistan, as Jinnah 
conceived it, would embrace the sixty million Mohammedans 

429 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


thickly settled in these Moslem-majority provinces where they 
were safe from Hindu domination. But to achieve Pakistan, 
Jinnah would have to inflame Moslem religious and nationalistic 
sentiments and risk inflaming in turn similar feelings among 
Hindus at the cost of the forty million Moslems dispersed in 
provinces where Hindus were the majority. 

Jinnah was prepared to take this plunge. 

The irreligious Jinnah wished to build a religious state. Gandhi, 
wholly religious, wanted a secular state. 

The hope of religious peace in India lay in the unifying national¬ 
ism written on the Gandhi-Nehru-Azad-Rajagopalachari banner. 
No doubt, the relations between Hindus and Moslems required 
adjustments and mutual concessions and depended greatly on 
economic expansion which would lessen the competition for 
government posts and increase business opportunities. Gandhi 
had enough faith in man to think that, with patience, it could 
be done. 

Jinnah, on the other hand, urged immediate bisection. Herbert 
L. Matthews, a veteran foreign correspondent of the New York 
Time?, quotes a frank admission by Sikander Hyat Khan, the 
Moslem prime minister of the Punjab, ‘that he considered a 
Bengal Moslem as foreign as a Chinese’. Yet Jinnah believed that 
the Punjab and Bengal yearned to be one in Pakistan. 

The fact is that India, a backward country without adequate 
communications, still lived in the grip of provincialism, like 
Europe in the Middle Ages. Gandhi wanted to use the cement 
of nationalism to make it one; Jinnah wanted to use the dynamite 
of religion to make it two. 

The bisection of India could not be done gently with a surgeon’s 
scalpel. It could only be achieved with a blunt butcher’s knife 
and heavy cleaver, and leave broken bones, mutilated muscles, 
severed nerves and bruised brain matter robbed of the capacity 
to think.. The partitioning of the United States or France would 
be no more painful. 

The tragedy of partition hung over Gandhi’s head from the 
time of his liberation in 1944 to the day of his death in 1948. 

In June 1944 Gandhi, partially recuperated from his illness, 
came back into the political arena. He asked Viceroy Wavell to 
receive him. Wavell replied, ‘In consideration of the radical 

430 


JINNAH AND GANDHI 

difference in our points of view, a meeting between us at present 
could have no value.’ 

Gandhi now focused his attention on Jinnah. Gandhi had 
always felt that if Congress and the Moslem League came to an 
agreement, the British would have to grant India independence. 

Spurred by Rajagopalachari, who evolved a formula for a Con¬ 
gress-League understanding, Gandhi wrote to Jinnah on July 17th, 
1944, suggesting talks. Gandhi addressed Jinnah as ‘Brother 
Jinnah 5 and signed, ‘Your brother, Gandhi 5 . Jinnah’s reply was 
addressed to ‘Dear Mr. Gandhi 5 and was signed ‘M. A. Jinnah 5 . 
In subsequent letters, Gandhi addressed Jinnah as ‘Qaid-e-Azam 5 
or Great Leader, a recently assumed title. Jinnah still wrote, 
‘Dear Mr. Gandhi 5 . 

The correspondence was voluminous. Gandhi arrived at 
Jinnah’s Bombay house for the first meeting at 3.55 p.m. on 
September 9th and remained till 7 p.m. He returned at 5.30 p.m. 
on the 1 ith and stayed for two hours. The two men conferred a 
third time on the 12th for two and a half hours, twice on the 13th 
for a total of three and a half hours, again on the 14th, again on 
the 15th and so on. After each conversation they wrote long 
letters to one another confirming and continuing the oral argu¬ 
ments. At one stage, Gandhi suggested that he be allowed to 
address the executive council of the Moslem League and, if the 
council rejected his proposal, that he should go before an open 
convention of the League. Jinnah called the suggestion ‘most 
extraordinary and unprecedented 5 , and repulsed it. 

The talks broke down on September 26th and then the entire 
correspondence was published in the newspapers. 

The wall between Gandhi and Jinnah was the two-nation 
theory. ‘By all the canons of international law, we are a nation, 5 
Jinnah wrote. ‘We are a nation with our own distinctive culture 
and civilization, language and literature, art and architecture, 
names and nomenclature, sense of value and proportion, legal 
laws and moral codes, customs and calendar, history and tradi¬ 
tions, aptitudes and ambitions. 5 

Gandhi did not make an effort to controvert this large statement. 
He merely said, ‘I find no parallel in history for a body of converts 
and their descendents claiming to be a nation apart from the 
parent stock. 5 Do people change their characteristics when they 

431 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


change their religion? Would there be a third nation in India if 
several million people adopted Christianity and a* fourth if 
several million joined the Jews? 

The cleavage on this cardinal issue was known in advance. 
Then why the discussions? 

‘Can we not agree to differ on the question of “two nations”/ 
Gandhi pleaded, ‘and yet solve the problem on the basis of self- 
determination?’ 

Gandhi proposed that Baluchistan, Sind, the North-west 
Frontier Province where Moslems constituted a majority, and 
those parts of Bengal, Assam and the Punjab where Moslems were 
a majority, should vote on whether to secede from the Indian 
Union. ‘If the vote is in favour of separation,’ Gandhi explained, 
‘it shall be agreed upon that these areas shall form a separate 
state as soon as possible after India is free.’ The two states, he 
urged, would then set up one, unified ‘administration of foreign 
affairs, defence, internal communications, customs, commerce 
and the like’. 

Jinnah said ‘No’ three times: he wanted the partition while the 
British were in India, not after India was free; he wanted com¬ 
plete separation with no unified administration; and he had his 
own remarkable plan for a referendum. 

According to Jinnah’s plan, only Moslems would vote in the 
plebiscite and if the majority of the voting Moslems voted for 
separation then the entire province would go to Pakistan. ‘Separa¬ 
tion’, according to an analysis of Jinnah’s views made by the 
British Embassy in Washington ‘for the information of British 
officials’, ‘must be decided on by the votes of Moslems only.’ 

But the British census gave the Moslem population of Assam as 
3,442,479, the non-Moslem 6,762,254. Yet Jinnah was demand¬ 
ing that a majority of the 3,442,479 determine the fate of the 
entire province. 

The Moslem population of the Punjab was 16,217,242, the 
non-Moslem 12,201,577; the Moslems were not more than 56 per 
cent of the total. Actually, two or three million Moslems, at 
most, would have been entitled to cast votes. And if a majority 
of the two or three million voted for Pakistan then the entire 
province of over twenty-eight million would become a part of 
Pakistan. 


432 


JINNAH AND GANDHI 

In Bengal, Moslems were 52 per cent of the population. A 
Moslem majority for secession would necessarily be a minority of 
the total number of inhabitants. 

Gandhi, obviously, could not agree to such a proposition. 
Jinnah did not have the power to effect it by force. Only the 
British could give it to him. 

‘Mr. Jinnah’, reads the ‘Note on the Gandhi-Jinnah Con¬ 
versations’ compiled by the British Embassy in Washington (Lord 
Halifax was Ambassador), ‘is in a strong position; he has something 
to give which Mr. Gandhi wants very badly and without delay, 
Moslem co-operation in putting pressure on the British govern¬ 
ment to hand over a substantial instalment of power at once . . . 
Mr. Gandhi, on the other hand, has got nothing to give which 
Mr. Jinnah is not prepared to wait for; in Mr. Jinnah’s eyes, the 
prospect of independence a year or two earlier is as nothing 
compared with security for Moslems. It is obvious that Mr. 
Jinnah is content to wait and see how near Mr. Gandhi will come 
to the price for which he is holding out.’ 

This is a shrewd analysis of the tactics of a shrewd bargainer. 
Jinnah could wait for independence. Gandhi felt this was the 
best time to get independence. 

History now intervened to upset Jinnah’s calculations. Then 
the able Jinnah upset history. 


433 







 

