CHAPTER VIII 


MURDER 

G andhi’s hartal idea spread throughout India. It united 
vast multitudes in common action; it gave the people a 
sense of power. They loved Gandhi for it. The hartal 
paralysed economic life; the dead cities and towns were tangible 
proof that Indians could be effective. What the Indian people 
needed most and lacked most, was faith in themselves. Gandhi 
gave it to them. 

Six hundred men and women in Bombay signed the Satyagraha 
pledge. Gandhi was happy. He had won with fewer numbers in 
South Africa. Vows were being taken in other cities, and in many 
villages. ‘Even such a mighty government as the Government of 
India, 5 Gandhi declared at Bombay, ‘will have to yield if we are 
true to our pledge. For the pledge is no small thing. It means a 
change of heart. It is an attempt to introduce the religious spirit 
into politics. We may no longer believe in the doctrine of “tit for 
tat 55 ; we may not meet hatred with hatred, violence with violence, 
evil with evil; but we have to make a continuous and persistent 
effort to return good for evil. . . Nothing is impossible. 5 

Sceptics mocked. ‘I have no desire to argue, 5 Gandhi replied. 
‘As the British proverb says, “The proof of the pudding lies in the 
eating 5 5 5 . The movement had been launched; it would surely 
spread and surely triumph. 

In a further appeal to the Viceroy, the Mahatma put the whole 
question on a high, universal level. The Satyagraha campaign, he 
told the Viceroy, ‘constitutes an attempt to revolutionize politics 
and restore moral force to its original station 5 . He quoted a 
statement of President Woodrow Wilson at Paris to the effect that 
if the moral force behind the League of Nations Covenant did not 
suffice, physical force would. ‘We 5 Gandhi wrote, ‘hope to 
reverse the process and by our action show that physical force is 
nothing compared to moral force and that moral force never fails. 5 

Somebody protested that Gandhi’s Satyagraha campaign 
would abet Bolshevism. (The Bolshevik Revolution had taken 

198 


MURDER 


place on November 7th, 1917, and made a deep impression on the 
East.) No, Gandhi said in a speech at Madras on March 30th, 
1919, s if anything can possibly prevent this calamity descending 
upon our country, it is Satyagraha. Bolshevism is the necessary 
result of modern materialistic civilization. Its insensate worship 
of matter has given rise to a school which has been brought up to 
look upon materialistic advancement as the goal and which has 
lost all touch with the final things in life ... I prophesy that if we 
disobey the law of the final supremacy of spirit over matter, of 
liberty and love over brute force, in a few years’ time we 
shall have Bolshevism rampant in this land which was once so 
holy’. 

The hartal, a prelude to Satyagraha, was observed in Delhi 
on March 30th and in Bombay and other cities and villages on 
April 6th; ‘Needless to say,’ Gandhi reported, ‘the hartal in 
Bombay was a complete success.’ The nationwide hartal, he 
said, ‘was a most wonderful spectacle’. 

In Delhi, however, the hartal provoked violence. The Punjab, 
home of millions of Moslems and Hindus and of five million 
bearded, turbaned, stoutly built Sikhs whose religion was an off¬ 
shoot of Hinduism, echoed to riots and shootings. Leaders asked 
Gandhi to come quickly to Delhi and the Punjab. The British 
stopped him at the borders of the province on April 9th and 
escorted him back to Bombay, where he was released. En route 
to and from Bombay, Gandhi sent messages that he was safe and 
free; reports of his arrest had inflamed the already heated passions 
of the people; riots occurred in Bombay and Ahmedabad. 

On April nth, Gandhi admonished his followers in Bombay. 
‘We have been throwing stones,’ he said. ‘We have obstructed 
tramcars by putting obstacles in the way. This is not Satyagraha. 
We have demanded the release of about fifty men who had been 
arrested for deeds of violence. But our duty is chiefly to get our¬ 
selves arrested. It is a breach of religious duty to endeavour to 
secure the release of those who have committed deeds of violence 
... If we cannot conduct this movement without the slightest 
violence from our side,’ Gandhi warned, ‘the movement might 
have to be abandoned ... It may be necessary to go even further. 
The time may come for me to offer Satyagraha against ourselves 
... I have just heard that some English gentlemen have been 

i99 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


injured. Some may even have died from such injuries. If so, it 
would be a great blot on Satyagraha. For me, Englishmen too 
are our brethren.’ 

From Bombay, Gandhi went to his ashram at Sabarmati, 
where on April 14th he addressed a huge multitude. Ahmedabad 
citizens too had committed acts of violence of which Gandhi was 
ashamed; ‘a rapier run through my body could hardly have pained 
me more’. Scathingly he denounced them: ‘We have burnt down 
buildings, forcibly captured weapons, extorted money, stopped 
trains, cut off telegraph wires, killed innocent people and plun¬ 
dered shops and private houses.’ As penance, he announced that 
he had undertaken a seventy-two-hour fast. He asked the people 
to fast twenty-four. 

Immediately after the Sabarmati meeting, Gandhi left for 
Nadiad, a town in the Kheda district, twenty-nine miles from 
Ahmedabad, where he had recruited for the war. There he 
discovered that violence had spread to small towns as well. 

Depressed, Gandhi told the people of Nadiad that the entire 
Satyagraha campaign was ‘a Himalayan miscalculation’ on his 
part. On April 18th he called off the movement. 

Many scoffed; the Mahatma, they taunted, had made ‘a 
Himalayan miscalculation’. But Gandhi never regretted a con¬ 
fession of error. ‘I have always held’, he wrote in his auto¬ 
biography, ‘that it is only when one sees one’s own mistakes with a 
convex lens and does just the reverse in the case of others, that 
one is able to arrive at a just relative estimate of the two.’ What 
politician would say that? 

His miscalculation, Gandhi explained, was in overlooking the 
fact that a person must be trained in civil obedience before civil 
disobedience against some laws could succeed. ‘I am sorry,’ 
Gandhi said in cancelling the Satyagraha campaign, ‘that when I 
embarked upon a mass movement I underrated the forces of evil 
and I must now pause and consider how best to meet the situation.’ 
Nobody forsook his leadership because he did not immediately 
announce a clever new plan to divert attention from the one 
that failed. 

Meanwhile, the Punjab province boiled. Events there cul¬ 
minated in the occurrence in the sacred Sikh city of Amritsar on 
April 13th, 1919, which Sir Valentine Ghirol called ‘that black 

200 


MURDER 


day in the annals of British India’. For Gandhi it was a turning 
point. Indians never forgot it. 

An official commission of inquiry, appointed by the government 
of India and consisting of seven members, four British and three 
Indian, with Lord Hunter, Senator of the College of Justice of 
Scotland, as chairman, investigated the Punjab disturbances for 
many months and then published its report. It found that in 
Amritsar ‘the Hartal on the thirtieth [of March] was successful 
beyond expectation and stopped the whole business of the city. 
There was no collision with the police and no resort to violence’. 
On April 6th, Amritsar, a city of 150,000 inhabitants, observed 
another hartal. ‘This second time also the Hartal passed off 
successfully,’ the official Hunter Report affirms, ‘and Europeans 
could and did walk unmolested amongst the crowds.’ 

On April 9th, the Punjab government issued an order for the 
deportation from the province of the two Congress party leaders, 
Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew, a Moslem, and Dr. Satyapal, a Hindu. 
It was the day of the Hindu festival Ram Naumi in which, 
according to the Report, Moslems also joined, shouting ‘Mahatma 
Gandhi ki jai (Long Live Mahatma Gandhi)’ and ‘Hindu- 
Mussalman ki jai (Long Live Hindu-Moslem unity)’, and ‘drink¬ 
ing out of the same cups publicly by way of demonstration’. The 
police expected that the demonstrators would try to liberate the 
two leaders and precautions were taken, but ‘there was no 
attempt at rescue’. 

The banishing of the leaders removed from Amritsar the two 
men who might have restrained the populace. ‘Starting in anger 
at the action of the government in deporting the two local 
politicians,’ reads the Hunter Report, a mob raged through the 
streets. At the National Bank, Mr. Stewart, the manager, and 
Mr. Scott, the assistant manager, were beaten to death and at the 
Alliance Bank, Mr. G. M. Thomson, the manager, ‘who attempted 
to defend himself with a revolver, was cruelly murdered’. Other 
English people were assaulted. 

Two days later, Brigadier-General Reginald Edward Harry 
Dyer arrived at Amritsar. Dyer, born in Simla, India, in 1864, 
was educated at Middleton College, County Cork, Ireland, and 
entered the British Army in 1885. He fought on the north-west 
frontier, in the Burma war and in the first World War. April 


201 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


1919 found him commanding a brigade at Jullunder, in the 
Punjab. Ordered to Amritsar on the 1 ith, he issued a proclama¬ 
tion on the 12th prohibiting processions and meetings. ‘The issue 
of the proclamation which was formally signed by the Brigade- 
Major on General Dyer’s behalf/ says the Hunter Report, ‘was 
left to the police; it does not appear what steps were taken to 
ensure its publication.’ 

During the morning of the next day, April 13th, Dyer went 
through the city reading the proclamation to the people. ‘From 
an examination of the map, showing the different places where 
the proclamation was read,’ the Hunter Report asserts, ‘it is 
evident that in many parts of the city the proclamation was not 
read.’ 

The Hunter Report then tells the story of the massacre of 
April 13th. ‘About one o’clock’, it reads, ‘General Dyer heard 
that the people intended to hold a big meeting about four- 
thirty p.m. On being asked why he did not take measures to 
prevent its being held, he replied: “I went there as soon as I 
could. I had to think the matter out.” ’ 

The meeting took place at Jallianwalla Bagh. Bagh means 
garden. ‘Jallianwalla Bagh’, the Report says, ‘is not in any sense 
a garden as its name would suggest. It is a rectangular piece of 
unused ground, covered to some extent by building material and 
debris. It is almost entirely surrounded by walls of buildings. 
The entrances and exits to it are few and imperfect. It seems to 
be frequently used to accommodate large gatherings of people. 
At the end at which General Dyer entered there is a raised ground 
on each side of the entrance. A large crowd had gathered at the 
opposite end of the Bagh and were being addressed by a man on 
a raised platform about 150 yards from where General Dyer 
stationed his troops.’ The Report estimates that there were be¬ 
tween ten and twenty thousand persons in the Bagh. 

Dyer went to the garden with twenty-five Gurkhas (soldiers 
from Nepal) and twenty-five Baluchis from Baluchistan armed 
with rifles, forty Gurkhas armed only with knives and two 
armoured cars. ‘On arriving at Jallianwalla Bagh’, the Report 
declares, ‘he [Dyer] entered with this force by a narrow entrance 
which was not sufficiently wide to allow the cars to pass. They 
were accordingly left in the street outside. 


202 


/ 


MURDER 


‘As soon as General Dyer entered the Bagh, 5 the Report con¬ 
tinues, ‘he stationed twenty-five troops on one side of the higher 
ground at the entrance and twenty-five troops on the other side. 
Without giving the crowd any warning to disperse, which he 
considered unnecessary as they were in breach of his proclama¬ 
tion, he ordered his troops to fire and the firing continued for about 
ten minutes. There is no evidence as to the nature of the address 
to which the audience was listening. None of them were provided 
with firearms, although some of them may have been carrying 
sticks. 

‘As soon as the firing commenced the crowd began to disperse. 
In all 1,650 rounds were fired by the troops. The firing was 
individual and not volley firing ... As a result of this investigation 
it was discovered that approximately 379 people were killed.’ 
The Report estimates that there were three times as many 
wounded as dead. This adds up to 379 dead plus 1137 wounded 
or 1516 casualties with 1650 bullets. The crowd, penned in the 
low-lying garden, was a perfect target. 

Under cross-examination before the Hunter Commission, Dyer 
revealed his mind and purpose: 

‘Question: From time to time you changed your firing and 
directed it to the place where the crowd were thickest? 

‘Answer: That is so. 5 

The crowd had rushed to the lowest wall, which was five feet 
high and that is where the bullets felled many of them. 

‘Question: Supposing the passage was sufficient to allow the 
armoured cars to go in, would you have opened fire with the 
machine-guns? 

‘Answer: I think, probably, yes. 5 

‘When examined before us 5 , the Hunter Report asserts, ‘he 
[Dyer] explained that his mind was made up as he came along in 
his motor car; if his orders against holding a meeting were dis¬ 
obeyed he was going to fire at once. 5 

‘I had made up my mind, 5 Dyer testified, ‘I would do all men 
to death. . . . 5 

General Dyer’s own dispatch to his military superior, which is 
quoted in the Hunter Report with his italics, said, ‘I fired and 
continued to fire until the crowd dispersed and I consider this the 
least amount of firing which could produce the necessary effect 

203 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


it was my duty to produce if I was to justify my action. It was no 
longer a question of merely dispersing the crowd , but one of producing a 
sufficient moral effect from a military point of view not only on 
those who were present, but more especially throughout the 
Punjab. There could be no question of undue severity.’ 

The Hunter Commission decided that ‘This was unfortunately 
a mistaken conception of his duty.’ It also found that ‘in continu¬ 
ing to fire for so long as he did it appears to us that General Dyer 
committed a grave error’. 

Moreover, the Report notes that ‘General Dyer’s action in not 
making provision for the wounded at Jallianwalla Bagh has been 
made the subject of criticism’. Dyer said at the hearings, ‘I was 
ready to help them if they applied.’ 

Sir Michael O’Dwyer, British Acting Governor of the Punjab, 
approved of Dyer’s action and referred to the disturbances as 
‘rebellion’. The Hunter Commission commented: ‘The action 
taken by General Dyer has also been described by others as having 
saved the situation in the Punjab and having averted a rebellion 
on a scale similar to the Mutiny. It does not, however, appear to 
us possible to draw this conclusion, particularly in view of the 
fact that a conspiracy to overthrow British power had not been 
formed prior to the outbreaks.’ 

Not only was no insurrection intended or planned, but, accord¬ 
ing to the Hunter Report, ‘It appears that the outburst on the 
ioth April subsided in a few hours, there was no repetition of any 
serious incident afterwards either on that date or on subsequent 
dates. And even with regard to the events on the ioth ... if the 
officer in charge . . . had done his duty, the worst crimes, viz., 
the murders of the bank officers . . . would in all probability have 
been prevented.’ 

Amritsar had been calm for two and a half days when Dyer’s 
butchery occurred. His unnecessary massacre was the child of 
the British military mentality then dominant in India. To 
characterize this mentality, the Hunter Report quotes an utter¬ 
ance of General Drake-Brockman of Delhi who said, ‘Force is the 
only thing that an Asiatic has any respect for.’ 

‘I thought I would be doing a jolly lot of good,’ was Dyer’s airy 
summary of the massacre at Jallianwalla Bagh. 

To add humiliation to hurt, General Dyer published his in- 

204 


MURDER 


famous C crawling order 5 . On April ioth Miss Sherwood, the 
headmistress of a girls 5 school in Amritsar, had been barbarously 
attacked by the mob. Several days after the Jallianwalla Bagh 
blood bath, Dyer issued instructions that anybody passing the 
street where Miss Sherwood was assaulted would have to go on all 
fours. This applied even to members of families whose only 
approach to their homes was through that street. Gandhi felt 
worse about this ‘outrage 5 , as he called it, than about the massacre. 

At the spot, moreover, on which Miss Sherwood was beaten, 
Dyer erected a whipping post for the public flogging of those who 
ignored his order that Indians on animals and vehicles must 
alight, Indians carrying umbrellas or parasols must lower them, 
and all Indians must salute or ‘salaam 5 with the hand as they 
passed British officers in some districts of Amritsar. 

The British Secretary of State for India, Edwin S. Montagu, in 
an official dispatch to the Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, dated 
May 26th, 1920, wrote, ‘His Majesty’s Government repudiate 
emphatically the doctrine upon which Brigadier-General Dyer 
based his action 5 at Jallianwalla Bagh. The crawling order, 
Montagu added, ‘offended against every canon of civilized govern¬ 
ment 5 . Innumerable Englishmen were ashamed of Dyer’s deed, 
yet he found many defenders. 

Dyer was asked to resign from the army. Towards the end of his 
life, he invented a range finder for sighting aircraft. He died in 
retirement at Bristol on July 23rd, 1927. 

Under the Hunter Commission’s cross-examination, General 
Dyer had said, ‘Yes, I think it quite possible that I could have 
dispersed them perhaps without firing 5 but ‘I was going to punish 
them. My idea from the military point of view was to make a 
wide impression. 5 

‘We have no doubt 5 , the official British Hunter Report con¬ 
tinued, ‘that he succeeded in creating a very wide impression and 
a great moral effect, but of a character quite opposite from the one 
he intended. 5 Jallianwalla Bagh quickened India’s political life 
and drew Gandhi into politics. 


205 


 

