CHAPTER XXI 


DESCENT INTO WAR 

Jawaharlal Nehru was president of the Congress for 1936 
and 1937 — an unusual honour and a heavy burden. But he him¬ 
self admitted that Gandhi was ‘the permanent Super-President’ 
of Congress. It obeyed him. Thanks to Gandhi’s suggestion, for 
instance, the twenty-five thousand persons who attended the 
Haripura annual convention in February 1938 were fed with 
hand-pounded rice, hand-ground flour, cow’s (not buffalo’s) 
milk and cow’s butter; of course everybody wore khadi. In poli¬ 
tics or out of politics, Gandhi could, by virtue of his hold on the 
people and on most Congress leaders, dictate the actions and veto 
the decisions of Congress if he wished. 

Only after Gandhi gave his consent did Congress participate 
in the elections to the provincial and central legislatures held 
early in 1937, under the new British constitution, the Act of India 
of 1935. ‘The boycott of the legislatures, let me tell you,’ Gandhi 
explained in Harijan of May 1st, 1937, ‘ 1S not an eternal principle 
like that of truth and non-violence.’ 

Congress swept the elections in six of India’s eleven provinces 
(Bombay, Madras, United Provinces, Bihar, Central Provinces 
and Orissa), was the largest single party in Assam, Bengal and the 
North-west Frontier Province, but obtained a very small minority 
of the votes in Sind and the Punjab. 

Should the Congress accept office in the provinces where it had 
won a majority? In March 1937, on the advice of Gandhi, it 
decided in the affirmative on the understanding, however, that 
the British governors of the provinces would not interfere, and in 
the hope of using office to organize the country for independence. 

The total Congress membership rose from 3,102,113 at the 
beginning of 1938, to 4,478,720 at the beginning of 1939. But 
Gandhi, never impressed by mere numbers, warned the party of 
being corrupted by power and office-seekers. He saw ‘decay’ 
setting in, and confessed that he could not undertake civil dis¬ 
obedience because, ‘though there is non-violence enough among 

369 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

the masses, there is not enough among those who have to organize 
the masses’. 

This reflected his disappointment with Congress leacjers. When, 
therefore, the convention of 1939 elected Subhas Chandra Bose as 
president of Congress — he was president too in 1938, and rode 
to that session in an ancient vehicle drawn by fifty-one bulls — 
Gandhi stepped in and forced Bose to resign. Bose openly advo¬ 
cated violence and dreamed of an armed revolt against Britain. 
He was dynamic and popular and threatened to seize control of 
Congress from the Vallabhbhai Patel machine. 

Gandhi also condemned the Congress provincial governments for 
using force during strikes and religious riots. As the 1930 decade 
advanced, Gandhi became more uncompromising in his pacifism. 
But neither Nehru, nor Bose, nor Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, 
the outstanding Moslem leader of Congress, was a pacifist. Of all 
India’s prominent nationalists, the only one who earned the title 
of‘Gandhi’ was Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, known to the country 
as ‘The Frontier Gandhi’. He is a Pathan from the wild, legendary 
north-west frontier region near the Khyber inhabited by the unruly 
Afridis, Wazirs and other mountain tribes; the British subsidized 
but never subdued them. Ghaffar Khan is six feet four, with a fine, 
perfectly oval head and a powerful muscular body. Grey-black 
stubble covers his head and face. He was sixty when I saw 
him in Devadas’s home in New Delhi in 1942; his dark, pene¬ 
trating, flashing eyes were those of a young man of thirty. His 
father and he were rich, but he renounced wealth to follow the 
Mahatma. He lives in a village (when he is not in jail) and lives 
like the villagers. He wears a long, blue-grey blouse and very 
wide-seat trousers made of homespun. His feet are bare. His 
feet are beautifully moulded and his big hands are almost white. 
After he shook hands he touched his hand to his heart. As Gandhi 
was of the soil and sand of India, Ghaffar Khan is of its rocks and 
crags and raging torrents. The hot blood of sharpshooting, trigger- 
happy mountaineers courses in his veins but he has adopted the 
philosophy of complete non-violence and so have the thousands 
of brother Pathans whom he organized as the Khudai Khidmatgar 
or Servants of God. 

Millions obeyed Gandhi, myriads adored him, multitudes 
accounted themselves his followers, only a handful did as lie did. 

370 


DESCENT INTO WAR 

He knew it. The knowledge did not diminish his volcanic energy 
or break his steel will. On the contrary; as he watched the dark¬ 
ness advance during the 1930s across China, Abyssinia, Spain, 
Czechoslovakia and above all Germany, his zeal for pure pacifism 
grew. ‘My faith is brightest in the midst of impenetrable darkness,’ 
he said on February 6th, 1939. He saw the second World War 
approaching. 

In 1921, he had written that ‘under independence too I would 
not hesitate to advise those who would bear arms to do so and 
fight for the country’. In 1928, answering the Frenchman the Rev. 
B. de Ligt, Tolstoy’s friend Chertkov and other European paci¬ 
fists who criticized him for supporting the two South African wars 
and the first World War, Gandhi declared, ‘I did participate in 
the three acts of war. I could not, it would be madness for me to, 
sever my connection with the society to which I belong.’ 

It would have been normal for Gandhi to be a pacifist from the 
very beginning of his public career.- But basic attitudes rarely 
came to Gandhi through cogitation. The absolute pacifism at 
which he arrived in the mid-1930s was partly the result of his less 
hopeful relationship towards the British Empire in which he had 
believed earlier. But chiefly, Gandhi’s pacifism came out of his 
own inner development. 

Once, when Gandhi was in prison, a scorpion stung a fellow 
prisoner; Gandhi sucked out the poison, A leper named Parchure 
Sastri, who was a Sanskrit scholar, asked to be admitted to 
Sevagram Ashram. Some members objected; they feared infec¬ 
tion. Gandhi not only admitted him; he gave him massage . . . 
In March 1939 Gandhi undertook a fast unto death on behalf 
of the civil liberties of the people of Rajkot, where he had gone to 
school as a boy. The doctors sought to dissuade the Mahatma. 
He showed symptoms of myocarditis, an inflammation or harden¬ 
ing of the muscles of the heart. 

But it was a Gandhian principle to subordinate the flesh to the 
spirit. When moral considerations made an act imperative, the 
body had no veto. If the flesh was weak it suffered or even died; 
it could not say no. 

This was the source of Gandhi’s pacifism. In the past, he had 
fought in the wars. He had allowed sympathy for Britain and duty 
to a country to guide him. Nor had he risen above Indian 

aa m.g. 371 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Nationalism. Morality did not yet completely command him. 

However, by the time the second World War approached, he 
had achieved more complete detachment. Also, he said, ‘I was 
not so disconsolate before [between 1914 and 1918] as I am today.’ 
He envisaged the second war as a ‘greater horror’ than the first; 
‘the greater horror would prevent me from becoming the self- 
appointed recruiting sergeant that I had become during the last 
war’. 

He had little hope of persauding others. But whereas in the past 
he had resisted all proddings from abroad and pleaded that he 
could not carry non-violence to the West while India remained 
violent, he advised the Abyssinians in 1935 not to fight. 

‘If the Abyssinians had adopted the attitude of non-violence of 
the strong,’ Gandhi said, ‘that is, the non-violence which breaks 
to pieces but never bends, Mussolini would have had no interest 
in Abyssinia. Thus if they had simply said: “You are welcome to 
reduce us to dust and ashes, but you will not find one Abyssinian 
ready to co-operate with you,” what could Mussolini have done? 
He did not want a desert ... If the Abyssinians had retired from 
the field and allowed themselves to be slaughtered, their seeming 
inactivity would have been much more effective though not for 
the moment visible. Hitler and Mussolini on the one hand and 
Stalin on the other are able to show the immediate effectiveness 
of violence. But it is as transitory as that of Genghis Khan’s 
slaughter.’ 

The tragedy of Czechoslovakia and of Germany’s Jews touched 
him even more deeply. ‘The peace of Europe gained at Munich’, 
where Chamberlain and Daladier betrayed Czechoslovakia to 
Hitler in September 1938, Gandhi wrote, ‘is a triumph of violence; 
it is also a defeat . . . England and France . . . quailed before the 
combined violence of Germany and Italy. But what have Ger¬ 
many and Italy gained? Have they added anything to the moral 
wealth of mankind?’ These words make more sense today than 
on October 8th, 1938, when they were published in Harijan. ‘The 
war is only postponed,’ Gandhi continued prophetically. ‘During 
the breathing time, I present the way of non-violence for accep¬ 
tance by the Czechs. They do not yet know what is in store for 
them. They can lose nothing by trying the way of non-violence. 
The fate of Republican Spain is hanging in the balance. So is that 

372 


DESCENT INTO WAR 


of China. If in the end they all lose, they will do So not because 
their cause is not just ... I suggest that, if it is brave, as it is, to 
die as a man fighting against odds, it is braver still to refuse to 
fight and yet to refuse to yield to the usurper. . . .’ 

While touring with Ghaffar Khan in October 1938, among the 
Pathans of the frontier, Gandhi wrote a Harijan article entitled 
‘If I were a Czech’. ‘Democracy dreads to spill blood,’ he said. 
‘The philosophy for which the two dictators stand calls it 
cowardice to shrink from carnage . . . Science of war leads one to 
dictatorship pure and simple. Science of non-violence can alone 
lead one to pure democracy . . . Russia is out of the picture just 
now. Russia has a dictator who dreams of peace and thinks he 
will wade to it through a sea of blood. . . . 

‘It was necessary to give this introduction to what I want to 
say to the Czechs and through them to all those nationalities 
which are called “small” or “weak”. I want to speak to the 
Czechs because their plight moved me to the point of physical and 
mental distress.’ His advice was: ‘Refuse to obey Hitler’s will 
and perish unarmed in the attempt. In so doing, though I lose 
the body, I save my soul, that is, my honour.’ 

Usually, the pacifist says, ‘It is evil to kill.’ He therefore ab¬ 
stains from war. He is answered by those who say, ‘I’d rather kill 
than be killed.’ To which, Gandhi replied, ‘No, I’d rather be 
killed.’ 

‘Man may and should shed his own blood for establishing what 
he considers to be his “right”,’ Gandhi wrote in Harijan. ‘He may 
not shed the blood of his opponent who disputes his “right”.’ 

In December 1938 the International Missionary Conference 
took place at Tambaram, near Madras, and when it was over, 
Christian clergymen, including Dr. John R. Mott, Reverend 
William Paton, secretary of the International Missionary Coun¬ 
cil, Reverend Leslie B. Moss, secretary of the Conference 
of Missionary Societies of North America, and many others sat 
at Gandhi’s feet in his ashram in Sevagram. Pyarelal Nayyar 
took notes. Soon they were cross-examining him on his formula 
for the Czechs. ‘You do not know Hitler and Mussolini,’ one 
missionary said. ‘They are incapable of any moral response. 
They have no conscience, and they have made themselves im¬ 
pervious to world opinion. Would it not be playing into the hands 

373 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

of these dictators if, for instance, the Czechs, following your advice, 
confronted them with non-violence?’ 

‘Your argument,’ Gandhi objected, ‘presupposes that the 
dictators like Mussolini and Hitler are beyond redemption.’ 

Discussions of a similar and even more challenging character 
were provoked by Gandhi’s counsel to the Jews. 

Gandhi wrote in Harijan , November nth, 1938: 

‘My sympathies are all with the Jews. They have been the un¬ 
touchables of Christianity . . . A Jewish friend has sent me a book 
called The Jewish Contribution to Civilization , by Cecil Roth. It 
gives a record of what the Jews have done to enrich the world’s 
literature, art, music, drama, science, medicine, agriculture, etc. 

. . . the German persecution of the Jews seems to have no parallel 
in history. The tyrants of old never went so mad as Hitler seems 
to have done. If there ever could be a justifiable war in the name 
of and for humanity, war against Germany to prevent the wanton 
persecution of a whole race would be completely justified. But I 
do not believe in any war. . . . 

‘Can the Jews resist this organized and shameless persecution? 

. . . If I were a Jew and were born in Germany and earned my 
livelihood there, I would claim Germany as my home even as the 
tallest gentile German might, and challenge him to shoot me or 
cast me in the dungeon . . . And for doing this I should not wait 
for the fellow Jews to join me in civil resistance, but would have 
confidence that in the end the rest were bound to follow my 
example. If one Jew or all the Jews were to accept the prescrip¬ 
tion here offered, he or they cannot be worse off than now . . . 
The calculated violence of Hitler may even result in a general 
massacre of the Jews by way of his first answer to the declaration 
of such hostilities. But if the Jewish mind could be prepared for 
voluntary sacrifice, even the massacre I have imagined could be 
turned into a day of thanksgiving that Jehovah had wrought 
deliverance of the race even at the hands of a tyrant. For to the 
God-fearing, death has no terror. ... 

‘The Jews of Germany can offer Satyagraha under infinitely 
better auspices than the Indians of South Africa. The Jews are a 
compact, homogeneous community in Germany. They are far 
more gifted than the Indians of South Africa. And they have 
organized world opinion behind them. I am convinced that if 

374 


DESCENT INTO WAR 


someone with courage and vision can arise among them to lead 
them in non-violent action, the winter of their despair can in the 
twinkling of an eye be turned into the summer of hope. And what 
has today become a degrading man hunt can be turned into a 
calm and determined stand offered by unarmed men and women 
possessing the strength of suffering given to them by Jehovah . . . 
The German Jews will score a lasting victory over the German 
gentiles in the sense that they will have converted the latter to an 
appreciation of human dignity.’ 

The Nazi press assaulted Gandhi savagely for these words. It 
threatened reprisals against India. T should rank myself a 
coward,’ he replied, £ if for fear of my country or myself or Indo- 
German relations being harmed, I hesitated to give what I felt 
in the innermost recesses of my heart to be one hundred per cent 
sound advice.’ 

The missionaries questioned him closely on his statements about 
the Jews. ‘To be truly non-violent,’ he said, ‘I must love [my 
adversary] and pray for him even when he hits me.’ The Jews 
should pray for Hitler. ‘If even one Jew acted thus, he would 
save his self-respect and leave an example which, if it became 
infectious, would save the whole of Jewry and leave a rich heritage 
to mankind besides.’ 

Herman Kallenbach was living in Sevagram Ashram at the 
time. ‘He has an intellectual belief in non-violence,’ Gandhi 
remarked, ‘but he says he cannot pray for Hitler ... I do not 
quarrel with him over his anger. He wants to be non-violent, 
but the sufferings of his fellow Jews are too much fpf him to bear. 
What is true of him is true of thousands of Jews who have no 
thought even of “loving the enemy”. With them, as with millions, 
“revenge is sweet, to forgive is divine”.’ There were few divine 
Jews or Christians or Hindus. Only one little Hindu and very 
few of his friends were capable of divine forgiveness. 

Jewish Frontier , a New York magazine, riddled Gandhi’s pro¬ 
posal in March 1939, and sent him a copy. He quoted at length 
from the attack. ‘I did not entertain the hope . . . that the Jews 
would be at once converted to my view,’ Gandhi replied. ‘I 
should have been satisfied if even one Jew had been fully con¬ 
vinced and converted ... It is highly probable that, as the [Jewish 
Frontier ] writer says, “A Jewish Gandhi in Germany, should one 

375 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


arise, could function for about five minutes and would be promptly 
taken to the guillotine.’* But that does not disprove my case or 
shake my belief in the efficacy of non-violence. I can conceive the 
necessity of the immolation of hundreds, if not thousands, to 
appease the hunger of dictators . .. Sufferers need not see the result 
during their lifetime . . . The method of violence gives no greater 
guarantee than that of non-violence . . .’ Millions sacrifice them¬ 
selves in war without any guarantee that the world will be better 
as a result or even that the enemy will be defeated. Yet who does 
not fiercely resent the suggestion that anybody should die in 
deliberate non-violent sacrifice? 

I mentioned the subject to Gandhi in 1946 when Hitler was 
dead. ‘Hitler,’ Gandhi said, ‘killed five million Jews. It is the' 
greatest crime of our time. But the Jews should have offered them¬ 
selves to the butcher’s knife. They should have thrown themselves 
into the sea from cliffs ... It would have aroused the world and 
the people of Germany ... As it is they succumbed anyway in 
their millions.’ 

Gandhi in 1938 and 1939 was seeking a moral substitute for the 
impending war. He knew his ideas would be rejected. But he 
had to express them. 

In December 1938 Mr. Takaoka, a member of the Japanese 
Parliament, came to Sevagram. He deliberately avoided the 
subject of the Sino-Japanese war; he asked how unity could be 
achieved between India and Japan. 

‘It can be possible,’ Gandhi replied harshly, ‘if Japan ceases to 
throw its greedy eyes on India.’ 

Takaoka requested a message for the Japanese party which 
advocated Asia for the Asiatics. ‘I do not subscribe to the doctrine 
of Asia for the Asiatics if it is meant as an anti-European com¬ 
bination,’ Gandhi affirmed. (Pyarelal published the interview in 
the December 24th, 1938, Harijan.) ‘How can we have Asia for the 
Asiatics unless we are content to let Asia remain a frog in the well?...’ 

' A lady cabled from London to Gandhi on August 24th, the day 
after the Stalin-Hitler pact was signed. ‘Please act. World await¬ 
ing lead:’ The war was a week off. Another woman wirelessed 
from England, ‘Urge you consider immediate expression of your 
unshakable faith in reason not force to rulers and all peoples.* 
Similar urgent messages poured into Sevagram. 

376 


DESCENT INTO WAR 

It was too late. On September ist, 1939, the Nazi Army invaded 
Poland. 

Sunday, September 3rd, 1939, 11 a.m.; British churches were 
filled; the British government declared war on Germany. I spent 
that afternoon in the country outside Paris. At 5 p.m. a lone plane 
flew overhead. The radio announced that France had gone to 
war. We drove back to town. Women stood in the streets of little 
towns gazing morosely into nowhere, into the bleak future. Some 
bit their fingernails. Our car paused for a long line of farm horses 
requisitioned by the army — heavy, well-groomed, powerful 
horses. A farmer put his arm around the neck of his horse, put 
his cheek against its head, and talked into its ear. The horse 
shook its head up and down. They were saying goodbye. Before 
it was over in 1945, more than thirty million persons in all parts 
of the world said goodbye to life. More than thirty million dead 
men, women and children; more than a hundred million wounded, 
hurt and incapacitated; millions of homes smashed; atom bombs 
dropped on two cities; hopes destroyed; ideals soured; moral 
values questioned. 

‘We have too many men of science, too few men of God,’ 
General Omar N. Bradley, Chief of Staff, United States Army, 
said in Boston on November 10th, 1948. ‘We have grasped the 
mystery of the atom and rejected the Sermon on the Mount . . . 
The world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, power without 
conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants and ethical infants. 
We know more about war than we know about peace, more about 
killing than we know about living.’ 

Gandhi rejected the atom and grasped the Sermon on the 
Mount. He was a nuclear infant and an ethical giant. He knew 
nothing about killing and much about living in the twentieth 
century. 

Only those who have no doubts can reject Gandhi completely. 


377 


 

