CHAPTER XXIV 


WILL-POWER 

I N May, June and July 1942, one felt a suffocating airlessness 
in India. Indians seemed desperate. British generals, U.S. 
General Joseph W. Stilwell and a small armed remnant, and 
thousands of Indian refugees were straggling out of Burma to 
escape the conquering Japanese. Japan was next door to India. 
England apparently lacked the strength to protect India from 
invasion. Vocal Indians were irritated and exasperated by their 
utter helplessness. There was the national emergency; tension 
was mounting; danger threatened; opportunity knocked; but 
Indians had no voice and no power to act. 

Gandhi found the situation intolerable. Resignation was alien 
to his nature. He believed and had taught a vast following that 
Indians must shape their own destiny. 

The Cripps mission awakened many hopes; India might gain 
the right to guide her fate. Now the hopes were dashed. Indians 
were to be supine spectators in an hour of decision. Anger swept 
the country. 

In the light of subsequent events, it appears clear that 1942 or 
1943 or 1944 was the best time to grant India independence. 
For, since Britain and other United Nations would keep their 
troops in the country as long as the war lasted, the transfer of 
power to a provisional Indian government could be achieved 
smoothly and with the least likelihood of riots, chaos, or attempts 
at a separate peace with Japan. Real power would remain in 
British hands. This would have avoided the hundreds of thou¬ 
sands of deaths and the millions of human torments atid tragedies 
which attended the liberation of India in 1947. 

Gandhi could not have foreseen the black future, but he did 
sense the urgent need of an immediate change. He was determined 
to exert maximum pressure on England for the early establish¬ 
ment of an independent national government. 

Gandhi’s formula was: £ not to put any obstacle in the way of 
the British forces’; not to assist the British actively; and to offer 
complete passive resistance to the Japanese. 

409 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

‘If the Japanese come, 5 Indians asked, ‘how are we to resist 
them non-violently? 5 

‘Neither food nor shelter is to be given, 5 Gandhi replied in the 
June 14th, 1942, Harijaiiy ‘nor are any dealings to be established 
with them. They should be made to feel that they are not 
wanted. But of course things are not going to happen quite so 
smoothly as the question implies. It is a superstition to think that 
they will come as friendlies ... If the people cannot resist fierce 
attack and are afraid of death, they must evacuate the infested 
place in order to deny compulsory service to the enemy. 5 

On July 26th, answering similar questions in Harijan , Gandhi 
wrote, ‘I would rather be shot than submit to Japanese or any 
other power. 5 He recommended the same preference to his 
friends. 

Gandhi, the absolute pacifist, would have wished India to give 
an unprecedented demonstration of a successful non-violent 
defeat of an invading army. Yet he was not so unrealistic as to 
forget that a fierce war to the death of countries raged. In 
Harijan of June 14th, 1942, Gandhi declared, ‘Assuming that the 
National government is formed and if it answers my expectations, 
its first act would be to enter into a treaty with the United Nations 
for defensive operations against aggressive powers, it being common 
cause that India will have nothing to do with any of the Fascist 
powers and India would be morally bound to help the United 
Nations. 5 

Asked by Reuters in London to amplify this encouraging 
pronouncement, Gandhi cabled, ‘There can be no limit to what 
friendly independent India can do. I had in mind a treaty 
between the United Nations and India for the defence of China 
against Japanese aggression. 5 

Would Gandhi, then, assist the war effort? No. United Nations 
armies would be tolerated on Indian soil and Indians could enlist 
in the British Army or render other help. But if he had anything 
to say, the Indian Army would be disbanded and the new Indian 
national government would use ‘all its power, prestige and' 
resources 5 to bring about world peace. 

Did he expect this to happen? No. ‘After the formation of the 
National Government 5 , he said, ‘my voice may be a voice in the 
wilderness and nationalist India may go war-mad. 5 

v 410 


WILL-POWER 

Nationalist India might well have gone ‘war-mad 5 if only to 
shake off the oppressive frustration of inaction. Nehru, Azad and 
Rajagopalachari were eager to have a national government for 
its own sake, to be sure, but also in order to fight the war. They 
were militantly anti-fascist. Nehru said, ‘We would fight in every 
way possible with non-violence and with arms, by making it a 
people’s war, by raising a people’s army, by increasing produc¬ 
tion . . .’ But if Britain did not enable them to do these things, 
they must continue the struggle for independence. ‘Passivity on 
our part at this moment’, Nehru declared, ‘would be suicidal 
... It would destroy and emasculate us.’ Fear of India’s emas¬ 
culation was an everpresent motive. ‘Today the whole of 
India is impotent,’ Gandhi complained in the same context. In 
different ways, both Nehru and Gandhi were concerned with 
building up the manhood of their people. Gandhi wanted to give 
them inner strength through confidence. He inspired that feeling 
in his Indian and foreign visitors. 

As the summer of 1942 wore on, it became clear that London 
would not depart from the spurned Gripps proposal. Nehru had 
waited for a sign from Washington; he had hoped Roosevelt 
would prevail upon Churchill to make another move in India. 
No sign came. Some Congressmen wondered whether the country 
would respond to a call for civil disobedience, and some feared that 
it would respond violently. Gandhi had no doubts. He was 
registering a nation’s blind urge to self-assertion. 

He did not contemplate the overthrow of the British govern¬ 
ment. ‘A non-violent revolution,’ he explained, ‘is not a pro¬ 
gramme of seizure of power. It is a programme of transformation 
of relationships ending in a peaceful transfer of power. . . .’ 

‘British rule in India must end immediately,’ the Working 
Committee of Congress resolved in Wardha on July 14th; foreign 
domination ‘even at its best’ is an evil and a ‘continuing injury’. 
The frustration left by the Cripps Mission ‘has resulted in a rapid 
and widespread increase of ill-will against Britain and a growing 
satisfaction at the success of Japanese arms. The Working 
Committee view this development with grave apprehension, as 
this, unless checked, will inevitably lead to a passive acceptance 
of aggression. The Committee hold that all aggression must be 
resisted . . . The Congress would change the present ill-will 

411 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


against Britain into good-will and make India a willing partner 
in a joint enterprise . . . This is only possible if India feels the glow 
of freedom’. 

Congress, the resolution continued, did not wish to embarrass 
the Allied powers; it is therefore ‘agreeable to the stationing of the 
armed forces of the Allies in India. . . .’ 

If this appeal failed, the resolution concluded, Congress will 
‘be reluctantly compelled 5 to start a civil disobedience campaign 
which ‘would inevitably be under the leadership of Mahatma 
Gandhi 5 . 

The resolution still required the approval of the larger All-India 
Congress Committee summoned to convene in Bombay early in 
August. From Sevagram, meanwhile, Gandhi issued an appeal 
‘To Every Japanese’. ‘I must confess 5 , he began, ‘that though I 
have no ill-will against you, I intensely dislike your attack upon 
China . . . you have descended to imperial ambition. You will 
fail to realize that ambition and may become the authors of the 
dismemberment of Asia, thus unwittingly preventing world 
federation and brotherhood without which there can be no hope 
for humanity. 5 

He warned Tokyo not to exploit the situation to invade India. 
‘You will be sadly disillusioned if you believe that you will receive 
a willing welcome from India ... we will not fail in resisting 
you with all the might that our country can muster. . . .’ 

Then he went to Bombay. To jA. T. Steele, of the New York 
Herald Tribune , Gandhi said,‘If anybody could convince me that 
in the midst of war, the British government cannot declare India 
free without jeopardizing the war effort, I should like to hear the 
argument. 5 

‘If you were convinced, 5 Steele asked, ‘would you call off the 

campaign ? 5 

c Of course, 5 Gandhi replied. ‘My complaint is that all these 
good people talk at me, swear at me, but never condescend to 

talk to me. 5 

Linlithgow had talked to him in 1939 an d 1940, but not there¬ 
after. 

Several hundred Congress leaders assembled for the A.I.C.C. 
session on August 7th, and after deliberating all day of the 7th 
and 3 th, they adopted a slightly modified version of the Wardha 

412 


WILL-POWER 


resolution; they dotted one i by declaring that an Indian govern¬ 
ment would resist aggression ‘with all the armed as well as the 
non-violent forces at its command’ — this was an un-Gandhian 
touch inserted by the Nehru-Azad school — and crossed one 
bridge before they reached it by cautioning the Congress rank 
and file that if their leaders were arrested and prevented from 
issuing instructions they must obey the general instructions which 
read, ‘non-violence is the basis of this movement’. 

Shortly after midnight of August 8th, Gandhi addressed the 
A.I.C.C. delegates. ‘The actual struggle does not commence this 
very moment,’ he emphasized. ‘You have merely placed certain 
powers in my hands. My first act will be to wait upon His 
Excellency the Viceroy and plead with him for the acceptance of 
the Congress demand. This may take two or three weeks. What 
are you to do in the meanwhile? I will tell you. There is the 
spinning wheel. . . But there is something more you have to do 
. . . Every one of you should, from this very moment, consider 
himself a free man or woman and even act as if you are free and 
no longer under the heel of this imperialism . . .’ He was reversing 
the materialistic concept that conditions determine psychology. 
No, psychology could shape conditions. ‘What you think, you 
become,’ he once said. 

The delegates went home to sleep. Gandhi, Nehru and scores 
of others were awakened by the police a few hours later — before 
sunrise — and carried off to prison. Gandhi was sent into a palace 
of the Aga Khan at Yeravda, near Poona. Mrs. Naidu, Mirabehn, 
Mahadev Desai and Pyarelal Nayyar, arrested at the same time, 
were quartered with him. The next day, Kasturbai got herself 
arrested by announcing that she would address a meeting in 
Bombay at which Gandhi had been scheduled to speak. She and 
Dr. Sushila Nayyar, who had been giving her medical care, joined 
the Gandhi jail company. The British were very accommodating. 

In an interview with the Viceroy after my week with Gandhi I 
conveyed the message entrusted to me at Sevagram: Gandhi 
wished to talk with Linlithgow. The Viceroy replied, ‘That is a 
matter of high policy and will have to be considered on its 
merits’; 1942 was Churchill’s first opportunity in office to cope 
with a vcivil disobedience movement in India. The British 
government preferred suppression to discussion. 

4i3 


GANDHI IN I N DIA 


The moment the prison doors closed behind Gandhi the sluice 
gates of violence opened. Police stations and government build¬ 
ings were set on fire, telegraph lines destroyed, railroad ties pulled 
up and British officials assaulted; a number were killed. Indivi¬ 
duals and groups dedicated to destruction roamed the country¬ 
side. Soon a powerful underground movement sprang into 
existence led, in most cases, by members of the Socialist party, a 
segment of the Congress party. Socialist leaders Jaiprakash 
Narayan, Mrs. Aruna Asaf Ali and others, political children of 
Gandhi but recent students of Karl Marx, acquired the halos of 
heroes as they moved secretly across the land fomenting rebellion. 
Staid citizens harboured and financed them while the British 
police hunted them. His Majesty’s writ no longer ran and his 
officials no longer appeared in many areas where Indians set up 
independent village, town and district governments. These 
were, in most cases, skeleton structures whose propaganda value 
exceeded their administrative effectiveness. Yet in some regions, 
notably in Tilak’s traditionally militant Maharashtra, it was not 
till 1944 that the British returned to rule. 

Even Gandhi was in a bellicose mood. With that irrepressible 
ability to take the centre of the stage, the jailed Mahatma’s 
personality broke through the walls of the Aga Khan’s desolate 
palace and besieged the mind first of the British government and 
then of the Indian people. 

He was no sooner in jail than he wrote a letter to Sir Roger 
Lumley, the governor of Bombay, protesting against his own 
transportation from the train to the prison by car while his 
comrades went by motor truck. He wanted no privileges, he 
said, ‘except for the special food’. The palace, he wrote, was 
‘commodious’; could not Sardar Patel, who had been ill, and his 
daughter who nursed him, be moved into it? The final point: 
on the train he had seen in a paper the Government’s justification 
of its policy; it contained ‘some grossly inaccurate statements 
which I ought to be allowed to correct. This and similar things I 
cannot do, unless I know what is going on outside the jail’. Yet 
newspapers had been forbidden to him. 

Lumley’s secretary replied he could not have newspapers or 
Patel. He might write personal letters to his family. 

Didn’t the Government know, Gandhi answered, that ‘for over 

414 


WILL-POWER 


thirty-five years I have ceased to live a family life’ and had been 
living an ashram life? He wanted to be in touch with the various 
voluntary organizations he had founded for Harijan uplift, 
khadi, the development of a national language, etc. The Govern¬ 
ment then made a concession: he could write to ashram members 
on personal questions but not about the organizations. Gandhi 
refused to avail himself of the privilege. 

Gandhi now turned on the Viceroy. Ever since President 
Roosevelt’s intervention in the Indian crisis and Churchill’s offer 
to ‘assuage’ United States public opinion by resigning, a gigantic 
propaganda battle had been going on to win American approval 
of British policy in India. Gandhi knew this. In his first letter 
from jail to the Viceroy on August 14th, Gandhi accused 
the Government of ‘distortions and misrepresentations’. The 
letter was many pages long. Linlithgow, addressing ‘Dear Mr. 
Gandhi’, answered in a paragraph that ‘it would not be 
possible for me either to accept your criticism’ or change the 
policy. 

Gandhi waited several months. On New Years Eve, 1942, he 
wrote, ‘Dear Lord Linlithgow, This is a very personal letter ... I 
must not allow the old year to expire without disburdening my¬ 
self of what is rankling in my breast against you. I have thought 
we were friends . . . However what has happened since August 
9th makes me wonder whether you still regard me as a friend. I 
have not perhaps come in such close touch with any occupant 
of your throne as with you.’ Then he voiced what apparently 
hurt him most: ‘Why did you not, before taking drastic action, 
send for me, tell me your suspicions and make yourself sure of 
your facts? I am quite capable of seeing myself as others see me.’ 
The Government had made the charge that he was responsible for 
the violence throughout the country and expected him to condemn 
it. How could he when he had only the official version? By 
accusing him without giving him freedom to reply, by holding 
him and his followers in prison despite their good intentions, the 
Government had ‘wronged innocent men’. 

Therefore, Gandhi concluded, he had decided to ‘crucify the 
flesh by fasting’. This was a last resort and he would be glad not 
to fast. ‘Convince me of my error or errors and I shall make 
ample amends. You can send for me . . . There are many other 

4i5 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


ways if you have the will. . . May the New Year bring peace to 
us all! I am, Your sincere friend, M. K. Gandhi.’ 

The Viceroy received this letter fourteen days later; minor 
officials had delayed it. He answered in a letter marked ‘Personal’. 
It was a two-page letter. Newspapers had been supplied to 
Gandhi’s prison after the early period without them. He knew of 
the arson and murders. Linlithgow was therefore ‘profoundly 
depressed . . . that no word of condemnation for that violence 
and crime should have come from you’. If Gandhi wished to 
dissociate himself from these acts ‘You know me well enough after 
these many years to believe that I shall be only too concerned to 
read with the same close attention as ever any message which I 
receive from you . . . Yours sincerely, Linlithgow.’ 

T had almost despaired of ever hearing from you,’ Gandhi’s 
reply began. ‘Please excuse my impatience. Your letter gladdens 
me to find that I have not lost caste with you. My letter of 
December 31st was a growl against you. Yours is a counter-growl 
. . . Of course I deplore the happenings that have taken place 
since August 9th. But have I not laid the blame for them at the 
door of the Government of India? Moreover, I could not express 
any opinion on events which I cannot influence or control and of 
which I have but a one-sided account... I am certain that noth¬ 
ing but good could have resulted if you had stayed your hand and 
granted me the interview which I had announced, on the night of 
August 8th, I was to seek . . . convince me that I was wrong and I 
will make ample amends. . . .’ 

Linlithgow responded quickly saying he had no choice ‘but to 
regard the Congress movement and you as its authorized and 
fully empowered spokesman ... as responsible for the sad cam¬ 
paign of violence and crime’. He repelled Gandhi’s charge that 
the Government was at fault. He asked the Mahatma to ‘repudiate 
or dissociate yourself from the resolution of August 8th and the 
policy which the resolution represents’ and to ‘give me appropriate 
assurances as regards the future . . .’ He had asked the Governor 
of Bombay to forward Gandhi’s letter without delay. 

It was the Government, Gandhi’s return letter stated, that 
‘goaded the people to the point of madness’. The Congress 
resolution of August 8th was friendly to the United Nations and 
to England: The Government’s violence was ‘leonine’. The arrests 

416 


WILL-POWER 


started the trouble. Yet the Viceroy blamed him for the violence 
though he had worked all his life for non-violence. ‘If then I 
cannot get soothing balm for my pain, I must resort to the law 
prescribed for Satyagrahis, namely, a fast according to capacity/ 
It would commence on February 9th and end twenty-one days 
later. ‘Usually, during my fasts, I take water with the addition of 
salt. But nowadays, my system refuses water. This time therefore 
I propose to add juices of citrus fruit to make water drinkable. 
For my wish is not to fast unto death, but to survive the ordeal, if 
God so wills. The fast can be ended sooner by the government 
giving the needed relief/ 

The Viceroy replied immediately, on February 5th, with a 
many-page letter. He still held Congress responsible for ‘the 
lamentable disorders’. Sir Reginald Maxwell, the Home Member 
of Linlithgow’s Executive Council, had made a full statement of 
this charge in the assembly and this would be sent to the prisoner. 
The letter reiterated the charge and added details. ‘Let me in 
conclusion say how greatly I regret, having regard to your health 
and age, the decision’ to fast. He hoped he would not fast. But it 
was Gandhi’s responsibility. ‘I regard the use of a fast for political 
purposes as a form of political blackmail for which there is no 
moral justification, and understood from your own previous 
writings that this was also your view.’ 

Besides, Gandhi had written that one may fast only against 
those who love you, not against a tyrant. 

By return post, Gandhi denied that his decision to fast was 
contrary to his previous writings. ‘I wonder whether you yourself 
have read those writings . . . Despite your description of it as “a 
form of political blackmail”, it is on my part an appeal to the 
Highest Tribunal for justice which I have failed to secure from 
you. If I do not survive the ordeal I shall go to the Judgment 
Seat with the fullest faith in my innocence. Posterity will judge 
between you as a representative of an all-powerful government 
and me a humble man who tried to serve his country and humanity 
through it.’ 

Two days before the fast was to commence the Government 
offered to release Gandhi for its duration. He and his associates 
in prison could go wherever they liked. Gandhi refused. If he 
was released, he said, he would not fast. Thereupon, the Govern- 

417 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


ment announced that he would be responsible for any results; 
meanwhile, he could invite into the jail any doctors he wanted to 
have and also friends from the outside. 

The fast commenced on February ioth, 1942, a day later than 
scheduled. The first day he was quite cheerful and for two d^ys 
he took his customary morning and evening half-hour walks. But 
soon the bulletins became increasingly disquieting. On the sixth 
day, six physicians, including British official doctors, stated that 
Gandhi’s condition had ‘further deteriorated’. The next morning 
Sir Homi Mody, Mr. N. R. Sarker and Mr. Aney, three Indians 
in the Viceroy’s Executive Council, whose membership indicated 
their pro-government and anti-Congress attitude, resigned from 
the Council in protest against the government accusations which 
had caused Gandhi to undertake the fast. A debate on the fast 
took place in the Central Legislature. From all over the country, 
the Government was bombarded with demands to release the 
Mahatma. Eleven days after the fast began, Linlithgow rejected 
all suggestions to liberate Gandhi. 

Dr. B. C. Roy came from Calcutta to attend Gandhi. The 
British physicians urged intravenous feeding to save the Mahatma. 
The Indian physicians said it would kill him; he objected to 
injections. The body could reject medicines taken orally, Gandhi 
always argued, but it was helpless before injections, and his mind 
therefore rebelled against them; they were violence. 

Crowds gathered around Yeravda. The Government allowed 
the public to come into the palace grounds and file through 
Gandhi’s room. Devadas and Ramdas, his sons, arrived. 

Horace Alexander, the British Friend, attempted to intervene 
with the Government. He was rebuffed. Mr. Aney, who had just 
resigned from the Viceroy’s Council, visited the sinking Mahatma. 

Gandhi had been taking water without salt or fruit juice. 
Nausea plagued him. His kidneys began to fail and his blood 
became thick. On the thirteenth day of the fast the pulse grew 
feeble and his skin was cold and moist. Kasturbai knelt before a 
sacred plant and prayed; she thought his death was near. 

Finally, the Mahatma was persuaded to mix a few drops of 
fresh moosambi fruit juice with the drinking water. Vomiting 
stopped; he became more cheerful. 

On March 2nd, Kasturbai handed him a glass containing six 

418 


WILL-POWER 


ounces of orange juice diluted with water. He sipped it for twenty 
minutes. He thanked the doctors and cried copiously while doing 
so. He lived on orange juice for the next four days and then went 
on a diet of goat’s milk, fruit juice and fruit pulp. His health 
improved slowly. 

India’s prominent non-Congress leaders now started agitating 
for Gandhi’s release and for a new government policy of concilia¬ 
tion. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and others asked permission to see 
Gandhi; Linlithgow refused. 

On April 25th, William Phillips, Roosevelt’s personal envoy in 
India and former United States Under-Secretary of State, said to 
foreign correspondents before leaving for home, C I should have 
liked to meet and talk with Mr. Gandhi. I requested the appro¬ 
priate authorities for permission to do so and I was informed that 
they were unable to grant the necessary permission.’ 

Linlithgow’s behaviour had induced unwonted bitterness in 
Gandhi, and when the Viceroy, whose usual five-year term had 
been prolonged because of the war emergency, was finally pre¬ 
paring to leave India, Gandhi wrote to him on September 27th, 
1943, as follows: 

Dear Lord Linlithgow, On the eve of your departure from India 
I would like to send you a word. 

Of all the high functionaries I have had the honour of knowing 
none has been the cause of such deep sorrow to me as you have 
been. It has cut me to the quick to have to think of you as having 
countenanced untruth, and that regarding one whom you at one 
time considered your friend. I hope and pray that God will some 
day put it into your heart to realize that you, a representative of a 
great nation, have been led into a grievous error. With good 
wishes, I still remain your friend, M. K. Gandhi. 

Linlithgow replied on October 7 th: 

Dear Mr. Gandhi, I have received your letter of September 27th. 
I am indeed sorry that your feelings about any deeds or words of 
mine should be as you describe. But I must be allowed, as gently 
as I may, to make plain to you that I am quite unable to accept 
your interpretation of the events in question. 
dd m.g. 419 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

As for the corrective virtues of time and reflection, evidently 
they are ubiquitous in their operation and wisely to be rejected 
by no man. I am sincerely, Linlithgow. 

Before and after the fast, Gandhi wrote long letters, some of 
which were of pamphlet length, to Sir Reginald Maxwell, Lord 
(formerly Sir Herbert) Samuel and others, seeking to controvert 
their public assertions about events and conditions in India. But 
none of them was published and his letter to Samuel, sent on 
May 15th, 1943, was not delivered in London until July 25th, 
1944. Throughout, Gandhi continued to maintain that he could 
‘accept no responsibility for the unfortunate happenings’ in India, 
that he was neither anti-British nor pro-Japanese and that he 
could have been dissuaded from taking any steps against the 
Government. 

The facts are: Gandhi never launched the civil disobedience 
movement. Congress had merely authorized him to launch it, 
but he had stated that it would not begin until he gave the 
order. First he would seek an interview with the Viceroy. The 
country was in a violent mood; Gandhi knew it; conceivably he 
might have chosen a form of civil disobedience, like the Salt 
March, which did not lend itself to mass violence. Had Gandhi 
remained at liberty he might have prevented his followers from 
engaging in the destruction of property and persons. He might 
have fasted against them. At least, he could have curbed the 
general violence. He would not have added to it. The British 
gained nothing from Gandhi’s arrest except the satisfaction, 
tempered by headaches, of having him under lock and key. 
Gandhi’s freedom would have mollified many Indians. His 
arrest inflamed them. It deepened the wide-spread impression 
that England did not intend to part with power in India. Hence 
the revolt. It was intensified by the 1943 famine in Bengal in 
which, according to British official figures, a million and a half 
Indians died. Indians said the Government might have prevented 
the famine or, at a minimum, undertaken emergency feeding. 
That was one of Wavell’s first steps on ascending the Viceroy’s 
throne in October 1943. 

For Gandhi, this stay in prison was an unrelieved tragedy. The 
widespread violence and his inability to deal with it made him 

420 


WILL-POWER 


unhappy. The Government’s accusation that he was to blame for 
the disturbances when it knew his devotion to non-violence and 
when it knew that he had never actually started civil disobedience 
impressed him as unfair and untrue; the injustice pained him. It 
was to protest against the charge — not to force the British to 
release him — that he had fasted. A perfect yogi might have 
remained indifferent to what others said. Gandhi was not com¬ 
pletely detached. 

The tragedy was deepened by personal loss. Six days after 
Gandhi entered the Aga Khan’s palace, Mahadev Desai, who 
was arrested with him, had a sudden heart attack and lost 
consciousness. ‘Mahadev, Mahadev,’ Gandhi called. 

‘If only he would open his eyes and look at me he would not 
die,’ Gandhi said. 

‘Mahadev, look, Bapu is calling you,’ Kasturbai exclaimed. 

But it was the end. 

Mahadev Desai, who was past fifty, had served Gandhi de¬ 
votedly and efficiently for twenty-four years as secretary, adviser, j 
chronicler, friend and son. The Mahatma was stunned by the 
death. He went daily to the spot in the palace grounds where the 
ashes were buried. 

Soon a still greater personal sorrow overtook Gandhi. 

Gandhi spent much time in prison teaching his wife Indian 
geography and other subjects. She failed, however, to memorize 
the names of the rivers of the Punjab, and on examination by 
Gandhi she said Lahore, which is the capital of the Punjab, was 
the capital of Calcutta, a city which is the capital of Bengal. He 
had little success in his persistent efforts to improve her reading 
and writing of Gujarati. She was seventy-four. 

Ba, or Mother, as everybody called Mrs. Gandhi, still paid 
homage to Brahmans for their high-caste status and regarded 
them as possessing special endowments; she asked one Brahman 
who worked in the jail when they would be released. But she had 
rid herself of anti-untouchable prejudices, was a regular spinner 
and a sincere but not uncritical Gandhian. One day she was 
annoyed with Gandhi and said to him, ‘Didn’t I tell you not to 
pick a quarrel with the mighty Government? You did not listen 
to me and now we all have to pay the penalty. The Government 
is using its limitless strength to crush the people.’ 

421 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

‘Then what do you want me to do . . . write to the Government 
and ask for their forgiveness? 5 

No, she did not ask that. But, she exclaimed, ‘Why do you 
ask the British to leave India? Our country is vast. We can all 
live there. Let them stay if they like, but let them stay as 
brothers. 5 

‘What else have I done? 5 Gandhi replied. ‘I want them to go 
as rulers. Once they cease to be our rulers, we have no quarrel 
with them. 5 

Ah, yes, she agreed with that. She apparently worshipped 
him without understanding. 

Kasturbai had been ailing, and in December 1943 she became 
seriously ill with chronic bronchitis. Dr. Gilder and Dr. Nayyar 
tended her, but she asked for Dr. Dinshah Mehta, a nature cure 
expert who had treated Gandhi, and an Aryuvedic or Indian- 
medicine practitioner. In deference to her wishes, Gandhi bom¬ 
barded the Government with letters to admit them. The practi¬ 
tioner tried all his art for a number of days during which the 
modern-medicine physicians withdrew from the patient. When 
he confessed defeat, Dr. Gilder, Dr. Nayyar and Dr. Jivraj Mehta 
resumed their efforts, but they too failed. The Government gave 
permission for her sons and grandsons to visit her. Ba especially 
asked for her first-born, Harilal, who had been estranged from 
his parents. 

Gandhi sat by his wife’s bed for many hours. He ordered all 
medicines to be stopped and all food except honey and water. It 
was more important, he said, for her to have peace with God. 
‘If God wills it, 5 he said, ‘she will pull through, else I would let 
her go, but I won’t drug her any longer. 5 

Penicillin, then rare in India, was flown from Calcutta; Devadas 
had insisted on it. ‘Why do you not trust God? 5 Gandhi said to 
him. ‘Do you wish to drug your mother even on her deathbed? 5 

Gandhi had not known that penicillin was given by injection. 
On being told, he forbade it. Most of the day, Gandhi sat on her 
bed, holding her hand. Fellow prisoners sang Hindu hymns. 
On February 21st Harilal arrived, summoned hastily by the 
Government. He was drunk and had to be removed from 
Kasturbai’s presence. She cried and beat her forehead. (Harilal 
attended his father’s funeral without being recognized and spent 

422 


W I L L-PO W E R 


that night with Devadas. He died, a derelict, in a tuberculosis 
hospital in Bombay on June 19th, 1948.) 

The next day, her head resting in Gandhi’s lap, she died. At 
the funeral, Gandhi offered a prayer borrowed from Hindu, 
Parsi, Moslem and Christian scriptures. Devadas lit the pyre. 
The ashes were buried beside those of Mahadev Desai in the 
prison grounds. 

When Gandhi returned from the cremation, he sat on his bed 
in silence and then, from time to time, as the thoughts came, he 
spoke: T cannot imagine life without Ba . . . Her passing has left 
a vacuum which never will be filled . . . We lived together for 
sixty-two years ... If I had allowed the penicillin it would not 
have saved, her . . . And she passed away in my lap. Gould it be 
better? I am happy beyond measure.’ 

Gandhi had been in correspondence on political issues with the 
new Viceroy, Lord Wavell. Immediately after Kasturbai’s death, 
Waved said in a letter to the Mahatma, T take this opportunity 
to express to you deep sympathy from my wife and myself at the 
death of Mrs. Gandhi. We understand what this loss must mean 
to you after so many years of companionship.’ 

Gandhi was touched. In his reply he wrote, ‘Though for her 
sake I have welcomed her death as bringing freedom from living 
agony, I feel the loss more than I had thought I should.’ Then he 
explained their intimate relationship to Waved, whom he had 
never met. ‘We were a couple outside the ordinary,’ he said. 
Their continence, after the age of thirty-seven, ‘knit us together 
as never before. We ceased to be two different entities . . . The 
result was that she became truly my better half’. 

Six weeks after Kasturbai’s passing, Gandhi suffered a severe 
attack of benign tertian malaria, during which he was delirious. 
Temperature rose to 105. A blood count showed a very high 
germ content. At first he thought he could cure it with a fruit- 
juice diet and fasting; he accordingly refused to take quinine. 
After two days he relented; he took a total of thirty-three grains 
of quinine in two days and the fever disappeared. In ad sub¬ 
sequent examinations, parasites were absent and the malaria 
never recurred. 

On May 3rd Gandhi’s physicians issued a bulletin saying his 
anaemia was worse and his blood pressure low. ‘His general condi- 

423 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


tion is again giving rise to severe anxiety.’ Agitation for his 
release swept India. A heavy armed guard was placed around the 
prison. At 8 a.m., May 6th, Gandhi and his associates were 
released. A subsequent analysis showed that he had hookworm 
(ankylostomiasis) and amoebiasis of the intestines. 

This was Gandhi’s last time in jail. Altogether, he spent 
2089 days in Indian and 249 days in South African prisons. 

Gandhi went to Juhu, by the sea near Bombay, where he stayed 
in the home of Shantikumar Morarji, whose father was from 
Porbandar, Gandhi’s birthplace. Mrs. Naidu and Mrs. Pandit, 
Jawaharlal Nehru’s sister, were there at the same time. 

Mrs. Morarji suggested that the Mahatma see a moving picture 
film; he had never seen either a silent movie or a talkie. After 
some urging, he agreed. Mission to Moscow was being exhibited 
in a nearby suburb. Mechanical equipment and the film were 
brought to the Morarji home and, together with about one 
hundred other persons, Gandhi viewed Mission to Moscow . 

‘How did you like it?’ Mrs. Morarji asked. 

‘I didn’t like it,’ he said. He hadn’t liked the ballroom dancing 
and the women in scanty dresses; he considered it improper. 

Friends complained that he had viewed a foreign picture, not 
one of Indian manufacture. He accordingly saw Ram Rajya , 
based on an ancient legend of an ideal moral king. 

For his relaxation, somebody read Gandhi a delightful, tranquil 
children’s book by Pearl S. Buck entitled The Chinese Children Next 
Door. 

The doctors were curing Gandhi and he was curing himself 
with silence, ‘medical silence’, he called it. At first it was total; 
after a few weeks, he would speak between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m., 
which was prayer-meeting time. 

After several weeks he plunged into work again. 


424 


 

