CHAPTER XVI 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 

G andhi was a reformer of individuals. Hence his concern for 
the means whereby India’s liberation might be achieved. 
If the means corrupted the individual the loss would be 
greater than the gain. 

Gandhi knew that the re-education of a nation was a slow pro¬ 
cess and he was not usually in a hurry unless prodded by events 
or by men reacting to those events. Left to himself, he would not 
have forced the issue of independence in 1930. But now the die 
was cast; Congress had decreed a campaign for independence. 
The leader therefore became an obedient soldier. 

During the weeks after the stirring New Year’s Eve indepen¬ 
dence ceremony, Gandhi searched for a form of civil disobedience 
that left no opening for violence. 

Gandhi’s monumental abhorrence of violence stemmed from 
the Jainist and Buddhist infusions into his Hinduism but, particu¬ 
larly, from his love of human beings. Every reformer, crusader 
and dictator avows his undying devotion to the anonymous mass; 
Gandhi had an apparently endless capacity to love the individual 
men, women and children who crowded his life. He gave them 
tenderness and affection; he remembered their personal needs and 
he enjoyed catering for their wants at the unnoticed expense of his 
limited time and energy. H. N. Brailsford, the humane British 
Socialist, explains this by ‘the fact that female tendencies were 
at least as strong in his mental make-up as male. They were 
evident, for example, in his love of children, in the pleasure he 
took in playing with them, and in the devotion he showed as a 
sick-nurse. His beloved spinning wheel has always been a woman’s 
tool. And is not Satyagraha, the method of conquering by self¬ 
suffering, a woman’s tactic?’ Perhaps. But maybe Brailsford is 
being unfair to men and too fair to the fair. Like Brailsford, 
everyone will interpret Gandhi’s loving kindness according to his 
own experience. It wrapped the Mahatma’s iron will and austerity 
in a downy softness; one touch of it and most Indians forgave his 

288 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 


blunders, quirks and fads. It ruled out anything that could lead 
to violence. In the successful Rardoli Satyagraha in 1928, for 
instance, there was no violence, but there might have been. The 
peasants might have allowed themselves to be goaded into the 
use of force. The civil disobedience campaign of 1930, Gandhi 
felt, had to preclude such potentials, for if it got out of hand no 
one, not even he, could control it. 

Rabindranath Tagore, for whom Gandhi had the deepest 
veneration, was in the neighbourhood of Sabarmati Ashram and 
came for a visit on January 18th. He inquired what Gandhi had 
in store for the country in 1930. T am furiously thinking night 
and day, 5 Gandhi replied, ‘and I do not see any light coming out 
of the surrounding darkness.’ 

The situation made Gandhi apprehensive. ‘There is a lot of 
violence in the air,’ he said. The British government had altered 
the exchange rate of the rupee so that India might import more 
from Lancashire; the Indian middle class suffered. The Wall 
Street crash of October 1929, and the spreading world economic 
depression hit the Indian peasant. Working-class unrest was 
mounting for all these reasons, and because of the Government’s 
persecution of labour organizers. Again, as in 1919 to 1921, a 
number of young Indians saw an opportunity of striking a bloody 
blow for freedom. 

Civil disobedience in these circumstances involved ‘undoubted 
risks’, but the only alternative was ‘armed rebellion’. Gandhi’s 
confidence remained unshaken. 

For six weeks, Gandhi had been waiting to hear the ‘Inner 
Voice’. This, as he interpreted it, had no Jo an-of-Arc connota¬ 
tions. ‘The “Inner Voice” ’, he wrote, ‘may mean a message from 
God or from the Devil, for both are wrestling in the human breast. 
Acts determine the nature of the voice.’ 

Presently, Gandhi seemed to have heard the Voice, which 
could only mean that he had come to a decision, for the February 
27th issue of Young India opened with an editorial by Gandhi 
entitled ‘When I am Arrested’, and then devoted considerable 
space to the iniquities of the salt tax. The next number of the 
magazine quoted the penal sections of the Salt Act. And on 
March 2nd, 1930, Gandhi sent a long letter to the Viceroy serving 
notice that civil disobedience would begin in nine days. 

289 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

It was the strangest communication the head of a government 
ever received. 

Dear Friend, Before embarking on Civil Disobedience and 
taking the risk I have dreaded to take all these years, I would 
fain approach you and find a way out. 

My personal faith is absolutely clear. I cannot intentionally 
hurt anything that lives, much less human beings, even though 
they may do the greatest wrong to me and mine. Whilst, therefore, 
I hold the British rule to be a curse, I do not intend harm to a single 
Englishman or to any legitimate interest he may have in India, . . . 
And why do I regard the British rule as a curse? 

It has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of pro¬ 
gressive exploitation and by a ruinous expensive military and 
civil administration which the country can never afford. 

It has reduced us politically to serfdom. It has sapped the 
foundations of our culture. And by the policy of cruel disarma¬ 
ment, it has degraded us spiritually. . . . 

I fear . . . there never has been any intention of granting . . . 
Dominion Status to India in the immediate future. . . . 

It seems as clear as daylight that responsible British statesmen 
do not contemplate any alteration in British policy that might 
adversely affect Britain’s commerce with India ... If nothing is 
done to end the process of exploitation India must be bled with 
an ever increasing speed. . . . 

Let me put before you some of the salient points. 

The terrific pressure of land revenue, which furnishes a large 
part of the total, must undergo considerable modification in an 
Independent India . . . the whole revenue system has to be so 
revised as to make the peasant’s good its primary concern. But 
the British system seems to be designed to crush the very life out 
of him. Even the salt he must use to live is so taxed as to make 
the burden fall heaviest on him, if only because of the heartless 
impartiality of its incidence. The tax shows itself still more 
burdensome on the poor man when it is remembered that salt 
is the one thing he must eat more than the rich man . . . The drink 
and drug revenue, too, is derived from the poor. It saps the 
foundations both of their health and morals. 

The iniquities sampled above are maintained in order to carry 

290 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 


on a foreign administration, demonstrably the most expensive in 
the world. Take your own salary. It is over 21,000 rupees [about 
£1750] P er month, besides many other indirect additions . . . You 
are getting over 700 rupees a day against India’s average income 
of less than two annas [twopence] per day. Thus you are getting 
much over five thousand times India’s average income. The 
British Prime Minister is getting only ninety times Britain’s 
average income. On bended knee, I ask you to ponder over this 
phenomenon. I have taken a personal illustration to drive home 
a painful truth. I have too great a regard for you as a man to 
wish to hurt your feelings. I know that you do not need the 
salary you get. Probably the whole of your salary goes for charity. 
But a system that provides for such an arrangement deserves to 
be summarily scrapped. What is true of the Viceregal salary is 
true generally of the whole administration . . . Nothing but 
organized non-violence can check the organized violence of the 
British government. . . . 

This non-violence will be expressed through civil disobedience, 
for the moment confined to the inmates of the Satyagraha 
[Sabarmati] Ashram, but ultimately designed to cover all those 
who choose to join the movement. . . . 

My ambition is no less than to convert the British people 
through non-violence, and thus make them see the wrong they 
have done to India. I do not seek to harm your people. I want 
to serve them even as I want to serve my own. . . . 

If the [Indian] people join me as I expect they will, the suffer¬ 
ings they will undergo, unless the British nation sooner retraces 
its steps, will be enough to melt the stoniest hearts. 

The plan through Civil Disobedience will be to combat such 
evils as I have sampled out ... I respectfully invite you to pave 
the way for the immediate removal of those evils, and thus open a 
way for a real conference between equals . . . But if you cannot see 
your way to deal with these evils and if my letter makes no appeal 
to your heart, on the eleventh day of this month I shall proceed 
with such co-workers of the Ashram as I can take, to disregard 
the provisions of the Salt Laws ... It is, I know, open to you to 
frustrate my design by arresting me. I hope that there will be 
tens of thousands ready, in a disciplined manner, to take up the 
work after me. ... 


T M.G. 


291 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


If you care to discuss matters with me, and if to that end you 
would like me to postpone publication of this letter, I shall gladly 
refrain on receipt of a telegram. . . . 

This letter is not in any way intended as a threat but is a simple 
and sacred duty peremptory on a civil resister. Therefore I am 
having it specially delivered by a young English friend who believes 
in the Indian cause. . . . 

I remain, 


Your sincere friend, 

M. K. Gandhi. 


The messenger was Reginald Reynolds, a British Quaker who 
later wrote a book on beards. Clad in khadi and a sun helmet, 
he entered the Viceroy’s house and delivered the letter to Irwin 
who had flown back from the polo matches at Meerut to receive it. 

Irwin chose not to reply. His secretary sent a four-line acknow¬ 
ledgment saying, ‘His Excellency . . . regrets to learn that you 
contemplate a course of action which is clearly bound to involve 
violation of the law and danger to the public peace.’ 

This law-and-order note, which disdained to deal with matters 
of justice and policy, caused Gandhi to say, ‘On bended knee I 
asked for bread and I received stone instead.’ Irwin refused to 
see Gandhi. Nor did he have him arrested. ‘The government,’ 
Gandhi declared, ‘is puzzled and perplexed.’ It was dangerous 
not to arrest the rebel, and dangerous to arrest him. 

As March nth neared, India bubbled with excitement and 
curiosity. Scores of foreign and domestic correspondents dogged 
Gandhi’s footsteps in the ashram; what exactly would he do? 
Thousands surrounded the village and waited. The excitement 
spread abroad. Cables kept the Ahmedabad post office humming. 
‘God guard you,’ the Reverend Dr. John Haynes Holmes wired 
from New York. 

Gandhi felt it was the ‘opportunity of a lifetime’. 

On March 12th, prayers having been sung, Gandhi and seventy- 
eight male and female members of the ashram, whose identities 
were published in Young India for the benefit of the police, left 
Sabarmati for Dandi, due south of Ahmedabad. Gandhi leaned 
on a lacquered bamboo staff one inch thick and fifty-four inches 
long with an iron tip. Following winding dirt roads from village 

292 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 


to village, he and his seventy-eight disciples walked two hundred 
miles in twenty-four days. ‘We are marching in the name of God,’ 
Gandhi said. 

Peasants sprinkled the roads and strewed leaves on them. Every 
settlement in the line of march was festooned and decorated with 
India’s national colours. From miles around, peasants gathered 
to kneel by the roadside as the pilgrims passed. Several times a 
day the marchers halted for a meeting where the Mahatma and 
others exhorted the people to wear khadi, abjure alcohol and 
drugs, abandon child marriage, keep clean, live purely and — 
when the signal came — break the Salt Laws. 

He had no trouble in walking. ‘Less than twelve miles a day in 
two stages with not much luggage,’ he said. ‘Child’s play!’ 
Several became fatigued and footsore, and had to ride in a bullock 
cart. A horse was available for Gandhi throughout the march but 
he never used it. ‘The modern generation is delicate, weak, and 
much pampered,’ Gandhi commented. He was sixty-one. He 
spun every day for an hour and kept a diary and required each 
ashramite to do likewise. 

In the area traversed, over three hundred village headmen gave 
up their government posts. The inhabitants of a village would 
accompany Gandhi to the next village. Young men and women 
attached themselves to the marching column; when Gandhi 
reached the sea at Dandi on April 5th, his small ashram band had 
grown into a non-violent army several thousand strong. 

The entire night of April 5th, the ashramites prayed, and early 
in the morning they accompanied Gandhi to the sea. He dipped 
into the water, returned to the beach, and there picked up some 
salt left by the waves. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, standing by his side, 
cried, ‘Hail, Deliverer’. Gandhi had broken the British law which 
made it a punishable crime to possess salt not obtained from the 
British government salt monopoly. Gandhi, who had not used 
salt for six years, called it a ‘nefarious monopoly’. Salt, he said, 
is as essential as air and water, and in India all the more essential 
to the hard-working, perspiring poor man and his beasts because 
of the tropical heat. 

Had Gandhi gone by train or motor-car to make salt, the 
effect would have been considerable. But to walk for twenty-four 
days and rivet the attention of all India, to trek across a country- 

293 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


side saying, ‘Watch, I am about to give a signal to the nation,’ 
and then to pick up a pinch of salt in publicized defiance of the 
mighty Government and thus become a criminal, that required 
imagination, dignity and the sense of showmanship of a great 
artist. It appealed to the illiterate peasant and it appealed to a 
sophisticated critic and sometime fierce opponent of Gandhi’s like 
Subhas Chandra Bose who compared the Salt March to ‘Napo¬ 
leon’s march to Paris on his return from Elba’. 

The act performed, Gandhi withdrew from the scene. India 
had its cue. Gandhi had communicated with it by lifting up some 
grains of salt. 

The next act was an insurrection without arms. Every villager 
on India’s long sea coast went to the beach or waded into the sea 
with a pan to make salt. The police began mass arrests. Ramdas, 
third son of Gandhi, with a large group of ashramites, was arrested. 
Pandit Malaviya and other moderate co-operators resigned from 
the Legislative Assembly. The police began to use violence. Civil 
resisters never resisted arrest; but they resisted the confiscation of 
the salt they had made, and Mahadev Desai reported cases where 
such Indians were beaten and bitten in the fingers by constables. 
Congress Volunteers openly sold contraband salt in cities. Many 
were arrested and sentenced to short prison terms. In Delhi, a 
meeting of fifteen thousand persons heard Pandit Malaviya appeal 
to the audience to boycott foreign cloth; he himself bought some 
illegal salt after his speech. The police raided the Congress party 
headquarters in Bombay where salt was being made in pans on 
the roof. A crowd of sixty thousand assembled. Hundreds were 
handcuffed or their arms fastened with ropes and led off to jail. 
In Ahmedabad, ten thousand people obtained illegal salt from 
Congress in the first week after the act at Dandi. They paid what 
they could; if they had no money they got it free. The salt lifted 
by Gandhi from the beach was sold to a Dr. Kanuga, the highest 
bidder, for 1600 rupees. Jawaharlal Nehru, the president of 
Congress, was arrested in Allahabad under the Salt Acts and 
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. The agitation and dis¬ 
obedience spread to the turbulent regions of the Maharashtra and 
Bengal. In Calcutta, the Mayor, J. M. Sengupta, read seditious 
literature aloud at a public meeting and urged non-wearing of 
foreign textiles. He was put in prison for six months. Picketing of 

294 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 

liquor shops and foreign cloth shops commenced throughout India. 
Girls and ladies from aristocratic families and from families where 
purdah had been observed came out into the streets to demon¬ 
strate. Police became vindictive and kicked resisters in sensitive 
parts. Civil resistance began in the province of Bihar. Seventeen 
Bihar Satyagrahis, including resigned members of Legislative 
Councils, were sentenced to periods of from six months to two 
years in prison. A Swami who had lived in South Africa received 
two and a half years. Teachers, professors and students made salt 
at the sea and inland, and were marched to jails in batches. 
Kishorlal Mashruwala, a faithful disciple of Gandhi, and Jamnalal 
Bajaj, a rich friend of Gandhi’s, were sentenced to two years’ 
imprisonment. In Karachi, the police fired on a demonstration; 
two young Volunteers were killed. ‘Bihar has been denuded of 
almost all its leaders,’ Mahadev Desai wrote, ‘but the result has 
been the opening of many more salt centres.’ Congress distributed 
literature explaining simple methods of producing salt. B. G. 
Kher and K. M. Munshi, leaders of the national Congress, were 
arrested in Bombay. Devadas Gandhi was sentenced to three 
months’ imprisonment in Delhi. The salt movement and the 
arrests and imprisonments spread to Madras, the Punjab and the 
Carnatic (Karnatak). Many towns observed hartals when Con¬ 
gress leaders were arrested. At Patna, in Bihar, a mass of many 
thousands moved out of the city to march to a spot where salt 
would be made. The police blocked the highway. The crowd 
stayed and slept on the road and in the fields for forty hours. 
Rajendra Prasad, who was present and told the story, received 
orders from the police officer to disperse the crowd. He refused. 
The officer announced that he would charge with cavalry. The 
crowd did not move. As the horses galloped forward, the men 
and women threw themselves flat on the ground. The horses 
stopped and did not trample them. Constables then proceeded 
to lift the demonstrators and place them in trucks for transporta¬ 
tion to prison. Other demonstrators replaced them. Mahadev 
Desai was arrested for bringing in a load of salt. In villages, 
millions of peasants were preparing their own salt. The British 
pressed local officials to cope with the problem. The officials 
resigned. Vithalbhai Patel, the speaker of the Legislative Assem¬ 
bly, resigned. A large group of prominent women appealed to 

295 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Lord Irwin to prohibit the sale of intoxicating beverages. At 
Karachi, fifty thousand people watched as salt was made on the 
seashore. The crowd was so dense the policemen were surrounded 
and could make no arrests. At Peshawar, the key to the volatile 
north-west Frontier Province, an armoured car, in which the 
Deputy Police Commissioner was seated, first ran full-tilt into a 
crowd and then machine-gunned it, killing seventy and wounding 
about one hundred. In parts of Bengal, in the United Provinces 
and in Gujarat, peasants refused to pay rent and the land tax. 
The Government tried to place all nationalist newspapers under 
censorship, whereupon most of them voluntarily suspended pub¬ 
lication. Congress provincial offices were sealed and their property 
and office paraphernalia confiscated. Rajagopalachari was 
arrested in Madras and given a nine months’ sentence. The wild 
Afridi tribe, in the north-west frontier Tribal Area, attacked 
British patrols. In the city of Chittagong, Bengal, a band of violent 
revolutionists raided the arsenal to seize arms. Some were killed. 

The Viceroy, says Irwin’s biographer, ‘had filled the jails with 
no less than sixty thousand political offenders’. Estimates ran as 
high as a hundred thousand. ‘A mere recital of the action 
taken by him during this time’, the biography affirms, ‘belies 
once for all the legend that he was a weak Viceroy. Those who 
were responsible for executing his orders testify that his religious 
convictions seemed to reinforce the very ruthlessness of his policy 
of suppression. . . .’ 

A month after Gandhi touched salt at the Dandi beach, India 
was seething in angry revolt. But, except at Chittagong, there was 
no Indian violence, and nowhere was there any Congress violence. 
Chauri Chaura in 1922 had taught India a lesson. Because they 
treasured the movement Gandhi had conjured into being, and 
lest he cancel it, they abstained from force. 

May 4th, Gandhi’s camp was at Karadi, a village near Dandi. 
He had gone to sleep on a cot under a shed beneath the branches 
of an old mango tree. Several disciples slept by his side. Else¬ 
where in the grove, other ashramites were in deep slumber. At 
12.45 a - m -) in the night of May 4th to 5th, heavy steps were heard. 
Thirty Indian policemen armed with rifles, pistols and lances, two 
Indian officers, and the British District Magistrate of Surat invaded 
the leafy compound. A party of armed constables entered Gandhi’s 

296 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 


shed and the English officer turned the flashlight on Gandhi’s face. 
Gandhi awoke, looked about him, and said to the Magistrate, ‘Do 
you want me?’ 

‘Are you Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi?’ the Magistrate 
asked for the sake of form. 

Gandhi admitted it. 

The officer said he had come to arrest him. 

‘Please give me time for my ablutions,’ Gandhi said politely. 

The Magistrate agreed. 

While brushing his few teeth, Gandhi said, ‘Mr. District 
Magistrate, may I know under which charge I am arrested. Is 
it Section 124?’ 

‘No, not under Section 124. I have got a written order.’ 

By this time, all the sleepers in the compound had crowded 
around the shed. ‘Please, would you mind reading it to me?’ 
Gandhi asked. 

The Magistrate (reading): ‘Whereas the Governor-in-Council 
views with alarm the activities of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, 
he directs that the said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi should be 
placed under restraint under Regulation XXXV of 1827, and 
suffer imprisonment during the pleasure of the Government, and 
that he be immediately removed to the Yeravda Central Jail.’ 

At 1 a.m., Gandhi was still cleaning his teeth. The officer told 
him to hurry. Gandhi packed some necessities and papers in a 
small bag. Turning to the officer, he said, ‘Please give me a few 
minutes more for prayer.’ 

The officer nodded in assent, and Gandhi requested Pandit 
Khare to recite a famous Hindu hymn. The ashramites sang. 
Gandhi lowered his head and prayed. Then he stepped to the 
side of the Magistrate who led him to the waiting vehicle. 

There was no trial, no sentence and no fixed term of imprison¬ 
ment. The arrest took place under an ordinance, passed before a 
British government existed in India, which regulated the relations 
between the East India Company and Indian potentates. 

The prison authorities measured Gandhi and noted his height: 
five feet five inches. They also made sure to have his special 
identification marks in case they needed to find him again: a scar 
on the right thigh, a small mole on the lower right eyelid, and a 
scar about the size of a pea below the left elbow. 

297 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Gandhi loved it in jail. ‘I have been quite happy and making 
up for arrears in sleep, 5 he wrote Miss Madeleine Slade, a week 
after his imprisonment. He was treated extremely well; the prison 
goat was milked in his presence. On his day of silence he wrote 
a letter to the little children in the ashram. 

Little birds, ordinary birds cannot fly without wings. With 
wings, of course, all can fly. But if you, without wings, will learn 
how to fly, then all your troubles will indeed be at an end. And 
I will teach you. 

See, I have no wings, yet I come flying to you every day in 
thought. Look, here is little Vimala, here is Hari and here is 
Dharmakumar. And you can also come flying to me in thought. . . . 
Tell me too who amongst you are not praying properly in 
Prabhubhai’s evening prayer. 

Send me a letter signed by all, and those who do not know how 
to sign may make a cross. 

Bapu’s blessings. 

Just before his arrest, Gandhi had drafted a letter to the Viceroy 
announcing his intention, ‘God willing 5 , to raid the Dharasana 
Salt Works with some companions. God, apparently, was not 
willing, but the companions proceeded to effect the plan. Mrs. 
Sarojini Naidu, the poet, led twenty-five hundred Volunteers to 
. the site one hundred and fifty miles north of Bombay and, after 
morning prayers, warned them that they would be beaten ‘but 5 , 
she said, ‘you must not resist; you must not even raise a hand to 
ward off a blow 5 . 

Webb Miller, the well-known correspondent of the United Press 
who died in England during the second World War, was on the 
scene and described the proceedings. Manilal Gandhi moved 
forward at the head of the marchers and approached the great 
salt pans which were surrounded by ditches and barbed wire and 
guarded by four hundred Surat policemen under the command of 
six British officers. ‘In complete silence the Gandhi men drew up 
and halted a hundred yards from the stockade. A picked column 
advanced from the crowd, waded the ditches, and approached 
the barbed-wire stockade. 5 The police officers ordered them to 
retreat. They continued to advance. ‘Suddenly, 5 Webb Miller 
reported, ‘at a word of command, scores of native policemen 

298 


DRAMA AT THE SEASHORE 

rushed upon the advancing marchers and rained blows on their 
heads with their steel-shod lathis. Not one of the marchers even 
raised an arm to fend off the blows. They went down like nine-pins. 
From where I stood I heard the sickening whack of the clubs on 
unprotected skulls. The waiting crowd of marchers groaned and 
sucked in their breath in sympathetic pain at every blow. Those 
struck down fell sprawling, unconscious or writhing with fractured 
skulls or broken shoulders . . . The survivors, without breaking 
ranks, silently and doggedly march on until struck down. 5 When 
the first column was laid low, another advanced. ‘Although 
everyone knew, 5 Webb Miller wrote, ‘that within a few minutes 
he would be beaten down, perhaps killed, I could detect no signs 
of wavering or fear. They marched steadily, with heads up, with¬ 
out the encouragement of music or cheering or any possibility that 
they might escape serious injury or death. The police rushed out 
and methodically and mechanically beat down the second column. 
There was no fight, no struggle; the marchers simply walked 
forward till struck, down.’ 

Another group of twenty-five advanced and sat down. ‘The 
police’, Webb Miller testifies, ‘commenced savagely kicking the 
seated men in the abdomen and testicles.’ Another column ad¬ 
vanced and sat down. Enraged, the police dragged them by their 
arms and feet and threw them into the ditches. ‘One was dragged 
to a ditch where I stood,’ Miller wrote, ‘the splash of his body 
doused me with muddy water. Another policeman dragged a 
Gandhi man to the ditch, threw him in, and belaboured him over 
the head with his lathi. Hour after hour stretcher-bearers carried 
back a stream of inert, bleeding bodies.’ 

A British officer approached Mrs. Naidu, touched her arm, and 
said, ‘Sarojini Naidu, you are under arrest.’ She shook off his 
hand. ‘I’ll come,’ she declared, ‘but don’t touch me.’ Manilal 
was also arrested. 

‘By eleven [in the morning],’ Webb Miller continued, ‘the heat 
had reached 116 and the activities of the Gandhi volunteers sub¬ 
sided.’ He went to the temporary hospital and counted three 
hundred and twenty injured, many of them still unconscious, 
others in agony from the body and head blows. Two men had 
died. The same scenes were repeated for several days. 

India was now free. Technically, legally, nothing had changed. 

299 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


India was still a British colony. Tagore explained the difference. 
‘Those who live in England, far away from the East/ he told the 
Manchester Guardian of May 17th, 1930, ‘have now got to realize 
that Europe has completely lost her former moral prestige in Asia. 
She is no longer regarded as the champion throughout the world 
of fair dealing and the exponent of high principle, but as the 
upholder of Western race supremacy and the exploiter of those 
outside her own borders. 

‘For Europe this is, in actual fact, a great moral defeat that has 
happened. Even though Asia is still physically weak and unable 
to protect herself from aggression where her vital interests are 
menaced, nevertheless she can now afford to look down on Europe 
where before she looked up. 5 He attributed the achievement in 
India to Mahatma Gandhi. 

Gandhi did two things in 1930: he made the British people 
aware that they were cruelly subjugating India, and he gave 
Indians the conviction that they could, by lifting their heads and 
straightening their spines, lift the yoke from their shoulders. After 
that, it was inevitable that Britain should some day refuse to rule 
India and that India should some day refuse to be ruled. 

The British beat the Indians with batons and rifle butts. The 
Indians neither cringed nor complained nor retreated. That 
made England powerless and India invincible. 



3°o 


 

