CHAPTER XVII 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 

M any British Labour ministers and their supporters were 
champions of Indian independence. Prime Minister Ram¬ 
say MacDonald could be faced with his own unequivocal 
statements in favour of India’s freedom. It was embarrassing for 
Labour to keep Gandhi and tens of thousands of Indian national¬ 
ists in jail. To Lord Irwin, Gandhi’s imprisonment was more 
than an embarrassment; it paralysed his administration. Revenues 
dropped steeply. Unrest mounted. When the news of Gandhi’s 
arrest reached industrial Sholapur, in the Bombay Presidency or 
province, the population overpowered the police, raised the 
national flag, and declared themselves independent of British 
rule. In Peshawar, the police surrendered the city to the non¬ 
violent, religious ‘Red Shirts’, an organization led by Khan 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the ‘Frontier Gandhi’. The army appeared 
three days later and machine-gunned peaceful citizens. But a 
platoon of Garhwal Rifles, famous Hindu regiment of the British 
Army, mutinied, refused to fire on Moslems, and were court- 
martialed and sentenced to ten to fourteen years’ hard labour. 
On June 30th, Motilal Nehru was arrested. More than a hundred 
thousand Indians, and almost all Congress first-, second-, third- 
rank leaders were in prison. 

The situation was politically intolerable for MacDonald and 
Irwin. Gandhi in jail was as much a nuisance as Gandhi on the 
march or at the beach or in the ashram. 

Conscious of their dilemma and of the growing revolt, the 
authorities permitted George Slocombe, handsome, red-bearded 
correspondent of the London Labour paper, the Daily Herald, to 
interview Gandhi in prison, on May 19th and 20th, only two 
weeks after the Mahatma’s arrest. Gandhi gave Slocombe the 
terms on which he would be ready to negotiate with the British 
government. In July, with the Viceroy’s consent, Sir Tej Bahadur 
Sapru and Mr. M. R. Jayakar, leaders of the moderates, went to 
Gandhi’s cell for parleys. Gandhi was glad to talk to them but 

3°! 


GANDHI IN INEFIA 

said he could not reply to overtures before he consulted the Con¬ 
gress Working Committee. Motilal and Jawaharlal Nehru, father 
and son, and Syed Mahmound, the acting secretary of Congress, 
were accordingly transported in a special train, with every com¬ 
fort and courtesy, from their jail in the United Provinces to 
Gandhi’s jail at Poona where Mrs. Naidu and Vallabhbhai Patel 
were also confined. Irwin willingly brought his prisoners together, 
but Working Committee members still at liberty were not allowed 
to participate in these prison conversations. 

After two days’ discussion (August 14th-15th), the leaders 
announced publicly that ‘an unbridgeable gulf’ separated them 
from the British position. 

The first Round Table Conference opened in London on 
November 12th, 1930; Jinnah, the Maharaja of Bikaner, Srini¬ 
vasa Sastri and others were there. No Congress representa¬ 
tive attended. The Conference accomplished nothing. But the 
Labour government’s conciliatory attitude was apparent through¬ 
out; indeed, at the closing session, on January 19th, 1931, Ramsay 
MacDonald expressed the hope that Congress would send delegates 
to the second Round Table Conference. 

Irwin gladly took the hint — or the command — and uncon¬ 
ditionally released Gandhi, the Nehrus, and more than twenty 
other Congress leaders on January 26th, Independence Day. 
In appreciation of this graceful gesture, Gandhi wrote a letter to 
the Viceroy asking for an interview. ‘Face-saving’ was an un¬ 
intelligible concept to Gandhi. He did not believe in ending a 
relationship that could be mended, and since he had an undying 
faith in mending, he tried never to end a personal or political 
relationship. 

The first meeting between Irwin and Gandhi began on Febru¬ 
ary 17th, at 2.30 p.m., and lasted till 6.10 p.m. ‘So the stage was 
set’, writes Irwin’s biographer, ‘for the most dramatic personal 
encounter between a Viceroy and an Indian leader in the whole 
seething history of the British raj.’ 

It was more than dramatic; the mere fact of the encounter was 
historically decisive. Winston Churchill, always clear-eyed, saw 
this better than anyone. He was revolted by ‘the nauseating and 
humiliating spectacle of this one-time Inner Temple lawyer, now 
seditious fakir, striding half-naked up the steps of the Viceroy’s 

302 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 


palace, there to negotiate and to parley on equal terms with the 
representative of the King-Emperor*. 

A fakir is an Indian mendicant monk. 

Churchill realized that it was not an ordinary interview. 
Gandhi did not come, like most of the Viceroy’s visitors, to ask 
favours. He came as the leader of a nation to negotiate ‘on equal 
terms’ with the leader of another nation. The Salt March and 
its aftermath had proved that England could not rule India against 
or without Gandhi. The British Empire was at the mercy of the 
half-naked fakir, and Churchill did not like it. Churchill saw 
that Britain was conceding India’s independence in principle 
while withholding it, for the time being, in practice. 

The negotiations between Irwin and Gandhi took place in the 
Viceroy’s new palace, designed by the gifted British architect Sir 
Edwin Lutyens. Rising suddenly, high, expensive and resplen¬ 
dent, out of the flat Delhi plain amidst the ruins of Mogul mosques 
and forts, it symbolized the towering might of the British raj. But 
almost the first act within its halls marked the beginning of the 
end of that power. 

Gandhi and Irwin conferred again for three hours on February 
18th, and for half an hour on the 19th. Meanwhile Irwin was 
cabling his superiors six thousand miles away in London, while 
Gandhi held long meetings with the Congress Working Committee 
members in New Delhi. (The great Motilal Nehru had died on 
February 6th.) Shuttling between the two parties, Sapru, 
Jayakar and Sastri strove to prevent a deadlock. 

Once, during a conference, Irwin asked Gandhi whether he 
would have tea. ‘Thank you,’ said Gandhi, taking a paper bag 
out of a fold in his shawl, ‘I will put some of this salt into my tea 
to remind us of the famous Boston Tea Party.’ Both laughed. 

Difficulties arose. There were no talks for seven days. On 
February 27th they were resumed. On March 1st, Gandhi came 
to Irwin at 2.30 p.m. The discussions continued till his dinner 
time so Miss Slade had brought his dinner — forty dates and a 
pint of goat’s milk — to the palace and Gandhi ate it in the 
presence of the Viceroy. At 5.50 p.m. Gandhi left the Viceroy, 
but that same evening he walked, unescorted, from Dr. Ansari’s 
house, where he was staying, to the palace, a distance of five miles, 
and remained closeted with Irwin till after midnight. ‘Good 

303 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


night/ Irwin said to him as he departed to trudge home alone in 
the darkness. ‘Good night, Mr. Gandhi, and my prayers go with 
you.’ Gandhi reached home at 2 a.m. The Workipg Committee 
was waiting for him. 

Finally, after further wrangling between the two men and be¬ 
tween each of them and their colleagues, the Irwin-Gandhi Pact, 
or The Delhi Pact as Irwin’s biographer calls it, was signed after 
breakfast on March 5th. The key word is ‘Pact’. Two national 
statesmen had signed a pact, a treaty, an agreed text, every phrase 
and stipulation of which had been hammered out in tough bar¬ 
gaining. British spokesmen maintained that Irwin won the battle, 
and a good case could be made for the contention. But in the 
long-range terms in which the Mahatma thought, the equality 
that had been established, in principle, between India and Eng¬ 
land was more important than any practical concession which he 
might have wrung from the reluctant Empire. A politician would 
have sought more substance. Gandhi was satisfied with the 
essence: a basis for a new relationship. 

For the millions, and for history, the thousands of words of the 
Pact with its many articles, headings and subheadings which 
appeared in the official Gazette of India Extraordinary of March 5th, 
1931, meant: civil disobedience would be called off, prisoners 
released, and salt manufacture permitted on the coast; Congress 
would attend the next Round Table Conference in London. 
Independence w'as not promised. Dominion Status was not 
promised. 

In an address to American and Indian journalists that day, 
Gandhi paid a tribute to the Viceroy. ‘I am aware,’ he told the 
newsmen, ‘that I must have, though quite unconsciously, given 
him cause for irritation. I must also have tried his patience, but 
I cannot recall an occasion when he allowed himself to be be¬ 
trayed into irritation or impatience.’ The settlement, Gandhi 
said, was ‘provisional’ and ‘conditional’; a ‘truce’. The goal 
remained: ‘complete independence . . . India cannot be satisfied 
with anything less . . . The Congress does not consider India to 
be a sickly child requiring nursing, outside help and other 
props’. 

One has a feeling, in reviewing Gandhi’s 1930 negotiations, that 
he viewed them at the time in the perspective of several decades 

304 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 


later. What does the phraseology or even content of Article 2 
matter now? Seventeen years after the Delhi Pact, India was'an 
independent nation. What are seventeen years in the life of an 
old nation like India? 

Subhas Chandra Bose, a critic of the Mahatma, watching the 
public reaction during a tour with Gandhi after the Pact was 
signed, wrote, T wonder if such a spontaneous ovation was ever 
given to a leader anywhere else.’ And Bose admitted that Irwin, 
‘though a prominent member of the Conservative Party . . . had 
proved himself to be a well-wisher of India’. To Gandhi, who 
was often guided in politics by his responses to persons, this 
warranted the signing of the Pact. 

The moment the Pact was signed, complaints of non-fulfilment 
were levelled against the Government, and soon Gandhi was again 
negotiating, this time with the new Viceroy, Lord Willingdon. 
Adjustments made, the Congress convention at Karachi which, 
according to Bose, was ‘the pinnacle of the Mahatma’s popularity 
and prestige’, elected Gandhi its sole delegate to the second Round 
Table Conference. 

At noon on August 29th, Gandhi sailed from Bombay aboard 
the S.S. Rajputana. Accompanying him in various capacities were 
Pandit Malaviya, Mrs. Naidu, his son Devadas, Mahadev Desai 
who, Gandhi said, ‘out-Boswelled Boswell’, Pyarelal Nayyar, a 
secretary and disciple, Miss Slade, who had made India her per¬ 
manent home and Gandhi her spiritual father, and G. D. Birla, 
the big Indian industrialist. ‘There is every chance of my return¬ 
ing empty-handed,’ he said on embarking. 

Gandhi had given orders that he and his party should travel by 
the lowest class. When he discovered how much luggage they had 
brought he saw to it that seven suitcases and trunks were sent back 
from Aden. He himself spent most of the day and all night on 
deck, spinning, writing, sleeping, eating, praying, talking and 
playing with child passengers. Like so many steamship passengers 
the world over, he was the Captain’s guest on the bridge, where 
he looked through the sextant and steered the ship for a minute. 

Gandhi arrived in London on September 12 th, and remained 
in England until December 5th. He stayed in an East End 
Settlement House called Kingsley Hall as guest of Muriel Lester 
who had visited him in 1926. Kingsley Hall is five miles from the 

305 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


centre of the city and from St. James’s Palace where the Round 
Table Conference sat. 

Friends told him that he would save many hours for work and 
sleep if he lived in an hotel, but he did not want to spend the 
money. Nor would he avail himself of the hospitality *of Indians 
and Englishmen who had big houses nearer the heart of London. 
He would come home to Kingsley Hall every evening, often very 
late, because, he said, he enjoyed living among his own kind, the 
poor people. To spare interviewers the necessity of coming all the 
way to the East End, however, he agreed, under pressure, to keep 
a little office at 88 Knightsbridge. (The building was destroyed 
in the second World War.) 

In the mornings, he walked through the slum streets around 
Kingsley Hall, and women and men going to work would smile 
and greet him and some would join him for conversation; he 
visited several in their homes. Children ran up and held his 
hand. ‘Uncle Gandhi’, they called him. One mischievous 
youngster yelled, ‘Hey, Gandhi, where’s your trousers?’ The 
Mahatma laughed heartily. 

Questioned by a reporter about his dress, Gandhi said, ‘You 
people wear plus-fours, mine are minus fours.’ Gandhi was 
wonderful newspaper copy, and journalists covered every move 
he made. The dailies and weeklies in Europe and America 
eagerly sought special features about him. George Slocombe 
wrote a story about Gandhi’s generosity and as an illustration 
said that when the Prince of Wales visited India the Mahatma 
prostrated himself before him. The next time Gandhi saw Slo¬ 
combe, he smiled and said, ‘Well, Mr. Slocombe, this does not 
even do credit to your imagination. I would bend the knee before 
the poorest untouchable in India for having participated in crush¬ 
ing him for centuries, I would take the dust off his feet. But I 
would not prostrate myself, not even before the King, much less 
before the Prince of Wales, for the simple reason that he repre¬ 
sented insolent might.’ Gandhi went to Buckingham Palace to 
have tea with King George V and Queen Mary. On the eve of 
the event, all England was agog over what he would wear. He 
wore a loincloth, sandals, a shawl and his dangling watch. Later, 
someone asked Gandhi whether he had had enough on. ‘The 
King,’ he replied, ‘had enough on for both of us.’ 

3°6 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 


David Lloyd George, Britain’s war-time Prime Minister, invited 
Gandhi to his farm at Churt, in Surrey. They talked for three 
hours. In 1938, when I saw Lloyd George at Churt, he mentioned 
the Gandhi visit. He said the servants did what no guest had 
ever inspired them to do: they all came out to meet the holy 
man. 

Four years later, I told Gandhi that Lloyd George had talked 
to me about his visit. ‘Yes,’ Gandhi queried eagerly. ‘What did 
he say?’ 

‘He told me that you squatted on his couch and just as you got 
settled a black cat they had never seen before entered through the 
window and rested in your lap.’ 

‘That’s correct,’ Gandhi recalled. 

‘And when you left, Lloyd George said, the cat disappeared.’ 

‘Ah,’ Gandhi said, ‘that I don’t know.’ 

‘Lloyd George,’ I continued, ‘said that the same cat returned 
when Miss Slade visited him at Churt.’ 

‘That too I don’t know,’ Gandhi declared. 

As soon as Gandhi reached England he inquired about Colonel 
Maddock who had performed the operation on him for appendi¬ 
citis in 1924, and the moment he found some leisure he went 
down to spend some hours at the home of Colonel and Mrs. 
Maddock near Reading where they sat in the beautiful garden 
and reminisced and told one another they did not look a year 
older. 

Charlie Chaplin asked to see Gandhi. Gandhi had never heard 
of him; he had never seen a moving picture. On being enlightened, 
Gandhi said no, he had no special interest in actors. But when told 
that Chaplin came from a poor family in the London East End, he 
received him at the home of Dr. Katial. The encounter turned 
into a competition between toothless and toothsome smiling and 
the inevitable discussion about Gandhi’s attitude to the machine, 
which was Chaplin’s first question. The answer may have 
inspired one of the actor’s subsequent films. 

George Bernard Shaw also paid his respects. With unusual 
modesty he gave the palm to Gandhi and called himself‘Mahatma 
Minor’. ‘You and I,’ he said, ‘belong to a very small community 
on earth.’ They touched on a score of subjects and Shaw’s 
humour immensely amused ‘Mahatma Major’, but it cannot be 

M.G. 307 


U 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


said that Gandhi liked the playwright’s love of the word that 
shocks. Neither had Tolstoy. 

Gandhi met Lord Irwin, General Smuts, the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, the Dean of Canterbury, Harold J. Laski, C. P. Scott, 
the retired editor of the Manchester Guardian , Arthur Henderson 
and hundreds of others. Churchill declined to see him. Smuts 
said, apropos South Africa, T did not give you such a bad time 
as you gave me.’ 

T did not know that,’ Gandhi apologized. 

At the Montessori Training College Gandhi joyously drank in 
the beautiful rhythmic exercises of the healthy, happy children 
who made him think, with sadness, of ‘the millions of children in 
semi-starved Indian villages’. Madame Maria Montessori intro¬ 
duced him as ‘Noble Master’. ‘Thought of world civilization and 
thought of the child,’ she said, ‘that is what links us . . .’ In his 
speech, Gandhi declared, ‘I believe implicitly that the child is 
not born mischievous in the bad sense of the term. If parents 
behave themselves while the child is growing, the child will 
instinctively obey the law of truth and the law of love . . . From 
my experience of hundreds — I was going to say thousands — of 
children, I know that they have a finer sense of honour than you 
and I have . . . Jesus never uttered a loftier or grander truth than 
when he said that wisdom cometh out of the mouths of babes. I 
believe it. . . .’ 

With what is regarded as typical American enterprise, the 
Columbia Broadcasting System arranged for a radio address to 
the United States the day after Gandhi’s arrival in England. He 
refused to prepare a script and spoke extemporaneously. In the 
studio, he eyed the microphone, and said, ‘Do I have to speak 
into that?’ He was already on the air. 

India’s struggle, Gandhi stated, had drawn the attention of the 
world not because Indians were fighting for their freedom, but 
because ‘the means adopted by us for attaining that liberty are 
unique, and as far as history shows us, have not been adopted by 
any other people . . . Hitherto, nations have fought in the manner 
of the brute. They have wreaked vengeance upon those whom 
they have considered to be their enemies. . . We in India,’ Gandhi 
continued, ‘have endeavoured to reverse the process. We feel that 
the law that governs brute creation ... is inconsistent with human 

308 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 

dignity. I personally would wait, if need be for ages, rather than 
seek to attain the freedom of my country through bloody means. 
I feel in the innermost recesses of my heart... that the world is sick 
unto death of blood-spilling. The world is seeking a way out and 
I flatter myself with the belief that perhaps it will be the privilege 
of the ancient land of India to show the way out to the hungering 
world. ... 

‘It is a matter of deep humiliation to confess that we are a house 
divided against itself, that we Hindus and Mussulmans are flying 
at one another. It is a matter of still deeper humiliation that we 
Hindus regard several million of our own kith and kin as too 
degraded even for our touch.’ 

He then elaborated on the curse of drink and of drugs and on the 
destruction, by the East India Company, of village industries for 
the benefit of British manufacturers. At this juncture, a note was 
passed to Gandhi saying his time was almost up and New York 
would cut him off in three minutes. Unperturbed, he delved still 
further into the economics of British rule, and closed with a plea: 
‘May I not, then, on behalf of the semi-starved millions, appeal 
to the conscience of the world to come to the rescue of a people 
dying to regain its liberty?’ 

The C.B.S. producer signalled him to stop. ‘Well, that’s over,’ 
Gandhi said. He was still on the air. His voice was clear and the 
reception perfect. 

In his eighty-four days in England, Gandhi visited Eton, Cam¬ 
bridge, where he sentimentally asked to be taken to Trinity, which 
was Jawaharial Nehru’s and C. F. Andrews’s college, and Oxford, 
and addressed scores of public meetings of women’s organizations, 
Quakers, Indian students, Indian merchants, British students, 
Labourites, Members of Parliament, the London School of 
Economics, The American Journalists Association, which arranged 
a vegetarian luncheon at the Savoy in deference to his habits, 
Friends of India, Temperance Society, Vegetarians, etc. etc. 

Gandhi’s two weekends at Oxford were memorable. He stayed 
with Professor Lindsay, the Master of Balliol, who later be¬ 
came a peer, Lord Lindsay of Birker. ‘Both my wife and I said’, 
Lindsay wrote in 1948, ‘that having him in our house was like 
having a saint in the house. He showed that mark of a great and 
simple man that he treated everyone with the same courtesy and 

309 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


respect whether one were a distinguished statesman or an un¬ 
known student. Anyone who was in earnest in wanting an answer 
to a question got a real one.’ 

Another view of Gandhi at Oxford was expressed by Dr. 
Edward Thompson, at whose home, on his second Oxonian week¬ 
end, Gandhi had a discussion with a group that included the 
Master of Balliol, Gilbert Murray, Professor S. Coupland, Sir 
Michael Sadler, P. C. Lyon and other trained minds. ‘He can 
be exasperating, 5 Professor Thompson remarked after Gandhi’s 
visit. 

Describing the intellectual joust, Thompson said, ‘For three 
hours he was sifted and cross-examined ... It was a reasonably 
exacting ordeal, yet not for a moment was he rattled or at a loss. 
The conviction came to me, that not since Socrates has the world 
seen his equal for absolute self-control and composure; and once 
or twice, putting myself in the place of men who had to confront 
that invincible calm and imperturbability, I thought I understood 
why the Athenians made “the martyr-sophist 55 drink the hemlock. 
Like Socrates, he has a “daemon”. And when the “daemon” has 
spoken, he is as unmoved by argument as by danger. 5 

Apparently, not all those present possessed the Socratic imper¬ 
turbability, for Professor Thompson says, ‘I can still hear Lind¬ 
say’s desperate tones, as he cited Cromwell’s appeal to the 
Presbyterian ministers — “In the bowels of Christ, I beseech you 
to think it possible that you may be mistaken” — and added, “Mr. 
Gandhi! think it possible that you may be mistaken !” Mr. Gandhi 
did not think it possible.’ 

But Mahadev Desai was there, taking notes as usual, and he 
records Gandhi as pleading for ‘the liberty to make mistakes’. 
On the other hand, Gandhi was adamant in defending civil dis¬ 
obedience; he would never give it up. ‘I will not purchase my 
country’s freedom at the cost of non-violence,’ he told the pro¬ 
fessors who thought they could not be mistaken. ‘You may be 
justified’, Gandhi admitted, ‘in saying that I must go more warily, 
but if you attack the fundamentals you have to convince me.’ 
They failed. 

In all Gandhi’s public and private, official and unofficial 
utterances during his eighty-four days in England, he tried, above 
all else, to clarify what he meant by the independence of India. 

310 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 


‘How far would you cut India off from the Empire?’ a member 
of the audience at the Raleigh Club asked. 

‘From the Empire entirely,’ Gandhi replied. ‘From the British 
nation not at all, if I want India to gain and not to grieve. The 
Emperorship must go and I should love to be an equal partner 
with Britain sharing her joys and sorrows and an equal partner 
with the Dominions. But it must be a partnership on equal terms.’ 

He advocated ‘an honourable partnership ... We can have a 
partnership between England and India ... I still aspire to be a 
citizen not in the Empire, but in a Commonwealth, in a partner¬ 
ship if possible; if God will it, an indissoluble partnership, but not 
a partnership superimposed upon one nation by another . . . The 
Congress does not stand merely for isolated independence which 
may easily become a menace to the world ... I would heartily 
welcome the union of East and West provided it is not based on 
brute force . . . England and India [should be] bound by the silken 
cord of love . . . India as an independent partner would have a 
special contribution to make in a world which is getting weary of 
war and bloodshed. In case of an outbreak of war it would be the 
common effort of India and Great Britain to prevent war, not 
indeed by force of arms, but by the irresistible force of example’. 

In these statements, Gandhi described precisely, and with re¬ 
markable prevision, the status which independent India volun¬ 
tarily assumed in the Commonwealth in 1948. More, the pro¬ 
tagonists of that move used the very argument — and almost the 
exact words — which Gandhi had used in London seventeen years 
earlier. Gandhi saw that the only beneficent independence was 
the kind that led to interdependence. ‘Isolated independence is 
not the goal,’ he said. ‘It is voluntary interdependence.’ He 
arrived at this conclusion through no abstruse theorizing about 
internationalism or world government. Gandhi was addicted to 
love; it was the basis of his relations with people. Love is creative 
interdependence. And since Gandhi regarded nations not as 
abstract legal entities but as agglomerations of human beings with 
names, noses, aches and smiles, he believed that international 
relationships should be founded on interdependence and love. 

Gandhi had been criticized for acquiescing in Article Two of 
the Irwin-Delhi Pact of March 5th, 1931, which stated that in 
the contemplated constitution of India, England would retain 

3 I3E 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

control over defence, foreign affairs, minority probleins and 
financial obligations to foreign creditors. It was a severe limitation 
on freedom. Gandhi took the criticism to heart. Indeed, the 
Congress convention in Karachi at the end of March 1931, in¬ 
structed Gandhi to change his position on this key question. 
Gandhi, accordingly, told British audiences that ‘it is part of the 
mandate given me by Congress that complete independence 
would be meaningless unless it was accompanied by complete 
control over finance, defence and external affairs’. This reversal 
in Gandhi’s attitude exasperated the British; he had gone back 
on his signature. Gandhi had a technical justification in the man¬ 
date of Congress, his master. Actually, he attached no political 
importance to the stipulation in the Delhi Pact and only propa- 
paganda importance to his advocacy of the opposite in London. 
England was not yet parting with power in India. That was the 
crucial fact. Hair-splitting over who would control what was 
therefore futile. 

This being his approach, Gandhi concentrated more on con¬ 
vincing the British people than on debating with the British 
government at the Round Table Conference. ‘I find that my 
work lies outside the Conference,’ he told one audience. Referring 
to his efforts to explain India to England, he said, ‘This to me is 
the real Round Table Conference . . . The seed which is being 
sown now may result in softening the British spirit. . . and in pre¬ 
venting the brutalization of human beings.’ He made friends 
through his charm, frankness, humanity and accessibility. He 
won the hearts of the Christians in England who recognized him 
as a big brother and ally. He touched what was Christian in all 
Englishmen. He found an echo in their common sense; it was 
clear after his visit that some day, sooner than some thought, 
sooner than Churchill wished, India would be liberated. Many 
considered him ‘difficult’, and he undoubtedly could be. But he 
moderated the hostility of the most rabid. He even walked into 
the lion’s den and went to Lancashire where his agitation against 
foreign cloth and in favour of khadi had caused unemployment 
and loss of profits. At a meeting, one man said, ‘I am one of the 
unemployed, but if I was in India I would say the same thing 
that Mr. Gandhi is saying.’ There is a telling photograph, taken 
outside the Greenfield Mill at Darwen, Lancashire, showing 

312 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 


Gandhi, wrapped in white cotton from neck to knee, overcome 
with coyness and squeezed in amidst cotton factory workers, most 
of them women, One of them holding his hand, and all of them, 
young, old, male, female, cheering the Mahatma and smiling 
He made friends among those whom he hurt. 

The Government assigned two Scotland Yard detectives, Ser¬ 
geant Evans and Sergeant Rogers, to guard Gandhi; they were 
special policemen, giants in stature, usually assigned to protecting 
royalty. They grew to like‘the little man’. Unlike most prominent 
personalities in such circumstances, Gandhi did not keep them at 
arms’ length or ignore them. He talked to them and visited their 
homes. Before leaving England, he begged that they be allowed 
to accompany him to Brindisi, Italy. The bureaucrat asked the 
reason for this strange request. 

‘Because they are part of my family,’ Gandhi answered. 

From India he sent each a watch engraved ‘With love from 
M. K. Gandhi'. 

Between lectures, speeches, forums, press interviews, trips, 
innumerable individual appointments, and answering a mountain 
of mail — all with a view to conquering Britain’s heart — he 
attended to the official business which had brought him to Lon¬ 
don: the second Round Table Conference. His official and un¬ 
official activities usually kept him busy twenty-one hours a day; 
diaries preserved show that he sometimes got to bed at 2 a.m., 
awoke at 3.45 a.m. for prayers, rested again from 5 to 6 a.m., 
and had no respite from then till the next morning at 1 or 2 a.m. 
The schedule wore him out; he delighted in driving his body to 
the maximum of endurance and beyond. As a result, what he 
gave the Round Table Conference was not of his best quality, 
yet the participants heard some remarkable, and certainly unique, 
utterances from his lips. He attended regularly, although most 
plenary sessions and committee meetings bored him; they were so 
political that he lost all sense of their reality. Often he sat with 
eyes closed. He may have slept a few winks. 

The purpose of the Round Table Conference was ‘constitution¬ 
building’ for India. Lord Reading, a member of the British dele¬ 
gation, formulated the British purpose in one sentence: ‘I believe 
that the true policy between Britain and India is that we should 
in this country strive all we can to give effect to the views of India 

3*3 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


while preserving at the same time our own position, which we 
must not and cannot abandon.’ 

How could England give effect to the views of India while 
remaining the mistress of India? 

The Round Table Conference was worse than a failure. By 
intensifying the religious divisions of India it exercised a sinister, 
tragic influence on the future. 

The Conference consisted of 112 delegates: 20 representing the 
Government of the United Kingdom, 23 from princely India— 
rajas, maharajas, nawabs and their subordinates — and 64 from 
British India. The Viceroy appointed the princes, and, with the 
exception of Gandhi, Mrs. Naidu and a few others, he appointed 
the visitors from British India. 

His selections were careful and purposeful. The British govern¬ 
ment advocated a federation of princely India, which was roughly 
a third of India, with British India. This would have introduced 
the weight of the autocratic princes, British puppets all, into the 
government of India. Thus what seemed like the unification of the 
two Indias was calculated to strengthen feudal, medieval reaction 
and reinforce British rule. 

The delegation from British India included the Aga Khan and 
others like him. It included British merchants, Anglo-Indians, 
Christians, Hindus, Moslems, landlords, Labourites, untouchables 
and Parsis (but not one peasant), and each of these groups de¬ 
manded a separate electorate for itself. In other words, a number 
of seats in the legislative assemblies would be reserved for English¬ 
men resident in India, for landlords, for Moslems, etc., and the 
Englishmen would be elected only by the votes of the Englishmen 
of India who could vote for no one else, the landlords would be 
elected by landlords, the Moslems could vote only for Moslem 
candidates, and so on. Every divisive tendency in India was 
encouraged. 

The Conference set up a Minorities Committee comprising six 
Englishmen from England, thirteen Moslems, ten Hindus, two 
untouchables, two Labourites, two Sikhs, one Parsi, two Indian 
Christians, one Anglo-Indian (Anglo-Indians are descendents of 
mixed marriages between British men and Indian women), two 
Englishmen domiciled in India and four women. Only the 
women did not ask for a separate electorate. Of the thirteen 

3*4 


PARLEYS WITH THE REBEL 

Moslems in the Committee only one was a nationalist Moslem 
who was an Indian politically and a follower of the Prophet 
religiously. The remaining twelve mingled Church and State and 
put the political interests of their religious community above the 
welfare of India as a whole. 

Mr. Fazl-ul Huq, a Moslem, was addressing the Plenary Session 
of November 28th, 1931. T wonder’, he said, ‘if Sir Austen 
Chamberlain has come across two such incongruous specimens of 
humanity as Dr. Moonje [a Hindu member of the Conference] 
and myself — professing different religions, worshipping different 
Gods.’ 

‘The same God,’ a member interjected. 

‘No,’ Mr. Fazl-ul Huq demurred, ‘no, it cannot be the same 
God. My God is for separate electorates; his God is for joint 
electorates.’ 

The Moslem delegate was partitioning God. But Gandhi would 
not partition God or India. He told the conference he rejected 
all separate electorates. In an independent India, he said, Indians 
would vote as Indians for Indians. The virtue of Indian nationalism 
and its appeal to Outsiders was not that it would create new 
national barriers — there were already too many — but rather 
that it would rid England and the world of the incubus of im¬ 
perialism and take religion out of politics in India. Instead, the 
Round Table Conference, under British management, intensified 
old and attempted to introduce new fissiparous influences. 
‘Divide and Rule’ is the law of Empire; the more the rule is 
threatened the more diligently that law is applied. 

The solution for India would have been to banish religious con¬ 
siderations from politics. But with all its twentieth-century vitality, 
Indian nationalism still lacked the strength to unite that which 
religion, provincial loyalties and economic differences separated. 
The Indian national movement was faced with the task of libera¬ 
tion before the Indians had been welded into a nation. 

The caste system was a further divisive influence which 
weakened nationalism. The Harijans or untouchables feared 
and often hated the Hindus who had harnessed so many brutal 
disabilities upon them. They, too, through their gifted and am¬ 
bitious representative at the Conference, Dr. Bhimrao Ramji 
Ambedkar, a lawyer who studied at Columbia University of New 

3*5 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


York under a scholarship from the Gaekwar Maharaja of Baroda, 
demanded a separate electorate or at least a right to a specified 
number of Hindu seats in the legislative assemblies. 

Mahatma Gandhi, a supremely devout Hindu, was incapable 
of discriminating against anyone on account of religion, race, 
caste, colour, or anything. His contribution to the equality of 
untouchables and to the education of a new generation which 
was Indian instead of Hindu or Moslem or Parsi or Christian has 
world significance. But at the time of the Round Table Con¬ 
ference of 1931, and especially with the British government 
pulling in the opposite direction, his arm lacked the power to 
draw the Hindu, Moslem and Harijan communities together into 
an Indian unity which could have commanded the British raj to 
go home. 

At the last plenary sitting of the Round Table Conference, on 
December 1st, 1931, the chairman, James Ramsay MacDonald, 
Prime Minister, since the general elections of October 27th, 1.931, 
not of a Labour government but of a Tory government in which 
he and J. H. Thomas were prisoners, referred to Gandhi as a 
Hindu. 

‘Not Hindu,’ Gandhi exclaimed. 

To his God, Gandhi was a Hindu. To the British Prime 
Minister, and in politics, he was an Indian. But there were few 
such Indians at the Round Table Conference and too few in 
India. 

That was the upshot of the Round Table Conference. It was 
completely abortive. It made the situation in India worse. 
Gandhi left it and England with a heartache, for though he had 
charmed and convinced many English people, he had failed to 
bridge or even to narrow the gulf that separated Hindus from 
Moslems; and the British government was holding on to India. 


3 j 6 


 

