Gem in the Lotus

The heaviest penalty for declining to rule is to be ruled by someone inferior to yourself.
– Plato
Founder of Western philosophy and science

resident Kalam was invited in January 2002 to the ninetieth Indian Science
Congress at Bangalore. He had been attending the Indian Science Congress
for more than a decade by this time. The Indian Science Congress Association
owes its origin to the foresight and initiative of two British chemists, namely,
Prof. J.L. Simonsen and Prof. P.S. MacMahon, who thought that scientific
research in India might be stimulated if an annual meeting of research workers,
somewhat on the lines of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science, could be arranged. The first meeting of the Congress was held in
January 1914 in Calcutta. One hundred and five scientists from different parts of
India and abroad attended.
In 1976, it was decided by the Indian Science Congress to have a focal theme
of national relevance and discuss it in every section, committee and forum
during the annual session. In 2003, the focal theme was ‘Frontier Science and
Cutting-Edge Technologies’. Prime Minister Vajpayee by now had embraced the
idea of India becoming a developed country by the year 2020. He was launching
the new Science and Technology Policy 2003 with an understanding that science
and technology, in all its true spirit, must be embraced to realize the dream of
making India a developed nation.
The space summit was a unique event of the Indian Science Congress that
year. President Kalam used the summit address to outline his vision for the
global space community for a prosperous, happy and secure planet earth. He

P

attended the Congress with his entire team of thoroughly prepared advisors that
comprised Prof. P.V. Indiresan, Y.S. Rajan, A. Sivathanu Pillai, R. Swaminathan,
D. Narayanamoorthy, Kota Harinarayana, Dr B. Soma Raju, Dr Tara Prasad Das
and the newly inducted V. Ponraj. I was Dr Kalam’s constant companion at the
Indian Science Congress meetings since he called me to assist him in writing the
historic ‘Let My Brain Remove Your Pain’ speech, which he delivered in the
ninety-fourth Indian Science Congress at Jaipur.
President Kalam emphasized the need for GDP growth of 8 per cent as an
important goal for India. In this context, he highlighted the role of technology;
its relationship with the development and well-being of society and the need to
transform Indian society into a knowledge society:
In the twenty-first century, a new society is emerging where knowledge is the primary production
resource instead of capital and labour. Efficient utilization of this existing knowledge can create
comprehensive wealth for the nation in the form of better health, education, infrastructure and other
social indicators. Such a knowledge society has two very important components driven by societal
transformation and wealth generation. The societal transformation has to be through large-scale
development in education, healthcare, agriculture and governance. These in turn will lead to
employment generation, high productivity and rural prosperity.1

In his address, President Kalam sharpened his focus on poverty. He asserted that
global terrorism sprang from historical isolation, poverty, illiteracy and
widespread unemployment, and that these relate to a dearth of basic resources,
such as water. He underscored the role space can play in solving the problem of
water scarcity and thus in integrated and sustainable development. Isolated
water-deficient regions could benefit from mainstream growth and prosperity
with a judicious application of this technology, and the factors that give rise to
terrorism would diminish. Moreover, Dr Kalam saw a role for energy from space
as a growing possibility in the twenty-first century.
President Kalam envisioned international cooperation as a means of
addressing common issues, including the cost of access to space and cost
reduction strategies. He also outlined the need for strategies to combat dangers
from asteroids and other space objects, which can threaten the existence of
mankind itself. He even suggested there may be a requirement for an
international space force for safeguarding assets in space, an idea that baffled
almost everyone and was considered a little far-fetched. Dr Kalam, though, was

reviving the dreams of his teacher Dr Vikram Sarabhai, who was a true global
scientist who drew the best of the world’s expertise in space science and
technology to India. President Kalam felt it was time for India to lead.
President Kalam hosted the governors from all states and lieutenant governors
of the Union territories at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 11 January 2003. It was a
bright winter morning. Besides all the twenty-eight governors and three
lieutenant governors in the two-day meet, the prime minister, the deputy prime
minister and other senior ministers, as well as the cabinet secretary and the
Union home secretary, were also invited. At the outset, President Kalam
presented some aspects of national development and some thoughts on his visits
to various states. He raised the issue of task team formation on river networking,
and the need for progressing towards IT-enabled administration and management
in governance. President Kalam called upon the governors to provide sage
advice, beyond any political considerations, to the people and the government:
In the last five months I have visited fifteen states. In each state I could visit remote districts and
villages and was able to interact with common people and the younger generation. From this
personal experience, I was convinced of the need for the governors of the states to reach the
grassroots to understand problems and convey them to the concerned state government, and
sometimes central government, for fast action to remove the sufferings of the common people.2

The burden of his exhortation was that without becoming a rival centre of power
or authority, the governors could still be more than ornamental figures confined
to the Raj Bhavans. Whether it be the issues of insurgency, communal tension or
networking of rivers, the governors could play a salutary role in creating a
climate of consensus among the states and the people. Additionally, the
governors should play a key role in creating harmony between the Centre and
the states.
After the president’s spirited speech, the governors settled down for working
sessions. The first session was devoted to the issue of militancy and insurgency.
The governor of Chhattisgarh, Dinesh Nandan Sahay, the governor of Jharkhand,
Justice M. Rama Jois, and the newly appointed governor of Andhra Pradesh,
Surjit Singh Barnala, talked of Naxalite-related violence. This had become the
bane of these states, and coordinating across state boundaries when facing a
motivated, geographically widespread movement had proved extremely difficult.

The perseverance of the Naxalite insurgency indeed posed the greatest internal
security threat to India.
The Jammu and Kashmir governor, Girish Chandra Saxena said that the
Jammu and Kashmir assembly elections in 2002 were seen as a victory of the
ballot over the bullet. Electronic voting machines were used for first time, and
the international community recognized the credibility of the elections and their
results. The election saw power shift from one party to another after fifty-one
years. Saxena said that people had participated in the elections in large numbers
because they were keen to secure governance in key developmental areas. The
new government was earnestly addressing the problems of education and
housing, and this ‘healing-touch policy’ was working.
In the concluding session of the conference Prime Minister Vajpayee raised a
vital issue. He said that all governors must play a proactive role with a total
sense of partnership and become full-fledged participants in the development
process. A few days after the conference, Dr Kalam told me in a reflective mood,
‘When I met all the governor sahibs, I felt the time has come to review our
system of governance afresh if India has to become functionally efficient,
politically transparent and competitive in today’s globalized environment.
Distortions are visible to me in the way governors function.’
The government decided to invite the president of Iran, Seyyed Mohammad
Khatami, as the chief guest at the Republic Day celebration. This is an honour
customarily accorded only to India’s closest friends, and was one of the first
steps in recent years to build warmer relations with Iran, which is one of India’s
more influential neighbours. Seyyed Mohammad Khatami had enjoyed a
distinguished career as a scholar before his appointment as president of Iran. In
1993, the influential American conservative political scientist Samuel
Huntington provoked great debate among the theorists of international relations
with his interrogatively titled article ‘The Clash of Civilizations?’ In this
controversial piece, he attempted to legitimize the American-led Western
aggression against China and the world’s Islamic cultures. Seyyed Mohammad
Khatami responded with the theory of ‘Dialogue Among Civilizations’.3 Indeed,
his term of office was punctuated by numerous meetings with high-profile
international figures.
India and Iran had historic ties. The Islamic Arabs invaded Persia and ended

the Sasanian Empire in the seventh century. The local population unwilling to
convert to Islam or accept dhimmi (‘protected person’ in Arabic) status was
persecuted and fled to different regions of the world. The largest number of these
people arrived in western India. Since this time, India has remained home to the
largest Zoroastrian population of the world. In the modern era, the Parsi
community have contributed significantly to India and Pakistan in the areas of
politics, industry, science and culture. Prominent Indian Parsis included
Dadabhai Naoroji, the three-time president of the Indian National Congress,
Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw, nuclear energy scientist Homi Bhabha and the
Tata family of J.R.D. Tata.Furthermore, Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh had been a
major centre of Shia culture and Persian study in the Indian subcontinent. The
ancestors of Ruhollah Moosavi Khomeini, later the Iranian Ayatollah, stayed for
several generations there.
Dr Kalam spent many days studying the interactions between the people of
two of the greatest civilizations of the world. He was struck by some marked
similarities between their cultures. There are unmistakeable similarities between
the Vedas and the Iranian Avesta. Sanskrit and Avesta languages share some
likeness in respect of their terminology and phonetics. The rhythm and style of
their poems were so similar that the Avesta language could be translated to
Vedas using phonetic rules. God and the myths in Rig Veda and Avesta
correspond closely. In fact, it could be argued that the Mitra in Rig Veda was a
Misra of Avesta. The Indian and Iranian people both shared the practice of
worshipping the sun, and beliefs in the holiness of fire and sacredness of the
cow.
On the eve of the Republic Day, President Kalam gave his first address to the
nation, which was eagerly watched by millions on the television. Beginning with
the theme of developing India by creating a knowledge society, he spoke of
ushering in a second green revolution, bringing urban amenities to villages and
implementing electronic governance to weed out corruption and delays in
servicing the citizens. He disappointed those who were expecting a homily on
secularism, socialism and moral values.
President Kalam explained eloquently that during the last century, the world
had undergone a change from an agriculture society, where manual labour was
the most critical factor, to an industrial society where the management of

technology, capital and labour provided the competitive advantage. He stated
that we are now in the information era, where connectivity and software
products have driven a sector of the economy of some nations, including our
own. In the twenty-first century, a new society is emerging where knowledge is
the primary production resource instead of capital and labour.
President Kalam gave a clarion call for India to embark upon a second green
revolution, which would enable it to increase its productivity in the agricultural
sector to meet the requirements of a growing population. The production of
cereals needs to increase from the present 200 million tonnes to over 300 million
tonnes by 2020. But the requirement of land for the increasing population as well
as for greater afforestation and environmental preservation activities would
demand that the present 170 million hectares of arable land will have to be
brought down to 100 million hectares by 2020.
The net result of this is that all our agricultural scientists and technologists
have to work for doubling the productivity of the land available for cultivation.
The type of technologies needed would be in the areas of biotechnology, proper
training to farmers and additional modern equipment for preservation and
storage. The president respectfully remembered C. Subramaniam. As the
minister for food and agriculture in the early 1970s, Subramaniam led the Indian
green revolution along with Dr M.S. Swaminathan. Dr Kalam evoked his vision
of graduating from grain production to food processing and marketing as the
next stage of the agricultural revolution.
President Kalam used this occasion to share his concept of providing urban
amenities in rural areas (PURA). He said that more than two-thirds of a billion
people live in the rural parts of India. The vision of transformation to a
developed India could only be realized if a tremendous mission for empowering
the rural people is launched. He saw the solution in terms of connectivity:
My visits to the rural parts of India have confirmed that the problem of rural India depends on the
extent of connectivity available there. The connectivity has four components: Physical connectivity
of roads; electronic connectivity of a reliable communications network; knowledge connectivity of
vocational training centres and schools, and financial connectivity with the banks and the markets.
All the four types of connectivity need to be pursued in an integrated manner so that economic
connectivity will emerge, leading to a self-actuating people and economy.4

The president cautioned that PURA had to be a business proposition that was
economically viable. It would need to be managed by entrepreneurs, local people
and small-scale industrialists, as it involves education, health, power generation,
transport and management. Government support should be in the form of
empowering such management agencies, providing initial economic support and
finding the right type of management structure and leaders to manage and
maintain the programme.
President Kalam said candidly that India cannot become a developed nation if
only the president or the prime minister desires it or the parliament makes a law.
India can only become a developed nation if everyone contributes to the best of
his or her abilities and capacity. For example, the student community can take up
the task during holidays to make a certain number of people literate in the area
where their schools or houses are situated. Teachers and parents can assist them
in this task. Only a burning candle can light another.
Dr Kalam saw all sectors as having a role in development, and cooperation
was key here. Research laboratories can provide technological support to our
small-scale industries so that production can become more competitive. Largescale industries have to increase their contribution to economic growth,
particularly for the growth of the GDP. They can aim at becoming multinational
companies in the areas of sugar and agricultural products, power, cement,
manufacturing and knowledge-based industries. The farming community has to
increase its productivity with advanced water conservation and innovative land
management methods.
Dr Kalam’s call for development unquestionably involved all of Indian
society. He expressed his view that the media should become a partner, promoter
and critic for national development. He stated that the fostering of a dynamic
environment with motivation is the foundation for our vision of transforming
India into a developed nation by 2020. The Telegraph on 26 January 2003 lauded
President Kalam’s address to the nation as a mix of ‘politics, science and
economics’:
Praise for the people, pat for governments, a word about those who worked the labs, and a call for
another green revolution – President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam’s Republic Day-eve address to the nation
was a mix of politics, science and economics … The President dwelt on the darker side, too. During
the last six months, he had visited seventeen states … ‘I had the occasion to visit a large number of

rural and drought-affected areas and I could share their concerns, grief and their aspirations,’ he
said.5

The next day, President Kalam and President Khatami took the salute at the
grand Republic Day parade. President Khatami and Prime Minister Vajpayee
signed the historic New Delhi Declaration, which boldly set forth the vision of a
strategic partnership between the two countries. The two leaders also pledged to
collaborate on energy, trade and other economic issues, to strengthen their
cooperation on counterterrorism, and to broaden their strategic collaboration in
third countries, which most analysts took to mean Afghanistan.6
Apart from the always vocal press and New Delhi’s lively think tanks, India
and its leaders had hitherto shown little interest in military or strategic issues.
Strategic defence reviews like those that take place routinely in America, Britain
and France, informed by serving officers and civil servants but led by politicians,
were unknown in India. Two visionary leaders, President Kalam and Prime
Minister Vajpayee, were changing that trend. Their aspiration was for a strong
republic, well prepared militarily and strategically for contingencies within and
beyond its borders. To the same degree, they concurred that the country should
remain compassionate and responsive to its people.
For Dr Kalam, emphasizing two parallel, somewhat incongruous aspects of
the nation’s security was perhaps merely encompassing the nation’s
requirements in one comprehensive vision. It could be viewed just as easily as
his perceiving the inherent need for symmetry, for equilibrium – in the man as
much as the nation. He had dedicated most of his illustrious career to bettering
the nation’s defence capabilities, and had been personally involved in building
the most lethal weapons the nation had seen. But he had advanced social causes
with unparalleled zeal and vision at a time of his life where most seek leisure
and personal comfort.
There was balance in the seeming paradox that was Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam: a
peace-loving missile man, a doyen of military hardware championing the
upliftment of the poor, an Indian of ardent patriotism who believed in the
confluence of cultures, and whose reverence among his own people was matched
by his esteem abroad. Dr Kalam knew well the capabilities of his weapons; he
had designed and witnessed their destructive powers himself. He likewise knew
that they were best kept in the barracks; but they were, at any rate, necessary for

the order of the nation. As he would famously declare in a speech to the
European parliament at the end of his presidency, ‘When there is harmony in the
home, there is order in the Nation. When there is order in the Nation, there is
peace in the World.’