REALIZATION

Life is a dream for the wise, a game for the fool, a comedy for the rich, a tragedy for the
poor.
– Sholom Aleichem
Nineteenth-century Yiddish author

3.1

Major General Prithviraj

The atomic bomb made the prospect of future war unendurable. It has led us up those last
few steps to the mountain pass; and beyond there is a different country.
– J. Robert Oppenheimer
Father of the atomic bomb

olitically, the world is a complex system of competing forces and interests.
The world order remains in equilibrium – and peace prevails – when these
forces compensate each other, like the two weights pushing down on the arms of
a pair of scales. The equilibrium is delicate; any small event may disturb its
stillness – and this is especially so with the myriad of opposing forces on the
subcontinent. The equilibrium here was disturbed in 1998 when Pakistan tested
the nuclear-capable Ghauri missile, a weapon of mass destruction that could
threaten India’s heartland.
While India had been treading a long path of science and technological
development and had been at some pains not to offend international anti-nuclear
sentiment, Pakistan had quietly become fully nuclear-capable. Moreover, it had
done so with the complicity of a rogue state and forces inimical to India,
unmindful of worldwide consequences. This was nuclear proliferation by proxy,
and it had delivered weapons of mass destruction into Pakistan’s hands; its
military could now deploy nuclear missiles capable of striking targets deep
inside Indian territory.
In a sinister barter that would deeply trouble observers throughout the world,
Pakistan had obtained North Korean No-Dong missiles and in return provided
the secretive regime nuclear design and enrichment equipment. India had no
option now but to develop its nuclear capability in symmetry with Pakistan’s, to
regain the delicate balance between the countries. For this, it was imperative that

P

the Agni family of ballistic missiles were nuclear-weaponized without any
further delay. Dr Kalam had, at any rate, been advocating this for several years.
He had even built some consensus within the establishment on this; but the
political leadership was reluctant to move forward in the face of international
pressure, and nuclear testing was abandoned. Reluctance would now give way to
resolve.
The 1998 general elections gave an exclusive public mandate for the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The BJP election campaign had already voiced the
party’s intention to further the nation’s nuclear weapons programme if it were
voted to power. The election victory indeed cleared doubt in anyone’s mind on
the nuclear question. There was now a broad consensus that India should
become an openly nuclear power, if for no other reason, then to be afforded its
deserved status on the world stage. The Pakistan missile shock would only add
urgency to the nuclear issue.
The bitter experience of 1995, when the plans of testing the nuclear bomb
were leaked to the United States, was still fresh in the leaders’ minds.
International pressure led by the US had been exerted such that testing had to be
aborted. This time, India was not simply exercising a defence prerogative; the
nation’s military capabilities had to be brought in symmetry with its most
implacable foe’s. Prime Minister Vajpayee therefore decided that every measure
should be taken to keep the impending nuclear trials from being exposed. He did
not share his intelligence with his cabinet colleagues, including even, of all
people, Defence Minister George Fernandes, who remained none the wiser for
these developments.
Pokhran had seen the beginnings of nuclear India, and it would now herald its
coming of age as a full-fledged nuclear power. Pokhran is a small town in a
remote location in the Thar Desert, in the Jaisalmer district of Rajasthan. The
first underground nuclear test was performed here in 1974. It is surrounded by
rocks, sand and five salt ranges. The name Pokhran means ‘place of five
mirages’, an apt name for this arid, scorched wasteland. In any event, the semidesert conditions with uninterrupted clear skies, gently undulating terrain and
only shoulder-high thorny bushes didn’t provide much cover against spy
satellites. World powers, both benign and hostile, had been watching Pokhran
from the skies for some time, seeking any clues of a nuclear test.

Within a fortnight of securing a vote of confidence for his coalition
government in the parliament, Prime Minister Vajpayee called Dr Kalam and Dr
R. Chidambaram and authorized them to conduct the nuclear tests. Brajesh
Mishra, principal secretary to the prime minister and his most trusted aide, was
nominated as the single authority in the bureaucracy for their liaison. Thirty
days’ time was thought reasonable notice for those responsible to carry out the
tests. President K.R. Narayanan was scheduled to tour Latin America from 26
April to 10 May 1997. Dr Chidambaram’s daughter was getting married on 27
April; his absence before this significant family event would betray to all
observers that something momentous was afoot. A full-moon-night enthusiast,
Dr Kalam suggested the Buddha Purnima Day for the tests, which would be 11
May 1998. With barely any discussion, everyone concurred wholeheartedly on
this auspicious date.
The Pokhran range area had been under the charge of the 58 Engineer
Regiment of the Indian Army’s Corps of Engineers. The regiment had dug three
shafts over the preceding several years, working during the night hours to avoid
detection of their activities by spy satellites. There were many dry, abandoned
wells in the area, and a few of them were deepened and widened into 50-metredeep shafts. The shafts and facilities were kept in a state of continuous readiness
for more than a year so that a test could be done within as little as ten days of a
decision.
As part of the strict protocol to maintain secrecy, Dr Kalam and Dr
Chidambaram donned army greens whenever they visited Pokhran, and their real
identities were never officially revealed to the people working there. Dr Kalam
was known as Major General Prithviraj, and Dr Chidambaram was called Major
General Natraj. Dr Anil Kakodar, director, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
(BARC), and the 100-odd scientists and technologists from the BARC and
DRDO who descended on Pokhran to conduct the tests, were also given army
fatigues and false military identities.
A nuclear weapon derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions, either
fission (fission bomb) or a combination of fission and fusion (thermonuclear
bomb). Both reactions release vast quantities of energy from relatively small
amounts of matter. This series of tests would explode six bombs. A
thermonuclear device was lowered into a 200-metre-deep shaft codenamed

White House and sealed. A fission bomb was set in place at the bottom of a 150metre-deep shaft code-named Taj Mahal and sealed. A sub-kiloton bomb was
placed in a shaft named Kumbhakaran. The other three 50-metre shafts for the
second test series were designated Navatala (‘new well’ in Hindi), abbreviated as
NT 1, 2, and 3.
A thermonuclear weapon is a nuclear weapon that uses the energy from a
primary nuclear fission reaction to compress and ignite a secondary nuclear
fusion reaction. The result is an explosion of much greater power than that of a
single-stage fission weapon. It is colloquially referred to as a hydrogen bomb,
because it employs hydrogen fusion. The fission stage in thermonuclear weapons
gives rise to their fusion. The concept of the thermonuclear weapon was first
developed and used in 1952 and has since been employed in the design of most
of the world’s nuclear weapons. The fission–fusion combination is favoured for
its efficiency: A thermonuclear weapon weighing little more than 1,000
kilograms can produce an explosive force comparable to the detonation of more
than 1.2 million tonnes of trinitrotoluene (TNT) explosive material used in
general warfare. A nuclear device no larger than traditional bombs can devastate
an entire city by blast, fire and radiation.
Sub-kiloton devices are low-yield nuclear devices. They are used as tactical
nuclear weapons for battlefield support purposes to replace short-range missiles
and bombs. One of the purposes for the Pokhran nuclear tests, which were more
of a scientific rather than military nature, was to provide data for computer
simulation for designing nuclear weapons and to provide technical inputs for
ultra-low-yield experimental blasts. Since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, nuclear weapons have been detonated on over two thousand
occasions for the purposes of testing and demonstration – sometimes at great
cost to the environment and humanity. The early atmospheric or above-ground
tests and high-altitude or exoatmospheric nuclear explosions were especially
deleterious to the environment and surrounding populations.
Dr Kalam, Dr Chidambaram and Dr Kakodkar were standing together near
the test site in the moonlit night of 10–11 May 1998. But for the sound of the
wind there was total silence. Suddenly, all three uttered, almost simultaneously,
the name of Dr Homi Bhabha. This led to an hour-long discussion between the
three great minds of nuclear energy about the dream of Dr Bhabha, to meet the

energy needs of India using electricity derived from nuclear fission.
In the 1950s, Dr Homi Bhabha dreamed of securing India’s long-term energy
independence through the use of uranium and thorium reserves found in the
monazite sands of coastal regions of south India. India had only around 1–2 per
cent of the global uranium reserves, but about 25 per cent of the world’s known
thorium reserves – one of the largest national shares of global thorium. Dr
Bhabha was of the view that with total reserves of thorium in India amounting to
over 500,000 tonnes in the readily extractable form, the country could produce
500 Gigawatt of electrical energy annually for at least four centuries. Kalam was
quite familiar with the science involved in Dr Homi Bhabha’s vision, and wrote
about it in the book I co-authored with him:
When mixed with natural uranium plutonium-239 undergoes fission to produce energy.
Interestingly, in this process, uranium-238 gets transmuted into plutonium-239 and ‘breeds’ more
fuel than it consumes. For this reason, such reactors are called Fast Breeding Reactors (FBR).
Thorium itself is not a fissile material, and thus cannot undergo fission to produce energy. It is only
on building up the inventory of plutonium-239 that thorium can be introduced as a blanket material
in the reactor and transmuted to uranium-233 for use in the third stage.1

The three scientists paid tribute to the great soul Dr Bhabha. Each one of
them felt they had been lucky to meet this science legend. Future generations fed
on the propaganda of consumerism would hardly believe that such visionaries
had walked on Indian soil, the trio of Dr Kalam, Dr Chidambaram and Dr
Kakodkar lamented. Each of these men had dedicated much of his life to
fulfilling the dream of nuclear self-reliance, bequeathed them by Dr Bhabha.
They knew that without Dr Bhabha, they would not be standing there that night.
The day of 11 May 1998 broke with heavy gusts blowing the powdery desert
sands. The wind was likely to take the dust created by the explosion towards the
town of Pokhran. They would have to wait. Prime Minister Vajpayee cancelled
all his engagements for the day and stayed at home near the secured hotline from
the test site. Dr Kalam remembered a very beautiful sentence he read somewhere
in his young days: ‘You usually have to wait for that which is worth waiting for.’
Dr Kalam called at 3.00 p.m. to tell the prime minister that the winds were
dying down and the tests could be conducted during the next hour. At 3:43:44.2
p.m. IST, the first three devices were detonated simultaneously. The combined

force of the three blasts lifted an area about the size of a cricket ground to a few
metres above the earth, sending billowing clouds of dust and sand into the air. In
contrast to the 1974 explosion, there was no thought of claiming that these were
‘peaceful tests’. Indeed, government officials quickly emphasized the military
nature of the explosions. ‘These tests have established that India has a proven
capability for a weaponized nuclear programme,’ Brajesh Mishra told reporters.
Two days later, on 13 May 1998 the two sub-kiloton devices lowered in NT 1
and 2 were detonated underground. The device in NT 3 was pulled out and taken
back under orders from Dr R. Chidambaram, as he felt that the team already had
the results they wanted with just five blasts. As he told the team laconically,
‘Why waste it?’ The Pokhran-II nuclear test had now proved the arrival in India
of more powerful and lighter nuclear weapons, small enough to be carried by
missiles.
Pakistan was quick to respond to the tests. On 28 May 1998, Pakistan carried
out nuclear tests at Ras Koh Hills in the Chagai district of Balochistan province.
It was followed by another test on 30 May 1998. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif
famously said, ‘If India had not exploded the bomb, Pakistan would not have
done so. Once New Delhi did so, we had no choice because of public pressure.’
Nevertheless, Dr Kalam was derisive of the commotion in the Western media
following the tests of May 1998. He told me, ‘Why should Britain have a nuclear
arsenal, but not India? Why did nobody say anything when the French were
conducting atmospheric nuclear tests in occupied Algiers? Are these not
reasonable questions? The answer does not lie in claiming that Britain and
France have a divine right to nuclear weaponry, but a truly ethical example of
unilateral nuclear disarmament, which the West was not interested in and neither
were the Soviets and the Chinese.’
While we were discussing this, I could not help but think of the unlikely
military personality, Major General Prithviraj, wearing his uniform with a very
un-military abandon. I wondered if the spy satellites hovering over Pokhran had
captured images of Dr Kalam’s hair. The flowing silvery locks that protruded
incongruously from the military hat of Major General Prithviraj would have
been a dead giveaway.
While he would have been quite unconvincing as a military officer, Dr Kalam
had a veritable arsenal of other talents. In January 1999, Dr Kalam published his

autobiography Wings of Fire,2 which I co-authored. Besides the story of his life
and the grateful mention of his parents, teachers and mentors who shaped him to
succeed, the book introduced to the world Dr Kalam’s penchant for poetry. The
book contained many of his poems and his favourite poems of others.
Do not look at Agni
As an entity directed upward
To deter the ominous
Or exhibit your might.
It is fire in the heart of an Indian.
Do not even give it
The form of a missile
As it clings to the
Burning pride of this nation
And thus is bright.

The book was very well received by the public and critically acclaimed.
Bhawani Prasad Chattopadhyay in The Statesman called it ‘a book worth its
weight in gold’. Prof. M.S. Mukunda at IISc wrote in Resonance, ‘There is
something that everybody can extract from this book … The book is worthy of
being read by every Indian.’When a reporter asked journalist and broadcasting
executive M.V. Kamath – in an interview published in The Asian Age – which
book would he make compulsory reading, he answered, ‘A.P.J. Abdul Kalam’s
Wings of Fire.’
Some months after the book was released, Dr Kalam was going through the
hundreds of letters with me that the readers of Wings of Fire had sent him. One
reader wrote that he felt like a fellow-traveller with Dr Kalam while reading the
story of his life. Dr Kalam was deeply touched and explained to me the
metaphor of life as a journey that is given form in the Quran. Dr Kalam said,
‘The course of the journey metaphor in the Quran explains life as a moral
journey. A man is given the gift of free will. There is good moral life and there is
bad immoral life. There is a good way, straight path and there is a bad way, a
convoluted path. Then there are many fellow-travellers. There are righteous
fellow-travellers. There are wicked fellow-travellers. There is God as a guide
and the Shaitan as the misleader permitted by God to test man. God is ever ready
to support the righteous and obstruct the wicked. He sends fellow-travellers

accordingly.’
On 20 February 1999, Prime Ministers Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Nawaz
Sharif created history by opening the gates of friendship at the Wagah border,
breaching the walls of hatred that had symbolized India–Pakistan relations for
the preceding fifty-one years. When Prime Minister Vajpayee arrived at the
border check-post in the Delhi–Lahore bus accompanied by twenty-two eminent
Indians, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif stood there to receive him. As the two
leaders shook hands and embraced, hundreds of people lined up on both sides of
the border, celebrating the event. It was a defining moment in the history of the
subcontinent. Despite the nuclear tests on both sides of the border, the leadership
of the countries managed to make inroads towards a peaceful coexistence.
Nevertheless, India would continue to pursue its full nuclear capability. The
Agni-II was first tested on 11 April 1999 from a converted rail carriage, with a
roof that slid open to allow the missile to be raised to the vertical launch position
by two large hydraulic pistons. The launch process was controlled from a
separate railcar. The missile was launched from Wheeler Island near Balasore.
The missile splashed down in the Bay of Bengal 2,100 kilometres down-range.
The liquid propulsion stage of Agni-I was replaced by a solid propellant motor,
making Agni-II an all-solid-propellant system. The missile would shortly see a
road-mobile configuration, lending flexibility and reducing vulnerability to first
strike.
In April 1999, the Pakistani incursion into the area that divided the Indian
territory of Ladakh from the northern areas of the state Jammu and Kashmir,
took the Indian Army by surprise. It was known that some elements of the
Pakistani armed forces were covertly training and sending Pakistani troops and
paramilitary forces into territory on the Indian side of the Line of Control (LOC).
The latest infiltration, though, was more serious, aimed at severing the link
between Kashmir and Ladakh and forcing Indian troops to withdraw from the
Siachen Glacier. But that it would happen almost immediately after the historic
visit of the Indian prime minister to Pakistan, where he was accorded such a
warm reception, only added to India’s dismay. The Ladakh incursion made little
diplomatic sense.
Before the Partition of India in 1947, Kargil was part of the Baltistan district
of Ladakh, a thinly populated region with diverse linguistic, ethnic and religious

groups, living in isolated valleys separated by some of the world’s highest
mountains. The Kashmir war of 1947–48 concluded with the LOC dividing the
Baltistan district, with the town and district of Kargil lying on the Indian side.
After Pakistan’s defeat in the war of 1971, the two nations signed the Simla
Agreement promising not to engage in armed conflict with respect to that
boundary.
After the incursion in Kargil, Nawaz Sharif, prime minister of Pakistan during
the conflict, claimed that he was unaware of the operation, and that he first
learned about the situation when he received an urgent telephone call from Prime
Minister Vajpayee. He blamed the incursion on his generals.
The fundamental fact is that hawkish tendencies exist in both India and
Pakistan, and both nations need to reduce them. Just as jihadis exist in Pakistan,
anti-Pakistan hardliners exist in India. The issues and enmity between the
countries cannot be solved easily. Processes are complex and opinions are
formed over many years. There are, however, so many brilliant people on both
sides; and such great natural resources. Combined, or at least cooperative, India
and Pakistan could have been far ahead of China, and perhaps among the
greatest of developed nations in the world. Dr Kalam’s understanding of such
conundrums was philosophical, and inspired by ancient scripture:
In Mahabharata, when Bhishma was lying on his bed of arrows, waiting for the moment of his death
and the Pandavas approached him for his advice, he told them, ‘Nobody is anybody’s friend.
Nobody is anybody’s enemy. It is the circumstances that make enemies and friends.’ The world will
not be the same in a few decades from what it is today. The evolving strategic thinking process must
be responsive to the new world order.3

It was time for Dr Kalam to move out of DRDO. He felt that he had stayed
for a little too long. Dr V.K. Aatre, chief controller (R&D) of DRDO and
erstwhile director of the Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory (NPOL),
Cochin, took over from Dr Kalam. But the Government of India was in no mood
to let Dr Kalam settle down to retirement.
In November 1999, The Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser (PSA) to
the Government of India was created. Dr Kalam was appointed the first occupant
of this exalted position. The PSA would evolve polices, strategies and missions
for the generation of innovations and support systems for multiple applications.

Moreover, the PSA would generate science and technology tasks in critical
infrastructure, economic and social sectors in partnership with government
departments, institutions and industry. This office would also function as the
secretariat to the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) to the cabinet.
Dr Kalam felt that carrying out evidence-based studies for policy and strategy
initiatives was particularly important. Development and pilot project efforts were
necessary to nucleate and catalyse multi-disciplinary projects or help to network
institutions with common goals for enhancing national competitiveness and
national-security-related technologies. Dr Kalam invited Y.S. Rajan, his longtime friend who was now retired from TIFAC, to head his new team. If life is a
journey, Y.S. Rajan was a fine fellow-traveller for Dr Kalam.