Kingdom of God

Know you all not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind.
– The Holy Bible
1 Corinthians 6:9

r Kalam’s talents were widely sought, and he never had any thoughts of
retirement. The National Aeronautical Laboratory had played a major
supporting role in the design of Light Combat Aircraft. NAL had been the work
centre for the National Control Law team, which spearheaded the activities
leading to the Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) Standard Control Law and airdata algorithms for the LCA. NAL quickly renewed its association with Dr
Kalam and made him the chairman of its Research Council (RC). One of his
colleagues reminisced of his time there in his new role, with a more prominent
status:

D

Once again we saw Kalam in the NAL guesthouse, but this time escorted by gun-toting security
staff because he was seen as a terrorist target. Curiously enough, the Z-class security made him an
even greater celebrity … As chairman, Kalam seemed brusque and impatient. He didn’t encourage
deep technical discussions. Kalam seemed somewhat shallow (compared to Satish Dhawan who had
been the chairman of RC earlier), but made sure that decisions were made quickly and followed up
rigorously.1

Despite the rebuff of the Indian Institute of Science, Dr Kalam’s credentials and
unparalleled experience in his field had led to his new post at his alma mater,
Anna University. He met with Prof. A. Kalanidhi, the vice chancellor of Anna
University on 29 September 2001. Prof. Kalanidhi had phoned him upon reading

in the newspapers that he was planning to join the Indian Institute of Science in
Bangalore. Prof. Kalanidhi felt that Dr Kalam should occupy a professor’s chair
at Anna University. After all, he was a former student, and surely the university
had the first right over him. They had a long, amicable discussion which
concluded with Dr Kalam promising to call back after thinking about Prof. A.
Kalanidhi’s offer. Prof. Kalanidhi left for the United States immediately after
their meeting. A few days later, when he was at Boston airport on his way to
Chicago, Dr Kalam confirmed his willingness to work at Anna University.
Prof. Kalanidhi told Dr Kalam that since he represented the scientific
community of India, he couldn’t exclusively represent the university and be
limited to any one subject or department. He suggested a title of ‘Professor of
Technology and Societal Transformation’ – perhaps one of the most apt titles Dr
Kalam had ever been given – and Dr Kalam readily agreed. Prof. Kalanidhi told
Dr Kalam that in Western countries, universities flourish with the help of their
alumni but in India, alumni support is barely mentioned. He wanted to change
this and develop an alumni network. He told Dr Kalam that his presence on the
campus would motivate the alumni of the university, spread across the world, to
support their alma mater. Some months later, his unassuming tenure at Anna
University – which was to be cut short by the calling of the nation – was
described by the vice chancellor:
On 2 October 2001, Kalam occupied the chair. A room and two attendants were provided for a man
who was known to be simple and hated ostentation. An office room, an Internet connection, two
research scholars and two stenographers were all that he had at the university. Of course, he had to
put up with the security personnel provided by the Indian government.2

Dr Kalam was accommodated in the guest house of Anna University at its
sprawling campus in Guindy. The grounds extended over 100 hectares abutting
the River Adyar on the north. There were no mess facilities at the guesthouse,
and breakfast would come from the PG Hostel mess. Prof. Kalanidhi convinced
Dr Kalam to accept meals cooked in his house. Stenographers T. Nagarajan and
S. Balasubramaniam, working in the registrar’s office, became his two office
assistants. Years later, T. Nagarajan would reminisce of Dr Kalam’s simplicity
and humility:
Kalam sir entered the room with one small leather bag, which contained three sets of his clothes, a

pair of shoes and a few books. I was surprised to see a man of his stature living such a simple life.
He was contented, concerned about people around him and their families, and was polite and
punctual. Not once has he shown any pride or arrogance. I have never come across someone like
him in my entire life.3

Though others may have viewed his lifestyle as austere, Dr Kalam enjoyed what
he perceived as the luxury of living on Anna University’s beautiful campus.
There, he could spend his leisure time with the students, listening to their dreams
and answering their questions. He could take his contemplative evening strolls
through the grounds and courtyards, surrounded by its trees and lawns. He was
near his ancestral roots, at least linguistically and culturally, and the balmy
Chennai weather was as familiar as the sultry seaside climate of his youth in
Rameswaram.
From an academic snub that his indomitable spirit had barely even registered,
he had landed in a place of acceptance and comfort, where his talents were
recognized and he could contribute to the future of the new generation. But this
was not what destiny wanted of him. He would be soon taken away from what
must have seemed to many as his perfect retirement job, to a greater, higher
orbit. He would not merely inspire a few students: he would inspire a nation.
Spiritual inspiration in these years was an increasingly important theme for
Dr Kalam, even while attending to his more temporal duties. Dr Kalam made his
first visit out of Anna University to Amrita Institute of Computer Technology
near Kollam in Kerala. N. Balakrishnan and G. Madhavan Nair, then director
VSSC, accompanied him. Dr Kalam met Mata Amritanandamayi Devi. She told
him, ‘Spirituality both begins and ends with compassion. No one is an isolated
island; we are all links in the great chain of life. Just as the right hand reaches
out to aid the left hand when it is injured, the ability to feel the sufferings of all
beings as our own, and an intense yearning to comfort them, should awaken
within us.’
On 6 October 2001, Dr Kalam went to Kanchipuram. The Sankaracharyas of
Kanchi organized a very important gathering of farmers from hundreds of
villages to launch a knowledge-empowered rural development programme based
on the PURA concept. When the meeting ended, both acharyas – Swami
Jayendra Saraswathigal and Swami Vijayendra Saraswathigal – called Dr Kalam
for a private meeting. Swami Vijayendra Saraswathigal said, ‘Kalam sahib, you

have realized the presence of the same atman in all living beings, thus malice
towards people and other beings starts disappearing. The divinity has dawned in
your heart. Go and spread compassion.’ Dr Kalam once again remembered the
prophetic words of Pramukh Swamiji that a great destiny awaited him and one
day he would lead India.
Dr Kalam did not realize the depth of the transformation that was happening
around him, though. He was too busy meeting students and visiting
organizations doing service. In January 2002, Dr Kalam went to Sri Sathya Sai
Institute of Higher Medical Sciences at Whitefield in Bangalore, to attend a
conference on Medical Technology and Health Care. Prof. P. Rama Rao
accompanied him. He was impressed to see the world-class tertiary health care
hospitals established by Sri Sathya Sai Baba to provide patient care facilities to
all irrespective of caste, class, creed, gender, religion or nationality – completely
free of any charge. As with the acharyas a few months earlier, Dr Kalam was
well received by Sri Sathya Sai Baba. Kalam recalled: ‘When I finished my
presentation on how technology would transform human life, he got up and
blessed me, to the cheers of participants.’4
The following month, Dr Kalam visited the Brahma Kumari Spiritual
Academy at Mount Abu in Rajasthan. Dr A. Sivathanu Pillai and Dr W.
Selvamurthy were with him. Dr Kalam interacted with coronary artery disease
(CAD) patients, called dilwals there, and the doctors at the Global Hospital and
Research Centre of the Brahma Kumari Academy, headed by Dr Pratap Midha.
Dr Selvamurthy and Dr Midha postulated, through years of clinical work and
research in physiology and psychology of heart patients, that there is a very
strong mind–body synchrony. Further, by the purification of the mind through
meditation and cleaning of the body with diet and exercise, heart disease can be
controlled and even cured. Kalam wrote later of a profound spiritual incident,
occurring in the wake of a number of spiritual events around this time, which
seemed to augur great happenings:
I had an extraordinary spiritual experience … The deity of the Brahma Kumaris, Shiva Baba,
descended on one of the disciples, Dhadhi Gurrzar. Before our eyes, her personality changed: Her
face became radiant, her voice became deeper as she talked about the four treasures of knowledge,
yoga, virtue and service.5

On 10 June 2002, Dr Kalam got a message from Dr Kalanidhi’s office that the
prime minister’s office was looking for him and that he should come to the vice
chancellor’s office to speak to the prime minister. Dr Kalam was perplexed, as
he had had no contact with any government functionary for some time. When he
arrived in the vice chancellor’s office, he was connected to the prime minister’s
office, and after a few minutes, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee came on the
line. He said, ‘Kalam sahib, the nation needs you as its Rashtrapati.’ Dr Kalam
thanked Prime Minister Vajpayee and requested an hour’s time so that he could
reflect upon his generous offer. Vajpayee said, ‘Please do that. But I need only a
“yes” and not a “no”. ’
By evening, Dr Kalam’s candidature was announced at a joint press
conference addressed by the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) convener,
George Fernandes, the parliamentary affairs minister, Pramod Mahajan, the
Andhra Pradesh chief minister, Chandrababu Naidu, and the Uttar Pradesh chief
minister, Kumari Mayawati. A press article at the time described the bipartisan
support that Dr Kalam’s nomination received:
Kalam emerged with the backing of an overwhelming majority of the establishment. The Congress,
after two days of being torn between its natural inclination to oppose the NDA and a strong
compulsion to endorse an eminent, apolitical member of the minority community, finally plumped
for the Missile Man.6

Another commentator saw the nomination in political terms, as a clever ploy by
the government to breach the opposition’s ranks. Ironically, Dr Kalam, an
apolitical, unaligned and almost universally approved candidate for the office of
president, had been a pawn in a political intrigue, the reporter asserted. And it
was for his very attributes that the intrigue had been successful:‘Unwittingly,
Kalam became the weapon of a devastating political strike. In a matter of six
days, Kalam’s candidature saw the People’s Front breaking up and the Congress
sheepishly toeing the great consensus.’7
Till Dr Kalam received the call from Prime Minister Vajpayee, presidency
was the last thing on Kalam’s mind. He had prepared himself to dedicate his
time to various projects that he could not fulfil during his career proper. In
Chennai, he launched himself into his dream of interacting with at least one lakh
students from across the country. He was also involved in trying to preserve and

transform the traditional knowledge etched on ancient palm leaves into digital
media for permanent storage and wider distribution through the Internet.
All these projects would have to be put on hold, then handed to trusted people
to advance on their own undertaking. Dr Kalam had many practical matters
ahead of him, and would address them in his characteristic practical manner.
When Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pramod Mahajan called him up and asked
him for an auspicious time for him to file his presidential nomination, Dr Kalam
told him astronomy, not astrology, keeps the world going. He would continue to
function in a similar manner to that which had sustained him all his working life;
and this could be quite a surprise for some. For their part, the media was
bemused and more than a little taken with the future president’s positivity and
sincerity, which was anything but politics as usual:
There is a quiet innocence about Kalam as he comes to terms with the fact that he will be the next
occupant of Rashtrapati Bhavan. India’s president-to-be at his first press conference on 13 June was
yet to shake off the hangover of having delivered fifty lectures in the last six months. So when he
faced the motley crew of young men and women holding notepads, microphones and video
cameras, he felt he was merely addressing another group of students. As he quoted from the
Bhagavad Gita (Whatever happened has happened for the good, whatever is happening is
happening for the good and whatever will happen will happen for the good), Kalam repeatedly
asked his ‘class’ if they had understood what he was saying. He urged everyone to repeat the
punchline after him – ‘The nation is bigger than the individual.’ His ‘students’ obliged!8

Pramod Mahajan came to Anna University and escorted Dr Kalam to New
Delhi. Defence Minister George Fernandes received Dr Kalam at the airport. He
immediately went to the prime minister’s office from there. He also met
Samajwadi Party leader Mulayam Singh Yadav, his earlier boss in the defence
ministry. In the evening, Dr Kalam opted to stay at the DRDO guest house in the
Asiad Village, which was his ‘home’ from 1992 until the final year when he left
Delhi to join Anna University.
Accompanied by Prime Minister Vajpayee and his senior cabinet colleagues,
Dr Kalam filed his nomination papers in parliament on 18 June 2002. The first
set of nomination papers was filed by the Congress party led by its chief Smt.
Sonia Gandhi, followed by party members Shivraj Patil, Dr Manmohan Singh,
P.M. Sayeed, Najma Heptullah, Ambika Soni, Arjun Singh and Ahmad Patel.
Prime Minister Vajpayee, Home Minister Lal Krishna Advani, External Affairs

Minister Jaswant Singh and Defence Minister George Fernandes filed the second
set of nomination papers on behalf of the National Democratic Alliance.
When Prime Minister Vajpayee pointed out the matrimonial status column,
which indicated that Dr Kalam was a bachelor, Dr Kalam quipped that not only
was he a bachelor, he was also a Brahmachari. This sent everyone present into
fits of laughter. Among the leaders of the parties supporting the NDA, Telugu
Desam Party chief N. Chandrababu Naidu, Samajwadi Party chief Mulayam
Singh Yadav, Biju Janata Dal chief Naveen Patnaik, Bahujan Samaj Party vicepresident Mayawati and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee were
present.
In his first press conference on 19 June 2002, Dr Kalam succinctly put across
the need for having an educated political class, with compassion as the
cornerstone of political decision making. Veteran reporters were a little
nonplussed but charmed by his candid approach to their questions:
For hard-nosed journalists, used to short term strategies, crisp and straight-on-the-face answers,
Kalam’s lectures about the need to educate people and improve the economy to end violence were
alien. However, in between his vague replies, Kalam slipped in a few suggestions about how he
plans to conduct himself atop the glorious Raisina Hill. On any controversial issue he would consult
the country’s leading constitutional experts. Decisions on issues such as president’s rule in states
would be decided based on ‘what people needed, rather than what a few people want’ … Dr
Kalam’s disarming candour and an almost fanatic rigour to avoiding anything remotely
controversial left both the missile man and the reporters still smiling at the end of it all …9

Despite robust support for his candidature across the political spectrum, Dr
Kalam would not be elected unopposed. Octogenarian freedom fighter and Left
Front nominee Lakshmi Sahgal filed her nomination papers for the presidential
election on 21 June 2002. She was accompanied by former prime minister H.D.
Deve Gowda, CPI-M leader Somnath Chatterjee, CPI leader J. Chittaranjan,
Forward Bloc leader Debabrata Biswas, RSP leaders Abani Roy and Harishankar
Mahale and West Bengal chief minister Buddhadev Bhattacharjee.
The president of India is indirectly elected by means of an electoral college
consisting of the members of parliament and the legislative assemblies of the
states and the Union territories. Dr Kalam took a nationwide tour to campaign as
a presidential candidate. While in the south, Dr Kalam made two detours. On 9
July he went to his home at Rameswaram, and on 14 July he went to Puttaparthi

to meet Sri Sathya Sai Baba.
Dr Kota Harinarayana accompanied Dr Kalam to Puttaparthi from Bangalore.
Dr Kalam saw Sri Sathya Sai Baba as a spiritual icon celebrating the civility and
grandeur of life. He spread amongst his followers the message of devotion in the
face of a global culture that was increasingly based on violence, cruelty and
unrestrained greed, concealed with beautifying niceties about progress. Dr
Kalam never discussed the mystique or extraordinary power devotees perceived
in the Baba, but revered him as a cultural force of incredible magnitude.
Perhaps inevitably, Dr Kalam’s election campaign raised some debate on his
religious practices. A comparison between Dr Kalam and former presidents
Zakir Hussain and Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed was rejected; Dr Kalam was not seen
as a Muslim in the common understanding of Islam. The sudden emergence of a
veena-playing, Bhagavadgita-reading, Rameswaram-born Kalam struck many as
an unreal happening. They were indeed baffled at Dr Kalam’s elevation as a
force for good, change, agency, self-reflexivity, critical thinking, action, service
and love. Dr Kalam invoked the simple truth of India as a pluralistic society; and
he challenged the carefully constructed stereotypes favoured by vote-bank-based
Indian politics. Some media commentators swiftly recognized that Dr Kalam
was in many ways the quintessential Indian Muslim of the ages:
The Indian Muslim, like any other Indian, is a creature of his village, district, state, in every
possible way … Kalam is part of a continuing tradition which exists but about which we have
developed an amnesia because of the obsession of the global media – and that of our own – with
painting the Muslim in a monochromatic shade … As for Kalam’s familiarity with Hindu scriptures,
was not Justice Ismail in Chennai the country’s leading authority on the Kamban Ramayanam? And
Kalam, for all his devotion to Rama, still has to catch up with Abdul Rahim Khan-e-Khana’s verses
in Sanskrit dedicated to Dasharath’s son.10

On 18 July 2002, Dr Kalam was elected the eleventh president of India, and the
first scientist president of the republic, by a thumping majority, winning 90 per
cent of the votes polled. Secretary General of the Rajya Sabha, R.C. Tripathi,
who was the returning officer of the presidential election, handed over a copy of
the notification declaring Dr Kalam as the president-elect to Parliamentary
Affairs Minister Pramod Mahajan.
Pramod Mahajan drove to the Asiad Village and handed over the declaration
to Dr Kalam. Dr Kalam thanked Pramod Mahajan for being his election agent.

‘So, funny guy, you made me the president!’ Dr Kalam said joyfully. He then
emerged to the large media contingent gathered outside:
I am indeed delighted to get elected as the next president. I thank all my friends, parents, teachers
and three great professors – Professor Vikram Sarabhai, Professor Satish Dhawan and Professor
Brahm Prakash … My message to the country is that we need a vision, a second vision for the
nation to get India transformed into a developed country in twenty years.11

On 24 July 2002, Dr Kalam’s elder brother A.P.J.M. Maracayer with the imam of
the local mosque, A.C.M. Noor-ul-Huda, P.L.V. Shastri, an elderly priest from
Rameswaram who was Azad’s classmate, and thirty-four other members of
family and friends arrived from Chennai by train. Maracayer was warm with his
words, and spoke of his wishes for Dr Kalam’s tenure: ‘I am extremely happy. I
always prayed for his success. He has made us proud. We had special prayers for
a hassle-free presidential term for him. But I don’t expect him to serve us. The
nation is more important.’12
On 25 July 2002, outgoing president K.R. Narayanan escorted Dr Kalam to
the central hall of parliament. Vice-President Krishan Kant, and Lok Sabha
Speaker Manohar Joshi welcomed him. The Chief Justice of India, B.N. Kirpal,
administered the oath of office and secrecy to the new president. Former
president R. Venkataraman was pleased and proud to see that the presidency of
his country was being bestowed on the man whom he had rightly trusted in 1982
to make India a missile power.
Dr Kalam invited all his friends to the swearing-in ceremony. Dr Varghese
Kurien came with his wife. Y.S. Rajan, Sivathanu Pillai, D. Narayanamoorthy,
R.N. Agarwal, R. Swaminathan, Dr B. Soma Raju, I and many others were there.
For most of us, it was our first chance to enter the Indian parliament, and in all
probability our last. Snehal Thakkar, who ‘ignited’ Dr Kalam’s mind in Anand a
few months earlier, was invited to the ceremony as the new president’s personal
guest.
President Kalam was given a twenty-one-gun salute and taken to Rashtrapati
Bhavan in a six-horse buggy, escorted by the mounted President’s Bodyguard, an
elite household cavalry regiment of the Indian Army.
In the evening, after the ‘tea’ ceremony was done with and all the guests had
left, President Kalam stood inside the majestic Rashtrapati Bhavan. It is a

mansion of four floors and 340 rooms, with a colossal floor area of 200,000
square feet, constructed by the British rulers in 1931 with heavy classical motifs
in order to emphasize power and imperial authority. President Kalam looked into
the space around him, as if oblivious of the opulent building, and told me:
‘Buddy, if you only had eyes to see and ears to hear and wits to understand, you
would know that the Kingdom of God is the sense of holiness, goodness and
beauty. It is as close to you as your breath. The Kingdom of God is where our
best dreams come from and our truest prayers. I glimpsed it at those moments
when I found myself being better than I was and wiser than I knew.’