Who Is Our Enemy?

Genius is not that you are smarter than everyone else. It is that you are ready to receive the
inspiration.
– Albert Einstein
Theoretical physicist and Noble laureate

r Kota Harinarayana had been Dr Kalam’s closest buddy during his tenure
as the chief of DRDO. Dr Kota was not a friend of Dr Kalam’s like Y.S.
Rajan. Neither was he his lieutenant like Sivathanu Pillai. He was hand-picked
by Dr Arunachalam to head the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Development
Programme in 1985 from HAL, where he was working as chief designer. Dr
Kalam stood by his side figuratively throughout the ten years that they worked
together and physically on 4 January 2001, when Wing Commander Rajiv
Kothiyal soared into the sky with the LCA, designated as Technology
Demonstrator 1 (TD-I) at HAL Airport in Bangalore.
The flight lasted about twenty minutes. Two support Mirage 2000 aircraft
flew along with the LCA prototype. Leading from the front, Chief of Air Staff
Air Marshal A.Y. Tipnis piloted one of them. With this accomplishment, India
entered the elite class of countries with an indigenous fighter aircraft. The
aircraft was given the code KH-1 to honour the great work of Dr Kota
Harinarayana that made this success possible.
The LCA project was conceived in 1983 with the target of designing and
developing an advanced technology, single-seat, single-engine and supersonic
lightweight aircraft for air-to-air, air-to-ground and air-to-sea combat. It was the
second prototype fighter of Indian origin, after HF-24 Marut, which was
designed by a German team. The American-made GE F-404 engine was used in
this aircraft, as the indigenously built Kaveri engine had been delayed.

D

LCA was the most ambitious project ever undertaken by the DRDO. There
had been over eighty organizations and 300 small and medium firms committed
to this mammoth effort. The project also faced loud criticism over cost and time
overruns and whether the aircraft’s technology would become obsolete by the
time it was inducted into the Indian Air Force. And worse, the question was
actually posed whether the country needed to embark on this exercise at all.
Dr Kalam used to pity the critics who never got their hands dirty in any
engineering shop and who would willingly or gullibly play into the Western
lobby’s hands. He answered the naysayers in his usual measured manner, but
with clarity hinting at bluntness: ‘We have more advanced technology than the
JAS 39 (Gripen) and as much advanced technology as EFA’s (Eurofighter)
Typhoon. We have pumped in so much advanced technology. I wish people
would understand the reasons why we have taken more time. We were not laying
a road; we were making a fighter plane.’
The point Dr Kalam had consistently made was that a country with a onebillion-strong population couldn’t sustain itself by relying on goods from abroad.
We can buy some things, but crucial military requirements such as strategic
aircraft have to be developed here, and that has been our challenge and mission.
We should not attempt to meet our defence needs by assembling aircraft with
parts from abroad. What base could you create in the country from such activity?
This country would forever remain poor if we relegate our engineers and
scientists to the mechanic’s shop, to use spanners and screwdrivers instead of
their minds. Dr Kalam saw all too clearly that this was an issue of generating
wealth – of the material and intellectual kinds. The LCA project, and those of a
similar nature that he championed, are not merely about building an aircraft or a
missile. They create jobs and stimulate the country’s scientific advancement; and
for this reason, they are indispensible.
From the LCA project, our country has fostered a series of technologies,
leading to a multitude of spin-off benefits. Several companies that developed
technologies for the LCA have exported them. There have been plenty of tears,
tribulations and hard work, but that is par for the course. Technological
development is by no means easy. Dr Kota Harinarayana explained the
protracted nature of aircraft development to the media, bemoaning that critics
had not looked at the time taken for foreign endeavours to field successful

aircraft:
Building of the F22 aircraft began in 1980 and it flew first in 1997 – after seventeen years. The
Eurofighter was to make its maiden flight in 1990, but it flew in 1994. The UK, Germany, Italy and
Spain have been involved with the EFA. Why is the media mum on this aspect? Western nations are
continually working on prototypes and have more time, considering their technology. In the aircraft
business, fifteen years is not a long time. But moving ahead should be faster – decisions are needed
to enter production.1

Dr Kalam’s face would beam with pride, however, when he talked about the
LCA:
The LCA is the smallest supersonic fighter in the world. It has performed beautifully. The
touchdown was beautiful and the pilot said it did not feel like a prototype. We may have taken our
time, but we have perfected it. When the Americans ran away with their software after Pokhran II,
we tested our control laws and flight control systems for almost two-and-a-half years. We have
tested it thrice as intensively as any European country or the US. There were no failures in the first
flight. The design, evaluation, flight-testing and airworthiness teams did an incredible job. Why are
we enemies of our own success?

Prof. P.V. Indiresan and Dr Kalam crossed each other’s paths by chance. Prof.
Indiresan, the former director at IIT, Madras, and a great champion of rural
development, had developed a model called Providing Urban Facilities in Rural
Areas (PURA). Dr Kalam as PSA was looking for ideas that can transform India,
particularly its 700,000 villages. On the sidelines of an event where they both
finally met, Dr Kalam asked him, ‘Tell me, sir, have the bureaucrats accepted
your counsel on contentious issues?’Prof. Indiresan said, ‘They seek the advice
which they want, and not the guidance that they need!’Thus began a short but
very intense collaboration between the two great scientists for transforming
Indian villages. Prof. P.V. Indiresan saw pooling resources as a way forward for
villages to sustain themselves and forge ahead: ‘The problems of rapid
urbanization can be overcome by “providing urban amenities in rural areas”
through the PURA scheme and by working with clusters rather than individual
villages.’2
Dr Kalam later recalled his immediate affinity with the concept: ‘When my
friend Prof. Indiresan came up with the idea of PURA, it struck a chord. I started
detailed discussions with him and several other experts in the field who had a

similar interest.’3
Bearing in mind that most villages in India are too small to offer even basic
amenities and cannot support schools, hospitals, markets and services that are
currently available in urban areas, PURA was evolved as a solution as well as an
ideal. PURA offered a way of transcending this isolation. It considered a village
not as a disparate unit but saw the resources of a cluster of villages with a total
population of at least thirty to fifty thousand; and this would be large enough to
sustain many basic urban services.
On 30 September 2001, Dr Kalam was flying in a helicopter from Ranchi to
Bokaro to attend a Jharkhand State Science and Technology Council meeting.
Samaresh Singh, science and technology minister in the Jharkhand government,
was seated next to Dr Kalam. There was violent turbulence, and the pilots said
that there was something terribly wrong with the helicopter’s rotor. Moments
before landing at Bokaro at around 4.30 p.m., the helicopter engine failed, and it
plummeted to the earth from a height of about 100 metres. Miraculously,
everybody survived. Samaresh Singh recalled Dr Kalam’s politeness and calm in
the face of doom: ‘It sounded like imminent death to all of us; Dr Kalam
remained composed with his signature smile playing on his lips. He even
advised the two pilots not to worry.’4
Despite being hurt, Dr Kalam effusively expressed his gratitude to the pilots,
who were injured themselves, and told them they deserved awards for bravery.
He then headed without delay to the Ramakrishna Vidyalaya in Bokaro for his
scheduled programme, addressing the students there without any indication of
his ordeal. At night, a panel of doctors sent by Samaresh Singh persuaded Dr
Kalam to take a tranquillizer. That night, Dr Kalam had a vivid dream. He saw
himself in a desert with miles of silvery sand shining under a full moon. Five
men stood in a circle around him. The men were Emperor Ashok, Caliph Umar,
Abraham Lincoln, Albert Einstein and Mahatma Gandhi, and they spoke in turn
to him.
Emperor Ashok said, ‘O Kalam, I learned after the Kalinga war that there is
no victory in causing suffering to others. Triumph is a peaceful kingdom. You
have done enough for weapons, now work for peace.’ Caliph Umar said, ‘O
Kalam, I learned after I conquered Jerusalem that all men are indeed equal.
There is no point in forcing others to follow your path. You will get only that

which is ordained for you. God alone is the sovereign. Never seek favours of
men.’ Einstein said, ‘O Kalam, you are a great scientist but be aware that science
without religion is lame; religion without science is blind. Never deviate from
your religion.’ Finally, Abraham Lincoln said, ‘O Kalam, nearly all men can
stand adversity, but if you want to test a man’s character, give him power. Be
careful with your power.’
The next morning, Dr Kalam read in the newspaper that a plane carrying the
young leader Madhavrao Jivajirao Scindia and a team of journalists, crashed on
the outskirts of Mainpuri district of Uttar Pradesh, killing all on board. A shiver
ran through his spine. What if the helicopter lost power a few seconds earlier?
Was there a link in his surviving the mishap and the divine messages in the
dream?
Upon returning to Delhi, Dr Kalam met Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee
and requested him to relieve him from government service. Dr Kalam said, ‘Sir,
I have completed seventy orbits around the sun, may I take leave now?’ The
prime minister offered Dr Kalam a ministerial position, but he politely declined.
After some silent moments, with unspoken words hanging in the air, the prime
minister said, ‘Jaisi aapki marzi’ (As you wish).
Prof. N. Balakrishnan at the IISc had been a friend of Dr Kalam’s since the
Cray supercomputer denial days in the late 1980s. He later established the
Supercomputer Education and Research Centre (SERC) at IISc, one of the best
high-performance computing centres in India. Balki, as Dr Kalam called Prof.
Balakrishnan, felt that Dr Kalam should come to IISc. The high-speed
aerodynamics laboratory at IISc had some of the first facilities in the country for
the study of gas flow, and it had flourished because of the launch vehicle
programmes of ISRO and the Agni missile programme.
Dr Kalam enjoyed the historical distinction of being the earliest scientist to
harness the growing power of computers for aerospace development in India. He
made it possible for new regimes of gas flow – high temperature, high speed,
low density, etc., to be studied in detail numerically. His collaboration with Prof.
Roddam Narasimha and his brilliant students at IISc and later at National
Aerospace Laboratories, which at that time had the country’s most powerful
computer using parallel computation technologies, was advantageous not just for
aerospace. A further spin-off benefit had seen an enhancement in national

capabilities due to the requirements of the programmes that Dr Kalam was
working on.
Dr Kalam played a key role in the creation of the Space Technology Cell at
IISc headed by Roddam Narasimha. In his habits and lifestyle, Dr Kalam was a
guerrilla commander in the disciplined barracks of IISc. His simple, almost
monkish lifestyle offended the ways and manners of many internationally trained
academicians at IISc, who would see themselves as martyrs, sacrificing their
lives by working in the institute rather than living in more developed Western
societies. Dr Kalam seemed entirely uninterested in chasing wealth or material
comfort; but he was clearly driven by an extraordinary passion for designing and
building ambitious technological systems. These characteristics, along with his
great personal charm and obvious commitment to the project on hand made it
very difficult for anyone to say no when Dr Kalam sought help. Prof. Sivaraj
Ramaseshan, who was the director of IISc from 1981 to 1984, would say that
Kalam could milk a tigress. Incidentally, Prof. Ramaseshan came from
impressive Indian scientific stock: he was the nephew of Indian scientist and
Nobel laureate Sir C.V. Raman and cousin of Nobel laureate Subramanyan
Chandrasekhar. An acclaimed writer, his fair summation of his colleague Dr
Kalam remains one of the most insightful ever written:
He (Kalam) defied monocultural paradigms: he was a technologist with a big heart, a man who
broke up the development of the nation to a large series of doable projects, an ascetic in his personal
life, and a person who respected ability wherever he found it, with total disregard for wealth, power,
degrees, position [and] class.5

The Indian Space Research Organization had set up the Brahm Prakash
Memorial Chair at IISc, and Balki and many others like him at IISc were keen
for Dr Kalam to take the chair. They met Dr Kalam at Delhi to this end, but he
pointed out that he did not hold a formal PhD degree, and that would be requisite
at IISc for such a position. But their enthusiasm for seeing him at the IISc
campus made for an interesting discussion, and the group bolstered their
argument by hearkening to the very conception of the institution.
They narrated to Dr Kalam a significant historic event that occurred in 1893.
A ship called Empress of India was sailing from Yokohama in Japan to
Vancouver in Canada. On board were two extraordinary Indians – Swami

Vivekananda and Jamsetji N. Tata. Both were headed for Chicago on two
different missions. Swamiji was to attend the World Congress of Religions.
Jamsetji was going to see World’s Columbian Exposition, a celebration of
technology and industrial progress. On board the ship, Jamsetji discussed his
plans to start a steel mill in India. Swamiji told Jamsetji that there were two parts
to the challenge – manufacturing technology and the science of steel. The
technology could be brought from abroad but the science had to be researched at
home. This sowed the seed of an idea in Jamsetji Tata’s mind to start the Indian
Institute of Science at Bangalore. He later wrote to Swamiji in 1898, asking for
his support for the venture.
The coterie of Dr Kalam’s supporters for the chair even showed him the
facsimile of that historical letter. The exact words Jamsetji Tata used were: ‘I
know not who would make a more fitting general of such a campaign than
Vivekananda.’ Swamiji in turn wrote, ‘I am not aware if any project, at once so
opportune and so far reaching in its beneficent effects, has ever been mooted in
India … The scheme grasps the vital point of weakness in our national wellbeing with a clearness of vision and tightness of grip, the mastery of which is
only equalled by the munificence of the gift that is being ushered to the public.’
As events would transpire, Swamiji passed away in 1902 before the Indian
Institute of Science eventually started functioning in 1909.
The team felt that an academic PhD was important; but it was no more than a
selfish endeavour between a guide and a student, financed by some project and
done to earn a livelihood by the student and sustaining one for the professor. In
their view, IISc was losing its way; it was drifting far from the ideology of its
founders. They felt it needed a breath of fresh air to lead the institution into
working for society, rather than for itself or its faculty. Perhaps they were a little
too close to the truth here, as the advocacy for Dr Kalam triggered a very strong
reaction in the IISc establishment, as a contemporary article pointed out:
The dons of IISc nixed the idea. ‘We cannot encourage him to work out of IISc because there is a
conflict of interest,’ the director said. Ostensibly, IISc, which handles only postgraduate and
doctoral students, did not want the 1,00,000 children that Kalam wanted to meet each year to instil
the scientific temper in them on its campus.6

Dr Kalam took the controversy, which was widely debated in the country, in his

usual stoic way. He was no Vivekananda, and IISc had long left behind the
legacy of Jamsetji Tata. The institution appeared now to be inspired by the more
worldly vision of becoming an Indian Harvard or MIT. The debate surrounding
Dr Kalam’s candidature – or at least the advocacy by his supporters – had,
however, raised an important point about the responsibility of the Indian
government to its scientists. The government should ensure that the scientists
who commit their careers to national programmes are given time and support to
earn academic credentials befitting their abilities. Nevertheless, Dr Kalam had
been too busy building rockets and assisting military and nuclear programmes to
commit himself to the rigmarole of a master’s and PhD. And perhaps, in the final
analysis, the nation was all the better for this.
In November 2001, Dr Kalam moved to the campus of his alma mater, Anna
University in Chennai, and resumed his academic pursuits. He became involved
in teaching and research tasks, which was something he had always wanted to
do. But his official responsibilities never allowed him to teach. By that time, he
felt he had a divine ordinance to inspire spiritually enlightened, skilful and hardworking youths – and that must be fulfilled.
At Anna University, Father Aathappilly Kuriakose George approached Prof.
Kalam. He wanted to do a PhD after completing his Master of Computer
Applications from Christ College in Bangalore. Dr Kalam asked him to select a
topic that would eventually help people. After many weeks of deliberation, he
came up with the idea of enhancing the capabilities of mentally challenged
children by stimulation of their brains.
This topic resonated with Dr Kalam. A mentally challenged child typically
suffers from his condition due to a deficiency in the quantity and quality of brain
neurons. It is this deficiency that results in his intellectual ability being impaired.
If a way of increasing the neuronal density by appropriate training in at least
some areas could be found, it would lead to a better quality of life for the
affected children. Aware that he was not qualified to guide his student – Dr
Kalam was never one to overstate his knowledge – he involved Dr T.R. Raju at
National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS) in the
research and to guide Father George. The research evolved methods for
increasing the population of neurons through natural challenging of the brain,
external stimulation, through the use of stem cells or with a combination of

these.
The research proved that the shortening of paths by practice underlines the
need for repetitions in the case of mentally challenged children. The role of both
the hemispheres in the execution of tasks points to the requirement for training
both the brain’s hemispheres. The role of proper exercises to wire the brain
underscores the need for proper exercises to enhance the brain’s capabilities. Dr
Kalam was fascinated by this work, and it expanded his understanding of
learning:
During this time I came across research done on the brain at Harvard University. I learnt that there
is converging scientific evidence for four systems as the foundations of human knowledge and it
hints at a fifth one. I knew now that a child learns by observing the objects if they are moving as
connected and bounded together as flocks of birds, or moving on connected, unobstructed paths like
trains on railway tracks, or the objects are influencing each others’ motion when and only when
they touch like billiard balls colliding with each other.7

Each interaction with students was advancing Dr Kalam on a spiritual path. As
time progressed he became more the saint than the scientist. On my birthday in
February 2002, Dr Kalam gave me a book: Care of the Soul. It dealt with the
theme of adding depth and meaning to everyday life. He highlighted the
following lines: ‘Soul is revealed in attachment, love, and community as well as
in retreat or inner communing and intimacy. When soul is neglected, it doesn’t
just go away; it appears symptomatically in obsessions, addictions, violence, and
loss of meaning.’8
On 11 April 2002, Dr Kalam was invited to a function at the Anandalaya
High School in Anand, Gujarat. When Dr Kalam reached Ahmedabad the
previous evening, the city was under curfew. He went to Anand by road,
escorted by police. The next day at Anandalaya High School, during the usual
informal interaction Dr Kalam would encourage after his formal lectures, one
boy asked him a question: ‘Who is our enemy?’ Dr Kalam did not have a prompt
answer, so he passed the question to the other children present there. After a few
moments of deliberation, Snehal Thakkar, a class twelve student, answered, ‘Sir,
our enemy is poverty.’ Dr Kalam was thrilled by the clarity of her answer. He
congratulated Snehal and later dedicated his book Ignited Minds to her. To Dr
Kalam, this answer was like a burst of light, akin to the blazing sun cutting

through dark clouds. Deep inside him, Dr Kalam knew that spiritual poverty is
even worse than material poverty. The ignorance of soul is our real enemy.