Angel and Marshal

What a piece of work is a man, how noble in reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and
moving how express and admirable, in action how like an angel, in apprehension how like a
god.
– William Shakespeare
The greatest playwright of the English language

he Appointments Committee of the Cabinet selected P.M. Nair, secretary,
Department of Defence Production and Supplies, as secretary to the
president of India. He came from the 1967 batch of IAS officers from the Union
territories cadre. Dr Kalam knew Nair ‘sahib’ since the time of the SLV-3
project, when he was posted at Thumba. President Kalam asked Nair to fix a
meeting with Vice-President Krishan Kant on 27 July 2002 as his first duty after
assuming office; but the meeting never took place.
The vice-president passed away that very morning. The unpredictability of
life once again confronted President Kalam. Before the National Democratic
Alliance decided on him as their candidate for the presidency, Krishan Kant was
one of the front runners for the post. Krishan Kant had served as governor of
Andhra Pradesh for seven-and-a-half years, from 1990 until his elevation to the
vice-presidency. It would have been only natural that Krishan Kant would have
followed the path of Dr Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Dr Zakir Hussain, V.V. Giri,
R. Venkataraman, Dr Shankar Dayal Sharma and K.R. Narayanan, who all
became presidents after completing their vice-presidential terms. However, there
was no telling one’s fate.
Dr Kalam’s guests from Rameswaram stayed for two days at the DRDO
Development Enclave Guest House and another three days in Rashtrapati
Bhavan after he moved there. Dr Kalam’s brother stayed with him in his room.

T

Dr Kalam hired a private bus to ferry his guests to various places and events. No
official car was used. He also paid for their food and stay. His simplicity and
propriety was ingrained, and no amount of pomp and circumstance would
change his approach.
The pressing needs of the time meant that he would only take a few short
days to settle into his position before he embarked on some of the more
important duties of his presidency. Dr Kalam had earlier been actively involved
in Gujarat’s rehabilitation and rebuilding efforts after the devastating Bhuj
earthquake of 2001. The earthquake had plunged Gujarat into the gloom of
death, destruction and sheer helplessness. Thousands of lives were lost.
Hundreds of thousands of people were rendered homeless. Entire livelihoods
were destroyed. As if that was not enough, within a mere five months the
mindless communal violence of 2002 had dealt the state another unexpected
blow. Innocents were killed; families were rendered helpless. Property built
through years of toil was destroyed. The violence was indeed a crippling blow to
an already shattered and hurting Gujarat, still struggling to get back on its feet
from the natural devastation of the earthquake.
As president, Dr Kalam took a bold decision to visit Gujarat as his first duty
outside the national capital. He knew that two railway carriages had been
burned, and efforts to quell the flames had been deliberately hampered by riotous
mobs. The fire killed fifty-eight passengers, including many women and
children. A retaliatory bloodbath followed in many parts of the state. Does the
real safety of the minorities lie in the goodwill of the majority? Had Delhi not
understood the need to confront the evil of communal violence after its anti-Sikh
pogrom in 1984? But it had to change. The nation can’t be held hostage to the
deranged mindset of mob killings. Dr Kalam had always been appalled by such
happenings, and he felt that his visit as president was the least he could do for
the nation under the circumstances. Dr Kalam’s decision to address the issue was
lauded in the press, which acknowledged the courage of his visit to Gujarat at
this time:
Being the first presidential visit outside the capital, the Gujarat trip acquires a symbolic dimension.
Dr Kalam will get to see for himself the horrors of communal violence and will hear the charges of
governmental complicity. In political terms, Dr Kalam’s Gujarat trip should serve a notice on all
those who thought they had got a pliable President.1

Prime Minister Vajpayee was, however, lukewarm about his visit, as Dr Kalam
would recollect:
Vajpayee asked me only one question, ‘Do you consider going to Gujarat at this time essential?’ I
told the prime minister, ‘I consider it an important duty so that I can be of some use to remove the
pain, and also accelerate the relief activities, and bring about a unity of minds, which is my mission,
as I stressed in my address during the swearing-in ceremony.’2

Central government officials cautioned Dr Kalam that he would face a cold
reception and that there would be protests from many sides. But to his great
surprise, when Dr Kalam landed at Ahmedabad airport on 10 August 2002, not
only was Chief Minister Narendra Modi awaiting his arrival, but his entire
cabinet and a large number of legislators, officials and members of the public
were also present at the airport. He could see the fear neurosis at play in the
minds of the people sitting in Delhi. Some influential people had created a script
for Indian society, and every event must fit that script – even if it has to be
distorted, exaggerated, minimized or even ignored.
Dr Kalam visited twelve areas – three relief camps and nine riot-hit locations
where the loss of life had been particularly egregious. The chief minister indeed
escorted President Kalam throughout the visit. President Kalam was able to
suggest to him directly the urgent actions that were required apropos the
petitions and complaints he received from the people.
After visiting the relief camps and riot-hit locations, Dr Kalam went to the
Swaminarayan temple on Shahibaug Road to meet Pramukh Swamiji. As he
entered the meeting hall, sadhus chanted the Shanti Path, a mantra for peace,
harmony and happiness. Pramukh Swamiji Maharaj warmly welcomed the
president and the chief minister with garlands, and offered his support and
prayers:
Swamiji said, ‘Our society is going through a difficult time, and peace, as you say, has to prevail.
There are thousands of victims, both Hindus and Muslims. Right measures need to be taken to
alleviate their suffering. Life is sacred; peace is sacred. My vintee (petition) to Rashtrapatiji and
Mukhyamantriji is to work for peace and unity of minds. I have only one earnest prayer to God.
That never again should such cruelly unfortunate days come in the lives of any other person,
society, state or nation.’3

Dr Kalam later visited Bhuj, wrecked by the earthquake the previous year. The

Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) had
constructed 500 shelters made of composite boards of jute and coir, and particle
boards made of rice husks, with bamboo-mat veneers supported on steel
channels and angles. They also made more than a hundred fibre-reinforced
plastic modular toilet units. It was a superb example of how composite materials
offer significant advantages over metals in some structural applications. The
shelter design had demonstrated the flexibility and efficacy of various
combinations of fibre reinforcement and resin materials. ‘Knowledge
purposefully applied indeed becomes a divine force,’ said President Kalam.
It was during this period that Dr Kalam read a book The Inner Journey Home,
written by A. Hameed Ali. He liked a ‘thought experiment’ described in the
book, and compared the situation of communal violence to a situation of dim
light and vision distorted by the colours and designs of shutter glasses. The
conversation he had with me on this matter would later appear in the book
Guiding Souls.
Let us imagine that we are in a completely dark room, a room full of all kinds of objects. There is a
light source in this room, with a dimmer switch that can be enhanced or reduced. We are also
wearing clear eyeglasses with shutters of different colours. The coloured glass of each shutter has
some transparent designs engraved on it. We begin to increase the intensity of the light by sliding
the dimmer slowly, to the dimmest illumination. We begin to see the vaguest outlines of some of the
objects in the room. We may misapprehend what we see, for we still cannot differentiate the
shadows from the real objects. Our predicament is complicated further because of the multishuttered glasses. Our knowledge is incomplete because of the dim light and distorted by the
colours and designs of the shutter glasses. But all of what we see is taken as knowledge. We turn the
dimmer up slowly and steadily, and every once in a while, remove one of the shutters in our glasses.
Basic knowledge increases steadily, becoming fuller and more accurate. Only if we remove the
shutters, what we see would surprise us. Our knowledge would become complete and objective, full
and truthful.4

Such a depth of understanding was sure to imbue Dr Kalam’s presidency with a
unique quality, and the nation watched intently at the very different approach
taken by President Kalam. He showed his independent mind, his courage to do
what he felt was right and above all, a desire to connect with the ordinary people
by going to them. He was aware that the powerful electronic media was capable
of creating a virtual reality. A good leader must not be swayed by what is shown
by the television channels. While his first visit had turned out to be a balm for a

hurting people, his second visit had all the potential to stir another hornet’s nest.
On 5 September 2002, Dr Kalam visited Bhopal and went to the Bhopal
Memorial Hospital and Research Centre. On his arrival at the hospital, Shakeela
Bano, a victim of the Union Carbide factory gas disaster of December 1984,
Justice A.M. Ahmadi, chairman of the Bhopal Memorial Hospital Trust and
Union cabinet minister Sadhvi Uma Bharati welcomed President Kalam. The
construction and management of the hospital had been mired in unsavoury
controversies, and many citizens had pleaded with the president to intervene.
The imbroglio was noted in the print media:
The hospital was funded from the sale of the attached property of Union Carbide India Ltd, and its
aim was to give free treatment to gas victims. Instead, the hospital gives favoured treatment to the
rich as 30 per cent of the money they pay goes to doctors. The very purpose of the hospital has been
defeated.5

Dr Kalam had a long discussion with Justice A.M. Ahmadi and the doctors. He
told the learned judge and the doctors that managing perception was very
important. Public perception is indeed at times more important than reality. He
said that your reality will not be a happy one if the perception of the people
about you is not good. Dr Kalam inaugurated a telemedicine link with Care
Hospital, Hyderabad, set up by Dr B. Soma Raju at his behest and interacted
with some gas victims undergoing treatment at a sub-centre in Ginouri.
In the evening, Dr Kalam inaugurated the National Judicial Academy in the
presence of the Chief Justice of India Justice B.N. Kirpal, Union Minister of
Law and Justice K. Jana Krishnamurthi, the chief minister of Madhya Pradesh,
Digvijaya Singh, and six former chief justices of India. Dr Kalam appeared to be
carrying his pain from witnessing the effects of the Gujarat carnage. He voiced
his concern over the growing intolerance and contempt in some quarters for
those of other religions, and spoke out against the all-too-common justification
of lawless violence. Describing the judiciary as the ‘angel and marshal’ that
ensures the survival of democracy, President Kalam said that it should not be a
mute witness to the devaluation of human life in society: ‘All of us have to work
hard and do everything to make our behaviour civilized and to protect the rights
of every individual.’6
Certain forces were meanwhile conspiring to subvert the tenuous communal

peace that remained in the state of Gujarat after the rioting. On 24 September
2002, two heavily armed gunmen killed at least thirty-two people in an attack on
Akshardham temple in Gandhinagar, Gujarat, before army commandos
recaptured the temple and killed the terrorists. It was yet another international
tragedy in which terrorists had taken the lives of innocent men, women and
children – pilgrims quietly going about their worship – in a senseless act of
violence. Their act of terror was even more acutely felt, since it was perpetrated
in the midst of the very place that serves as an inspiration for peace, harmony
and tolerance. Dr Kalam would always remember Pramukh Swamiji’s
compassion and spiritual leadership in the face of this horror:
The attack was meant to stir communal riots and tear apart the fabric of society. But Pramukh
Swamiji defeated these nefarious designs of the terrorists … Swamiji encouraged his followers to
pray, not punish … I believe that his spiritual calmness and saintliness not only restored peace in
Gujarat, but also provided a final seal on the perpetuating cycle of communal violence in the state.7

Dr Kalam had always avoided his birthday celebration. But now that he was a
public figure, this was going to be difficult. He found a solution by being away
from the capital. There was an invitation to attend the Buddha Mahotsava
festival from the Union tourism ministry in Tawang on 15 October 2002, and he
decided to go there. He had heard a lot about the sacred Buddhist monastery at
Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh and felt that his prayers for communal harmony
and peace in the nation would surely be answered there.
IAF helicopters flew the presidential entourage, which included me, across
the mighty 4,200 meters-high Sela Mountain. We were given oxygen masks
while flying over the peaks. The pass had hardly any vegetation and was
completely covered under the snow.
Soon after our arrival, President Kalam proceeded to the monastery situated
at an altitude of over 11,000 feet. This monastery is known as Galden Namgyel
Lhatse. It is one of the largest lamaseries of the Mahayana sect in Asia. Dr
Kalam offered prayers and met the Rimpoche (the local term for the head lama).
Everyone was surprised to see an instant rapport between President Kalam and
the Rimpoche. Their discussion became very famous in the course of the time,
and was notable for its succinct honesty:

Kalam: What advice can I take back for the people of India?
Rimpoche: Put aside the violence.
Kalam: And how can I do that?
Rimpoche: By sublimating your ego. It’s ego that is the core of selfishness
and from it stems all violence.
Kalam: But how can this be done? How can we control our egos?
Rimpoche: Learn to forget the ‘I’ and ‘Me’.
Dr Kalam was taken aback by this simple, stark and short answer. The
dimness was illuminated by Rimpoche’s words, and Dr Kalam could see the root
of all trouble in human relations. President Kalam, as the supreme commander of
the defence forces, met army personnel deployed in the area and laid flowers at
the war memorial of martyrs of the 1962 Sino-Indian War. In the evening,
Governor Arvind Dave and Chief Minister Mukut Mithi hosted dinner. As there
was no large building to accommodate more than 200 guests, a large tent was
erected and tens of bonfires were made to keep everybody warm.
Dr Kalam knew Governor Dave well from the time of Pokhran- II, when he
was the director of the Research and Analysis Wing. They spoke about the
dynamics of security in the region. Having understood the root of violence in ‘I’
and ‘me’ earlier in the day, Dr Kalam perhaps wanted to understand now from a
military intelligence veteran, how armed conflicts developed and persisted over
such long periods of time. The territorial disputes in this region have helped no
one but have deprived the entire region of development. Mukut Mithi and some
of us joined the discussion with Dr Kalam.
The roots of territorial disputation in this region reach back to the latter
colonial times. In the sixteenth century, when the Tawang Monastery was built,
the Indian and the Tibetan rulers were in harmony, and no border was ever
drawn or enforced. But things would change. In 1914, Tibet was an independent
country. British India negotiated with Tibet to accept that the region of Tawang
and the area south of it belonged to India. Everyone was happy except China.
Chinese representatives in the meeting withdrew, and since then China has
refused to accept the accord arising from the meeting.
Most of the state of Assam had lived with a strong Indian cultural influence
from ancient times, and in 1914 the Tibetan government signed an agreement

acknowledging the region as part of India. When in 1950 China annexed Tibet,
the Tawang Monastery remained the last bastion of Tibetan culture. In 1962,
China warred over the region. But the geography clearly favoured India, and
China pulled back from Tawang. Since then, India has established complete
control over the region. It is now as Indian as any other part of the country.
The holy month of Ramadan began on 5 November 2002. At this time, in
accordance with a long-standing Delhi tradition, the president, the prime
minister, political leaders, ambassadors, businessmen – anyone of any note or
public profile – would host Iftar parties, serving the evening meal when Muslims
end their daily Ramadan fast at sunset. People from all religions would attend
these parties. The Iftar parties had become something of a talking point in the
gossip press: not only who attended a party, but who skipped it would be treated
as news. Moreover, the parties, over the years, had become events around which
political analysts constructed conspiracy theories, forecast alliances – and much
more. But no one could ever argue that the food wasn’t delectable at the Iftar
parties.
A grand Iftar party from President Kalam was much anticipated. It was a
regular practice for the president of India to host one; and Dr Kalam was a
Muslim. Dr Kalam, though, asked Nair sahib why he should host a feast for
people who were already well fed. He asked him to find out the cost involved in
holding an Iftar party. It was estimated at rupees twenty-two lakh. Dr Kalam
asked Nair sahib to donate that amount to a few select orphanages in the form of
food, clothing and blankets. He left the selection of orphanages to a team in
Rashtrapati Bhavan and had no role in deciding where the money would go and
in what proportion.
After the selections for the bequest was made, Dr Kalam asked Nair sahib to
come into his room. He placed a cheque for rupees one lakh in Nair sahib’s
hand. Dr Kalam said that he was giving this amount from his personal savings,
and this should not be disclosed to anyone. P.M. Nair spoke of his gift, however,
as he felt that people should know that here was a man who not only donated
what he should have spent, but was giving his own money also. Though he was a
devout Muslim, Dr Kalam did not host Iftar parties in any of his five years in
Rashtrapati Bhavan. With typical self-denial, he abstained from this indulgence
so that poor children in orphanages could feast for at least that one day in the

year.
Nair sahib and the staff at Rashtrapati Bhavan quickly understood Dr Kalam’s
ascetic tendencies; but it was perhaps difficult for others, more used to the
ceremonial of the office of president, to come to terms with his style. At the very
least, his staff would have to prevail upon Dr Kalam to change his manner of
dress, if nothing else. His trademark pale blue shirt and sports shoes, which he
wore for their practicality and comfort, were simply not befitting his new station.
From now, bandhgala suits would be the new mode of dress, and one of the most
renowned tailors in Delhi was summoned to make Dr Kalam several of these
suits.
The tailor was proud of his record for making fine suits for all the presidents
of the previous few decades, and he was naturally very pleased to be outfitting
the latest president in the costume of his office. He arrived and carefully took all
of Dr Kalam’s measurements. A few days later, the tailor and his assistants
arrived, beaming, with four beautifully crafted bandhgala suits. Dr Kalam tried
on his new uniform. The dark suit was a perfect cut for Dr Kalam’s physique; the
length and drop were exact, and the coat was square on his shoulders. I was
taken aback at witnessing the somewhat unkempt, brilliant man I had known for
two decades transforming into a statesman in front of me. The charm of a boss
with tousled hair, runners and a lab coat that had endeared a generation of staff
to this great man was gone, and in its place was the bearing of a world leader. A
comb over the untamed silver locks, and the transformation was complete.
The man himself, though, was far from happy. ‘I’m feeling strangled in this
thing. How can I breathe? You have to remake it.’ The tailor and his staff looked
quite bemused and more than a little disappointed; for their part, they had done
their job perfectly, and to their trained eyes the suit was a sublime fit. But their
famous client was having none of it. He had been in the business of making
things for his whole working life – to be granted, nothing in the world of couture
– and he knew exactly what needed to be done. ‘Cut it at the neck,’ he said. And
the tailor complied. Thereafter, Dr Kalam mostly wore what came to be known
as a ‘Kalam suit’: a bandhgala suit with an open neck – which was, of course, a
contradiction in terms.
The new president would also baulk at wearing a tie. He felt choked while
wearing ties, just as he did by the closed round-neck collar, which he would

insist on the tailors calling an ‘Indian collar’ after Nehru, rather than a ‘Chinese
collar’ according to tailoring jargon. ‘Be patriotic,’ he would say. He would,
though, wear ties under sufferance. Once, I found him cleaning his spectacles
with his tie, and I told him he shouldn’t do this. An eminently practical man, he
said, ‘This is an absolutely purposeless garment. Let me at least put it to some
use!’
Further than the Kalam suits and the occasional tie, Dr Kalam would not
burnish his image or alter his style, as some are apt to do when they assume a
new role. His trademark unruly silver hair, which he had worn long since his
youth, would need to be regularly tamed. But his humble demeanour stayed, and
he was just as approachable to all and sundry as he had ever been. His staff could
not effect a makeover on their charge; and he didn’t need one. That he cut a
distinguished figure in his suits and formal wear was more of his natural
charisma; that, and his hallmark silver locks with an appealing, boyish face that
had endured into his senior years. Dr Kalam had not been changed by becoming
president, but the office of president would be changed by him.