Aarif

Your only obligation in any lifetime is to be true to yourself. Being true to anyone else or
anything else is not only impossible, but the mark of a fake messiah.
– Richard Bach
Author of Jonathan Livingston Seagull

he PSA office was housed in the Vigyan Bhavan Annexe, the adjacent
building to Vigyan Bhavan, a premier convention centre the Government of
India had built in 1956 adjacent to the vice-president’s house on Maulana Azad
Road. Dr Kalam had his personal secretary H. Sheridon transferred to the new
office. Dr Rajan took over as Dr Kalam’s scientific secretary. For the first few
weeks, it was not clear what the new office would do. Memories of the sleepy
times of ADE in the early 1950s and the uncertainty of the post SLV-3 days at
ISRO returned. But like then, Dr Kalam and his team would make their own
work. Drawing from his rich experience at ISRO headquarters and at the
Department of Science and Technology (DST), Dr Y.S. Rajan made the PSA a
functional entity in the Government of India.
Instead of allowing his office to become another add-on to the great scientific
bureaucracy that had evolved over the years in India, Dr Kalam perceived a
pressing requirement for new means of achieving his goals. Unquestionably, he
was a veteran in handling tortuous bureaucratic matters; his ability here was one
of his strong suits. He had secured DGCI approval for the stent, presided over
distribution of FRO to the needy and relocated people every time he had
launched a missile in Balasore. He had successfully negotiated bureaucratic
mazes by a persistent and straightforward approach – and with his trademark
charm. But now, he sought an innovative approach to the corridors of power.
Not that one could discount the power of his charm, nor his commitment to

T

seeing a project through to fruition. But not everyone was A.P.J. Abdul Kalam,
and even with his abilities and stature, he sometimes felt challenged by the
intricacies of the government bureaucracy. Furthermore, he was no longer young
by any stretch, and he felt an urgent need to move forward with his plans. There
had to be better methods for doing good work within the system; Abraham
Lincoln’s fundamental principle of a government of the people, by the people,
for the people became his guiding light. Dr Kalam decided to create a niche for
his office, by boldly taking socially relevant issues – which had been lost in the
labyrinth of multiple ministries – directly to the Cabinet for approval and
implementation. He was determined to make a difference in the lives of
everyday Indians, and he would circumvent red tape and vested interests to do
so.
Conversely, he would bring his eyes and ears closer to the people. For this, he
would need to identify the best minds of the times, which was another of his
strong suits. When Dr Kalam moved out of the mighty corridors of the South
Block to understand the larger problems of the people of India in his new role,
he found resonance in three people: Dr Kakarla Subbarao, professor of radiology
at the Albert Einstein Institute of Medicine in New York, who had been called by
N.T. Rama Rao, the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh to set up Nizam’s Institute
of Medical Sciences in Hyderabad; R.M. Lala, the co-founder of the Centre for
the Advancement of Philanthropy (CAP) and its chairman since 1993; and
Chandru Shahani, the chairman of Klenzaids, an engineering company in
Mumbai, working in the field of clean manufacturing settings for the biological
and electronics industries.
Dr Kalam drew on Dr Kakarla Subbarao’s passion for bringing the best of
medical science for the service of his patients, whatever their background. While
working at the affiliated hospitals of Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New
York at Montefiore, Jacobi and Bronx-Lebanon, Dr Kakarla Subbarao came in
contact with thousands of poor African American patients who faced
discrimination at every turn. Even after segregation ended, African American
people faced all manner of bigotry and racism in the great American cities. They
had poorer schools, lesser resources directed to their areas and suffered from
prejudice based on the colour of their skin. Their needs were often ignored; they
were mostly treated as an afterthought by those in power. Dr Subbarao played a

key role in the formation of the Telugu Association of North America (TANA),
and brought Telugu-speaking people together in America before he was called
back to India. Inspired by Dr Kalam, Dr Subbarao used his life’s savings to
create a trust for the study of radiology and an international school for children
in the Shaikpet area of Hyderabad.
Dr Kalam came to know about R.M. Lala after reading his book Celebration
of the Cells, written in the form of letters to a friend who had been diagnosed
with cancer. Lala chose journalism as his career at the age of nineteen and
established the first book-publishing house from India in London in 1959. He
founded Himmat Weekly with Rajmohan Gandhi, a biographer and grandson of
Mahatma Gandhi, which he edited for a decade. In 1974, Lala joined the Tata
Group and was working director of the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust when Dr Kalam
first met him. He shared with Dr Kalam that he had worked in the Tata trusts for
almost twenty years before J.R.D. Tata had invited him to actually join the trusts.
But JRD never interfered in his duties, even though he was the chairman and had
the power to do so. He possessed, along with Dr Kalam, the same attribute of all
truly great leaders: he knew when to use his power and when not to use it.
Chandru Shahani was suffering from a rare type of blood cancer when Dr
Kalam met him first in 1999. His indomitable spirit touched Dr Kalam. Their
friendship over the years facilitated the indigenous development of biologics.
Although the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had approved many
forms of biological therapy, others remained experimental and were available to
cancer patients principally through participation in clinical trials. Dr Kalam used
his good offices to take care of the regulatory issues for these therapies. Shahani
developed four mobile-level biological facilities to cultivate and contain bacteria
to stimulate the body’s immune system to act against cancer cells.
In May 2000, Dr Kalam invited fifty medical experts, directors of government
laboratories, researchers and industrialists to Vigyan Bhavan. This diverse
selection of prominent minds attended this meeting to brainstorm on how lifesaving treatments based on modern techniques could be made affordable in India
and other developing countries. The magnitude and severity of preventable and
treatable non-communicable diseases – diabetes, stroke, cancer and heart disease
– had brought the affordability of medicines to the forefront of global public
health. Dr Kalam called on these eminent people of the health sector to evolve a

blueprint for more timely and affordable access to medicines, not only in India
but for the whole world’s poor.
There was a general consensus at the meeting that if medicines were priced at
the cost of production under an alternative research and development system,
they would immediately become more affordable. Moreover, the budgets of
government subsidy programmes and charities would be able to provide greater
coverage and treatment to those who needed it. Dr Kalam told the members,
‘Multinational corporations founded on the wealth amassed during colonialism
would never work for the poor of this world. They undertake research as a
money-multiplying activity. Indian companies must find solutions for their own
people. They would become great multinational corporations eventually, as their
products will be used by three billion poor people of the world.’
This meeting proved the beginning of three great developments in Indian
health care: the development of a malaria vaccine, indigenous liver transplants,
and stem cell research in ophthalmology. Not much, though, could be achieved
in the way of bringing down the high cost of patented pharmaceuticals, stents,
and cancer treatment using biologics.
Indigenous agricultural development also had long been a keen interest for Dr
Kalam, and it featured heavily in his India 2020. He now initiated a pilot project
involving 3,000 farming families that implemented a systemic approach for the
cultivation of rice, wheat and pulses. The constant supply of input materials such
as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides had been met through people’s participation
with the creation of the Agro Service Centre and the Seed Growers Association.
Knowledge empowerment of farmers with improved cultivation technology was
given a special thrust. This made a significant impact on the productivity of
crops, particularly rice and wheat. Productivity of rice in project areas increased
from 2 to 5.5 tonnes per hectare and of wheat from 0.9 to 2.6 tonnes per hectare.
Most encouraging was the readiness of the farmers to adopt the new technology.
Dr Kalam kept a close eye on the project and was gratified with the results: ‘I
was continuously in contact with Paliganj farmers of Bihar. The TIFAC mission
has resulted in doubling the productivity of rice and wheat in areas near RP
Channel-5 in Bihar using innovative integrated farming and marketing
methods.’1
In January 2000, I accompanied Dr Kalam on a visit to Bihar. We stayed at

the Government Guest House near the Bihar assembly. It was a British colonialera building with gloriously high ceilings, large wooden stairs made of massive
teak planks, decorative lamps and, of course, vintage furniture. It possessed a
kind of stiff-necked, fusty charm; but not all was to Dr Kalam’s liking. We sat
down to breakfast the first morning after we arrived, and Dr Kalam became
immediately agitated. The staff had prepared for him a typically English
breakfast of toast and jam. He called me and asked me to go down to the kitchen
to see if something ‘eatable’ could be served: ‘Don’t tell me that these guys eat
this for breakfast here!’
The cook most respectfully explained to me that most of the sahibs who came
from Delhi were served this breakfast. I told the cook that Dr Kalam was not a
sahib, he was a saint. The cook enthusiastically cooked hot bhaat in about fifteen
minutes’ time and served it to Dr Kalam, who ate it gleefully.
In the evening, Dr Kalam was taking his usual post-dinner stroll in the
sprawling courtyard of the guest house, when he noticed a giant tamarind tree.
He became animated and said, ‘Look, funny guy, these funny guys have such a
big tree full of tamarinds, but did not put even one in my bhaat. Why are we
Indians so blind to our own gifts and unsure of the soundness of our traditions
that we mimic the eating habits and foods of the foreigners?’
Throughout, Dr Kalam was a curious mix of simplicity of habits and great
intellectual complexity; but he was by no means a sahib yearning for the
trappings of a glorious past. Everything in his life was forward-looking and
progressive. Even his spartan lifestyle served its purpose here; he had no
extraneous retinue or pointless attachment to material goods that could impede
his progress – physical or spiritual. Even as age advanced on him, he kept up a
cracking pace, his sprightly gait matched by a similarly sprightly mind.
And his focus remained on bringing technological progress to his country. On
5 May 2000, Dr Kalam inaugurated the first telemedicine link connecting Care
Hospital with Mehboobnagar District Hospital on a V-SAT link provided by the
Hughes Escorts Communications Ltd. Dr B. Soma Raju opened a new facility of
Care Hospital at Banjara Hills, Hyderabad. Dr Kalam joined the board of
directors of Quality Care India Ltd., the holding company that owned the Care
Hospitals.
Education, as Dr Kalam knew, is the key to technological development. In

October 2000, Dr Kalam met Azim Premji during his visit to the Wipro-GE
Centre at Bangalore. This installation built GE’s advanced medical equipment in
India, significantly reducing its cost. Premji briefed Dr Kalam about the
educational initiative that he was planning. Dr Kalam asked Premji how Wipro
reached its high stature in the business world. Dr Kalam was quite taken with
Premji’s reply and later quoted it in several of his speeches:
Sir, I can say that there are three aspects that come to my mind. First: Sweat for generations and the
hard work of teams. Second: We work for customers’ delight. Third: A bit of luck. The third point
will not be of any consequence if the first two aspects are not achieved. In Wipro, what we have
tried to do is wealth generation with social concern.2

On 26 January 2001, a massive earthquake measuring 7.9 on the Richter scale
struck Gujarat. More than 30,000 people perished in the calamity. The epicentre
of the quake was some 300 kilometres west of Ahmedabad near the town of
Bhuj, which bore the brunt of the destruction. On 15 March 2001, Dr Kalam and
Y.S. Rajan visited Bhuj to review the rehabilitation work in the aftermath of the
earthquake that struck Gujarat on 26 January 2001. There, Dr Kalam met Sadhu
Brahmaviharidas, a disciple of Pramukh Swamiji, the head and inspirer of
BAPS.
Sadhu Brahmaviharidas asked Dr Kalam a startling question: ‘After the
detonation of the first atomic bomb, Robert Oppenheimer remembered the Gita:
“Time I am the shatterer of the world.” What came to your mind after you
detonated India’s first atomic bomb?’ Dr Kalam said, ‘The energy of God does
not shatter, it unifies,’ to which Sadhu Brahmaviharidas replied, ‘Our spiritual
leader, Pramukh Swami Maharaj is a great unifier. He has unified all our
energies to regenerate and restore life from the rubble of damage.’ Deeply
impressed, Dr Kalam expressed his desire to Y.S. Rajan to meet such a swami.
On 30 June 2001, Dr Kalam and Y.S. Rajan met Pramukh Swamiji in New
Delhi. Swamiji was sitting on a sofa, and another sofa was kept for Dr Kalam.
Humbled by Pramukh Swamiji’s gentle and gracious presence, Dr Kalam opted
to sit down on the floor along with the other sadhus present in the room. As Dr
Kalam did not know a word of Gujarati, Pramukh Swamiji’s language, and
Pramukh Swamiji would not understand English, Sadhu Brahmaviharidas first
became the interpreter, and later a very close friend after many such meetings

with Swamiji over the next decade.
Dr Kalam told Pramukh Swamiji that India had had a vision before 1857 to
be an independent nation. The struggle persisted for the following ninety long
years. During this time the entire Indian society – people from all walks of life,
rich and poor, young and old, elite and ordinary, educated and illiterate – all
came together in this aim. The goal was singular and focused, and it was well
understood that India must be a free country.
Dr Kalam told Pramukh Swamiji that he had worked for forty years in three
of the great scientific fields of India – atomic energy, space research and defence
research. Dr Kalam said that he was pained to see that despite the passage of
fifty years since India attained Independence, there was no new vision. It was
still a developing country. It was not strong economically, it was not cohesive
socially, not even stable at times, its energy deficiency was unbearable, it had
serious security threats, and it had crippling dependency on imports of oil and
critical technology.
Dr Kalam further informed Pramukh Swamiji that five hundred experts at
TIFAC had pondered for more than a year upon what should be the new vision
after Independence. A vision for making India a developed country by the year
2020 had emerged. The experts, after much deliberation, had identified five
important areas by which to transform India into a developed country in the next
twenty years. These areas were education and health care, agriculture and food
processing, information and communication, infrastructure, and critical
technology for the strategic sectors of atomic energy, space and defence.
Dr Kalam said that as the principal scientific adviser to the Government of
India, he was visiting various organizations and meeting people from all walks
of life. His goal was to distil a clear vision that could inspire the nation, but there
was not much movement. Dr Kalam very candidly expressed that he felt that it
was not enough to secure a mandate from the government or even the finances;
the problem lies in having people to carry out this mission of developing the
nation.
Pramukh Swamiji heard Dr Kalam patiently, allowing him to finish. Then,
spontaneously, Swamiji pointed out, ‘Along with the five areas, you need a sixth
one – faith in God.’ This utterly new dimension which the scientists and thinkers
had not yet pondered upon generated a discussion that lasted for more than an

hour. Swamiji explained that development in all the proposed five areas was
necessary, but a nation is as good as its people. The quality of people is enhanced
by cultural and moral values. Both of which are sustained by spiritual values.
Hence, with progress and prosperity, the inner spirituality of India should be
developed through faith in God. We must enhance life along with lifestyle.
Dr Kalam was riveted by this revelation and very candidly agreed that he felt
the problem lies in people; not having the people to carry out this mission. He
understood that to realize this great dream (of a developed India), three types of
people are needed – punyatma (virtuous people), punyaneta (virtuous leaders)
and punyadhikari (virtuous officers) … how can their numbers be increased?3
Dr Kalam informed Pramukh Swamiji that he was contemplating the
establishment of a five-member trust to implement the plan evolved in his India
2020 book and sought Pramukh Swamiji’s blessings. Pramukh Swamiji
concluded the meeting saying, ‘It’s good that you’ve come here today. It has
given us much joy. You are like a Vedic rishi. The rishis of the past have done
both; given us science and served society. You too are a rishi – serving society
through science.’ Pramukh Swamiji prophetically blessed him to lead India.
Dr Kalam had been hoping to set up a trust to realize his dream, but now felt
something more than a trust was needed to motivate a nation. He was not clear
what was needed, but after meeting Pramukh Swamiji, Dr Kalam was deeply
satisfied and felt that whatever was needed would come. His personal faith in
himself, his dream and his work increased immensely. If God is with you, who
can be against you?
In September 2001, Dr Kalam visited the Dargah Sharif of Sufi saint Khwaja
Moinuddin Chishti, called Gharib Nawaz at Ajmer. The simple teachings and
message of Gharib Nawaz could penetrate even a heart of stone. Dr Kalam heard
that Gharib Nawaz’s compassionate gaze had silenced the fiercest of his
enemies.
The teachings of Gharib Nawaz have been recorded in several books. Gharib
Nawaz said that one who possesses the magnanimity of the river, the kindness of
the sun and the humility of the earth is closest to God. One who is graceful in
poverty, content in hunger, cheerful in grief and friendly in hostility, possesses
the noblest character. According to the great saint, the surest way to avoid the
punishment of hell is to feed the hungry, to redress the aggrieved and to help the

distressed.
Dr Kalam always felt drawn to the spiritual teachings of great Sufi saints. His
father once told Dr Kalam that his mother wanted to name him Aarif. She
visualized her youngest child as enlightened, knowledgeable and devoted to
Allah. She wanted to impart to her son a deep inner calling to inspire others for a
higher cause. But his father saw his boy as a collector, and therefore they settled
on naming him after the most respected Muslim of the era. That day while
returning from Ajmer, Dr Kalam realized that he had indeed become what his
mother wished him to be.
That he had become knowledgeable was also without question. On 1
November 2001, Tezpur University conferred an honorary doctoral degree on Dr
Kalam, along with renowned musician Bhupen Hazarika and eminent
mathematician Professor Jyotiprasad Medhi.After the convocation, Dr Kalam
addressed a large gathering of young students. He chose the theme ‘indomitable
spirit’ for the interaction. During the ensuing discussion, one student asked Dr
Kalam, ‘Why cannot water from the Brahmaputra, which is in flood most of the
time, be diverted to Rajasthan, which suffers from a drought every year?’ Dr
Kalam later recalled how he was baffled by the manifest common sense of the
question: ‘Only children will have these innovative ideas. Grown-ups tend to see
more impossibility. It was such a powerful question! I was completely beaten. I
was sure even the prime minister would not have been able to answer it!’4
How could Dr Kalam answer this bright youngster, who was asking a valid,
straightforward question? How could he explain that rivers are a pet issue for the
states, and that they fight for imaginary rights over their waters, never minding
that the rivers have flowed for millennia before the states were formed? The
states make claims over the water with arguments that they are guarding the
prosperity of their future generations, careless of the fact that in the meantime
the water wastefully flows into the sea and causes floods every year. Galvanized
by this most obvious but perplexing question, Dr Kalam made interlinking of
rivers a mission at the PSA and pursued it at various forums – but in vain. As
president, he would continue to speak of the virtues of linking the country’s
rivers:
Interlinking of rivers could minimize flood havoc and provide water to drought-prone regions. The
country has been utilizing very little of the quantity of water from the available 4,000 billion cubic

metres. The country’s food and water requirement has been growing because of the fast-growing
population. Only planned and better water management (can) meet the challenge.5

In the same event, another student asked Dr Kalam a question for which he had
no good answer. The student said, ‘Sir, big leaders in any field don’t come and
talk to us. We see our prime minister often going to Chennai, Lucknow, and
many other places. But he never comes here. We want him to come here; we
want to talk to him. Is Assam not part of India?’ Dr Kalam didn’t shy away from
the student’s valid concern, and even made a point of conveying it to the prime
minister:‘I later narrated this to the Prime Minister (Vajpayee). He conceded the
point and said. “Children don’t talk to me anymore. Maybe the security cordon
has created a separation.”’6 Thereafter, Dr Kalam resolved that he would meet
young children whenever and wherever he could possibly do so. He would
remain firm on this throughout his presidency and later in his life; he even
breathed his last while talking to young children.
On 3 November 2001, Dr Kalam delivered the Justice Harihar Mahapatra
Memorial Lecture in Cuttack, Orissa, declaring: ‘India will emerge as a
developed nation in twenty years.’ Justice Mahapatra was judge in the Patna
High Court for a long period. He established Cuttack Eye Hospital, Utkal
University and above all, worked to eradicate poverty in his area, living to a
good age of ninety-two years. The Oriya translation of Wings of Fire was
released on the occasion of Dr Kalam’s lecture. After the function, one boy
asked Dr Kalam about his favourite books. Dr Kalam’s reply was as revealing of
his character as it was frank: ‘Four books in my life have been very close to my
heart. Man the Unknown by Dr Alexis Careel, The Thirukkural, Light from Many
Lamps by Lillian Eichler Watson; and the Holy Quran is, of course, a constant
companion.’7
There was no clutter in Dr Kalam’s mind. Just four books, a book providing
scientific outlook, a book the morality of his culture, a treasury of inspiration
featuring hundreds of passages and quotations selected from the wisdom of the
ages and the book of his religion.