Thinking Is Growth

Isolation is the sum total of wretchedness to a man.
– Thomas Carlyle
Scottish philosopher and teacher

resident Kalam visited Tripura on 4 October 2002. He had been there earlier
twice. In 1998, he had attended a Tripura State Planning Board meeting.
Later, he visited Tripura to attend the Tripura University convocation on 31
January 2001. Dr Kalam established a strong rapport with Chief Minister Manik
Sarkar. The son of a tailor, Manik was born in East Pakistan and his father later
migrated to Tripura. Manik and his wife lived a very simple life. In 1998, at the
age of forty-nine, he became a member of the politburo of the Communist Party
of India (Marxist), better known as CPI(M). In the same year, he became the
chief minister of the state of Tripura.
Dr Kalam sent me to meet him in preparation for his visit. He said, ‘You will
meet a true revolutionary. He is the only chief minister in India who doesn’t have
a house or car. I know you speak well but when in front of Manik Sarkar, keep
your mouth shut. Listen carefully to what he wants for his people.’
I was surprised at the intensity expressed by Dr Kalam to do something really
good for Tripura. It was public knowledge that in the run-up to the presidential
election, the CPI(M), which had been ruling Tripura for a long time, had
supported Lakshmi Sahgal for the presidency against Dr Kalam. Only after Dr
Kalam’s passing, the truth came out that Manik Sarkar was indeed a great
admirer of Dr Kalam. But he had followed the discipline of the party in voting
against Dr Kalam; and Dr Kalam understood this well. Dr Kalam all along knew
the extent of party discipline’s role in the matter, which was only acknowledged

P

in the print media in the days following Dr Kalam’s death: ‘The CPM politburo’s
decision had not gone down well with the state CPM, which unanimously called
for a reversal of the politburo’s decision and support to Kalam. The politburo
remained unfazed and “martial law within the party” ensured compliance.’1
The chief secretary of Tripura, V. Thulasidas, reciprocated fully Dr Kalam’s
warmth. He suggested a telemedicine link between Kailashahar and Agartala and
from there to Hyderabad. He ensured the support of BSNL on a war footing and
despatched me to Kailashahar with a senior health official in the government
with an armed escort.
Kailashahar is the headquarters of the Unakoti district along the Bangladesh
border. It was the ancient capital of the Tripuri kingdom. After Partition, the road
link with Agartala was lost to the other side of the international border, and what
formerly was a pleasant three hours’ drive on a plain road was now taking a
tortuous six to eight hours through insurgency-affected highlands.
President Kalam’s day-long visit was most fruitful and widely followed. He
opened a telemedicine centre at the state’s GB Hospital and interacted with a
fourteen-year-old boy in Kailashahar, who was suffering from a heart valve
disease and needed immediate surgery. When Dr Kalam asked him his name, the
boy answered ‘Abdul Kalam’. The president said that was his name and again
asked him his name. When the boy answered that his name was also Abdul
Kalam, everybody burst into laughter. Later, that boy was shifted to Hyderabad
and was operated on by the cardiothoracic surgeon Dr G. Ramasubramanyam at
Care Hospital, Hyderabad. The boy is now a healthy young man approaching his
thirties.
In deference to President Kalam’s wishes, two interactive sessions with
students had been arranged in Agartala. It was vintage Kalam: radiating hope,
vibrancy and positivity, while replying to the students’ queries and encouraging
learners with words of wisdom. President Kalam also laid the foundation for a
factory at the Bodhjungnagar industrial hub to manufacture medicated powder
from the state’s abundant pineapple production. But it did not develop as
expected, and farmers in Tripura continue to see their bumper crops rotting
without sale. Later, Tripura artisans built a bamboo-cane hut with a thatched roof
in Rashtrapati Bhavan for the President.
President Kalam went to Manipur the following day. He was shown black

flags and the Manipur Peoples Liberation Front observed a twelve-hour general
strike. They were protesting against the failure of the authorities to provide
security along the Imphal–Dimapur NH 39 and Imphal–Jiribam NH 53, where
lootings and crimes had been rife for many years. Dr Kalam took the black flags
in his stride with his usual calm aplomb, acknowledging that the people were
simply trying to raise an issue that was causing suffering to them, and he should
not take this personally. The president then went to Leimakhong, about 28
kilometres north of Imphal to inaugurate a 38 MW heavy fuel plant built by the
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
After the function, Dr Kalam raised the issue with BHEL engineers that the
cost of the project was higher than hydro and thermal projects. Further,
cognizant that the heavy oil used in the furnaces of the generators was such an
expensive commodity, he asked why this costly option was selected. None of the
engineers could adequately address these critical and ineluctable issues. It
appeared to be a regular case of distant planning, where the person does not
know for whom he is planning. Dr Kalam was a technologist as much as a
scientist and had an uncanny, almost psychic ability to select the best technology
for a given purpose. But in this instance, anyone with common sense could see
the project’s shortcomings. Many years later, the apprehensions President Kalam
had about the project openly erupted in a public scandal. An article in The
Telegraph in July 2010 reported that a prominent state politician described the
plant as
… a ‘useless sleeping lion’ and demanded in the Assembly today to dismantle the project. The price
of the fuel has gone up to Rs 35.95 per litre, making it impossible for the government to operate the
plant. Whoever formulated the project did so to ruin Manipur and responsibility should be fixed.
‘What kind of project is this?’2

Dr Kalam had been keenly aware for some time of the need for greater
integration of the north-east with the rest of India. He felt that the people of this
geographically and politically isolated region needed more of a voice in the halls
of power; further, that their potential had been routinely overlooked. With this in
mind, he invited Anil Mangotra of the 1978 IAS batch from the Manipur-Tripura
cadre to the presidential secretariat. Mangotra had a sound understanding of
problems of the north-eastern states, and provided the president with worthwhile

insights. He was very candid in proposing that the data and information on the
region were not sufficiently analysed and communicated between the region and
the Centre, contributing to further misinformation, mismanagement and
alienation.
The history of these reaches of the subcontinent had been characterized by a
divide between the Central government and its people. The colonial rulers took
nearly a century to annex the entire region, and administered the hills as a loose
‘frontier area’. The result was that large parts of the north-eastern hill areas
never became acquainted with the principle of a central administration. The
allegiance to the newly formed Indian nation state that was somewhat halfhearted from the beginning was further diminished by the creation of East
Pakistan, which engendered the loss of a major chunk of the physical connection
between mainland India and north-east India. Mangotra pointed out that 99 per
cent of the north-east’s boundaries is international borders.
Dr Kalam felt that although the conflict in the region is ostensibly based on
complex political and economic issues such as the struggle over natural
resources, migration-related issues, displacement, social exclusion and so forth,
the politics of identity should not be overlooked. He saw identity itself as lying
at the heart of the problems of the north-east, and believed that this must be
addressed along with the other extant issues. He said that our leaders must reach
out to the different ethnic groups there and hold the hands of their leaders like
brothers and sisters, not treat them as colonial subjects.
Unfortunately, the approach of the Centre has been not dissimilar to that of a
bewildered colonial ruler. With widespread ignorance of the region, the official
modus operandi for dealing with its ills seems to have been either to pump in
money or send in the army. The prevailing thought in New Delhi is that if there
is economic development, all problems will disappear. But the generic
challenges of governance in India – weak institutions, rampant graft and
wasteful centralized planning – have made development elusive in Manipur.
On the long return flight from Imphal to Delhi, Dr Kalam told me we were
not created to live our lives by ourselves. We were not given a sentence of
solitary confinement and placed in a world of isolation. From the moment we
enter this human experience, it is clear there is a world waiting to be discovered
– people, creatures and experiences that are there for our interaction. And the

spark inside us often has to be spoken to, to be touched by the soul of another.
He felt that in a broad sense, the problems of the north-east relate to isolation
and a dearth of meaningful interaction – the cause of many of man’s conflicts.
The north-east policy of the Centre was not just unfocused; it lacked any vision
or understanding.
Dr Kalam returned to the north-east soon afterwards to address the National
Symposium on Biodiversity at Shillong on 25 October 2002. Armed with a
sound understanding of the region by now, and having developed the contour of
his vision for the region, Dr Kalam gave a powerful mantra to the large gathering
of scientists who arrived from all over the country. He could just as easily have
articulated this at Anna University as professor of technology and societal
transformation:
Technology is the most non-linear tool that can effect the most fundamental changes in the ground
rules of economic competitiveness. Science is linked to technology through applications.
Technology is linked to the economy and environment through manufacturing. The economy and
environment link technology to society. So there is an integrated relationship between science,
technology, environment, manufacturing and society.3

Dr Kalam pointed out that India ranked among the top few nations in terms of
having a rich biodiversity. Particularly in the herbal area, there were potential
applications for developing a myriad of products for nutrition, and prevention
and cure of diseases. Of the global herbal product market of USD 61 billion,
China had a share of around USD 3 billion, whereas India’s share was not even
USD 0.1 billion. Dr Kalam pointed out that there was tremendous opportunity
for growth in this area. It could only be achieved, however, if peace returned to
the region, if scientists could come and work in the north-east without fear, if
industries could set up their factories – and if investors bring in their money. It
had to be done by the private sector, with full participation of the people living
here. Setting up a furnace oil plant to generate power or installing a MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) machine in a hospital where the X-ray machine
does not work to ‘utilize’ the budget can’t be termed development. Such
practices are indeed an insult to the sensibilities of the people of this region.
After his lecture in Shillong, President Kalam visited Nagaland. He first
landed in Tuensang and then went to Kohima to attend a civic reception at

Khuzama Public Ground. Before addressing the massive crowd there, Dr Kalam
met Khuzama Village Council members. Soon after the programme ended, he
chose to walk through the milling crowd, avoiding the VVIP car waiting for him
in front of the rostrum, interacting with the schoolchildren eagerly waiting for
him across the road at their small school compound.
Governor Shyamal Datta and Chief Minister S.C. Jamir were the president’s
constant companions on this visit. While interacting with the schoolchildren at
Khuzama, he urged them to do their part to turn India into a developed and
powerful nation. In this way, he was igniting their will for transformation, just as
he had intended to do in his duties at Anna University. Assuming the mantle of
president of the country had only made his campus of students immeasurably
larger. And here, he became a role model to many young Naga students, who
were thrilled to freely and frankly talk with him, sitting little more than an arm’s
length away from him. It was this unassuming manner of Dr Kalam that would
endear him to the people of the country in general and children and students in
particular. Chief Minister Jamir would recall this in his reminiscences years
later:
We reached the village and he went straight to the school. He interacted with the students and
teachers for hours. He had questions, some plain and simple, and some really peculiar, which
seemed ordinarily extraordinary. In the beginning, the students were overawed by the enormity of
the occasion. However, as seconds rolled into minutes and minutes into hours, the students, younger
and older, were somehow trapped into believing that they were NOT interacting with the President
of India, rather they were with a friend, a very intimate and learned one! During the session, ideas
were exchanged, intricate questions raised and answered.4

Dr Kalam expressed his thorough satisfaction that the village council comprised
a teachers’ representative, a parents’ representative, a village representative and a
government official. It was a sort of check-and-balance way of ensuring student
attendance, teachers’ presence, quality work for infrastructure and overall
improvement. It was this kind of self-empowered approach that Dr Kalam
favoured as a model for the nation’s growth, and it relied on participation,
forward thinking, a common purpose and the willingness to believe in human
potential.
At a civic reception in the evening, a very pleased Jamir warmly addressed
President Kalam as the ‘Father of Nagaland’. Everybody gave a standing

ovation, and it took a while for the applause to subside. When Dr Kalam’s turn
came to speak, he said, ‘We all are the children of Mother India,’ and called
Jamir his beloved brother. This was what was needed; and it was here that the
Centre had been failing.
Upon his return to Delhi, President Kalam shared this experience with Prime
Minister Vajpayee. He told that him that neither Smt. Indira Gandhi nor Rajiv
Gandhi had ever visited Kohima as prime minister and urged him to visit
Nagaland, which he did on 28 October 2003. During Prime Minister Vajpayee’s
visit, he not only recognized the ‘unique history’ of the Nagas, but also admitted
that mistakes had been made by the government. Moreover, he expressed his
sorrow for the needless spilling of blood in the state.
In November 2002, President Kalam participated in the celebrations of the
1950th anniversary of the arrival of St Thomas and the 450th death anniversary
of St Francis Xavier at Kochi in Kerala. He later spoke of his affinity with the
divine in all world religions:
Celebrations connected with any religion to my mind have a special significance. This is basically
because all religions in their true form are one and the same. All are based on truth, fellow feeling,
humility and the greatness of life in any form. It is people like us who have made religion
subservient to our own selfish ends, corrupting religions from their pristine pure form to those that
suit us, for our own specific purposes.5

St Thomas was one of the twelve disciples of Jesus. After Jesus Christ rose from
the dead and came to the other disciples, St Thomas was not there. And he did
not believe the others when they said that they had seen Jesus Christ. St Thomas
said he wanted to see Jesus for himself before he would believe the good news.
So Jesus Christ appeared to him and showed St Thomas his hands and sides,
which had holes in them from his crucifixion. St Thomas is said to have
exclaimed aloud, ‘My Lord and My God’, and spent the rest of his life telling the
good news to all in faraway parts of the world.
St Thomas is believed to have brought Christianity to India more than 1950
years ago, which in due course became one of several major religions followed
by Indians. St Francis Xavier, born in 1506 in the Spanish kingdom of Navarre,
came to Goa in 1542 and went on from there to Kanyakumari. According to the
legend, St Francis spent three years working among the pearl fishers or Paravas.

He brought with him nothing but his all-consuming love for God and for the
souls of his fellow men.
Dr Kalam never took any interest in the quibbling and controversies that
might cloud the perception of any religion. He always celebrated the positive
contribution that the believers of all religions had made to Indian society,
particularly in the fields of education and medicine. His own teachers had been
an eclectic mix of Hindus of various beliefs, Muslims of his own creed and
Christians of several denominations, and he felt all the more privileged for this.
Dr Kalam held that for a nation like India, which is rich in its unity of diversity,
the contributions made by each religion are to be looked upon with gratitude and
reverence.
Communal harmony and peace has been the mainstay of Kerala’s society and,
without exaggeration, the progressive state has been the envy of many on the
subcontinent. For millennia, the region was the gateway to India for foreign
seafarers, who brought new ideas and religions here. Perhaps this has facilitated
a more pluralist society. Unlike many other parts of India, schools and other
institutions here have catered for all those who resided in a particular area,
irrespective of their caste or religion. This contrasts with the tradition of
education in north India, where religious denominations founded exclusive
schools and other institutions. The state of Kerala has given to the rest of the
country a great lesson in tolerance and respect for diversity. Dr Kalam praised
Kerala’s excellence in universal education, and exhorted its people to continue to
show leadership to the rest of India in this area: ‘I appeal to the enlightened
people of Kerala to sustain and reinforce that great tradition, built assiduously on
these values from time immemorial and continue to be a beacon for the rest of
the country to follow. I have no doubt that with such a high level of education
and literacy in the state, my appeal will not fall on deaf ears. I am sure I shall not
be disappointed in my expectations.’
Dr Kalam spent twenty years of his life in Kerala. During this first visit here
as president of India, it was only natural that he opened up his heart and
celebrated the uniqueness of Kerala’s society. To him, the state was a model of
harmony and aspiration, with the people striving for a better future through hard
work and education. Those from Kerala may thus be seen pursuing careers in all
the states of India and indeed, many countries of the world.

On 18 November 2002, President Kalam launched a ‘bridging the digital
divide’ campaign called Akshaya. He also used this occasion to unveil his
knowledge society and national development visions, which he would expound
for the rest of his life. Dr Kalam always believed in the power of information
and communication technology. He saw that it could generate massive economic
growth, creating direct employment opportunities and transforming the entire
socio-political economy of India.
The Akshaya mission was aimed at making at least one person in every
family functionally IT literate, thereby making Kerala the first 100 per cent IT
literate state in the world. Under this project, the government would develop
multipurpose information technology centres within a 2-km radius of any
household through private sector participation. This was a groundbreaking
endeavour. It later transpired that these centres contributed to the employment of
more than 50,000 youths and attracted Rs 500 crore of investment to the state.
President Kalam declared that day that becoming a knowledge power within a
decade was a very important mission for the nation. While a knowledge society
has a two-dimensional objective of societal transformation and wealth
generation, a third dimension emerges when India has to transform into a
knowledge power. That day also marked the birth of an idea that would later
become the Aadhaar card. Seven years later, the Unique Identification Authority
of India (UIDAI) was set up by the Government of India. Dr Kalam was an early
proponent of the concept:
We need to take on a mission for bringing out a national citizen card for usage as a voter ID card, a
ration card, to operate a bank account and many other applications. The national citizen card/smart
card has to be an integrated approach from multiple departments and industries.6

Dr Kalam spoke at length on competitiveness and cited the report prepared by
the World Economic Forum that defined competitiveness as the ability of a
national economy to achieve sustained high rates of economic growth. As per
this definition, different countries were ranked as of April 2001. United States
ranked first, Singapore second, Australia eleventh, Taiwan eighteenth, China
thirty-third and India forty-first. As world competitiveness was decided by a
triangular combination of progressiveness of industry, technological
advancement and judicious governmental deregulation, an integrated approach

assimilating and adapting technology to local needs must be a national mission.
‘India must evolve such systems to improve its competitiveness in a global
marketplace and to be in the first ten countries in the globalized world,’ declared
the great visionary president. He was unequivocal in advocating India’s young
minds to effect this improvement:
Thinking is growth. Non-thinking is destruction of the individual or organization or the nation.
India has to have a second vision. Seventy per cent of India’s population is young. Only the vision
of the nation can ignite its young minds. The ignited mind empowered with knowledge is the most
powerful resource on the earth to bring about this transformation.7

The first three months of Dr Kalam’s presidency had brought in the fresh air of
hope and belief. He had successfully dispelled the gloom of communal violence,
not by preaching religious harmony but instead by providing a vision for the
country, to acquire knowledge and become an economic power in the globalized
world. Through his extensive travel in different parts of the country and by
meeting more than 100,000 people in the process, Dr Kalam had developed his
own insights into the challenges facing the country. He identified the root of
many of the nation’s ills as the people’s primordial identities, coupled with an
insecure mindset of holding on to one’s turf. He postulated that these had been
conditioned by centuries of invasions and colonial rule.