Birth of a Humanist

There is nothing I fear more than waking up without a programme that will help me bring a
little happiness to those with no resources, those who are poor, illiterate, and ridden with
terminal disease.
– Nelson Mandela
Anti-apartheid revolutionary and Nobel laureate

he 2001 Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development was
conferred upon Prof. Sadako Ogata of Japan, for her outstanding
contribution in alleviating the pain of millions of refugees all over the world. She
had been closely associated with the United Nations, in the area of human rights
and refugees. Professor Ogata protected and assisted millions of people who had
to leave their countries because of war, conflict and persecution.
Dr Kalam wanted to prepare well for this lecture. He called me for assistance.
We sat inside the bamboo hut erected by the artisans from Tripura. Why had the
history of the world been constantly ridden with conflict? No single century had
passed so far without a major war happening somewhere between two or more
groups of people. How did the imaginary lines of religion and national
boundaries come to be drawn?
Dr Kalam recalled his discussion with Governor Dave in Arunachal Pradesh.
There was no boundary between India and Tibet. They were living together as
two colours in a rainbow – different but not separated by any line. Then some
British official drew a line on the map. But outside, none of these lines tend to
exist. As soon as you rise a kilometre into the skies and look down upon the
earth, there are no national boundaries. Dr Kalam would say he never ceased to
be confounded by the proclivity of these imaginary lines to draw blood from
young soldiers. Furthermore, people are turned into refugees simply for being on

T

the wrong side of these lines. Dr Kalam wanted to start his lecture with this
thought but abandoned the idea after Nair sahib found it too radical for an
international forum.
President Kalam instead started his lecture with a quote from one of Professor
Ogata’s speeches:
‘The sources of security threats have emanated mostly from internal conflicts, most of the time
caused by historical rivalries and animosities among different ethnic, religious and social groups.’
The originators of these conflicts are mostly kings, priests and zealous ideologues. But the victims
are primarily the civilians – ordinary men, women and children.

A sea change in basic humanitarian and developmental thinking and action is
clearly called for. A realization was by now dawning on Dr Kalam that making
policies and ensuring budgets for schemes was not going to change much. It was
seven years since India 2020 was published, and he could see hardly any
progress. Dr Kalam saw this ceremony as a golden opportunity for a course
correction, and was, true to habit, quite candid in expressing what he felt the
country needed:
What we get from (Professor Ogata’s) message is: We should shed the differences in the name of
religion and caste and in the name of haves and have-nots. Then only the mission of transforming
our nation into a developed nation by 2020 will succeed.1

Where does socio-economic inequality hurt the poor most? Dr Kalam belonged
to that rare breed of men who willingly engage in hard, solid thinking. He stood
apart from the fraternity of people that are found in the corridors of power,
peddling quick fixes, easy answers and half-baked solutions. Nothing pains some
people more than having to think; but here Dr Kalam was thinking and caring for
the answers to alleviate the suffering he saw around him. Two events to which
Dr Kalam had been invited were like divine inspiration. It was almost as if they
had been preordained to satiate his thirst for answers.
First, President Kalam was invited to the convocation of the Nizam’s Institute
of Medical Sciences (NIMS) at Hyderabad on 26 November 2002. Prof. Kakarla
Subbarao was the director and vice chancellor of this deemed medical university.
Prof. Subbarao had played a leading role in compiling a report on ‘Healthcare in
India’ in Dr Kalam’s days as principal scientific adviser. The report underscored

the typical health problems facing Indian people and suggested possible
solutions. The expert team proposed the eradication of three major diseases –
tuberculosis, HIV and waterborne diseases – within the next decade. It also
highlighted the threats posed by cardiovascular diseases, neuropsychiatric
disorders, renal diseases and hypertension, gastrointestinal disorders, eye
disorders, genetic diseases and accidents and trauma.
Dr Kalam saw that there were two major streams of development involved in
addressing India’s health care deficiencies. First, we would have to greatly
augment our primary health care system, empower our secondary health care
system and integrate both with the tertiary care centres. Second, we should see
how the advancement in technology could be put to use to improve the
healthcare system of the country. These two efforts would make modern
medicine available and accessible. This would contribute to the nation’s
progress, as strong bodies and sound minds of its citizens are essential for
progress.
Dr Kalam said in this convocation address that the vision of providing
affordable and effective health care to the entire Indian population was much
beyond the capability of any individual, institution or organization. Massive
resources, both financial and in terms of human skills would be required. This
vision needs to be developed into multi-organizational missions leading to the
generation of thousands of goal-oriented projects. These projects would have to
be supported and nurtured not only by the government, but also by our industry
and philanthropic organizations. The most important ingredient of such a multiorganizational mission would be its leadership, which must be decentralized yet
interlinked. Institutions which undertake research on various technological
systems that are the tools for medical care, have to be fed with the latest clinical
knowledge. Dr Kalam made it abundantly clear, by giving a tangible instance
where indigenous medical technology had been successful, that this was no idle
talk:
I have just seen the indigenously developed digital Cath. Lab2 at the CARE hospital. It
demonstrates the success of multidisciplinary partnerships and technology integration … the
medico-technical knowledge must then go to the industries, which not only produce cost effective
medical products but also profit share to make them available to the poorest of the poor at no cost.3

Dr Kalam enjoyed the rare distinction of having initiated numerous major
projects that relied on bringing a diverse selection of people in different
organizations together. It was thought impossible earlier that government
organizations, academic institutions and industry could cooperate. Dr Kalam
pioneered this approach during the missile programme and then at the Society
for Biomedical Technology. He was now advocating this as the means of
effecting a health care revolution in India.
The rewards for these collaborations could be rich. The interface between
medical science, electronics, material science and engineering was facilitating
the development of new techniques, both investigative and curative. These had
provided the research worker with numerous tools to apply into the working of
various physiological functions, right down to the molecular levels.
Developments in biotechnology and molecular biology had made it possible not
only to design drugs with specific properties, but also to deliver them to the
specific sites in the body where they are most required. New imaging techniques
had now made it possible to obtain real-time images of the various organs at a
physiological and biological level. This would henceforth provide
comprehensive data, invaluable for selecting the most appropriate treatment for a
patient.
The second significant convocation for Dr Kalam was held a few days after
that of the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences. In December 2002, ICRISAT
(The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics) invited
President Kalam for its thirtieth anniversary celebrations. President Kalam was,
by this time, no longer seen as just a missile man. He was now seen more as a
scientist who was committed to using knowledge for advancing society,
particularly the marginalized poor. And his experiments in developing socially
useful spin-offs of defence technology had, at least in some sense, compensated
for his building of weapons. Dr William Dar, the Filipino director general of
ICRISAT, aptly expressed the enthusiasm that the public felt for their genial
scientist, social activist president: ‘Sir, we are doubly graced by this visit – not
only are you the head of state of this great country, you are also one of us – a
scientist! We at ICRISAT share and support your dream of a food-secure India.’4
President Kalam was given a tour of the Sat Venture, which exhibits samples
of the institute’s many facets. Dr Kalam showed great interest in ICRISAT’s

genetic resources collection and was fascinated by the pyramid of institute crops,
displaying from bottom to top the wild relatives, the farmer’s landraces, the
improved varieties and the hybrids. Another display which attracted President
Kalam’s attention was of photographs from the earthquake-affected areas of
Kachchh, where ICRISAT gave relief aid, chiefly in the form of seed to help
rebuild the area’s agriculture.
President Kalam said that every Indian must have the physical, economic,
social and environmental access to a balanced diet that includes the necessary
macro- and micronutrients and safe drinking water. He moreover stated that
everyone must have proper sanitation, environmental hygiene, primary health
care and education so as to lead a healthy and productive life. The president
highlighted the three interdependent dimensions: national or macro-level food
security, essentially amounting to the domestic availability of food; household
food security and individual food security. He said that while India had achieved
national food security, there is the unfinished agenda of ensuring the physical
and economic access to the available food by half of India’s population.
India produces and stocks more than enough food to feed its entire
population. Yet about 500 million people are food insecure. President Kalam was
at pains to point out that despite the green revolution launched in the late 1960s,
the country was home to one-fourth of the world’s population of hungry and
poor. In a manner that was consistent over many decades, he saw the
development of technology for empowering the poor as a means of social
upliftment:
Another question I wanted to share with you, wherever there are people below the poverty line there
is also the problem of the availability of water. It costs energy and money to bring water for
specialized agriculture to such dry areas. What are the agricultural technologies and water
conservation methodologies that can help uplift the people who are below the poverty line?5

Ably assisted by P.M. Nair, President Kalam was carefully choosing to connect
with the best organizations that were truly working for the benefit of poor people
and the marginalized sectors of society. When India gained Independence, the
general perception was that developmental efforts and social service activities
were purely the concern of the government. But as time passed, the
government’s role gradually diminished for various reasons and, appropriately,

came to be regarded as more or less regulatory. It was important that nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) came forward to weave a social safety net.
On 30 November 2002, President Kalam visited Wagholi Educational and
Rehabilitation Centre in Pune, an NGO that was indeed a harbinger of this
wholesome and welcome change in the philosophy of development.
Dr Kalam was instantly drawn to the sagacious Shantilalji Gulabchandji
Muttha, the chairman of Bharatiya Jain Sanghatana, Pune. When Dr Kalam
asked Mr Muttha how he became involved in this mission, he said that in 1993,
after the Latur earthquake, he initiated a programme to rehabilitate
schoolchildren in the area. This gave birth to the Wagholi Educational and
Rehabilitation Centre. He shifted 1,200 orphaned children of the fifth to tenth
standard from Latur to this school-cum-hostel, where they were nurtured through
to graduation. The same centre also accommodated schoolchildren from the
1997 Jabalpur earthquake. Dr Kalam liked his model of social service, disaster
management and permanent rehabilitation through quality education. He
congratulated the chairman, saying, ‘Mutthaji, you are a divine person.’
Dr Kalam had always maintained that for the success of any such venture, the
wholehearted cooperation and participation of the people affected were
absolutely essential. His happiness derived from his observation that the
Bharatiya Jain Sanghatana had helped the needy young children with full
participation of their community and other people in society who mattered. Not
only did Dr Kalam thereafter help provide them a nest to secure their childhoods,
he empowered them with wings to soar high in their lives. He was most
emphatic in his belief that the young would bring greatness to their country:
I have no doubt that the future of the nation is in the hands of the younger generation … They have
their dreams, their aspirations, their vision, their expectations and hopes of a prosperous and
developed India … Developing them into citizens who would be capable of translating such dreams
… is the noblest task that can be undertaken in nation building.6

President Kalam presented the National Award for the Welfare of Persons with
Disabilities at Vigyan Bhavan on 3 December 2002. The ceremony was held
next to the building where he had his office as principal scientific adviser. He
wanted to spend some time with his successor Dr R. Chidambaram in his old
office, but presidential protocol would not allow this.

In his lecture, President Kalam recalled that when he was working in Anna
University, he guided a doctoral research project to find a software–hardware
integrated solution to achieve near-normal functioning of the brain of mentally
challenged children. He said that when he saw some of the mentally challenged
children performing certain activities like singing and painting, he became
convinced that one day the convergence of information and communication
technology, medical electronics, biotechnology and mathematical simulation
could find a solution for their problems. He saw the potential of the disabled for
a happy, productive life, just as he saw potential in the normally abled in society:
I have been visiting various states and meeting children, people of all walks of life, including those
who are in hospitals with pain, disabled persons in special schools and organizations and mentally
challenged people. People with disabilities would definitely like to have a life like any other citizen
and participate in all social activities and employment.7

President Kalam predicted on this occasion that the Internet would play a major
role in rehabilitation measures for the disabled. He visualized a scenario in
which all disabled people become part of the Internet culture. They would have
access to information. Lack of access to the right information at the right time
has been a barrier for the disabled in their growth. The Internet would provide a
solution to these types of problems. He saw that online shopping and online
transactions to pay various government service departments would greatly help
the disabled to order their own lives.
Furthermore, Dr Kalam said the Internet would assist the disabled in having
virtual interactions with people. In their working lives, this would obviate the
necessity for physical mobility, which would be minimized or even eliminated
by virtual office concepts. People would be allowed to work from their homes
through computers and deliver their work output to their offices online. It is now
clear that Dr Kalam’s grasp of the potential of the Internet to better people’s lives
was uncannily accurate. One of his key strengths was, without question, to
visualize people and technology in all their potential.
World Human Rights Day, 10 December, is normally marked both by highlevel political conferences and meetings and by cultural events and exhibitions
dealing with human rights issues across the globe. The Nobel Peace Prize is
awarded every year on this day and on that day in 2002, Jimmy Carter, the

thirty-ninth president of the United States, won the prize.
President Kalam chose the occasion to roll out his Empowered Human Life
Vision in the function organized by the National Human Rights Commission. He
said that he had visited numerous states and met people from all walks of life,
including those who had been affected by communal clashes, poverty and
unemployment. He raised the question: Is the perception of human beings
different when viewed from an individual, national or global perspective? He
predicted that future wars were rarely going to occur between nations; they
would mostly involve smaller groups, often fighting proxy wars. Dr Kalam
asserted that human rights in this new scenario would suffer grievously, almost
beyond humanitarian comprehension. We can now see his sad prophecy coming
to pass in various parts of the world, particularly in the Middle East.
He further said that the world in the twenty-first century was beset by
international terrorism, and this was worse in some senses than the Kalinga war
and the two world wars. It threatened the entire human community; people
everywhere lived with constant fear and insecurity. He said that we had
repeatedly witnessed human rights violations in terrorist strikes: during the
World Trade Center attack, the attack on the Indian parliament, the Moscow
theatre siege, the Bali hotel bombing in Indonesia and several plane hijacks. And
ever more regularly, he stated, we saw mighty countries declaring war
unilaterally, ignoring the United Nations. In an emotionally charged voice, he
said,
What are we doing, the great creations of God? Is it any more possible to realize a society in which
a standard human being is a reality? Unlike in conventional wars, where war ethics have been
defined in the Geneva Conventions, in proxy wars there are no codes of conduct. Innocent lives get
caught in the crossfire and people are killed. Will the planet earth at any time see a no-war situation,
at least in the future? It is indeed a big question … With this background, can we evolve the
creation of a standard human being?8

I was sitting near the press block and could hear the hushed voices of
astonishment from the journalists. They were frantically scribbling on their
notepads. Later I heard one senior journalist declaring that he had never heard
such a passionate speech: ‘This man is really different!’
Dr Kalam spoke for around an hour, which gave the captivated audience

plenty of food for thought. No one present could harbour any illusion that he had
assumed his lofty position to savour its fruits. This was no born-to-rule denizen
of elevated company and sumptuous banquets, given to platitudes and selfcongratulation. His dissertation on the evolution of human society from an
agricultural to an industrial, information and the present-day knowledge society
enlightened those present, and astounded them in equal measure. His delivery
was a refreshing mix of one from a seer, university professor, scientist and
statesman, the likes of which had never been seen in high office in the country.
President Kalam had now bestowed on his presidency an aura of idealism and
vision, and his principles were reminiscent of those of Abraham Lincoln. He
declared, ‘Every citizen in the country has a right to live with dignity; every
citizen has a right to aspire for distinction. Availability of a large number of
opportunities to resort to just and fair means in order to attain that dignity and
distinction is what democracy is all about. That is what our constitution is all
about. And that is what makes life wholesome and worth living in a true and
vibrant democracy.’
The humanist Kalam was born that evening.