MY LIFE, during the Defiance Campaign, ran on two separate tracks: my work in the struggle and my livelihood as an attorney. I was never a fulltime organizer for the ANC; the organization had only one, and that was Thomas Titus Nkobi. The work I did had to be arranged around my
schedule as an attorney. In 1951, after I had completed my articles at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman, I went to work for the law firm of Terblanche &
Briggish. When I completed my articles, I was not yet a fully-fledged attorney, but I was in a position to draw court pleadings, send out summonses,
interview witnesses — all of which an attorney must do before a case goes to court.
After leaving Sidelsky, I had investigated a number of white firms — there were, of course, no African law firms. I was particularly interested in the
scale of fees charged by these firms and was outraged to discover that many of the most blue-chip law firms charged Africans even higher fees for
criminal and civil cases than they did their far wealthier white clients.
After working for Terblanche & Briggish for about one year, I joined the firm of Helman and Michel. It was a liberal firm and one of the few that
charged Africans on a reasonable scale. In addition, the firm prided itself on its devotion to African education, toward which they donated
handsomely. Mr. Helman, the firm’s senior partner, was involved with African causes long before they became popular or fashionable. The firm’s
other partner, Rodney Michel, a veteran of World War II, was also extremely liberal. He was a pilot, and years later helped fly ANC people out of
South Africa during the worst periods of repression. Michel’s only discernible vice was that he was a heavy smoker who puffed on one cigarette
after another all day long at the office.
I stayed at Helman and Michel for a number of months while I was studying for my qualification exam, which would establish me as a fully-fledged
attorney. I had given up studying for an LL.B. degree at the University of the Witwatersrand after failing my exams several times. I opted to take the
qualifying exam so that I could practice and begin to earn enough money to support my family. At the time, my sister was living with us, and my
mother had come to visit, and Evelyn’s wages as a nurse trainee plus my own paltry income were not enough to keep everyone warm and fed.
When I passed the qualification exam, I went to work as a fully-fledged attorney at the firm of H. M. Basner. Basner had been an African
Representative in the Senate, an early member of the Communist Party, and a passionate supporter of African rights. As a lawyer, he was a
defender of African leaders and trade unionists. For the months that I worked there, I was often in court representing the firm’s many African clients.
Mr. Basner was an excellent boss and as long as I got my work done at the firm he encouraged my political work. After the experience I gained
there, I felt ready to go off on my own.
In August of 1952, I opened my own law office. What early success I enjoyed I owed to Zubeida Patel, my secretary. I had met her when she had
gone to work at H. M. Basner as a replacement for an Afrikaans-speaking secretary, Miss Koch, who had refused to take my dictation. Zubeida
was the wife of my friend Cassim Patel, a member of the Indian Congress, and she was without any sense of color bar whatsoever. She had a wide
circle of friends, knew many people in the legal world, and when I went out on my own, she agreed to work for me. She brought a great deal of
business through the door.
Oliver Tambo was then working for a firm called Kovalsky and Tuch. I often visited him there during his lunch hour, and made a point of sitting in a
Whites Only chair in the Whites Only waiting room. Oliver and I were very good friends, and we mainly discussed ANC business during those lunch
hours. He had first impressed me at Fort Hare, where I noticed his thoughtful intelligence and sharp debating skills. With his cool, logical style he
could demolish an opponent’s argument — precisely the sort of intelligence that is useful in a courtroom. Before Fort Hare, he had been a brilliant
student at St. Peter’s in Johannesburg. His even-tempered objectivity was an antidote to my more emotional reactions to issues. Oliver was deeply
religious and had for a long time considered the ministry to be his calling. He was also a neighbor: he came from Bizana in Pondoland, part of the
Transkei, and his face bore the distinctive scars of his tribe. It seemed natural for us to practice together and I asked him to join me. A few months
later, when Oliver was able to extricate himself from his firm, we opened our own office in downtown Johannesburg.

“Mandela and Tambo” read the brass plate on our office door in Chancellor House, a small building just across the street from the marble statues of
Justice standing in front of the Magistrate’s Court in central Johannesburg. Our building, owned by Indians, was one of the few places where
Africans could rent offices in the city. From the beginning, Mandela and Tambo was besieged with clients. We were not the only African lawyers in
South Africa, but we were the only firm of African lawyers. For Africans, we were the firm of first choice and last resort. To reach our offices each
morning, we had to move through a crowd of people in the hallways, on the stairs, and in our small waiting room.
Africans were desperate for legal help in government buildings: it was a crime to walk through a Whites Only door, a crime to ride a Whites Only
bus, a crime to use a Whites Only drinking fountain, a crime to walk on a Whites Only beach, a crime to be on the streets past eleven, a crime not to
have a pass book and a crime to have the wrong signature in that book, a crime to be unemployed and a crime to be employed in the wrong place,
a crime to live in certain places and a crime to have no place to live.
Every week we interviewed old men from the countryside who told us that generation after generation of their family had worked a scraggly piece
of land from which they were now being evicted. Every week we interviewed old women who brewed African beer as a way to supplement their tiny
incomes, who now faced jail terms and fines they could not afford to pay. Every week we interviewed people who had lived in the same house for
decades only to find that it was now declared a white area and they had to leave without any recompense at all. Every day we heard and saw the
thousands of humiliations that ordinary Africans confronted every day of their lives.

Oliver had a prodigious capacity for work. He spent a great deal of time with each client, not so much for professional reasons but because he was
a man of limitless compassion and patience. He became involved in his clients’ cases and in their lives. He was touched by the plight of the
masses as a whole and by each and every individual.
I realized quickly what Mandela and Tambo meant to ordinary Africans. It was a place where they could come and find a sympathetic ear and a
competent ally, a place where they would not be either turned away or cheated, a place where they might actually feel proud to be represented by
men of their own skin color. This was the reason I had become a lawyer in the first place, and my work often made me feel I had made the right
decision.
We often dealt with a half-dozen cases in a morning, and were in and out of court all day long. In some courts we were treated with courtesy; in
others we were treated with contempt. But even as we practiced and fought and won cases, we always knew that no matter how well we pursued
our careers as attorneys, we could never become a prosecutor, a magistrate, a judge. Although we were dealing with officials whose competence
was no greater than our own, their authority was founded on and protected by the color of their skin.
We frequently encountered prejudice in the court itself. White witnesses often refused to answer questions from a black attorney. Instead of citing

them for contempt of court, the magistrate would then pose the questions they would not answer from me. I routinely put policemen on the stand and
interrogated them; though I would catch them in discrepancies and lies, they never considered me anything but a “kaffir lawyer.”
I recall once being asked at the outset of a trial to identify myself. This was customary. I said, “I am Nelson Mandela and I appear for the
accused.” The magistrate said, “I don’t know you. Where is your certificate?” A certificate is the fancy diploma that one frames and hangs on the
wall; it is not something that an attorney ever carries with him. It would be like asking a man for his university degree. I requested that the magistrate
begin the case, and I would bring in my certificate in due course. But the magistrate refused to hear the case, even going so far as to ask a court
officer to evict me.
This was a clear violation of court practice. The matter eventually came before the Supreme Court and my friend George Bizos, an advocate,
appeared on my behalf. At the hearing, the presiding judge criticized the conduct of the magistrate and ordered that a different magistrate must
hear the case.
Being a lawyer did not guarantee respect out of court either. One day, near our office, I saw an elderly white woman whose motorcar was
sandwiched between two cars. I immediately went over and pushed the car, which helped free it. The English-speaking woman turned to me and
said, “Thank you, John” — John being the name whites used to address any African whose name they did not know. She then handed me a
sixpence coin, which I politely refused. She pushed it toward me, and again I said no thank you. She then exclaimed, “You refuse a sixpence. You
must want a shilling, but you shall not have it!” and then threw the coin at me, and drove off.
Within a year, Oliver and I discovered that under the Urban Areas Act we were not permitted to occupy business premises in the city without
ministerial consent. Our request was denied, and we received instead a temporary permit, under the Group Areas Act, which soon expired. The
authorities refused to renew it, insisting that we move our offices to an African location many miles away and virtually unreachable for our clients.
We interpreted this as an effort by the authorities to put us out of business, and occupied our premises illegally, with threats of eviction constantly
hanging over our heads.
Working as a lawyer in South Africa meant operating under a debased system of justice, a code of law that did not enshrine equality but its
opposite. One of the most pernicious examples of this is the Population Registration Act, which defined that inequality. I once handled the case of a
Coloured man who was inadvertently classified as an African. He had fought for South Africa during World War II in North Africa and Italy, but after
his return, a white bureaucrat had reclassified him as African. This was the type of case, not at all untypical in South Africa, that offered a moral
jigsaw puzzle. I did not support or recognize the principles in the Population Registration Act, but my client needed representation, and he had been
classified as something he was not. There were many practical advantages to being classified as Coloured rather than African, such as the fact
that Coloured men were not required to carry passes.
On his behalf, I appealed to the Classification Board, which adjudicated cases falling under the Population Registration Act. The board consisted
of a magistrate and two other officials, all white. I had formidable documentary evidence to establish my client’s case and the prosecutor formally
indicated that he would not oppose our appeal. But the magistrate seemed uninterested in both my evidence and the prosecutor’s demurral. He
stared at my client and gruffly asked him to turn around so that his back faced the bench. After scrutinizing my client’s shoulders, which sloped down
sharply, he nodded to the other officials and upheld the appeal. In the view of the white authorities those days, sloping shoulders were one
stereotype of the Coloured physique. And so it came about that the course of this man’s life was decided purely on a magistrate’s opinion about
the structure of his shoulders.
We tried many cases involving police brutality, though our success rate was quite low. Police assaults were always difficult to prove. The police
were clever enough to detain a prisoner long enough for the wounds and bruises to heal, and often it was simply the word of a policeman against
our client. The magistrates naturally sided with the police. The coroner’s verdict on a death in police custody would often read, “Death due to
multiple causes,” or some vague explanation that let the police off the hook.
Whenever I had a case outside Johannesburg, I applied to have my bans temporarily lifted, and this was often granted. For example, I traveled to
the eastern Transvaal, and defended a client in the town of Carolina. My arrival caused quite a sensation, as many of the people had never before
seen an African lawyer. I was received warmly by the magistrate and prosecutor, and the case did not begin for quite a while, as they asked me
numerous questions about my career and how I became a lawyer. The court was similarly crowded with curious townspeople.
In a nearby village I appeared for a local medicine man charged with witchcraft. This case also attracted a large crowd — not to see me, but to
find out whether the white man’s laws could be applied to a sangoma. The medicine man exerted tremendous power in the area, and many people
both worshipped and feared him. At one point, my client sneezed violently, causing a virtual stampede in the courtroom; most observers believed
he was casting a spell. He was found not guilty, but I suspect that the local people attributed this not to my skill as a lawyer, but to the power of the
medicine man’s herbs.
As an attorney, I could be rather flamboyant in court. I did not act as though I were a black man in a white man’s court, but as if everyone else —
white and black — was a guest in my court. When trying a case, I often made sweeping gestures and used high-flown language. I was punctilious
about all court regulations, but I sometimes used unorthodox tactics with witnesses. I enjoyed cross-examinations, and often played on racial
tension. The spectators’ gallery was usually crowded, because people from the township attended court as a form of entertainment.
I recall once defending an African woman employed as a domestic worker in town. She was accused of stealing her “madam’s” clothes. The
clothing that was allegedly stolen was displayed on a table in court. After the “madam” had testified, I began my cross-examination by walking over
to the table of evidence. I perused the clothing and then, with the tip of my pencil, I picked up an item of ladies’ underwear. I slowly turned to the
witness box brandishing the panties and simply asked, “Madam, are these . . . yours?” “No,” she replied quickly, too embarrassed to admit that they
were hers. Because of this response, and other discrepancies in her evidence, the magistrate dismissed the case.