IN THE SUMMER OF 1979, I was playing tennis in the courtyard, when my opponent hit a cross-court shot that I strained to reach. As I ran across
the court, I felt a pain in my right heel that was so intense I had to stop playing. For the next few days I walked with a severe limp.
I was examined by a doctor on the island who decided I should go to Cape Town to see a specialist. The authorities had become more solicitous
of our health, afraid that if we died in prison they would be condemned by the international community.
Although under normal circumstances I and the other men would relish a visit to Cape Town, going as a prisoner was altogether different. I was
handcuffed and kept in a remote corner of the boat surrounded by five armed warders. The sea was rough that day, and the boat shuddered at
every wave. About midway between the island and Cape Town, I thought we were in danger of capsizing. I spied a lifejacket behind two warders
young enough to be my grandsons. I said to myself, “If this boat goes under, I will commit my last sin on earth and run over those two boys to get that
lifejacket.” But in the end, it was unnecessary.
On the docks, we were met by more armed guards and a small crowd. It is a humiliating experience to watch the fear and disgust on ordinary
citizens’ faces when they watch a convict go by. My inclination was to duck down and hide, but one could not do that.
I was examined by a young surgeon who asked if I had ever before injured my heel. In fact, I had when I was at Fort Hare. One afternoon, I was
playing soccer when I attempted to steal the ball and felt a searing pain in my heel. I was taken to the local hospital, the first time in my life I had ever
been to a hospital or seen a doctor. Where I grew up, there was no such thing as an African doctor, and going to see a white doctor was unheard
of.
The Fort Hare doctor examined my heel and said he would need to operate. The diagnosis alarmed me, and I abruptly told him that I did not want
him to touch me. At that stage in my life I regarded seeing a doctor as unmanly and having a medical procedure seemed even worse. “Suit
yourself,” he said, “but when you are old this thing will worry you.”
The Cape Town surgeon X-rayed my heel and discovered bone fragments that had probably been there since Fort Hare. He said he could
remove them in a procedure that could be performed with a local anesthetic right in his office. I immediately agreed.
The surgery went well, and when it was over, the doctor was explaining to me how to care for my heel. He was abruptly interrupted by the head
warder, who said that I had to return immediately to Robben Island. The surgeon was incensed by this and in his most authoritative manner said that
it was necessary for Mr. Mandela to remain in hospital overnight and that he would not release me under any circumstances. The warder was
intimidated and acquiesced.
My first night in a proper hospital turned out to be quite pleasant. The nurses fussed over me a good deal. I slept very well, and in the morning, a
group of nurses came in and said that I should keep the pajamas and dressing gown that I had been given. I thanked them and told them that I
would be the envy of all my comrades.
I found the trip instructive in another way because in that hospital I sensed a thawing in the relationship between black and white. The doctor and
nurses had treated me in a natural way as though they had been dealing with blacks on a basis of equality all their lives. This was something new
and different to me, and an encouraging sign. It reaffirmed my long-held belief that education was the enemy of prejudice. These were men and
women of science, and science had no room for racism.
My only regret was that I did not have the opportunity to contact Winnie before I went into hospital. Rumors had appeared in newspapers that I
was at death’s door and she had become quite concerned. But when I returned, I wrote to her to dispel her fears.
* * *
In 1980, we were granted the right to buy newspapers. This was a victory, but as always, each new privilege contained within it a catch. The new
regulation stated that A Group prisoners were granted the right to buy one English-language newspaper and one Afrikaans newspaper a day. But
the annoying caveat was that any A Group prisoner found sharing his newspaper with a non–A Group prisoner would lose his newspaper
privileges. We protested against this restriction, but to no avail.
We received two daily newspapers: the Cape Times and Die Burger. Both were conservative papers, especially the latter. Yet prison censors
went through each of those newspapers every day with scissors, clipping articles that they deemed unsafe for us to see. By the time we received
them, they were filled with holes. We were soon able to supplement these papers with copies of the Star, the Rand Daily Mail, and the Sunday
Times, but these papers were even more heavily censored.

One story I was certainly not able to read was in the Johannesburg Sunday Post in March 1980. The headline was “FREE MANDELA!” Inside was
a petition that people could sign to ask for my release and that of my fellow political prisoners. While newspapers were still barred from printing my
picture or any words I had ever said or written, the Post’s campaign ignited a public discussion of our release.
The idea had been conceived in Lusaka by Oliver and the ANC, and the campaign was the cornerstone of a new strategy that would put our
cause in the forefront of people’s minds. The ANC had decided to personalize the quest for our release by centering the campaign on a single
figure. There is no doubt that the millions of people who subsequently became supporters of this campaign had no idea of precisely who Nelson
Mandela was. (I am told that when “Free Mandela” posters went up in London, most young people thought my Christian name was Free.) There
were a handful of dissenting voices on the island who felt that personalizing the campaign was a betrayal of the collectivity of the organization, but
most people realized that it was a technique to rouse the people.
The previous year I had been awarded the Jawaharlal Nehru Human Rights Award in India, another bit of evidence of the resurgence of the
struggle. I was of course refused permission to attend the ceremony, as was Winnie, but Oliver accepted the award in my absence. We had a
sense of a reviving ANC. Umkhonto we Sizwe was stepping up its sabotage campaign, which had become far more sophisticated. In June, MK set
off bombs at the vast Sasolburg refinery just south of Johannesburg. MK was orchestrating an explosion a week at some strategic site or another.
Bombs exploded at power stations in the eastern Transvaal, at police stations in Germiston, Daveyton, New Brighton, and elsewhere, and at the
Voortrekkerhoogte military base outside Pretoria. These were all strategically significant locations, places that would attract attention and worry the
state. The defense minister, General Magnus Malan, backed by P. W. Botha, introduced a policy known as “total onslaught,” which was a
militarization of the country to combat the liberation struggle.
The Free Mandela campaign had its lighter side as well. In 1981, I learned that the students at the University of London had nominated me as a
candidate for the honorific post of university chancellor. This was a wonderful honor, to be sure, and my rivals were none other than Princess Anne
and the trade union leader Jack Jones. In the end, I polled 7,199 votes and lost to the daughter of the queen. I wrote to Winnie in Brandfort that I

hoped the voting might have for a moment turned her humble shack into a castle, making its tiny rooms as grand as the ballroom at Windsor.
The campaign for our release rekindled our hopes. During the harsh days of the early 1970s, when the ANC seemed to sink into the shadows,
we had to force ourselves not to give in to despair. In many ways, we had miscalculated; we had thought that by the 1970s we would be living in a
democratic, nonracial South Africa. Yet as we entered the new decade my hopes for that South Africa rose once again. Some mornings I walked
out into the courtyard and every living thing there, the seagulls and wagtails, the small trees, and even the stray blades of grass, seemed to smile
and shine in the sun. It was at such times when I perceived the beauty of even this small, closed-in corner of the world, that I knew that someday my
people and I would be free.
