THE MAJOR EVENT facing the country in 1958 was the general election — “general” only in the sense that three million whites could participate,
but none of the thirteen million Africans. We debated whether or not to stage a protest. The central issue was: Did an election in which only whites
could participate make any difference to Africans? The answer, as far as the ANC was concerned, was that we could not remain indifferent even
when we were shut out of the process. We were excluded, but not unaffected: the defeat of the National Party would be in our interest and that of all
Africans.
The ANC joined with the other congresses and SACTU, the South African Congress of Trade Unions, to call a three-day strike during the
elections in April. Leaflets were distributed in factories and shops, at railway stations and bus stops, in beer halls and hospitals, and from house to
house. “THE NATS MUST GO!” was the main slogan of this campaign. Our preparations worried the government; four days before the election, the
state ruled that a gathering of more than ten Africans in any urban area was illegal.
The night before a planned protest, boycott, or stay-away, the leaders of the event would go underground in order to foil the police swoop that
inevitably took place. The police were not yet monitoring us around the clock and it was easy to disappear for a day or two. The night before the
strike, Walter, Oliver, Moses Kotane, J. B. Marks, Dan Tloome, Duma Nokwe, and I stayed in the house of Dr. Nthato Motlana, my physician, in
Orlando. Very early the next morning, we moved to another house in the same neighborhood where we were able to keep in touch by telephone
with other leaders around the city. Communications were not very efficient in those days, particularly in the townships where few people owned
telephones, and it was a frustrating task to oversee a strike. We dispatched men to strategic places around the townships to watch the trains,
buses, and taxis in order to determine whether or not people were going to work. They returned with bad news: the buses and trains were filled;
people were ignoring the strike. Only then did we notice that the gentleman in whose house we were staying was nowhere to be found — he had
slipped out and gone to work. The strike was shaping up as a failure.
We resolved to call off the strike. A three-day strike that is canceled on the first day is only a one-day failure; a strike that fails three days running
is a fiasco. It was humiliating to have to retreat, but we felt that it would have been more humiliating not to. Less than one hour after we had released
a statement calling off the strike, the government-run South African Broadcasting Corporation read our announcement in full. Normally, the SABC
ignored the ANC altogether; only in defeat did we make their broadcasts. This time, they even complimented us on calling off the strike. This greatly
annoyed Moses Kotane. “To be praised by the SABC, that is too much,” he said, shaking his head. Kotane questioned whether we had acted too
hastily and played into the state’s hands. It was a legitimate concern, but decisions should not be taken out of pride or embarrassment, but out of
pure strategy — and strategy here suggested we call off the strike. The fact that the enemy had exploited our surrender didn’t mean we were wrong
to surrender.
But some areas did not hear that the strike was called off, while others spurned our call. In Port Elizabeth, an ANC stronghold, and other areas of
the Cape, the response was better on the second and third days than the first. In general, however, we could not hide the fact that the strike was a
failure. As if that were not enough, the Nationalists increased their popular vote in the election by more than 10 percent.
We had heated discussions about whether we ought to have relied on coercive measures. Should we have used pickets, which generally prevent
people from entering their place of work? The hard-liners suggested that if we had deployed pickets, the strike would have been a success. But I
have always resisted such methods. It is best to rely on the freely given support of the people; otherwise, that support is weak and fleeting. The
organization should be a haven, not a prison. However, if the majority of the organization or the people support a decision, coercion can be used in
certain cases against the dissident minority in the interests of the majority. A minority, however vocal, should not be able to frustrate the will of the
majority.
In my own house, I attempted to use a different sort of coercion, but without success. Ida Mthimkhulu, a Sotho-speaking woman of my own age,
was then our house assistant. Ida was more a member of the family than an employee and I called her Kgaitsedi, which means “Sister” and is a
term of endearment. Ida ran the house with military efficiency, and Winnie and I took our orders willingly; I often ran out to do errands at her
command.
The day before the strike, I was driving Ida and her twelve-year-old son home, and I mentioned that I needed her to wash and press some shirts
for me the following day. A long and uncharacteristic silence followed. Ida then turned to me and said with barely concealed disdain, “You know very
well that I can’t do that.”
“Why not?” I replied, surprised by the vehemence of her reaction.
“Have you forgotten that I, too, am a worker?” she said with some satisfaction. “I will be on strike tomorrow with my people and fellow workers!”
Her son saw my embarrassment and in his boyish way tried to ease the tension by saying that “Uncle Nelson” had always treated her as a sister
not a worker. In irritation, she turned on her wellmeaning son and said, “Boy, where were you when I was struggling for my rights in that house? If I
had not fought hard against your ‘Uncle Nelson’ I would not today be treated like a sister!” Ida did not come to work the next day, and my shirts went
unpressed.