97
ON JULY 4, I was visited by General Willemse, who informed me that I was being taken to see President Botha the following day. He described the
visit as a “courtesy call,” and I was told to be ready to leave at 5:30 A.M. I told the general that while I was looking forward to the meeting, I thought it
appropriate that I have a suit and tie in which to see Mr. Botha. (The suit from the visit of the Eminent Persons Group had long since vanished.) The
general agreed, and a short while later, a tailor appeared to take my measurements. That afternoon I was delivered a new suit, tie, shirt, and shoes.
Before leaving, the general also asked me my blood type, just in case anything untoward should happen the following day.
I prepared as best I could for the meeting. I reviewed my memo and the extensive notes I had made for it. I looked at as many newspapers and
publications as I could to make sure I was up to date. After President Botha’s resignation as head of the National Party, F. W. de Klerk had been
elected in his place, and there was said to be considerable jockeying between the two men. Some might interpret Botha’s willingness to meet me
as his way of stealing thunder from his rival, but that did not concern me. I rehearsed the arguments that the state president might make and the
ones I would put in return. In every meeting with an adversary, one must make sure one has conveyed precisely the impression one intends to.
I was tense about seeing Mr. Botha. He was known as die Groot Krokodil — the Great Crocodile — and I had heard many accounts of his
ferocious temper. He seemed to me to be the very model of the old-fashioned, stiff-necked, stubborn Afrikaner who did not so much discuss
matters with black leaders as dictate to them. His recent stroke had apparently only exacerbated this tendency. I resolved that if he acted in that
finger-wagging fashion with me I would have to inform him that I found such behavior unacceptable, and I would then stand up and adjourn the
meeting.
* * *
At precisely 5:30 in the morning, Major Marais, the commander of Victor Verster, arrived at my cottage. He came into the lounge where I stood in
front of him in my new suit for inspection. He walked around me, and then shook his head from side to side.
“No, Mandela, your tie,” he said. One did not have much use for ties in prison, and I realized that morning when I was putting it on that I had
forgotten how to tie it properly. I made a knot as best I could and hoped no one would notice. Major Marais unbuttoned my collar, loosened and then
removed my tie, and then, standing behind me, tied it in a double Windsor knot. He then stood back to admire his handiwork. “Much better,” he
said.
We drove from Victor Verster to Pollsmoor, to the residence of General Willemse, where we were served breakfast by the general’s wife. After
breakfast, in a small convoy, we drove to Tuynhuys, the official presidential office, and parked in an underground garage where we would not be
seen. Tuynhuys is a graceful, nineteenth-century Cape Dutch-style building, but I did not get a proper look at it that day. I was essentially smuggled
into the presidential suite.
We took an elevator to the ground floor and emerged in a grand, wood-paneled lobby in front of the president’s office. There we were met by
Kobie Coetsee and Niel Barnard, and a retinue of prison officials. I had spoken extensively with both Coetsee and Dr. Barnard about this meeting,
and they had always advised me to avoid controversial issues with the president. While we were waiting, Dr. Barnard looked down and noticed that
my shoelaces were not properly tied and he quickly kneeled down to tie them for me. I realized just how nervous they were, and that did not make
me any calmer. The door then opened and I walked in expecting the worst.
From the opposite side of his grand office, P. W. Botha walked toward me. He had planned his march perfectly, for we met exactly halfway. He
had his hand out and was smiling broadly, and in fact, from that very first moment, he completely disarmed me. He was unfailingly courteous,
deferential, and friendly.
We very quickly posed for a photograph of the two of us shaking hands, and then were joined at a long table by Kobie Coetsee, General
Willemse, and Dr. Barnard. Tea was served and we began to talk. From the first, it was not as though we were engaged in tense political
arguments but a lively and interesting tutorial. We did not discuss substantive issues, so much as history and South African culture. I mentioned that
I had recently read an article in an Afrikaans magazine about the 1914 Afrikaner Rebellion, and I mentioned how they had occupied towns in the
Free State. I said I saw our struggle as parallel to this famous rebellion, and we discussed this historical episode for quite a while. South African
history, of course, looks very different to the black man than to the white man. Their view was that the rebellion had been a quarrel between
brothers, whereas my struggle was a revolutionary one. I said that it could also be seen as a struggle between brothers who happen to be different
colors.
The meeting was not even half an hour, and was friendly and breezy until the end. It was then that I raised a serious issue. I asked Mr. Botha to
release unconditionally all political prisoners, including myself. That was the only tense moment in the meeting, and Mr. Botha said that he was
afraid that he could not do that.
There was then a brief discussion as to what we should say if news of the meeting leaked out. We very quickly drafted a bland statement saying
that we had met for tea in an effort to promote peace in the country. When this was agreed upon, Mr. Botha rose and shook my hand, saying what a
pleasure it had been. Indeed, it had been. I thanked him, and left the way we had come.
While the meeting was not a breakthrough in terms of negotiations, it was one in another sense. Mr. Botha had long talked about the need to
cross the Rubicon, but he never did it himself until that morning at Tuynhuys. Now, I felt, there was no turning back.

A little more than a month later, in August 1989, P. W. Botha went on national television to announce his resignation as state president. In a
curiously rambling farewell address, he accused cabinet members of a breach of trust, of ignoring him and of playing into the hands of the African
National Congress. The following day, F. W. de Klerk was sworn in as acting president and affirmed his commitment to change and reform.
To us, Mr. de Klerk was a cipher. When he became head of the National Party, he seemed to be the quintessential party man, nothing more and
nothing less. Nothing in his past seemed to hint at a spirit of reform. As education minister, he had attempted to keep black students out of white
universities. But as soon as he took over the National Party, I began to follow him closely. I read all of his speeches, listened to what he said, and
began to see that he represented a genuine departure from his predecessor. He was not an ideologue, but a pragmatist, a man who saw change
as necessary and inevitable. On the day he was sworn in, I wrote him a letter requesting a meeting.
In his inaugural address, Mr. de Klerk said his government was committed to peace and that it would negotiate with any other group committed to
peace. But his commitment to a new order was demonstrated only after his inauguration when a march was planned in Cape Town to protest police
brutality. It was to be led by Archbishop Tutu and the Reverend Allan Boesak. Under President Botha, the march would have been banned,
marchers would have defied that ban, and violence would have resulted. The new president lived up to his promise to ease restrictions on political

gatherings and permitted the march to take place, only asking that the demonstrators remain peaceful. A new and different hand was on the tiller.