THE INITIAL HEARING was set for Monday, October 15, 1962. The organization had set up a Free Mandela Committee and launched a lively
campaign with the slogan “Free Mandela.” Protests were held throughout the country and the slogan began to appear scrawled on the sides of
buildings. The government retaliated by banning all gatherings relating to my imprisonment, but this restriction was ignored by the liberation
movement.
In preparation for Monday’s hearing, the Free Mandela Committee had organized a mass demonstration at the courthouse. The plan was to have
people line both sides of the road along the route my van would take. From press reports, conversations with visitors, and even the remarks of
prison guards, I learned that a large and vociferous turnout was expected.
On Saturday, while I was preparing myself for the Monday hearing, I was ordered to pack my things immediately: the hearing had been shifted to
Pretoria. The authorities had made no announcement, and had I not managed to get word out through a sympathetic jailer, no one would have
known that I had left Johannesburg.
But the movement reacted quickly, and by the time my case began on Monday morning, the Old Synagogue was packed with supporters. The
synagogue was like a second home to me after four years of the Treason Trial. My legal adviser, Joe Slovo, could not be present as he was
confined to Johannesburg by bans and I was ably assisted instead by Bob Hepple.

I entered the court that Monday morning wearing a traditional Xhosa leopard-skin kaross instead of a suit and tie. The crowd of supporters rose as
one and with raised, clenched fists shouted “Amandla!” and “Ngawethu!” The kaross electrified the spectators, many of whom were friends and
family, some of whom had come all the way from the Transkei. Winnie also wore a traditional beaded headdress and an ankle-length Xhosa skirt.
I had chosen traditional dress to emphasize the symbolism that I was a black African walking into a white man’s court. I was literally carrying on
my back the history, culture, and heritage of my people. That day, I felt myself to be the embodiment of African nationalism, the inheritor of Africa’s
difficult but noble past and her uncertain future. The kaross was also a sign of contempt for the niceties of white justice. I well knew the authorities
would feel threatened by my kaross as so many whites feel threatened by the true culture of Africa.
When the crowd had quieted down and the case was called, I formally greeted the prosecutor, Mr. Bosch, whom I had known from my attorney
days, and the magistrate, Mr. Van Heerden, who was also familiar to me. I then immediately applied for a two-week remand on the grounds that I
had been transferred to Pretoria without being given the opportunity of notifying my attorneys. I was granted a week’s postponement.
When I was on my way back to my cell, a very nervous white warder said that the commanding officer, Colonel Jacobs, had ordered me to hand
over the kaross. I said, “You can tell him that he is not going to have it.” This warder was a weak fellow, and he started trembling. He practically
begged me for it and said he would be fired if he did not bring it back. I felt sorry for him and I said, “Look, here, just tell your commanding officer
that it is Mandela speaking, not you.” A short while later Colonel Jacobs himself appeared and ordered me to turn over what he referred to as my
“blanket.” I told him that he had no jurisdiction over the attire I chose to wear in court and if he tried to confiscate my kaross I would take the matter
all the way to the Supreme Court. The colonel never again tried to take my “blanket,” but the authorities would permit me to wear it only in court, not
on my way to or from court for fear it would “incite” other prisoners.

When the case resumed a week later I was given permission to address the court before I was asked to plead. “I hope to be able to indicate,” I
explained, “that this case is a trial of the aspirations of the African people, and because of that I thought it proper to conduct my own defense.” I
wanted to make it clear to the bench, the gallery, and the press that I intended to put the state on trial. I then made application for the recusal of the
magistrate on the grounds that I did not consider myself morally bound to obey laws made by a Parliament in which I had no representation. Nor
was it possible to receive a fair trial from a white judge:
Why is it that in this courtroom I am facing a white magistrate, confronted by a white prosecutor, escorted by white orderlies? Can anybody honestly and seriously suggest that in
this type of atmosphere the scales of justice are evenly balanced? Why is it that no African in the history of this country has ever had the honor of being tried by his own kith and kin,
by his own flesh and blood? I will tell Your Worship why: the real purpose of this rigid color bar is to ensure that the justice dispensed by the courts should conform to the policy of
the country, however much that policy might be in conflict with the norms of justice accepted in judiciaries throughout the civilized world. . . . Your Worship, I hate racial
discrimination most intensely and in all its manifestations. I have fought it all my life. I fight it now, and I will do so until the end of my days. I detest most intensely the set-up that
surrounds me here. It makes me feel that I am a black man in a white man’s court. This should not be.

During the trial the prosecutor called more than one hundred witnesses from all over the country, including the Transkei and South West Africa.
They were policemen, journalists, township superintendents, printers. Most of them gave technical evidence to show that I left the country illegally
and that I had incited African workers to strike during the three-day stay-at-home in May 1961. It was indisputable — and in fact I did not dispute —
that I was technically guilty of both charges.
The prosecutor had called Mr. Barnard, the private secretary to the prime minister, to testify to the letter I had sent the prime minister demanding
that he call a national convention and informing him that if he did not, we would organize a three-day strike. In my cross-examination of Mr. Barnard I
first read the court the letter I sent requesting that the prime minister call a national convention for all South Africans to write a new nonracial
constitution.
NM: Did you place this letter before your prime minister?
WITNESS: Yes.
NM: Now was any reply given to this letter by the prime minister?
WITNESS: He did not reply to the writer.
NM: He did not reply to the letter. Now, will you agree that this letter raises matters of vital concern to the vast majority of the citizens of this country?
WITNESS: I do not agree.
NM: You don’t agree? You don’t agree that the question of human rights, of civil liberties, is a matter of vital importance to the African people?
WITNESS: Yes, that is so, indeed.
NM: Are these things mentioned here?
WITNESS: Yes, I think so.
NM: . . . You have already agreed that this letter raises questions like the rights of freedom, civil liberties, and so on?
WITNESS: Yes, the letter raises it.
NM: Now, you know of course that Africans don’t enjoy the rights demanded in this letter? They are denied these rights of government.
WITNESS: Some rights.

NM: No African is a member of Parliament?
WITNESS: That is right.
NM: No African can be a member of the provincial council, of the municipal councils.
WITNESS: Yes.
NM: Africans have no vote in this country?
WITNESS: They have got no vote as far as Parliament is concerned.
NM: Yes, that is what I am talking about, I am talking about Parliament and other government bodies of the country, the provincial councils, the municipal councils. They have no
vote?
WITNESS: That is right.
NM: Would you agree with me that in any civilized country in the world it would be scandalous for a prime minister to fail to reply to a letter raising vital issues affecting the majority of
the citizens of that country. Would you agree with that?
WITNESS: I don’t agree with that.
NM: You don’t agree that it would be irregular for a prime minister to ignore a letter raising vital issues affecting the vast majority of the citizens of that country?
WITNESS: This letter has not been ignored by the prime minister.
NM: Just answer the question. Do you regard it proper for a prime minister not to respond to pleas made in regard to vital issues by the vast majority of the citizens of the country?
You say that is wrong?
WITNESS: The prime minister did respond to the letter.
NM: Mr. Barnard, I don’t want to be rude to you. Will you confine yourself to answering my questions. The question I am putting to you is, do you agree that it is most improper on the
part of a prime minister not to reply to a communication raising vital issues affecting the vast majority of the country?

Mr. Barnard and I never did agree. In the end, he simply said that the tone of the letter was aggressive and discourteous and for that reason the
prime minister did not answer it.
* * *
Throughout the proceedings the prosecutor and the magistrate repeatedly inquired about the number of witnesses I intended to call. I would always
reply, “I plan to call as many witnesses as the state, if not more.” When the state finally concluded its case, there was a stillness in the courtroom in
anticipation of the beginning of my defense. I rose and instead of calling my first witness, I declared quite matter-of-factly that I was not calling any
witnesses at all, at which point I abruptly closed my case. There was a murmur in the courtroom and the prosecutor could not help exclaiming,
“Lord!”
I had misled the court from the beginning because I knew the charge was accurate and the state’s case was solid, and I saw no point in
attempting to call witnesses and defend myself. Through my cross-examination and attempts to force the judge to recuse himself, I had made the
statements I wanted about the unfairness of the court. I saw no advantage in calling witnesses to try to disprove something that was incontrovertible.
The magistrate was taken by surprise by my action and asked me with some incredulity, “Have you anything more to say?”
“Your Worship, I submit that I am guilty of no crime.”
“Is that all you have to say?”
“Your Worship, with respect, if I had something more to say I would have said it.”
The prosecutor then shuffled through his papers attempting to get ready for an address he did not expect to have to make. He briefly addressed
the court and asked the magistrate to find me guilty on both counts. The court was then adjourned until the following day, when I would have a
chance to address the court in what is known as the plea in mitigation before the magistrate gave his sentence.

The following morning, before court was called into session, I was in an office off the courtroom talking with Bob Hepple, who had been advising me
on the case, and we were praising the fact that the day before, the General Assembly of the U.N. had voted in favor of sanctions against South
Africa for the first time. Bob also told me that acts of sabotage in Port Elizabeth and Durban had occurred, both celebrating the U.N. vote and
protesting my trial. We were in the midst of this discussion when the prosecutor, Mr. Bosch, entered the room and then asked Bob to excuse
himself.
“Mandela,” he said, after Bob had left, “I did not want to come to court today. For the first time in my career, I despise what I am doing. It hurts me
that I should be asking the court to send you to prison.” He then reached out and shook my hand, and expressed the hope that everything would turn
out well for me. I thanked him for his sentiments, and assured him that I would never forget what he had said.
The authorities were on alert that day. The crowd inside the courtroom seemed even larger than on the first day of the case. All one hundred fifty
“non-European” seats were filled. Winnie was present, in Xhosa dress, as well as a number of my relatives from the Transkei. Hundreds of
demonstrators stood a block from the courthouse, and there seemed to be as many policemen as spectators.
When I walked in the courtroom, I raised my right fist and called out “Amandla!” which was met by a mighty “Ngawethu!” The magistrate pounded
his gavel and cried for order. When the court was quiet, he summed up the charges, after which I had my opportunity to speak. My plea in mitigation
lasted over an hour. It was not a judicial appeal at all but a political testament. I wanted to explain to the court how and why I had become the man I
was, why I had done what I had done, and why, if given the chance, I would do it again.
Many years ago, when I was a boy brought up in my village in the Transkei, I listened to the elders of the tribe telling stories about the good old days before the arrival of the white
man. Then our people lived peacefully, under the democratic rule of their kings and their amapakati [literally “insiders,” but meaning those closest in rank to the king], and moved
freely and confidently up and down the country without let or hindrance. The country was our own, in name and right. We occupied the land, the forests, the rivers; we extracted the
mineral wealth beneath the soil and all the riches of this beautiful country. We set up and operated our own government, we controlled our own arms and we organized our trade
and commerce. The elders would tell tales of the wars fought by our ancestors in defense of the Fatherland, as well as the acts of valor by generals and soldiers during these epic
days. . . .
The structure and organization of early African societies in this country fascinated me very much and greatly influenced the evolution of my political outlook. The land, then the
main means of production, belonged to the whole tribe and there was no individual ownership whatsoever. There were no classes, no rich or poor and no exploitation of man by
man. All men were free and equal and this was the foundation of government. Recognition of this general principle found expression in the constitution of the council, variously
called “Imbizo” or “Pitso” or “Kgotla,” which governs the affairs of the tribe. The council was so completely democratic that all members of the tribe could participate in its
deliberations. Chief and subject, warrior and medicine man, all took part and endeavored to influence its decisions. It was so weighty and influential a body that no step of any
importance could ever be taken by the tribe without reference to it.
There was much in such a society that was primitive and insecure and it certainly could never measure up to the demands of the present epoch. But in such a society are
contained the seeds of revolutionary democracy in which none will be held in slavery or servitude, and in which poverty, want and insecurity shall be no more. This is the history
which, even today, inspires me and my colleagues in our political struggle.

I told the court how I had joined the African National Congress and how its policy of democracy and nonracialism reflected my own deepest
convictions. I explained how as a lawyer I was often forced to choose between compliance with the law and accommodating my conscience.

I would say that the whole life of any thinking African in this country drives him continuously to a conflict between his conscience on the one hand and the law on the other. This is
not a conflict peculiar to this country. The conflict arises for men of conscience, for men who think and who feel deeply in every country. Recently in Britain, a peer of the realm, Earl
[Bertrand] Russell, probably the most respected philosopher of the Western world, was sentenced and convicted for precisely the type of activities for which I stand before you today
— for following his conscience in defiance of the law, as a protest against the nuclear weapons policy being pursued by his own government. He could do no other than to oppose
the law and to suffer the consequences for it. Nor can I. Nor can many Africans in this country. The law as it is applied, the law as it has been developed over a long period of
history, and especially the law as it is written and designed by the Nationalist government is a law which, in our views, is immoral, unjust, and intolerable. Our consciences dictate
that we must protest against it, that we must oppose it and that we must attempt to alter it. . . . Men, I think, are not capable of doing nothing, of saying nothing, of not reacting to
injustice, of not protesting against oppression, of not striving for the good society and the good life in the ways they see it.

I recounted in detail the numerous times the government had used the law to hamper my life, career, and political work, through bannings,
restrictions, and trials.
I was made, by the law, a criminal, not because of what I had done, but because of what I stood for, because of what I thought, because of my conscience. Can it be any wonder to
anybody that such conditions make a man an outlaw of society? Can it be wondered that such a man, having been outlawed by the government, should be prepared to lead the life
of an outlaw, as I have led for some months, according to the evidence before this court?
It has not been easy for me during the past period to separate myself from my wife and children, to say good-bye to the good old days when, at the end of a strenuous day at an
office I could look forward to joining my family at the dinnertable, and instead to take up the life of a man hunted continuously by the police, living separated from those who are
closest to me, in my own country, facing continually the hazards of detection and of arrest. This has been a life infinitely more difficult than serving a prison sentence. No man in his
right senses would voluntarily choose such a life in preference to the one of normal, family, social life which exists in every civilized community.
But there comes a time, as it came in my life, when a man is denied the right to live a normal life, when he can only live the life of an outlaw because the government has so
decreed to use the law to impose a state of outlawry upon him. I was driven to this situation, and I do not regret having taken the decisions that I did take. Other people will be driven
in the same way in this country, by this very same force of police persecution and of administrative action by the government, to follow my course, of that I am certain.

I enumerated the many times that we had brought our grievances before the government and the equal number of times that we were ignored or
shunted aside. I described our stay-away of 1961 as a last resort after the government showed no signs of taking any steps to either talk with us or
meet our demands. It was the government that provoked violence by employing violence to meet our nonviolent demands. I explained that because
of the government’s actions we had taken a more militant stance. I said that I had been privileged throughout my political life to fight alongside
colleagues whose abilities and contributions were far greater than my own. Many others had paid the price of their beliefs before me, and many
more would do so after me.
Before sentencing, I informed the court that whatever sentence the state imposed, it would do nothing to change my devotion to the struggle.
I do not believe, Your Worship, that this court, in inflicting penalties on me for the crimes for which I am convicted should be moved by the belief that penalties will deter men from
the course that they believe is right. History shows that penalties do not deter men when their conscience is aroused, nor will they deter my people or the colleagues with whom I
have worked before.
I am prepared to pay the penalty even though I know how bitter and desperate is the situation of an African in the prisons of this country. I have been in these prisons and I know
how gross is the discrimination, even behind the prison wall, against Africans. . . . Nevertheless these considerations do not sway me from the path that I have taken nor will they
sway others like me. For to men, freedom in their own land is the pinnacle of their ambitions, from which nothing can turn men of conviction aside. More powerful than my fear of the
dreadful conditions to which I might be subjected in prison is my hatred for the dreadful conditions to which my people are subjected outside prison throughout this country. . . .
Whatever sentence Your Worship sees fit to impose upon me for the crime for which I have been convicted before this court, may it rest assured that when my sentence has
been completed I will still be moved, as men are always moved, by their conscience; I will still be moved by my dislike of the race discrimination against my people when I come out
from serving my sentence, to take up again, as best I can, the struggle for the removal of those injustices until they are finally abolished once and for all. . . .
I have done my duty to my people and to South Africa. I have no doubt that posterity will pronounce that I was innocent and that the criminals that should have been brought
before this court are the members of the government.

When I had finished, the magistrate ordered a ten-minute recess to consider the sentence. I turned and looked out at the crowd before exiting the
courtroom. I had no illusions about the sentence I would receive. Exactly ten minutes later, in a courtroom heavy with tension, the magistrate
pronounced sentence: three years for inciting people to strike and two years for leaving the country without a passport; five years in all, with no
possibility of parole. It was a stern sentence and there was wailing among the spectators. As the court rose, I turned to the gallery and again made
a clenched fist, shouting “Amandla!” three times. Then, on its own, the crowd began to sing our beautiful anthem, “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika.” People
sang and danced and the women ululated as I was led away. The uproar among the gallery made me forget for a moment that I would be going to
prison to serve what was then the stiffest sentence yet imposed in South Africa for a political offense.
Downstairs, I was permitted a brief good-bye to Winnie, and on this occasion she was not at all grim: she was in high spirits and shed no tears.
She seemed confident, as much a comrade as a wife. She was determined to brace me. As I was driven away in the police van I could still hear the
people outside singing “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika.”
