IN LATE MAY of 1971, a number of men from SWAPO (the South-West African People’s Organization), an ally of the ANC fighting for
independence in Namibia, were brought to the isolation section. They were led by Andimba Toivo ja Toivo, a founder of SWAPO and a formidable
freedom fighter. We learned that they had embarked on a hunger strike to protest their isolation, and we immediately decided to join in. This
angered Badenhorst and the authorities who regarded this as unacceptable insubordination.
Late on the night of May 28, we were awakened by shouts and fierce knocking on our cell doors. “Get up! Get up!” the warders yelled. We were
ordered to strip and then line up against the wall of the courtyard. The warders were obviously drunk and were yelling and taunting us. They were led
by a sadistic fellow named Fourie, whom we privately called Gangster.
It was a bitterly cold night, and for the next hour, while we stood at attention naked and shivering, our cells were searched one by one. Warders
kept up their abuse for the entire time. Toward the end of the hour, Govan experienced severe chest pains and collapsed. This seemed to scare
Fourie, and he ordered us to return to our cells.
The warders searched high and low, and found nothing. But the search seemed only an excuse for Fourie’s sadistic impulses. Only later did we
learn that Fourie was reputed to have molested prisoners in the general section. The following day we discovered that the warders had brutally
beaten some general prisoners before they came to us, and afterward, assaulted Toivo ja Toivo, who hit back and knocked down the warder who
was beating him. Toivo was severely punished for this.
We filed a formal complaint about our treatment, but it was ignored. The incident stands out in my memory, but it was by no means unique;
incidents like it were the rule rather than the exception during Badenhorst’s command.

We were determined not to let conditions deteriorate entirely under Badenhorst. We smuggled messages to our people on the outside to agitate
for his dismissal. At the same time, we resolved to create a delegation among ourselves to see Badenhorst. We discussed this for months and
gradually decided on its composition; Walter and I represented the ANC, and each of the other parties had two representatives as well.
Badenhorst agreed to meet us, and at our parley we threatened work stoppages, go-slows, hunger strikes — every weapon at our disposal —
unless he reformed his ways and restored many of the privileges that he had rescinded. He merely said he would take what we said under
consideration. We regarded this confrontation as a victory, for he was wary of us and knew that we had alerted people on the outside of our
complaints. These efforts soon produced a response.
A few weeks later, we knew an important visit must be imminent because when it rained that day at the quarry we were allowed to take shelter
instead of continuing to work. The following day we were informed that a troika of judges were coming to the island. The authorities asked us to
nominate a spokesman to express our grievances, and I was chosen.
As I was preparing for my meeting with the judges, I was informed by a reliable source that a prisoner in the general section had recently been
severely beaten by a guard. The three judges were Justices Jan Steyn, M. E. Theron, and Michael Corbett of the Cape provincial division of the
Supreme Court. They were escorted by the commissioner of prisons, General Steyn, and accompanied by Colonel Badenhorst. I met them that day
outside, where we were working.
General Steyn introduced me to the judges and explained that I had been selected to represent the other prisoners. The judges then indicated
that as a matter of course they would talk with me privately. I replied that I had nothing to hide and that in fact I welcomed the presence of General
Steyn and the colonel. I could see that they were taken aback by my statement, and I added that it would be only proper for them to have the
opportunity to reply to my charges. The judges reluctantly acquiesced.
I began by recounting the recent assault in the general section. I told them the details that had been reported to me, the viciousness of the
beating, and the cover-up of the crime. I had barely begun to speak when I noticed Badenhorst shifting uncomfortably. When I had finished
describing the incident, Badenhorst interjected in a gruff, aggressive manner: “Did you actually witness this assault?” I replied calmly that I had not
but that I trusted the people who had told me of it. He snorted and wagged his finger in my face. “Be careful, Mandela,” he said. “If you talk about
things you haven’t seen, you will get yourself in trouble. You know what I mean.”
I ignored Badenhorst’s remarks and turned to the judges and said, “Gentlemen, you can see for yourselves the type of man we are dealing with
as commanding officer. If he can threaten me here, in your presence, you can imagine what he does when you are not here.” Judge Corbett then
turned to the others and said, “The prisoner is quite right.”
I spent the remainder of the meeting enumerating complaints about our diet, work, and studying. Inwardly Badenhorst must have been fuming, but
outwardly he seemed chastened. At the end of the session, the judges thanked me, and I bade them good-bye.
I have no idea what the judges said or did after the meeting, but over the next few months, Badenhorst seemed to have his hands tied. The
harshness abated, and within three months of the judges’ visit, we received word that Badenhorst was to be transferred.

A few days before Badenhorst’s departure, I was called to the main office. General Steyn was visiting the island and wanted to know if we had any
complaints. Badenhorst was there as I went through a list of demands. When I had finished, Badenhorst spoke to me directly. He told me that he
would be leaving the island, and added, “I just want to wish you people good luck.” I do not know if I looked dumbfounded, but I was amazed. He
spoke these words like a human being, and showed a side of himself we had never seen before. I thanked him for his good wishes, and wished
him luck in his endeavors.
I thought about this moment for a long time afterward. Badenhorst had perhaps been the most callous and barbaric commanding officer we had
had on Robben Island. But that day in the office, he had revealed that there was another side to his nature, a side that had been obscured but that
still existed. It was a useful reminder that all men, even the most seemingly cold-blooded, have a core of decency, and that if their heart is touched,
they are capable of changing. Ultimately, Badenhorst was not evil; his inhumanity had been foisted upon him by an inhuman system. He behaved
like a brute because he was rewarded for brutish behavior.