ONE DAY in the summer of 1965, we discovered some fat glistening on our porridge at breakfast and chunks of fresh meat with our pap at supper.
The next day some of the men received new shirts. The guards at the quarry and the warders in our section seemed a bit more deferential. All of us
were suspicious; in prison, no improvement happens without a reason. A day later we were notified that the International Red Cross would be
arriving the following day.
This was a crucial occasion, more important than any of our previous visitors. The Red Cross was responsible and independent, an international
organization to whom the Western powers and the United Nations paid attention. The prison authorities respected the Red Cross — and by
respected, I mean feared, for the authorities respected only what they were afraid of. The prison service distrusted all organizations that could affect
world opinion, and regarded them not as legitimate investigators to be dealt with honestly but as meddling interlopers to be hoodwinked if possible.
Avoiding international condemnation was the authorities’ principal goal.
In those early years, the International Red Cross was the only organization that both listened to our complaints and responded to them. This was
vital, because the authorities ignored us. Regulations required that the authorities provide some official procedure for acknowledging our
complaints. They did so, but only in the most perfunctory manner. Every Saturday morning, the chief warder would come into our section and call
out, “Klagtes en Versoeke! Klagtes en Versoeke!” (Complaints and Requests! Complaints and Requests!) Those of us with klagtes and versoeke
— which was nearly everyone — lined up to see the chief warder. One by one, we would make formal complaints about food, or clothing, or visits.
To each, the chief warder would nod his head and simply say, “Ja, ja,” and then, “Next!” He did not even write down what we said. If we tried to
speak for our organizations, the warders would yell, “No ANC or PAC here! Verstaan?” (Understand?)

Shortly before the Red Cross’s visit we had submitted a formal list of complaints to the commissioner of prisons. At the time we were only
permitted paper and pencil to write letters. We had secretly consulted with each other at the quarry and in the lavatory, and put together a list. We
submitted it to our chief warder, who did not want to take it and accused us of violating regulations by making such a list. One of our complaints to
the Red Cross would be that the authorities did not listen to our complaints.
On the day of their visit, I was called to the head office to meet with the Red Cross representative. That year, and for the following few years, the
representative was a Mr. Senn, a former director of prisons in his native Sweden who had emigrated to Rhodesia. Senn was a quiet, rather
nervous man in his mid-fifties who did not seem at all comfortable in his surroundings.
The meeting was not monitored, a critical difference from nearly all of our other visitors. He asked to hear all of our complaints and grievances,
and listened very carefully, taking extensive notes. He was very courteous and thanked me for all that I told him. Even so, that first visit was rather
tense. Neither of us yet knew what to expect from the other.
I complained quite vociferously about our clothing, affirming that we did not want to wear short trousers and needed proper clothing including
socks and underwear, which we were not then given. I recounted our grievances regarding food, visits, letters, studies, exercise, hard labor, and the
behavior of warders. I made certain requests I knew the authorities would never satisfy, such as our desire to be transferred to prisons nearer our
homes.
After our session, Senn met with the commissioner of prisons and his staff while I waited. I assumed that he relayed our complaints to the
authorities, indicating the ones he thought were reasonable. Not long after Senn’s visit our clothing did improve and we were given long trousers.
But Senn was not a progressive fellow by any means; his years in Rhodesia seemed to have acclimatized him to racism. Before I had returned to
my cell, I reminded him of our complaint that African prisoners did not receive bread. Mr. Senn appeared flustered, and glanced over at the colonel,
who was head of the prison. “Bread is very bad for your teeth, you know, Mandela,” Mr. Senn said. “Mealies are much better for you. They make
your teeth strong.”
In later years, the International Red Cross sent more liberal men who wholeheartedly fought for improvements. The organization also played a
critical role in an area that was less obvious but no less important to us. They often provided money to wives and relatives who would not otherwise
have been able to visit us on the island.

After we had been sent to Robben Island, there was concern among our supporters that we would not be permitted to study. Within a few months of
our arrival, the authorities announced that those who wanted to study could apply for permission. Most of the men did so and even though they were
D Group prisoners, permission was granted. The state, after the Rivonia Trial, was feeling confident and thought giving us study privileges would be
harmless. Later, they came to regret it. Postgraduate study was not permitted, but they made an exception in my case because I had established a
precedent when I was in Pretoria.
Very few of the men in our section had B.A.’s and many registered for university-level courses. Quite a few did not have high school degrees and
elected courses to qualify for that degree. Some of the men were already well educated, like Govan Mbeki and Neville Alexander, but others had
not gone past Standard V or VI. Within months, virtually all of us were studying for one degree or another. At night, our cell block seemed more like
a study hall than a prison.
But the privilege of studying came with a host of conditions. Certain subjects, such as politics and military history, were prohibited. For years, we
were not permitted to receive funds except from our families, so that poor prisoners rarely had money for books or tuition. This made the
opportunity to study a function of how much money one had. Nor were we permitted to lend books to other prisoners, which would have enabled our
poorer colleagues to study.
There was always controversy about whether or not we should accept study privileges. Some members of the Unity Movement at first felt that we
were accepting a handout from the government, which compromised our integrity. They argued that studying should not be a conditional privilege
but an unfettered right. While I agreed, I could not accept that we should therefore disavow studying. As freedom fighters and political prisoners, we
had an obligation to improve and strengthen ourselves, and study was one of the few opportunities to do so.
Prisoners were permitted to enroll at either the University of South Africa (UNISA) or Rapid Results College, which was for those studying for
their high school qualification. In my own case, studying under the auspices of the University of London was a mixed blessing. On the one hand I
was assigned the sorts of stimulating books that would not have been on a South African reading list; on the other, the authorities inevitably
regarded many of them as unsuitable and thus banned them.
Receiving books at all was often a challenge. You might make an application to a South African library for a book on contract law. They would

process your request and then send you the book by post. But because of the vagaries of the mail system, the remoteness of the island, and the
often deliberate slowness of the censors, the book would reach you after the date that it needed to be returned. If the date had passed, the warders
would typically send the book back without even showing it to you. Given the nature of the system, you might receive a late fine without ever having
received the book.
In addition to books, we were permitted to order publications necessary to our studies. The authorities were extremely strict about this, and the
only kind of publication that would pass muster might be a quarterly on actuarial science for a prisoner studying accounting. But one day, Mac
Maharaj told a comrade who was studying economics to request The Economist. We laughed and said we might as well ask for Time magazine,
because The Economist was also a newsweekly. But Mac simply smiled and said the authorities wouldn’t know that; they judged a book by its title.
Within a month, we were receiving The Economist and reading the news we hungered for. But the authorities soon discovered their mistake and
ended the subscription.
Once most of the men began to study, we complained that we did not even have the minimum facilities necessary for studying, such as desks
and chairs. I made this complaint to the International Red Cross. Finally, the authorities built in each cell a kind of stand-up desk, a simple wooden
board that jutted out from the wall at about chest-level.
This was not precisely what we had envisaged. After a tedious day at the quarry, one did not much feel like working at a stand-up desk. A
number of us complained about the desks, and Kathy was the most vociferous. He informed the commanding officer that not only was it an
imposition to have stand-up desks, but that they sloped so steeply that the books fell off. The commanding officer made a surprise visit to Kathy’s
cell, asked for a book, and plunked it on his desk. It did not move. He asked Kathy for another and placed it on top of the first one; again, nothing
happened. Finally, after placing four books on the desk, he turned to a sheepish Kathy and said, “Ag, there’s nothing wrong with these desks,” and
walked out. But about six months later, the authorities relented and we were given three-legged wooden stools and the stand-up desks were
lowered.

One complaint I voiced to the International Red Cross concerned the arbitrary way we were charged by the warders. To be “charged” meant that a
warder claimed that a prisoner had violated a specific regulation, which could be punished by isolation or by loss of meals and privileges. Warders
generally did not treat this lightly, for when a prisoner was charged he was allowed a judicial hearing and, depending on the seriousness of the
offense, a magistrate was brought in from Cape Town. At the time, the authorities were refusing to permit hearings. When I complained to the
International Red Cross about this, I had yet to experience the problem myself. But that situation was soon remedied.
On weekends, during our first year on the island, we were kept inside our cells all day except for a half hour of exercise. One Saturday, after
returning from exercise in the courtyard, I noticed that a warder had left a newspaper on the bench at the end of the corridor. He had become rather
friendly to us, and I assumed that he had not left the newspaper there by accident.
Newspapers were more valuable to political prisoners than gold or diamonds, more hungered for than food or tobacco; they were the most
precious contraband on Robben Island. News was the intellectual raw material of the struggle. We were not allowed any news at all, and we craved
it. Walter, even more than myself, seemed bereft without news. The authorities attempted to impose a complete blackout; they did not want us to
learn anything that might raise our morale or reassure us that people on the outside were still thinking about us.
We regarded it as our duty to keep ourselves current on the politics of the country, and we fought long and hard for the right to have newspapers.
Over the years, we devised many ways of obtaining them, but back then we were not so adept. One of the advantages of going to the quarry was
that warders’ sandwiches were wrapped in newspaper and they would often discard these newsprint wrappers in the trash, where we secretly
retrieved them. We would distract the warders’ attention, pluck the papers out of the garbage, and slide them into our shirts.
One of the most reliable ways to acquire papers was through bribery, and this was the only area where I tolerated what were often unethical
means of obtaining information. The warders always seemed to be short of money, and their poverty was our opportunity.
When we did get hold of a paper, it was far too risky to pass around. Possession of a newspaper was a serious charge. Instead, one person
would read the paper, usually Kathy or, later, Mac Maharaj. Kathy was in charge of communications, and he had thought of ingenious ways for us to
pass information. Kathy would go through the paper and make cuttings of relevant stories, which were then secretly distributed to the rest of us.
Each of us would write out a summary of the story we were given; these summaries were then passed among us, and later smuggled to the general
section. When the authorities were particularly vigilant, Kathy or Mac would write out his summary of the news and then destroy the paper, usually by
tearing it into small pieces and placing it in his ballie, which the warders never inspected.

When I noticed the newspaper lying on the bench, I quickly left my cell, walked to the end of the corridor, looked in both directions, and then plucked
the newspaper off the bench and slipped it into my shirt. Normally, I would have hidden the newspaper somewhere in my cell and taken it out only
after bedtime. But like a child who eats his sweet before his main course, I was so eager for news that I opened the paper in my cell immediately.
I don’t know how long I was reading; I was so engrossed in the paper that I did not hear any footsteps. Suddenly, an officer and two other warders
appeared and I did not even have time to slide the paper under my bed. I was caught black-and-white-handed, so to speak. “Mandela,” the officer
said, “we are charging you for possession of contraband, and you will pay for this.” The two warders then began a thorough search of my cell to see
if they could turn up anything else.
Within a day or two a magistrate was brought in from Cape Town and I was taken to the room at headquarters that was used as the island’s
court. In this instance, the authorities were willing to call in an outside magistrate because they knew they had an open-and-shut case. I offered no
defense, and was sentenced to three days in isolation and deprivation of meals.
I do not think that I was set up by the warder who left the newspaper on the bench, though some assumed I had been. At the hearing, the
authorities grilled me as to how I got the newspaper, and I refused to answer. If I had been railroaded, the authorities would have known how I’d
gotten it.

The isolation cells were in our same complex, but in another wing. Although just across the courtyard, they felt enormously distant. In isolation, one
was deprived of company, exercise, and even food: one received only rice water three times a day for three days. (Rice water is simply water in
which rice has been boiled.) By comparison, our normal ration of pap seemed like a feast.
The first day in isolation was always the most painful. One grows accustomed to eating regularly and the body is not used to being deprived. I
found that by the second day I had more or less adjusted to the absence of food, and the third passed without much craving at all. Such deprivation

was not uncommon among Africans in everyday life. I myself had gone without food for days at a time in my early years in Johannesburg.
As I have already mentioned, I found solitary confinement the most forbidding aspect of prison life. There is no end and no beginning; there is
only one’s own mind, which can begin to play tricks. Was that a dream or did it really happen? One begins to question everything. Did I make the
right decision, was my sacrifice worth it? In solitary, there is no distraction from these haunting questions.
But the human body has an enormous capacity for adjusting to trying circumstances. I have found that one can bear the unbearable if one can
keep one’s spirits strong even when one’s body is being tested. Strong convictions are the secret of surviving deprivation; your spirit can be full
even when your stomach is empty.

In those early years, isolation became a habit. We were routinely charged for the smallest infractions and sentenced to isolation. A man might lose
his meals for a sidelong glance or be sentenced for failing to stand when a warder entered the room. Some PAC prisoners, who often flouted the
rules simply for the sake of doing so, spent a great deal of time in isolation. The authorities believed that isolation was the cure for our defiance and
rebelliousness.
The second time I was charged and spent time in isolation occurred shortly after the first. As I have mentioned, we were having great difficulty
making our complaints heard. The remoteness of the prison made the authorities feel they could ignore us with impunity. They believed that if they
turned a deaf ear to us, we would give up in frustration and the people on the outside would forget about us.
One day we were working at the lime quarry when the commanding officer came to observe us, accompanied by a gentleman whom we at first
did not recognize. One of my colleagues whispered to me that it was Brigadier Aucamp from the Head Office, our commanding officer’s
commanding officer. (He is not to be confused with the Aucamp of Pretoria Local, who looked after us during the Rivonia Trial.) The two men stood
at a distance, watching us.
Aucamp was a short, heavyset fellow in a suit rather than a military uniform. He normally came to the island on biannual inspections. On those
occasions, we were ordered to stand at attention at the grille of our cells and hold up our prison cards as he walked by.
I decided that Aucamp’s unexpected appearance was a singular opportunity to present our grievances to the man who had the power to remedy
them. I put down my pick and began to walk over to them. The warders immediately became alarmed and moved toward me. I knew that I was
violating regulations, but I hoped the warders would be so surprised by the novelty of my action that they would do nothing to stop me. That proved
to be the case.
When I reached the two men, the commanding officer said bluntly, “Mandela, go back to your place. No one called you.” I disregarded him and
addressed Aucamp, saying I had taken this extraordinary action because our complaints were being ignored. The C.O. interrupted me: “Mandela, I
order you back to your place.” I turned to him and said in a measured tone, “I am here already, I will not go back.” I was hoping that Aucamp would
agree to hear me out, but he studied me coldly and then turned to the warders and said calmly, “Charge him.”
I continued to speak as the guards led me away. “Take him back to the cells,” the C.O. said. I was charged and, once again, I had no defense.
The punishment this time was four days in isolation. There was a lesson in what I had done, a lesson I already knew but had disobeyed out of
desperation. No one, least of all prison officials, ever likes to have his authority publicly challenged. In order to respond to me, Aucamp would have
had to humiliate his subordinate. Prison officials responded much better to private overtures. The best way to effect change on Robben Island was
to attempt to influence officials privately rather than publicly. I was sometimes condemned for appearing to be too accommodating to prison
officials, but I was willing to accept the criticism in exchange for the improvement.