BIRTHDAY CELEBRATIONS were bare-bones affairs on Robben Island. In lieu of cake and gifts, we would pool our food and present an extra
slice of bread or cup of coffee to the birthday honoree. Fikile Bam and I were born on the same date, July 18, and I would save a few sweets that I
had purchased at Christmas for the two of us to share on our mutual anniversary. My fiftieth birthday had passed without much notice in 1968, but in
1975, when I turned fifty-seven, Walter and Kathy approached me with a long-term plan that would make my sixtieth birthday more memorable.
One of the issues that always concerned us was how to keep the idea of the struggle before the people. During the previous decade, the
government had silenced most of the radical press, and there remained a prohibition on publishing the words or pictures of any banned or
imprisoned individuals. An editor could go to jail and his newspaper be shuttered for publishing so much as a snapshot of me or my colleagues.
One day, Kathy, Walter, and myself were talking in the courtyard when they suggested that I ought to write my memoirs. Kathy noted that the
perfect time for such a book to be published would be on my sixtieth birthday. Walter said that such a story, if told truly and fairly, would serve to
remind people of what we had fought and were still fighting for. He added that it could become a source of inspiration for young freedom fighters.
The idea appealed to me, and during a subsequent discussion, I agreed to go ahead.
When I decide to do something, I like to start immediately, and I threw myself into this new project. I adopted a rather unorthodox work schedule: I
would write most of the night and sleep during the day. During the first week or two, I would take a nap after dinner, awake at ten o’clock, and then
write until it was time for breakfast. After working at the quarry, I would then sleep until dinner, and the process would begin again. After a few
weeks of this, I notified the authorities that I was not feeling well and would not be going to the quarry. They did not seem to care, and from then on I
was able to sleep most of the day.
We created an assembly line to process the manuscript. Each day I passed what I wrote to Kathy, who reviewed the manuscript, and then read it
to Walter. Kathy then wrote their comments in the margins. Walter and Kathy have never hesitated to criticize me, and I took their suggestions to
heart, often incorporating their changes. This marked-up manuscript was then given to Laloo Chiba, who spent the next night transferring my writing
to his own almost microscopic shorthand, reducing ten pages of foolscap to a single small piece of paper. It would be Mac’s job to smuggle the
manuscript to the outside world.
The warders grew suspicious. They went to Mac and said, “What is Mandela up to? Why is he sitting up late at night?” But Mac merely shrugged
his shoulders and said he had no idea. I wrote rapidly, completing a draft in four months. I did not hesitate over choosing a word or phrase. I
covered the period from my birth through the Rivonia Trial, and ended with some notes about Robben Island.
I relived my experiences as I wrote about them. Those nights, as I wrote in silence, I could once again experience the sights and sounds of my
youth in Qunu and Mqhekezweni; the excitement and fear of coming to Johannesburg; the tempests of the Youth League; the endless delays of the
Treason Trial; the drama of Rivonia. It was like a waking dream and I attempted to transfer it to paper as simply and truthfully as I could.

Mac ingeniously hid the transcribed version of the manuscript inside the binding of a number of notebooks he used for his studies. In this way, he
was able to safeguard the entire text from the authorities and smuggle it out when he was released in 1976. The arrangement was that Mac would
secretly communicate when the manuscript was safely out of the country; only then would we destroy the original. In the meantime, we still had to
dispose of a five-hundred-page manuscript. We did the only thing we could do: we buried it in the garden in the courtyard. Surveillance in the
courtyard had become careless and sporadic. The warders usually sat in an office at the northern end talking among themselves. From that office,
they could not see the southern end next to the isolation area where there was a small garden. I had casually inspected this area on my early
morning walks, and it was there that I decided to bury the manuscript.
In order not to have to dig a great hole, we decided to bury the manuscript in three separate places. We divided it into two smaller segments and
one larger one, wrapped each in plastic, and placed them inside empty cocoa containers. The work would have to be done quickly, and I asked Jeff
Masemola to fashion some digging tools. Within a few days I was equipped with several sharp iron stakes.
One morning, after breakfast, Kathy, Walter, Eddie Daniels, and I drifted over to the garden at the southern end of the courtyard where we
appeared to be having a political discussion. We were each hiding portions of the manuscript in our shirts. At a signal from me, we dropped down
and began digging. I dug in the center, near a manhole cover that led to a drainpipe. When I reached the pipe, I carved out a space beneath it, and
it was there that I placed the largest of the three containers. The others dug two shallower holes for their portions.
We finished just in time to line up for our march to the quarry. As I walked that morning, I felt a sense of relief that the manuscript was safely
hidden. I then thought no more about it.

A few weeks later, just after our wake-up call, I heard a sound in the courtyard that made me uneasy: it was the thud of picks and shovels on the
ground. When we were allowed out of our cells for wash-up, I walked to the front of the corridor and managed to peer out the door and around the
corner. There, at the south end of the courtyard, was a work crew from the general section. To my alarm, they were digging in the area where the
manuscript was buried.
The authorities had decided to build a wall in front of the isolation section because they had discovered that the prisoners in isolation were able
to communicate with us in the courtyard. The work crew was digging a shallow trench for the concrete foundation of the wall.
While washing up I managed to inform Walter and Kathy about the digging outside. Kathy thought that the main part of the manuscript, which was
buried under the pipe, would probably be safe, but that the other two were vulnerable. When the drums of breakfast porridge were wheeled into the
courtyard, the warders commanding the work crew ordered the men out of the yard. This was done to prevent any fraternization with the political
prisoners.
With our bowls of porridge in hand, I led Walter and Kathy over to the south end of the courtyard as though I wanted to confer with them privately.
The beginnings of the trench were already perilously close to the two smaller containers. At the same time, we were joined by Eddie Daniels, who
immediately recognized the problem.
There was only one thing to do: as inconspicuously as possible, the four of us began digging in the area where the two smaller pieces of
manuscript would be. We managed to unearth the two containers rather quickly, and covered the area again with soil. To rescue the chunk of
manuscript under the pipe would require more time, but we were confident that they would not find the manuscript because they would not dislodge
the pipe in order to build the wall.
We hid the manuscript in our shirts as we walked back to our cells. Eddie was not going to the quarry that day, and we gave the containers to
him, instructing him to destroy them as soon as possible. At great personal risk, Eddie agreed to do so. I breathed easier knowing that we had

salvaged the two containers, and tried not to dwell on the remaining piece of manuscript as I worked that day.

When we returned from the quarry that afternoon, instead of washing up, which I normally did, I strolled over to the far end of the courtyard. I
attempted to appear as casual as possible, but I was alarmed by what I saw. The prisoners had dug a trench that ran parallel to the wall of the
isolation section and had actually removed the pipe altogether. They could not help but have uncovered the manuscript.
I must have flinched or reacted in some way that was noticeable. Unknown to me, I was being watched by a number of warders, who later said
that my reaction confirmed that I knew a manuscript had been there. I returned to the corridor to wash up and told Walter and Kathy that I suspected
the manuscript had been discovered. Eddie had meanwhile successfully disposed of the other two pieces.
Early the next morning, I was summoned to the office to see the commanding officer. Next to him stood a high prison official who had just arrived
from Pretoria. Without any greeting whatsoever, the commanding officer announced: “Mandela, we have found your manuscript.”
I did not reply. The commanding officer then reached behind his desk and produced a sheaf of papers.
“This is your handwriting, is it not?” he demanded. Again, I remained silent.
“Mandela,” the commander said in some exasperation. “We know this is your work.”
“Well,” I replied, “you must produce some proof of that.” They scoffed at this, and said they knew the notations in the margin were made by Walter
Sisulu and Ahmed Kathrada. Again, I said that they must furnish evidence if they were going to impose any penalties.
“We do not need evidence,” the commander said. “We have the evidence.”
Although he did not impose a penalty that day, a short while later, Walter, Kathy, and I were called before General Rue, the deputy commissioner
of prisons, who told us that we had abused our study privileges in order to illegally write the manuscript. For that offense, our study privileges were
being suspended indefinitely. As it turned out, we lost study privileges for four years.

After Mac was released in December, he sent the notebooks overseas to England. He spent the next six months under house arrest in South Africa
before slipping out of the country and going first to Lusaka to see Oliver, and then to London. He stayed there for six months; with a typist he
reconstructed the manuscript and put together a typescript. He then returned to Lusaka and presented Oliver with a copy.
From there, the trail grows cold. I heard nothing from Lusaka about the manuscript and still do not know precisely what Oliver did with it. Although
it was not published while I was in prison, it forms the spine of this memoir.