THE VILLAGE OF QUNU was situated in a narrow, grassy valley crisscrossed by clear streams, and overlooked by green hills. It consisted of no
more than a few hundred people who lived in huts, which were beehive-shaped structures of mud walls, with a wooden pole in the center holding up
a peaked, grass roof. The floor was made of crushed ant-heap, the hard dome of excavated earth above an ant colony, and was kept smooth by
smearing it regularly with fresh cow dung. The smoke from the hearth escaped through the roof, and the only opening was a low doorway one had to
stoop to walk through. The huts were generally grouped together in a residential area that was some distance away from the maize fields. There
were no roads, only paths through the grass worn away by barefooted boys and women. The women and children of the village wore blankets dyed
in ocher; only the few Christians in the village wore Western-style clothing. Cattle, sheep, goats, and horses grazed together in common pastures.
The land around Qunu was mostly treeless except for a cluster of poplars on a hill overlooking the village. The land itself was owned by the state.
With very few exceptions, Africans at the time did not enjoy private title to land in South Africa but were tenants paying rent annually to the
government. In the area, there were two small primary schools, a general store, and a dipping tank to rid the cattle of ticks and diseases.
Maize (what we called mealies and people in the West call corn), sorghum, beans, and pumpkins formed the largest portion of our diet, not
because of any inherent preference for these foods, but because the people could not afford anything richer. The wealthier families in our village
supplemented their diets with tea, coffee, and sugar, but for most people in Qunu these were exotic luxuries far beyond their means. The water
used for farming, cooking, and washing had to be fetched in buckets from streams and springs. This was women’s work, and indeed, Qunu was a
village of women and children: most of the men spent the greater part of the year working on remote farms or in the mines along the Reef, the great
ridge of gold-bearing rock and shale that forms the southern boundary of Johannesburg. They returned perhaps twice a year, mainly to plow their
fields. The hoeing, weeding, and harvesting were left to the women and children. Few if any of the people in the village knew how to read or write,
and the concept of education was still a foreign one to many.
My mother presided over three huts at Qunu which, as I remember, were always filled with the babies and children of my relations. In fact, I hardly
recall any occasion as a child when I was alone. In African culture, the sons and daughters of one’s aunts or uncles are considered brothers and
sisters, not cousins. We do not make the same distinctions among relations practiced by whites. We have no half brothers or half sisters. My
mother’s sister is my mother; my uncle’s son is my brother; my brother’s child is my son, my daughter.
Of my mother’s three huts, one was used for cooking, one for sleeping, and one for storage. In the hut in which we slept, there was no furniture in
the Western sense. We slept on mats and sat on the ground. I did not discover pillows until I went to Mqhekezweni. My mother cooked food in a
three-legged iron pot over an open fire in the center of the hut or outside. Everything we ate we grew and made ourselves. My mother planted and
harvested her own mealies. Mealies were harvested from the field when they were hard and dry. They were stored in sacks or pits dug in the
ground. When preparing the mealies, the women used different methods. They could grind the kernels between two stones to make bread, or boil
the mealies first, producing umphothulo (mealie flour eaten with sour milk) or umngqusho (samp, sometimes plain or mixed with beans). Unlike
mealies, which were sometimes in short supply, milk from our cows and goats was always plentiful.
From an early age, I spent most of my free time in the veld playing and fighting with the other boys of the village. A boy who remained at home
tied to his mother’s apron strings was regarded as a sissy. At night, I shared my food and blanket with these same boys. I was no more than five
when I became a herd-boy, looking after sheep and calves in the fields. I discovered the almost mystical attachment that the Xhosa have for cattle,
not only as a source of food and wealth, but as a blessing from God and a source of happiness. It was in the fields that I learned how to knock birds
out of the sky with a slingshot, to gather wild honey and fruits and edible roots, to drink warm, sweet milk straight from the udder of a cow, to swim in
the clear, cold streams, and to catch fish with twine and sharpened bits of wire. I learned to stick-fight — essential knowledge to any rural African
boy — and became adept at its various techniques, parrying blows, feinting in one direction and striking in another, breaking away from an
opponent with quick footwork. From these days I date my love of the veld, of open spaces, the simple beauties of nature, the clean line of the
horizon.
As boys, we were mostly left to our own devices. We played with toys we made ourselves. We molded animals and birds out of clay. We made
ox-drawn sleighs out of tree branches. Nature was our playground. The hills above Qunu were dotted with large smooth rocks which we transformed
into our own roller coaster. We sat on flat stones and slid down the face of the large rocks. We did this until our backsides were so sore we could
hardly sit down. I learned to ride by sitting atop weaned calves — after being thrown to the ground several times, one got the hang of it.
I learned my lesson one day from an unruly donkey. We had been taking turns climbing up and down its back and when my chance came I
jumped on and the donkey bolted into a nearby thornbush. It bent its head, trying to unseat me, which it did, but not before the thorns had pricked
and scratched my face, embarrassing me in front of my friends. Like the people of the East, Africans have a highly developed sense of dignity, or
what the Chinese call “face.” I had lost face among my friends. Even though it was a donkey that unseated me, I learned that to humiliate another
person is to make him suffer an unnecessarily cruel fate. Even as a boy, I defeated my opponents without dishonoring them.
Usually the boys played among themselves, but we sometimes allowed our sisters to join us. Boys and girls would play games like ndize (hideand-seek) and icekwa (touch-and-run). But the game I most enjoyed playing with the girls was what we called khetha, or choose-the-one-you-like.
This was not so much an organized game, but a spur-of-the-moment sport that took place when we accosted a group of girls our own age and
demanded that each select the boy she loved. Our rules dictated that the girl’s choice be respected and once she had chosen her favorite, she was
free to continue on her journey escorted by the lucky boy she loved. But the girls were nimble-witted — far cleverer than we doltish lads — and
would often confer among themselves and choose one boy, usually the plainest fellow, and then tease him all the way home.
The most popular game for boys was thinti, and like most boys’ games it was a youthful approximation of war. Two sticks, used as targets, would
be driven firmly into the ground in an upright position about one hundred feet apart. The goal of the game was for each team to hurl sticks at the
opposing target and knock it down. We each defended our own target and attempted to prevent the other side from retrieving the sticks that had
been thrown over. As we grew older, we organized matches against boys from neighboring villages, and those who distinguished themselves in
these fraternal battles were greatly admired, as generals who achieve great victories in war are justly celebrated.
After games such as these, I would return to my mother’s kraal where she was preparing supper. Whereas my father once told stories of historic
battles and heroic Xhosa warriors, my mother would enchant us with Xhosa legends and fables that had come down from numberless generations.
These tales stimulated my childish imagination, and usually contained some moral lesson. I recall one story my mother told us about a traveler who
was approached by an old woman with terrible cataracts on her eyes. The woman asked the traveler for help, and the man averted his eyes. Then
another man came along and was approached by the old woman. She asked him to clean her eyes, and even though he found the task unpleasant,
he did as she asked. Then, miraculously, the scales fell from the old woman’s eyes and she became young and beautiful. The man married her and
became wealthy and prosperous. It is a simple tale, but its message is an enduring one: virtue and generosity will be rewarded in ways that one
cannot know.

Like all Xhosa children, I acquired knowledge mainly through observation. We were meant to learn through imitation and emulation, not through
questions. When I first visited the homes of whites, I was often dumbfounded by the number and nature of questions that children asked of their
parents — and their parents’ unfailing willingness to answer them. In my household, questions were considered a nuisance; adults imparted
information as they considered necessary.
My life, and that of most Xhosas at the time, was shaped by custom, ritual, and taboo. This was the alpha and omega of our existence, and went
unquestioned. Men followed the path laid out for them by their fathers; women led the same lives as their mothers had before them. Without being
told, I soon assimilated the elaborate rules that governed the relations between men and women. I discovered that a man may not enter a house
where a woman has recently given birth, and that a newly married woman would not enter the kraal of her new home without elaborate ceremony. I
also learned that to neglect one’s ancestors would bring ill-fortune and failure in life. If you dishonored your ancestors in some fashion, the only way
to atone for that lapse was to consult with a traditional healer or tribal elder, who communicated with the ancestors and conveyed profound
apologies. All of these beliefs seemed perfectly natural to me.
I came across few whites as a boy at Qunu. The local magistrate, of course, was white, as was the nearest shopkeeper. Occasionally white
travelers or policemen passed through our area. These whites appeared as grand as gods to me, and I was aware that they were to be treated with
a mixture of fear and respect. But their role in my life was a distant one, and I thought little if at all about the white man in general or relations
between my own people and these curious and remote figures.
The only rivalry between different clans or tribes in our small world at Qunu was that between the Xhosas and the amaMfengu, a small number of
whom lived in our village. AmaMfengu arrived on the eastern Cape after fleeing from Shaka Zulu’s armies in a period known as the iMfecane, the
great wave of battles and migrations between 1820 and 1840 set in motion by the rise of Shaka and the Zulu state, during which the Zulu warrior
sought to conquer and then unite all the tribes under military rule. AmaMfengu, who were not originally Xhosa-speakers, were refugees from the
iMfecane and were forced to do jobs that no other African would do. They worked on white farms and in white businesses, something that was
looked down upon by the more established Xhosa tribes. But amaMfengu were an industrious people, and because of their contact with
Europeans, they were often more educated and “Western” than other Africans.
When I was a boy, amaMfengu were the most advanced section of the community and furnished our clergymen, policemen, teachers, clerks, and
interpreters. They were also amongst the first to become Christians, to build better houses, and to use scientific methods of agriculture, and they
were wealthier than their Xhosa compatriots. They confirmed the missionaries’ axiom, that to be Christian was to be civilized, and to be civilized
was to be Christian. There still existed some hostility toward amaMfengu, but in retrospect, I would attribute this more to jealousy than tribal
animosity. This local form of tribalism that I observed as a boy was relatively harmless. At that stage, I did not witness nor even suspect the violent
tribal rivalries that would subsequently be promoted by the white rulers of South Africa.
My father did not subscribe to local prejudice toward amaMfengu and befriended two amaMfengu brothers, George and Ben Mbekela. The
brothers were an exception in Qunu: they were educated and Christian. George, the older of the two, was a retired teacher and Ben was a police
sergeant. Despite the proselytizing of the Mbekela brothers, my father remained aloof from Christianity and instead reserved his own faith for the
great spirit of the Xhosas, Qamata, the God of his fathers. My father was an unofficial priest and presided over ritual slaughtering of goats and
calves and officiated at local traditional rites concerning planting, harvest, birth, marriage, initiation ceremonies, and funerals. He did not need to be
ordained, for the traditional religion of the Xhosas is characterized by a cosmic wholeness, so that there is little distinction between the sacred and
the secular, between the natural and the supernatural.
While the faith of the Mbekela brothers did not rub off on my father, it did inspire my mother, who became a Christian. In fact, Fanny was literally
her Christian name, for she had been given it in church. It was due to the influence of the Mbekela brothers that I myself was baptized into the
Methodist, or Wesleyan Church as it was then known, and sent to school. The brothers would often see me playing or minding sheep and come
over to talk to me. One day, George Mbekela paid a visit to my mother. “Your son is a clever young fellow,” he said. “He should go to school.” My
mother remained silent. No one in my family had ever attended school and my mother was unprepared for Mbekela’s suggestion. But she did relay
it to my father, who despite — or perhaps because of — his own lack of education immediately decided that his youngest son should go to school.
The schoolhouse consisted of a single room, with a Western-style roof, on the other side of the hill from Qunu. I was seven years old, and on the
day before I was to begin, my father took me aside and told me that I must be dressed properly for school. Until that time, I, like all the other boys in
Qunu, had worn only a blanket, which was wrapped around one shoulder and pinned at the waist. My father took a pair of his trousers and cut them
at the knee. He told me to put them on, which I did, and they were roughly the correct length, although the waist was far too large. My father then took
a piece of string and cinched the trousers at the waist. I must have been a comical sight, but I have never owned a suit I was prouder to wear than
my father’s cut-off pants.
On the first day of school, my teacher, Miss Mdingane, gave each of us an English name and said that from thenceforth that was the name we
would answer to in school. This was the custom among Africans in those days and was undoubtedly due to the British bias of our education. The
education I received was a British education, in which British ideas, British culture, British institutions, were automatically assumed to be superior.
There was no such thing as African culture.
Africans of my generation — and even today — generally have both an English and an African name. Whites were either unable or unwilling to
pronounce an African name, and considered it uncivilized to have one. That day, Miss Mdingane told me that my new name was Nelson. Why she
bestowed this particular name upon me I have no idea. Perhaps it had something to do with the great British sea captain Lord Nelson, but that
would be only a guess.
