THE MEETINGS had a positive effect: I was told in the winter of 1988 that President Botha was planning to see me before the end of August. The
country was still in turmoil. The government had reimposed a State of Emergency in both 1987 and 1988. International pressure mounted. More
companies left South Africa. The American Congress had passed a sweeping sanctions bill.
In 1987, the ANC celebrated its seventy-fifth anniversary and held a conference at the end of the year in Tanzania attended by delegates from
more than fifty nations. Oliver declared that the armed struggle would intensify until the government was prepared to negotiate the abolition of
apartheid. Two years before, at the ANC’s Kabwe conference in Zambia marking the thirtieth anniversary of the Freedom Charter, members of
other races were elected to the National Executive Committee for the first time, and the NEC pledged that no discussions with the government
could be held until all ANC leaders were released from prison.
Although violence was still pervasive, the National Party had never been stronger. In the white general election of May 1987, the Nationalists won
an overwhelming majority. Worse still, the liberal Progressive Federal Party had been replaced as the official opposition by the Conservative Party,
which was to the right of the Nationalists and campaigned on the theme that the government was too lenient with the black opposition.
Despite my optimism about the secret talks, it was a difficult time. I had recently had a visit from Winnie and I learned that 8115 Orlando West,
the house in which we had been married and which I considered home, had been burned down by arsonists. We had lost invaluable family records,
photographs, and keepsakes — even the slice of wedding cake Winnie was saving for my release. I had always thought that someday when I left
prison I would be able to recapture the past when looking over those pictures and letters, and now they were gone. Prison had robbed me of my
freedom but not my memories, and now I felt some enemies of the struggle had tried to rob me of even those.
I was also suffering from a bad cough that I could not seem to shake, and I often felt too weak to exercise. I had continued to complain about the
dampness of my cell, but nothing had been done about it. One day, during a meeting in the visiting area with my attorney, Ismail Ayob, I felt ill and
vomited. I was taken back to my cell, examined by a doctor, and I soon recovered. A few days later, however, I was in my cell after dinner when a
number of warders and a doctor arrived. The physician gave me a cursory examination, and then one of the warders told me to get dressed. “We
are taking you to hospital in Cape Town,” I was told. Security was tight; I went in a convoy of cars and military vehicles accompanied by at least a
dozen warders.

I was taken to Tygerberg Hospital, on the campus of the University of Stellenbosch, in a rich and verdant area of the Cape. As I later discovered,
they had nearly chosen a different facility because the authorities feared I might attract sympathetic attention at a university hospital. The warders
went in first and cleared everyone out of the entrance area. I was then escorted up to a floor that had been entirely emptied. The hall of the floor was
lined with more than a dozen armed guards.
While sitting on a table in the examining room, I was looked at by a young and amiable doctor who was also a professor at the university medical
school. He inspected my throat, tapped my chest, took some cultures, and in no time pronounced me fit. “There is nothing wrong with you,” he said
with a smile. “We should be able to release you tomorrow.” I was anxious not to be diverted from my talks with the government, so I was pleased
with his diagnosis.
After the examination, the doctor asked me if I would like some tea. I said I would and a few minutes later, a tall young Coloured nurse came in
with a tray. The presence of all the armed guards and warders so frightened her that she dropped the tray on my bed, spilling the tea, before
rushing out.

I spent the night in the empty ward under heavy guard. The first thing the next morning, even before I had breakfast, I was visited by an older doctor
who was head of internal medicine at the hospital. He was a no-nonsense fellow and had far less of a bedside manner than the cordial young
physician of the night before. Without any preliminaries, he tapped me roughly on my chest and then said gruffly, “There is water in your lung.” I told
him that the previous doctor had done tests and said I was fine. With a hint of annoyance, he said, “Mandela, take a look at your chest.” He pointed
out that one side of my chest was actually larger than the other, and said that it was probably filled with water.
He asked a nurse to bring him a syringe, and without further ado he poked it into my chest and drew out some brownish liquid. “Have you had
breakfast?” he said. No, I replied. “Good,” he said, “we are taking you to the operating theater immediately.” He told me I had a great deal of water
on my lung and he wanted to draw it out right away.
In the operating room I was given anesthesia, and the next thing I recalled was waking up in a room with the doctor present. I was groggy, but I
concentrated on what he said: he had removed two liters of water from my chest and when the liquid was analyzed, a tuberculosis germ had been
discovered. He said it was in the very early stages of the illness, and that the germ had done no damage to the lung. While full-blown tuberculosis
normally took six months to cure, he said, I should be better in two months. The doctor agreed that it was probably the damp cell that had helped
cause my illness.

I spent the next six weeks at Tygerberg recuperating and receiving treatment. In December, I was moved to the Constantiaberge Clinic, a luxurious
facility near Pollsmoor that had never had a black patient before. My first morning there, I had an early visit from Kobie Coetsee, who was
accompanied by Major Marais, a deputy commander responsible for looking after me. We had barely exchanged greetings when the orderly
brought in my breakfast.
Because of my recent illness and my history of high blood pressure, I had been put on a strict low-cholesterol diet. That order had apparently not
yet been conveyed to the clinic’s kitchen, for the breakfast tray contained scrambled eggs, three rashers of bacon, and several pieces of buttered
toast. I could not remember the last time I had tasted bacon and eggs, and I was ravenous. Just as I was about to take a delicious forkful of egg,
Major Marais said, “No, Mandela, that is against the orders of your physician,” and he reached over to take the tray. I held it tightly, and said, “Major,
I am sorry. If this breakfast will kill me, then today I am prepared to die.”

Once I was ensconced at Constantiaberge, I again began to meet with Kobie Coetsee and the secret committee. While I was still at the clinic
Coetsee said he wanted to put me in a situation that was halfway between confinement and freedom. While he did not spell out what this meant, I

had a notion of what he was talking about, and I merely nodded. I would not be so naïve as to consider his proposal to be freedom, but I knew that it
was a step in that direction.
In the meantime, the clinic was extremely comfortable and for the first time I actually enjoyed a hospital convalescence. The nurses — who were
white or Coloured, no black nurses were permitted — spoiled me; they brought extra desserts and pillows and were constantly visiting, even during
their time off.
One day, one of the nurses came to me and said, “Mr. Mandela, we are having a party tonight and we would like you to come.” I said I’d be
honored to attend, but that the authorities would undoubtedly have something to say about it. The prison authorities refused permission for me to
go, which nettled the nurses, and as a result, they decided to hold their party in my room, insisting they could not have their party without me.
That night, a dozen or so of these young ladies in party frocks descended on my room with cake and punch and gifts. The guards seemed
befuddled, but they could hardly consider these vivacious young girls a security risk. In fact, when one of the guards attempted to prevent some of
the nurses from entering my room, I jestingly accused him of being jealous of an old man receiving so much attention from such beautiful young
ladies.