THE MEETINGS with the committee continued, and we stalled on the same issues that had always prevented us from moving forward: the armed
struggle, the Communist Party, and majority rule. I was still pressing Coetsee for a meeting with P. W. Botha. By this time, the authorities permitted
me to have rudimentary communications with my comrades at Pollsmoor and Robben Island and also the ANC in Lusaka. Although I knew I was
going out ahead of my colleagues, I did not want to go too far ahead and find that I was all alone.
In January 1989, I was visited by my four comrades from Pollsmoor and we discussed the memorandum I was planning to send to the state
president. The memorandum reiterated most of the points I had made in our secret committee meetings, but I wanted to make sure the state
president heard them directly from me. He would see that we were not wild-eyed terrorists, but reasonable men.
“I am disturbed,” I wrote to Mr. Botha in the memorandum, sent to him in March, “as many other South Africans no doubt are, by the specter of a
South Africa split into two hostile camps — blacks on one side . . . and whites on the other, slaughtering one another.” To avert this and prepare the
groundwork for negotiations, I proposed to deal with the three demands made of the ANC by the government as a precondition to negotiations:
renouncing violence; breaking with the SACP; and abandoning the call for majority rule.
On the question of violence I wrote that the refusal of the ANC to renounce violence was not the problem: “The truth is that the government is not
yet ready . . . for the sharing of political power with blacks.” I explained our unwillingness to cast aside the SACP, and reiterated that we were not
under its control. “Which man of honour,” I wrote, “will desert a lifelong friend at the insistence of a common opponent and still retain a measure of
credibility with his people?” I said the rejection of majority rule by the government was a poorly disguised attempt to preserve power. I suggested he
must face reality. “Majority rule and internal peace are like the two sides of a single coin, and white South Africa simply has to accept that there will
never be peace and stability in this country until the principle is fully applied.”
At the end of the letter, I offered a very rough framework for negotiations.
Two political issues will have to be addressed; firstly, the demand for majority rule in a unitary state, secondly, the concern of white South Africa over this demand, as well as the
insistence of whites on structural guarantees that majority rule will not mean domination of the white minority by blacks. The most crucial tasks which will face the government and
the ANC will be to reconcile these two positions.

I proposed that this be done in two stages, the first being a discussion to create the proper conditions for negotiations, the second being the
actual negotiations themselves. “I must point out that the move I have taken provides you with the opportunity to overcome the current deadlock, and
to normalize the country’s political situation. I hope you will seize it without delay.”

But delay there was. In January, P. W. Botha suffered a stroke. While it did not incapacitate the president, it did weaken him and, according to his
cabinet, made him even more irascible. In February, Botha unexpectedly resigned as head of the National Party, but kept his position as state
president. This was an unparalleled situation in the country’s history: in the South African parliamentary system, the leader of the majority party
becomes the head of state. President Botha was now head of state but not of his own party. Some saw this as a positive development: that Botha
wanted to be “above party politics” in order to bring about true change in South Africa.
Political violence and international pressure continued to intensify. Political detainees all across the country had held a successful hunger strike,
persuading the minister of law and order to release over nine hundred of them. In 1989, the UDF formed an alliance with the Congress of South
African Trade Unions (COSATU) to form the Mass Democratic Movement (MDM), which then began organizing a countrywide “defiance campaign”
of civil disobedience to challenge apartheid institutions. On the international front, Oliver held talks with the governments of Great Britain and the
Soviet Union, and in January 1987 met with the U.S. secretary of state, George Shultz, in Washington. The Americans recognized the ANC as an
indispensable element of any solution in South Africa. Sanctions against South Africa remained in force and even increased.
Political violence also had its tragic side. As the violence in Soweto intensified, my wife permitted a group of young men to act as her
bodyguards as she moved around the township. These young men were untrained and undisciplined and became involved in activities that were
unbecoming to a liberation struggle. Winnie subsequently became legally entangled in the trial of one of her bodyguards who was convicted of
murdering a young comrade. This situation was deeply disconcerting to me, for such a scandal only served to divide the movement at a time when
unity was essential. I wholly supported my wife and maintained that while she had shown poor judgment, she was innocent of any serious charges.
That July, for my seventy-first birthday, I was visited at the cottage at Victor Verster by nearly my entire family. It was the first time I had ever had
my wife and children and grandchildren all in one place, and it was a grand and happy occasion. Warrant Officer Swart outdid himself in preparing
a feast, and he did not even get upset when I permitted some of the grandchildren to eat their sweets before their main course. After the meal, the
grandchildren went into my bedroom to watch a video of a horror movie while the adults stayed outside gossiping in the lounge. It was a deep, deep
pleasure to have my whole family around me, and the only pain was the knowledge that I had missed such occasions for so many years.
