WHEN I RETURNED to South Africa in July, after brief trips to Uganda, Kenya, and Mozambique, I requested a meeting with Mr. de Klerk. Violence
in the country was worsening; the death toll of 1990 was already over fifteen hundred, more than all the political deaths of the previous year. After
conferring with my colleagues, I felt it necessary to speed up the process of normalization. Our country was bleeding to death, and we had to move
ahead faster.
Mr. de Klerk’s lifting the State of Emergency in June seemed to set the stage for a resumption of talks, but in July, government security forces
arrested about forty members of the ANC, including Mac Maharaj, Pravin Gordhan, Siphiwe Nyanda, and Billy Nair, claiming that they were part of
a Communist Party plot called Operation Vula to overthrow the government. De Klerk called for an urgent meeting with me and read to me from
documents he claimed had been confiscated in the raid. I was taken aback because I knew nothing about it.
After the meeting I wanted an explanation and called Joe Slovo. Joe explained that the passages read by Mr. de Klerk had been taken out of
context and that Vula was a moribund operation. But the government was intent on using this discovery to try to pry the ANC from the SACP and
keep Joe Slovo out of the negotiations. I went back to Mr. de Klerk and told him that he had been misled by his own police and that we had no
intention of parting ways with the SACP or dropping Joe Slovo from our negotiating team.
In the middle of July, shortly before a scheduled meeting of the National Executive Committee, Joe Slovo came to me privately with a proposition.
He suggested we voluntarily suspend the armed struggle in order to create the right climate to move the negotiation process forward. Mr. de Klerk,
he said, needed to show his supporters that his policy had brought benefits to the country. My first reaction was negative; I did not think the time
was ripe.
But the more I thought about it, the more I realized that we had to take the initiative and this was the best way to do it. I also recognized that Joe,
whose credentials as a radical were above dispute, was precisely the right person to make the proposal. He could not be accused of being a dupe
of the government or of having gone soft. The following day I told Joe that if he brought up the idea in the NEC, I would support him.
When Joe raised the idea in the NEC the next day there were some who firmly objected, claiming that we were giving de Klerk’s supporters a
reward but not our own people. But I defended the proposal, saying the purpose of the armed struggle was always to bring the government to the
negotiating table, and now we had done so. I argued that the suspension could always be withdrawn, but it was necessary to show our good faith.
After several hours, our view prevailed.
This was a controversial move within the ANC. Although MK was not active, the aura of the armed struggle had great meaning for many people.
Even when cited merely as a rhetorical device, the armed struggle was a sign that we were actively fighting the enemy. As a result, it had a
popularity out of proportion to what it had achieved on the ground.
On August 6, in Pretoria, the ANC and the government signed what became known as the Pretoria Minute, in which we agreed to suspend the
armed struggle. As I was to say over and over to our followers: we suspended armed action, we did not terminate the armed struggle. The
agreement also set forth target dates for the release of political prisoners and the granting of certain types of indemnity. The process of indemnity
was scheduled to be completed by May 1991, and the government also agreed to review the Internal Security Act.
* * *
Of all the issues that hindered the peace process, none was more devastating and frustrating than the escalation of violence in the country. We had
all hoped that as negotiations got under way, violence would decrease. But in fact the opposite happened. The police and security forces were
making very few arrests. People in the townships were accusing them of aiding and abetting the violence. It was becoming more and more clear to
me that there was connivance on the part of the security forces. Many of the incidents indicated to me that the police, rather than quelling violence,
were fomenting it.
Over the next few months, I visited townships all across the violence-racked Vaal Triangle south of Johannesburg, comforting wounded people
and grieving families. Over and over again, I heard the same story: the police and the defense force were destabilizing the area. I was told of the
police confiscating weapons one day in one area, and then Inkatha forces attacking our people with those stolen weapons the next day. We heard
stories of the police escorting Inkatha members to meetings and on their attacks.
In September, I gave a speech in which I said there was a hidden hand behind the violence and suggested that there was a mysterious “Third
Force,” which consisted of renegade men from the security forces who were attempting to disrupt the negotiations. I could not say who the
members of the Third Force were, for I did not know them myself, but I was certain that they existed and that they were murderously effective in their
targeting of the ANC and the liberation struggle.
I came to this conclusion after becoming personally involved in two specific incidents. In July of 1990, the ANC received information that hostel
dwellers belonging to the Inkatha Freedom Party were planning a major attack on ANC members in Sebokeng Township in the Vaal Triangle on
July 22. Through our attorneys, we notified the minister of law and order, the commissioner of police, and the regional commissioner, warning them
of the impending attacks and urging them to take the proper action. We asked the police to prevent armed Inkatha members from entering the
township to attend an Inkatha rally.
On July 22, busloads of armed Inkatha members, escorted by police vehicles, entered Sebokeng in broad daylight. A rally was held, after which
the armed men went on a rampage, murdering approximately thirty people in a dreadful and grisly attack. I visited the area the next day and
witnessed scenes I have never before seen and never hope to see again. At the morgue were bodies of people who had been hacked to death; a
woman had both her breasts cut off with a machete. Whoever these killers were, they were animals.
I requested a meeting with Mr. de Klerk the following day. When I saw him, I angrily demanded an explanation. “You were warned in advance,” I
told him, “and yet did nothing. Why is that? Why is it that there have been no arrests? Why have the police sat on their hands?” I then told him that in
any other nation where there was a tragedy of this magnitude, when more than thirty people were slain, the head of state would make some
statement of condolence, yet he had not uttered a word. He had no reply to what I said. I asked de Klerk to furnish me with an explanation, and he
never did.

The second incident occurred in November, when a group of Inkatha members entered a squatter camp known as Zonkizizwe (Zulu for “the place
where all nations are welcome”) outside the city of Germiston, east of Johannesburg, and drove ANC people out, killing a number of them in the
process. Inkatha members then proceeded to occupy the abandoned shacks and confiscate all the property. Residents of the area said that the
Inkatha members were accompanied by the police. Once again, in the wake of this tragedy, the police and the government took no action. Black

life in South Africa had never been so cheap.
Again, I met with Mr. de Klerk and his minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok. Again, I asked Mr. de Klerk why no action by the police had been
taken in the aftermath of these crimes. I said the attackers could easily be found because they were now occupying the shacks of the people they
had killed. Mr. de Klerk asked Mr. Vlok for an explanation and then Vlok, in a rather rude tone, asked me on whose property the shacks were
located, the implication being that these people were squatters and therefore had no rights. In fact, I told him, the land had been made available to
these people by the local authorities. His attitude was like that of many Afrikaners who simply believed that black tribes had been killing each other
since time immemorial. Mr. de Klerk again told me he would investigate and respond, but never did.

During this time, the government took another action that added fuel to the flames. It introduced a regulation permitting Zulus to carry so-called
traditional weapons to political rallies and meetings in Natal and elsewhere. These weapons, assegais, which are spears, and knobkerries,
wooden sticks with a heavy wooden head, are actual weapons with which Inkatha members killed ANC members. This gave me grave doubts
about Mr. de Klerk’s peaceful intentions.
Those opposed to negotiations benefited from the violence, which always seemed to flare up when the government and the ANC were moving
toward an agreement. These forces sought to ignite a war between the ANC and Inkatha, and I believe many members of Inkatha connived at this
as well. Many in the government, including Mr. de Klerk, chose to look the other way or ignore what they knew was going on under their noses. We
had no doubts that men at the highest levels of the police and the security forces were aiding the Third Force. These suspicions were later
confirmed by newspaper reports disclosing that the South African police had secretly funded Inkatha.
As the violence continued to spiral, I began to have second thoughts about the suspension of the armed struggle. Many of the people in the ANC
were restive, and in September, at a press conference, I said that the continuing violence might necessitate taking up arms once more. The
situation looked very grim, and any understanding that had been achieved with the government seemed lost.
