WITHIN A FEW WEEKS of my move, I wrote to Kobie Coetsee to propose talks about talks. As before, I received no response. I wrote once more,
and again there was no response. I found this peculiar and demoralizing, and I realized I had to look for another opportunity to be heard. That came
in early 1986.
At a meeting of the British Commonwealth in Nassau in October 1985, the leaders could not reach agreement on whether to participate in
international sanctions against South Africa. This was mainly because British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was adamantly opposed. To
resolve the deadlock, the assembled nations agreed that a delegation of “eminent persons” would visit South Africa and report back on whether
sanctions were the appropriate tool to help bring about the end of apartheid. In early 1986, the seven-member Eminent Persons Group, led by
General Olusegun Obasanjo, the former military leader of Nigeria, and former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, arrived in South Africa on
their fact-finding mission.
In February, I was visited by General Obasanjo to discuss the nature of the delegation’s brief. He was eager to facilitate a meeting between me
and the full group. With the government’s permission, such a meeting was scheduled for May. The group would be talking with the cabinet after they
saw me, and I viewed this as a chance to raise the subject of negotiations.
The government regarded my session with the group as something extraordinary. Two days before the meeting I was visited by Brigadier Munro,
who had brought along a tailor. “Mandela,” the commander said, “we want you to see these people on an equal footing. We don’t want you to wear
those old prison clothes, so this tailor will take your measurements and outfit you with a proper suit.” The tailor must have been some kind of wizard,
for the very next day I tried on a pinstriped suit that fit me like a glove. I was also given a shirt, tie, shoes, socks, and underwear. The commander
admired my new attire. “Mandela, you look like a prime minister now, not a prisoner,” he said and smiled.
* * *
At the meeting between myself and the Eminent Persons Group, we were joined by two significant observers: Kobie Coetsee and Lieutenant
General W. H. Willemse, the commissioner of prisons. Like the tailor, these two men were there to take my measure. But, curiously, they left shortly
after the session started. I pressed them to remain, saying I had nothing to hide, but they left anyway. Before they took their leave, I told them the
time had come for negotiations, not fighting, and that the government and the ANC should sit down and talk.
The Eminent Persons Group had come with many questions involving the issues of violence, negotiations, and international sanctions. At the
outset, I set the ground rules for our discussions. “I am not the head of the movement,” I told them. “The head of the movement is Oliver Tambo in
Lusaka. You must go and see him. You can tell him what my views are, but they are my personal views alone. They don’t even represent the views
of my colleagues here in prison. All that being said, I favor the ANC beginning discussions with the government.”
Various members of the group had concerns about my political ideology and what a South Africa under ANC leadership might look like. I told
them I was a South African nationalist, not a Communist, that nationalists came in every hue and color, and that I was firmly committed to a
nonracial society. I told them I believed in the Freedom Charter, that the charter embodied principles of democracy and human rights, and that it
was not a blueprint for socialism. I spoke of my concern that the white minority feel a sense of security in any new South Africa. I told them I thought
many of our problems were a result of lack of communication between the government and the ANC and that some of these could be resolved
through actual talks.
They questioned me extensively on the issue of violence, and while I was not yet willing to renounce violence, I affirmed in the strongest possible
terms that violence could never be the ultimate solution to the situation in South Africa and that men and women by their very nature required some
kind of negotiated understanding. While I once again reiterated that these were my views and not those of the ANC, I suggested that if the
government withdrew the army and the police from the townships, the ANC might agree to a suspension of the armed struggle as a prelude to talks.
I told them that my release alone would not stem the violence in the country or stimulate negotiations.
After the group finished with me, they planned to see both Oliver in Lusaka and government officials in Pretoria. In my remarks, I had sent
messages to both places. I wanted the government to see that under the right circumstances we would talk and I wanted Oliver to know that my
position and his were the same.
In May, the Eminent Persons Group was scheduled to see me one last time. I was optimistic as they had been to both Lusaka and Pretoria, and I
hoped that the seed of negotiations had been planted. But the day before we were to meet, the South African government took a step that
sabotaged whatever goodwill had been engendered by the Commonwealth visitors. On the day the Eminent Persons Group was scheduled to
meet with cabinet ministers, the South African Defense Force, under the orders of President Botha, launched air raids and commando attacks on
ANC bases in Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. This utterly poisoned the talks, and the Eminent Persons Group immediately left South Africa.
Once again, I felt my efforts to move negotiations forward had stalled.

Oliver Tambo and the ANC had called for the people of South Africa to render the country ungovernable, and the people were obliging. The state of
unrest and political violence was reaching new heights. The anger of the masses was unrestrained; the townships were in upheaval. International
pressure was growing stronger every day. On June 12, 1986, the government imposed a State of Emergency in an attempt to keep a lid on protest.
In every outward way, the time seemed inauspicious for negotiations. But often, the most discouraging moments are precisely the time to launch an
initiative. At such times people are searching for a way out of their dilemma. That month I wrote a very simple letter to General Willemse, the
commissioner of prisons. In it, I merely said, “I wish to see you on a matter of national importance.” I handed the letter to Brigadier Munro on a
Wednesday.
That weekend, I was told by the commanding officer to be prepared to see General Willemse, who was coming down from Pretoria. This meeting
was not treated in the usual fashion. Instead of conferring with the general in the visiting area, I was taken to his residence on the grounds of
Pollsmoor itself.
Willemse is a direct fellow and we got down to business immediately. I told him I wanted to see Kobie Coetsee, the minister of justice. He asked
me why. I hesitated for a moment, reluctant to discuss political matters with a prison official. But I responded with frankness: “I want to see the
minister in order to raise the question of talks between the government and the ANC.”
He pondered this for a moment, and then said, “Mandela, as you know, I am not a politician. I cannot discuss such issues myself, for they are
beyond my authority.” He then paused, as if something had just occurred to him. “It just so happens,” he said, “that the minister of justice is in Cape
Town. Perhaps you can see him. I will find out.”

The general then telephoned the minister and the two spoke for a few moments. After putting down the phone, the general turned to me and said,
“The minister said, ‘Bring him round.’ ” Minutes later, we left the general’s residence in his car bound for the minister’s house in Cape Town.
Security was light; only one other car accompanied the general’s vehicle. The ease and rapidity with which this meeting was set up made me
suspect that the government might have planned this rendezvous ahead of time. Whether they had or not was immaterial; it was an opportunity to
take the first step toward negotiations.
At his official residence in the city, Coetsee greeted me warmly and we settled down on comfortable chairs in his lounge. He apologized that I
had not had a chance to change out of my prison clothes. I spent three hours in conversation with him and was struck by his sophistication and
willingness to listen. He asked knowledgeable and relevant questions — questions that reflected a familiarity with the issues that divided the
government and the ANC. He asked me under what circumstances would we suspend the armed struggle; whether or not I spoke for the ANC as a
whole; whether I envisioned any constitutional guarantees for minorities in a new South Africa. His questions went to the heart of the issues dividing
the government and the ANC.
After responding in much the same way as I did to the Eminent Persons Group, I sensed that Coetsee wanted some resolution. What is the next
step? he asked. I told him I wanted to see the state president and the foreign minister, Pik Botha. Coetsee noted this on a small pad he had kept
beside him, and said he would send my request through the proper channels. We then shook hands, and I was driven back to my solitary cell on the
ground floor of Pollsmoor Prison.
I was greatly encouraged. I sensed the government was anxious to overcome the impasse in the country, that they were now convinced they had
to depart from their old positions. In ghostly outline, I saw the beginnings of a compromise.
I told no one of my encounter. I wanted the process to be under way before I informed anyone. Sometimes it is necessary to present one’s
colleagues with a policy that is already a fait accompli. I knew that once they examined the situation carefully, my colleagues at Pollsmoor and in
Lusaka would support me. But again, after this promising start, nothing happened. Weeks and then months passed without a word from Coetsee. In
some frustration, I wrote him another letter.