IN MARCH, after much negotiation within our respective parties, we scheduled our first face-to-face meeting with Mr. de Klerk and the government.
These were to be “talks about talks,” and the meetings were to begin in early April. But on March 26, in Sebokeng Township, about thirty miles
south of Johannesburg, the police opened fire without warning on a crowd of ANC demonstrators, killing twelve and wounding hundreds more, most
of them shot in the back as they were fleeing. Police had used live ammunition in dealing with the demonstrators, which was intolerable. The police
claimed that their lives were endangered, but many demonstrators were shot in the back and had no weapons. You cannot be in danger from an
unarmed man who is running away from you. The right to assemble and demonstrate in support of our just demands was not a favor to be granted
by the government at its discretion. This sort of action angered me like no other, and I told the press that every white policeman in South Africa
regarded every black person as a military target. After consultation with the NEC, I announced the suspension of our talks and warned Mr. de Klerk
that he could not “talk about negotiations on the one hand and murder our people on the other.”
But despite the suspension of our official talks, with the approval of the leadership, I met privately with Mr. de Klerk in Cape Town in order to keep
up the momentum for negotiations. Our discussions centered primarily on a new date, and we agreed on early May. I brought up the appalling
behavior at Sebokeng and the police’s unequal treatment of blacks and whites; police used live ammunition with black demonstrators, while they
never unsheathed their guns at white right-wing protests.
The government was in no great rush to begin negotiations; they were counting on the euphoria that greeted my release to die down. They
wanted to allow time for me to fall on my face and show that the former prisoner hailed as a savior was a highly fallible man who had lost touch with
the present situation.
Despite his seemingly progressive actions, Mr. de Klerk was by no means the great emancipator. He was a gradualist, a careful pragmatist. He
did not make any of his reforms with the intention of putting himself out of power. He made them for precisely the opposite reason: to ensure power
for the Afrikaner in a new dispensation. He was not yet prepared to negotiate the end of white rule.
His goal was to create a system of power-sharing based on group rights, which would preserve a modified form of minority power in South
Africa. He was decidedly opposed to majority rule, or “simple majoritarianism” as he sometimes called it, because that would end white domination
in a single stroke. We knew early on that the government was fiercely opposed to a winner-takes-all Westminster parliamentary system, and
advocated instead a system of proportional representation with built-in structural guarantees for the white minority. Although he was prepared to
allow the black majority to vote and create legislation, he wanted to retain a minority veto. From the start I would have no truck with this plan. I
described it to Mr. de Klerk as apartheid in disguise, a “loser-takes-all” system.
The Nationalists’ long-term strategy to overcome our strength was to build an anti-ANC alliance with the Inkatha Freedom Party and to lure the
Coloured Afrikaans-speaking voters of the Cape to a new National Party. From the moment of my release, they began wooing both Buthelezi and
the Coloured voters of the Cape. The government attempted to scare the Coloured population into thinking the ANC was anti-Coloured. They
supported Chief Buthelezi’s desire to retain Zulu power and identity in a new South Africa by preaching to him the doctrine of group rights and
federalism.

The first round of talks with the government was held over three days in early May. Our delegation consisted of Walter Sisulu, Joe Slovo, Alfred Nzo,
Thabo Mbeki, Ahmed Kathrada, Joe Modise, Ruth Mompati, Archie Gumede, Reverend Beyers Naude, Cheryl Carolus, and myself. The setting
was Groote Schuur, the Cape Dutch-style mansion that was the residence of South Africa’s first colonial governors, among them Cecil Rhodes.
Some of our delegation joked that we were being led into an ambush on the enemy’s ground.
But the talks, contrary to expectation, were conducted with seriousness and good humor. Historic enemies who had been fighting each other for
three centuries met and shook hands. Many wondered out loud why such discussions had not taken place long before. The government had
granted temporary indemnities to Joe Slovo, the general secretary of the Communist Party, and Joe Modise, the commander of MK, and to see
these two men shaking hands with the National Party leaders who had demonized them for decades was extraordinary. As Thabo Mbeki later said
to reporters, each side had discovered that the other did not have horns.
The very fact of the talks themselves was a significant milestone in the history of our country; as I pointed out, the meeting represented not only
what the ANC had been seeking for so many years, but an end to the master/servant relationship that characterized black and white relations in
South Africa. We had not come to the meeting as supplicants or petitioners, but as fellow South Africans who merited an equal place at the table.
The first day was more or less a history lesson. I explained to our counterparts that the ANC from its inception in 1912 had always sought
negotiations with the government in power. Mr. de Klerk, for his part, suggested that the system of separate development had been conceived as a
benign idea, but had not worked in practice. For that, he said, he was sorry, and hoped the negotiations would make amends. It was not an apology
for apartheid, but it went further than any other National Party leader ever had.
The primary issue discussed was the definition of political prisoners and political exiles. The government argued for a narrow definition, wanting
to restrict the number of our people who would qualify for an indemnity. We argued for the broadest possible definition and said that any person
who was convicted of an offense that was politically motivated should qualify for an indemnity. We could not agree on a mutually satisfactory
definition of “politically motivated” crimes, and this would be an issue that would bedevil us for quite a while to come.
At the end of the three-day meeting, we agreed on what became known as the Groote Schuur Minute, pledging both sides to a peaceful process
of negotiations and committing the government to lifting the State of Emergency, which they shortly did everywhere except for the violence-ridden
province of Natal. We agreed to set up a joint working group to resolve the many obstacles that still stood in our way.
When it came to constitutional issues, we told the government we were demanding an elected constituent assembly to draw up a new
constitution; we believed that the men and women creating the constitution should be the choice of the people themselves. But before the election
of an assembly, it was necessary to have an interim government that could oversee the transition until a new government was elected. The
government could not be both player and referee, as it was now. We advocated the creation of a multiparty negotiating conference to set up the
interim government and set out the guiding principles for the functioning of a constituent assembly.
