AFTER CROSSING THE BORDER, I breathed in deeply. The air of one’s home always smells sweet after one has been away. It was a clear winter
night and somehow even the stars looked more welcoming here than from elsewhere on the continent. Though I was leaving a world where I
experienced freedom for the first time and returning to one where I was a fugitive, I was profoundly relieved to be back in the land of my birth and
destiny.
Between Bechuanaland and the northwestern Transvaal, dozens of unmarked roads traverse the border, and Cecil knew just which ones to take.
During the drive, he filled me in on many of the events I had missed. We drove all night, slipping across the border just after midnight and reaching
Liliesleaf Farm at dawn. I was still wearing my beat-up khaki training uniform.
Once at the farm, I did not have time for rest and reflection because the following night we held a secret meeting for me to brief the Working
Committee on my trip. Walter, Moses Kotane, Govan Mbeki, Dan Tloome, J. B. Marks, and Duma Nokwe all arrived at the farm, a rare reunion. I
first gave a general overview of my travels, itemizing the money we had received and the offers of training. At the same time, I reported in detail the
reservations I had encountered about the ANC’s cooperation with whites, Indians, particularly Communists. Still ringing in my ears was my final
meeting with the Zambian leaders who told me that while they knew the ANC was stronger and more popular than the PAC, they understood the
PAC’s pure African nationalism but were bewildered by the ANC’s nonracialism and Communist ties. I informed them that Oliver and I believed the
ANC had to appear more independent to reassure our new allies on the continent, for they were the ones who would be financing and training
Umkhonto we Sizwe. I proposed reshaping the Congress Alliance so that the ANC would clearly be seen as the leader, especially on issues
directly affecting Africans.
This was a serious proposition, and the entire leadership had to be consulted. The Working Committee urged me to go down to Durban and
brief the chief. All agreed except Govan Mbeki, who was not then living at Liliesleaf Farm but was present as part of the High Command of MK. He
urged me to send someone else. It was simply too risky, he said, and the organization should not jeopardize my safety, especially as I was newly
returned and ready to push ahead with MK. This wise advice was overruled by everyone, including myself.

I left the next night from Rivonia in the company of Cecil, again posing as his chauffeur. I had planned a series of secret meetings in Durban, the first
of which was with Monty Naicker and Ismail Meer to brief them about my trip and to discuss the new proposal. Monty and Ismail were extremely
close to the chief, and the chief trusted their views. I wanted to be able to tell Luthuli I had spoken to his friends and convey their reaction. Ismail and
Monty, however, were disturbed by my belief that the ANC needed to take the lead among the Congress Alliance and make statements on its own
concerning affairs that affected Africans. They were against anything that unraveled the alliance.
I was taken to Groutville, where the chief lived, and we met in the house of an Indian lady in town. I explained the situation to the chief at some
length, and he listened without speaking. When I was done, he said he did not like the idea of foreign politicians dictating policy to the ANC. He
said we had evolved the policy of nonracialism for good reasons and he did not think that we should alter our policy because it did not suit a few
foreign leaders.
I told the chief that these foreign politicians were not dictating our policy, but merely saying that they did not understand it. My plan, I told him, was
simply to effect essentially cosmetic changes in order to make the ANC more intelligible — and more palatable — to our allies. I saw this as a
defensive maneuver, for if African states decided to support the PAC, a small and weak organization could suddenly become a large and potent
one.
The chief did not make decisions on the spur of the moment. I could see he wanted to think about what I had said and talk to some of his friends
about it. I said farewell, and he advised me to be careful. I still had a number of clandestine meetings in the city and townships that evening. My last
meeting that evening was with the MK Regional Command in Durban.
The Durban Command was led by a sabotage expert named Bruno Mtolo, whom I had never met before, but would meet again under
dramatically different circumstances. I briefed them on my trip to Africa, about the support we had received and the offers of training. I explained
that for the moment MK was limited to sabotage, but that if sabotage did not have the desired effect we would probably move on to guerrilla
warfare.
Later that same evening, at the home of the photojournalist G. R. Naidoo, where I was staying, I was joined by Ismail and Fatima Meer, Monty
Naicker, and J. N. Singh for what was a combination welcome-home party and going-away party, for I was leaving the next day for Johannesburg. It
was a pleasant evening and my first night of relaxation in a long while. I slept well and I met Cecil on Sunday afternoon — the fifth of August — for
the long drive back to Johannesburg in his trusty Austin.
I wore my chauffeur’s white dust-coat and sat next to Cecil as he drove. We often took turns spelling each other behind the wheel. It was a clear,
cool day and I reveled in the beauty of the Natal countryside; even in winter, Natal remains green. Now that I was returning to Johannesburg I would
have some time to see Winnie and the children. I had often wished that Winnie could share with me the wonders of Africa, but the best I could do
was to tell her what I had seen and done.
Once we left the industrial precincts of Durban, we moved through hills that offered majestic views of the surrounding valleys and the blue-black
waters of the Indian Ocean. Durban is the principal port for the country’s main industrial area, and the highway that leads to Johannesburg runs
parallel to the railway line for a great distance. I went from contemplating the natural beauty to ruminating on the fact that the railway line, being so
close to the highway, offered a convenient place for sabotage. I made a note of this in the small notebook I always carried with me.
Cecil and I were engrossed in discussions of sabotage plans as we passed through Howick, twenty miles northwest of Pietermaritzburg. At
Cedara, a small town just past Howick, I noticed a Ford V-8 filled with white men shoot past us on the right. I instinctively turned round to look behind
and I saw two more cars filled with white men. Suddenly, in front of us, the Ford was signaling us to stop. I knew in that instant that my life on the run
was over; my seventeen months of “freedom” were about to end.
As Cecil slowed down he turned to me and said, “Who are these men?” I did not answer because we both knew full well who they were. They had
chosen their hiding-spot well; to the left of us was a steep wooded bank they could have forced us into had we tried to elude them. I was in the lefthand passenger seat, and for a moment I thought about jumping out and making an escape into the woods, but I would have been shot in a matter
of seconds.
When our car stopped, a tall slender man with a stern expression on his face came directly over to the window on the passenger side. He was
unshaven and it appeared that he had not slept in quite a while. I immediately assumed he had been waiting for us for several days. In a calm voice,
he introduced himself as Sergeant Vorster of the Pietermaritzburg police and produced an arrest warrant. He asked me to identify myself. I told him
my name was David Motsamayi. He nodded, and then, in a very proper way, he asked me a few questions about where I had been and where I was

going. I parried these questions without giving him much information. He seemed a bit irritated and then, he said, “Ag, you’re Nelson Mandela, and
this is Cecil Williams, and you are under arrest!”
He informed us that a police major from the other car would accompany us back to Pietermaritzburg. The police were not yet so vigilant in those
days, and Sergeant Vorster did not bother searching me. I had my loaded revolver with me, and again, I thought of escape, but I would have been
greatly outnumbered. I secretly put the revolver — and my notebook — in the upholstery between my seat and Cecil’s. For some reason, the police
never found the gun or the small notebook, which was fortunate, for many more people would have been arrested if they had.
At the police station I was led into Sergeant Vorster’s office, where I saw a number of officers, one of whom was Warrant Officer Truter, who had
testified in the Treason Trial. Truter had made a favorable impression on the accused because he had accurately explained the policy of the ANC,
and had not exaggerated or lied. We greeted each other in a friendly way.
I had still not admitted to anything other than the name David Motsamayi, and Truter said to me, “Nelson, why do you keep up this farce? You
know I know who you are. We all know who you are.” I told him simply that I had given a name and that is the name I was standing by. I asked for a
lawyer and was curtly refused. I then declined to make a statement.
Cecil and I were locked in separate cells. I now had time to ruminate on my situation. I had always known that arrest was a possibility, but even
freedom fighters practice denial, and in my cell that night I realized I was not prepared for the reality of capture and confinement. I was upset and
agitated. Someone had tipped off the police about my whereabouts; they had known I was in Durban and that I would be returning to Johannesburg.
For weeks before my return the police believed that I was already back in the country. In June, newspaper headlines blared “RETURN OF THE
BLACK PIMPERNEL” while I was still in Addis Ababa. Perhaps that had been a bluff?
The authorities had been harassing Winnie in the belief that she would know whether or not I was back. I knew that they had followed her and
searched the house on a number of occasions. I guessed they had figured I would visit Chief Luthuli directly upon my return, and they were correct.
But I also suspected they had information that I was in Durban at that time. The movement had been infiltrated with informers, and even wellintentioned people were generally not as tight-lipped as they should have been. I had also been lax. Too many people had known I was in Durban. I
had even had a party the night before I left, and I chastised myself for letting down my guard. My mind ricocheted among the possibilities. Was it an
informer in Durban? Someone from Johannesburg? Someone from the movement? Or even a friend or member of the family? But such speculation
about unknowns is futile, and with the combination of mental and physical exhaustion, I soon fell deeply asleep. At least on this night — August 5,
1962 — I did not have to worry about whether the police would find me. They already had.

In the morning, I felt restored and I braced myself for the new ordeal that lay ahead of me. I would not, under any circumstances, seem despairing or
even disappointed to my captors. At 8:30 I appeared before the local magistrate and was formally remanded to Johannesburg. It was low-key, and
the magistrate seemed no more concerned than if he were handling a traffic summons. The police had not taken elaborate precautions for the trip
back to Johannesburg or for my security, and I merely sat in the backseat of a sedan, unhandcuffed, with two officers riding in front. My arrest had
been discovered by my friends; Fatima Meer brought some food to the jail for me and I shared it with the two officers in the car. We even stopped
at Volksrust, a town along the way, and they allowed me to take a brief walk to stretch my legs. I did not contemplate escape when people were
kind to me; I did not want to take advantage of the trust they placed in me.
But as we approached Johannesburg, the atmosphere changed. I heard an announcement over the police radio of my capture and the order to
fold up the roadblocks to and from Natal. At sunset, on the outskirts of Johannesburg, we were met by a sizable police escort. I was abruptly
handcuffed, taken from the car, and placed in a sealed police van with small opaque windows reinforced with wire netting. The motorcade then took
a circuitous and unfamiliar route to Marshall Square as if they were concerned we might be ambushed.
I was locked in a cell by myself. In the quiet of the cell I was planning my strategy for the next day, when I heard a cough from a nearby cell. I did
not realize a prisoner was close by, but more than that, there was something about this cough, something that struck me as curiously familiar. I sat
up in sudden recognition and called out, “Walter?”
“Nelson, is that you?” he said, and we laughed with an indescribable mixture of relief, surprise, disappointment, and happiness. Walter, I learned,
had been arrested shortly after my own arrest. We did not think that the arrests were unrelated. While this was not the most auspicious place for a
meeting of the National Working Committee, it was certainly convenient and the night sped by as I gave him a full account of my arrest, as well as
my meetings in Durban.
The next day I appeared in court before a senior magistrate for formal remand. Harold Wolpe and Joe Slovo had come to court after hearing of
my arrest, and we conferred in the basement. I had appeared before this magistrate on numerous occasions in my professional capacity and we
had grown to respect one another. A number of attorneys were also present, some of whom I knew quite well. It is curious how one can be easily
flattered in certain situations by otherwise insignificant incidents. I am by no means immune to flattery in normal circumstances, but there I was, a
fugitive, number one on the state’s Most Wanted list, a handcuffed outlaw who had been underground for more than a year, and yet the judge, the
other attorneys, and the spectators all greeted me with deference and professional courtesy. They knew me as Nelson Mandela attorney-at-law, not
Nelson Mandela outlaw. It lifted my spirits immensely.
During the proceedings, the magistrate was diffident and uneasy, and would not look at me directly. The other attorneys also seemed
embarrassed, and at that moment, I had something of a revelation. These men were not only uncomfortable because I was a colleague brought low,
but because I was an ordinary man being punished for his beliefs. In a way I had never quite comprehended before, I realized the role I could play in
court and the possibilities before me as a defendant. I was the symbol of justice in the court of the oppressor, the representative of the great ideals
of freedom, fairness, and democracy in a society that dishonored those virtues. I realized then and there that I could carry on the fight even within the
fortress of the enemy.
When I was asked the name of my counsel, I announced that I would represent myself, with Joe Slovo as legal adviser. By representing myself I
would enhance the symbolism of my role. I would use my trial as a showcase for the ANC’s moral opposition to racism. I would not attempt to
defend myself so much as put the state itself on trial. That day, I answered only the questions as to my name and choice of counsel. I listened silently
to the charges: inciting African workers to strike and leaving the country without valid travel documents. In apartheid South Africa, the penalties for
these “crimes” could be as much as ten years in prison. Yet the charges were something of a relief: the state clearly did not have enough evidence
to link me with Umkhonto we Sizwe or I would have been charged with the far more serious crimes of treason or sabotage.
Only as I was leaving the courtroom, did I see Winnie in the spectators’ gallery. She looked distressed and gloomy; she was undoubtedly
considering the difficult months and years ahead, of life on her own, raising two small children, in an often hard and forbidding city. It is one thing to
be told of possible hardships ahead, it is entirely another to actually have to confront them. All I could do, as I descended the steps to the basement,
was to give her a wide smile, as if to show her that I was not worried and that she should not be either. I cannot imagine that it helped very much.
From the court, I was taken to the Johannesburg Fort. When I emerged from the courthouse to enter the sealed van, there was a crowd of

hundreds of people cheering and shouting “Amandla!” followed by “Ngawethu,” a popular ANC call-and-response meaning “Power!” and “The
power is ours!” People yelled and sang and pounded their fists on the sides of the van as the vehicle crawled out of the courthouse exit. My capture
and case had made headlines in every paper: “POLICE SWOOP ENDS TWO YEARS ON THE RUN” was one; “NELSON MANDELA UNDER
ARREST” was another. The so-called Black Pimpernel was no longer at large.
A few days later Winnie was granted permission to visit me. She had gotten dressed up and now, at least on the face of it, appeared less glum
than before. She brought me a new pair of expensive pajamas and a lovely silk gown more appropriate to a salon than a prison. I did not have the
heart to tell her it was wholly inappropriate for me to wear such things in jail. I knew, however, that the parcel was a way of expressing her love and a
pledge of solidarity. I thanked her, and although we did not have much time we quickly discussed family matters, especially how she would support
herself and the children. I mentioned the names of friends who would help her and also clients of mine who still owed me money. I told her to tell the
children the truth of my capture, and how I would be away for a long time. I said we were not the first family in this situation, and that those who
underwent such hardships came out the stronger. I assured her of the strength of our cause, the loyalty of our friends, and how it would be her love
and devotion that would see me through whatever transpired. The officer supervising the visit turned a blind eye, and we embraced and clung to
each other with all the strength and pent-up emotion inside each of us, as if this were to be the final parting. In a way, it was, for we were to be
separated for much longer than either of us could then have imagined. The warrant officer allowed me to accompany Winnie part of the way to the
main gate where I was able to watch her, alone and proud, disappear around the corner.