THE DECEMBER 1959 ANC annual conference was held in Durban during that city’s dynamic antipass demonstrations. The conference
unanimously voted to initiate a massive countrywide antipass campaign beginning March 31 and climaxing on June 26 with a great bonfire of
passes.
The planning began immediately. On March 31, deputations were sent to local authorities. ANC officials toured the country, talking to the
branches about the campaign. ANC field-workers spread the word in townships and factories. Leaflets, stickers, and posters were printed and
circulated and posted in trains and buses.
The mood of the country was grim. The state was threatening to ban the organization, with cabinet ministers warning the ANC that it would soon
be battered with “an ungloved fist.” Elsewhere in Africa, the freedom struggle was marching on: the emergence of the independent republic of
Ghana in 1957 and its pan-Africanist, anti-apartheid leader, Kwame Nkrumah, had alarmed the Nationalists and made them even more intent on
clamping down on dissent at home. In 1960, seventeen former colonies in Africa were scheduled to become independent states. In February,
British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan visited South Africa and gave a speech before Parliament in which he talked of “winds of change”
sweeping Africa.
The PAC at the time appeared lost; they were a leadership in search of followers, and they had yet to initiate any action that put them on the
political map. They knew of the ANC’s antipass campaign and had been invited to join, but instead of linking arms with the Congress movement,
they sought to sabotage us. The PAC announced that it was launching its own antipass campaign on March 21, ten days before ours was to begin.
No conference had been held by them to discuss the date, no organizational work of any significance had been undertaken. It was a blatant case of
opportunism. Their actions were motivated more by a desire to eclipse the ANC than to defeat the enemy.
Four days before the scheduled demonstration, Sobukwe invited us to join with the PAC. Sobukwe’s offer was not a gesture of unity but a tactical
move to prevent the PAC from being criticized for not including us. He made the offer at the eleventh hour, and we declined to participate. On the
morning of March 21, Sobukwe and his executive walked to the Orlando police station to turn themselves in for arrest. The tens of thousands of
people going to work ignored the PAC men. In the magistrate’s court, Sobukwe announced the PAC would not attempt to defend itself, in
accordance with their slogan “No bail, no defense, no fine.” They believed the defiers would receive sentences of a few weeks. But Sobukwe was
sentenced not to three weeks’ but to three years’ imprisonment without the option of a fine.
The response to the PAC’s call in Johannesburg was minimal. No demonstrations at all took place in Durban, Port Elizabeth, or East London.
But in Evaton, Z. B. Molete, ably assisted by Joe Molefi and Vusumuzi Make, mustered the support of the entire township as several hundred men
presented themselves for arrest without passes. Cape Town saw one of the biggest antipass demonstrations in the history of the city. In Langa
township, outside Cape Town, some thirty thousand people, led by the young student Philip Kgosana, gathered and were spurred to rioting by a
police baton-charge. Two people were killed. But the last of the areas where demonstrations took place was the most calamitous and the one
whose name still echoes with tragedy: Sharpeville.
Sharpeville was a small township about thirty-five miles south of Johannesburg in the grim industrial complex around Vereeniging. PAC activists
had done an excellent job of organizing the area. In the early afternoon, a crowd of several thousand surrounded the police station. The
demonstrators were controlled and unarmed. The police force of seventy-five was greatly outnumbered and panicky. No one heard warning shots or
an order to shoot, but suddenly, the police opened fire on the crowd and continued to shoot as the demonstrators turned and ran in fear. When the
area had cleared, sixty-nine Africans lay dead, most of them shot in the back as they were fleeing. All told, more than seven hundred shots had
been fired into the crowd, wounding more than four hundred people, including dozens of women and children. It was a massacre, and the next day
press photos displayed the savagery on front pages around the world.
The shootings at Sharpeville provoked national turmoil and a government crisis. Outraged protests came in from across the globe, including one
from the American State Department. For the first time, the U.N. Security Council intervened in South African affairs, blaming the government for
the shootings and urging it to initiate measures to bring about racial equality. The Johannesburg stock exchange plunged and capital started to flow
out of the country. South African whites began making plans to emigrate. Liberals urged Verwoerd to offer concessions to Africans. The
government insisted Sharpeville was the result of a Communist conspiracy.
The massacre at Sharpeville created a new situation in the country. In spite of the amateurishness and opportunism of their leaders, the PAC
rank and file displayed great courage and fortitude in their demonstrations at Sharpeville and Langa. In just one day, they had moved to the front
lines of the struggle, and Robert Sobukwe was being hailed inside and outside the country as the savior of the liberation movement. We in the ANC
had to make rapid adjustments to this new situation, and we did so.
A small group of us — Walter, Duma Nokwe, Joe Slovo, and myself — held an all-night meeting in Johannesburg to plan a response. We knew
we had to acknowledge the events in some way and give the people an outlet for their anger and grief. We conveyed our plans to Chief Luthuli, and
he readily accepted them. On March 26, in Pretoria, the chief publicly burned his pass, calling on others to do the same. He announced a
nationwide stay-at-home on March 28, a national Day of Mourning and protest for the atrocities at Sharpeville. In Orlando, Duma Nokwe and I then
burned our passes before hundreds of people and dozens of press photographers.
Two days later, on the twenty-eighth, the country responded magnificently as several hundred thousand Africans observed the chief’s call. Only a
truly mass organization could coordinate such activities, and the ANC did so. In Cape Town a crowd of fifty thousand met in Langa township to
protest the shootings. Rioting broke out in many areas. The government declared a State of Emergency, suspending habeas corpus and assuming
sweeping powers to act against all forms of subversion. South Africa was now under martial law.