EVEN BEFORE THE TRIAL, my marriage to Evelyn had begun to unravel. In 1953, Evelyn had become set on upgrading her four-year certificate in
general nursing. She enrolled in a midwifery course at King Edward VII Hospital in Durban that would keep her away from home for several months.
This was possible because my mother and sister were staying with us and could look after the children. During her stay in Durban, I visited her on at
least one occasion.
Evelyn returned, having passed her examinations. She was pregnant again and later that year, gave birth to Makaziwe, named after the daughter
we had lost six years before. In our culture, to give a new child the name of a deceased child is considered a way of honoring the earlier child’s
memory and retaining a mystical attachment to the child who left too soon.
Over the course of the next year Evelyn became involved with the Watch Tower organization, part of the church of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Whether
this was due to some dissatisfaction with her life at the time, I do not know. The Jehovah’s Witnesses took the Bible as the sole rule of faith and
believed in a coming Armageddon between good and evil. Evelyn zealously began distributing their publication The Watchtower, and began to
proselytize me as well, urging me to convert my commitment to the struggle to a commitment to God. Although I found some aspects of the Watch
Tower’s system to be interesting and worthwhile, I could not and did not share her devotion. There was an obsessional element to it that put me off.
From what I could discern, her faith taught passivity and submissiveness in the face of oppression, something I could not accept.
My devotion to the ANC and the struggle was unremitting. This disturbed Evelyn. She had always assumed that politics was a youthful diversion,
that I would someday return to the Transkei and practice there as a lawyer. Even as that possibility became remote, she never resigned herself to
the fact that Johannesburg would be our home, or let go of the idea that we might move back to Umtata. She believed that once I was back in the
Transkei, in the bosom of my family, acting as counselor to Sabata, I would no longer miss politics. She encouraged Daliwonga’s efforts to
persuade me to come back to Umtata. We had many arguments about this, and I patiently explained to her that politics was not a distraction but my
lifework, that it was an essential and fundamental part of my being. She could not accept this. A man and a woman who hold such different views of
their respective roles in life cannot remain close.
I tried to persuade her of the necessity of the struggle, while she attempted to persuade me of the value of religious faith. When I would tell her
that I was serving the nation, she would reply that serving God was above serving the nation. We were finding no common ground, and I was
becoming convinced that the marriage was no longer tenable.
We also waged a battle for the minds and hearts of the children. She wanted them to be religious, and I thought they should be political. She
would take them to church at every opportunity and read them Watch Tower literature. She even gave the boys Watchtower pamphlets to distribute
in the township. I used to talk politics to the boys. Thembi was a member of the Pioneers, the juvenile section of the ANC, so he was already
politically cognizant. I would explain to Makgatho in the simplest terms how the black man was persecuted by the white man.
Hanging on the walls of the house, I had pictures of Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin, Gandhi, and the storming of the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg
in 1917. I explained to the boys who each of the men was, and what he stood for. They knew that the white leaders of South Africa stood for
something very different. One day, Makgatho came running into the house, and said, “Daddy, Daddy, there is Malan on the hill!” Malan had been the
first Nationalist prime minister and the boy had confused him with a Bantu Education official, Willie Maree, who had announced that he would that
day address a public meeting in the township. I went outside to see what Makgatho was talking about, for the ANC had organized a demonstration
to ensure that the meeting did not succeed. As I went out, I saw a couple of police vans escorting Maree to the place he was meant to speak, but
there was trouble from the start and Maree had fled without delivering his speech. I told Makgatho that it was not Malan but might as well have been.
My schedule in those days was relentless. I would leave the house very early in the morning and return late at night. After a day at the office, I
would usually have meetings of one kind or another. Evelyn could not understand my meetings in the evening, and when I returned home late
suspected I was seeing other women. Time after time, I would explain what meeting I was at, why I was there, and what was discussed. But she was
not convinced. In 1955, she gave me an ultimatum: I had to choose between her and the ANC.
Walter and Albertina were very close to Evelyn, and their fondest wish was for us to stay together. Evelyn confided in Albertina. At one point,
Walter intervened in the matter and I was very short with him, telling him it was none of his business. I regretted the tone I took, became Walter had
always been a brother to me and his friendship and support had never faltered.
One day, Walter told me he wanted to bring someone over to the office for me to meet. He did not tell me that it was my brother-in-law, and I was
surprised but not displeased to see him. I was pessimistic about the marriage and I thought it only fair to inform him of my feelings.
We were discussing this issue cordially among the three of us, when either Walter or I used a phrase like “Men such as ourselves,” or something
of that ilk. Evelyn’s brother-in-law was a businessman, opposed to politics and politicians. He became very huffy and said, “If you chaps think you
are in the same position as myself, that is ridiculous. Do not compare yourselves to me.” When he left, Walter and I looked at each other and
started laughing.
After we were arrested in December and kept in prison for two weeks, I had one visit from Evelyn. But when I came out of prison, I found that she
had moved out and taken the children. I returned to an empty, silent house. She had even removed the curtains, and for some reason I found this
small detail shattering. Evelyn had moved in with her brother, who told me, “Perhaps it is for the best; maybe when things will have cooled down you
will come back together.” It was reasonable advice, but it was not to be.
Evelyn and I had irreconcilable differences. I could not give up my life in the struggle, and she could not live with my devotion to something other
than herself and the family. She was a very good woman, charming, strong, and faithful, and a fine mother. I never lost my respect and admiration
for her, but in the end, we could not make our marriage work.
The breakup of any marriage is traumatic, especially for the children. Our family was no exception, and all of the children were wounded by our
separation. Makgatho took to sleeping in my bed. He was a gentle child, a natural peacemaker and he tried to bring about some sort of
reconciliation between me and his mother. Makaziwe was still very small, and I remember one day, when I was not in prison or in court, I visited her
crèche (nursery school) unannounced. She had always been a very affectionate child, but that day, when she saw me, she froze. She did not know
whether to run to me or retreat, to smile or frown. She had some conflict in her small heart, which she did not know how to resolve. It was very
painful.
Thembi, who was ten at the time, was the most deeply affected. He stopped studying and became withdrawn. He had once been keen on
English and Shakespeare, but after the separation he seemed to become apathetic about learning. The principal of his school spoke to me on one
occasion, but there was little that I was able to do. I would take him to the gym whenever I could, and occasionally he would brighten a bit. There
were many times when I could not be there and later, when I was underground, Walter would take Thembi with him along with his own son. One
time, Walter took him to an event, and afterward Walter said to me, “Man, that chap is quiet.” Following the breakup, Thembi would frequently wear
my clothes, even though they were far too large for him; they gave him some kind of attachment to his too-often-distant father.
