ON FEBRUARY 2, 1990, F. W. de Klerk stood before Parliament to make the traditional opening speech and did something no other South African
head of state had ever done: he truly began to dismantle the apartheid system and lay the groundwork for a democratic South Africa. In dramatic
fashion, Mr. de Klerk announced the lifting of the bans on the ANC, the PAC, the South African Communist Party, and thirty-one other illegal
organizations; the freeing of political prisoners incarcerated for nonviolent activities; the suspension of capital punishment; and the lifting of various
restrictions imposed by the State of Emergency. “The time for negotiation has arrived,” he said.
It was a breathtaking moment, for in one sweeping action he had virtually normalized the situation in South Africa. Our world had changed
overnight. After forty years of persecution and banishment, the ANC was now a legal organization. I and all my comrades could no longer be
arrested for being a member of the ANC, for carrying its green, yellow, and black banner, for speaking its name. For the first time in almost thirty
years, my picture and my words, and those of all my banned comrades, could freely appear in South African newspapers. The international
community applauded de Klerk’s bold actions. Amidst all the good news, however, the ANC objected to the fact that Mr. de Klerk had not
completely lifted the State of Emergency or ordered the troops out of the townships.
On February 9, seven days after Mr. de Klerk’s speech opening Parliament, I was informed that I was again going to Tuynhuys. I arrived at six
o’clock in the evening. I met a smiling Mr. de Klerk in his office and as we shook hands, he informed me that he was going to release me from
prison the following day. Although the press in South Africa and around the world had been speculating for weeks that my release was imminent,
Mr. de Klerk’s announcement nevertheless came as a surprise to me. I had not been told that the reason Mr. de Klerk wanted to see me was to tell
me that he was making me a free man.
I felt a conflict between my blood and my brain. I deeply wanted to leave prison as soon as I could, but to do so on such short notice would not be
wise. I thanked Mr. de Klerk, and then said that at the risk of appearing ungrateful I would prefer to have a week’s notice in order that my family and
my organization could be prepared for my release. Simply to walk out tomorrow, I said, would cause chaos. I asked Mr. de Klerk to release me a
week from that day. After waiting twenty-seven years, I could certainly wait another seven days.
De Klerk was taken aback by my response. Instead of replying, he continued to relate the plan for my release. He said that the government would
fly me to Johannesburg and officially release me there. Before he went any further, I told him that I strongly objected to that. I wanted to walk out of
the gates of Victor Verster and be able to thank those who looked after me and greet the people of Cape Town. Though I was from Johannesburg,
Cape Town had been my home for nearly three decades. I would make my way back to Johannesburg, but when I chose to, not when the
government wanted me to. “Once I am free,” I said, “I will look after myself.”
De Klerk was again nonplused. But this time my objections caused a reaction. He excused himself and left his office to consult with others. After
ten minutes he returned with a rather long face and said, “Mr. Mandela, it is too late to change the plan now.” I replied that the plan was
unacceptable and that I wanted to be released a week hence and at Victor Verster, not Johannesburg. It was a tense moment and, at the time,
neither of us saw any irony in a prisoner asking not to be released and his jailer attempting to release him.
De Klerk again excused himself and left the room. After ten minutes he returned with a compromise: yes, I could be released at Victor Verster,
but, no, the release could not be postponed. The government had already informed the foreign press that I was to be set free tomorrow and felt they
could not renege on that statement. I felt I could not argue with that. In the end, we agreed on the compromise, and Mr. de Klerk poured a tumbler of
whisky for each of us to drink in celebration. I raised the glass in a toast, but only pretended to drink; such spirits are too strong for me.
I did not get back to my cottage until shortly before midnight, whereupon I immediately sent word to my colleagues in Cape Town that I was to be
released the following day. I managed to get a message to Winnie and I telephoned Walter in Johannesburg. They would all fly in on a chartered
plane the next day. That evening, a number of ANC people on what was known as the National Reception Committee came to the cottage to draft a
statement that I would make the following day. They left in the early hours of the morning, and despite my excitement, I had no trouble falling asleep.