IT WAS ANNOUNCED that Colonel Willemse would succeed Colonel Badenhorst as commanding officer. I requested a meeting with the colonel
after his appointment and visited with him shortly after his arrival. While he was obviously not a progressive man, he was courteous and reasonable,
in marked contrast to his predecessor. Badenhorst’s tenure, we hoped, would simply be a dip on the graph of the steady improvement of our
conditions.
The aggressive young warders departed with Badenhorst as well, and we quickly resumed our customary behavior at the quarry and in our
section. Willemse may have been a reasonable man, but when he saw that we spent more time at the quarry talking than working, he was shocked.
He had been on the island for only a few weeks when I was summoned to his office for a meeting. “Mandela,” he said frankly, “you must help me.”
I asked him how. “Your men are not working. They don’t listen to orders. They only do what they want to do. This is a prison. There must be some
discipline. It is not only good for us but good for you. We must have some order or they will bring back someone like the previous head of prison.”
What the colonel said made sense. I listened and told him that his request was a legitimate one, but before I could respond to him, I would need
to meet with all my men. At that time, a meeting of all prisoners in the single cells was something that was expressly forbidden. By asking him to
permit such a meeting, I was asking him for a significant extension of the rules. He knew this as well as I did, and he wanted some time to consider
it.
Within days, I received a communication from Willemse saying he would allow it. All of us met one afternoon in the courtyard, without guards
watching over us. I told the men what Willemse said, and noted that by compromising a bit now, we would be making our conditions better in the
long run. We decided that we would at least appear to be working, but what work we did would be at a pace that suited us. From then on, that is
what we did, and we heard no more complaints from the commanding officer.

During the early part of Willemse’s tenure, in 1971–2, there was a steady influx of captured MK soldiers. These men had seen combat, and were
well informed about the state of the exile movement. While I was never happy to see ANC men imprisoned, I was keen to debrief them after they
arrived. I was extremely eager to know about Oliver, about the training camps, about MK’s successes and failures.
The men were extremely militant, and they did not take to prison life easily. One of the first of these men was Jimmy April, an MK officer who had
trained under Joe Slovo and had fought against the enemy in Rhodesia. MK had been slowly infiltrating men back into the country with forged
identity documents. Jimmy had been one of them and he was arrested in South Africa.
Jimmy regaled us with war stories, but I also took him aside and asked him about MK’s problems. As I was founder of MK and its first
commander-in-chief, Jimmy and the others were more candid with me than they were with the others. He told me stories of discontent in the camps,
and of abuses by MK officers. I asked him to keep the matter to himself, and I managed to smuggle a letter out to Oliver suggesting that some
reforms must be made in the camps.
One day, I was at the Head Office meeting with Colonel Willemse when I saw Jimmy outside the office of another official. He turned to me and
said in some agitation, “They are refusing to give me my letter.”
“On what ground?” I replied.
“They claim it contains matter which I am not allowed to see,” he said. I entered the office to discuss the matter, but before I could even open my
mouth, Jimmy had barged in and loudly said to the official, “Give me my letter!” Jimmy began to push me aside to get to the officer’s desk and take
the letter himself. At this point, the official took the letter and moved behind me as if for protection from Jimmy. It might have been a comical scene
in a film, but at the time it was nerve-racking. I turned to Jimmy and said quietly but sternly, “Please don’t do this. Calm down. I’ll sort out this matter
and see to it that you get your letter. Now, please leave.”
My speech had the intended effect, and Jimmy left the office. I then turned to the officer, who was extremely rattled. It was, for me, an odd
position. I was not opposing the authorities but mediating between my own people and the men I had so long fought against. The militancy of those
who were coming to the island put me in this position more and more frequently. While we were encouraged by their radicalism, these men
sometimes made our day-to-day life more burdensome.
Within a week, the officer handed me Jimmy’s letter.
