ONE NIGHT, when I was nine years old, I was aware of a commotion in the household. My father, who took turns visiting his wives and usually came
to us for perhaps one week a month, had arrived. But it was not at his accustomed time, for he was not scheduled to be with us for another few
days. I found him in my mother’s hut, lying on his back on the floor, in the midst of what seemed like an endless fit of coughing. Even to my young
eyes, it was clear that my father was not long for this world. He was ill with some type of lung disease, but it was not diagnosed, as my father had
never visited a doctor. He remained in the hut for several days without moving or speaking, and then one night he took a turn for the worse. My
mother and my father’s youngest wife, Nodayimani, who had come to stay with us, were looking after him, and late that night he called for
Nodayimani. “Bring me my tobacco,” he told her. My mother and Nodayimani conferred, and decided that it was unwise that he have tobacco in his
current state. But he persisted in calling for it, and eventually Nodayimani filled his pipe, lit it, and then handed it to him. My father smoked and
became calm. He continued smoking for perhaps an hour, and then, his pipe still lit, he died.
I do not remember experiencing great grief so much as feeling cut adrift. Although my mother was the center of my existence, I defined myself
through my father. My father’s passing changed my whole life in a way that I did not suspect at the time. After a brief period of mourning, my mother
informed me that I would be leaving Qunu. I did not ask her why, or where I was going.
I packed the few things that I possessed, and early one morning we set out on a journey westward to my new residence. I mourned less for my
father than for the world I was leaving behind. Qunu was all that I knew, and I loved it in the unconditional way that a child loves his first home. Before
we disappeared behind the hills, I turned and looked for what I imagined was the last time at my village. I could see the simple huts and the people
going about their chores; the stream where I had splashed and played with the other boys; the maize fields and green pastures where the herds and
flocks were lazily grazing. I imagined my friends out hunting for small birds, drinking the sweet milk from the cow’s udder, cavorting in the pond at
the end of the stream. Above all else, my eyes rested on the three simple huts where I had enjoyed my mother’s love and protection. It was these
three huts that I associated with all my happiness, with life itself, and I rued the fact that I had not kissed each of them before I left. I could not
imagine that the future I was walking toward could compare in any way to the past that I was leaving behind.
We traveled by foot and in silence until the sun was sinking slowly toward the horizon. But the silence of the heart between mother and child is not
a lonely one. My mother and I never talked very much, but we did not need to. I never doubted her love or questioned her support. It was an
exhausting journey, along rocky dirt roads, up and down hills, past numerous villages, but we did not pause. Late in the afternoon, at the bottom of a
shallow valley surrounded by trees, we came upon a village at the center of which was a large and gracious home that so far exceeded anything
that I had ever seen that all I could do was marvel at it. The buildings consisted of two iingxande (rectangular houses) and seven stately rondavels
(superior huts), all washed in white lime, dazzling even in the light of the setting sun. There was a large front garden and a maize field bordered by
rounded peach trees. An even more spacious garden spread out in back, which boasted apple trees, a vegetable garden, a strip of flowers, and a
patch of wattles. Nearby was a white stucco church.
In the shade of two gum trees that graced the doorway of the front of the main house sat a group of about twenty tribal elders. Encircling the
property, contentedly grazing on the rich land, was a herd of at least fifty cattle and perhaps five hundred sheep. Everything was beautifully tended,
and it was a vision of wealth and order beyond my imagination. This was the Great Place, Mqhekezweni, the provisional capital of Thembuland, the
royal residence of Chief Jongintaba Dalindyebo, acting regent of the Thembu people.
As I contemplated all this grandeur, an enormous motorcar rumbled through the western gate and the men sitting in the shade immediately arose.
They doffed their hats and then jumped to their feet shouting, “Bayete a-a-a, Jongintaba!” (Hail, Jongintaba!), the traditional salute of the Xhosas for
their chief. Out of the motorcar (I learned later that this majestic vehicle was a Ford V8) stepped a short, thickset man wearing a smart suit. I could
see that he had the confidence and bearing of a man who was used to the exercise of authority. His name suited him, for Jongintaba literally means
“One who looks at the mountain,” and he was a man with a sturdy presence toward whom all eyes gazed. He had a dark complexion and an
intelligent face, and he casually shook hands with each of the men beneath the tree, men who as I later discovered comprised the highest Thembu
court of justice. This was the regent who was to become my guardian and benefactor for the next decade.
In that moment of beholding Jongintaba and his court I felt like a sapling pulled root and branch from the earth and flung into the center of a
stream whose strong current I could not resist. I felt a sense of awe mixed with bewilderment. Until then I had had no thoughts of anything but my own
pleasures, no higher ambition than to eat well and become a champion stick-fighter. I had no thought of money, or class, or fame, or power.
Suddenly a new world opened before me. Children from poor homes often find themselves beguiled by a host of new temptations when suddenly
confronted by great wealth. I was no exception. I felt many of my established beliefs and loyalties begin to ebb away. The slender foundation built by
my parents began to shake. In that instant, I saw that life might hold more for me than being a champion stick-fighter.
* * *
I learned later that, in the wake of my father’s death, Jongintaba had offered to become my guardian. He would treat me as he treated his other
children, and I would have the same advantages as they. My mother had no choice; one did not turn down such an overture from the regent. She
was satisfied that although she would miss me, I would have a more advantageous upbringing in the regent’s care than in her own. The regent had
not forgotten that it was due to my father’s intervention that he had become acting paramount chief.
My mother remained in Mqhekezweni for a day or two before returning to Qunu. Our parting was without fuss. She offered no sermons, no words
of wisdom, no kisses. I suspect she did not want me to feel bereft at her departure and so was matter-of-fact. I knew that my father had wanted me
to be educated and prepared for a wide world, and I could not do that in Qunu. Her tender look was all the affection and support I needed, and as
she departed she turned to me and said, “Uqinisufokotho, Kwedini!” (Brace yourself, my boy!) Children are often the least sentimental of creatures,
especially if they are absorbed in some new pleasure. Even as my dear mother and first friend was leaving, my head was swimming with the
delights of my new home. How could I not be braced up? I was already wearing the handsome new outfit purchased for me by my guardian.
I was quickly caught up in the daily life of Mqhekezweni. A child adapts rapidly, or not at all — and I had taken to the Great Place as though I had
been raised there. To me, it was a magical kingdom; everything was delightful; the chores that were tedious in Qunu became an adventure in
Mqhekezweni. When I was not in school, I was a plowboy, a wagon guide, a shepherd. I rode horses and shot birds with slingshots and found boys
to joust with, and some nights I danced the evening away to the beautiful singing and clapping of Thembu maidens. Although I missed Qunu and my
mother, I was completely absorbed in my new world.
I attended a one-room school next door to the palace and studied English, Xhosa, history, and geography. We read Chambers English Reader
and did our lessons on black slates. Our teachers, Mr. Fadana, and later, Mr. Giqwa, took a special interest in me. I did well in school not so much
through cleverness as through doggedness. My own self-discipline was reinforced by my aunt Phathiwe, who lived in the Great Place and

scrutinized my homework every night.
Mqhekezweni was a mission station of the Methodist Church and far more up-to-date and Westernized than Qunu. People dressed in modern
clothes. The men wore suits and the women affected the severe Protestant style of the missionaries: thick long skirts and high-necked blouses, with
a blanket draped over the shoulder and a scarf wound elegantly around the head.

If the world of Mqhekezweni revolved around the regent, my smaller world revolved around his two children. Justice, the elder, was his only son and
heir to the Great Place, and Nomafu was the regent’s daughter. I lived with them and was treated exactly as they were. We ate the same food, wore
the same clothes, performed the same chores. We were later joined by Nxeko, the older brother to Sabata, the heir to the throne. The four of us
formed a royal quartet. The regent and his wife No-England brought me up as if I were their own child. They worried about me, guided me, and
punished me, all in a spirit of loving fairness. Jongintaba was stern, but I never doubted his love. They called me by the pet name of Tatomkhulu,
which means “Grandpa,” because they said when I was very serious, I looked like an old man.
Justice was four years older than I and became my first hero after my father. I looked up to him in every way. He was already at Clarkebury, a
boarding school about sixty miles distant. Tall, handsome, and muscular, he was a fine sportsman, excelling in track and field, cricket, rugby, and
soccer. Cheerful and outgoing, he was a natural performer who enchanted audiences with his singing and transfixed them with his ballroom
dancing. He had a bevy of female admirers — but also a coterie of critics, who considered him a dandy and a playboy. Justice and I became the
best of friends, though we were opposites in many ways: he was extroverted, I was introverted; he was lighthearted, I was serious. Things came
easily to him; I had to drill myself. To me, he was everything a young man should be and everything I longed to be. Though we were treated alike, our
destinies were different: Justice would inherit one of the most powerful chieftainships of the Thembu tribe, while I would inherit whatever the regent,
in his generosity, decided to give me.
Every day I was in and out of the regent’s house doing errands. Of the chores I did for the regent, the one I enjoyed most was pressing his suits, a
job in which I took great pride. He owned half-a-dozen Western suits, and I spent many an hour carefully making the crease in his trousers. His
palace, as it were, consisted of two large Western-style houses with tin roofs. In those days, very few Africans had Western houses and they were
considered a mark of great wealth. Six rondavels stood in a semicircle around the main house. They had wooden floorboards, something I had
never seen before. The regent and the queen slept in the right-hand rondavel, the queen’s sister in the center one, and the left-hand hut served as a
pantry. Under the floor of the queen’s sister’s hut was a beehive, and we would sometimes take up a floorboard or two and feast on its honey.
Shortly after I moved to Mqhekezweni, the regent and his wife moved to the uxande (middle house), which automatically became the Great House.
There were three small rondavels near it: one for the regent’s mother, one for visitors, and one shared by Justice and myself.

The two principles that governed my life at Mqhekezweni were chieftaincy and the Church. These two doctrines existed in uneasy harmony,
although I did not then see them as antagonistic. For me, Christianity was not so much a system of beliefs as it was the powerful creed of a single
man: Reverend Matyolo. For me, his powerful presence embodied all that was alluring in Christianity. He was as popular and beloved as the
regent, and the fact that he was the regent’s superior in spiritual matters made a strong impression on me. But the Church was as concerned with
this world as the next: I saw that virtually all of the achievements of Africans seemed to have come about through the missionary work of the Church.
The mission schools trained the clerks, the interpreters, and the policemen, who at the time represented the height of African aspirations.
Reverend Matyolo was a stout man in his mid-fifties, with a deep and potent voice that lent itself to both preaching and singing. When he
preached at the simple church at the western end of Mqhekezweni, the hall was always brimming with people. The hall rang with the hosannas of
the faithful, while the women knelt at his feet to beg for salvation. The first tale I heard about him when I arrived at the Great Place was that the
reverend had chased away a dangerous ghost with only a Bible and a lantern as weapons. I saw neither implausibility nor contradiction in this story.
The Methodism preached by Reverend Matyolo was of the fire-and-brimstone variety, seasoned with a bit of African animism. The Lord was wise
and omnipotent, but He was also a vengeful God who let no bad deed go unpunished.
At Qunu, the only time I had ever attended church was on the day that I was baptized. Religion was a ritual that I indulged in for my mother’s sake
and to which I attached no meaning. But at Mqhekezweni, religion was a part of the fabric of life and I attended church each Sunday along with the
regent and his wife. The regent took his religion very seriously. In fact the only time that I was ever given a hiding by him was when I dodged a
Sunday service to take part in a fight against boys from another village, a transgression I never committed again.
That was not the only rebuke I received on account of my trespasses against the reverend. One afternoon, I crept into Reverend Matyolo’s garden
and stole some maize, which I roasted and ate right there. A young girl saw me eating the corn in the garden and immediately reported my
presence to the priest. The news quickly made the rounds and reached the regent’s wife. That evening, she waited until prayer time — which was a
daily ritual in the house — and confronted me with my misdeed, reproaching me for taking the bread from a poor servant of God and disgracing the
family. She said the devil would certainly take me to task for my sin. I felt an unpleasant mixture of fear and shame — fear that I would get some
cosmic comeuppance and shame that I had abused the trust of my adopted family.

Because of the universal respect the regent enjoyed — from both black and white — and the seemingly untempered power that he wielded, I saw
chieftaincy as being the very center around which life revolved. The power and influence of chieftaincy pervaded every aspect of our lives in
Mqhekezweni and was the preeminent means through which one could achieve influence and status.
My later notions of leadership were profoundly influenced by observing the regent and his court. I watched and learned from the tribal meetings
that were regularly held at the Great Place. These were not scheduled, but were called as needed, and were held to discuss national matters such
as a drought, the culling of cattle, policies ordered by the magistrate, or new laws decreed by the government. All Thembus were free to come —
and a great many did, on horseback or by foot.
On these occasions, the regent was surrounded by his amaphakathi, a group of councilors of high rank who functioned as the regent’s
parliament and judiciary. They were wise men who retained the knowledge of tribal history and custom in their heads and whose opinions carried
great weight.
Letters advising these chiefs and headmen of a meeting were dispatched from the regent, and soon the Great Place became alive with
important visitors and travelers from all over Thembuland. The guests would gather in the courtyard in front of the regent’s house and he would open
the meeting by thanking everyone for coming and explaining why he had summoned them. From that point on, he would not utter another word until
the meeting was nearing its end.

Everyone who wanted to speak did so. It was democracy in its purest form. There may have been a hierarchy of importance among the
speakers, but everyone was heard, chief and subject, warrior and medicine man, shopkeeper and farmer, landowner and laborer. People spoke
without interruption and the meetings lasted for many hours. The foundation of self-government was that all men were free to voice their opinions
and equal in their value as citizens. (Women, I am afraid, were deemed second-class citizens.)
A great banquet was served during the day, and I often gave myself a bellyache by eating too much while listening to speaker after speaker. I
noticed how some speakers rambled and never seemed to get to the point. I grasped how others came to the matter at hand directly, and who
made a set of arguments succinctly and cogently. I observed how some speakers used emotion and dramatic language, and tried to move the
audience with such techniques, while other speakers were sober and even, and shunned emotion.
At first, I was astonished by the vehemence — and candor — with which people criticized the regent. He was not above criticism — in fact, he
was often the principal target of it. But no matter how flagrant the charge, the regent simply listened, not defending himself, showing no emotion at
all.
The meetings would continue until some kind of consensus was reached. They ended in unanimity or not at all. Unanimity, however, might be an
agreement to disagree, to wait for a more propitious time to propose a solution. Democracy meant all men were to be heard, and a decision was
taken together as a people. Majority rule was a foreign notion. A minority was not to be crushed by a majority.
Only at the end of the meeting, as the sun was setting, would the regent speak. His purpose was to sum up what had been said and form some
consensus among the diverse opinions. But no conclusion was forced on people who disagreed. If no agreement could be reached, another
meeting would be held. At the very end of the council, a praise-singer or poet would deliver a panegyric to the ancient kings, and a mixture of
compliments to and satire on the present chiefs, and the audience, led by the regent, would roar with laughter.
As a leader, I have always followed the principles I first saw demonstrated by the regent at the Great Place. I have always endeavored to listen to
what each and every person in a discussion had to say before venturing my own opinion. Oftentimes, my own opinion will simply represent a
consensus of what I heard in the discussion. I always remember the regent’s axiom: a leader, he said, is like a shepherd. He stays behind the flock,
letting the most nimble go out ahead, whereupon the others follow, not realizing that all along they are being directed from behind.

It was at Mqhekezweni that I developed my interest in African history. Until then I had heard only of Xhosa heroes, but at the Great Place I learned of
other African heroes like Sekhukhune, king of the Bapedi, and the Basotho king, Moshoeshoe, and Dingane, king of the Zulus, and others such as
Bambatha, Hintsa and Makana, Montshiwa and Kgama. I learned of these men from the chiefs and headmen who came to the Great Place to settle
disputes and try cases. Though not lawyers, these men presented cases and then adjudicated them. Some days, they would finish early and sit
around telling stories. I hovered silently and listened. They spoke in an idiom that I’d never heard before. Their speech was formal and lofty, their
manner slow and unhurried, and the traditional clicks of our language were long and dramatic.
At first, they shooed me away and told me I was too young to listen. Later they would beckon me to fetch fire or water for them, or to tell the
women they wanted tea, and in those early months I was too busy running errands to follow their conversation. But, eventually, they permitted me to
stay, and I discovered the great African patriots who fought against Western domination. My imagination was fired by the glory of these African
warriors.
The most ancient of the chiefs who regaled the gathered elders with ancient tales was Zwelibhangile Joyi, a son from the Great House of King
Ngubengcuka. Chief Joyi was so old that his wrinkled skin hung on him like a loose-fitting coat. His stories unfolded slowly and were often
punctuated by a great wheezing cough, which would force him to stop for minutes at a time. Chief Joyi was the great authority on the history of the
Thembus in large part because he had lived through so much of it.
But as grizzled as Chief Joyi often seemed, the decades fell off him when he spoke of the young impis, or warriors, in the army of King
Ngangelizwe fighting the British. In pantomime, Chief Joyi would fling his spear and creep along the veld as he narrated the victories and defeats.
He spoke of Ngangelizwe’s heroism, generosity, and humility.
Not all of Chief Joyi’s stories revolved around the Thembus. When he first spoke of non-Xhosa warriors, I wondered why. I was like a boy who
worships a local soccer hero and is not interested in a national soccer star with whom he has no connection. Only later was I moved by the broad
sweep of African history, and the deeds of all African heroes regardless of tribe.
Chief Joyi railed against the white man, who he believed had deliberately sundered the Xhosa tribe, dividing brother from brother. The white man
had told the Thembus that their true chief was the great white queen across the ocean and that they were her subjects. But the white queen brought
nothing but misery and perfidy to the black people, and if she was a chief she was an evil chief. Chief Joyi’s war stories and his indictment of the
British made me feel angry and cheated, as though I had already been robbed of my own birthright.
Chief Joyi said that the African people lived in relative peace until the coming of the abelungu, the white people, who arrived from across the sea
with fire-breathing weapons. Once, he said, the Thembu, the Mpondo, the Xhosa, and the Zulu were all children of one father, and lived as brothers.
The white man shattered the abantu, the fellowship, of the various tribes. The white man was hungry and greedy for land, and the black man shared
the land with him as they shared the air and water; land was not for man to possess. But the white man took the land as you might seize another
man’s horse.
I did not yet know that the real history of our country was not to be found in standard British textbooks, which claimed South Africa began with the
landing of Jan Van Riebeeck at the Cape of Good Hope in 1652. It was from Chief Joyi that I began to discover that the history of the Bantuspeaking peoples began far to the north, in a country of lakes and green plains and valleys, and that slowly over the millennia we made our way
down to the very tip of this great continent. However, I later discovered that Chief Joyi’s account of African history, particularly after 1652, was not
always so accurate.

In Mqhekezweni, I felt not unlike the proverbial country boy who comes to the big city. Mqhekezweni was far more sophisticated than Qunu, whose
residents were regarded as backward by the people of Mqhekezweni. The regent was loath to have me visit Qunu, thinking I would regress and fall
into bad company back in my old village. When I did visit, I sensed that my mother had been briefed by the regent, for she would question me
closely as to whom I was playing with. On many occasions, however, the regent would arrange for my mother and sisters to be brought to the Great
Place.
When I first arrived in Mqhekezweni I was regarded by some of my peers as a yokel who was hopelessly unequipped to exist in the rarefied
atmosphere of the Great Place. As young men will, I did my best to appear suave and sophisticated. In church one day, I had noticed a lovely young
woman who was one of the daughters of the Reverend Matyolo. Her name was Winnie, and I asked her out and she accepted. She was keen on

me, but her eldest sister, nomaMpondo, regarded me as hopelessly backward. She told her sister that I was a barbarian who was not good enough
for the daughter of Reverend Matyolo. To prove to her younger sister how uncivilized I was, she invited me to the rectory for lunch. I was still used to
eating at home, where we did not use knife and fork. At the family table, this mischievous older sister handed me a plate that contained a single
chicken wing. But the wing, instead of being soft and tender, was a bit tough, so the meat did not fall easily off the bone.
I watched the others using their knives and forks with ease and slowly picked up mine. I observed the others for a few moments, and then
attempted to carve my little wing. At first I just moved it around the plate, hoping that the flesh would fall from the bone. Then I tried in vain to pin the
thing down, and cut it, but it eluded me, and in my frustration I was clanking my knife on the plate. I tried this repeatedly and then noticed that the
older sister was smiling at me and looking knowingly at the younger sister as if to say, “I told you so.” I struggled and struggled and became wet with
perspiration, but I did not want to admit defeat and pick the infernal thing up with my hands. I did not eat much chicken that day at luncheon.
Afterward the older sister told the younger, “You will waste your whole life if you fall in love with such a backward boy,” but I am happy to say the
young lady did not listen — she loved me, as backward as I was. Eventually, of course, we went different ways and drifted apart. She attended a
different school, and qualified as a teacher. We corresponded for a few years and then I lost track of her, but by that time I had considerably
improved my table etiquette.
