IF WE HAD ANY HOPES or illusions about the National Party before they came into office, we were disabused of them quickly. Their threat to put
the kaffir in his place was not an idle one. Apart from the Suppression of Communism Act, two laws passed in 1950 formed the cornerstones of
apartheid: the Population Registration Act and the Group Areas Act. As I have mentioned, the Population Registration Act authorized the
government officially to classify all South Africans according to race. If it had not already been so, race became the sine qua non of South African
society. The arbitrary and meaningless tests to decide black from Coloured or Coloured from white often resulted in tragic cases where members
of the same family were classified differently, all depending on whether one child had a lighter or darker complexion. Where one was allowed to live
and work could rest on such absurd distinctions as the curl of one’s hair or the size of one’s lips.
The Group Areas Act was the foundation of residential apartheid. Under its regulations, each racial group could own land, occupy premises, and
trade only in its own separate area. Indians could henceforth only live in Indian areas, Africans in African, Coloureds in Coloured. If whites wanted
the land or houses of the other groups, they could simply declare the land a white area and take them. The Group Areas Act initiated the era of
forced removals, when African communities, towns, and villages in newly designated “white” urban areas were violently relocated because the
nearby white landowners did not want Africans living near them or simply wanted their land.
At the top of the list for removal was Sophiatown, a vibrant community of more than fifty thousand people, which was one of the oldest black
settlements in Johannesburg. Despite its poverty, Sophiatown brimmed with a rich life and was an incubator of so much that was new and valuable
in African life and culture. Even before the government’s efforts to remove it, Sophiatown held a symbolic importance for Africans disproportionate
to its small population.
The following year, the government passed two more laws that directly attacked the rights of the Coloureds and Africans. The Separate
Representation of Voters Act aimed to transfer Coloureds to a separate voters’ roll in the Cape, thereby diluting the franchise rights that they had
enjoyed for more than a century. The Bantu Authorities Act abolished the Natives Representative Council, the one indirect forum of national
representation for Africans, and replaced it with a hierarchical system of tribal chiefs appointed by the government. The idea was to restore power
to traditional and mainly conservative ethnic leaders in order to perpetuate ethnic differences that were beginning to erode. Both laws epitomized
the ethos of the Nationalist government, which pretended to preserve what they were attempting to destroy. Laws stripping people of their rights
were inevitably described as laws restoring those rights.

The Coloured people rallied against the Separate Representation of Voters Act, organizing a tremendous demonstration in Cape Town in March of
1951 and a strike in April that kept shops closed and schoolchildren at home. It was in the context of this spirit of activism by Indians, Coloureds,
and Africans that Walter Sisulu first broached the idea to a small group of us of a national civil disobedience campaign. He outlined a plan under
which selected volunteers from all groups would deliberately invite imprisonment by defying certain laws.
The idea immediately appealed to me, as it did to the others, but I differed with Walter on the question of who should take part. I had recently
become national president of the Youth League, and in my new role I urged that the campaign should be exclusively African. The average African, I
said, was still cautious about joint action with Indians and Coloureds. While I had made progress in terms of my opposition to communism, I still
feared the influence of Indians. In addition, many of our grassroots African supporters saw Indians as exploiters of black labor in their role as
shopkeepers and merchants.
Walter vehemently disagreed, suggesting that the Indians, Coloureds, and Africans were inextricably bound together. The issue was taken up at
a meeting of the National Executive Committee and my view was voted down, even by those who were considered staunch African nationalists. But
I was nevertheless persistent and I raised the matter once more at the national conference in December 1951, where the delegates dismissed my
view as emphatically as the National Executive Committee had done. Now that my view had been rejected by the highest levels of the ANC, I fully
accepted the agreed-upon position. While my speech advocating a go-it-alone strategy was met with a lukewarm reception, the speech I gave as
president of the Youth League after the league pledged its support for the new policy of cooperation was given a resounding ovation.
At the behest of a joint planning council consisting of Dr. Moroka, Walter, J. B. Marks, Yusuf Dadoo, and Yusuf Cachalia, the ANC conference
endorsed a resolution calling upon the government to repeal the Suppression of Communism Act, the Group Areas Act, the Separate
Representation of Voters Act, the Bantu Authorities Act, the pass laws, and stock limitation laws by February 29, 1952. The law was intended to
reduce overgrazing by cattle, but its impact would be to further abridge land for Africans. The council resolved that the ANC would hold
demonstrations on April 6, 1952, as a prelude to the launching of the Campaign for the Defiance of Unjust Laws. That same day white South
Africans would be celebrating the three hundredth anniversary of Jan Van Riebeeck’s arrival at the Cape in 1652. April 6 is the day white South
Africans annually commemorate as the founding of their country — and Africans revile as the beginning of three hundred years of enslavement.
The ANC drafted a letter to the prime minister advising him of these resolutions and the deadline for repealing the laws. Because the letter was
to go out under the name of Dr. Moroka, and Dr. Moroka had not participated in the writing of it, I was instructed to take him the letter by driving to
his home in Thaba ’Nchu, a town near Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State, a very conservative area of the country. I almost did not make it there
to see him.

Only a few weeks before, I had taken my driver’s test. In those days, a driver’s license was an unusual thing for an African, for very few blacks had
cars. On the appointed day, I borrowed a car to use for the test. I was a bit cocky, and decided to drive the car there myself. I was running late and
was driving faster than I should have been, and as I maneuvered the car along a side street that met a main road, I failed to look both ways and
collided with a car coming in another direction. The damage was minimal, but now I would certainly be late. The other driver was a reasonable
fellow and we simply agreed to pay our own expenses.
When I reached the testing station, I observed a white woman ahead of me in the middle of her test. She was driving properly and cautiously.
When the test was finished, the driving inspector said, “Thank you. Would you please park the car over there,” gesturing to a space nearby. She
had performed the test well enough to pass, but as the woman drove over to the parking place, she did not negotiate a corner properly and the
back wheel jumped the curb. The inspector hurried over and said, “I’m sorry, madam, you’ve failed the test; please make another appointment.” I felt
my confidence ebbing. If this fellow tricks a white woman into failing her test, what hope would I have? But I performed well on the test, and when the
inspector told me to park the car at the end of the exam, I drove so carefully that I thought he might penalize me for going too slowly.
Once I could legally drive, I became a one-man taxi service. It was one’s obligation to give rides to comrades and friends. I was thus deputized to
take the letter to Dr. Moroka. This was no hardship to me as I have always found it enjoyable to gaze out the window while driving. I seemed to have

my best ideas while driving through the countryside with the wind whipping through the window.
On my way down to Thaba ’Nchu, I passed through Kroonstad, a conservative Free State town about 120 miles south of Johannesburg. I was
driving up a hill and saw two white boys ahead of me on bicycles. My driving was still a bit unsteady, and I came too close to the boys, one of whom
suddenly made a turn without signaling, and we collided. He was knocked off his bicycle and was groaning when I got out of the car to help him. He
had his arms out signaling for me to pick him up, but just as I was about to do so, a white truck driver yelled for me not to touch the boy. The truck
driver scared the child, who then dropped his arms as though he did not want me to pick him up. The boy was not badly hurt, and the truck driver
took him to the police station, which was close by.
The local police arrived a short time later, and the white sergeant took one look at me and said, “Kaffer, jy sal kak vandag!” (Kaffir, you will shit
today!) I was shaken by the accident and the violence of his words, but I told him in no uncertain terms that I would shit when I pleased, not when a
policeman told me to. At this, the sergeant took out his notebook to record my particulars. Afrikaans policemen were surprised if a black man could
speak English, much less answer back.
After I identified myself, he turned to the car, which he proceeded to ransack. From under the floor mat he pulled out a copy of the left-wing weekly
The Guardian, which I had hidden immediately after the accident. (I had slipped the letter for Dr. Moroka inside my shirt.) He looked at the title and
then held it up in the air like a pirate with his booty: “Wragtig ons her ’n Kommunis gevang!” he cried. (My word, we’ve caught a Communist!)
Brandishing the newspaper, he hurried off.
The sergeant returned after about four hours, accompanied by another officer. This sergeant, while also an Afrikaner, was intent on doing his duty
correctly. He said he would need to take measurements at the site of the accident for police records. I told the sergeant that it was not proper to
take the measurements at night when the accident had occurred in the daylight. I added that I intended to spend the night in Thaba ’Nchu, and that I
could not afford to stay in Kroonstad. The sergeant eyed me impatiently and said, “What is your name?”
“Mandela,” I said.
“No, the first one,” he said. I told him.
“Nelson,” the sergeant said, as if he were talking to a boy, “I want to help you resume your journey. But if you are going to be difficult with me I will
have no alternative but to be difficult with you and lock you up for the night.” That brought me down to earth and I consented to the measurements.
I resumed my journey late that night, and the next morning I was traveling through the district of Excelsior when my car ground to a halt. I had run
out of petrol. I walked to a nearby farmhouse and explained in English to an elderly white lady that I would like to buy some petrol. As she was
closing the door, she said, “I don’t have any petrol for you.” I tramped two miles to the next farm and, chastened by my unsuccessful first effort, tried
a different approach. I asked to see the farmer, and when he appeared I assumed a humble demeanor. “My baas has run out of petrol,” I said.
(Baas, the Afrikaans word for boss or master, signifies subservience.) Friendly and helpful, the farmer was a relation of Prime Minister Strydom.
Yet, I believe he would have given me the petrol had I told him the truth and not used the hated word baas.

The meeting with Dr. Moroka proved far less eventful than my journey there. He approved of the letter and I made my way back to Johannesburg
without incident. The letter to the prime minister noted that the ANC had exhausted every constitutional means at our disposal to achieve our
legitimate rights, and that we demanded the repeal of the six “unjust laws” by February 29, 1952, or else we would take extra-constitutional action.
Malan’s reply, signed by his private secretary, asserted that whites had an inherent right to take measures to preserve their own identity as a
separate community, and ended with the threat that if we pursued our actions the government would not hesitate to make full use of its machinery to
quell any disturbances.
We regarded Malan’s curt dismissal of our demands as a declaration of war. We now had no alternative but to resort to civil disobedience, and
we embarked on preparations for mass action in earnest. The recruitment and training of volunteers was one of the essential tasks of the campaign
and would in large part be responsible for its success or failure. On April 6, preliminary demonstrations took place in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Port
Elizabeth, Durban, and Cape Town. While Dr. Moroka addressed a crowd at Freedom Square in Johannesburg, I spoke to a group of potential
volunteers at the Garment Workers Union. I explained to a group of several hundred Africans, Indians, and Coloureds that volunteering was a
difficult and even dangerous duty, as the authorities would seek to intimidate, imprison, and perhaps attack the volunteers. No matter what the
authorities did, the volunteers could not retaliate, otherwise they would undermine the value of the entire enterprise. They must respond to violence
with nonviolence; discipline must be maintained at all cost.
On May 31, the executives of the ANC and the SAIC met in Port Elizabeth and announced that the Defiance Campaign would begin on June 26,
the anniversary of the first National Day of Protest. They also created a National Action Committee to direct the campaign and a National Volunteer
Board to recruit and train volunteers. I was appointed national volunteer-in-chief of the campaign and chairman of both the Action Committee and
the Volunteer Board. My responsibilities were to organize the campaign, coordinate the regional branches, canvass for volunteers, and raise funds.
We also discussed whether the campaign should follow Gandhian principles of nonviolence, or what the Mahatma called satyagraha, a
nonviolence that seeks to conquer through conversion. Some argued for nonviolence on purely ethical grounds, saying it was morally superior to
any other method. This idea was strongly affirmed by Manilal Gandhi, the Mahatma’s son and the editor of the newspaper Indian Opinion, who was
a prominent member of the SAIC. With his gentle demeanor, Gandhi seemed the very personification of nonviolence, and he insisted that the
campaign be run along identical lines to that of his father’s in India.
Others said that we should approach this issue not from the point of view of principles but of tactics, and that we should employ the method
demanded by the conditions. If a particular method or tactic enabled us to defeat the enemy, then it should be used. In this case, the state was far
more powerful than we, and any attempts at violence by us would be devastatingly crushed. This made nonviolence a practical necessity rather than
an option. This was my view, and I saw nonviolence in the Gandhian model not as an inviolable principle but as a tactic to be used as the situation
demanded. The principle was not so important that the strategy should be used even when it was self-defeating, as Gandhi himself believed. I
called for nonviolent protest for as long as it was effective. This view prevailed, despite Manilal Gandhi’s strong objections.
The joint planning council agreed upon an open-ended program of noncooperation and nonviolence. Two stages of defiance were proposed. In
the first stage, a small number of well-trained volunteers would break selected laws in a handful of urban areas. They would enter proscribed areas
without permits, use Whites Only facilities such as toilets, Whites Only railway compartments, waiting rooms, and post office entrances. They would
deliberately remain in town after curfew. Each batch of defiers would have a leader who would inform the police in advance of the act of
disobedience so that the arrests could take place with a minimum of disturbance. The second stage was envisioned as mass defiance,
accompanied by strikes and industrial actions across the country.
Prior to the inauguration of the Defiance Campaign, a rally, called the Day of the Volunteers, was held in Durban on June 22. Chief Luthuli,
president of the Natal ANC, and Dr. Naicker, president of the Natal Indian Congress, both spoke and committed themselves to the campaign. I had

driven down the day before and was the main speaker. About ten thousand people were in attendance, and I told the crowd that the Defiance
Campaign would be the most powerful action ever undertaken by the oppressed masses in South Africa. I had never addressed such a great
crowd before, and it was an exhilarating experience. One cannot speak to a mass of people as one addresses an audience of two dozen. Yet I
have always tried to take the same care to explain matters to great audiences as to small ones. I told the people that they would make history and
focus the attention of the world on the racist policies of South Africa. I emphasized that unity among the black people — Africans, Coloureds, and
Indians — in South Africa had at last become a reality.

All across the country, those who defied on June 26 did so with courage, enthusiasm, and a sense of history. The campaign began in the early
morning hours in Port Elizabeth, where thirty-three defiers, under the leadership of Raymond Mhlaba, entered a railway station through a Whites
Only entrance and were arrested. They marched in singing freedom songs, to the accompanying cheers of friends and family. In a call and
response, the defiers and the crowd yelled, “Mayibuye Afrika!” (Let Africa come back!)
On the morning of the twenty-sixth, I was in the ANC office overseeing the day’s demonstrations. The Transvaal batch of volunteers was
scheduled to go into action at midday at an African township near Boksburg, east of Johannesburg. Led by Reverend N. B. Tantsi, they were to
court arrest by entering the township without permission. Reverend Tantsi was an elderly fellow, a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal
Church, and the acting president of the Transvaal ANC.
It was late morning, and I was waiting for Reverend Tantsi to arrive from Pretoria, when he telephoned me at the office. With regret in his voice,
he told me that his doctor advised him against defying and going to prison. I assured him that we would provide him with warm clothing and that he
would spend only a night in jail, but to no avail. This was a grave disappointment, for Reverend Tantsi was a distinguished figure and had been
selected in order to show the authorities that we were not just a group of young rabble-rousers.
In place of Reverend Tantsi, we quickly found someone equally venerable: Nana Sita, the president of the Transvaal Indian Congress, who had
served a month in jail for his passive resistance during the 1946 protest campaign. Despite his advanced age and acute arthritis, Sita was a fighter
and agreed to lead our defiers.
In the afternoon, as we were preparing to go to Boksburg, I realized that the secretary of the Transvaal branch of the ANC was nowhere to be
found. He was meant to accompany Nana Sita to Boksburg. This was another crisis, and I turned to Walter and said, “You must go.” This was our
first event in the Transvaal, and it was necessary to have prominent figures lead the defiers, otherwise the leaders would appear to be hanging
back while the masses took the punishment. Even though Walter was one of the organizers and was scheduled to defy later, he readily agreed. My
main concern was that he was wearing a suit, impractical dress for prison, but we managed to find him some old clothes instead.
We then left for Boksburg, where Yusuf Cachalia and I planned to deliver a letter to the Boksburg magistrate, advising him that fifty of our
volunteers would enter the African township in his area that day without permits. When we arrived at the magistrate’s office, we found a large
contingent of pressmen and photographers. As I handed the envelope to the magistrate, the photographers went into action. The magistrate
shielded himself from the camera flashes and then invited Yusuf and myself into his chambers to discuss the matter privately. He was a reasonable
man, and said his office was always open to us, but that excessive publicity would only worsen matters.
From the magistrate’s office, we went straight to the township where the demonstration was taking place, and even from half a mile away we
heard the robust singing of our volunteers and the great crowd of supporters who had come to encourage them. At the scene, we found the high
metal gates to the township locked and our volunteers waiting patiently outside, demanding entrance. There were fifty-two volunteers in all, both
Africans and Indians, and a crowd of several hundred enthusiastic spectators and journalists. Walter was at the head of the defiers; his presence
was evidence that we meant business. But the guiding spirit of the demonstrators was Nana Sita, who, despite his arthritis, was moving among the
demonstrators in high spirits, clapping them on the back, and bolstering their confidence with his own.
For the first hour there was a standoff. The police were uncharacteristically restrained and their behavior baffled us. Was their restraint a strategy
to exhaust the volunteers? Were they waiting for the journalists to depart and then stage a massacre under the cover of darkness? Or were they
faced with the dilemma that by arresting us — which is what they would have normally done — they would be doing the very thing we wanted? But
even while we were wondering, the situation suddenly changed. The police ordered the gates opened. Immediately the volunteers surged through
the gates, thus breaking the law. A police lieutenant blew a whistle and seconds later the police surrounded the volunteers and began arresting
them. The campaign was under way. The demonstrators were carted off to the local police station and charged.
That same evening, the leaders of the Action Committee, which included Oliver Tambo, Yusuf Cachalia, and myself, attended a meeting in the
city to discuss the day’s events and to plan for the week ahead. It was near the area where the second batch of defiers, led by Flag Boshielo,
chairman of the central branch of the ANC, were courting arrest. Shortly after eleven o’clock, we found them marching in unison in the street; at
eleven, curfew regulations went into effect and Africans needed a permit to be outside.
We emerged from our meeting at midnight. I felt exhausted and was thinking not of defiance but of a hot meal and a night’s sleep. At that
moment, a policeman approached Yusuf and me. It was obvious that we were going home, not protesting. “No, Mandela,” the policeman called out.
“You can’t escape.” He pointed with his nightstick to the police wagon parked nearby and said, “Into the van.” I felt like explaining to him that I was in
charge of running the campaign on a day-to-day basis and was not scheduled to defy and be arrested until much later, but of course, that would
have been ridiculous. I watched as he arrested Yusuf, who burst out laughing at the irony of it all. It was a lovely sight to see him smiling as he was
led away by the police.
Moments later, Yusuf and I found ourselves among the more than fifty of our volunteers led by Flag Boshielo who were being taken in trucks to the
red-brick police station known as Marshall Square. As the leaders of the Action Committee, we were worried that the others would wonder at our
absence and I was concerned about who would be running the campaign. But spirits were high. Even on the way to prison, the vans swayed to the
rich voices of the defiers singing “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika” (God Bless Africa), the hauntingly beautiful African national anthem.
That first night, in the drill yard, one of us was pushed so violently by a white warder that he fell down some steps and broke his ankle. I protested
to the warder about his behavior, and he lashed out at me by kicking me in the shin. I demanded that the injured man receive medical attention and
we initiated a small but vocal demonstration. We were curtly informed that the injured man could make a request for a doctor the next day if he so
wished. We were aware throughout the night of his acute pain.
Until then I had spent bits and pieces of time in prison, but this was my first concentrated experience. Marshall Square was squalid, dark, and
dingy, but we were all together and so impassioned and spirited that I barely noticed my surroundings. The camaraderie of our fellow defiers made
the two days pass very quickly.
* * *

On that first day of the Defiance Campaign, more than 250 volunteers around the country violated various unjust laws and were imprisoned. It was
an auspicious beginning. Our troops were orderly, disciplined, and confident.
Over the next five months, 8,500 people took part in the campaign. Doctors, factory workers, lawyers, teachers, students, ministers, defied and
went to jail. They sang, “Hey, Malan! Open the jail doors. We want to enter.” The campaign spread throughout the Witwatersrand, to Durban, to Port
Elizabeth, East London, and Cape Town, and smaller towns in the eastern and western Cape. Resistance was beginning to percolate even in the
rural areas. For the most part, the offenses were minor, and the penalties ranged from no more than a few nights in jail to a few weeks, with the
option of a fine which rarely exceeded ten pounds. The campaign received an enormous amount of publicity and the membership of the ANC shot
up from some 20,000 to 100,000 with the most spectacular increase occurring in the eastern Cape, which contributed half of all new members.
During the six months of the campaign I traveled a great deal throughout the country. I generally went by car, leaving at night or very early in the
morning. I toured the Cape, Natal, and the Transvaal, explaining the campaign to small groups, sometimes going from house to house in the
townships. Often, my task was to iron out differences in areas that were about to launch actions or had recently done so. In those days, when mass
communication for Africans was primitive or nonexistent, politics were parochial. We had to win people over one by one.
On one occasion I drove to the eastern Cape to resolve a dispute involving Alcott Gwentshe, who was running the campaign in East London.
Gwentshe had been a successful shopkeeper and had played an important role in organizing East London for the stay-at-home of June 26, two
years before. He had briefly gone to jail at the beginning of the Defiance Campaign. He was a strong and able man, but he was an individualist who
ignored the advice of the executive and took decisions unilaterally. He was now at odds with his own executive, which was mainly populated with
intellectuals.
Gwentshe knew how to exploit certain issues in order to discredit his opponents. He would speak before local members who were workers not
intellectuals, and say — in Xhosa, never English, for English was the language of the intellectuals — “Comrades, I think you know that I have
suffered for the struggle. I had a good job and then went to jail at the beginning of the Defiance Campaign and I lost that job. Now that I am out of
prison, these intellectuals have come along and said, ‘Gwentshe, we are better educated than you, we are more capable than you, let us run this
campaign.’ ”
When I investigated the situation I found that Gwentshe had indeed ignored the advice of the executive. But the people were behind him, and he
had created a disciplined and well-organized group of volunteers who had defied in an orderly fashion even while Gwentshe was in prison. Although
I thought Gwentshe was wrong for disregarding the executive, he was doing a good job and was so firmly entrenched that he could not easily be
dislodged. When I saw the members of the executive, I explained that it was impractical to do anything about the situation now, but if they wanted to
remedy it, they must defeat him at the next election. It was one of the first times that I saw that it was foolhardy to go against the masses of people. It
is no use to take an action to which the masses are opposed, for it will then be impossible to enforce.

The government saw the campaign as a threat to its security and its policy of apartheid. They regarded civil disobedience not as a form of protest
but as a crime, and were perturbed by the growing partnership between Africans and Indians. Apartheid was designed to divide racial groups, and
we showed that different groups could work together. The prospect of a united front between Africans and Indians, between moderates and
radicals, greatly worried them. The Nationalists insisted that the campaign was instigated and led by Communist agitators. The minister of justice
announced that he would soon pass legislation to deal with our defiance, a threat he implemented during the 1953 parliamentary session with the
passage of the Public Safety Act, which empowered the government to declare martial law and to detain people without trial, and the Criminal
Laws Amendment Act, which authorized corporal punishment for defiers.
The government tried a number of underhanded means to interrupt the campaign. Government propagandists repeatedly claimed that the
leaders of the campaign were living it up in comfort while the masses were languishing in jail. This allegation was far from the truth, but it achieved a
certain currency. The government also infiltrated spies and agents provocateurs into the organization. The ANC welcomed virtually anyone who
wanted to join. In spite of the fact that our volunteers were carefully screened before they were selected to defy, the police managed to penetrate not
only our local branches but some of the batches of defiers. When I was arrested and sent to Marshall Square, I noticed two fellows among the
defiers, one of whom I had never seen before. He wore unusual prison garb: a suit and tie with an overcoat and a silk scarf. What kind of fellow
goes to jail dressed like that? His name was Ramaila, and on the third day when we were due to be released, he simply vanished.
The second fellow, whose name was Makhanda, stood out because of his military demeanor. We were out in the courtyard and we were all in
high spirits. The defiers would march in front of Yusuf and myself and salute us. Makhanda, who was tall and slender, marched in a soldierly manner
and then gave a crisp, graceful salute. A number of the fellows teased him that he must be a policeman to salute so well.
Makhanda had previously worked as a janitor at ANC headquarters. He was very industrious and was popular among the fellows because he
would run out and get fish and chips whenever anyone was hungry. But at a later trial we discovered that both Makhanda and Ramaila were police
spies. Ramaila testified that he had infiltrated the ranks of the defiers; the trusty Makhanda was actually Detective-Sergeant Motloung.
Africans who worked as spies against their own brothers generally did so for money. Many blacks in South Africa believed that any effort by the
black man to challenge the white man was foolhardy and doomed to failure; the white man was too smart and too strong. These spies saw us as a
threat not to the white power structure but to black interests, for whites would mistreat all blacks based on the conduct of a few agitators.
Yet, there were many black policemen who secretly aided us. They were decent fellows and found themselves in a moral quandary. They were
loyal to their employer and needed to keep their jobs to support their families, but they were sympathetic to our cause. We had an understanding
with a handful of African officers who were members of the security police that they would inform us when there was going to be a police raid.
These men were patriots who risked their lives to help the struggle.
The government was not our only impediment. Others who might have helped us instead hindered us. At the height of the Defiance Campaign,
the United Party sent two of its MPs to urge us to halt the campaign. They said that if we abandoned our campaign in response to a call made by J.
G. N. Strauss, the United Party leader, it would help the party defeat the Nationalists in the next election. We rejected this and Strauss proceeded to
attack us with the same scorn used by the Nationalists.
We also came under attack from a breakaway ANC group called the National Minded Bloc. Led by Selope Thema, a former member of the
National Executive Committee, the group bolted from the ANC when J. B. Marks was elected president of the Transvaal ANC. Thema, who was
editor of the newspaper the Bantu World, fiercely criticized the campaign in his paper, claiming that Communists had taken over the ANC and that
Indians were exploiting the Africans. He asserted that the Communists were more dangerous now that they were working underground, and that
Indian economic interests were in conflict with those of Africans. Although he was in a minority in the ANC, his views got a sympathetic hearing
among certain radical Youth Leaguers.

In May, during the middle of the Defiance Campaign, J. B. Marks was banned under the 1950 Suppression of Communism Act for “furthering the
aims of communism.” Banning was a legal order by the government, and generally entailed forced resignation from indicated organizations, and
restriction from attending gatherings of any kind. It was a kind of walking imprisonment. To ban a person, the government required no proof, offered
no charges; the minister of justice simply declared it so. It was a strategy designed to remove the individual from the struggle, allowing him to live a
narrowly defined life outside of politics. To violate or ignore a banning order was to invite imprisonment.
At the Transvaal conference that year in October, my name was proposed to replace the banned J. B. Marks, who had recommended that I
succeed him. I was the national president of the Youth League, and the favorite for Marks’s position, but my candidacy was opposed by a group
from within the Transvaal ANC that called itself “Bafabegiya” (Those Who Die Dancing). The group consisted mainly of ex-Communists turned
extreme African nationalists. They sought to cut all links with Indian activists and to move the ANC in the direction of a more confrontational strategy.
They were led by MacDonald Maseko, a former Communist who had been chairman of the Orlando Branch of the ANC during the Defiance
Campaign, and Seperepere Marupeng, who had been the chief volunteer for the Defiance Campaign in the Witwatersrand. Both Maseko and
Marupeng intended to stand for the presidency of the Transvaal.
Marupeng was considered something of a demagogue. He used to wear a military-style khaki suit replete with epaulets and gold buttons, and
carried a baton like that made famous by Field Marshal Montgomery. He would stand up in front of meetings, his baton clutched underneath his
arm, and say: “I am tired of waiting for freedom. I want freedom now! I will meet Malan at the crossroads and I will show him what I want.” Then,
banging his baton on the podium, he would cry, “I want freedom now!”
Because of speeches like these, Marupeng became extremely popular during the Defiance Campaign, but popularity is only one factor in an
election. He thought that because of his newfound prominence he would win the presidency. Before the election, when it was known that I would be
a candidate for the presidency, I approached him and said, “I would like you to stand for election to the executive so that you can serve with me
when I am president.” He regarded this as a slight, that I was in effect demoting him, and he refused, choosing instead to run for the presidency
himself. But he had miscalculated, for I won the election with an overwhelming majority.

On July 30, 1952, at the height of the Defiance Campaign, I was at work at my then law firm of H. M. Basner when the police arrived with a warrant
for my arrest. The charge was violation of the Suppression of Communism Act. The state made a series of simultaneous arrests of campaign
leaders in Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth, and Kimberley. Earlier in the month, the police had raided homes and offices of ANC and SAIC officials
all over the country and confiscated papers and documents. This type of raid was something new and set a pattern for the pervasive and illegal
searches that subsequently became a regular feature of the government’s behavior.
My arrest and those of the others culminated in a trial in September in Johannesburg of twenty-one accused, including the presidents and
general-secretaries of the ANC, the SAIC, the ANC Youth League, and the Transvaal Indian Congress. Among the twenty-one on trial in
Johannesburg were Dr. Moroka, Walter Sisulu, and J. B. Marks. A number of Indian leaders were arrested, including Dr. Dadoo, Yusuf Cachalia,
and Ahmed Kathrada.
Our appearances in court became the occasion for exuberant political rallies. Massive crowds of demonstrators marched through the streets of
Johannesburg and converged on the city’s Magistrate’s Court. There were white students from the University of the Witwatersrand; old ANC
campaigners from Alexandra; Indian school-children from primary and secondary schools; people of all ages and colors. The court had never been
deluged with such crowds before. The courtroom itself was packed with people, and shouts of “Mayibuye Afrika!” punctuated the proceedings.
The trial should have been an occasion of resolve and solidarity, but was sullied by a breach of faith by Dr. Moroka. Dr. Moroka, the presidentgeneral of the ANC and the figurehead of the campaign, shocked us all by employing his own attorney. The plan was for all of us to be tried
together. My fellow accused designated me to discuss the matter with Dr. Moroka and attempt to persuade him not to separate himself. The day
before the trial, I went to see Dr. Moroka at Village Deep, Johannesburg.
At the outset of our meeting, I suggested alternatives to him, but he was not interested and instead aired a number of grievances. Dr. Moroka felt
that he had been excluded from the planning of the campaign. Yet, Moroka was often quite uninterested in ANC affairs and content to be so. But he
said the matter that disturbed him more than any other was that by being defended with the rest of us, he would be associated with men who were
Communists. Dr. Moroka shared the government’s animosity to communism. I remonstrated with him and said that it was the tradition of the ANC to
work with anyone who was against racial oppression. But Dr. Moroka was unmoved.
The greatest jolt came when Dr. Moroka tendered a humiliating plea in mitigation to Judge Rumpff and took the witness stand to renounce the
very principles on which the ANC had been founded. Asked whether he thought there should be equality between black and white in South Africa,
Dr. Moroka replied that there would never be such a thing. We felt like slumping in despair in our seats. When his own lawyer asked him whether
there were some among the defendants who were Communists, Dr. Moroka actually began to point his finger at various people, including Dr.
Dadoo and Walter. The judge informed him that that was not necessary.
His performance was a severe blow to the organization and we all immediately realized that Dr. Moroka’s days as ANC president were
numbered. He had committed the cardinal sin of putting his own interests ahead of the organization and the people. He was unwilling to jeopardize
his medical career and fortune for his political beliefs, thereby he had destroyed the image that he had built during three years of courageous work
on behalf of the ANC and the Defiance Campaign. I regarded this as a tragedy, for Dr. Moroka’s faintheartedness in court took away some of the
glow from the campaign. The man who had gone round the country preaching the importance of the campaign had now forsaken it.
On December 2, we were all found guilty of what Judge Rumpff defined as “statutory communism” — as opposed to what he said “is commonly
known as communism.” According to the statutes of the Suppression of Communism Act, virtually anyone who opposed the government in any way
could be defined as — and therefore convicted of — being a “statutory” Communist, even without ever having been a member of the party. The
judge, who was fair-minded and reasonable, said that although we had planned acts that ranged from “open noncompliance of laws to something
that equals high treason,” he accepted that we had consistently advised our members “to follow a peaceful course of action and to avoid violence in
any shape or form.” We were sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment with hard labor, but the sentence was suspended for two years.

We made many mistakes, but the Defiance Campaign marked a new chapter in the struggle. The six laws we singled out were not overturned; but
we never had any illusion that they would be. We selected them as the most immediate burden pressing on the lives of the people, and the best way
to engage the greatest number of people in the struggle.
Prior to the campaign, the ANC was more talk than action. We had no paid organizers, no staff, and a membership that did little more than pay

lip service to our cause. As a result of the campaign, our membership swelled to 100,000. The ANC emerged as a truly mass-based organization
with an impressive corps of experienced activists who had braved the police, the courts, and the jails. The stigma usually associated with
imprisonment had been removed. This was a significant achievement, for fear of prison is a tremendous hindrance to a liberation struggle. From
the Defiance Campaign onward, going to prison became a badge of honor among Africans.
We were extremely proud of the fact that during the six months of the campaign, there was not a single act of violence on our side. The discipline
of our resisters was exemplary. During the later part of the campaign, riots broke out in Port Elizabeth and East London in which more than forty
people were killed. Though these outbreaks had nothing whatsoever to do with the campaign, the government attempted to link us with them. In this,
the government was successful, for the riots poisoned the views of some whites who might otherwise have been sympathetic.
Some within the ANC had unrealistic expectations and were convinced that the campaign could topple the government. We reminded them that
the idea of the campaign was to focus attention on our grievances, not eradicate them. They argued that we had the government where we wanted
them, and that we should continue the campaign indefinitely. I stepped in and said that this government was too strong and too ruthless to be
brought down in such a manner. We could embarrass them, but overthrowing them as a result of the Defiance Campaign was impossible.
As it was, we continued the campaign for too long. We should have listened to Dr. Xuma. The Planning Committee met with Dr. Xuma during the
tail end of the campaign and he told us that the campaign would soon lose momentum and it would be wise to call it off before it fizzled out
altogether. To halt the campaign while it was still on the offensive would be a shrewd move that would capture the headlines. Dr. Xuma was right:
the campaign soon slackened, but in our enthusiasm and even arrogance, we brushed aside his advice. My heart wanted to keep the campaign
going but my head told me that it should stop. I argued for closure but went along with the majority. By the end of the year, the campaign foundered.
The campaign never expanded beyond the initial stage of small batches of mostly urban defiers. Mass defiance, especially in the rural areas,
was never achieved. The eastern Cape was the only region where we succeeded in reaching the second stage and where a strong resistance
movement emerged in the countryside. In general, we did not penetrate the countryside, an historical weakness of the ANC. The campaign was
hampered by the fact that we did not have any full-time organizers. I was attempting to organize the campaign and practice as a lawyer at the same
time, and that is no way to wage a mass campaign. We were still amateurs.
I nevertheless felt a great sense of accomplishment and satisfaction: I had been engaged in a just cause and had the strength to fight for it and
win. The campaign freed me from any lingering sense of doubt or inferiority I might still have felt; it liberated me from the feeling of being
overwhelmed by the power and seeming invincibility of the white man and his institutions. But now the white man had felt the power of my punches
and I could walk upright like a man, and look everyone in the eye with the dignity that comes from not having succumbed to oppression and fear. I
had come of age as a freedom fighter.