ALTHOUGH I HAD WANTED to journey to Qunu immediately after my release from prison, it was not until April that I was able to go. I could not pick
up and leave whenever I wanted; security had to be arranged, as well as speeches prepared for local organizations. By April, the ANC and General
Bantu Holomisa, the military leader of the Transkei and an ANC loyalist, had arranged for a visit. But what was foremost in my mind and heart was
paying my respects to my mother’s grave.
I went first to Qunu and the site where my mother was buried. Her grave was simple and unadorned, covered only by a few stones and some
upturned bricks, no different from the other graves at Qunu. I find it difficult to describe my feelings: I felt regret that I had been unable to be with her
when she died, remorse that I had not been able to look after her properly during her life, and a longing for what might have been had I chosen to
live my life differently.
In seeing my village again after so many years, I was greatly struck by what had changed and what had not. When I had been young, the people of
Qunu were not political at all; they were unaware of the struggle for African rights. People accepted life as it was and did not dream of changing it.
But when I returned I heard the schoolchildren of Qunu singing songs about Oliver Tambo and Umkhonto we Sizwe, and I marveled at how
knowledge of the struggle had by then seeped into every corner of African society.
What had endured was the warmth and simplicity of the community, which took me back to my days as a boy. But what disturbed me was that the
villagers seemed as poor if not poorer than they had been then. Most people still lived in simple huts with dirt floors, with no electricity and no
running water. When I was young, the village was tidy, the water pure, and the grass green and unsullied as far as the eye could see. Kraals were
swept, the topsoil was conserved, fields were neatly divided. But now the village was unswept, the water polluted, and the countryside littered with
plastic bags and wrappers. We had not known of plastic when I was a boy, and though it surely improved life in some ways, its presence in Qunu
appeared to me to be a kind of blight. Pride in the community seemed to have vanished.

That month, I had another homecoming: I returned to Robben Island in order to persuade twenty-five MK political prisoners to accept the
government’s offer of amnesty and leave the island. Though I had left the island eight years before, my memories of prison were still fresh and
untinged by nostalgia. After all the years of being visited by others, it was a curious sensation to be a visitor on Robben Island.
But that day, I did not have much opportunity to sight-see for I met immediately with the men protesting the government offer of amnesty. They
maintained that they would leave only after a victory on the battlefield, not the negotiating table. They were fiercely opposed to this particular
settlement, in which they had to enumerate their crimes before receiving indemnity. They accused the ANC of retreating from the Harare
Declaration demand for an unconditional, blanket amnesty covering political prisoners and exiles. One man said, “Madiba, I have been fighting the
government all my life, and now I have to ask for a pardon from them.”
I could sympathize with their arguments, but they were being unrealistic. Every soldier would like to defeat his enemy on the field, but in this case,
such a victory was out of reach. The struggle was now at the negotiating table. I argued that they were not advancing the cause by remaining in jail.
They could be of greater service outside than inside. In the end, they agreed to accept the government’s offer.
* * *
In early June, I was scheduled to leave on a six-week tour of Europe and North America. Before going, I met privately with Mr. de Klerk, who wanted
to discuss the issue of sanctions. Based on the changes he had made in South Africa, he asked me to mute the call for the continuation of
international sanctions. While we were mindful of what Mr. de Klerk had done, in our view sanctions remained the best lever to force him to do
more. I was aware that the European Community and the States were inclined to relax sanctions based on Mr. de Klerk’s reforms. I explained to Mr.
de Klerk that we could not tell our supporters to relax sanctions until he had completely dismantled apartheid and a transitional government was in
place. While he was disappointed at my response, he was not surprised.
The first leg of the trip took Winnie and me to Paris, where we were treated in very grand style by François Mitterrand and his charming wife,
Danielle, a longtime ANC supporter. This was not my first trip to the European mainland, but I was still entranced by the beauties of the Old World.
Although I do not want to stint on the loveliness of the City of Light, the most important event that occurred while I was in France was that the
government announced the suspension of the State of Emergency. I was pleased, but well aware that they had taken this action while I was in
Europe in order to undermine my call for sanctions.
After stops in Switzerland, Italy, and the Netherlands, I went to England, where I spent two days visiting with Oliver and Adelaide. My next stop
was the United States, but I would be returning to England on my way back to South Africa, which is when I was scheduled to meet with Mrs.
Thatcher. As a courtesy, however, I phoned her before I left, and Mrs. Thatcher proceeded to give me a stern but well-meaning lecture: she said she
had been following my travels and noting how many events I attended each day. “Mr. Mandela, before we discuss any issues,” she said, “I must
warn you that your schedule is too heavy. You must cut it in half. Even a man half your age would have trouble meeting the demands that are being
made on you. If you keep this up, you will not come out of America alive. That is my advice to you.”

I had read about New York City since I was a young man, and finally to see it from the bottom of its great glass-and-concrete canyons while millions
upon millions of pieces of ticker tape came floating down was a breathtaking experience. It was reported that as many as a million people
personally witnessed our procession through the city, and to see the support and enthusiasm they gave to the anti-apartheid struggle was truly
humbling. I had always read that New York was a hard-hearted place, but I felt the very opposite of that on my first full day in the city.
The following day I went up to Harlem, an area that had assumed legendary proportions in my mind since the 1950s when I watched young men
in Soweto emulate the fashions of Harlem dandies. Harlem, as my wife said, was the Soweto of America. I spoke to a great crowd at Yankee
Stadium, telling them that an unbreakable umbilical cord connected black South Africans and black Americans, for we were together children of
Africa. There was a kinship between the two, I said, that had been inspired by such great Americans as W. E. B. Du Bois, Marcus Garvey, and
Martin Luther King Jr. As a young man, I idolized the Brown Bomber, Joe Louis, who took on not only his opponents in the ring but racists outside of
it. In prison, I followed the struggle of black Americans against racism, discrimination, and economic inequality. To us, Harlem symbolized the
strength of resistance and the beauty of black pride. This was brought home to me by a young man I had seen the previous day who wore a T-shirt
that read, “BLACK BY NATURE, PROUD BY CHOICE.” We were linked by nature, I said, but we were proud of each other by choice.
After journeying to Memphis and Boston, I went to Washington to address a joint session of Congress and attend a private meeting with

President Bush. I thanked the U.S. Congress for its anti-apartheid legislation and said the new South Africa hoped to live up to the values that
created the two chambers before which I spoke. I said that as freedom fighters we could not have known of such men as George Washington,
Abraham Lincoln, and Thomas Jefferson “and not been moved to act as they were moved to act.” I also delivered a strong message on sanctions,
for I knew that the Bush administration felt it was time to loosen them. I urged Congress not to do so.
Even before meeting Mr. Bush, I had formed a positive impression of him, for he was the first world leader to telephone me with congratulations
after I left prison. From that point on, President Bush included me on his short list of world leaders whom he briefed on important issues. In person,
he was just as warm and thoughtful, though we differed markedly on the issues of the armed struggle and sanctions. He was a man with whom one
could disagree and then shake hands.
From the United States I proceeded to Canada, where I had a meeting with Prime Minister Mulroney and also addressed their Parliament. We
were due to go to Ireland next, and before crossing the Atlantic, our plane, a small jet, stopped for refueling in a remote place above the Arctic
Circle called Goose Bay. I felt like having a walk in the brisk air, and as I was strolling on the tarmac, I noticed some people standing by the airport
fence. I asked a Canadian official who they were. Eskimos, he said.
In my seventy-two years on earth I had never met an Innuit and never imagined that I would. I headed over to that fence and found a dozen or so
young people, in their late teens, who had come out to the airport because they had heard our plane was going to stop there. I had read about the
Innuit (the name “Eskimo” was given to them by the colonists) as a boy, and the impression I received from the racist colonialist texts was that they
were a backward culture.
But in talking with these bright young people, I learned that they had watched my release on television and were familiar with events in South
Africa. “Viva ANC!” one of them said. The Innuit are an aboriginal people historically mistreated by a white settler population; there were parallels
between the plights of black South Africans and the Innuit people. What struck me so forcefully was how small the planet had become during my
decades in prison; it was amazing to me that a teenaged Innuit living at the roof of the world could watch the release of a political prisoner on the
southern tip of Africa. Television had shrunk the world, and had in the process become a great weapon for eradicating ignorance and promoting
democracy.

After Dublin, I went to London, where I had a three-hour meeting with Mrs. Thatcher. Standing out in the cold talking with the young Innuits had given
me a chill. On the day I was to see Mrs. Thatcher it was wintry and raining, and as we were leaving, Winnie told me I must take a raincoat. We were
already in the lobby of the hotel, and if I went back for my coat we would be late. I am a stickler about punctuality, not only because I think it is a sign
of respect to the person you are meeting but in order to combat the Western stereotype of Africans as being notoriously tardy. I told Winnie we did
not have time, and instead I stood out in the rain signing autographs for some children. By the time I got to Mrs. Thatcher I was feeling poorly, and I
was later diagnosed as having a mild case of pneumonia.
But it did not interfere with our meeting, except that she chided me like a schoolmarm for not taking her advice and cutting down on my schedule.
Even though Mrs. Thatcher was on the opposite side of the ANC on many issues, such as sanctions, she was always a forthright and solicitous
lady. In our meeting that day, though, I could not make the slightest bit of headway with her on the question of sanctions.
