AT THE END of our first two weeks on the island, we were informed that our lawyers, Bram Fischer and Joel Joffe, were going to be visiting the
following day. When they arrived, we were escorted to the visiting area to meet them. The purpose of their visit was twofold: to see how we had
settled in, and to verify that we still did not want to appeal our sentences. It had only been a few weeks since I had seen them, but it felt like an
eternity. They seemed like visitors from another world.
We sat in an empty room, a major just outside supervising the consultation. I felt like hugging them, but I was restrained by the presence of the
major. I told them that all of us were well, and explained that we were still opposed to an appeal for all the reasons we had previously enunciated,
including the fact that we did not want our appeal to interfere with the cases of other ANC defendants. Bram and Joel seemed resigned to this,
though I knew Bram believed we should mount an appeal.
When we were winding up our conversation, I briefly asked Bram about Molly, his wife. No sooner had I pronounced Molly’s name than Bram
stood up, turned away, and abruptly walked out of the room. A few minutes later, he returned, once again composed, and resumed the
conversation, but without answering my question.
Our meeting ended shortly afterward, and when we were walking back to our cells with the major, he said to me, “Mandela, were you struck by the
behavior of Bram Fischer?” I said that I had been. He told me that Molly had died in a car accident the previous week. Bram, he said, had been
driving and had swerved to avoid an animal in the road, and the car had plunged into a river. Molly had drowned.
We were devastated by the news. Molly was a wonderful woman, generous and unselfish, utterly without prejudice. She had supported Bram in
more ways than it was possible to know. She had been wife, colleague, and comrade. Bram had already experienced disaster in his life: his son
had died of cystic fibrosis in adolescence.
The act of turning away when I asked about Molly was typical of Bram’s character. He was a stoic, a man who never burdened his friends with his
own pain and troubles. As an Afrikaner whose conscience forced him to reject his own heritage and be ostracized by his own people, he showed a
level of courage and sacrifice that was in a class by itself. I fought only against injustice, not my own people.
I informed the major that I intended to write Bram a condolence letter, and he responded that I could do so. The rules governing letter-writing were
then extremely strict. We were only permitted to write to our immediate families, and just one letter of five hundred words every six months. I was
therefore surprised and pleased when the major did not oppose my writing Bram. But he didn’t live up to his agreement. I wrote the letter and
handed it over to the major, but it was never posted.

Within a few months, our life settled into a pattern. Prison life is about routine: each day like the one before; each week like the one before it, so that
the months and years blend into each other. Anything that departs from this pattern upsets the authorities, for routine is the sign of a well-run prison.
Routine is also comforting for the prisoner, which is why it can be a trap. Routine can be a pleasant mistress whom it is hard to resist, for routine
makes the time go faster. Watches and timepieces of any kind were barred on Robben Island, so we never knew precisely what time it was. We
were dependent on bells and warders’ whistles and shouts. With each week resembling the one before, one must make an effort to recall what day
and month it is. One of the first things I did was to make a calendar on the wall of my cell. Losing a sense of time is an easy way to lose one’s grip
and even one’s sanity.
Time slows down in prison; the days seem endless. The cliché of time passing slowly usually has to do with idleness and inactivity. But this was
not the case on Robben Island. We were busy almost all the time, with work, study, resolving disputes. Yet, time nevertheless moved glacially. This
is partially because things that took a few hours or days outside would take months or years in prison. A request for a new toothbrush might take six
months or a year to be filled. Ahmed Kathrada once said that in prison the minutes can seem like years, but the years go by like minutes. An
afternoon pounding rocks in the courtyard might seem like forever, but suddenly it is the end of the year, and you do not know where all the months
went.
The challenge for every prisoner, particularly every political prisoner, is how to survive prison intact, how to emerge from prison undiminished,
how to conserve and even replenish one’s beliefs. The first task in accomplishing that is learning exactly what one must do to survive. To that end,
one must know the enemy’s purpose before adopting a strategy to undermine it. Prison is designed to break one’s spirit and destroy one’s resolve.
To do this, the authorities attempt to exploit every weakness, demolish every initiative, negate all signs of individuality — all with the idea of
stamping out that spark that makes each of us human and each of us who we are.
Our survival depended on understanding what the authorities were attempting to do to us, and sharing that understanding with each other. It
would be very hard if not impossible for one man alone to resist. I do not know that I could have done it had I been alone. But the authorities’
greatest mistake was keeping us together, for together our determination was reinforced. We supported each other and gained strength from each
other. Whatever we knew, whatever we learned, we shared, and by sharing we multiplied whatever courage we had individually. That is not to say
that we were all alike in our responses to the hardships we suffered. Men have different capacities and react differently to stress. But the stronger
ones raised up the weaker ones, and both became stronger in the process. Ultimately, we had to create our own lives in prison. In a way that even
the authorities acknowledged, order in prison was preserved not by the warders but by ourselves.
As a leader, one must sometimes take actions that are unpopular, or whose results will not be known for years to come. There are victories
whose glory lies only in the fact that they are known to those who win them. This is particularly true of prison, where one must find consolation in
being true to one’s ideals, even if no one else knows of it.
I was now on the sidelines, but I also knew that I would not give up the fight. I was in a different and smaller arena, an arena for whom the only
audience was ourselves and our oppressors. We regarded the struggle in prison as a microcosm of the struggle as a whole. We would fight inside
as we had fought outside. The racism and repression were the same; I would simply have to fight on different terms.
Prison and the authorities conspire to rob each man of his dignity. In and of itself, that assured that I would survive, for any man or institution that
tries to rob me of my dignity will lose because I will not part with it at any price or under any pressure. I never seriously considered the possibility that
I would not emerge from prison one day. I never thought that a life sentence truly meant life and that I would die behind bars. Perhaps I was denying
this prospect because it was too unpleasant to contemplate. But I always knew that someday I would once again feel the grass under my feet and
walk in the sunshine as a free man.
I am fundamentally an optimist. Whether that comes from nature or nurture, I cannot say. Part of being optimistic is keeping one’s head pointed
toward the sun, one’s feet moving forward. There were many dark moments when my faith in humanity was sorely tested, but I would not and could
not give myself up to despair. That way lay defeat and death.