THE ANTIREMOVAL CAMPAIGN in Sophiatown was a long-running battle. We held our ground, as did the state. Through 1954 and into 1955,
rallies were held twice a week, on Wednesday and Sunday evenings. Speaker after speaker continued to decry the government’s plans. The ANC
and the Ratepayers Association, under the direction of Dr. Xuma, protested to the government in letters and petitions. We ran the antiremoval
campaign on the slogan “Over Our Dead Bodies,” a motto often shouted from the platforms and echoed by the audience. One night, it even roused
the otherwise cautious Dr. Xuma to utter the electrifying slogan used to rally African warriors to battle in the previous century: “Zemk’ inkomo
magwalandini!” (The enemy has captured the cattle, you cowards!)
The government had scheduled the removal for February 9, 1955. As the day approached, Oliver and I were in the township daily, meeting local
leaders, discussing plans, and acting in our professional capacity for those being forced out of the area or prosecuted. We sought to prove to the
court that the government’s documentation was often incorrect and that many orders to leave were therefore illegal. But this was only a temporary
measure; the government would not let a few illegalities stand in their way.
Shortly before the scheduled removal, a special mass meeting was planned for Freedom Square. Ten thousand people gathered to hear Chief
Luthuli speak. But upon his arrival in Johannesburg, he was served with a banning order forcing him to return to Natal.

The night before the removal, Joe Modise, one of the most dedicated of the local ANC leaders, addressed a tense meeting of more than five
hundred youthful activists. They expected the ANC to give them an order to battle the police and the army. They were prepared to erect barricades
overnight and engage the police with weapons and whatever came to hand the next day. They assumed our slogan meant what it said: that
Sophiatown would be removed only over our dead bodies.
But after discussions with the ANC leadership, including myself, Joe told the youth to stand down. They were angry and felt betrayed. But we
believed that violence would have been a disaster. We pointed out that an insurrection required careful planning or it would become an act of
suicide. We were not yet ready to engage the enemy on its own terms.
In the hazy dawn hours of February 9, four thousand police and army troops cordoned off the township while workers razed empty houses and
government trucks began moving families from Sophiatown to Meadowlands. The night before, the ANC had evacuated several families to
prearranged accommodation with pro-ANC families in the interior of Sophiatown. But our efforts were too little and too late, and could only be a
stopgap measure. The army and the police were relentlessly efficient. After a few weeks, our resistance collapsed. Most of our local leaders had
been banned or arrested, and in the end, Sophiatown died not to the sound of gunfire but to the sound of rumbling trucks and sledgehammers.
One can always be correct about a political action one is reading about in the next day’s newspaper, but when you are in the center of a heated
political fight, you are given little time for reflection. We made a variety of mistakes in the Western Areas antiremoval campaign and learned a
number of lessons. “Over Our Dead Bodies” was a dynamic slogan, but it proved as much a hindrance as a help. A slogan is a vital link between
the organization and the masses it seeks to lead. It should synthesize a particular grievance into a succinct and pithy phrase, while mobilizing the
people to combat it. Our slogan caught the imagination of the people, but it led them to believe that we would fight to the death to resist the removal.
In fact, the ANC was not prepared to do that at all.
We never provided the people with an alternative to moving to Meadowlands. When the people in Sophiatown realized we could neither stop the
government nor provide them with housing elsewhere, their own resistance waned and the flow of people to Meadowlands increased. Many tenants
moved willingly, for they found they would have more space and cleaner housing in Meadowlands. We did not take into account the different
situations of landlords and tenants. While the landlords had reasons to stay, many tenants had an incentive to leave. The ANC was criticized by a
number of Africanist members who accused the leadership of protecting the interests of the landlords at the expense of the tenants.
The lesson I took away from the campaign was that in the end, we had no alternative to armed and violent resistance. Over and over again, we
had used all the nonviolent weapons in our arsenal — speeches, deputations, threats, marches, strikes, stay-aways, voluntary imprisonment — all
to no avail, for whatever we did was met by an iron hand. A freedom fighter learns the hard way that it is the oppressor who defines the nature of the
struggle, and the oppressed is often left no recourse but to use methods that mirror those of the oppressor. At a certain point, one can only fight fire
with fire.

Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the son of
a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that a child of farmworkers can become the president of a great nation. It is what we make out of
what we have, not what we are given, that separates one person from another.
Since the turn of the century, Africans owed their educational opportunites primarily to the foreign churches and missions that created and
sponsored schools. Under the United Party, the syllabus for African secondary schools and white secondary schools was essentially the same. The
mission schools provided Africans with Western-style English-language education, which I myself received. We were limited by lesser facilities but
not by what we could read or think or dream.
Yet, even before the Nationalists came to power, the disparities in funding tell a story of racist education. The government spent about six times
as much per white student as per African student. Education was not compulsory for Africans and was free only in the primary grades. Less than
half of all African children of school age attended any school at all, and only a tiny number of Africans were graduated from high school.
Even this amount of education proved distasteful to the Nationalists. The Afrikaner has always been unenthusiastic about education for Africans.
To him it was simply a waste, for the African was inherently ignorant and lazy and no amount of education could remedy that. The Afrikaner was
traditionally hostile to Africans learning English, for English was a foreign tongue to the Afrikaner and the language of emancipation to us.
In 1953, the Nationalist-dominated Parliament passed the Bantu Education Act, which sought to put apartheid’s stamp on African education. The
act transferred control of African education from the Department of Education to the much loathed Native Affairs Department. Under the act, African
primary and secondary schools operated by the church and mission bodies were given the choice of turning over their schools to the government or
receiving gradually diminished subsidies; either the government took over education for Africans or there would be no education for Africans.
African teachers were not permitted to criticize the government or any school authority. It was intellectual “baasskap,” a way of institutionalizing
inferiority.
Dr. Hendrik Verwoerd, the minister of Bantu education, explained that education “must train and teach people in accordance with their
opportunities in life.” His meaning was that Africans did not and would not have any opportunities, therefore, why educate them? “There is no place

for the Bantu in the European community above the level of certain forms of labor,” he said. In short, Africans should be trained to be menial
workers, to be in a position of perpetual subordination to the white man.
To the ANC, the act was a deeply sinister measure designed to retard the progress of African culture as a whole and, if enacted, permanently set
back the freedom struggle of the African people. The mental outlook of all future generations of Africans was at stake. As Professor Matthews
wrote at the time, “Education for ignorance and for inferiority in Verwoerd’s schools is worse than no education at all.”
The act and Verwoerd’s crude exposition of it aroused widespread indignation from both black and white. With the exception of the Dutch
Reform Church, which supported apartheid, and the Lutheran mission, all Christian churches opposed the new measure. But the unity of the
opposition extended only to condemning the policy, not resisting it. The Anglicans, the most fearless and consistent critics of the new policy, had a
divided policy. Bishop Ambrose Reeves of Johannesburg took the extreme step of closing his schools, which had a total enrollment of ten thousand
children. But the archbishop of the church in South Africa, anxious to keep children out of the streets, handed over the rest of the schools to the
government. Despite their protests, all the other churches did the same with the exception of the Roman Catholics, the Seventh-Day Adventists,
and the United Jewish Reform Congregation — who soldiered on without state aid. Even my own church, the Wesleyan Church, handed over their
two hundred thousand African students to the government. If all the other churches had followed the example of those who resisted, the government
would have been confronted with a stalemate that might have forced a compromise. Instead, the state marched over us.

The transfer of control to the Native Affairs Department was set to take place on April 1, 1955, and the ANC began to discuss plans for a school
boycott that would begin on that date. Our secret discussions among the executive turned on whether we should call on the people to stage a
protest for a limited period or whether we should proclaim a permanent school boycott to destroy the Bantu Education Act before it could take root.
The discussions were fierce and both sides had forceful advocates. The argument for an indefinite boycott was that Bantu Education was a poison
one could not drink even at the point of death from thirst. To accept it in any form would cause irreparable damage. They argued that the country
was in an explosive mood and the people were hungry for something more spectacular than a mere protest.
Although I had the reputation of being a firebrand, I always felt that the organization should never promise to do more than it was able, for the
people would then lose confidence in it. I took the stance that our actions should be based not on idealistic considerations but on practical ones. An
indefinite boycott would require massive machinery and vast resources that we did not possess, and our past campaigns showed no indication that
we were up to such an undertaking. It was simply impossible for us to create our own schools fast enough to accommodate hundreds of thousands
of pupils, and if we did not offer our people an alternative, we were offering next to nothing. Along with others, I urged a week’s boycott.
The National Executive Committee resolved that a weeklong school boycott should begin on April 1. This was recommended at the annual
conference in Durban in December of 1954, but the delegates rejected the recommendation and voted for an indefinite boycott. The conference
was the supreme authority, even greater than the executive, and we found ourselves saddled with a boycott that would be almost impossible to
effect. Dr. Verwoerd announced that the government would permanently close all schools that were boycotted and that children who stayed away
would not be readmitted.

For this boycott to work, the parents and the community would have to step in and take the place of the schools. I spoke to parents and ANC
members and told them that every home, every shack, every community structure, must become a center of learning for our children.
The boycott began on April 1 and had mixed results. It was often sporadic, disorganized, and ineffectual. On the east Rand it affected some
seven thousand schoolchildren. Predawn marches called on parents to keep their children at home. Women picketed the schools and plucked out
children who had wandered into them.
In Germiston, a township southeast of the city, Joshua Makue, chairman of our local branch, ran a school for eight hundred boycotting children
that lasted for three years. In Port Elizabeth, Barrett Tyesi gave up a government teaching post and ran a school for boycotting children. In 1956, he
presented seventy of these children for the Standard VI exams; all but three passed. In many places, improvised schools (described as “cultural
clubs” in order not to attract the attention of the authorities) taught boycotting students. The government subsequently passed a law that made it an
offense punishable by fine or imprisonment to offer unauthorized education. Police harassed these clubs, but many continued to exist underground.
In the end, the community schools withered away and parents, faced with a choice between inferior education and no education at all, chose the
former. My own children were at the Seventh-Day Adventist school, which was private and did not depend on government subsidies.
The campaign should be judged on two levels: whether the immediate objective was achieved, and whether it politicized more people and drew
them into the struggle. On the first level, the campaign clearly failed. We did not close down African schools throughout the country nor did we rid
ourselves of the Bantu Education Act. But the government was sufficiently rattled by our protest to modify the act, and at one point Verwoerd was
compelled to declare that education should be the same for all. The government’s November 1954 draft syllabus was a retreat from the original
notion of modeling the school system on tribal foundations. In the end, we had no option but to choose between the lesser of two evils, and opt for a
diminished education. But the consequences of Bantu Education came back to haunt the government in unforeseen ways. For it was Bantu
Education that produced in the 1970s the angriest, most rebellious generation of black youth the country had ever seen. When these children of
Bantu Education entered their late teens and early twenties, they rose up with a vehemence.

Several months after Chief Luthuli was elected president of the ANC, Professor Z. K. Matthews returned to South Africa after a year as a visiting
professor in the U.S., armed with an idea that would reshape the liberation struggle. In a speech at the ANC annual conference in the Cape,
Professor Matthews said, “I wonder whether the time has not come for the African National Congress to consider the question of convening a
national convention, a congress of the people, representing all the people of this country irrespective of race or colour, to draw up a Freedom
Charter for the democratic South Africa of the future.”
Within months the ANC national conference accepted the proposal, and a Council of the Congress of the People was created, with Chief Luthuli
as chairman and Walter Sisulu and Yusuf Cachalia as joint secretaries. The Congress of the People was to create a set of principles for the
foundation of a new South Africa. Suggestions for a new constitution were to come from the people themselves, and ANC leaders all across the
country were authorized to seek ideas in writing from everyone in their area. The charter would be a document born of the people.
The Congress of the People represented one of the two main currents of thought operating within the organization. It seemed inevitable that the
government would ban the ANC, and many argued that the organization must be prepared to operate underground and illegally. At the same time,
we did not want to give up on the important public policies and activities that brought the ANC attention and mass support. The Congress of the

People would be a public display of strength.
Our dream for the Congress of the People was that it would be a landmark event in the history of the freedom struggle — a convention uniting all
the oppressed and all the progressive forces of South Africa to create a clarion call for change. Our hope was that it would one day be looked upon
with the same reverence as the founding convention of the ANC in 1912.
We sought to attract the widest possible sponsorship and invited some two hundred organizations — white, black, Indian, and Coloured — to
send representatives to a planning conference at Tongaat, near Durban, in March of 1954. The National Action Council created there was
composed of eight members from each of the four sponsoring organizations. The chairman was Chief Luthuli, and the secretariat consisted of
Walter Sisulu (later replaced by Oliver after Walter’s banning forced him to resign), Yusuf Cachalia of the SAIC, Stanley Lollan of the South African
Coloured People’s Organization (SACPO), and Lionel Bernstein of the Congress of Democrats (COD).
Formed in Cape Town in September of 1953 by Coloured leaders and trade unionists, SACPO was the belated offspring of the struggle to
preserve the Coloured vote in the Cape and sought to represent Coloured interests. SACPO’s founding conference was addressed by Oliver
Tambo and Yusuf Cachalia. Inspired by the Defiance Campaign, the COD was formed in late 1952 as a party for radical, left-wing, antigovernment
whites. The COD, though small and limited mainly to Johannesburg and Cape Town, had an influence disproportionate to its numbers. Its
members, such as Michael Harmel, Bram Fischer, and Rusty Bernstein, were eloquent advocates of our cause. The COD closely identified itself
with the ANC and the SAIC and advocated a universal franchise and full equality between black and white. We saw the COD as a means whereby
our views could be put directly to the white public. The COD served an important symbolic function for Africans; blacks who had come into the
struggle because they were antiwhite discovered that there were indeed whites of goodwill who treated Africans as equals.
The National Action Council invited all participating organizations and their followers to send suggestions for a freedom charter. Circulars were
sent out to townships and villages all across the country. “IF YOU COULD MAKE THE LAWS . . . WHAT WOULD YOU DO?” they said. “HOW
WOULD YOU SET ABOUT MAKING SOUTH AFRICA A HAPPY PLACE FOR ALL THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN IT?” Some of the flyers and
leaflets were filled with the poetic idealism that characterized the planning:
WE CALL THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH AFRICA BLACK AND WHITE — LET US SPEAK TOGETHER OF FREEDOM! . . . LET THE VOICES OF ALL THE PEOPLE BE HEARD. AND LET
THE DEMANDS OF ALL THE PEOPLE FOR THE THINGS THAT WILL MAKE US FREE BE RECORDED. LET THE DEMANDS BE GATHERED TOGETHER IN A GREAT CHARTER
OF FREEDOM.

The call caught the imagination of the people. Suggestions came in from sports and cultural clubs, church groups, ratepayers’ associations,
women’s organizations, schools, trade union branches. They came on serviettes, on paper torn from exercise books, on scraps of foolscap, on the
backs of our own leaflets. It was humbling to see how the suggestions of ordinary people were often far ahead of the leaders’. The most commonly
cited demand was for one-man-one-vote. There was a recognition that the country belongs to all those who have made it their home.
The ANC branches contributed a great deal to the process of writing the charter and in fact the two best drafts came from Durban and
Pietermaritzburg. A combination of these drafts was then circulated to different regions and committees for comments and questions. The charter
itself was drafted by a small committee of the National Action Council and reviewed by the ANC’s National Executive Committee.
The charter would be presented at the Congress of the People and each of its elements submitted to the delegates for approval. In June, a few
days before the congress was scheduled, a small group of us reviewed the draft. We made few changes, as there was little time and the document
was already in good shape.

The Congress of the People took place at Kliptown, a multiracial village on a scrap of veld a few miles southwest of Johannesburg, on two clear,
sunny days, June 25 and 26, 1955. More than three thousand delegates braved police intimidation to assemble and approve the final document.
They came by car, bus, truck, and foot. Although the overwhelming number of delegates were black, there were more than three hundred Indians,
two hundred Coloureds, and one hundred whites.
I drove to Kliptown with Walter. We were both under banning orders, so we found a place at the edge of the crowd where we could observe
without mixing in or being seen. The crowd was impressive both in its size and in its discipline. “Freedom volunteers” wearing black, green, and
yellow armbands met the delegates and arranged for their seating. There were old women and young wearing congress skirts, congress blouses,
congress doekies (scarves); old men and young wearing congress armbands and congress hats. Signs everywhere said, “FREEDOM IN OUR
LIFETIME, LONG LIVE THE STRUGGLE.” The platform was a rainbow of colors: white delegates from the COD, Indians from the SAIC, Coloured
representatives from SACPO all sat in front of a replica of a four-spoked wheel representing the four organizations in the Congress Alliance. White
and African police and members of the Special Branch milled around, taking photographs, writing in notebooks, and trying unsuccessfully to
intimidate the delegates.
There were dozens of songs and speeches. Meals were served. The atmosphere was both serious and festive. On the afternoon of the first day,
the charter was read aloud, section by section, to the people in English, Sesotho, and Xhosa. After each section, the crowd shouted its approval
with cries of “Afrika!” and “Mayibuye!” The first day of the congress was a success.
The second day was much like the first. Each section of the charter had been adopted by acclamation and at 3:30, the final approval was to be
voted when a brigade of police and Special Branch detectives brandishing Sten guns swarmed onto the platform. In a gruff, Afrikaans-accented
voice, one of the police took the microphone and announced that treason was suspected and that no one was to leave the gathering without police
permission. The police began pushing people off the platform and confiscating documents and photographs, even signs such as “SOUP WITH MEAT”
and “SOUP WITHOUT MEAT.” Another group of constables armed with rifles formed a cordon around the crowd. The people responded magnificently by
loudly singing “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika.” The delegates were then allowed to leave one by one, each person interviewed by the police and his or her
name taken down. I had been on the outskirts of the crowd when the police raid began, and while my instinct was to stay and help, discretion
seemed the wiser course, because I would have immediately been arrested and tossed in jail. An emergency meeting had been called in
Johannesburg and I made my way back there. As I returned to Johannesburg, I knew that this raid signaled a harsh new turn on the part of the
government.

Though the Congress of the People had been broken up, the charter itself became a great beacon for the liberation struggle. Like other enduring
political documents, such as the American Declaration of Independence, the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, and the Communist
Manifesto, the Freedom Charter is a mixture of practical goals and poetic language. It extols the abolition of racial discrimination and the
achievement of equal rights for all. It welcomes all who embrace freedom to participate in the making of a democratic, nonracial South Africa. It

captured the hopes and dreams of the people and acted as a blueprint for the liberation struggle and the future of the nation. The preamble reads:
We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our country and the world to know: —
That South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and that no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of the people;
That our people have been robbed of their birthright to land, liberty and peace by a form of government founded on injustice and inequality;
That our country will never be prosperous or free until all our people live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights and opportunities;
That only a democratic state, based on the will of the people, can secure to all their birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex or belief;
And therefore, we, the people of South Africa, black and white, together — equals, countrymen and brothers — adopt this FREEDOM CHARTER. And we pledge ourselves to
strive together, sparing nothing of our strength and courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.

The charter then lays out the requirements for a free and democratic South Africa.
THE PEOPLE SHALL GOVERN!
Every man and woman shall have the right to vote for and stand as a candidate for all bodies which make laws.
All the people shall be entitled to take part in the administration of the country.
The rights of the people shall be the same regardless of race, colour or sex.
All bodies of minority rule, advisory boards, councils and authorities shall be replaced by democratic organs of self-government.
ALL NATIONAL GROUPS SHALL HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS!
There shall be equal status in the bodies of state, in the courts and in the schools for all national groups and races;
All national groups shall be protected by law against insults to their race and national pride;
All people shall have equal rights to use their own language and to develop their own folk culture and customs;
The preaching and practice of national, race or colour discrimination and contempt shall be a punishable crime;
All apartheid laws and practices shall be set aside.
THE PEOPLE SHALL SHARE IN THE COUNTRY’S WEALTH!
The national wealth of our country, the heritage of all South Africans, shall be restored to the people;
The mineral wealth beneath the soil, the banks and monopoly industry shall be transferred to the ownership of the people as a whole;
All other industries and trade shall be controlled to assist the well-being of the people;
All people shall have equal rights to trade where they choose, to manufacture and to enter all trades, crafts and professions.
THE LAND SHALL BE SHARED AMONG THOSE WHO WORK IT!
Restriction of land ownership on racial basis shall be ended, and all the land re-divided amongst those who work it, to banish famine and land hunger. . . .

Some in the ANC, particularly the Africanist contingent, who were anti-Communist and antiwhite, objected to the charter as being a design for a
radically different South Africa from the one the ANC had called for throughout its history. They claimed the charter favored a socialist order and
believed the COD and white Communists had had a disproportionate influence on its ideology. In June 1956, in the monthly journal Liberation, I
pointed out that the charter endorsed private enterprise and would allow capitalism to flourish among Africans for the first time. The charter
guaranteed that when freedom came, Africans would have the opportunity to own their own businesses in their own names, to own their own houses
and property, in short, to prosper as capitalists and entrepreneurs. The charter does not speak about the eradication of classes and private
property, or public ownership of the means of production, or promulgate any of the tenets of scientific socialism. The clause discussing the possible
nationalization of the mines, the banks, and monopoly industries was an action that needed to be taken if the economy was not to be solely owned
and operated by white businessmen.
The charter was in fact a revolutionary document precisely because the changes it envisioned could not be achieved without radically altering the
economic and political structure of South Africa. It was not meant to be capitalist or socialist but a melding together of the people’s demands to end
the oppression. In South Africa, to merely achieve fairness, one had to destroy apartheid itself, for it was the very embodiment of injustice.
