WHEN I RECEIVED my banning, the Transvaal conference of the ANC was due to be held the following month, and I had already completed the
draft of my presidential address. It was read to the conference by Andrew Kunene, a member of the executive. In that speech, which subsequently
became known as “The No Easy Walk to Freedom” speech, a line taken from Jawaharlal Nehru, I said that the masses now had to be prepared for
new forms of political struggle. The new laws and tactics of the government had made the old forms of mass protest — public meetings, press
statements, stay-aways — extremely dangerous and self-destructive. Newspapers would not publish our statements; printing presses refused to
print our leaflets, all for fear of prosecution under the Suppression of Communism Act. “These developments,” I wrote, “require the evolution of new
forms of political struggle. The old methods,” I said, were now “suicidal.”
“The oppressed people and the oppressors are at loggerheads. The day of reckoning between the forces of freedom and those of reaction is not
very far off. I have not the slightest doubt that when that day comes truth and justice will prevail. . . . The feelings of the oppressed people have never
been more bitter. The grave plight of the people compels them to resist to the death the stinking policies of the gangsters that rule our country. . . .
To overthrow oppression has been sanctioned by humanity and is the highest aspiration of every free man.”

In April of 1954, the Law Society of the Transvaal applied to the Supreme Court for my name to be struck off the roll of accredited attorneys on the
ground that the political activities for which I was convicted in the Defiance case amounted to unprofessional and dishonorable conduct. This
occurred at a time when Mandela and Tambo was flourishing and I was in court dozens of times a week.
The documents were served at my office, and as soon as the application against me had been made and publicized, I began to receive offers of
support and help. I even received offers of help from a number of well-known Afrikaner lawyers. Many of these men were supporters of the National
Party, but they believed that the application was biased and unfair. Their response suggested to me that even in racist South Africa professional
solidarity can sometimes transcend color, and that there were still attorneys and judges who refused to be the rubber stamps of an immoral regime.
My case was ably defended by advocate Walter Pollak, Q.C., chairman of the Johannesburg Bar Council. At the time that I retained Walter
Pollak, I was advised that I should also retain someone who was not connected with the struggle, as that would positively influence the Transvaal
bar. To that end, we retained William Aronsohn, as instructing attorney or barrister, who was head of one of the oldest law firms in Johannesburg.
Both men acted for me without charge. We argued that the application was an affront to the idea of justice and that I had an inherent right to fight for
my political beliefs, which was the right of all men in a state where the rule of law applied.
But the argument that had great weight was Pollak’s use of the case of a man called Strijdom, who was detained during the Second World War
together with B. J. Vorster (who later became prime minister). Both were interned for their pro-Nazi stance. Following a failed escape attempt,
Strijdom had been found guilty of car theft. Later, after he was released, he applied to the bar for admission as an advocate. Despite his crimes
and strong objections from the Bar Council, the court decided to admit him on the ground that his offense was political and that a man cannot be
barred from practicing as an advocate for his political beliefs. Pollak said, “There are of course differences between Strijdom and Mandela.
Mandela is not a Nationalist and Mandela is not a white.”
Judge Ramsbottom, who heard the case, was an example of a judge who refused to be a mouthpiece for the Nationalists and upheld the
independence of the judiciary. His judgment in the case completely upheld our claim that I had a right to campaign for my political beliefs even
though they were opposed to the government, and he dismissed the Law Society’s application. And in a rare instance the Law Society was
ordered to pay its own costs.