ONE MORNING in early January, as we lined up to be counted before beginning work in the courtyard, we were instead marched outside and
ordered into a covered truck. It was the first time that we had left our compound. No announcement was made as to our destination, but I had an
idea of where we were headed. A few minutes later we emerged from the truck in a place that I had first seen when I was on the island in 1962: the
lime quarry.
The lime quarry looked like an enormous white crater cut into a rocky hillside. The cliffs and the base of the hillside were blindingly white. At the
top of the quarry were grass and palm trees, and at the base was a clearing with a few old metal sheds.
We were met by the commanding officer, Colonel Wessels, a rather colorless fellow who cared only about strict adherence to prison regulations.
We stood at attention as he told us that the work we would be doing would last six months and afterward we would be given light tasks for the
duration of our terms. His timing was considerably off. We remained at the quarry for the next thirteen years.
After the C.O.’s speech, we were handed picks and shovels and given rudimentary instructions as to the mining of lime. Mining lime is not a
simple task. That first day, we were clumsy with our new tools and extracted little. The lime itself, which is the soft, calcified residue of seashells and
coral, is buried in layers of rock, and one had to break through to it with a pick, and then extract the seam of lime with a shovel. This was far more
strenuous than the work in the courtyard, and after our first few days on the quarry we fell asleep immediately after our supper at 4:30 in the
afternoon. We woke the next morning aching and still tired.
The authorities never explained why we had been taken from the courtyard to the quarry. They may simply have needed extra lime for the island’s
roads. But when we later discussed the transfer, we assumed it was another way of enforcing discipline, of showing us that we were not different
from the general prisoners — who worked in the island’s stone quarry — and that we had to pay for our crimes just as they did. It was an attempt to
crush our spirits.
But those first few weeks at the quarry had the opposite effect on us. Despite blistered and bleeding hands, we were invigorated. I much
preferred being outside in nature, being able to see grass and trees, to observe birds flitting overhead, to feel the wind blowing in from the sea. It
felt good to use all of one’s muscles, with the sun at one’s back, and there was simple gratification in building up mounds of stone and lime.
Within a few days, we were walking to the quarry, rather than going by truck, and this too was a tonic. During our twenty-minute march to the
quarry, we got a better sense of the island, and could see the dense brush and tall trees that covered our home, and smell the eucalyptus blossoms,
spot the occasional springbok or kudu grazing in the distance. Although some of the men regarded the march as drudgery, I never did.

Although our work at the quarry was meant to show us that we were no different from the other prisoners, the authorities still treated us like the
lepers who once populated the island. Sometimes we would see a group of common-law prisoners working by the side of the road, and their
warders would order them into the bushes so they would not see us as we marched past. It was as if the mere sight of us might somehow affect
their discipline. Sometimes out of the corner of an eye we could see a prisoner raise his fist in the ANC salute.
Near the quarry, the dirt road diverged, and to the right the general prisoners trooped off to the rock quarry. This crossroads was later to become
an important site of communications with them. Where the road branched, we could see in the brush the small white cottage where Robert
Sobukwe lived. The house had been built for a black warder years before, and now Sobukwe lived in it by himself. It was a tiny plot, unkempt and
overgrown, and one would not even know that anyone lived there, except for the guard who stood in front.
Sobukwe’s sentence had ended in 1963, but under what became known as the Sobukwe clause of the General Law Amendment Act of 1963,
the minister of justice could hold political prisoners indefinitely without charge. That is precisely what they did with Bob. For six years, Sobukwe
lived a kind of half-life on the island; he was a free man who was denied his liberty. Sometimes we were able to get a glimpse of him in his garden,
but that was all.

After arriving in the morning, we would fetch our picks, shovels, hammers, and wheelbarrows from a zinc shed at the top of the quarry. Then we
would array ourselves along the quarry face, usually in groups of three or four. Warders with automatic weapons stood on raised platforms watching
us. Unarmed warders walked among us, urging us to work harder. “Gaan aan! Gaan aan!” (Go on! Go on!), they would shout, as if we were oxen.
By eleven, when the sun was high in the sky, we would begin to flag. By that time, I would already be drenched in sweat. The warders would then
drive us even harder. “Nee, man! Kom aan! Kom aan!” (No, man! Come on! Come on!), they would shout. Just before noon, when we would break
for lunch, we would pile the lime into wheelbarrows and cart it over to the truck, which would take it away.
At midday, a whistle would blow, and we would make our way to the bottom of the hill. We sat on makeshift seats under a simple zinc shed
shielding us from the sun. The warders ate at a larger shed with tables and benches. Drums of boiled mealies were delivered to us. Hundreds of
seagulls, screaming and swooping, circled above us as we ate, and a well-aimed dropping could sometimes spoil a man’s lunch.
We worked until four, when we again carted the lime to the waiting truck. By the end of the day, our faces and bodies were caked with white dust.
We looked like pale ghosts except where rivulets of sweat had washed away the lime. When we returned to our cells, we would scrub ourselves in
the cold water, which never seemed to completely rinse away the dust.

Worse than the heat at the quarry was the light. Our backs were protected from the sun by our shirts, but the sun’s rays would be reflected into our
eyes by the lime itself. The glare hurt our eyes and, along with the dust, made it difficult to see. Our eyes teared and our faces became fixed in a
permanent squint. It would take a long time after each day’s work for our eyes to adjust to the diminished light.
After our first few days at the quarry, we made an official request for sunglasses. The authorities refused. This was not unexpected, for we were
then not even permitted reading glasses. I had previously pointed out to the commanding officer that it did not make sense to permit us to read
books but not permit us glasses to read them with.
During the following weeks and months, we requested sunglasses again and again. But it was to take us almost three years before we were
allowed to have them, and that was only after a sympathetic physician agreed that the glasses were necessary to preserve our eyesight. Even then,
we had to purchase the glasses ourselves.
For us, such struggles — for sunglasses, long trousers, study privileges, equalized food — were corollaries to the struggle we waged outside
prison. The campaign to improve conditions in prison was part of the apartheid struggle. It was, in that sense, all the same; we fought injustice

wherever we found it, no matter how large, or how small, and we fought injustice to preserve our own humanity.

Shortly after we started working at the quarry, we were joined in Section B by a number of other prominent political prisoners. Several were MK
men who had been arrested in July of 1964 and convicted of more than fifty acts of sabotage in what became known as the “little Rivonia Trial.”
These included Mac Maharaj, a member of the SACP and one of the sharpest minds in the struggle; Laloo Chiba, also a member of the MK High
Command, and a stalwart colleague who proved a great asset in prison; and Wilton Mkwayi, the Treason Trialist who had been mistakenly let go
during a moment of confusion when the State of Emergency was declared in 1960. He had left South Africa secretly, received military training, and
become commander-in-chief of MK after the Rivonia Trial. We were also joined by Eddie Daniels, a Coloured member of the Liberal Party, who
had been convicted for sabotage operations undertaken by the African Resistance Movement, a small sabotage group composed of members of
the Liberal Party. Eddie was to become one of my greatest friends in prison.
To counterbalance the effect of these new political allies, the authorities also put a handful of common-law prisoners in our section. These men
were hardened criminals, convicted of murder, rape, and armed robbery. They were members of the island’s notorious criminal gangs, either the
Big Fives or the Twenty-Eights, which terrorized other prisoners. They were brawny and surly, and their faces bore the scars of the knife fights that
were common among gang members. Their role was to act as agents provocateurs, and they would attempt to push us around, take our food, and
inhibit any political discussions we tried to have. One of these fellows was known as Bogart, after the American tough-guy movie actor. He had a
cell opposite Walter’s and Walter used to complain that he would demand Walter’s breakfast from him each morning, and that he was too scared to
refuse.
The gang members worked in their own clique apart from us at the quarry. One day, they began singing what sounded like a work song. In fact, it
was a famous work song with their own adapted lyrics: “Benifunani eRivonia?,” which means “What did you want at Rivonia?” The next line was
something like “Did you think that you would become the government?” They sang exuberantly and with a mocking tone. They had obviously been
encouraged by the warders, who were hoping that the song would provoke us.
Although the more hotheaded among us wanted to confront them, instead, we decided to fight fire with fire. We had far more and better singers
among us than they had, and we huddled together and planned our response. Within a few minutes, we were all singing the song “Stimela,” a
rousing anthem about a train making its way down from Southern Rhodesia. “Stimela” is not a political song, but in the context, it became one, for
the implication was that the train contained guerrillas coming down to fight the South African army.
For a number of weeks our two groups sang as we worked, adding songs and changing lyrics. Our repertoire increased, and we were soon
singing overt political songs, such as “Amajoni,” a song about guerrilla soldiers, the title of which was a corruption of the English slang word for
soldier, Johnny; and “Tshotsholoza,” a song that compares the struggle to the motion of an oncoming train. (If you say the title over and over, it
mimics the sound of the train.) We sang a song about the Freedom Charter, and another about the Transkei, whose lyrics said, “There are two
roads, one road is the Matanzima road, and one road is the Mandela road, which one will you take?”
The singing made the work lighter. A few of the fellows had extraordinary voices, and I often felt like putting my pick down and simply listening.
The gang members were no competition for us; they soon became quiet while we continued singing. But one of the warders was fluent in Xhosa
and understood the content of our songs, and we were soon ordered to stop singing. (Whistling was also banned.) From that day on we worked in
silence.

I saw the gang members not as rivals but as raw material to be converted. There was a nonpolitical prisoner among us, nicknamed Joe My Baby,
who later joined the ANC and proved invaluable in helping us smuggle material in and out of prison.
One day we heard that Bogart had been savagely beaten by a warder at the quarry. I did not see the assault, but I saw the results. His face cut
and badly bruised, Bogart approached me in our corridor and asked for help. I immediately agreed to take up his case.
We were always looking for ways to stand up to the authorities, and the report of a beating was the kind of incident we could raise with the head
office. Shortly before this, we had learned that a certain PAC man named Ganya had been beaten by a warder. In my role as an attorney, I wrote a
letter to the commissioner of prisons protesting on behalf of Ganya. I was brought to the Head Office, where I was confronted by prison officials. In
the same breath they denied that the beating had occurred and wanted to know how I had heard about it. I insisted that the warder who had beaten
Ganya be removed from the island. They refused, saying there was no evidence against him. But shortly afterward the warder in question was
transferred off the island.
I had been emboldened by this case, so when Bogart asked for help I immediately demanded to see the commanding officer. The next day I was
summoned to the head office, where the commander blandly informed me that the case had been investigated and dismissed. “That’s a violation of
regulations,” I said. “The case must be tried.”
“No,” he said, “we have attempted to interview the so-called complainant and he denies that he was ever assaulted.”
“That’s impossible,” I said. “I spoke to him only yesterday.” The commander gestured to a lieutenant and said, “Then see for yourself.” The
lieutenant led Bogart into the room. His face was covered with bandages. The commander asked him whether or not he had been beaten. “No,
baas,” he said quietly, without meeting my gaze, “I was never assaulted.” He was then dismissed.
“Well, Mandela,” the commander said. “The case is closed.” The commander had succeeded in humiliating me. He had obviously bribed Bogart
with extra food and tobacco to drop his charges. From that point on, I demanded a signed and written statement from a prisoner before I agreed to
take up his case.