ALTHOUGH FEW PEOPLE will remember June 3, 1993, it was a landmark in South African history. On that day, after months of negotiations at the
World Trade Centre, the multiparty forum voted to set a date for the country’s first national, nonracial, one-person-one-vote election: April 27, 1994.
For the first time in South African history, the black majority would go to the polls to elect their own leaders. The agreement was that voters would
elect four hundred representatives to a constituent assembly, which would both write a new constitution and serve as a parliament. After convening,
the first order of business for the assembly would be to elect a president.
The talks had reconvened in April. This time, the twenty-six parties included Inkatha, the Pan Africanist Congress, and the Conservative Party.
We had been pressing the government to establish a date for months, and they had been stalling. But now the date was written in stone.
A month later, in July, the multiparty forum agreed on a first draft of an interim constitution. It provided for a bicameral parliament with a fourhundred-member national assembly elected by proportional representation from national and regional party lists and a senate elected indirectly by
regional legislatures. Elections to regional legislatures would take place at the same time as national elections, and the regional bodies could draw
up their own constitutions consistent with the national constitution.
Chief Buthelezi wanted a constitution drawn up before the election and walked out in protest against the setting of an election date before a
constitution was finalized. A second draft interim constitution in August gave greater powers to the regions, but this did not placate either Chief
Buthelezi or the Conservative Party. The Conservative Party described the resolutions as hostile to Afrikaner interests. A group called the Afrikaner
Volksfront, led by General Constand Viljoen, a former chief of the South African Defense Force, was formed to unite conservative white
organizations around the idea of a volkstaat, a white homeland.
Just after midnight on November 18, an interim constitution was approved by a plenary session of the multiparty conference. The government and
the ANC had cleared the remaining hurdles. The new cabinet would be composed of those winning more than 5 percent of the vote and would
make decisions by consensus, rather than the two-thirds majority proposed by the government; national elections would not take place until 1999,
so that the government of national unity would serve for five years; and finally, the government gave way on our insistence on a single ballot paper
for the election, rather than separate ballots for national and provincial legislatures. Two ballot papers would only confuse a majority of voters, most
of whom would be voting for the first time in their lives. In the period leading up to the election, a Transitional Executive Council with members from
each party would ensure the right climate for the elections. In effect, the TEC would be the government between December 22 and the election on
April 27. An Independent Electoral Commission with extensive powers would be responsible for the administration of the election. We were truly on
the threshold of a new era.

I have never cared very much for personal prizes. A man does not become a freedom fighter in the hope of winning awards, but when I was notified
that I had won the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize jointly with Mr. de Klerk, I was deeply moved. The Nobel Peace Prize had a special meaning to me
because of its involvement with South African history.
I was the third South African since the end of the Second World War to be so honored by the Nobel committee. Chief Albert Luthuli was awarded
the prize in 1960. The second was Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who selflessly fought the evils of racism during the most terrible days of apartheid.
The award was a tribute to all South Africans and especially to those who had fought in the struggle; I would accept the award on their behalf. But
the Nobel award was one I never thought about. Even during the bleakest years on Robben Island, Amnesty International would not campaign for us
on the grounds that we had pursued an armed struggle, and their organization would not represent anyone who had embraced violence. It was for
that reason that I assumed the Nobel committee would never consider the man who had started Umkhonto we Sizwe for the peace prize.
I had tremendous respect for the nations of Norway and Sweden. In the 1950s and 1960s, when we went to Western governments seeking
contributions to the ANC, we were turned down flat. But in Norway and Sweden, we were greeted with open arms, and given assistance and
scholarships and money for legal defense and humanitarian aid for political prisoners.
I used my speech in Norway nor only to thank the Nobel committee and sketch out a vision of a future South Africa that was just and equitable, but
to pay tribute to my fellow laureate, Mr. F. W. de Klerk.
He had the courage to admit that a terrible wrong had been done to our country and people through the imposition of the system of apartheid. He had the foresight to understand
and accept that all the people of South Africa must, through negotiations and as equal participants in the process, together determine what they want to make of their future.

I was often asked how could I accept the award jointly with Mr. de Klerk after I had criticized him so severely. Although I would not take back my
criticisms, I could say that he had made a genuine and indispensable contribution to the peace process. I never sought to undermine Mr. de Klerk,
for the practical reason that the weaker he was, the weaker the negotiations process. To make peace with an enemy one must work with that
enemy, and that enemy becomes one’s partner.

Although the official campaign for the national assembly was not scheduled to begin until February 1994, we started to campaign in earnest after
the new constitution was ratified. That did not give us a head start; the National Party began its campaign the day they released me from prison.
Although the polls showed the ANC with a healthy margin, we never took victory for granted. I counseled everyone against overoptimism. We had
all read dozens of accounts of parties favored to win who came in second. We faced an experienced, well-organized, and well-financed rival.
Our campaign was under the capable leadership of Popo Molefe, Terror Lekota, and Ketso Gordhan, all veteran UDF activists adept at mass
mobilization. The task was a formidable one. We estimated that there would be over twenty million people going to the polls, most of them voting for
the first time. Many of our voters were illiterate, and were likely to be intimidated by the mere idea of voting. According to the Independent Electoral
Commission, there would be ten thousand polling stations around the country. We sought to train over one hundred thousand people to assist with
voter education.
The first stage of our election effort was what was known as People’s Forums. ANC candidates would travel all over the country and hold
meetings in towns and villages in order to listen to the hopes and fears, the ideas and complaints, of our people. The People’s Forums were similar
to the town meetings that candidate Bill Clinton held in America on his way to the presidency. The forums were parliaments of the people, not unlike
the meetings of chiefs at the Great Place that I witnessed as a boy.
I reveled in the People’s Forums. I began in Natal in November, and then went to the PWV area, the northern Transvaal, and the Orange Free
State. I attended as many as three or four forums in a day. The people themselves enjoyed them immensely. No one had ever come to solicit their

opinion on what should be done in their own country.
After incorporating the suggestions from the forums, we traveled the country delivering our message to the people. Some in the ANC wanted to
make the campaign simply a liberation election, and tell the people: Vote for us because we set you free. We decided instead to offer them a vision
of the South Africa we hoped to create. We wanted people to vote for the ANC not just because we had fought apartheid for eighty years, but
because we were best qualified to bring about the kind of South Africa they hoped to live in. I felt that our campaign should be about the future, not
the past.
The ANC drafted a 150-page document known as the Reconstruction and Development Program, which outlined our plan to create jobs through
public works; to build a million new houses with electricity and flush toilets; to extend primary health care and ten years of free education to all South
Africans; to redistribute land through a land claims court; and to end the value-added tax on basic foodstuffs. We were also committed to extensive
affirmative action measures in both the private and public sectors. This document was translated into a simpler manifesto called “A Better Life for
All,” which in turn became the ANC’s campaign slogan.
Just as we told the people what we would do, I felt we must also tell them what we could not do. Many people felt life would change overnight after
a free and democratic election, but that would be far from the case. Often, I said to crowds, “Do not expect to be driving a Mercedes the day after
the election or swimming in your own backyard pool.” I told our supporters, “Life will not change dramatically, except that you will have increased
your self-esteem and become a citizen in your own land. You must have patience. You might have to wait five years for results to show.” I challenged
them; I did not patronize them: “If you want to continue living in poverty without clothes and food,” I told them, “then go and drink in the shebeens. But
if you want better things, you must work hard. We cannot do it all for you; you must do it yourselves.”
I told white audiences that we needed them and did not want them to leave the country. They were South Africans just like ourselves and this was
their land, too. I would not mince words about the horrors of apartheid, but I said, over and over, that we should forget the past and concentrate on
building a better future for all.
Each rally was also designed to teach people how to vote. The ballot itself was a long, narrow piece of paper with the parties listed in
descending order to the left, and then the symbol of the party and a picture of its leader to the right. Voters were to place an X in the box next to the
party of their choice. I would tell audiences, “On election day, look down your ballot and when you see the face of a young and handsome man, mark
an X.”
