THE OPPRESSION of my wife did not let up. In 1972, security policemen kicked down the door of 8115 Orlando West. Bricks were hurled through
the window. Gunshots were fired at the front door. In 1974, Winnie was charged with violating her banning orders, which restricted her from having
any visitors apart from her children and her doctor. She was then working at a lawyer’s office, and a friend brought Zeni and Zindzi to see her during
her lunch hour. For this, Winnie was charged and then sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. She was put in Kroonstad Prison, in the Orange
Free State, but her experience there was not as horrendous as her previous stay in Pretoria. Winnie wrote to me that she felt liberated in prison this
time, and it served to reaffirm her commitment to the struggle. The authorities permitted Zindzi and Zeni to visit her on Sundays.
When Winnie was released in 1975, we managed, through letters and communications with our lawyers, to work out a plan for me to see Zindzi.
Prison regulations stated that no child between the ages of two and sixteen may visit a prisoner. When I went to Robben Island, all my children were
in this legal limbo of age restrictions. The reasoning behind the rule is not pernicious: the lawmakers presumed that a prison visit would negatively
affect the sensitive psyches of children. But the effect on prisoners was perhaps equally damaging. It is a source of deep sorrow not to be able to
see one’s children.
In 1975, Zindzi turned fifteen. The plan was for her mother to alter Zindzi’s birth documents to show that the girl was turning sixteen, not fifteen,
and therefore able to see me. Birth records are not kept in a very uniform or organized way for Africans, and Winnie found that it was not hard to
modify her documents to show that Zindzi was born a year earlier. She applied for a permit, and it was approved.

A few weeks before Zindzi’s scheduled visit in December, I had a previously arranged visit with Winnie’s mother. When I was seated across from
her in the visiting area, I said to her, “Well, Ma, I’m very excited because I’m going to see Zindzi.” My mother-in-law, who was a former teacher,
regarded me with some surprise and then said in a rather peevish way, “No, Zindzi cannot come and see you because she is not yet sixteen.”
I realized immediately that no one had told her about our gambit. There was a warder behind each of us, and I decided I would simply gloss over
what she had said, and mumbled, “Ah, well, Ma, it is nothing.”
But my mother-in-law is a stubborn woman and she did not let it pass. “Well, Mkonyanisi” — an affectionate term for son-in-law in Xhosa, which is
what she always called me — “you have made a serious error because Zindzi is only fifteen.”
I widened my eyes in a gesture of alarm and she must have gotten the message because she did not mention Zindzi again.

I had not seen Zindzi since she was three years old. She was a daughter who knew her father from old photographs rather than memory. I put on a
fresh shirt that morning, and took more trouble than usual with my appearance: it is my own vanity, but I did not want to look like an old man for my
youngest daughter.
I had not seen Winnie for over a year, and I was gratified to find that she looked well. But I was delighted to behold what a beautiful woman my
youngest daughter had become and how closely she resembled her equally beautiful mother.
Zindzi was shy and hesitant at first. I am sure it was not easy for her finally to see a father she had never really known, a father who could love her
only from a distance, who seemed to belong not to her but to the people. Somewhere deep inside her she must have harbored resentment and
anger for a father who was absent during her childhood and adolescence. I could see right away that she was a strong and fiery young woman like
her own mother had been when she was Zindzi’s age.
I knew she would be feeling uncomfortable, and I did my best to lighten the atmosphere. When she arrived I said to her, “Have you met my guard
of honor?,” gesturing to the warders who followed me everywhere. I asked her questions about her life, her schooling, and her friends, and then tried
to take her back to the old days that she barely remembered. I told her how I often recalled Sunday mornings at home when I dandled her on my
knee while Mum was in the kitchen making a roast. I recollected small incidents and adventures in Orlando when she was a baby, and how she had
rarely cried even when she was small. Through the glass, I could see her holding back her tears as I talked.

The one tragic note of the visit was when I learned from Winnie that Bram Fischer had died of cancer shortly after being let out of prison. Bram’s
death affected me deeply. Although the government left no fingerprints on Bram’s body, it was the state’s relentless harassment of him that brought
on the final illness that took him too soon. They hounded him even after death — the state confiscated his ashes after his cremation.
Bram was a purist, and after the Rivonia Trial, he decided he could best serve the struggle by going underground and living the life of an outlaw. It
burdened him that the men whom he was representing in court were going to prison while he lived freely. During the trial, I advised Bram not to take
this route, stressing that he served the struggle best in the courtroom, where people could see this Afrikaner son of a judge president fighting for the
rights of the powerless. But he could not let others suffer while he remained free. Like the general who fights side by side with his troops at the front,
Bram did not want to ask others to make a sacrifice that he was unwilling to make himself.
Bram went underground while out on bail and was captured in 1965, and sentenced to life imprisonment for conspiracy to commit sabotage. I
had tried to write him in prison, but regulations forbade prisoners from corresponding with each other. After he had been diagnosed with cancer, a
newspaper campaign calling for his release on humanitarian grounds had influenced the government. It was just a few weeks after the authorities
released him, still under house arrest, to his brother’s house in Bloemfontein that he died.
In many ways, Bram Fischer, the grandson of the prime minister of the Orange River Colony, had made the greatest sacrifice of all. No matter
what I suffered in my pursuit of freedom, I always took strength from the fact that I was fighting with and for my own people. Bram was a free man
who fought against his own people to ensure the freedom of others.

A month after this visit I received word from Winnie that her most recent request for a visit had been turned down by the authorities on the absurd
grounds that I did not wish to see her. I immediately made an appointment with Lieutenant Prins, who was then head of prison, to lodge a protest.
Prins was not what one would call a sophisticated man. When I went in to see him I explained the situation evenly and without animosity. But I
said the situation as it stood was unacceptable and my wife must be permitted to visit.
Prins did not appear to be listening, and when I had finished he said, “Ag, Mandela, your wife is only seeking publicity.” I told him that I resented
his remark, and before I had even finished, he uttered something so offensive and uncomplimentary about my wife that I immediately lost my

temper.
I rose from my chair and started to move around the desk toward the lieutenant. Prins began to retreat, but I soon checked myself. Instead of
assaulting him with my fists, as I felt like doing, I pummeled him with words. I am not a man who approves of oaths or curses, but that day I violated
my own principle. I finished by telling him that he was a contemptible man without honor, and that if he ever repeated those same words I would not
hold myself back as I had that day.
When I had finished, I turned and stormed out of his office. As I was leaving, I saw Kathy and Eddie Daniels outside but I did not even greet them
as I walked back to my cell. Even though I had silenced Prins, he had caused me to violate my self-control and I consider that a defeat at the hands
of my opponent.
After breakfast the following morning, two warders entered my cell and said I was wanted at the Head Office. When I reached the office, I was
surrounded by a half-dozen armed warders. Off to one side was Lieutenant Prins and in the center of this circle was a warrant officer who was the
prison prosecutor. The atmosphere was tense.
“Well, Mandela,” the prosecutor said, “I hear you had yourself a nice time yesterday, but today will not be so pleasant. I am charging you for
having insulted and threatened the head of prison. It is a grave charge.” He then handed me the summons.
“Do you have anything to say?” he asked.
“No,” I replied. “You can speak with my attorney.” I then asked to be taken back to my cell. Prins did not say a word.

I knew immediately what I would do: prepare a countersuit charging everyone from the lieutenant all the way up to the minister of justice with
misconduct. I would indict the prison system as a whole as a racist institution that sought to perpetuate white supremacy. I would make the case a
cause célèbre, and make them regret they had ever charged me in the first place.
I asked George Bizos to represent me, and a meeting was soon arranged. Before George’s visit I informed the authorities that I would be giving
him written instructions. They asked me why and I replied frankly that I assumed the consultation room was bugged. The authorities then refused
permission for me to give a written statement; I must make an oral one. I told them that they had no right to withhold permission, and the fact that
they did only confirmed my suspicions.
The truth was that the authorities were afraid George would leak a written statement to the press. This was indeed part of our strategy. They were
also concerned that I was using George as a conduit to communicate with Oliver in Lusaka, and assumed that the written statement would contain
sensitive information. I had previously used George for such purposes, but the document in question did not contain such material.
A date was set for the island’s disciplinary court, and a magistrate from Cape Town was assigned. A day before the hearing, I was told that my
attorney would be arriving the following day and I would be free to give him my written statement. I met George at the head office in the morning and
we briefly consulted before court was called into session. But the hearing had no sooner started than the prosecutor announced that the prison was
withdrawing its case. The judge gaveled the session to a close and abruptly left the room. George and I looked at each other in surprise, and
congratulated one another on an apparent victory. I was putting away my papers when another warrant officer came over and, pointing to my written
statement, said, “Hand me that file.”
I refused, saying it was a confidential matter between myself and my attorney. I called over the prosecutor and said: “Inform this man that these
documents are protected by attorney-client privilege, and that I do not have to turn them over.” The prosecutor replied that they were, but that the
case was over, court was no longer in session, and the only authority in the room was that of the warrant officer. The officer plucked the document
off the table. There was nothing I could do to stop him. I believe the authorities dropped the case simply to get hold of that document — which, as
they discovered, contained nothing they did not already know.

As unlikely a prospect as it may have seemed, I nevertheless thought about escape the entire time I was on the island. Mac Maharaj and Eddie
Daniels, both brave and resourceful men, were always hatching plans and discussing possibilities. Most were far too dangerous, but that did not
stop us from considering them.
We had made certain advances. Jeff Masemola, our master craftsman, had managed to make a passkey that unlocked most of the doors in and
around our section. One day, a warder had left his key on the desk in the office at the end of our corridor. Jeff took a piece of soap and made an
imprint of the key. Using that outline, he took a piece of metal and filed it into the shape of the key. This key gave us access to some of the
storerooms behind our cells as well as to the isolation section. But we never used it to leave our section. It was the sea, after all, that was the
uncrossable moat around Robben Island.
In 1974, Mac had an idea how to cross that barrier. He had recently been taken to the dentist in Cape Town and discovered that the dentist
himself was related by marriage to a well-known political prisoner. The dentist was sympathetic; he had refused to treat Mac unless Mac’s leg irons
were first removed. Mac had also noticed that the window in the dentist’s second-floor waiting room was just a short drop to a small side-street
where we might make a run for it.
When Mac returned, he met with a few of us and urged us to make appointments at the dentist. We did so, and learned that a day had been
arranged for Mac, Wilton Mkwayi, me, and one other prisoner to go to Cape Town. The three of us were willing to make the attempt, but when Mac
contacted the fourth man, he refused. We had doubts about this man’s loyalty, and it concerned me that he knew what we were planning.
The three of us were taken by boat to Cape Town and then to the dentist’s office under heavy guard. All three of us had trained as soldiers and
we probably had the best chance of actually executing an escape. Mac was also carrying a knife, and was prepared to use it. At the dentist’s office,
the guards first cleared away all the other patients. We demanded to have our leg irons removed, and with the support of the dentist, our guards
took them off.
Mac led us over to the window and pointed out the street that was our escape route. But something about the street bothered Mac as soon as he
saw it: we were in the center of Cape Town in the middle of the day, and yet the street was empty. When he had been here before, the street had
been filled With traffic. “It’s a setup,” Mac whispered. I, too, had the sense that something was not right, and I agreed with Mac. Wilton, whose
adrenaline was flowing, said Mac was talking nonsense. “Madiba, you’re losing your nerve,” he said. But I agreed with Mac, and the three of us
simply ended up having our teeth examined. The dentist was curious as to why I had come, because my teeth were fine.

While Mac considered the most practical escape plans, Eddie Daniels hatched the most imaginative ones. During the early years, airplanes were

not permitted to fly over the island. But by the mid-1970s, we noticed that not only were planes flying over our heads, but helicopters on their way to
and from the tankers that sailed off the coast. Eddie came to me with a plan that would involve the organization using a helicopter, painted with the
South African military colors, to pick me up on the island and then deposit me on the roof of a friendly foreign embassy in Cape Town where I would
seek asylum. It was not an ill-conceived plan, and I told Eddie he should smuggle out the suggestion to Oliver in Lusaka. Eddie did manage to get
his idea to Lusaka, but we never received a response.