I NEVER IMAGINED the struggle would be either short or easy. The first few years on the island were difficult times both for the organization
outside and those of us in prison. After Rivonia, much of the movement’s underground machinery had been destroyed. Our structures had been
discovered and uprooted; those who were not captured were scrambling to stay one step ahead of the enemy. Virtually every one of the ANC’s
senior leaders was either in jail or in exile.
In the years after Rivonia, the ANC’s External Mission, formerly responsible for fund-raising, diplomacy, and establishing a military training
program, took up the reins of the organization as a whole. The External Mission not only had to create an organization in exile, but had the even
more formidable task of trying to revitalize the underground ANC inside South Africa.
The state had grown stronger. The police had become more powerful, their methods more ruthless, their techniques more sophisticated. The
South African Defense Force was expanding. The economy was stable, the white electorate untroubled. The South African government had
powerful allies in Great Britain and the United States who were content to maintain the status quo.
But elsewhere the struggle against imperialism was on the march. In the middle to late 1960s, armed struggles were being fought throughout
southern Africa. In Namibia (then South-West Africa), SWAPO was making its first incursions in the Caprivi Strip; in Mozambique and Angola, the
guerrilla movement was growing and spreading. In Zimbabwe (then Rhodesia), the battle against white minority rule was advancing. Ian Smith’s
white government was bolstered by the South African Defense Force, and the ANC regarded the battle in Zimbabwe as an extension of our
struggle at home. In 1967, we learned that the ANC had forged an alliance with the Zimbabwe African People’s Union (ZAPU), which had been
formed by Joshua Nkomo.
That year, a group of MK soldiers who had been training in Tanzania and Zambia crossed the Zambezi River into Rhodesia with the intention of
making their way home. This first group of MK soldiers was christened the Luthuli Detachment and they were the spearhead of the armed struggle.
In August, as the Luthuli Detachment, accompanied by ZAPU troops, moved southward, they were spotted by the Rhodesian army. Over the next
few weeks, fierce battles were fought and both sides sustained casualties. Finally, our troops were overpowered by the superior numbers of the
Rhodesian forces. Some were captured, and others retreated into Bechuanaland — which had become independent Botswana. By the beginning
of 1968, another larger ANC detachment had entered Rhodesia and fought not only the Rhodesian army but South African policemen who had
been posted to Rhodesia.
We heard of this months later by rumor, but did not learn the full story until some of the men who had fought there were imprisoned with us.
Though our forces were not victorious, we quietly celebrated the fact that our MK cadres had engaged the enemy in combat on their own terms. It
was a milestone in the struggle. “Justice” Panza, one of the commanders of the Luthuli Detachment, was later imprisoned with us. He briefed us on
the detachment’s military training, political education, and valor in the field. As a former commander-in-chief of MK, I was terribly proud of our
soldiers.
* * *
Before receiving the news of MK’s battles abroad, we also learned of Chief Luthuli’s death at home in July 1967. The circumstances were curious:
he had been hit by a train in an area near his farm where he often walked. I was granted permission to write a letter to his widow. Luthuli’s death left
a great vacuum in the organization; the chief was a Nobel Prize winner, a distinguished, internationally known figure, a man who commanded
respect from both black and white. For these reasons, he was irreplaceable. Yet in Oliver Tambo, who was acting president-general of the ANC,
the organization found a man who could fill the chief’s shoes. Like Luthuli, he was articulate yet not showy, confident but humble. He too epitomized
Chief Luthuli’s precept: “Let your courage rise with danger.”
We organized a small memorial service for the chief in Section B and permitted everyone who wanted to speak to do so. It was a quiet,
respectful service, with only one sour note. When Neville Alexander of the Unity Movement rose to speak, it was apparent that he had come not to
praise the chief but to bury him. Without even perfunctory regrets at the man’s passing, he accused Luthuli of being a patsy of the white man, mainly
on the grounds that the chief had accepted the Nobel Peace Prize.
Apart from its wrong-headedness, Neville’s speech was entirely contrary to the climate of cooperation between organizations we were trying to
create on the island. From the moment I arrived on the island, I had made it my mission to seek some accommodation with our rivals in the
struggle. I saw Robben Island as an opportunity to patch up the long and often bitter differences between the PAC and the ANC. If we could unite
the two organizations on the island, that could set a precedent for uniting them in the liberation struggle as a whole.
Yet from the beginning, relations with the PAC had been more competitive than cooperative. Some of the PAC men had already been on the
island, and saw our arrival as an encroachment on their territory. We heard from some of our men that the most senior PAC prisoners had
expressed regret that we had not been hanged.
In 1962, when I had first been on the island, the PAC had greatly outnumbered the ANC. In 1967, the numbers were reversed. Yet this seemed to
harden the PAC in their positions. They were unashamedly anti-Communist and anti-Indian. In the early years, I had talks with Zeph Mothopeng, who
had been on the PAC’s National Executive Committee. Zeph argued that the PAC was more militant than the ANC, and that in prison, the ANC
should follow the PAC’s lead. The PAC maintained that negotiations with the authorities were a betrayal, but that did not stop them from taking
advantage of the benefits that resulted from negotiations. In 1967, I held talks with Selby Ngendane on the question of unity. Outside of prison,
Ngendane had been violently opposed to the Freedom Charter, but in prison, particularly when sent to our section, Selby mellowed. We eventually
wrote separate letters to our respective organizations in the general section advocating the idea of unity. The ANC also worked well with Clarence
Makwetu, who later became president of the PAC. Makwetu, who had once been a member of the ANC Youth League, was in our section and was
a balanced, sensible man. We had many fruitful discussions about the unity of our two organizations, but after Makwetu was released and was
succeeded in the PAC leadership on Robben Island by John Pokela, the talks foundered.
The PAC’s insecurity occasionally had comical results. At one point, an order came from Pretoria that I was to be isolated from all other
prisoners at the quarry. I would work separately, eat separately, and have my own guard. We noticed that this new ruling caused some agitation
among the PAC. Several days later, the PAC decided that their leader, Zeph Mothopeng, would also be isolated, and on their own they had him
work and eat separately from everyone else for as long as I did.
The PAC often refused to participate in meetings that had no overt party affiliation. When we called meetings to discuss our grievances and later
had news sessions to discuss what we had learned from the paper, the PAC boycotted these gatherings. I found this greatly annoying. The PAC,
we learned, were ignorant of changes in their own organization on the outside. At the time, the PAC members on the island refused to believe our
claims that the exiled PAC had opened its doors to whites and Indians as members. That was heresy. Yet we had read in the paper that the white
activist Patrick Duncan had become a member of the PAC executive. The PAC members derided this at the time as ANC propaganda.

* * *
The ANC formed its own internal organization on the island. Known as the High Command, or more officially, the High Organ, it consisted of the
most senior ANC leaders on Robben Island, the men who had been members of the National Executive Committee: Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki,
Raymond Mhlaba, and myself. I served as the head of the High Organ.
From its inception, we decided the High Organ would not try to influence external ANC policy. We had no reliable way of evaluating the situation
in the country, and concluded it would neither be fair nor wise for us to offer guidance on matters about which we were uninformed. Instead, we
made decisions about such matters as prisoners’ complaints, strikes, mail, food — all of the day-to-day concerns of prison life. We would, when
possible, convene a general members’ meeting, which we regarded as vital to the health of our organization. But as these meetings were extremely
dangerous and thus infrequent, the High Organ would often take decisions that were then communicated to all the other members. The High Organ
also operated a cell system, with each cell consisting of three members.
In the first few years on the island, the High Organ also acted as a representative committee for all the political prisoners in our section. In 1967,
we organized a petition demanding better treatment that was signed by virtually everyone, including members of the PAC, the Unity Movement, and
the Liberal Party, represented by Eddie Daniels. This arrangement was acceptable to all until Neville Alexander complained that the High Organ
was neither democratic nor truly representative, and that some other body ought to be created.
Neville’s original suggestion eventually turned into a prisoners’ committee composed of people from all political parties. There was fear among
the other organizations that the ANC would attempt to dominate it, and the committee’s rules were crafted so that its powers were purely
consultative and its decisions not binding. Even so, it was still difficult to agree on a common approach to problems. We suggested that Fikile
Bam, a member of the Yu Chi Chan Club, preside over meetings. Later, the committee leadership would rotate. Eventually the committee became
known as Ulundi, and acted as a disciplinary committee for all political prisoners.
The High Organ was the source of some controversy because of its ethnic composition: all four permanent members were from Xhosa
backgrounds. This was a matter of coincidence rather than design; the senior ANC leadership on the island, the only four to have served on the
National Executive Committee, happened to be Xhosa. It would not have been proper to take a less senior comrade and put him on the High Organ
simply because he was not a Xhosa. But the fact that the High Organ was Xhosa-dominated disturbed me because it seemed to reinforce the
mistaken perception that we were a Xhosa organization.
I have always found this criticism to be vexing and based on both ignorance of ANC history and maliciousness. I would refute it by noting that the
presidents of the ANC have been Zulus, Basotho, Pedis, and Tswanas, and the executive has always been a mixture of tribal groups. I recall once
working in our courtyard on a sunny afternoon, while some men from the general section were working on the roof above me. They shouted at me,
“Mdala! [Old man!], why do you only talk to Xhosas?” The accusation stung me. I looked up and said, “How can you accuse me of discrimination?
We are one people.” They seemed satisfied by that, but their perception stuck in my mind. From then on, whenever I knew I would be walking in
front of men from the general section, I would try to converse with Kathy or Eddie Daniels, or someone who was not a Xhosa.
We subsequently decided that there should be a fifth, rotating member of the High Organ. This member was usually not a Xhosa; Kathy, for
example, was the fifth member of the High Organ for more than five years. Laloo Chiba also served for a time, and in the end, the criticism died a
slow and unremarkable death.
I did not by any means dominate the High Organ, and in fact, a number, of proposals that I felt strongly about were rejected. This is as it should
be, but I sometimes found it frustrating. There were two issues regarding the authorities about which I could never persuade my colleagues. Prison
regulations stated that prisoners must stand in the presence of a senior officer. I advocated that we should remain seated, as it was demeaning to
have to recognize the enemy when he did not recognize us as political prisoners. My comrades believed this was a trivial matter and the negative
consequences of resistance would outweigh any benefits.
The second issue was rejected by the High Organ on similar grounds. The warders called us by either our surnames or our Christian names.
Each, I felt, was degrading, and I thought we should insist on the honorific “Mister.” I pressed for this for many years, without success. Later, it even
became a source of humor as my colleagues would occasionally call me “Mr.” Mandela.