FEW ISSUES touched a nerve as much as that of passes for women. The state had not weakened in its resolve to impose passes on women and
women had not weakened in their resolve to resist. Although the government now called passes “reference books,” women weren’t fooled: they
could still be fined ten pounds or imprisoned for a month for failing to produce their “reference book.”
In 1957, spurred by the efforts of the ANC Women’s League, women all across the country, in rural areas and in cities, reacted with fury to the
state’s insistence that they carry passes. The women were courageous, persistent, enthusiastic, indefatigable, and their protest against passes set
a standard for antigovernment protest that was never equaled. As Chief Luthuli said, “When the women begin to take an active part in the struggle,
no power on earth can stop us from achieving freedom in our lifetime.”
All across the southeastern Transvaal, in Standerton, Heidelberg, Balfour, and other dorps, thousands of women protested. On recess from the
Treason Trial, Frances Baard and Florence Matomela organized women to refuse passes in Port Elizabeth, their hometown. In Johannesburg, in
October, a large group of women gathered at the central pass office, and chased away women who had come to collect passes and clerks who
worked in the office, bringing the office to a standstill. Police arrested hundreds of the women.
Not long after these arrests, Winnie and I were relaxing after supper when she quietly informed me that she intended to join the group of Orlando
women who would be protesting the following day at the pass office. I was a bit taken aback, and while I was pleased at her sense of commitment
and admired her courage, I was also wary. Winnie had become increasingly politicized since our marriage, and had joined the Orlando West
branch of the ANC’s Women’s League, all of which I encouraged.
I told her I welcomed her decision, but that I had to warn her about the seriousness of her action. It would, I said, in a single act, radically change
her life. By African standards, Winnie was from a well-to-do family and had been shielded from some of the more unpleasant realities of life in
South Africa. At the very least, she never had had to worry about where her next meal was coming from. Before our marriage, she had moved in
circles of relative wealth and comfort, a life very different from the often hand-to-mouth existence of the freedom fighter.
I told her that if she was arrested she would be certain to be fired by her employer, the provincial administration — we both knew that it was her
small income that was supporting the household — and that she could probably never work again as a social worker, since the stigma of
imprisonment would make public agencies reluctant to hire her. Finally, she was pregnant, and I warned her of the physical hardship and
humiliations of jail. My response may sound harsh, but I felt responsibility both as a husband and as a leader of the struggle, to be as clear as
possible about the ramifications of her action. I, myself, had mixed emotions, for the concerns of a husband and a leader do not always coincide.
But Winnie is a determined person, and I suspect my pessimistic reaction only strengthened her resolve. She listened to all I said and informed
me that her mind was made up. The next morning I rose early to make her breakfast, and we drove over to the Sisulus’ house to meet Walter’s wife,
Albertina, one of the leaders of the protest. We then drove to the Phefeni station in Orlando, where the women would get the train into town. I
embraced her before she boarded the train. Winnie was nervous yet resolute as she waved to me from the train, and I felt as though she were
setting out on a long and perilous journey, the end of which neither of us could know.

Hundreds of women converged on the Central Pass Office in downtown Johannesburg. They were old and young; some carried babies on their
backs, some wore tribal blankets, while others had on smart suits. They sang, marched, and chanted. Within minutes, they were surrounded by
dozens of armed police, who arrested all of them, packed them into vans, and drove them to Marshall Square police station. The women were
cheerful throughout; as they were being driven away, some called out to reporters, “Tell our madams we won’t be at work tomorrow!” All told, more
than one thousand women were arrested.
I knew this not because I was the husband of one of the detainees but because Mandela and Tambo had been called on to represent most of the
women who had been arrested. I quickly made my way to Marshall Square to visit the prisoners and arrange bail. I managed to see Winnie, who
beamed when she saw me and seemed as happy as one could be in a bare police cell. It was as if she had given me a great gift that she knew
would please me. I told her I was proud of her, but I could not stay and talk as I had quite a lot of legal work to do.
By the end of the second day, the number of arrests had increased and nearly two thousand women were incarcerated, many of them remanded
to the Fort to await trial. This created formidable problems not only for Oliver and me, but for the police and the prison authorities. There was simply
not enough space to hold them all. There were too few blankets, too few mats and toilets, and too little food. Conditions at the Fort were cramped
and dirty. While many in the ANC, including myself, were eager to bail out the women, Lilian Ngoyi, the national president of the Women’s League,
and Helen Joseph, secretary of the South African Women’s Federation, believed that for the protest to be genuine and effective, the women should
serve whatever time the magistrate ordered. I remonstrated with them but was told in no uncertain terms that the matter was the women’s affair and
that the ANC — as well as anxious husbands — should not meddle. I did tell Lilian that I thought she should discuss the issue with the women
themselves before making a decision, and escorted her down to the cells where she could poll the prisoners. Many were desperate to be bailed out
and had not been adequately prepared for what would await them in prison. As a compromise, I suggested to Lilian that the women spend a
fortnight in prison, after which we would bail them out. Lilian accepted.
Over the next two weeks, I spent many hours in court arranging bail for the women. A few were frustrated and took their anger out on me.
“Mandela, I am tired of this case of yours,” one woman said to me. “If this does not end today I will not ever reappear in court.” With the help of
relatives and fund-raising organizations, we managed to bail them all out within two weeks.
Winnie did not seem the worse for wear from her prison experience. If she had suffered, she would not have told me anyway. While she was in
prison Winnie became friendly with two teenaged Afrikaner wardresses. They were sympathetic and curious, and after Winnie was released on
bail, we invited them to visit us. They accepted and traveled by train to Orlando. We gave them lunch at the house and afterward Winnie took them
for a tour of the township. Winnie and the two wardresses were about the same age and got on well. They laughed together as though they were all
sisters. The two girls had an enjoyable day and thanked Winnie, saying that they would like to return. As it turned out, this was not to be, for in
traveling to Orlando they had, of necessity, sat in a non-White carriage. (There were no white trains to Orlando for the simple reason that no whites
went to Orlando.) As a result, they attracted a great deal of attention and it was soon widely known that two Afrikaner wardresses from the Fort had
visited Winnie and me. This was not a problem for us, but it proved to be one for them: the prison authorities dismissed them. We never saw nor
heard from them again.