ONE MORNING, instead of walking to the quarry, we were ordered into the back of a truck. It rumbled off in a new direction, and fifteen minutes
later we were ordered to jump out. There in front of us, glinting in the morning light, we saw the ocean, the rocky shore, and in the distance, winking
in the sunshine, the glass towers of Cape Town. Although it was surely an illusion, the city, with Table Mountain looming behind it, looked
agonizingly close, as if one could almost reach out and grasp it.
The senior officer explained to us that we had been brought to the shore to collect seaweed. We were instructed to pick up the large pieces that
had washed up on the beach, and wade out to collect seaweed attached to rocks or coral. The seaweed itself was long and slimy and brownishgreen in color. Sometimes the pieces were six to eight feet in length and thirty pounds in weight. After fishing out the seaweed from the shallows,
we lined it up in rows on the beach. When it was dry, we loaded it into the back of the truck. We were told it was then shipped to Japan, where it
was used as a fertilizer.
The work did not seem too taxing to us that day, but in the coming weeks and months, we found it could be quite strenuous. But that hardly
mattered because we had the pleasures and distractions of such a panoramic tableau: we watched fishing ships trawling, stately oil tankers moving
slowly across the horizon; we saw gulls spearing fish from the sea and seals cavorting on the waves; we laughed at the colony of penguins, which
resembled a brigade of clumsy, flat-footed soldiers; and we marveled at the daily drama of the weather over Table Mountain, with its shifting
canopy of clouds and sun.
In the summer, the water felt wonderful, but in winter, the icy Benguela currents made wading out into the waves a torture. The rocks on and
around the shore were jagged, and we often cut and scraped our legs as we worked. But we preferred the sea to the quarry, although we never
spent more than a few days there at a time.
* * *
The ocean proved to be a treasure chest. I found beautiful pieces of coral and elaborate shells, which I sometimes brought back to my cell. Once
someone discovered a bottle of wine stuck in the sand that was still corked. I am told it tasted like vinegar. Jeff Masemola of the PAC was an
extremely talented artist and sculptor, and the authorities allowed him to harvest pieces of driftwood, which he carved into fantastic figures, some of
which the warders offered to buy. He constructed a bookcase for me, which I used for many years. The authorities told visitors that they had
provided me with it.
The atmosphere at the shore was more relaxed than at the quarry. We also relished the seaside because we ate extremely well there. Each
morning when we went to the shore, we would take a large drum of fresh water. Later, we would bring along a second drum, which we would use to
make a kind of Robben Island seafood stew. For our stew we would pick up clams and mussels. We also caught crayfish, which hid themselves in
the crevices of rocks. Capturing a crayfish was tricky; one had to grab it firmly between its head and tail or it would wiggle free.
Abalone, or what we call parlemoen, was my favorite dish. Abalones are mollusks that cling tenaciously to rocks, and one has to pry them loose.
They are stubborn creatures, difficult to open, and if they are the slightest bit overcooked, they are too tough to eat.
We would take our catch and pile it into the second drum. Wilton Mkwayi was the chef among us and he would concoct the stew. When it was
ready, the warders would join us and we would all sit down on the beach and have a kind of picnic lunch. In 1973, in a smuggled newspaper, we
read about the wedding of Princess Anne and Mark Phillips, and the story detailed the bridal luncheon of rare and delicate dishes. The menu
included mussels, crayfish, and abalone, which made us laugh; we were dining on such delicacies every day.
One afternoon, we were sitting on the beach eating our stew when Lieutenant Terblanche, who was then head of prison, made a surprise visit.
We quickly pretended to be working, but we had not fooled him. He soon discovered the second drum containing a mussel stew bubbling over the
fire. The lieutenant opened the pot and looked inside. He then speared a mussel, ate it, and pronounced it “Smaaklik,” Afrikaans for “tasty.”