FORMERLY KNOWN as Abyssinia, Ethiopia, according to tradition, was founded long before the birth of Christ, supposedly by the son of Solomon
and the queen of Sheba. Although it had been conquered dozens of times, Ethiopia was the birthplace of African nationalism. Unlike so many other
African states, it had fought colonialism at every turn. Menelik had rebuffed the Italians in the last century, though Ethiopia failed to halt them in this
one. In 1930, Haile Selassie became emperor and the shaping force of contemporary Ethiopian history. I was seventeen when Mussolini attacked
Ethiopia, an invasion that spurred not only my hatred of that despot but of fascism in general. Although Selassie was forced to flee when the Italians
conquered Ethiopia in 1936, he returned after Allied forces drove the Italians out in 1941.
Ethiopia has always held a special place in my own imagination and the prospect of visiting Ethiopia attracted me more strongly than a trip to
France, England, and America combined. I felt I would be visiting my own genesis, unearthing the roots of what made me an African. Meeting the
emperor himself would be like shaking hands with history.
Our first stop was Addis Ababa, the Imperial City, which did not live up to its title, for it was the opposite of grand, with only a few tarred streets,
and more goats and sheep than cars. Apart from the Imperial Palace, the university, and the Ras Hotel, where we stayed, there were few structures
that could compare with even the least impressive buildings of Johannesburg. Contemporary Ethiopia was not a model when it came to
democracy, either. There were no political parties, no popular organs of government, no separation of powers; only the emperor, who was
supreme.
Before the opening of the conference, the delegates assembled at the tiny town of Debra Zaid. A grandstand had been erected in the central
square and Oliver and I sat off to the side, away from the main podium. Suddenly we heard the distant music of a lone bugle and then the strains of
a brass band accompanied by the steady beating of African drums. As the music came closer, I could hear — and feel — the rumbling of hundreds
of marching feet. From behind a building at the edge of the square, an officer appeared brandishing a gleaming sword; at his heels marched five
hundred black soldiers in rows four across, each carrying a polished rifle against his uniformed shoulder. When the troops had marched directly in
front of the grandstand, an order rang out in Amharic, and the five hundred soldiers halted as one man, spun around, and executed a precise salute
to an elderly man in a dazzling uniform, His Highness the Emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie, the Lion of Judah.
Here, for the first time in my life, I was witnessing black soldiers commanded by black generals applauded by black leaders who were all guests
of a black head of state. It was a heady moment. I only hoped it was a vision of what lay in the future for my own country.
On the morning after the parade, Oliver and I attended a meeting where each organization had to apply for accreditation. We were unpleasantly
surprised to find that our application was blocked by a delegate from Uganda who complained that we were a tribal organization of Xhosas. My
impulse was to dismiss this claim contemptuously, but Oliver’s notion was that we should simply explain that our organization was formed to unite
Africans and our membership was drawn from all sections of the people. This I did, adding that the president of our organization, Chief Luthuli, was
a Zulu. Our application was accepted. I realized that many people on the continent only knew about the ANC from the PAC’s description of us.
The conference was officially opened by our host, His Imperial Majesty, who was dressed in an elaborate brocaded army uniform. I was
surprised by how small the emperor appeared, but his dignity and confidence made him seem like the African giant that he was. It was the first time
I had witnessed a head of state go through the formalities of his office, and I was fascinated. He stood perfectly straight, and inclined his head only
slightly to indicate that he was listening. Dignity was the hallmark of all his actions.
I was scheduled to speak after the emperor, the only other speaker that morning. For the first time in many months, I flung aside the identity of
David Motsamayi and became Nelson Mandela. In my speech, I reviewed the history of the freedom struggle in South Africa and listed the brutal
massacres that had been committed against our people, from Bulhoek in 1921, when the army and police killed one hundred eighty-three unarmed
peasants, to Sharpeville forty years later. I thanked the assembled nations for exerting pressure on South Africa, citing in particular Ghana, Nigeria,
and Tanganyika, who spearheaded the successful drive to oust South Africa from the British Commonwealth. I retraced the birth of Umkhonto we
Sizwe, explaining that all opportunities for peaceful struggle had been closed to us. “A leadership commits a crime against its own people if it
hesitates to sharpen its political weapons where they have become less effective. . . . On the night of 16 December last year, the whole of South
Africa vibrated under the heavy blows of Umkhonto we Sizwe.” I had no sooner said this than the chief minister of Uganda cried out: “Give it to them
again!”
I then related my own experience:
I have just come out of South Africa, having for the last ten months lived in my own country as an outlaw, away from family and friends. When I was compelled to lead this sort of life,
I made a public statement in which I announced that I would not leave the country but would continue working underground. I meant it and I will honor that undertaking.

The announcement that I would return to South Africa was met with loud cheers. We had been encouraged to speak first so PAFMECSA could
evaluate our cause and decide how much support to give it. There was a natural reluctance among many African states to support violent struggles
elsewhere; but the speech convinced people that freedom fighters in South Africa had no alternative but to take up arms.
Oliver and I had a private discussion with Kenneth Kaunda, the leader of the United National Independence Party of Northern Rhodesia and the
future president of Zambia. Like Julius Nyerere, Kaunda was worried about the lack of unity among South African freedom fighters and suggested
that when Sobukwe emerged from jail, we might all join forces. Among Africans, the PAC had captured the spotlight at Sharpeville in a way that far
exceeded their influence as an organization. Kaunda, who had once been a member of the ANC, told us he was concerned about our alliance with
white Communists and indicated that this reflected poorly on us in Africa. Communism was suspect not only in the West but in Africa. This came as
something of a revelation to me, and it was a view that I was to hear over and over during my trip.
When I attempted to make the case that UNIP’s support of the PAC was misguided, Kaunda put his hand on my shoulder and said, “Nelson,
speaking to me on this subject is like carrying coals to Newcastle. I am your supporter and a follower of Chief Luthuli. But I am not the sole voice of
UNIP. You must speak to Simon Kapwepwe. If you persuade him you will make my job easier.” Kapwepwe was the second in command of UNIP,
and I made arrangements to see him the following day. I asked Oliver to join me but he said, “Nel, you must see him on your own. Then you can be
completely frank.”
I spent the entire day with Kapwepwe and heard from him the most astonishing tale. “We were mightily impressed by your speech,” he said, “and
indeed by your entire ANC delegation. If we were to judge your organization by these two things, we would certainly be in your camp. But we have
heard disturbing reports from the PAC to the effect that Umkhonto we Sizwe is the brainchild of the Communist Party and the Liberal Party, and that
the idea of the organization is merely to use Africans as cannon fodder.”
I was nonplussed, and I blurted out that I was astounded that he could not see himself how damnably false this story was. “First of all,” I said, “it is
well known that the Liberal Party and the Communist Party are archenemies and could not come together to form a game of cards. Second, I am
here to tell you at the risk of immodesty that I myself was the prime mover behind MK’s formation.” Finally, I said I was greatly disappointed in the

PAC for spreading such lies.
By the end of the day, I had converted Kapwepwe, and he said he would call a meeting and make our case himself — and he did so. But it was
another example of both the lack of knowledge about South Africa in the rest of Africa and the extraordinary lengths the PAC would go to besmirch
the ANC. Kapwepwe bade me good luck, for the conference was now over. It had been successful, but we had our work cut out for us.

As a student, I had fantasized about visiting Egypt, the cradle of African civilization, the treasure chest of so much beauty in art and design, about
seeing the pyramids and the sphinx, and crossing the Nile, the greatest of African rivers. From Addis, Oliver, Robert Resha — who was to
accompany me on the rest of my travels — and I flew to Cairo. I spent the whole morning of my first day in Cairo at the museum, looking at art,
examining artifacts, making notes, learning about the type of men who founded the ancient civilization of the Nile Valley. This was not amateur
archaeological interest; it is important for African nationalists to be armed with evidence to dispute the fictitious claims of whites that Africans are
without a civilized past that compares with that of the West. In a single morning, I discovered that Egyptians were creating great works of art and
architecture when whites were still living in caves.
Egypt was an important model for us, for we could witness firsthand the program of socialist economic reforms being launched by President
Nasser. He had reduced private ownership of land, nationalized certain sectors of the economy, pioneered rapid industrialization, democratized
education, and built a modern army. Many of these reforms were precisely the sort of things that we in the ANC someday hoped to enact. At that
time, however, it was more important to us that Egypt was the only African state with an army, navy, and air force that could in any way compare with
those of South Africa.

After a day, Oliver left for London, promising to join Robbie and me in Ghana. Before Robbie and I left on our tour, we discussed the presentation
we would make in each country. My inclination was to explain the political situation as truthfully and objectively as possible and not omit the
accomplishments of the PAC. In each new country, I would initially seal myself away in our hotel familiarizing myself with information about the
country’s policies, history, and leadership. Robbie did the opposite. A natural extrovert, he would leave the hotel as soon as we arrived and hit the
streets, learning by seeing and talking to people. We were an odd couple, for I affected the informal dress I had gotten used to underground and
wore khakis and fatigues, while Robbie was always smartly turned out in a suit.
In Tunis, our first stop, we met with the minister of defense, who bore a striking resemblance to Chief Luthuli. But I’m afraid that is where the
similarity ended, for when I was explaining to him the situation in our country with PAC leaders such as Robert Sobukwe in jail, he interrupted me
and said, “When that chap returns, he will finish you!” Robbie raised his eyebrows at this (later he said, “Man, you were putting the case for the PAC
better than they could!”), but I insisted on giving the minister the full picture. When we met the following day with President Habib Bourguiba, his
response was utterly positive and immediate: he offered training for our soldiers and five thousand pounds for weapons.
Rabat in Morocco, our next stop, with its ancient and mysterious walls, its fashionable shops, and its medieval mosques, seemed a charming
mixture of Africa, Europe, and the Middle East. Apparently freedom fighters thought so as well, for Rabat was the crossroads of virtually every
liberation movement on the continent. While there, we met with freedom fighters from Mozambique, Angola, Algeria, and Cape Verde. It was also
the headquarters of the Algerian revolutionary army, and we spent several days with Dr. Mustafa, head of the Algerian mission in Morocco, who
briefed us on the history of the Algerian resistance to the French.
The situation in Algeria was the closest model to our own in that the rebels faced a large white settler community that ruled the indigenous
majority. He related how the FLN had begun their struggle with a handful of guerrilla attacks in 1954, having been heartened by the defeat of the
French at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam. At first, the FLN believed they could defeat the French militarily, Dr. Mustafa said, then realized that a pure
military victory was impossible.
Instead, they resorted to guerrilla warfare. Guerrilla warfare, he explained, was not designed to win a military victory so much as to unleash
political and economic forces that would bring down the enemy. Dr. Mustafa counseled us not to neglect the political side of war while planning the
military effort. International public opinion, he said, is sometimes worth more than a fleet of jet fighters.
At the end of three days, he sent us to Oujda, a dusty little town right across the border from Algeria and the headquarters of the Algerian army in
Morocco. We visited an army unit at the front, and at one point I took a pair of field glasses and could actually see French troops across the border.
I confess I imagined that I was looking at the uniforms of the South African Defense Force.
A day or two later I was a guest at a military parade in honor of Ahmed Ben Bella, who was to become the first prime minister of independent
Algeria and who had recently emerged from a French prison. A far cry from the military parade I had witnessed in Addis Ababa, this parade was
not the crisp, well-drilled, handsomely uniformed force of Ethiopia but a kind of walking history of the guerrilla movement in Algeria.
At its head sauntered proud, battle-hardened veterans in turbans, long tunics, and sandals, who had started the struggle many years before. They
carried the weapons they had used: sabers, old flintlock rifles, battle-axes, and assegais. They were followed in turn by younger soldiers, all
carrying modern arms and equally proud. Some held heavy antitank and anti-aircraft guns. But even these soldiers did not march with the
smartness and precision of the Ethiopians. This was a guerrilla force, and they were soldiers who had won their stripes in the fire of battle, who
cared more about fighting and tactics than dress uniforms and parades. As inspired as I was by the troops in Addis, I knew that our own force
would be more like these troops here in Oujda, and I could only hope they would fight as valiantly.
At the rear was a rather ragtag military band that was led by a man called Sudani. Tall, well built, and confident, he was as black as the night. He
was swinging a ceremonial mace, and when we saw him, our whole party stood up and started clapping and cheering. I looked around and noticed
others staring at us, and I realized that we were only cheering because this fellow was a black man and black faces were quite rare in Morocco.
Once again I was struck by the great power of nationalism and ethnicity. We reacted instantly, for we felt as though we were seeing a brother
African. Later, our hosts informed us that Sudani had been a legendary soldier, and had even reputedly captured an entire French unit singlehandedly. But we were cheering him because of his color, not his exploits.
From Morocco, I flew across the Sahara to Bamako, the capital of Mali, and then on to Guinea. The flight from Mali to Guinea was more like a
local bus than an airplane. Chickens wandered the aisles; women walked back and forth carrying packages on their heads and selling bags of
peanuts and dried vegetables. It was flying democratic-style and I admired it very much.
My next stop was Sierra Leone, and when I arrived, I discovered that Parliament was in session and decided to attend the proceedings. I entered
as any tourist would and was given a seat not far from the Speaker. The clerk of the House approached me and asked me to identify myself. I
whispered to him, “I am the representative of Chief Luthuli of South Africa.” He shook my hand warmly and proceeded to report to the Speaker. The
clerk then explained that I had inadvertently been given a seat not normally allowed to visitors, but in this case it was an honor for them to make an

exception.
Within an hour there was an adjournment, and as I stood among the members and dignitaries drinking tea, a queue formed in front of me and I
saw to my amazement that the entire Parliament had lined up to shake hands with me. I was very gratified, until the third or fourth person in line
mumbled something to the effect of, “It is a great honor to shake the hand of the revered Chief Luthuli, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize.” I was an
impostor! The clerk had misunderstood. The prime minister, Sir Milton Margai, was then brought over to meet me, and the clerk introduced me as
the chief. I immediately attempted to inform the clerk that I was not Chief Luthuli, but the fellow would have none of it, and I decided that in the
interests of hospitality I would continue the charade. I later met with the president, explained the case of mistaken identity, and he offered generous
material assistance.
In Liberia, I met with President Tubman, who not only gave me five thousand dollars for weapons and training, but said in a quiet voice, “Have you
any pocket money?” I confessed that I was a bit low, and instantly an aide came back with an envelope containing four hundred dollars in cash.
From Liberia, I went to Ghana, where I was met by Oliver and entertained by Guinea’s resident minister, Abdoulaye Diallo. When I told him that I
had not seen Sékou Touré when I was in Guinea, he arranged for us to return immediately to that arid land. Oliver and I were impressed with Touré.
He lived in a modest bungalow, and wore an old faded suit that could have used a visit to the dry cleaners. We made our case to him, explained the
history of the ANC and MK, and asked for five thousand dollars for the support of MK. He listened very carefully, and replied in a rather formal way.
“The government and the people of Guinea,” he said, as though giving a speech, “fully support the struggle of our brothers in South Africa, and we
have made statements at the U.N. to that effect.” He went to the bookcase where he removed two books of his, which he autographed to Oliver and
me. He then said thank you, and we were dismissed.
Oliver and I were annoyed: we had been called back from another country, and all he gave us were signed copies of his book? We had wasted
our time. A short while later, we were in our hotel room, when an official from the Foreign Affairs Department knocked on our door and presented us
with a suitcase. We opened it and it was filled with banknotes; Oliver and I looked at each other in glee. But then Oliver’s expression changed.
“Nelson, this is Guinean currency,” he said. “It is worthless outside of here; it is just paper.” But Oliver had an idea: we took the money to the Czech
embassy, where he had a friend who exchanged it for a convertible currency.

The gracefulness of the slender fishing boats that glided into the harbor in Dakar was equaled only by the elegance of the Senegalese women who
sailed through the city in flowing robes and turbaned heads. I wandered through the nearby marketplace, intoxicated by the exotic spices and
perfumes. The Senegalese are a handsome people and I enjoyed the brief time that Oliver and I spent in their country. Their society showed how
disparate elements — French, Islamic, and African — can mingle to create a unique and distinctive culture.
On our way to a meeting with President Leopold Senghor, Oliver suffered a severe attack of asthma. He refused to return to the hotel, and I
carried him on my back up the stairs to the president’s office. Senghor was greatly concerned by Oliver’s condition and insisted that he be attended
to by his personal physician.
I had been told to be wary of Senghor, for there were reports that Senegalese soldiers were serving with the French in Algeria, and that President
Senghor was a bit too taken with the customs and charms of the ancien régime. There will always be, in emerging nations, an enduring attraction to
the ways of the colonizer — I myself was not immune to it. President Senghor was a scholar and a poet, and he told us he was collecting research
material on Shaka, flattering us by asking numerous questions about that great South African warrior. We summarized the situation in South Africa
and made our request for military training and money. Senghor replied that his hands were tied until Parliament met.
In the meantime, he wanted us to talk with the minister of justice, a Mr. Daboussier, about military training, and the president introduced me to a
beautiful white French girl who, he explained, would interpret for me in my meeting with him. I said nothing, but was disturbed. I did not feel
comfortable discussing the very sensitive issues of military training in front of a young woman I did not know and was not sure I could trust. Senghor
sensed my uneasiness, for he said, “Mandela, do not worry, the French here identify themselves completely with our African aspirations.”
When we reached the minister’s office, we found some African secretaries in the reception area. One of the black secretaries asked the French
woman what she was doing here. She said she had been sent by the president to interpret. An argument ensued and in the middle of it, one of the
African secretaries turned to me and said, “Sir, can you speak English?” I said I could, and she replied, “The minister speaks English and you can
talk with him directly. You don’t need an interpreter.” The French girl, now quite miffed, stood aside as I went in to speak to the minister, who
promised to fulfill our requests. In the end, although Senghor did not then provide us with what we asked for, he furnished me with a diplomatic
passport and paid for our plane fares from Dakar to our next destination: London.