THE FIRST FORMAL MEETING of the secret working group took place in May 1988, at a posh officers’ club within the precincts of Pollsmoor.
While I knew both Coetsee and Willemse, I had never before met van der Merwe and Dr. Barnard. Van der Merwe was a quiet, levelheaded man
who spoke only when he had something important to say. Dr. Barnard was in his mid-thirties and was exceedingly bright, a man of controlled
intelligence and self-discipline.
The initial meeting was quite stiff, but in subsequent sessions we were able to talk more freely and directly. I met with them almost every week for
a few months, and then the meetings occurred at irregular intervals, sometimes not for a month, and then suddenly every week. The meetings were
usually scheduled by the government, but sometimes I would request a session.
During our early meetings, I discovered that my new colleagues, with the exception of Dr. Barnard, knew little about the ANC. They were all
sophisticated Afrikaners, and far more open-minded than nearly all of their brethren. But they were the victims of so much propaganda that it was
necessary to straighten them out about certain facts. Even Dr. Barnard, who had made a study of the ANC, had received most of his information
from police and intelligence files, which were in the main inaccurate and sullied by the prejudices of the men who had gathered them. He could not
help but be infected by the same biases.
I spent some time in the beginning sketching out the history of the ANC and then explaining our positions on the primary issues that divided the
organization from the government. After these preliminaries, we focused on the critical issues: the armed struggle, the ANC’s alliance with the
Communist Party, the goal of majority rule, and the idea of racial reconciliation.
The first issue to arise was in many ways the most crucial, and that was the armed struggle. We spent a number of months discussing it. They
insisted that the ANC must renounce violence and give up the armed struggle before the government would agree to negotiations — and before I
could meet President Botha. Their contention was that violence was nothing more than criminal behavior that could not be tolerated by the state.
I responded that the state was responsible for the violence and that it is always the oppressor, not the oppressed, who dictates the form of the
struggle. If the oppressor uses violence, the oppressed have no alternative but to respond violently. In our case it was simply a legitimate form of
self-defense. I ventured that if the state decided to use peaceful methods, the ANC would also use peaceful means. “It is up to you,” I said, “not us,
to renounce violence.”
I think I advanced their understanding on this point, but the issue soon moved from a philosophical question to a practical one. As Minister
Coetsee and Dr. Barnard pointed out, the National Party had repeatedly stated that it would not negotiate with any organization that advocated
violence: therefore, how could it suddenly announce talks with the ANC without losing its credibility? In order for us to begin talks, they said, the
ANC must make some compromise so that the government would not lose face with its own people.
It was a fair point and one that I could well understand, but I would not offer them a way out. “Gentlemen,” I said, “it is not my job to resolve your
dilemma for you.” I simply told them that they must tell their people that there can be no peace and no solution to the situation in South Africa without
sitting down with the ANC. People will understand, I said.

The ANC’s alliance with the Communist Party seemed to trouble them almost as much as the armed struggle. The National Party accepted the
most hidebound of 1950s cold war ideology and regarded the Soviet Union as the evil empire and communism as the work of the devil. There was
nothing that one could do to disabuse them of this notion. They maintained that the Communist Party dominated and controlled the ANC and that in
order for negotiations to begin we must break with the party.
First of all, I said, no self-respecting freedom fighter would take orders from the government he is fighting against or jettison a longtime ally in the
interest of pleasing an antagonist. I then explained at great length that the party and the ANC were separate and distinct organizations that shared
the same short-term objectives, the overthrow of racial oppression and the birth of a nonracial South Africa, but that our long-term interests were not
the same.
This discussion went on for months. Like most Afrikaners, they thought that because many of the Communists in the ANC were white or Indian,
they were controlling the blacks in the ANC. I cited many occasions when the ANC and the CP had differed on policy and the ANC had prevailed,
but this did not seem to impress them. Finally, in exasperation, I said to them, “You gentlemen consider yourselves intelligent, do you not? You
consider yourselves forceful and persuasive, do you not? Well, there are four of you and only one of me, and you cannot control me or get me to
change my mind. What makes you think the Communists can succeed where you have failed?”

They were also concerned about the idea of nationalization, insisting that the ANC and the Freedom Charter supported blanket nationalization for
the South African economy. I explained that we were for a more even distribution of the rewards of certain industries, industries that were already
monopolies, and that nationalization might occur in some of those areas. But I referred them to an article I wrote in 1956 for Liberation in which I
said that the Freedom Charter was not a blueprint for socialism but for African-style capitalism. I told them I had not changed my mind since then.
The other main area of discussion was the issue of majority rule. They felt that if there was majority role, the rights of minorities would be
trampled. How would the ANC protect the rights of the white minority? they wanted to know. I said that there was no organization in the history of
South Africa to compare with the ANC in terms of trying to unite all the people and races of South Africa. I referred them to the preamble of the
Freedom Charter: “South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.” I told them that whites were Africans as well, and that in any future
dispensation the majority would need the minority. We do not want to drive you into the sea, I said.