ON APRIL 6, 1959, on the anniversary of Jan Van Riebeeck’s landing at the Cape, a new organization was born that sought to rival the ANC as the
country’s premier African political organization and repudiate the white domination that began three centuries before. With a few hundred
delegates from around the country at the Orlando Communal Hall, the Pan Africanist Congress launched itself as an Africanist organization that
expressly rejected the multiracialism of the ANC. Like those of us who had formed the Youth League fifteen years before, the founders of the new
organization thought the ANC was insufficiently militant, out of touch with the masses, and dominated by non-Africans.
Robert Sobukwe was elected president and Potlako Leballo became national secretary, both of them former ANC Youth Leaguers. The PAC
presented a manifesto and a constitution, along with Sobukwe’s opening address, in which he called for a “government of the Africans by the
Africans and for the Africans.” The PAC declared that they intended to overthrow white supremacy and establish a government Africanist in origin,
socialist in content, and democratic in form. They disavowed communism in all its forms and considered whites and Indians “foreign minority
groups” or “aliens” who had no natural place in South Africa. South Africa was for Africans, and no one else.
The birth of the PAC did not come as a surprise to us. The Africanists within the ANC had been loudly voicing their grievances for more than
three years. In 1957, the Africanists had called for a vote of no confidence in the Transvaal executive at the national conference, but had been
defeated. They had opposed the election day stay-at-home of 1958, and their leader, Potlako Leballo, had been expelled from the ANC. At the
November 1958 ANC conference, a group of Africanists had declared their opposition to the Freedom Charter, claiming it violated the principles of
African nationalism.
The PAC claimed that they drew their inspiration from the principles surrounding the ANC’s founding in 1912, but their views derived principally
from the emotional African nationalism put forth by Anton Lembede and A. P. Mda during the founding of the Youth League in 1944. The PAC
echoed the axioms and slogans of that time: Africa for the Africans and a United States of Africa. But the immediate cause for their breakaway was
their objection to the Freedom Charter and the presence of whites and Indians in the Congress Alliance leadership. They were opposed to
interracial cooperation, in large part because they believed that white Communists and Indians had come to dominate the ANC.
The founders of the PAC were all well known to me. Robert Sobukwe was an old friend. He was the proverbial gentleman and scholar (his
colleagues called him “Prof”). His consistent willingness to pay the penalty for his principles earned my enduring respect. Potlako Leballo, Peter
Raboroko, and Zephania Mothopeng were all friends and colleagues. I was astonished and indeed somewhat dismayed to learn that my political
mentor Gaur Radebe had joined the PAC. I found it curious that a former member of the Communist Party’s Central Committee had decided to
align himself with an organization that then explicitly rejected Marxism.
Many of those who cast their lot with the PAC did so out of personal grudges or disappointments and were not thinking of the advancement of the
struggle, but of their own feelings of jealousy or revenge. I have always believed that to be a freedom fighter one must suppress many of the
personal feelings that make one feel like a separate individual rather than part of a mass movement. One is fighting for the liberation of millions of
people, not the glory of one individual. I am not suggesting that a man become a robot and rid himself of all personal feelings and motivations. But
in the same way that a freedom fighter subordinates his own family to the family of the people, he must subordinate his own individual feelings to
the movement.
I found the views and the behavior of the PAC immature. A philosopher once noted that something is odd if a person is not liberal when he is
young and conservative when he is old. I am not a conservative, but one matures and regards some of the views of one’s youth as undeveloped and
callow. While I sympathized with the views of the Africanists and once shared many of them, I believed that the freedom struggle required one to
make compromises and accept the kind of discipline that one resisted as a younger, more impulsive man.
The PAC put forward a dramatic and overambitious program that promised quick solutions. Their most dramatic — and naïve — promise was
that liberation would be achieved by the end of 1963, and they urged Africans to ready themselves for that historic hour. “In 1960 we take our first
step,” they promised, “in 1963, our last towards freedom and independence.” Although this prediction inspired hope and enthusiasm among people
who were tired of waiting, it is always dangerous for an organization to make promises it cannot keep.
Because of the PAC’s anticommunism, they became the darlings of the Western press and the American State Department, which hailed its
birth as a dagger to the heart of the African left. Even the National Party saw a potential ally in the PAC: they viewed the PAC as mirroring their
anticommunism and supporting their views on separate development. The Nationalists also rejected interracial cooperation, and both the National
Party and the American State Department saw fit to exaggerate the size and importance of the new organization for their own ends.
While we welcomed anyone brought into the struggle by the PAC, the role of the organization was almost always that of a spoiler. They divided
the people at a critical moment, and that was hard to forget. They would ask the people to go to work when we called a general strike, and make
misleading statements to counter any pronouncement we would make. Yet the PAC aroused in me the hope that even though the founders were
breakaway ANC men, unity between our two groups was possible. I thought that once the heated polemics had cooled, the essential commonality
of the struggle would bring us together. Animated by this belief, I paid particular attention to their policy statement and activities, with the idea of
finding affinities rather than differences.
The day after the PAC’s inaugural conference, I approached Sobukwe for a copy of his presidential address, as well as the constitution and other
policy material. Sobukwe, I thought, seemed pleased by my interest, and said he would make sure I received the requested material. I saw him
again not long afterward and reminded him of my request and he said the material was on its way. I subsequently met Potlako Leballo and said,
“Man, you chaps keep promising me your material, but no one has given it to me.” He said, “Nelson, we have decided not to give it to you because
we know you only want to use it to attack us.” I disabused him of this notion, and he relented, giving me all that I had sought.
