, WHO HAD NEVER been a soldier, who had never fought in battle, who had never fired a gun at an enemy, had been given the task of starting an
army. It would be a daunting task for a veteran general much less a military novice. The name of this new organization was Umkhonto we Sizwe
(The Spear of the Nation) — or MK for short. The symbol of the spear was chosen because with this simple weapon Africans had resisted the
incursions of whites for centuries.
Although the executive of the ANC did not allow white members, MK was not thus constrained. I immediately recruited Joe Slovo, and along with
Walter Sisulu, we formed the High Command with myself as chairman. Through Joe, I enlisted the efforts of white Communist Party members who
had resolved on a course of violence and had already executed acts of sabotage like cutting government telephone and communication lines. We
recruited Jack Hodgson, who had fought in World War II and was a member of the Springbok Legion, and Rusty Bernstein, both party members.
Jack became our first demolitions expert. Our mandate was to wage acts of violence against the state — precisely what form those acts would take
was yet to be decided. Our intention was to begin with what was least violent to individuals but most damaging to the state.
I began the only way I knew how, by reading and talking to experts. What I wanted to find out were the fundamental principles for starting a
revolution. I discovered that there was a great deal of writing on this very subject, and I made my way though the available literature on armed
warfare and in particular guerrilla warfare. I wanted to know what circumstances were appropriate for a guerrilla war; how one created, trained, and
maintained a guerrilla force; how it should be armed; where it gets its supplies — all basic and fundamental questions.
Any and every source was of interest to me. I read the report of Blas Roca, the general secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba, about their
years as an illegal organization during the Batista regime. In Commando, by Deneys Reitz, I read of the unconventional guerrilla tactics of the Boer
generals during the Anglo-Boer War. I read works by and about Che Guevara, Mao Tse-tung, Fidel Castro. In Edgar Snow’s brilliant Red Star Over
China I saw that it was Mao’s determination and nontraditional thinking that led him to victory. I read The Revolt by Menachem Begin and was
encouraged by the fact that the Israeli leader had led a guerrilla force in a country with neither mountains nor forests, a situation similar to our own. I
was eager to know more about the armed struggle of the people of Ethiopia against Mussolini, and of the guerrilla armies of Kenya, Algeria, and
the Cameroons.
I went into the South African past. I studied our history both before and after the white man. I probed the wars of African against African, of African
against white, of white against white. I made a survey of the country’s chief industrial areas, the nation’s transportation system, its communication
network. I accumulated detailed maps and systematically analyzed the terrain of different regions of the country.

On June 26, 1961, our Freedom Day, I released a letter to South African newspapers from underground, which commended the people for their
courage during the recent stay-at-home, once more calling for a national constitutional convention. I again proclaimed that a countrywide campaign
of noncooperation would be launched if the state failed to hold such a convention. My letter read in part:
I am informed that a warrant for my arrest has been issued, and that the police are looking for me. The National Action Council has given full and serious consideration to this
question . . . and they have advised me not to surrender myself. I have accepted this advice, and will not give myself up to a Government I do not recognize. Any serious politician will
realize that under present day conditions in the country, to seek for cheap martyrdom by handing myself to the police is naive and criminal. . . .
I have chosen this course which is more difficult and which entails more risk and hardship than sitting in gaol. I have had to separate myself from my dear wife and children,
from my mother and sisters to live as an outlaw in my own land. I have had to close my business, to abandon my profession, and live in poverty, as many of my people are doing. . .
. I shall fight the Government side by side with you, inch by inch, and mile by mile, until victory is won. What are you going to do? Will you come along with us, or are you going to cooperate with the Government in its efforts to suppress the claims and aspirations of your own people? Are you going to remain silent and neutral in a matter of life and death to my
people, to our people? For my own part I have made my choice. I will not leave South Africa, not will I surrender. Only through hardship, sacrifice and militant action can freedom be
won. The struggle is my life. I will continue fighting for freedom until the end of my days.