PRISON NOT ONLY robs you of your freedom, it attempts to take away your identity. Everyone wears the same uniform, eats the same food,
follows the same schedule. It is by definition a purely authoritarian state that tolerates no independence or individuality. As a freedom fighter and as
a man, one must fight against the prison’s attempt to rob one of these qualities.
From the courthouse, I was taken directly to Pretoria Local, the gloomy red-brick monstrosity that I knew so well. But I was now a convicted
prisoner, not an awaiting-trial prisoner, and was treated without even that little deference that is afforded to the latter. I was stripped of my clothes
and Colonel Jacobs was finally able to confiscate my kaross. I was issued the standard prison uniform for Africans: a pair of short trousers, a rough
khaki shirt, a canvas jacket, socks, sandals, and a cloth cap. Only Africans are given short trousers, for only African men are deemed “boys” by the
authorities.
I informed the authorities that I would under no circumstances wear shorts and told them I was prepared to go to court to protest. Later, when I
was brought dinner, stiff cold porridge with a half teaspoonful of sugar, I refused to eat it. Colonel Jacobs pondered this and came up with a
solution: I could wear long trousers and have my own food, if I agreed to be put in isolation. “We were going to put you with the other politicals,” he
said, “but now you will be alone, man. I hope you enjoy it.” I assured him that solitary confinement would be fine as long as I could wear and eat what
I chose.

For the next few weeks, I was completely and utterly isolated. I did not see the face or hear the voice of another prisoner. I was locked up for twentythree hours a day, with thirty minutes of exercise in the morning and again in the afternoon. I had never been in isolation before, and every hour
seemed like a year. There was no natural light in my cell; a single bulb burned overhead twenty-four hours a day. I did not have a wristwatch and I
often thought it was the middle of the night when it was only late afternoon. I had nothing to read, nothing to write on or with, no one to talk to. The
mind begins to turn in on itself, and one desperately wants something outside of oneself on which to fix one’s attention. I have known men who took
half-a-dozen lashes in preference to being locked up alone. After a time in solitary, I relished the company even of the insects in my cell, and found
myself on the verge of initiating conversations with a cockroach.
I had one middle-aged African warder whom I occasionally was able to see, and one day I tried to bribe him with an apple to get him to talk to
me. “Baba,” I said, which means Father, and is a term of respect, “can I give you an apple?” He turned away, and met all my subsequent overtures
with silence. Finally, he said, “Man, you wanted long trousers and better food, and now you have them and you are still not happy.” He was right.
Nothing is more dehumanizing than the absence of human companionship. After a few weeks, I was ready to swallow my pride and tell Colonel
Jacobs that I would trade my long trousers for some company.
During those weeks I had plenty of time to ponder my fate. The place of a freedom fighter is beside his people, not behind bars. The knowledge
and contacts I had recently made in Africa were going to be locked away rather than used in the struggle. I cursed the fact that my expertise would
not be put to use in creating a freedom army.
I soon began to protest vigorously against my circumstances and demanded to be put with the other political prisoners at Pretoria Local. Among
them was Robert Sobukwe. My request was ultimately granted, accompanied by a stern warning from Colonel Jacobs that serious consequences
would result if I returned to my impudent ways. I don’t think I ever looked forward to eating cold mealie pap so much in my life.

Apart from my desire for company, I was keen to talk with Sobukwe and the others, most of whom were PAC, because I thought that in prison we
might forge a unity that we could not on the outside. Prison conditions have a way of tempering polemics, and making individuals see more what
unites them than what divides them.
When I was taken to the courtyard with the others, we greeted each other warmly. Besides Sobukwe, there was also John Gaetsewe, a leading
member of the South African Congress of Trade Unions; Aaron Molete, an ANC member who worked for New Age; and Stephen Tefu, a prominent
Communist, trade unionist, and PAC member. Robert asked me to give them an account of my African tour, which I did gladly. I was candid about
how both the PAC and the ANC were perceived in the rest of Africa. At the end of my narrative I said there were issues that I wanted us to examine.
But after initially allowing Sobukwe and me a certain proximity, the authorities took pains to keep us apart. We lived in single cells along a corridor
and he and I were given cells at opposite ends.
Occasionally, we did have a chance to talk as we sat next to each other on the ground of the prison courtyard sewing and patching up shabby old
mailbags. I have always respected Sobukwe, and found him a balanced and reasonable man. But we differed markedly about the principal subject
at hand: prison conditions. Sobukwe believed that to fight poor conditions would be to acknowledge the state’s right to have him in prison in the first
place. I responded that it was always unacceptable to live in degrading conditions and that political prisoners throughout history had considered it
part of their duty to fight to improve prison conditions. Sobukwe responded that prison conditions would not change until the country changed. I
completely agreed with this, but I did not see why that ought to prevent us from fighting in the only realm in which we now could fight. We never
resolved this issue, but we did make some progress when we submitted a joint letter to the commanding officer setting out our complaints about
prison conditions.
Sobukwe never broke in prison. But in Pretoria he was a bit sensitive and testy, and I attribute this to Stephen Tefu. Tefu had become a kind of
goad to Sobukwe, teasing, taunting, and challenging him. Even at the best of times, Tefu was a difficult fellow: dyspeptic, argumentative,
overbearing. He was also articulate, knowledgeable, and an expert in Russian history. Above all, he was a fighter, but he would fight everyone, even
his friends. Tefu and Sobukwe quarreled every day.
I was keen to discuss policy issues with Sobukwe, and one of the matters I took up with him was the PAC slogan “Freedom in 1963.” It was
already 1963 and freedom was nowhere to be seen. “My brother,” I said to Sobukwe, “there is nothing so dangerous as a leader making a demand
that he knows cannot be achieved. It creates false hopes among the people.”
I said this in a most respectful manner, but Tefu jumped in and started to berate Sobukwe. “Bob,” he said, “you have met your match with
Mandela. You know he is right.” Tefu continued in this vein, annoying Sobukwe to the point where he would tell Tefu, “Leave me alone.” But Tefu
would not stop. “Bob, the people are waiting for you. They are going to kill you because you have deceived them. You are just an amateur, Bob. You
are not a real politician.”
Tefu did his best to alienate me as well. Every morning, when we were visited by the warders, he would complain to them about something — the
food, the conditions, the heat or the cold. One day, an officer said to Tefu: “Look, man, why do you complain every morning?”

“I complain because it is my duty to complain,” Steve said.
“But, look at Mandela,” the officer said, “he does not complain every day.”
“Ah,” said Tefu with disgust, “Mandela is a little boy who is afraid of the white man. I don’t even know who he is. One morning, I woke up and
found every newspaper saying, ‘Mandela, Mandela, Mandela,’ and I said to myself, ‘Who is this Mandela?’ I will tell you who Mandela is. He is a
chap built up by you people for some reason that I don’t understand. That is who Mandela is!”
* * *
We were joined for two weeks by Walter, who had been on trial in Johannesburg for incitement to strike while I had been in Pretoria. He was
sentenced to six years. We had a number of opportunities to talk in jail and we discussed Walter’s application for bail while his appeal was
pending, a move I wholeheartedly supported. After two weeks he was released on bail, and he was instructed by the movement to go underground,
from where he was to continue to lead the struggle, which he ably did.
Not long after Walter left, I was walking to the prison hospital with Sobukwe when I spotted Nana Sita in the courtyard about twenty-five yards
away. Sita, the distinguished Indian campaigner who had led our defiance at Boksburg in 1952, had just been convicted by a Pretoria magistrate
for refusing to vacate his house — the house he had lived in for more than forty years — which was in a precinct that had been proclaimed “white” in
terms of the Group Areas Act. He was hunched over, and the fact that he was barefoot despite an acute arthritic condition made me uncomfortable
in my own sandals. I wanted to go over to greet him, but we were marching under the eyes of a half-dozen warders.
Suddenly and without warning, I suffered a blackout. I crumpled to the concrete and sustained a deep gash above my left eye, which required
three stitches. I had been diagnosed back in the Fort with high blood pressure and had been given certain pills. The cause of the blackout was
evidently an overdose of these pills; I was taken off them, and put on a low-salt diet, which solved the problem.
That afternoon was my first scheduled visit from Winnie since I had been sentenced. Stitches or no stitches, I was not going to miss it. She was
extremely concerned when she saw me but I assured her I was fine and explained what happened. Even so, rumors circulated that my health had
broken down.
