I CONFESS TO being something of an Anglophile. When I thought of Western democracy and freedom, I thought of the British parliamentary
system. In so many ways, the very model of the gentleman for me was an Englishman. Despite Britain being the home of parliamentary democracy,
it was that democracy that had helped inflict a pernicious system of iniquity on my people. While I abhorred the notion of British imperialism, I never
rejected the trappings of British style and manners.
I had several reasons for wanting to go to England, apart from my desire to see the country I had so long read and heard about. I was concerned
about Oliver’s health and wanted to persuade him to receive treatment. I very much wanted to see Adelaide, his wife, and their children, as well as
Yusuf Dadoo, who was now living there and representing the Congress movement. I also knew that in London I would be able to obtain literature on
guerrilla warfare that I had been unable to acquire elsewhere.
I resumed my old underground ways in London, not wanting word to leak back to South Africa that I was there. The tentacles of South African
security forces reached all the way to London. But I was not a recluse; my ten days there were divided among ANC business, seeing old friends,
and occasional jaunts as a conventional tourist. With Mary Benson, a Pretoria-born friend who had written about our struggle, Oliver and I saw the
sights of the city that had once commanded nearly two-thirds of the globe: Westminster Abbey, Big Ben, the Houses of Parliament. While I gloried
in the beauty of these buildings, I was ambivalent about what they represented. When we saw the statue of General Smuts near Westminster
Abbey, Oliver and I joked that perhaps someday there would be a statue of us in its stead.
I had been informed by numerous people that the Observer newspaper, run by David Astor, had been tilting toward the PAC in its coverage,
editorializing that the ANC was the party of the past. Oliver arranged for me to meet Astor at his house, and we talked at length about the ANC. I do
not know if I had an effect on him, but the coverage certainly changed. He also recommended that I talk to a number of prominent politicians, and in
the company of Labour MP Denis Healey, I met with Hugh Gaitskell, the leader of the Labour Party, and Jo Grimond, the leader of the Liberal Party.
It was only toward the end of my stay that I saw Yusuf, but it was not a happy reunion. Oliver and I had encountered a recurring difficulty in our
travels: one African leader after another had questioned us about our relations with white and Indian Communists, sometimes suggesting that they
controlled the ANC. Our nonracialism would have been less of a problem had it not been for the formation of the explicitly nationalistic and antiwhite
PAC. In the rest of Africa, most African leaders could understand the views of the PAC better than those of the ANC. Oliver had discussed these
things with Yusuf, who was unhappy about Oliver’s conclusions. Oliver had resolved that the ANC had to appear more independent, taking certain
actions unilaterally without the involvement of the other members of the alliance, and I agreed.
I spent my last night in London discussing these issues with Yusuf. I explained that now that we were embarking on an armed struggle we would
be relying on other African nations for money, training, and support, and therefore had to take their views into account more than we did in the past.
Yusuf believed that Oliver and I were changing ANC policy, that we were preparing to depart from the nonracialism that was the core of the
Freedom Charter. I told him he was mistaken; we were not rejecting nonracialism, we were simply saying the ANC must stand more on its own and
make statements that were not part of the Congress Alliance. Often, the ANC, the South African Indian Congress, and the Coloured People’s
Congress would make a collective statement on an issue affecting only Africans. That would have to change. Yusuf was unhappy about this. “What
about policy?” he kept asking. I told him I was not talking about policy, I was talking about image. We would still work together, only the ANC had to
appear to be the first among equals.

Although I was sad to leave my friends in London, I was now embarking on what was to be the most unfamiliar part of my trip: military training. I had
arranged to receive six months of training in Addis Ababa. I was met there by Foreign Minister Yefu, who warmly greeted me and took me to a
suburb called Kolfe, the headquarters of the Ethiopian Riot Battalion, where I was to learn the art and science of soldiering. While I was a fair
amateur boxer, I had very little knowledge of even the rudiments of combat. My trainer was a Lieutenant Wondoni Befikadu, an experienced soldier,
who had fought with the underground against the Italians. Our program was strenuous: we trained from 8 A.M. until 1 P.M., broke for a shower and
lunch, and then again from 2 P.M. to 4 P.M. From 4 P.M. into the evening, I was lectured on military science by Colonel Tadesse, who was also
assistant commissioner of police and had been instrumental in foiling a recent coup attempt against the emperor.
I learned how to shoot an automatic rifle and a pistol and took target practice both in Kolfe with the Emperor’s Guard, and at a shooting range
about fifty miles away with the entire battalion. I was taught about demolition and mortar-firing and I learned how to make small bombs and mines —
and how to avoid them. I felt myself being molded into a soldier and began to think as a soldier thinks — a far cry from the way a politician thinks.
What I enjoyed most were the “fatigue marches” in which you are equipped with only a gun, bullets, and some water, and you must reach a distant
point within a certain time. During these marches I got a sense of the landscape, which was very beautiful, with dense forests and spare highlands.
The country was extremely backward: people used wooden plows and lived on a very simple diet supplemented by home-brewed beer. Their
existence was similar to the life in rural South Africa; poor people everywhere are more alike than they are different.
In my study sessions, Colonel Tadesse discussed matters such as how to create a guerrilla force, how to command an army, and how to enforce
discipline. One evening, during supper, Colonel Tadesse said to me, “Now, Mandela, you are creating a liberation army not a conventional
capitalist army. A liberation army is an egalitarian army. You must treat your men entirely differently than you would in a capitalist army. When you
are on duty, you must exercise your authority with assurance and control. That is no different from a capitalist command. But when you are off duty,
you must conduct yourself on the basis of perfect equality, even with the lowliest soldier. You must eat what they eat; you must not take your food in
your office, but eat with them, drink with them, not isolate yourself.”
All of this seemed admirable and sensible, but while he was talking to me, a sergeant came into the hall and asked the colonel where he could
find a certain lieutenant. The colonel regarded him with ill-concealed contempt and said, “Can’t you see that I am talking to an important individual
here? Don’t you know not to interrupt me when I am eating? Now, get out of my sight!” Then he continued with his discussion in the same didactic
tone as before.
The training course was meant to be six months, but after eight weeks I received a telegram from the ANC urgently requesting that I return home.
The internal armed struggle was escalating and they wanted the commander of MK on the scene.
Colonel Tadesse rapidly arranged for me to take an Ethiopian flight to Khartoum. Before I left, he presented me with a gift: an automatic pistol
and two hundred rounds of ammunition. I was grateful, both for the gun and his instruction. Despite my fatigue marches, I found it wearying to carry
around all that ammunition. A single bullet is surprisingly heavy: hauling around two hundred is like carrying a small child on one’s back.
In Khartoum, I was met by a British Airways official who told me that my connecting flight to Dar es Salaam would not leave until the following day
and they had taken the liberty of booking me into a posh hotel in town. I was dismayed, for I would have preferred to stay in a less conspicuous
third-class hotel.

When I was dropped off, I had to walk across the hotel’s long and elegant veranda, where several dozen whites were sitting and drinking. This
was long before metal detectors and security checks, and I was carrying my pistol in a holster inside my jacket and the two hundred rounds
wrapped around my waist inside my trousers. I also had several thousand pounds in cash. I had the feeling that all of these well-dressed whites had
X-ray vision and that I was going to be arrested at any moment. But I was escorted safely to my room, where I ordered room service; even the
footsteps of the waiters put me on edge.
From Khartoum I went directly to Dar es Salaam, where I greeted the first group of twenty-one Umkhonto recruits who were headed to Ethiopia to
train as soldiers. It was a proud moment, for these men had volunteered for duty in an army I was then attempting to create. They were risking their
lives in a battle that was only just beginning, a battle that would be most dangerous for those who were its first soldiers. They were young men,
mainly from the cities, and they were proud and eager. We had a farewell dinner: the men slaughtered a goat in my honor, and I addressed them
about my trip and told them of the necessity of good behavior and discipline abroad, because they were representatives of the South African
freedom struggle. Military training, I said, must go hand in hand with political training, for a revolution is not just a question of pulling a trigger; its
purpose is to create a fair and just society. It was the first time that I was ever saluted by my own soldiers.
President Nyerere gave me a private plane to Mbeya, and I then flew directly to Lobatse. The pilot informed me that we would be landing in
Kanye. This concerned me: why was the plan altered? In Kanye, I was met by the local magistrate and a security man, both of whom were white.
The magistrate approached me and asked me my name. David Motsamayi, I replied. No, he said, please tell me your real name. Again, I said
David Motsamayi. The magistrate said, “Please tell me your real name because I was given instructions to meet Mr. Mandela here and provide him
with help and transportation. If you are not Mr. Nelson Mandela, I am afraid I will have to arrest you for you have no permit to enter the country. Are
you Nelson Mandela?”
This was a quandary; I might be arrested either way. “If you insist that I am Nelson Mandela and not David Motsamayi,” I said, “I will not challenge
you.” He smiled and said simply, “We expected you yesterday.” He then offered me a lift to where my comrades would be waiting for me. We drove
to Lobatse, where I met Joe Modise and an ANC supporter named Jonas Matlou, who was then living there. The magistrate told me that the South
African police were aware that I was returning, and he suggested that I leave tomorrow. I thanked him for his help and advice, but when I arrived at
Matlou’s house, I said that I would leave tonight. I was to drive back to South Africa with Cecil Williams, a white theater director and member of MK.
Posing as his chauffeur, I got behind the wheel and we left that night for Johannesburg.
