IN 1987, I RESUMED CONTACT with Kobie Coetsee. I had several private meetings with him at his residence, and later that year the government
made its first concrete proposal. Coetsee said the government would like to appoint a committee of senior officials to conduct private discussions
with me. This would be done with the full knowledge of the state president, Coetsee said. Coetsee himself would be head of the committee, and it
would include General Willemse, the commissioner of prisons; Fanie van der Merwe, the director general of the Prisons Department; and Dr. Niel
Barnard, a former academic who was then head of the National Intelligence Service. The first three individuals were associated with the prison
system, so if talks foundered or were leaked to the press, both sides would be able to cover up and say we were discussing prison conditions and
nothing more.
The presence of Dr. Barnard, however, disturbed me. He was the head of South Africa’s equivalent of the CIA, and was also involved with
military intelligence. I could justify to my organization discussions with the other officials, but not Barnard. His presence made the talks more
problematic and suggested a larger agenda. I told Coetsee that I would like to think about the proposal overnight.
That night I considered all the ramifications. I knew that P. W. Botha had created something called the State Security Council, a shadowy
secretariat of security experts and intelligence officials. He had done this, according to the press, to circumvent the authority of the cabinet and
increase his own power. Dr. Barnard was a key player in this inner council and was said to be a protégé of the president. I thought that my refusing
Barnard would alienate Botha, and I decided that such a tack was too risky. If the state president was not brought on board, nothing would happen.
In the morning, I sent word to Coetsee that I accepted his offer.
I knew that I had three crucial matters that I needed to address: first, I wanted to sound out my colleagues on the third floor before I proceeded any
further; second, it was essential to communicate with Oliver in Lusaka about what was occurring; and finally, I intended to draft a memorandum to P.
W. Botha laying out my views and those of the ANC on the vital issues before the country. This memorandum would create talking points for any
future discussion.
I requested a meeting with my colleagues, and to my surprise, the authorities summarily refused. This was remarkable, and I assumed it reflected
a great deal of nervousness about the prospect of secret talks between myself and the government. I took my complaints to more senior officials.
Finally, the request was approved, with the proviso that I could see my colleagues one by one, not together.
I met them in the visiting area. I had resolved to leave out a few details; I would seek their counsel about the idea of having talks with the
government without mentioning that an actual committee had been formed. Walter was first. I told him about my letter to the commissioner of
prisons and my meeting with Coetsee. I said that I had discussed with Coetsee the idea of beginning talks with the government and that the
government seemed interested. What were his views on the matter?
I have been through thick and thin with Walter. He was a man of reason and wisdom, and no man knew me better than he did. There was no one
whose opinion I trusted or valued more. Walter considered what I told him. I could see he was uncomfortable, and at best, lukewarm. “In principle,”
he said, “I am not against negotiations. But I would have wished that the government initiated talks with us rather than us initiating talks with them.”
I replied that if he was not against negotiations in principle, what did it matter who initiated them? What mattered was what they achieved, not
how they started. I told Walter that I thought we should move forward with negotiations and not worry about who knocked on the door first. Walter
saw that my mind was made up and he said he would not stop me, but that he hoped I knew what I was doing.
Next was Raymond Mhlaba. I explained the entire situation to him as I had to Walter. Ray was always a man of few words, and for several
moments he digested what I had said. He then looked at me and said, “Madiba, what have you been waiting for? We should have started this years
ago.” Andrew Mlangeni’s reaction was virtually the same as Ray’s. The last man was Kathy. His response was negative; he was as resolutely
against what I was suggesting as Raymond and Andrew were in favor. Even more strongly than Walter, he felt that by initiating talks it would appear
that we were capitulating. Like Walter, he said he was not in principle against negotiations, and I responded exactly as I had with Walter. But Kathy
was adamant; he felt I was going down the wrong path. But, despite his misgivings, he said he would not stand in my way.

Not long after this I received a note from Oliver Tambo that was smuggled in to me by one of my lawyers. He had heard reports that I was having
secret discussions with the government and he was concerned. He said he knew I had been alone for some time and separated from my
colleagues. He must have been wondering: What is going on with Mandela? Oliver’s note was brief and to the point: What, he wanted to know, was
I discussing with the government? Oliver could not have believed that I was selling out, but he might have thought I was making an error in judgment.
In fact, the tenor of his note suggested that.
I replied to Oliver in a very terse letter saying that I was talking to the government about one thing and one thing only: a meeting between the
National Executive Committee of the ANC and the South African government. I would not spell out the details, for I could not trust the confidentiality
of the communication. I simply said the time had come for such talks and that I would not compromise the organization in any way.
Although the ANC had called for talks with the government for decades, we had never been confronted with the actual prospect of such talks. It is
one thing to consider them in theory, and quite another to engage in them. As I was writing my response to Oliver, I was also beginning to draft my
memorandum to P. W. Botha. I would make sure that Oliver saw this as well. I knew that when Oliver and the National Executive read my memo,
their fears that I had gone off the road would be allayed.