LIKE MY FATHER BEFORE ME, I had been groomed to be a counselor to the king of the Thembu. Although I had chosen a different path, I tried in
my own fashion to live up to the responsibilities of the role for which I had been schooled. From prison, I did my best to remain in contact with the
king and advise him as best I could. As I grew older, my thoughts turned more and more often to the green hills of the Transkei. Although I would
never move there under the government’s auspices, I dreamed of one day returning to a free Transkei. Thus, it was with great dismay that I learned
in 1980 that the king, Sabata Dalindyebo, the paramount chief of the Thembu, had been deposed by my nephew, K. D. Matanzima, the prime
minister of the Transkei.
A group of Thembu chiefs requested an urgent visit with me, which was approved by the authorities, who were usually willing to countenance
visits by traditional leaders — believing that the more involved I was in tribal and Transkei matters, the less committed I would be to the struggle.
The government promoted the power of traditional leaders as a counterpoint to the ANC. While many of my comrades thought we should
disavow those leaders, my inclination was to reach out to them. There is no contradiction between being a traditional leader and a member of the
ANC. This spurred one of the longest and most delicate debates we had on the island: whether or not the ANC should participate in governmentsponsored institutions. Many of the men considered this collaborationist. Once again, I thought it necessary to draw a distinction between principle
and tactics. To me, the critical question was a tactical one: Will our organization emerge stronger through participating in these organizations or by
boycotting them? In this case, I thought we would emerge stronger by participating.

I met with the chiefs in a large room in the visiting area, and they explained their dilemma. Although their hearts were with Sabata, they feared
Matanzima. After listening to their presentation, I advised them to throw their support to Sabata against Matanzima, who was illegally and
shamefully usurping power from the king. I sympathized with their situation, but I could not condone Matanzima’s actions. I asked them to convey my
support to Sabata and my disapproval to Matanzima.
Matanzima had also proposed a visit to discuss Sabata and family matters. As my nephew, he had actually been requesting such a visit for a
number of years. Although Matanzima claimed to want to discuss family matters, such a visit would have political consequences. From the moment
of Matanzima’s first request, I referred the matter to the High Organ and the ANC men in our section. Some simply shrugged their shoulders and
said, “He’s your nephew; he has a right to visit.” Raymond, Govan, and Kathy, however, insisted that although such a visit could be explained away
as a family matter, it would be interpreted by many people inside and outside as a sign of my endorsement of the man and his policies. That was
the reason why Matanzima wanted to visit, and the reason such a visit was unacceptable.
I understood and in large part agreed with their arguments, but I wanted to meet with my nephew. I have always had perhaps too high a regard for
the importance of face-to-face meetings and of my own ability in such a meeting to persuade men to change their views. I was hoping I could
convince Matanzima to modify his policies.
Eventually, the ANC men in our section decided not to object to a visit. In the interests of democracy, we then consulted with our men in F and G
on the matter, and they were adamantly opposed. Steve Tshwete, who was one of the leading ANC figures in the general section, said such a visit
would help Matanzima politically and was therefore out of the question. Many of them noted that Matanzima had already tried to coopt my approval
by making Winnie’s father, Columbus Madikizela, the minister of agriculture in his government. This was bad enough, they said, without Madiba
agreeing to see him. I bowed to the views of the membership in the general section and regretfully informed the authorities that I would not accept a
visit from my nephew.

In March of 1982, I was told by the prison authorities that my wife had been in a car accident, and that she was in hospital. They had very little
information, and I had no idea of her condition or what her circumstances were. I accused the authorities of holding back information, and I made an
urgent application for my attorney to visit me. The authorities used information as a weapon, and it was a successful one. I was preoccupied with
my wife’s health until I was visited on March 31 by Winnie’s attorney and my friend Dullah Omar.
Dullah quickly eased my mind about Winnie. She had been in a car that overturned but she was all right. Our visit was brief, and as I was led back
to Section B my mind was still dwelling on Winnie, and I was plagued by the feeling of powerlessness and my inability to help her.
I had not been in my cell long when I was visited by the commanding officer and a number of other prison officials. This was highly unusual; the
commanding officer did not generally pay calls on prisoners in their cells. I stood up when they arrived, and the commander actually entered my cell.
There was barely room for the two of us.
“Mandela,” he said, “I want you to pack up your things.”
I asked him why.
“We are transferring you,” he said simply.
Where?
“I cannot say,” he replied.
I demanded to know why. He told me only that he had received instructions from Pretoria that I was to be transferred off the island immediately.
The commanding officer left and went in turn to the cells of Walter, Raymond Mhlaba, and Andrew Mlangeni and gave them the same order.

I was disturbed and unsettled. What did it mean? Where were we going? In prison, one can only question and resist an order to a certain point, then
one must succumb. We had no warning, no preparation. I had been on the island for over eighteen years, and to leave so abruptly?
We were each given several large cardboard boxes in which to pack our things. Everything that I had accumulated in nearly two decades could fit
in these few boxes. We packed in little more than half an hour.
There was a commotion in the corridor when the other men learned we were leaving, but we had no time to say a proper goodbye to our
comrades of many years. This is another one of the indignities of prison. The bonds of friendship and loyalty with other prisoners count for nothing
with the authorities.
Within minutes we were on board the ferry headed for Cape Town. I looked back at the island as the light was fading, not knowing whether or not
I would ever see it again. A man can get used to anything, and I had grown used to Robben Island. I had lived there for almost two decades and
while it was never a home — my home was in Johannesburg — it had become a place where I felt comfortable. I have always found change difficult,

and leaving Robben Island, however grim it had been at times, was no exception. I had no idea what to look forward to.
At the docks, surrounded by armed guards, we were hustled into a windowless truck. The four of us stood in the dark while the truck drove for
what seemed considerably longer than an hour. We passed through various checkpoints, and finally came to a stop. The back doors swung open,
and in the dark we were marched up some concrete steps and through metal doors into another security facility. I managed to ask a guard where
we were.
“Pollsmoor Prison,” he said.