I WAS SCHEDULED to hold a press conference the afternoon after my release, and in the morning I met with a number of my colleagues to talk
about scheduling and strategy. A small mountain of telegrams and messages of congratulations had arrived, and I tried to review as many of these
as possible. There were telegrams from all around the world, from presidents and prime ministers, but I remember one in particular from a white
Cape Town housewife that amused me greatly. It read: “I am very glad that you are free, and that you are back among your friends and family, but
your speech yesterday was very boring.”
Before I went to prison I never held such a press conference as I did that day. In the old days there were no television cameras, and most ANC
press conferences were conducted clandestinely. That afternoon, there were so many journalists, from so many different countries, I did not know
whom to speak with. I was pleased to see a high percentage of black journalists among the throng. At the press conference I was once again keen
to reassert a number of themes: first, that I was a loyal and disciplined member of the ANC. I was mindful of the fact that the most senior ANC
people would be watching my release from abroad, and attempting to gauge my fidelity from a distance. I was aware that they had heard rumors
that I had strayed from the organization, that I was compromised, so at every turn I sought to reassure them. When asked what role I would play in
the organization, I told the press that I would play whatever role the ANC ordered.
I told the reporters that there was no contradiction between my continuing support for the armed struggle and my advocating negotiations. It was
the reality and the threat of the armed struggle that had brought the government to the verge of negotiations. I added that when the state stopped
inflicting violence on the ANC, the ANC would reciprocate with peace. Asked about sanctions, I said the ANC could not yet call for the relaxation of
sanctions, because the situation that caused sanctions in the first place — the absence of political rights for blacks — was still the status quo. I
might be out of jail, I said, but I was not yet free.
I was asked as well about the fears of whites. I knew that people expected me to harbor anger toward whites. But I had none. In prison, my anger
toward whites decreased, but my hatred for the system grew. I wanted South Africa to see that I loved even my enemies while I hated the system
that turned us against one another.
I wanted to impress upon the reporters the critical role of whites in any new dispensation. I have tried never to lose sight of this. We did not want
to destroy the country before we freed it, and to drive the whites away would devastate the nation. I said that there was a middle ground between
white fears and black hopes, and we in the ANC would find it. “Whites are fellow South Africans,” I said, “and we want them to feel safe and to know
that we appreciate the contribution that they have made toward the development of this country.” Any man or woman who abandons apartheid will
be embraced in our struggle for a democratic, nonracial South Africa; we must do everything we can to persuade our white compatriots that a new,
nonracial South Africa will be a better place for all.
From my very first press conference I noticed that journalists were as eager to learn about my personal feelings and relationships as my political
thoughts. This was new to me; when I went to prison, a journalist would never have thought of asking questions about one’s wife and family, one’s
emotions, one’s most intimate moments. While it was understandable that the press might be interested in these things, I nevertheless found their
curiosity difficult to satisfy. I am not and never have been a man who finds it easy to talk about his feelings in public. I was often asked by reporters
how it felt to be free, and I did my best to describe the indescribable, and usually failed.
After the press conference, Archbishop Tutu’s wife telephoned us from Johannesburg to say that we must fly there straightaway. Winnie and I had
hoped to spend a few days in Cape Town relaxing, but the message we were getting was that the people of Johannesburg were getting restless
and there might be chaos if I did not return directly. We flew to Johannesburg that evening, but I was informed that there were thousands of people
surrounding our old home, 8115 Orlando West, which had been reconstructed, and that it would be unwise to go there. I reluctantly acceded; I
yearned to spend my second night of freedom under my own roof. Instead, Winnie and I stayed in the northern suburbs at the home of an ANC
supporter.
The following morning we flew by helicopter to the First National Bank Stadium in Soweto. We were able to make an aerial tour of Soweto, the
teeming metropolis of matchbox houses, tin shanties, and dirt roads, the mother city of black urban South Africa, the only home I ever knew as a
man before I went to prison. While Soweto had grown, and in some places prospered, the overwhelming majority of the people remained dreadfully
poor, without electricity or running water, eking out an existence that was shameful in a nation as wealthy as South Africa. In many places, the
poverty was far worse than when I went to prison.
* * *
We circled over the stadium, overflowing with 120,000 people, and landed in the center. The stadium was so crowded, with people sitting or
standing in every inch of space, that it looked as though it would burst. I expressed my delight to be back among them, but I then scolded the people
for some of the crippling problems of urban black life. Students, I said, must return to school. Crime must be brought under control. I told them that I
had heard of criminals masquerading as freedom fighters, harassing innocent people and setting alight vehicles; these rogues had no place in the
struggle. Freedom without civility, freedom without the ability to live in peace, was not true freedom at all.
Today, my return to Soweto fills my heart with joy. At the same time I also return with a deep sense of sadness. Sadness to learn that you are still suffering under an inhuman
system. The housing shortage, the schools crisis, unemployment and the crime rate still remain. . . . As proud as I am to be part of the Soweto community, I have been greatly
disturbed by the statistics of crime that I read in the newspapers. Although I understand the deprivations our people suffer I must make it clear that the level of crime in the township
is unhealthy and must be eliminated as a matter of urgency.

I ended by opening my arms to all South Africans of goodwill and good intentions, saying that “no man or woman who has abandoned apartheid
will be excluded from our movement toward a nonracial, united and democratic South Africa based on one-person one-vote on a common voters’
roll.” That was the ANC’s mission, the goal that I had always kept before me during the many lonely years in prison, the goal that I would work
toward during the remaining years of my life. It was the dream I cherished when I entered prison at the age of forty-four, but I was no longer a young
man, I was seventy-one, and I could not afford to waste any time.

That night, I returned with Winnie to number 8115 in Orlando West. It was only then that I knew in my heart that I had left prison. For me, 8115 was
the centerpoint of my world, the place marked with an X in my mental geography. The house had been soundly rebuilt after the fire. When I saw the
four-roomed house, I was surprised by how much smaller and humbler it was than I remembered it being. Compared to my cottage at Victor
Verster, number 8115 could have been the servants’ quarters at the back. But any house in which a man is free is a castle when compared to even

the plushest prison.
That night, as happy as I was to be home, I had a sense that what I most wanted and longed for was going to be denied me. I yearned to resume
a normal and ordinary life, to pick up some of the old threads from my life as a young man, to be able to go to my office in the morning and return to
my family in the evening, to be able to pop out and buy some toothpaste at the pharmacy, to visit in the evening with old friends. These ordinary
things are what one misses most in prison, and dreams about doing when one is free. But I quickly realized that such things were not going to be
possible. That night, and every night for the next weeks and months, the house was surrounded by hundreds of well-wishers. People sang and
danced and called out, and their joy was infectious. These were my people, and I had no right and no desire to deny myself to them. But in giving
myself to my people I could see that I was once again taking myself away from my family.
We did not sleep much that night, as the singing continued until the early hours, when members of the ANC and UDF who were guarding the
house begged the crowd to remain quiet and allow us to rest. There were many in the ANC who advised me to move to the home a few blocks
distant, in Diepkloof extension, that Winnie had built while I was in prison. It was a grand place by Soweto standards, but it was a house that held no
meaning or memories for me. Moreover, it was a house that because of its size and expense seemed somehow inappropriate for a leader of the
people. I rejected that advice for as long as I could. I wanted not only to live among my people, but like them.