SOME OF THE WARDERS began to engage us in conversation. I never initiated conversations with warders, but if they addressed a question to
me, I tried to answer. It is easier to educate a man when he wants to learn. Usually, these questions were posed with a kind of exasperation: “All
right, Mandela, what is it you really want?” Or, “Look, you have a roof over your head and enough food, why are you causing so much trouble?” I
would then calmly explain our policies to the warders. I wanted to demystify the ANC for them, to peel away their prejudices.
In 1969 a young warder arrived who seemed particularly eager to get to know me. I had heard rumors that our people on the outside were
organizing an escape for me, and had infiltrated a warder onto the island who would assist me. Gradually, this fellow communicated to me that he
was planning my escape.
In bits and pieces he explained the plan: one night, he would drug the warders on duty at the lighthouse to allow for the landing of a boat on the
beach. He would furnish me with a key to get out of our section so that I could meet the boat. On the boat I was to be equipped with underwater
diving gear, which I would use to swim into the harbor at Cape Town. From Cape Town, I would be taken to a local airport and flown out of the
country.
I listened to the plan in its entirety and did not communicate to him how far-fetched and unreliable it sounded. I consulted with Walter, and we
agreed that this fellow was not to be trusted. I never told him that I would not do it, but I never took any of the actions required to implement the plan.
He must have gotten the message, for he was soon transferred off the island.
As it turned out, my mistrust was justified, for we later learned that the warder was an agent of the Bureau of State Security (BOSS), South
Africa’s secret intelligence agency. The plot was that I was to be successfully taken off the island, but killed in a dramatic shootout with security
forces at the airport as I tried to leave the country. The entire plan had been dreamed up by BOSS, even the rumors that reached me about the
ANC’s planning an escape. It was not the last time they would try to eliminate me.

The term of a commanding officer was usually no more than three years, and we had been through several by 1970. That year, Robben Island’s
commanding officer was Colonel Van Aarde, a rather amiable, harmless fellow who allowed us free rein. But at the end of the year, the authorities
concluded that they wanted a different atmosphere on the island, and Colonel Piet Badenhorst was named the new C.O. of Robben Island.
This was an ominous development. Badenhorst was reputed to be one of the most brutal and authoritarian officers in the entire prison service.
His appointment indicated one thing: the government believed that discipline on the island was too lax, and that a strong hand was needed to keep
us in line. Badenhorst would supposedly make us yearn for the days of Suitcase.
Whenever a new commanding officer was appointed, I requested a meeting with him. I did this in order to impress upon him the seriousness of
our cause and also to evaluate his character. I requested a meeting with Colonel Badenhorst and was turned down. He was the first commanding
officer to spurn such a meeting.
We felt the effects of his regime before we ever saw him. A number of the newer regulations regarding study and free time were immediately
rescinded. It was obvious that he intended to roll back every privilege we had won over the years. Our old warders were transferred off the island
and replaced by Badenhorst’s handpicked guards. They were younger, coarser men who enforced every niggling regulation, whose job was to
harass and demoralize us. Within days of Badenhorst’s appointment, our cells were raided and searched; books and papers were confiscated;
meals were suspended without warning; and men were jostled on the way to the quarry.
Badenhorst attempted to turn back the clock to the way the island was in the early 1960s. The answer to every question was always no. Prisoners
who requested to see their lawyers were given solitary confinement instead. Complaints were completely ignored. Visits were canceled without
explanation. The food deteriorated. Censorship increased.
About a week after Badenhorst arrived, we were working at the quarry one morning when, without introduction or fanfare, Badenhorst and his
driver pulled up in the commander’s car. He got out and surveyed us from a distance. We paused to look at our new commander. Badenhorst
returned my glance and called out, “Mandela, Jy moet jou vinger uit jou gat trek” (You must pull your finger out of your arse). I did not care for this
expression at all, and without thinking, I started advancing toward Badenhorst. He was still a distance away, and before I got close he had returned
to his car and driven away.
From his car, Badenhorst radioed a command to his staff, and within minutes a truck had arrived to transport us back to Section B. We were
commanded to be silent in the truck, and when we arrived at the courtyard, we were ordered to stand at attention. Badenhorst appeared in front of
us, pacing back and forth. He seemed incapable of uttering a sentence without including an oath or swearword. “Jou ma se moer,” was his favorite
expression. “Your mother is a moer” — moer being a vulgar term for an intimate part of a woman’s anatomy.
In his guttural voice, he told us he was disgusted to have observed our laziness at the quarry. As a result, he said, he was arbitrarily dropping all
of our classifications by one notch. Though we despised the classification system, most of the men had by that time risen to at least C level, where
they were permitted to study. D level prisoners were not allowed to study. The authorities rued the fact that they had allowed us study privileges, and
Badenhorst was determined to rectify that mistake.
Later, after my anger abated, I realized that Badenhorst’s crude remark to me at the quarry was a calculated one. He had been brought to
Robben Island to restore order, and he had singled out the individual he assumed was the source of the disorder. Like a teacher who takes over a
rowdy class, he sought to discipline the student he regarded as the principal troublemaker.