THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSON in any prisoner’s life is not the minister of justice, not the commissioner of prisons, not even the head of prison,
but the warder in one’s section. If you are cold and want an extra blanket, you might petition the minister of justice, but you will get no response. If
you go to the commissioner of prisons, he will say, “Sorry, it is against regulations.” The head of prison will say, “If I give you an extra blanket, I must
give one to everyone.” But if you approach the warder in your corridor, and you are on good terms with him, he will simply go to the stockroom and
fetch a blanket.
I always tried to be decent to the warders in my section; hostility was self-defeating. There was no point in having a permanent enemy among the
warders. It was ANC policy to try to educate all people, even our enemies: we believed that all men, even prison service warders, were capable of
change, and we did our utmost to try to sway them.
In general we treated the warders as they treated us. If a man was considerate, we were considerate in return. Not all of our warders were ogres.
We noticed right from the start that there were some among them who believed in fairness. Yet, being friendly with warders was not an easy
proposition, for they generally found the idea of being courteous to a black man abhorrent. Because it was useful to have warders who were well
disposed toward us, I often asked certain men to make overtures to selected warders. No one liked to take on such a job.
We had one warder at the quarry who seemed particularly hostile to us. This was troublesome, for at the quarry we would hold discussions
among ourselves, and a warder who did not permit us to talk was a great hindrance. I asked a certain comrade to befriend this fellow so that he
would not interrupt our talks. The warder was quite crude, but he soon began to relax a bit around this one prisoner. One day, the warder asked this
comrade for his jacket so that he could lay it on the grass and sit on it. Even though I knew it went against the comrade’s grain, I nodded to him to
do it.
A few days later, we were having our lunch under the shed when this warder wandered over. The warder had an extra sandwich, and he threw it
on the grass near us and said, “Here.” That was his way of showing friendship.
This presented us with a dilemma. On the one hand, he was treating us as animals to whom he could toss a bit of slop, and I felt it would
undermine our dignity to take the sandwich. On the other hand, we were hungry, and to reject the gesture altogether would humiliate the warder we
were trying to befriend. I could see that the comrade who had befriended the warder wanted the sandwich, and I nodded for him to take it.
The strategy worked, for this warder became less wary around us. He even began to ask questions about the ANC. By definition, if a man
worked for the prison service he was probably brainwashed by the government’s propaganda. He would have believed that we were terrorists and
Communists who wanted to drive the white man into the sea. But as we quietly explained to him our nonracialism, our desire for equal rights, and
our plans for the redistribution of wealth, he scratched his head and said, “It makes more bloody sense than the Nats.”

Having sympathetic warders facilitated one of our most vital tasks on Robben Island: communication. We regarded it as our duty to stay in touch
with our men in F and G, which was where the general prisoners were kept. As politicians, we were just as intent on fortifying our organization in
prison as we had been outside. Communication was essential if we were to coordinate our protests and complaints. Because of the greater
numbers of prisoners coming and going in the general section, the men in F and G tended to have more recent information about not only what was
happening in the movement, but about our friends and families.
Communication between sections was a serious violation of regulations. We found many effective ways around the ban. The men who delivered
our drums of food were from the general section, and in the early months we managed to have whispered conversations with them in which we
conveyed brief messages. We formed a clandestine communications committee, composed of Kathy, Mac Maharaj, Laloo Chiba, and several
others, and their job was to organize all such practices.
One of the first techniques was engineered by Kathy and Mac, who had noticed that on our walks to the quarry, the warders often tossed away
empty matchboxes. They began secretly collecting them, and Mac had the idea of constructing a false bottom to the box and placing in it a tiny
written message. Laloo Chiba, who once trained as a tailor, wrote out minuscule coded messages that would be placed in the converted matchbox.
Joe Gqabi, another MK soldier who was with us, would carry the matchboxes on our walks to the quarry and drop them at a strategic crossing
where we knew the general prisoners would pass. Through whispered conversations at food deliveries, we explained the plan. Designated
prisoners from F and G would pick up the matchboxes on their walks, and we retrieved messages in the same fashion. It was far from perfect, and
we could easily be foiled by something as simple as the rain. We soon evolved more efficient methods.
We looked for moments when the warders were inattentive. One such time was during and after meals. We helped ourselves to our food, and we
worked out a scheme whereby comrades from the general section who worked in the kitchen began placing letters and notes wrapped in plastic at
the bottom of the food drums. We sent return communication in a similar way, wrapping notes in the same plastic and placing them at the bottom of
the mounds of dirty dishes that were routed back to the kitchen. We would do our best to create a mess, scattering food all over the plates. The
warders even complained about the disarray, but never bothered to investigate.
Our toilets and showers were adjacent to the isolation section. Prisoners from the general section were often sentenced to isolation there and
would use the same set of toilets we did, though at different times. Mac devised a method of wrapping notes in plastic and then taping them inside
the rim of the toilet bowl. We encouraged our political comrades in the general section to be charged and placed in isolation so that they could
retrieve these notes and send replies. The warders never bothered to search there.
In order not to have our notes read or understood by the authorities if they were found, we devised ways of writing that could not easily be seen or
deciphered. One way was to write messages with milk. The milk would dry almost immediately, and the paper would look blank. But the disinfectant
we were given to clean our cells, when sprayed on the dried milk, made the writing reappear. Unfortunately, we did not regularly receive milk. After
one of us was diagnosed with an ulcer, we used his.
Another technique was to write in tiny, coded script on toilet paper. The paper was so small and easily hidden that this became a popular way of
smuggling out messages. When the authorities discovered a number of these communications, they took the extraordinary measure of rationing
toilet paper. Govan was then ailing and not going to the quarry, and he was given the task of counting out eight squares of toilet paper for each
prisoner per day.
But even with all these ingenious methods, one of the best ways was also the easiest: getting sent to the prison hospital. The island had one
hospital, and it was difficult to segregate us from the general prisoners while we were there. Sometimes prisoners from the different sections even
shared the same wards, and men from Section B and prisoners from F and G mingled and exchanged information about political organizations,
strikes, go-slows, whatever the current prison issues were.
Communication with the outside world was accomplished in two ways: through prisoners whose sentences were completed and who were

leaving the island, and through contact with visitors. Prisoners who were leaving would smuggle out letters in their clothes or baggage. With outside
visitors, the situation was even more dangerous, because the risks were also borne by the visitor. When lawyers visited us, warders were not
permitted in the room and we would sometimes pass a letter to the lawyer to be taken out. Lawyers were not searched. In these meetings, we could
also communicate by writing as we had during the Rivonia Trial. Because the room was bugged, we might say, “Please tell . . .” and then pause and
write “O.T.,” meaning Oliver Tambo, on a piece of paper, “that we approve of his plan to cut down the size of the . . .” and then write, “National
Executive.”

Through a plastic-wrapped note hidden in our food drums, we learned in July of 1966 that the men in the general section had embarked on a
hunger strike to protest poor conditions. The note was imprecise, and we did not know exactly when the strike had started or exactly what it was
about. But we would support any strike of prisoners for whatever reason they were striking. Word was passed among us, and we resolved to initiate
a sympathetic strike beginning with our next meal. A hunger strike consists of one thing: not eating.
Because of the time lag in communications, the general prisoners probably did not learn of our participation for a day or so. But we knew that the
news would hearten them. The authorities would be telling them that we were not participating in the strike, that we were gorging ourselves on
gourmet meals. This was standard operating procedure; in a crisis, the authorities inevitably started a disinformation campaign to play one section
against the other. In this case, while the ANC unanimously supported the strike, some PAC men in the general section did not.
During the first day of our strike, we were served our normal rations and refused to take them. On the second day, we noticed that our portions
were larger and a few more vegetables accompanied our pap. On the third day, juicy pieces of meat were served with supper. By the fourth day,
the porridge was glistening with fat, and great hunks of meat and colorful vegetables were steaming on top. The food was positively mouthwatering.
The warders smiled when we passed up the food. The temptation was great, but we resisted, even though we were being driven especially hard at
the quarry. We heard that in the main section, prisoners were collapsing and being taken away in wheelbarrows.
I was called to the Head Office for an interview with Colonel Wessels. Such sessions were delicate, as my fellow prisoners knew that the
authorities would attempt to influence me to call off the strike. Wessels was a direct man and demanded to know why we were on a hunger strike. I
explained that as political prisoners we saw protest to alter prison conditions as an extension of the anti-apartheid struggle. “But you don’t even
know why they are striking in F and G,” he said. I said that did not matter, that the men in F and G were our brothers and that our struggle was
indivisible. He snorted, and dismissed me.
The following day we learned of an extraordinary course of events: the warders had gone on their own food boycott, refusing to go to their own
cafeteria. They were not striking in support of us, but had decided that if we could do such a thing, why couldn’t they? They were demanding better
food and improved living conditions. The combination of the two strikes was too much for the authorities. They settled with the warders and then, a
day or two later, we learned the authorities had gone to the general section and asked for three representatives to negotiate changes. The general
prisoners declared victory and called off the hunger strike. We followed suit a day later.
* * *
That was the first and most successful of the hunger strikes on the island. As a form of protest, they did not have a high success rate and the
rationale behind them always struck me as quixotic. In order for a hunger strike to succeed, the outside world must learn of it. Otherwise, prisoners
will simply starve themselves to death and no one will know. Smuggled-out information that we were on a hunger strike would elicit newspaper
stories, which in turn would generate pressure from advocacy groups. The problem, particularly in the early years, was that it was next to impossible
to alert people on the outside that we were waging a hunger strike inside.
For me, hunger strikes were altogether too passive. We who were already suffering were threatening our health, even courting death. I have
always favored a more active, militant style of protest such as work strikes, go-slow strikes, or refusing to clean up; actions that punished the
authorities, not ourselves. They wanted gravel and we produced no gravel. They wanted the prison yard clean and it was untidy. This kind of
behavior distressed and exasperated them, whereas I think they secretly enjoyed watching us go hungry.
But when it came to a decision, I was often outvoted. My colleagues even jokingly accused me of not wanting to miss a meal. The proponents of
hunger strikes argued that it was a traditionally accepted form of protest that had been waged all over the world by such prominent leaders as
Mahatma Gandhi. Once the decision was taken, however, I would support it as wholeheartedly as any of its advocates. In fact, during the strikes I
was often in the position of remonstrating with some of my more wayward colleagues who did not want to abide by our agreement. “Madiba, I want
my food,” I remember one man saying. “I don’t see why I should go without. I have served the struggle for many years.”
Comrades would sometimes eat on the sly. We knew this for a simple reason: by the second day of a hunger strike, no one needs to use the
toilet. Yet one morning you might see a fellow going to the toilet. We had our own internal intelligence service because we knew that certain men
were weak in this regard.
