IN OCTOBER 1962, during my trial, the ANC held its first annual conference since 1959. Because the organization was illegal, the conference took
place in Lobatse, just over the border in Bechuanaland. The conference was a milestone, for it explicitly linked the ANC and MK. Although the
National Executive Committee stated, “Our emphasis still remains mass political action,” Umkhonto was referred to as the “military wing of our
struggle.” This was done in part to try to quell the more irresponsible acts of terrorism then being committed by Poqo. Poqo, Xhosa for
“independent” or “standing alone,” was loosely linked to the PAC, and their acts of terrorism targeted both African collaborators and whites. The
ANC wanted the people to see its new militancy, but also to see that it was controlled and responsible.
The government had decided to accelerate the program of “separate development” to show the world that apartheid allowed races their
individual “freedom.” The prototype would be the Transkei. In January 1962, Verwoerd had announced that South Africa intended to grant the
Transkei “self-government.” In 1963, the Transkei became a “self-governing” homeland. In November 1963, an election was held for the Transkei
legislative assembly. But by a margin of more than three to one, Transkei voters elected members opposed to the homeland policy.
The bantustan system was nevertheless instituted; the voters had opposed it, but participated in it simply by voting. Though I abhorred the
bantustan system, I felt the ANC should use both the system and those within it as a platform for our policies, particularly as so many of our leaders
were now voiceless through imprisonment, banning, or exile.
Terrorism against the Bantu Authorities increased. As acts of sabotage mounted, so did the government’s vigilance. John Vorster, the new
minister of justice, who had himself been detained during World War II for opposing the government’s support of the Allies, was a man
unsentimental in the extreme. For him, the iron fist was the best and only answer to subversion.
On May 1, 1963, the government enacted legislation designed “to break the back” of Umkhonto, as Vorster put it. The General Law Amendment
Act, better known as the Ninety-Day Detention Law, waived the right of habeas corpus and empowered any police officer to detain any person
without a warrant on grounds of suspicion of a political crime. Those arrested could be detained without trial, charge, access to a lawyer, or
protection against self-incrimination for up to ninety days. The ninety-day detention could be extended, as Vorster ominously explained, until “this
side of eternity.” The law helped transform the country into a police state; no dictator could covet more power than the Ninety-Day Detention Law
gave to the authorities. As a result, the police became more savage: prisoners were routinely beaten and we soon heard reports of electric shock,
suffocation, and other forms of torture. In Parliament, Helen Suzman, the representative of the liberal Progressive Party, cast the lone vote against
the act.
Increased penalties were ordered for membership in illegal organizations; sentences from five years to the death penalty were instituted for
“furthering the aims” of communism or of other banned organizations. Political prisoners were redetained as I found out in May 1963, when
Sobukwe’s three-year sentence was up; instead of releasing him, the government simply redetained him without charging him, and then sent him to
Robben Island.
Vorster also championed the Sabotage Act of June 1962, which allowed for house arrests and more stringent bannings not subject to challenge
in the court, restricting the liberties of citizens to those in the most extreme fascist dictatorships. Sabotage itself now carried a minimum penalty of
five years without parole and a maximum of death. Because the wording of the act was so broad, even activities such as trespassing or illegal
possession of weapons could constitute sabotage. Another act of Parliament prohibited the reproduction of any statement made by a banned
person. Nothing I said or had ever said could be reported in the newspapers. New Age was banned at the end of 1962, and possession of a
banned publication became a criminal offense, punishable by up to two years in prison. Provision was also made for house arrest, the most wellknown use of which was imposed on the white political activist Helen Joseph.