IT WAS DAWN when we reached the offices of Crown Mines, which were located on the plateau of a great hill overlooking the still dark metropolis.
Johannesburg was a city built up around the discovery of gold on the Witwatersrand in 1886, and Crown Mines was the largest gold mine in the city
of gold. I expected to see a grand building like the government offices in Umtata, but the Crown Mine offices were rusted tin shanties on the face of
the mine.
There is nothing magical about a gold mine. Barren and pockmarked, all dirt and no trees, fenced in all sides, a gold mine resembles a war-torn
battlefield. The noise was harsh and ubiquitous: the rasp of shaft-lifts, the jangling power drills, the distant rumble of dynamite, the barked orders.
Everywhere I looked I saw black men in dusty overalls looking tired and bent. They lived on the grounds in bleak, single-sex barracks that contained
hundreds of concrete bunks separated from each other by only a few inches.
Gold-mining on the Witwatersrand was costly because the ore was low grade and deep under the earth. Only the presence of cheap labor in the
form of thousands of Africans working long hours for little pay with no rights made gold-mining profitable for the mining houses — white-owned
companies that became wealthy beyond the dreams of Croesus on the backs of the African people. I had never seen such enterprise before, such
great machines, such methodical organization, and such backbreaking work. It was my first sight of South African capitalism at work, and I knew I
was in for a new kind of education.
We went straight to the chief induna, or headman. His name was Piliso, a tough old fellow who had seen life at its most pitiless. Piliso knew
about Justice, as the regent had sent a letter months before making arrangements for him to receive a clerical job, the most coveted and respected
job in the mine compound. I, however, was unknown to him. Justice explained that I was his brother.
“I was expecting only Justice,” Piliso responded. “Your father’s letter mentions nothing about a brother.” He looked me over rather skeptically. But
Justice pleaded with him, saying it had simply been an oversight, and that the regent had already posted a letter about me. Piliso’s crusty exterior
hid a sympathetic side, and he took me on as a mine policeman, saying that if I worked out, he would give me a clerical post in three months’ time.
The regent’s word carried weight at Crown Mines. This was true of all chiefs in South Africa. Mining officials were eager to recruit labor in the
countryside, and the chiefs had authority over the men they needed. They wanted the chiefs to encourage their subjects to come to the Reef. The
chiefs were treated with great deference; the mining houses provided special lodgings for them whenever they came to visit. One letter from the
regent was enough to secure a man a good job, and Justice and I were treated with extra care because of our connection. We were to be given
free rations, sleeping quarters, and a small salary. We did not stay in the barracks that first night. For our first few days, Piliso, out of courtesy to the
regent, invited Justice and me to stay with him.
Many of the miners, especially those from Thembuland, treated Justice as a chief and greeted him with gifts of cash, the custom when a chief
visited a mine. Most of these men were in the same hostel; miners were normally housed according to tribe. The mining companies preferred such
segregation because it prevented different ethnic groups from uniting around a common grievance and reinforced the power of the chiefs. The
separation often resulted in factional fights between different ethnic groups and clans, which the companies did not effectively discourage.
Justice shared some of his booty with me and gave me a few extra pounds as a bonus. For those first few days, my pockets jingling with
newfound riches, I felt like a millionaire. I was beginning to think I was a child of fortune, that luck was shining on me, and that if I had not wasted
precious time studying at college I could have been a wealthy man by then. Once again, I did not see that fate was busy setting snares around me.
I started work immediately as a night watchman. I was given a uniform, a new pair of boots, a helmet, a flashlight, a whistle, and a knobkerrie,
which is a long wooden stick with a heavy ball of wood at one end. The job was a simple one: I waited at the compound’s entrance next to the sign
that read, “BEWARE: NATIVES CROSSING HERE,” and checked the credentials of all those entering and leaving. For the first few nights, I
patrolled the grounds of the compound without incident. I did challenge a rather drunken miner late one evening, but he meekly showed his pass
and retired to his hostel.
Flushed with our success, Justice and I boasted of our cleverness to a friend of ours whom we knew from home, who was also working at the
mines. We explained how we had run away and tricked the regent in the bargain. Although we swore this fellow to secrecy, he went straightaway to
the induna and revealed our secret. A day later, Piliso called us in and the first question he asked Justice was: Where is the permission from the
regent for your brother? Justice said that he had already explained that the regent had posted it. Piliso was not mollified by this, and we sensed that
something was wrong. He then reached inside his desk and produced a telegram. “I have had a communication from the regent,” he said in a
serious tone of voice, and handed it to us. It contained a single sentence: “SEND BOYS HOME AT ONCE.”
Piliso then vented his anger on us, accusing us of lying to him. He said we had presumed on his hospitality and the good name of the regent. He
told us that he was taking up a collection among the miners to put us on a train back to the Transkei. Justice protested against going home, saying
that we simply wanted to work at the mine, and that we could make decisions for ourselves. But Piliso turned a deaf ear. We felt ashamed and
humiliated, but we left his office determined not to return to the Transkei.
We rapidly hatched another plan. We went to see Dr. A. B. Xuma, an old friend of the regent’s who was the president-general of the African
National Congress. Dr. Xuma was from the Transkei, and was an extremely well-respected physician.

Dr. Xuma was pleased to see us, and politely questioned us about family matters in Mqhekezweni. We told him a series of half-truths about why we
were in Johannesburg, and that we greatly desired jobs in the mines. Dr. Xuma said he would be glad to assist us, and immediately telephoned a
Mr. Wellbeloved at the Chamber of Mines, a powerful organization representing the mining houses and exerting monopoly control over the hiring of
mine labor. Dr. Xuma told Mr. Wellbeloved what splendid fellows we were and how he should find places for us. We thanked Dr. Xuma and went off
to see Mr. Wellbeloved.
Mr. Wellbeloved was a white man whose office was grander than any I had ever seen; his desk seemed as wide as a football field. We met him
in the company of a mine boss named Festile, and we told him the same fabrications that we had told Dr. Xuma. Mr. Wellbeloved was impressed
with my not-entirely-truthful explanation that I had come to Johannesburg to continue my studies at the University of the Witwatersrand. “Well, boys,”
he said, “I will put you in touch with the manager of Crown Mines, a Mr. Piliso, and I will tell him to give you jobs as clerks.” He said he had worked
with Mr. Piliso for thirty years and in all that time, Piliso had never lied to him. Justice and I squirmed at this but said nothing. Despite some
misgivings, we naively felt we had the upper hand with Mr. Piliso now that we had his boss, Mr. Wellbeloved, on our side.
We returned to the Crown Mine offices, where the white compound manager was considerate to us because of the letter we presented from Mr.
Wellbeloved. Just then, Mr. Piliso passed by the office, saw us, and then stormed in. “You boys! You’ve come back!” he said with irritation. “What
are you doing here?”
Justice was calm. “We’ve been sent by Mr. Wellbeloved,” he replied, his tone bordering on defiance. Mr. Piliso considered this for a moment.

“Did you tell him that you ran away from your father?” Piliso then countered. Justice was silent.
“You’ll never be employed in any mine that I run!” he yelled. “Now, get out of my sight!” Justice waved Wellbeloved’s letter. “I don’t give a damn
about a letter!” Piliso said. I looked to the white manager, hoping that he might overrule Piliso, but he was as still as a statue and seemed as
intimidated as we were. We had no rejoinder for Piliso, and we sheepishly walked out of the office, feeling even more humbled than we had on the
first occasion.
Our fortunes were now reversed. We were without jobs, without prospects, and without a place to stay. Justice knew various people in
Johannesburg, and he went into town to investigate a place for us to stay. In the meantime, I was to fetch our suitcase, which was still at Piliso’s,
and then meet Justice at George Goch, a small township in southern Johannesburg, later that day.
I prevailed upon a fellow named Bikitsha, whom I knew from home, to help me carry the suitcase to the front gate. A watchman at the gate
stopped us both and said he needed to search the bag. Bikitsha protested, asserting there was no contraband in the suitcase. The watchman
replied that a search was routine, and he looked through the bag in a cursory way, not even disturbing the clothing. As the watchman was closing it,
Bikitsha, who was a cocky fellow, said, “Why do you make trouble? I told you there was nothing there.” These words irked the watchman, who then
decided to search the case with a fine-toothed comb. I became increasingly nervous as he opened every compartment and probed every pocket.
He then reached all the way to the bottom of the case and found the very thing I prayed he would not: a loaded revolver wrapped inside some of my
clothing.
He turned to my friend and said, “You are under arrest.” He then blew his whistle, which brought a team of guards over to us. My friend looked at
me with a mixture of consternation and confusion as they led him away to the local police station. I followed them at a distance, considering my
options. The gun, an old revolver, had been my father’s and he had left it to me when he died. I had never used it, but as a precaution, I had brought
it with me to the city.
I could not let my friend take the blame in my stead. Not long after he had entered the police station, I went inside and asked to see the officer in
charge. I was taken to him and spoke as directly and forthrightly as I could: “Sir, that is my gun that was found in my friend’s suitcase. I inherited it
from my father in the Transkei and I brought it here because I was afraid of gangsters.” I explained that I was a student from Fort Hare, and that I
was only in Johannesburg temporarily. The officer in charge softened a bit as I spoke, and said that he would release my friend straightaway. He
said he would have to charge me for possession of the gun, though he would not arrest me, and that I should appear in court first thing on Monday
morning to answer the charge. I was grateful, and told him that I would certainly appear in court on Monday. I did go to court that Monday and
received only a nominal fine.
In the meantime, I had arranged to stay with one of my cousins, Garlick Mbekeni, in George Goch Township. Garlick was a hawker who sold
clothing, and had a small boxlike house. He was a friendly, solicitous man, and after I had been there a short while, I told him that my real aspiration
was to be a lawyer. He commended me for my ambition and said he would think about what I had said.
A few days later, Garlick told me that he was taking me to see “one of our best people in Johannesburg.” We rode the train to the office of an
estate agent on Market Street, a dense and rollicking thoroughfare with trams groaning with passengers, sidewalk vendors on every street, and a
sense that wealth and riches were just around the next corner.
Johannesburg in those days was a combination frontier town and modern city. Butchers cut meat on the street next to office buildings. Tents were
pitched beside bustling shops and women hung out their washing next door to high-rise buildings. Industry was energized due to the war effort. In
1939, South Africa, a member of the British Commonwealth, had declared war on Nazi Germany. The country was supplying men and goods to the
war effort. Demand for labor was high, and Johannesburg became a magnet for Africans from the countryside seeking work. Between 1941, when I
arrived, and 1946, the number of Africans in the city would double. Every morning, the township felt larger than it had the day before. Men found jobs
in factories and housing in the “non-European townships” of Newclare, Martindale, George Goch, Alexandra, Sophiatown, and the Western Native
Township, a prisonlike compound of a few thousand matchbox houses on treeless ground.
Garlick and I sat in the estate agent’s waiting room while a pretty African receptionist announced our presence to her boss in the inner office.
After she relayed the message, her nimble fingers danced across the keyboard as she typed a letter. I had never in my life seen an African typist
before, much less a female one. In the few public and business offices that I had visited in Umtata and Fort Hare, the typists had always been white
and male. I was particularly impressed with this young woman because those white male typists had only used two slow-moving fingers to peck out
their letters.
She soon ushered us into the inner office, where I was introduced to a man who looked to be in his late twenties, with an intelligent and kindly
face, light in complexion, and dressed in a double-breasted suit. Despite his youth, he seemed to me an experienced man of the world. He was
from the Transkei, but spoke English with a rapid urban fluency. To judge from his well-populated waiting room and his desk piled high with papers,
he was a busy and successful man. But he did not rush us and seemed genuinely interested in our errand. His name was Walter Sisulu.
Sisulu ran a real estate office that specialized in properties for Africans. In the 1940s, there were still quite a few areas where freehold properties
could be purchased by Africans, small holdings located in such places as Alexandra and Sophiatown. In some of these areas, Africans had owned
their own homes for several generations. The rest of the African areas were municipal townships containing matchbox houses for which the
residents paid rent to the Johannesburg City Council.
Sisulu’s name was becoming prominent as both a businessman and a local leader. He was already a force in the community. He paid close
attention as I explained about my difficulties at Fort Hare, my ambition to be a lawyer, and how I intended to register at the University of South Africa
to finish my degree by correspondence course. I neglected to tell him the circumstances of my arrival in Johannesburg. When I had finished, he
leaned back in his chair and pondered what I had said. Then, he looked me over one more time, and said that there was a white lawyer with whom
he worked named Lazar Sidelsky, who he believed to be a decent and progressive fellow. Sidelsky, he said, was interested in African education.
He would talk to Sidelsky about taking me on as an articled clerk.
In those days, I believed that proficiency in English and success in business were the direct result of high academic achievements and I assumed
as a matter of course that Sisulu was a university graduate. I was greatly surprised to learn from my cousin after I left the office that Walter Sisulu
had never gone past Standard VI. It was another lesson from Fort Hare that I had to unlearn in Johannesburg. I had been taught that to have a B.A.
meant to be a leader, and to be a leader one needed a B.A. But in Johannesburg I found that many of the most outstanding leaders had never been
to university at all. Even though I had done all the courses in English that were required for a B.A., my English was neither as fluent nor as eloquent
as many of the men I met in Johannesburg who had not even received a school degree.

After a brief time staying with my cousin, I arranged to move in with Reverend J. Mabutho of the Anglican Church at his home on Eighth Avenue in
Alexandra Township. Reverend Mabutho was a fellow Thembu, a friend of my family’s, and a generous, God-fearing man. His wife, whom we called
Gogo, was warm, affectionate, and a splendid cook who was liberal with her helpings. As a Thembu who knew my family, Reverend Mabutho felt

responsible for me. “Our ancestors have taught us to share,” he once told me.
But I had not learned from my experience at Crown Mines, for I did not tell Reverend Mabutho about the circumstances of my leaving the
Transkei. My omission had unhappy consequences. A few days after I had moved in with the Mabuthos, I was having tea with them when a visitor
arrived. Unfortunately, their friend was Mr. Festile, the induna at the Chamber of Mines who had been present when Justice and I met with Mr.
Wellbeloved. Mr. Festile and I greeted each other in a way that suggested we knew one another, and though nothing was said of our previous
meeting, the next day Reverend Mabutho took me aside and made it clear that I could no longer remain under their roof.
I cursed myself for not having told the whole truth. I had become so used to my deceptions that I lied even when I did not have to. I am sure that
Reverend Mabutho would not have minded, but when he learned of my circumstances from Festile, he felt deceived. In my brief stay in
Johannesburg, I had left a trail of mistruths, and in each case, the falsehood had come back to haunt me. At the time, I felt that I had no alternative. I
was frightened and inexperienced, and I knew that I had not gotten off on the right foot in my new life. In this instance, Reverend Mabutho took pity
on me and found me accommodation with his next-door neighbors, the Xhoma family.
Mr. Xhoma was one of an elite handful of African landowners in Alexandra. His house — 46, Seventh Avenue — was small, particularly as he had
six children, but it was pleasant, with a veranda and a tiny garden. In order to make ends meet, Mr. Xhoma, like so many other residents of
Alexandra, rented rooms to boarders. He had built a tin-roofed room at the back of his property, no more than a shack, with a dirt floor, no heat, no
electricity, no running water. But it was a place of my own and I was happy to have it.
In the meantime, on Walter’s recommendation, Lazar Sidelsky had agreed to take me on as a clerk while I completed my B.A. degree. The firm
of Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman was one of the largest law firms in the city and handled business from blacks as well as whites. In addition to
studying law and passing certain exams, in order to qualify as an attorney in South Africa one had to undergo several years of apprenticeship to a
practicing lawyer, which is known as serving articles. But in order for me to become articled, I first had to complete my B.A. degree. To that end, I
was studying at night with UNISA, short for the University of South Africa, a respected educational institution that offered credits and degrees by
correspondence.
In addition to trying conventional law cases, Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman oversaw real estate transactions for African customers. Walter
brought the firm clients who needed a mortgage. The firm would handle their loan applications, and then take a commission, which it would split
with the real estate agent. In fact, the law firm would take the lion’s share of the money, leaving only a pittance for the African real estate agent.
Blacks were given the crumbs from the table, and had no option but to accept them.
Even so, the law firm was far more liberal than most. It was a Jewish firm, and in my experience, I have found Jews to be more broad-minded
than most whites on issues of race and politics, perhaps because they themselves have historically been victims of prejudice. The fact that Lazar
Sidelsky, one of the firm’s partners, would take on a young African as an articled clerk — something almost unheard of in those days — was
evidence of that liberalism.
Mr. Sidelsky, whom I came to respect greatly and who treated me with enormous kindness, was a graduate of the University of the Witwatersrand
and was in his mid-thirties when I joined the firm. He was involved in African education, donating money and time to African schools. A slender,
courtly man, with a pencil mustache, he took a genuine interest in my welfare and future, preaching the value and importance of education — for me
individually and for Africans in general. Only mass education, he used to say, would free my people, arguing that an educated man could not be
oppressed because he could think for himself. He told me over and over again that becoming a successful attorney and thereby a model of
achievement for my people was the most worthwhile path I could follow.
I met most of the firm’s staff on my first day in the office, including the one other African employee, Gaur Radebe, with whom I shared an office.
Ten years my senior, Gaur was a clerk, interpreter, and messenger. He was a short, stocky, muscular man, fluent in English, Sotho, and Zulu,
expressing himself in all of them with precision, humor, and confidence. He had strong opinions and even stronger arguments to back them up and
was a well-known figure in black Johannesburg.
That first morning at the firm, a pleasant young white secretary, Miss Lieberman, took me aside and said, “Nelson, we have no color bar here at
the law firm.” She explained that at midmorning, the tea-man arrived in the front parlor with tea on a tray and a number of cups. “In honor of your
arrival, we have purchased two new cups for you and Gaur,” she said. “The secretaries take cups of tea to the principals, but you and Gaur will take
your own tea, just as we do. I will call you when the tea comes, and then you can take your tea in the new cups.” She added that I should convey this
message to Gaur. I was grateful for her ministrations, but I knew that the “two new cups” she was so careful to mention were evidence of the color
bar that she said did not exist. The secretaries might share tea with two Africans, but not the cups with which to drink it.
When I told Gaur what Miss Lieberman had said, I noticed his expression change as he listened, just as you can see a mischievous idea enter
the head of a child. “Nelson,” he said, “at teatime, don’t worry about anything. Just do as I do.” At eleven o’clock, Miss Lieberman informed us that
tea had arrived. In front of the secretaries and some of the other members of the firm, Gaur went over to the tea tray and ostentatiously ignored the
two new cups, selecting instead one of the old ones, and proceeded to put in generous portions of sugar, milk, and then tea. He stirred his cup
slowly, and then stood there drinking it in a very self-satisfied way. The secretaries stared at Gaur and then Gaur nodded to me, as if to say, “It is
your turn, Nelson.”
For a moment, I was in a quandary. I neither wanted to offend the secretaries nor alienate my new colleague, so I settled on what seemed to me
the most prudent course of action: I declined to have any tea at all. I said I was not thirsty. I was then just twenty-three years old and just finding my
feet as a man, as a resident of Johannesburg, and as an employee of a white firm, and I saw the middle path as the best and most reasonable one.
Thereafter, at teatime, I would go to the small kitchen in the office and take my tea there in solitude.
The secretaries were not always so thoughtful. Some time later, when I was more experienced at the firm, I was dictating some information to a
white secretary when a white client whom she knew came into the office. She was embarrassed, and to demonstrate that she was not taking
dictation from an African, she took a sixpence from her purse and said stiffly, “Nelson, please go out and get me some hair shampoo from the
chemist.” I left the room and got her shampoo.
In the beginning, my work at the firm was quite rudimentary. I was a combination of a clerk and messenger. I would find, arrange, and file
documents and serve or deliver papers around Johannesburg. Later, I would draw up contracts for some of the firm’s African clients. Yet, no matter
how small the chore, Mr. Sidelsky would explain to me what it was for and why I was doing it. He was a patient and generous teacher, and sought to
impart not only the details of the law but the philosophy behind it. His view of the law was broad rather than narrow, for he believed that it was a tool
that could be used to change society.
While Mr. Sidelsky imparted his views of the law, he warned me against politics. Politics, he said, brings out the worst in men. It was the source
of trouble and corruption, and should be avoided at all costs. He painted a frightening picture of what would happen to me if I drifted into politics,
and counseled me to avoid the company of men he regarded as troublemakers and rabble-rousers, specifically, Gaur Radebe and Walter Sisulu.
While Mr. Sidelsky respected their abilities, he abhorred their politics.
Gaur was indeed a “troublemaker,” in the best sense of that term, and was an influential man in the African community in ways that Mr. Sidelsky

did not know or suspect. He was a member of the Advisory Board in the Western Native Township, an elected body of four local people who dealt
with the authorities on matters relating to the townships. While it had little power, the board had great prestige among the people. Gaur was also, as
I soon discovered, a prominent member of both the ANC and the Communist Party.
Gaur was his own man. He did not treat our employers with exaggerated courtesy, and often chided them for their treatment of Africans. “You
people stole our land from us,” he would say, “and enslaved us. Now you are making us pay through the nose to get the worst pieces of it back.”
One day, after I returned from doing an errand and entered Mr. Sidelsky’s office, Gaur turned to him and said, “Look, you sit there like a lord whilst
my chief runs around doing errands for you. The situation should be reversed, and one day it will, and we will dump all of you into the sea.” Gaur then
left the room, and Mr. Sidelsky just shook his head ruefully.
Gaur was an example of a man without a B.A. who seemed infinitely better educated than the fellows who left Fort Hare with glittering degrees.
Not only was he more knowledgeable, he was bolder and more confident. Although I intended to finish my degree and enter law school, I learned
from Gaur that a degree was not in itself a guarantee of leadership and that it meant nothing unless one went out into the community to prove
oneself.

I was not the only articled clerk at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman. A fellow about my age named Nat Bregman started work shortly before I had. Nat
was bright, pleasant, and thoughtful. He seemed entirely color-blind and became my first white friend. He was a deft mimic and could do fine
imitations of the voices of Jan Smuts, Franklin Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill. I often sought his counsel on matters of law and office procedure,
and he was unfailingly helpful.
One day, at lunchtime, we were sitting in the office and Nat took out a packet of sandwiches. He removed one sandwich and said, “Nelson, take
hold of the other side of the sandwich.” I was not sure why he asked me to do this, but as I was hungry, I decided to oblige. “Now, pull,” he said. I did
so, and the sandwich split roughly in two. “Now, eat,” he said. As I was chewing, Nat said, “Nelson, what we have just done symbolizes the
philosophy of the Communist Party: to share everything we have.” He told me he was a member of the party and explained the rudiments of what
the party stood for. I knew that Gaur was a member of the party, but he had never proselytized for it. I listened to Nat that day, and on many
subsequent occasions when he preached the virtues of communism and tried to persuade me to join the party. I heard him out, asked questions,
but did not join. I was not inclined to join any political organization, and the advice of Mr. Sidelsky was still ringing in my ears. I was also quite
religious, and the party’s antipathy to religion put me off. But I appreciated half that sandwich.
I enjoyed Nat’s company and we often went places together, including a number of lectures and CP meetings. I went primarily out of intellectual
curiosity. I was just becoming aware of the history of racial oppression in my own country, and saw the struggle in South Africa as purely racial. But
the party saw South Africa’s problems through the lens of the class struggle. To them, it was a matter of the Haves oppressing the Have-nots. This
was intriguing to me, but did not seem particularly relevant to present-day South Africa. It may have been applicable to Germany or England or
Russia, but it did not seem appropriate for the country that I knew. Even so, I listened and learned.
Nat invited me to a number of parties where there was a mixture of whites, Africans, Indians, and Coloureds. The get-togethers were arranged by
the party, and most of the guests were party members. I remember being anxious the first time I went, mainly because I did not think I had the
proper attire. At Fort Hare, we were taught to wear a tie and jacket to a social function of any kind. Though my wardrobe was severely limited, I
managed to find a tie to wear to the party.
I discovered a lively and gregarious group of people who did not seem to pay attention to color at all. It was one of the first mixed gatherings I had
ever attended, and I was far more of an observer than a participant. I felt extremely shy, wary of committing a faux pas, and unequipped to
participate in the high-flown and rapid-fire conversations. My thoughts seemed undeveloped by comparison to the sophisticated dialogue around
me.
At one point in the evening, I was introduced to Michael Harmel, who I was told had a master’s degree in English from Rhodes University. I was
impressed with his degree, but when I met him, I thought to myself, “This chap has an M.A. and he is not even wearing a tie!” I just could not
reconcile this discrepancy. Later, Michael and I became friends, and I came to admire him greatly, in no small measure because he rejected so
many of the rather foolish conventions I once embraced. He was not only a brilliant writer, but was so committed to communism that he lived in a
manner no different from an African.