FOR SIX MONTHS — ever since the end of the preparatory hearings in January — we had been awaiting and preparing for our formal trial, which
was to commence in August 1958. The government set up a special high court — Mr. Justice F. L. Rumpff, president of the three-man court, Mr.
Justice Kennedy, and Mr. Justice Ludorf. The panel was not promising: it consisted of three white men, all with ties to the ruling party. While Judge
Rumpff was an able man and better informed than the average white South African, he was rumored to be a member of the Broederbond, a secret
Afrikaner organization whose aim was to solidify Afrikaner power. Judge Ludorf was a well-known member of the National Party, as was Judge
Kennedy. Kennedy had a reputation as a hanging judge, having sent a group of twenty-three Africans to the gallows for the murder of two white
policemen.
Shortly before the case resumed, the state played another unpleasant trick on us. They announced that the venue of the trial was to be shifted
from Johannesburg to Pretoria, thirty-six miles away. The trial would be conducted in an ornate former synagogue that had been converted into a
court of law. All of the accused as well as our defense team resided in Johannesburg, so we would be forced to travel each day to Pretoria. The trial
would now take up even more of our time and money — neither of which we had in abundance. Those who had managed to keep their jobs had
been able to do so because the court had been near their work. Changing the venue was also an attempt to crush our spirits by separating us from
our natural supporters. Pretoria was the home of the National Party, and the ANC barely had a presence there.
Nearly all of the ninety-two accused commuted to Pretoria in a lumbering, uncomfortable bus, with stiff wooden slats for seats, which left every
day at six in the morning and took two hours to reach the Old Synagogue. The round-trip took us nearly five hours — time far better spent earning
money to pay for food, rent, and clothes for the children.
Once more we were privileged to have a brilliant and aggressive defense team, ably led by advocate Israel Maisels, and assisted by Bram
Fischer, Rex Welsh, Vernon Berrangé, Sydney Kentridge, Tony O’Dowd, and G. Nicholas. On the opening day of the trial, they displayed their
combativeness with a risky legal maneuver that a number of us had decided on in consultation with the lawyers. Issy Maisels rose dramatically and
applied for the recusal of Judges Ludorf and Rumpff on the grounds that both had conflicts of interest that prevented them from being fair arbiters of
our case. There was an audible murmur in the courtroom. The defense contended that Rumpff, as the judge at the 1952 Defiance Trial, had already
adjudicated on certain aspects of the present indictment and therefore it was not in the interest of justice that he try this case. We argued that
Ludorf was prejudiced because he had represented the government in 1954 as a lawyer for the police when Harold Wolpe had sought a court
interdict to eject the police from a meeting of the Congress of the People.
This was a dangerous strategy, for we could easily win this legal battle but lose the war. Although we regarded both Ludorf and Rumpff as strong
supporters of the National Party, there were far worse judges in the country who could replace them. In fact, while we were keen to have Ludorf step
down, we secretly hoped that Rumpff, whom we respected as an honest broker, would decide not to recuse himself. Rumpff always stood for law,
no matter what his own political opinions might be, and we were convinced that when it came to law, we could only be found innocent.
That Monday, the atmosphere was expectant when the three red-robed judges marched into the courtroom. Judge Ludorf announced that he
would withdraw, adding that he had completely forgotten about the previous case. But Rumpff refused to recuse himself and instead offered the
assurance that his judgment in the Defiance case would have no influence on him in this one. To replace Ludorf, the state appointed Mr. Justice
Bekker, a man we liked right from the start and who was not linked to the National Party. We were happy about Rumpff’s decision.
After the success of this first maneuver, we tried a second, nearly as risky. We began a long and detailed argument contesting the indictment
itself. We claimed, among other things, that the indictment was vague and lacked particularity. We also argued that the planning of violence was
necessary to prove high treason, and the prosecution needed to provide examples of its claim that we intended to act violently. It became apparent
by the end of our argument that the three judges agreed. In August, the court quashed one of the two charges under the Suppression of
Communism Act. On October 13, after two more months of legal wrangling, the Crown suddenly announced the withdrawal of the indictment
altogether. This was extraordinary, but we were too well versed in the devious ways of the state to celebrate. A month later the prosecution issued a
new, more carefully worded indictment and announced that the trial would proceed against only thirty of the accused; the others would be tried later.
I was among the first thirty, all of whom were members of the ANC.
Under the new indictment, the prosecution was now required to prove the intention to act violently. As Pirow put it, the accused knew that the
achievement of the goals of the Freedom Charter would “necessarily involve the overthrow of the State by violence.” The legal sparring continued
through the middle of 1959, when the court dismissed the Crown’s indictment against the remaining sixty-one accused. For months on end, the
activity in the courtroom consisted of the driest legal maneuvering imaginable. Despite the defense’s successes in showing the shoddiness of the
government’s case, the state was obdurately persistent. As the minister of justice said, “This trial will be proceeded with, no matter how many
millions of pounds it costs. What does it matter how long it takes?”
* * *
Just after midnight on the 4th of February, 1958, I returned home after a meeting to find Winnie alone and in pain, about to go into labor. I rushed
her to Baragwanath Hospital, but was told that it would be many hours before her time. I stayed until I had to leave for the trial in Pretoria.
Immediately after the session ended, I speeded back with Duma Nokwe to find mother and daughter doing extremely well. I held my newborn
daughter in my arms and pronounced her a true Mandela. My relative, Chief Mdingi, suggested the name Zenani, which means “What have you
brought to the world?” — a poetic name that embodies a challenge, suggesting that one must contribute something to society. It is a name one
does not simply possess, but has to live up to.
My mother came from the Transkei to help Winnie, and planned to give Zenani a Xhosa baptism by calling in an inyanga, a tribal healer, to give
the baby a traditional herbal bath. But Winnie was adamantly opposed, thinking it unhealthy and outdated, and instead smeared Zenani with olive
oil, plastered her little body with Johnson’s Baby Powder, and filled her stomach with shark oil.
As soon as Winnie was up and about, I undertook the task of teaching the new mother of the household how to drive. Driving, in those days, was
a man’s business; very few women, especially African women, were to be seen in the driver’s seat. But Winnie was independent-minded and intent
on learning, and it would be useful because I was gone so much of the time and could not drive her places myself. Perhaps I am an impatient
teacher or perhaps I had a headstrong pupil, but when I attempted to give Winnie lessons along a relatively flat and quiet Orlando road, we could
not seem to shift gears without quarreling. Finally, after she had ignored one too many of my suggestions, I stormed out of the car and walked
home. Winnie seemed to do better without my tutelage than with it, for she proceeded to drive around the township on her own for the next hour. By
that time, we were ready to make up, and it is a story we subsequently laughed about.
Married life and motherhood were an adjustment for Winnie. She was then a young woman of twenty-five who had yet to form her own character
completely. I was already formed and rather stubborn. I knew that others often saw her as “Mandela’s wife.” It was undoubtedly difficult for her to

create her own identity in my shadow. I did my best to let her bloom in her own right, and she soon did so without any of my help.
