MY TIME UNDERGROUND was mainly taken up in planning the May 29 stay-at-home. It was shaping up to be a virtual war between the state and
the liberation movement. Late in May, the government staged countrywide raids on opposition leaders. Meetings were banned; printing presses
were seized; and legislation was rushed through Parliament permitting the police to detain charged prisoners for twelve days without bail.
Verwoerd declared that those supporting the strike, including sympathetic newspapers, were “playing with fire,” an ominous declaration given the
ruthlessness of the state. The government urged industries to provide sleeping accommodations for workers so that they would not have to return
home during the strike. Two days before the stay-at-home, the government staged the greatest peace-time show of force in South African history.
The military exercised its largest call-up since the war. Police holidays were canceled. Military units were stationed at the entrances and exits of
townships. While Saracen tanks rumbled through the dirt streets of the townships, helicopters hovered above, swooping down to break up any
gathering. At night, the helicopters trained searchlights on houses.
The English-language press had widely publicized the campaign until a few days before it was to begin. But on the eve of the stay-at-home the
entire English-language press crumbled and urged people to go to work. The PAC played the role of saboteur and released thousands of flyers
telling people to oppose the stay-at-home, and denouncing the ANC leaders as cowards. The PAC’s actions shocked us. It is one thing to criticize,
and that we can accept, but to attempt to break a strike by calling upon the people to go to work directly serves the interests of the enemy.

The night before the stay-at-home, I was scheduled to meet the Johannesburg leadership of the ANC at a safe house in Soweto. To avoid police
roadblocks, I entered Soweto through Kliptown, which was normally not patrolled. But as I went around a blind corner I drove straight into what I had
been trying to avoid: a roadblock. A white policeman motioned for me to stop. I was dressed in my usual costume of overalls and chauffeur’s cap.
He squinted through the window at me and then stepped forward and searched the car on his own. Normally, this was the duty of the African police.
After he found nothing, he demanded my pass. I told him that I had left it at home by mistake, and casually recited a fictitious pass number. This
seemed to satisfy him and he motioned for me to drive through.
On Monday, May 29, the first day of the stay-at-home, hundreds of thousands of people risked their jobs and livelihoods by not going to work. In
Durban, Indian workers walked out of factories while in the Cape thousands of Coloured workers stayed home. In Johannesburg, more than half of
employees stayed home and in Port Elizabeth the rate was even higher. I praised the response as “magnificent” to the press, lauding our people for
“defying unprecedented intimidation by the state.” The white celebration of Republic Day was drowned out by our protest.
Although reports on the first day of the stay-at-home suggested strong reactions in various parts of the country, the response as a whole
appeared less than we had hoped. Communication was difficult, and bad news always seems to travel more efficiently than good news. As more
reports came in, I felt let down and disappointed by the reaction. That evening, feeling demoralized and a bit angry, I had a conversation with
Benjamin Pogrund of the Rand Daily Mail in which I suggested that the days of nonviolent struggle were over.
On the second day of the stay-at-home, after consultations with my colleagues, I called it off. I met that morning in a safe flat in a white suburb with
various members of the local and foreign press, and I once again called the stay-at-home “a tremendous success.” But I did not mask the fact that I
believed a new day was dawning. I said, “If the government reaction is to crush by naked force our nonviolent struggle, we will have to reconsider
our tactics. In my mind we are closing a chapter on this question of a nonviolent policy.” It was a grave declaration, and I knew it. I was criticized by
our executive for making that remark before it was discussed by the organization, but sometimes one must go public with an idea to push a
reluctant organization in the direction you want it to go.
The debate on the use of violence had been going on among us since early 1960. I had first discussed the armed struggle as far back as 1952
with Walter. Now, I again conferred with him and we agreed that the organization had to set out on a new course. The Communist Party had secretly
reconstituted itself underground and was now considering forming its own military wing. We decided that I should raise the issue of the armed
struggle within the Working Committee, and I did so in a meeting in June of 1961.
I had barely commenced my proposal when Moses Kotane, the secretary of the Communist Party and one of the most powerful figures in the
ANC executive, staged a counterassault, accusing me of not having thought out the proposal carefully enough. He said that I had been
outmaneuvered and paralyzed by the government’s actions, and now in desperation I was resorting to revolutionary language. “There is still room,”
he stressed, “for the old methods if we are imaginative and determined enough. If we embark on the course Mandela is suggesting, we will be
exposing innocent people to massacres by the enemy.”
Moses spoke persuasively and I could see that he had defeated my proposal. Even Walter did not speak on my behalf, and I backed down.
Afterward I spoke with Walter and voiced my frustration, chiding him for not coming to my aid. He laughed and said it would have been as foolish as
attempting to fight a pride of angry lions. Walter is a diplomat and extremely resourceful. “Let me arrange for Moses to come and see you privately,”
he said, “and you can make your case that way.” I was underground, but Walter managed to put the two of us together in a house in the township
and we spent the whole day talking.
I was candid and explained why I believed we had no choice but to turn to violence. I used an old African expression: Sebatana ha se bokwe ka
diatla (The attacks of the wild beast cannot be averted with only bare hands). Moses was an old-line Communist, and I told him that his opposition
was like the Communist Party in Cuba under Batista. The party had insisted that the appropriate conditions had not yet arrived, and waited
because they were simply following the textbook definitions of Lenin and Stalin. Castro did not wait, he acted — and he triumphed. If you wait for
textbook conditions, they will never occur. I told Moses point-blank that his mind was stuck in the old mold of the ANC’s being a legal organization.
People were already forming military units on their own, and the only organization that had the muscle to lead them was the ANC. We have always
maintained that the people were ahead of us, and now they were.
We talked the entire day, and at the end, Moses said to me, “Nelson, I will not promise you anything, but raise the issue again in committee, and
we will see what happens.” A meeting was scheduled in a week’s time, and once again I raised the issue. This time, Moses was silent, and the
general consensus of the meeting was that I should make the proposal to the National Executive Committee in Durban. Walter simply smiled.
The executive meeting in Durban, like all ANC meetings at the time, was held in secret and at night in order to avoid the police. I suspected I
would encounter difficulties because Chief Luthuli was to be in attendance and I knew of his moral commitment to nonviolence. I was also wary
because of the timing: I was raising the issue of violence so soon after the Treason Trial, where we had contended that for the ANC nonviolence
was an inviolate principle, not a tactic to be changed as conditions warranted. I myself believed precisely the opposite: that nonviolence was a
tactic that should be abandoned when it no longer worked.
At the meeting I argued that the state had given us no alternative to violence. I said it was wrong and immoral to subject our people to armed
attacks by the state without offering them some kind of alternative. I mentioned again that people on their own had taken up arms. Violence would

begin whether we initiated it or not. Would it not be better to guide this violence ourselves, according to principles where we save lives by attacking
symbols of oppression, and not people? If we did not take the lead now, I said, we would soon be latecomers and followers to a movement we did
not control.
The chief initially resisted my arguments. For him, nonviolence was not simply a tactic. But we worked on him the whole night; and I think that in
his heart he realized that we were right. He ultimately agreed that a military campaign was inevitable. When someone later insinuated that perhaps
the chief was not prepared for such a course, he retorted, “If anyone thinks I’m a pacifist, let him try to take my chickens, and he will know how wrong
he is!”
The National Executive formally endorsed the preliminary decision of the Working Committee. The chief and others suggested that we should
treat this new resolution as if the ANC had not discussed it. He did not want to jeopardize the legality of our unbanned allies. His idea was that a
military movement should be a separate and independent organ, linked to the ANC and under the overall control of the ANC, but fundamentally
autonomous. There would be two separate streams of the struggle. We readily accepted the chief’s suggestion. The chief and others warned
against this new phase becoming an excuse for neglecting the essential tasks of organization and the traditional methods of struggle. That, too,
would be self-defeating because the armed struggle, at least in the beginning, would not be the centerpiece of the movement.
The following night a meeting of the joint executives was scheduled in Durban. This would include the Indian Congress, the Colored People’s
Congress, the South African Congress of Trade Unions, and the Congress of Democrats. Although these other groups customarily accepted ANC
decisions, I knew that some of my Indian colleagues would strenuously oppose the move toward violence.
The meeting had an inauspicious beginning. Chief Luthuli, who was presiding, announced that even though the ANC had endorsed a decision on
violence, “it is a matter of such gravity, I would like my colleagues here tonight to consider the issue afresh.” It was apparent that the chief was not
fully reconciled to our new course.
We began our session at 8 P.M. and it was tumultuous. I made the identical arguments that I had been making all along, and many people
expressed reservations. Yusuf Cachalia and Dr. Naicker pleaded with us not to embark on this course, arguing that the state would slaughter the
whole liberation movement. J. N. Singh, an effective debater, uttered words that night which still echo in my head. “Nonviolence has not failed us,”
he said, “we have failed nonviolence.” I countered by saying that in fact nonviolence had failed us, for it had done nothing to stem the violence of the
state nor change the heart of our oppressors.
We argued the entire night, and in the early hours of the morning I began to feel we were making progress. Many of the Indian leaders were now
speaking in a sorrowful tone about the end of nonviolence. But then suddenly M. D. Naidoo, a member of the South African Indian Congress, burst
forth and said to his Indian colleagues, “Ah, you are afraid of going to jail, that is all!” His comment caused pandemonium in the meeting. When you
question a man’s integrity, you can expect a fight. The entire debate went back to square one. But toward dawn, there was a resolution. The
congresses authorized me to go ahead and form a new military organization, separate from the ANC. The policy of the ANC would still be that of
nonviolence. I was authorized to join with whomever I wanted or needed to create this organization and would not be subject to the direct control of
the mother organization.
This was a fateful step. For fifty years, the ANC had treated nonviolence as a core principle, beyond question or debate. Henceforth, the ANC
would be a different kind of organization. We were embarking on a new and more dangerous path, a path of organized violence, the results of
which we did not and could not know.