IN THEIR ANXIOUSNESS to deal with these young lions, the authorities more or less let us fend for ourselves. We were in the second year of a goslow strike at the quarry, demanding a complete end to all manual labor. Our requirement was for the right to do something useful with our days, like
studying or learning a trade. We no longer even went through the motions of working at the quarry; we simply talked among ourselves. In early 1977,
the authorities announced the end of manual labor. Instead, we could spend our days in our section. They arranged some type of work for us to do
in the courtyard, but it was merely a fig leaf to hide their capitulation.
This victory was the combined result of our own unceasing protests and simple logistics. The authorities normally preferred to have a ratio of one
warder for every three prisoners. Even before the arrival of the post-Soweto prisoners, there was a shortage of warders, and the rebellious young
men required even greater supervision. They were so bold that each man seemed to require his own warder. If we remained in our section, we
required less supervision.

The end of manual labor was liberating. I could now spend the day reading, writing letters, discussing issues with my comrades, or formulating legal
briefs. The free time allowed me to pursue what became two of my favorite hobbies on Robben Island: gardening and tennis.
To survive in prison, one must develop ways to take satisfaction in one’s daily life. One can feel fulfilled by washing one’s clothes so that they are
particularly clean, by sweeping a hallway so that it is empty of dust, by organizing one’s cell to conserve as much space as possible. The same
pride one takes in more consequential tasks outside of prison one can find in doing small things inside prison.
Almost from the beginning of my sentence on Robben Island, I asked the authorities for permission to start a garden in the courtyard. For years,
they refused without offering a reason. But eventually they relented, and we were able to cut out a small garden on a narrow patch of earth against
the far wall.
The soil in the courtyard was dry and rocky. The courtyard had been constructed over a landfill, and in order to start my garden, I had to excavate
a great many rocks to allow the plants room to grow. At the time, some of my comrades jested that I was a miner at heart, for I spent my days at the
quarry and my free time digging in the courtyard.
The authorities supplied me with seeds. I initially planted tomatoes, chilies, and onions — hardy plants that did not require rich earth or constant
care. The early harvests were poor, but they soon improved. The authorities did not regret giving permission, for once the garden began to flourish,
I often provided the warders with some of my best tomatoes and onions.
While I have always enjoyed gardening, it was not until I was behind bars that I was able to tend my own garden. My first experience in the garden
was at Fort Hare where, as part of the university’s manual labor requirement, I worked in one of my professors’ gardens and enjoyed the contact
with the soil as an antidote to my intellectual labors. Once I was in Johannesburg studying and then working, I had neither the time nor the space to
cultivate a garden.

I began to order books on gardening and horticulture. I studied different gardening techniques and types of fertilizer. I did not have many of the
materials that the books discussed, but I learned through trial and error. For a time, I attempted to grow peanuts, and used different soils and
fertilizers, but finally I gave up. It was one of my only failures.
A garden was one of the few things in prison that one could control. To plant a seed, watch it grow, to tend it and then harvest it, offered a simple
but enduring satisfaction. The sense of being the custodian of this small patch of earth offered a small taste of freedom.
In some ways, I saw the garden as a metaphor for certain aspects of my life. A leader must also tend his garden; he, too, plants seeds, and then
watches, cultivates, and harvests the result. Like the gardener, a leader must take responsibility for what he cultivates; he must mind his work, try to
repel enemies, preserve what can be preserved, and eliminate what cannot succeed.
I wrote Winnie two letters about a particularly beautiful tomato plant, how I coaxed it from a tender seedling to a robust plant that produced deep
red fruit. But, then, either through some mistake or lack of care, the plant began to wither and decline, and nothing I did would bring it back to health.
When it finally died, I removed the roots from the soil, washed them, and buried them in a corner of the garden.
I narrated this small story at great length. I do not know what she read into that letter, but when I wrote it I had a mixture of feelings: I did not want
our relationship to go the way of that plant, and yet I felt that I had been unable to nourish many of the most important relationships in my life.
Sometimes there is nothing one can do to save something that must die.

One unanticipated result of ending manual labor was that I began to gain weight. Though we were doing barely enough labor at the quarry to work
up a sweat, the walk there and back was enough to keep me trim.
I have always believed that exercise is not only a key to physical health but to peace of mind. Many times in the old days I unleashed my anger
and frustration on a punching bag rather than taking it out on a comrade or even a policeman. Exercise dissipates tension, and tension is the
enemy of serenity. I found that I worked better and thought more clearly when I was in good physical condition, and so training became one of the
inflexible disciplines of my life. In prison, having an outlet for one’s frustrations was absolutely essential.
Even on the island, I attempted to follow my old boxing routine of doing roadwork and muscle-building from Monday through Thursday and then
resting for the next three days. On Monday through Thursday, I would do stationary running in my cell in the morning for up to forty-five minutes. I
would also perform one hundred fingertip push-ups, two hundred sit-ups, fifty deep kneebends, and various other calisthenics.
In my letters to my children, I regularly urged them to exercise, to play some fast-moving sport like basketball, soccer, or tennis to take their mind
off whatever might be bothering them. While I was not always successful with my children, I did manage to influence some of my more sedentary
colleagues. Exercise was unusual for African men of my age and generation. After a while, even Walter began to take a few turns around the
courtyard in the morning. I know that some of my younger comrades looked at me and said to themselves, “If that old man can do it, why can’t I?”
They too began to exercise.

From the very first meetings I had with outside visitors and the International Red Cross, I stressed the importance of having the time and facilities for
proper exercise. Only in the mid-1970s, under the auspices of the International Red Cross, did we begin to receive things like volleyball equipment

and a Ping-Pong table.
At roughly the same time we finished working at the quarry, one of the warders had the idea of converting our courtyard into a tennis court. Its
dimensions were perfect. Prisoners from the general section painted the cement surface green and then fashioned the traditional configuration of
white lines. A few days later a net was put up and suddenly we had our own Wimbledon in our front yard.
I had played a bit of tennis when I was at Fort Hare, but I was by no means an expert. My forehand was relatively strong, my backhand regrettably
weak. But I pursued the sport for exercise, not style; it was the best and only replacement for the walks to and from the quarry. I was one of the first
in our section to play regularly. I was a back-court player, only rushing the net when I had a clean slam.

Once manual labor ended, I had much more time for reading, but the books I had been using were now out-of-bounds. When my studies were
canceled, I was still in the midst of pursuing my LL.B. at the University of London. I had started studying for the LL.B. during the Rivonia Trial and the
suspension of study privileges for four years would undoubtedly assure me of the university record for the most number of years pursuing that
degree.
But the suspension of study privileges had an unintended benefit, and that was that I began to read books that I would not otherwise have read.
Instead of poring over tomes about contract law, I was now absorbed by novels.
I did not have an unlimited library to choose from on Robben Island. We had access to many unremembered mysteries and detective novels and
all the works of Daphne du Maurier, but little more. Political books were off-limits. Any book about socialism or communism was definitely out. A
request for a book with the word red in the title, even if it was Little Red Riding Hood, would be rejected by the censors. War of the Worlds by H. G.
Wells, though it is a work of science fiction, would be turned down because the word war appeared in its title.
From the first, I tried to read books about South Africa or by South African writers. I read all the unbanned novels of Nadine Gordimer and learned
a great deal about the white liberal sensibility. I read many American novels, and recall especially John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath, in which I
found many similarities between the plight of the migrant workers in that novel and our own laborers and farmworkers.
One book that I returned to many times was Tolstoy’s great work, War and Peace. (Although the word war was in the title, this book was
permitted.) I was particularly taken with the portrait of General Kutuzov, whom everyone at the Russian court underestimated. Kutuzov defeated
Napoleon precisely because he was not swayed by the ephemeral and superficial values of the court, and made his decisions on a visceral
understanding of his men and his people. It reminded me once again that to truly lead one’s people one must also truly know them.