TIME MAY SEEM to stand still for those of us in prison, but it did not halt for those outside. I was reminded of this when I was visited by my mother
in the spring of 1968. I had not seen her since the end of the Rivonia Trial. Change is gradual and incremental, and when one lives in the midst of
one’s family, one rarely notices differences in them. But when one doesn’t see one’s family for many years at a time, the transformation can be
striking. My mother suddenly seemed very old.
She had journeyed all the way from the Transkei, accompanied by my son Makgatho, my daughter Makaziwe, and my sister Mabel. Because I
had four visitors and they had come a great distance, the authorities extended the visiting time from a half an hour to forty-five minutes.
I had not seen my son and daughter since before the trial and they had become adults in the interim, growing up without me. I looked at them with
amazement and pride. But though they had grown up, I am afraid I still treated them more or less as the children they had been when I went to
prison. They may have changed, but I hadn’t.
My mother had lost a great deal of weight, which concerned me. Her face appeared haggard. Only my sister Mabel seemed unchanged. While it
was a great pleasure to see all of them and to discuss family issues, I was uneasy about my mother’s health.
I spoke with Makgatho and Maki about my desire for them both to pursue further schooling and asked Mabel about relatives in the Transkei. The
time passed far too quickly. As with most visits, the greatest pleasure often lies in the recollection of it, but this time, I could not stop worrying about
my mother. I feared that it would be the last time I would ever see her.
Several weeks later, after returning from the quarry, I was told to go to the Head Office to collect a telegram. It was from Makgatho, informing me
that my mother had died of a heart attack. I immediately made a request to the commanding officer to be permitted to attend her funeral in the
Transkei, which he turned down. “Mandela,” he said, “while I know you are a man of your word and would not try to escape, I cannot trust your own
people, and we fear that they would try to kidnap you.” It added to my grief that I was not able to bury my mother, which was my responsibility as her
eldest child and only son.
Over the next few months I thought about her a great deal. Her life had been far from easy. I had been able to support her when I was practicing
as an attorney, but once I went to prison, I was unable to help her. I had never been as attentive as I should have been.
A mother’s death causes a man to look back on and evaluate his own life. Her difficulties, her poverty, made me question once again whether I
had taken the right path. That was always the conundrum: Had I made the right choice in putting the people’s welfare even before that of my own
family? For a long time, my mother had not understood my commitment to the struggle. My family had not asked for or even wanted to be involved in
the struggle, but my involvement penalized them.
But I came back to the same answer. In South Africa, it is hard for a man to ignore the needs of the people, even at the expense of his own family.
I had made my choice, and in the end, she had supported it. But that did not lessen the sadness I felt at not being able to make her life more
comfortable, or the pain of not being able to lay her to rest.

In the early hours of the morning of May 12, 1969, the security police awakened Winnie at our home in Orlando and detained her without charge
under the 1967 Terrorism Act, which gave the government unprecedented powers of arrest and detention without trial. The raid, I later learned, was
part of a nationwide crackdown in which dozens of others were detained, including Winnie’s sister. The police dragged Winnie away while Zeni and
Zindzi clung to her skirts. She was placed in solitary confinement in Pretoria, where she was denied bail and visitors; over the next weeks and
months, she was relentlessly and brutally interrogated.
When Winnie was finally charged — six months later — I managed to send instructions that she be represented by Joel Carlson, a longtime antiapartheid lawyer. Winnie and twenty-two others were charged under the Suppression of Communism Act for attempting to revive the ANC. Later,
George Bizos and Arthur Chaskalson, both members of the Rivonia team, joined the defense. In October, seventeen months after her arrest, the
state withdrew its case without explanation, and Winnie was released. Within two weeks, she was again banned, and placed under house arrest.
She immediately applied for permission to visit me and was rebuffed.
There was nothing I found so agonizing in prison as the thought that Winnie was in prison too. I put a brave face on the situation, but inwardly I
was deeply disturbed and worried. Nothing tested my inner equilibrium as much as the time that Winnie was in solitary confinement. Although I often
urged others not to worry about what they could not control, I was unable to take my own advice. I had many sleepless nights. What were the
authorities doing to my wife? How would she bear up? Who was looking after our daughters? Who would pay the bills? It is a form of mental torture
to be constantly plagued by such questions and not have the means to answer them.
Brigadier Aucamp allowed me to send letters to Winnie, and relayed one or two from her. Normally, prisoners awaiting trial are not permitted
mail, but Aucamp permitted it as a favor to me. I was grateful, but knew the authorities had not granted permission out of altruism: they were
reading our letters, hoping to glean some information that would assist their case against Winnie.

During this time I experienced another grievous loss. One cold morning in July of 1969, three months after I learned of Winnie’s incarceration, I was
called to the main office on Robben Island and handed a telegram. It was from my youngest son, Makgatho, and it was only a sentence long. He
informed me that his older brother, my first and oldest son, Madiba Thembekile, whom we called Thembi, had been killed in a motorcar accident in
the Transkei. Thembi was then twenty-five years old, and the father of two small children.
What can one say about such a tragedy? I was already overwrought about my wife, I was still grieving for my mother, and then to hear such news .
. . I do not have words to express the sorrow, or the loss I felt. It left a hole in my heart that can never be filled.
I returned to my cell and lay on my bed. I do not know how long I stayed there, but I did not emerge for dinner. Some of the men looked in, but I
said nothing. Finally, Walter came to me and knelt beside my bed, and I handed him the telegram. He said nothing, but only held my hand. I do not
know how long he remained with me. There is nothing that one man can say to another at such a time.
I asked permission of the authorities to attend my son’s funeral. As a father, it was my responsibility to make sure that my son’s spirit would rest
peacefully. I told them they could send a security cordon with me, and that I would give my word that I would return. Permission was denied. All I was
permitted to do was write a letter to Thembi’s mother, Evelyn, in which I did my best to comfort her and tell her that I shared her suffering.
I thought back to one afternoon when Thembi was a boy and he came to visit me at a safe house in Cyrildene that I used for secret ANC work.
Between my underground political work and legal cases, I had not been able to see him for some time. I surprised him at the house and found him
wearing an old jacket of mine that came to his knees. He must have taken some comfort and pride in wearing his father’s clothing, just as I once did
with my own father’s. When I had to say good-bye again, he stood up tall, as if he were already grown, and said, “I will look after the family while you

are gone.”