IT IS SAID that the mills of God grind exceedingly slowly, but even the Lord’s machinations can’t compete with those of the South African judicial
system. On August 3, 1959, two years and eight months after our arrests, and after a full year of legal maneuvering, the actual trial commenced at
the Old Synagogue in Pretoria. We were finally formally arraigned and all thirty of us pleaded not guilty.
Our defense team was once again led by Issy Maisels, and he was assisted by Sydney Kentridge, Bram Fischer, and Vernon Berrangé. This
time, at long last, the trial was in earnest. During the first two months of the case, the Crown entered some two thousand documents into the record
and called two hundred ten witnesses, two hundred of whom were members of the Special Branch. These detectives admitted to hiding in closets
and under beds, posing as ANC members, perpetrating virtually any deception that would enable them to get information about our organization.
Yet many of the documents the state submitted and the speeches they transcribed were public documents, public speeches, information available
to all. As before, much of the Crown’s evidence consisted of books, papers, and documents seized from the accused during numerous raids that
took place between 1952 and 1956, as well as notes taken by the police at Congress meetings during this same period. As before, the reports by
the Special Branch officers of our speeches were generally muddled. We used to joke that between the poor acoustics of the hall and the confused
and inaccurate reports of the Special Branch detectives, we could be fined for what we did not say, imprisoned for what we could not hear, and
hanged for what we did not do.
Each day at lunchtime we were permitted to sit outside in the spacious garden of a neighboring vicarage where we were supplied with a meal
cooked by the redoubtable Mrs. Thayanagee Pillay and her friends. They prepared a spicy Indian lunch for us almost every day, and also tea,
coffee, and sandwiches during the morning and afternoon breaks. These respites were like tiny vacations from court, and were a chance for us to
discuss politics with each other. Those moments under the shade of the jacaranda trees on the vicarage lawn were the most pleasant of the trial, for
in many ways the case was more a test of our endurance than a trial of justice.

On the morning of October 11, as we were preparing to go to court, we heard an announcement on the radio that the prosecutor, Oswald Pirow,
had died suddenly from a stroke. His death was a severe setback to the government, and the effectiveness and aggressiveness of the Crown team
diminished from that point on. In court that day, Judge Rumpff gave an emotional eulogy to Pirow, and praised his legal acumen and thoroughness.
Although we would benefit from his absence, we did not rejoice at his death. We had developed a certain affection for our opponent, for despite
Pirow’s noxious political views, he was a humane man without the virulent personal racism of the government he was acting for. His habitual polite
reference to us as “Africans” (even one of our own attorneys occasionally slipped and referred to us as “natives”) contrasted with his supremacist
political leanings. In a curious way, our small world inside the Old Synagogue seemed balanced when, each morning, we observed Pirow reading
the right-wing Nuwe Order at his table and Bram Fischer reading the left-wing New Age at ours. His donation to us of the more than one hundred
volumes of the preparatory examination free of charge was a generous gesture that saved the defense a great deal of money. Advocate De Vos
became the new leader of the Crown’s team and could not match the eloquence or acuity of his predecessor.

Shortly after Pirow’s death, the prosecution concluded its submission of evidence. It was then that the prosecution began its examination of expert
witnesses commencing with the long-suffering Professor Murray, its supposed expert in communism who had proved so inept in his subject during
the preparatory examination. In a relentless cross-examination by Maisels, Murray admitted that the charter was in fact a humanitarian document
that might well represent the natural reaction and aspirations of nonwhites to the harsh conditions in South Africa.
Murray was not the only Crown witness who did little to advance the state’s case. Despite the voluminous amount of Crown evidence and the
pages and pages of testimony from their expert witnesses, the prosecution had not managed to produce any valid evidence that the ANC plotted
violence, and they knew it. Then, in March, the prosecution displayed a new burst of confidence. They were about to release their most damning
evidence. With great fanfare and a long drumroll in the press, the state played for the court a secretly recorded speech of Robert Resha’s. The
speech was given in his capacity as Transvaal Volunteer-in-Chief to a roomful of Freedom Volunteers in 1956, a few weeks before we were all to
be arrested. The courtroom was very quiet, and despite the static of the recording and the background din, one could make out Robert’s words very
clearly.
When you are disciplined and you are told by the organization not to be violent, you must not be violent . . . but if you are a true volunteer and you are called upon to be violent, you
must be absolutely violent, you must murder! Murder! That is all.

The prosecution believed it had sealed its case. Newspapers prominently featured Resha’s words and echoed the sensibilities of the state. To
the Crown, the speech revealed the ANC’s true and secret intent, unmasking the ANC’s public pretense of nonviolence. But in fact, Resha’s words
were an anomaly. Robert was an excellent if rather excitable platform speaker, and his choice of analogy was unfortunate. But as the defense would
show, he was merely emphasizing the importance of discipline and that the volunteer must do whatever he is ordered, however unsavory. Over and
over, our witnesses would show that Resha’s speech was not only taken out of context but did not represent ANC policy.

The prosecution concluded its case on March 10, 1960, and we were to call our first witness for the defense four days later. We had been in the
doldrums for months, but as we started to prepare ourselves for our testimony, we were eager to go on the offensive. We had been parrying the
enemy’s attacks for too long.
There had been much speculation in the press that our first witness would be Chief Luthuli. The Crown apparently believed that as well, for there
was great consternation among the prosecution when, on March 14, our first witness was not Luthuli but Dr. Wilson Conco.
Conco was the son of a Zulu cattle farmer from the beautiful Ixopo district of Natal. In addition to being a practicing physician, he had been one of
the founders of the Youth League, an active participant in the Defiance Campaign, and the treasurer of the ANC. As a preparation for his testimony,
he was asked about his brilliant academic record at the University of the Witwatersrand, where he graduated first in his medical school class,
ahead of all the sons and daughters of white privilege. As Conco’s credentials were cited, I got the distinct impression that Justice Kennedy, who
was also from Natal, seemed proud. Natalians are noted for their loyalty to their region, and these peculiar bonds of attachment can sometimes
even transcend color. Indeed, many Natalians thought of themselves as white Zulus. Justice Kennedy had always seemed to be a fair-minded man,
and I sensed that through Wilson Conco’s example, he began to see us not as heedless rabble-rousers but men of worthy ambitions who could help

their country if their country would only help them. At the end of Conco’s testimony, when Conco was cited for some medical achievement, Kennedy
said in Zulu, a language in which he was fluent, “Sinjalo thina maZulu,” which means, “We Zulus are like that.” Dr. Conco proved a calm and
articulate witness who reaffirmed the ANC’s commitment to nonviolence.
Chief Luthuli was next. With his dignity and sincerity, he made a deep impression on the court. He was suffering from high blood pressure, and
the court agreed to sit only in the mornings while he gave evidence. His evidence-in-chief lasted several days and he was cross-examined for
nearly three weeks. He carefully outlined the evolution of the ANC’s policy, putting things simply and clearly, and his former positions as teacher and
chief imparted an added gravity and authority to his words. As a devout Christian, he was the perfect person to discuss how the ANC had sincerely
strived for racial harmony.
The chief testified to his belief in the innate goodness of man and how moral persuasion plus economic pressure could well lead to a change of
heart on the part of white South Africans. In discussing the ANC’s policy of nonviolence, he emphasized that there was a difference between
nonviolence and pacifism. Pacifists refused to defend themselves even when violently attacked, but that was not necessarily the case with those
who espoused nonviolence. Sometimes men and nations, even when nonviolent, had to defend themselves when they were attacked.
As I listened to Conco and Luthuli, I thought that here, probably for the first time in their lives, the judges were listening not to their domestic
servants who said only what they knew their masters would like to hear, but to independent and articulate Africans spelling out their political beliefs
and how they hoped to realize them.
The chief was cross-examined by Advocate Trengove, who doggedly attempted to get him to say the ANC was dominated by Communists and
had a dual policy of nonviolence intended for the public and a secret plan of waging violent revolution. The chief steadfastly refuted the implications
of what Trengove was suggesting. He himself was the soul of moderation, particularly as Trengove seemed to lose control. At one point, Trengove
accused the chief of hypocrisy. The chief ignored Trengove’s aspersion and calmly remarked to the bench, “My Lord, I think the Crown is running
wild.”
But on March 21, the chief’s testimony was interrupted by a shattering event outside the courtroom. On that day, the country was rocked by an
occurrence of such magnitude that when Chief Luthuli returned to testify a month later, the courtroom — and all of South Africa — was a different
place.