IN 1985 after a routine medical examination with the prison doctor, I was referred to a urologist, who diagnosed an enlarged prostate gland and
recommended surgery. He said the procedure was routine. I consulted with my family and decided to go ahead with the operation.
I was taken to Volks Hospital in Cape Town, under heavy security. Winnie flew down and was able to see me prior to the surgery. But I had
another visitor, a surprising and unexpected one: Kobie Coetsee, the minister of justice. Not long before, I had written to Coetsee pressing him for
a meeting to discuss talks between the ANC and the government. He did not respond. But that morning, the minister dropped by the hospital
unannounced as if he were visiting an old friend who was laid up for a few days. He was altogether gracious and cordial, and for the most part we
simply made pleasantries. Though I acted as though this was the most normal thing in the world, I was amazed. The government, in its slow and
tentative way, was reckoning that they had to come to some accommodation with the ANC. Coetsee’s visit was an olive branch.
Although we did not discuss politics, I did bring up one sensitive issue, and that was the status of my wife. In August, shortly before I entered the
hospital, Winnie had gone to Johannesburg to receive medical treatment. The only trips she was permitted from Brandfort were to visit either me or
her doctor. While in Johannesburg, her house in Brandfort and the clinic behind it were firebombed and destroyed. Winnie had no place in which to
reside, and she decided to remain in Johannesburg despite the fact that the city was off-limits to her. Nothing happened for a few weeks, and then
the security police wrote to inform her that the house in Brandfort had been repaired and she must return. But she refused to do so. I asked
Coetsee to allow Winnie to remain in Johannesburg and not force her to return to Brandfort. He said he could promise nothing, but he would indeed
look into it. I thanked him.

I spent several days in hospital recuperating from the surgery. When I was discharged, I was fetched at the hospital by Brigadier Munro.
Commanding officers do not usually pick up prisoners at the hospital, so my suspicions were immediately aroused.
On the ride back, Brigadier Munro said to me in a casual way, as though he were simply making conversation, “Mandela, we are not taking you
back to your friends now.” I asked him what he meant. “From now on, you are going to be alone.” I asked him why. He shook his head. “I don’t know.
I’ve just been given these instructions from headquarters.” Once again, there was no warning and no explanation.
Upon my return to Pollsmoor I was taken to a new cell on the ground floor of the prison, three floors below and in an entirely different wing. I was
given three rooms, and a separate toilet, with one room to be used for sleeping, one across the hall for studying, and another for exercise. By
prison standards, this was palatial, but the rooms were damp and musty and received very little natural light. I said nothing to the brigadier, for I
knew the decision had not been his. I wanted time to consider the ramifications of the move. Why had the state taken this step?
It would be too strong to call it a revelation, but over the next few days and weeks I came to a realization about my new circumstances. The
change, I decided, was not a liability but an opportunity. I was not happy to be separated from my colleagues and I missed my garden and the sunny
terrace on the third floor. But my solitude gave me a certain liberty, and I resolved to use it to do something I had been pondering for a long while:
begin discussions with the government. I had concluded that the time had come when the struggle could best be pushed forward through
negotiations. If we did not start a dialogue soon, both sides would be plunged into a dark night of oppression, violence, and war. My solitude would
give me an opportunity to take the first steps in that direction, without the kind of scrutiny that might destroy such efforts.
We had been fighting against white minority rule for three-quarters of a century. We had been engaged in the armed struggle for more than two
decades. Many people on both sides had already died. The enemy was strong and resolute. Yet even with all their bombers and tanks, they must
have sensed they were on the wrong side of history. We had right on our side, but not yet might. It was clear to me that a military victory was a
distant if not impossible dream. It simply did not make sense for both sides to lose thousands if not millions of lives in a conflict that was
unnecessary. They must have known this as well. It was time to talk.
This would be extremely sensitive. Both sides regarded discussions as a sign of weakness and betrayal. Neither would come to the table until
the other made significant concessions. The government asserted over and over that we were a terrorist organization of Communists, and that they
would never talk to terrorists or Communists. This was National Party dogma. The ANC asserted over and over that the government was fascistic
and racist and that there was nothing to talk about until they unbanned the ANC, unconditionally released all political prisoners, and removed the
troops from the townships.
A decision to talk to the government was of such import that it should only have been made in Lusaka. But I felt that the process needed to begin,
and that I had neither the time nor the means to communicate fully with Oliver. Someone from our side needed to take the first step, and my new
isolation gave me both the freedom to do so and the assurance, at least for a while, of the confidentiality of my efforts.

I was now in a kind of splendid isolation. Though my colleagues were only three floors above me, they might as well have been in Johannesburg. In
order to see them, I had to put in a formal request for a visit, which had to be approved by the Head Office in Pretoria. It often took weeks to receive
a response. If it was approved, I would then meet them in the visiting area. This was a novel experience: my comrades and fellow prisoners were
now official visitors. For years, we had been able to talk for hours a day; now we had to make official requests and appointments, and our
conversations were monitored.
After I had been in my new cell for a few days, I asked the commanding officer to arrange such a meeting. He did so, and the four of us discussed
the issue of my transfer. Walter, Kathy, and Ray were angry that we had been separated. They wanted to lodge a strong protest, and demand that
we be reunited. My response was not what they expected. “Look, chaps,” I said, “I don’t think we should oppose this thing.” I mentioned that my new
accommodations were superior, and maybe this would set a precedent for all political prisoners. I then added somewhat ambiguously, “Perhaps
something good will come of this. I’m now in a position where the government can make an approach to us.” They did not care too much for this
latter explanation, as I knew they would not.
I chose to tell no one of what I was about to do. Not my colleagues upstairs or those in Lusaka. The ANC is a collective, but the government had
made collectivity in this case impossible. I did not have the security or the time to discuss these issues with my organization. I knew that my
colleagues upstairs would condemn my proposal, and that would kill my initiative even before it was born. There are times when a leader must
move out ahead of the flock, go off in a new direction, confident that he is leading his people the right way. Finally, my isolation furnished my
organization with an excuse in case matters went awry: the old man was alone and completely cut off, and his actions were taken by him as an
individual, not a representative of the ANC.