IN DECEMBER OF 1990 Oliver returned to South Africa after being in exile from his native land for three decades. It was wonderful to have him
near. He returned for an ANC consultative conference in Johannesburg, which was attended by over fifteen hundred delegates from forty-five
different regions, home and abroad.
At the meeting, I spoke in tribute to Oliver as the man who had led the ANC during its darkest hours and never let the flame go out. Now, he had
ushered us to the brink of a future that looked bright and hopeful. During the twenty-seven years that I was in prison, it was Oliver who saved the
ANC, and then built it into an international organization with power and influence. He took up the reins when most of its leaders were either in prison
or in exile. He was a soldier, a diplomat, a statesman.
Although I criticized the government for its orchestrated campaign of counterrevolutionary activities, it was Oliver’s address that created a storm.
He opened the meeting with a controversial speech in which he called for our sanctions policy to be reevaluated. The ANC, he maintained, faced
“international marginalization” unless it took the initiative to deescalate sanctions. The European Community had already begun to scale back
sanctions. The countries in the West, particularly the United Kingdom and the United States, wanted to reward Mr. de Klerk for his reforms,
believing that this would encourage him to go further. We felt this was the wrong strategy, but we had to recognize international realities.
Although Oliver’s speech had been discussed and approved by the NEC, his proposal was met with indignation by ANC militants, who insisted
that sanctions must be maintained unchanged. The conference decided to retain the sanctions policy as it was.
I myself was the target of complaints by those who charged that the negotiators were out of touch with the grass roots and that we spent more
time with National Party leaders than our own people. I was also criticized at the conference for engaging in “personal diplomacy” and not keeping
the rank-and-file of the organization informed. As a leader of a mass organization, one must listen to the people, and I agreed that we had been
remiss in keeping the entire organization informed about the course of the negotiations. But I also knew the delicacy of our talks with the
government; any agreements that we arrived at depended in part on their confidentiality. Although I accepted the criticism, I believed we had no
alternative but to proceed on the same course. I knew that I had to be more inclusive, brief more people as to our progress, and I proceeded with
that in mind.

Each day, each weekend, the newspapers were filled with fresh reports of new and bloody violence in our communities and townships. It was clear
that violence was the number one issue in the country. In many communities in Natal and on the Reef around Johannesburg, a poisonous mixture of
crime, political rivalries, police brutality, and shadowy death squads made life brutish and untenable. As long as the violence was not dealt with, the
progress to a new dispensation would remain uneven and uncertain.
To try to arrest the spiral of violence, I contacted Chief Buthelezi to arrange a meeting. We met at Durban’s Royal Hotel in January. Chief
Buthelezi spoke first to assembled delegates and media and in the process opened old wounds rather than healing them. He catalogued the verbal
attacks the ANC had made on him and criticized the ANC’s negotiating demands. When it was my turn to speak, I chose not to respond to his
remarks but to thank him for his efforts over many years to secure my release from prison. I cited our long relationship and underlined the many
matters that united our two organizations rather than divided us.
Progress was made during our private talks, and Chief Buthelezi and I signed an agreement that contained a code of conduct covering the
behavior of our two organizations. It was a fair accord, and I suspect that if it had been implemented it would indeed have helped to staunch the
bloodletting. But as far as I could tell, Inkatha never made any effort to implement the accord, and there were violations as well on our own side.
The violence continued between our two organizations. Each month people were dying by the hundreds. In March, Inkatha members launched an
attack in Alexandra Township north of Johannesburg in which forty-five people were killed over three days of fighting. Again, no one was arrested.
I could not sit idly by as the violence continued, and I sought another meeting with Chief Buthelezi. In April I went down to Durban and we again
made strong statements and signed another agreement. But again, the ink was no sooner dry than it was drenched in blood. I was more convinced
than ever that the government was behind much of the violence and the violence was impeding the negotiations. Mr. de Klerk’s failure to respond
put our own relationship in jeopardy.
In April, at a two-day meeting of the National Executive Committee, I discussed my doubts about Mr. de Klerk. The NEC believed that the
government was behind the violence and that the violence was upsetting the climate for negotiations. In an open letter to the government, we called
for the dismissal of Magnus Malan, the minister of defense, and Adriaan Vlok, the minister of law and order; the banning of the carrying of
traditional weapons in public; the phasing out of the migrant-worker hostels, where so many Inkatha members lived in the townships around
Johannesburg; the dismantling of secret government counterinsurgency units; and the appointment of an independent commission to probe
complaints of misconduct on the part of the security forces.
We gave the government until May to meet our demands. Mr. de Klerk responded by calling for a multiparty conference on violence to be held in
May, but I replied that this was pointless since the government knew precisely what it had to do to end the violence. In May, we announced the
suspension of talks with the government.

In July 1991, the ANC held its first annual conference inside South Africa in thirty years. The conference was attended by 2,244 voting delegates
who were democratically elected at ANC branches at home and abroad. At the conference I was elected president of the ANC without opposition.
Cyril Ramaphosa was elected secretary-general, evidence that the torch was being passed from an older generation of leadership to a younger
one. Cyril, whom I met only upon my release from prison, was a worthy successor to a long line of notable ANC leaders. He was probably the most
accomplished negotiator in the ranks of the ANC, a skill he honed as secretary-general of the National Union of Mine Workers.
In my speech I expressed my appreciation for the great honor that had been bestowed on me, and spoke of how difficult it would be to follow in
the large footsteps of my predecessor, Oliver Tambo. Though we were then at loggerheads with the government, negotiations in and of themselves,
I said, constituted a victory. The mere fact that the government was engaged in negotiations at all was a sign that they did not have the strength to
sustain apartheid. I reiterated that the process would not be smooth, as we were dealing with politicians who do not want to negotiate themselves
out of power. “The point which must be clearly understood is that the struggle is not over, and negotiations themselves are a theater of struggle,
subject to advances and reverses as any other form of struggle.”
But negotiations could not wait. It was never in our interest to prolong the agony of apartheid for any reason. It was necessary, I said, to create a
transitional government as soon as possible.

The conference underlined one of the most important and demanding tasks before the ANC: to transform an illegal underground liberation
movement to a legal mass political party. For thirty years, the ANC had functioned clandestinely in South Africa; those habits and techniques were
deeply ingrained. We had to reconstruct an entire organization, from the smallest local branch to the national executive. And we had to do so in a
matter of months during a period of extraordinary change.
A large part of the ANC and Communist Party leadership had been in exile. Most of them had returned for the conference in July. They were
unfamiliar with present-day South Africa; it was a newfound land for them as well as me. There was, however, an extraordinary crop of young
leaders of the United Democratic Front and COSATU who had remained in the country, who knew the political situation in a way that we did not.
These organizations had in some measure been surrogates for the ANC inside South Africa during the 1980s. The ANC had to integrate these
men and women into the organization as well.
We faced not only logistical problems but philosophical ones. It is a relatively simple proposition to keep a movement together when you are
fighting against a common enemy. But creating a policy when that enemy is across the negotiating table is another matter altogether. In the new
ANC, we had to integrate not only many different groups, but many different points of view. We needed to unite the organization around the idea of
the negotiations.
In the first seventeen months of legal activity, the ANC had recruited 700,000 members. This was an impressive number, but there was no room
for complacency. A proportionately low number of these members were from the rural areas, the regions where the ANC had historically been
weakest. At the same time, the National Party was throwing open its doors to nonwhites and was busily recruiting disaffected Coloureds and
Indians.

Ever since my release from prison, the state had continued its campaign to discredit my wife. After the alleged kidnapping of four youths who were
staying in the Diepkloof house and the death of one of them, Winnie had first been vilified by a whispering campaign and was then charged with
four counts of kidnapping and one of assault. The continuing aspersions cast on her character were such that both Winnie and I were eager for her
to have her day in court and prove her innocence of the charges.
My wife’s formal trial began in February in the Rand Supreme Court in Johannesburg. I attended the trial on the first day, as did many senior
figures in the ANC, and I continued to attend as often as I could. I did this both to support my wife and to show my belief in her innocence. She was
ably defended by George Bizos, who attempted to demonstrate that Winnie had no involvement with either the kidnappings or the beatings.
After three and a half months, the court found her guilty of kidnapping charges and being an accessory to assault. The judge, however,
acknowledged that she had not taken part in any assault herself. She was sentenced to six years in prison, but was released on bail pending her
appeal. As far as I was concerned, verdict or no verdict, her innocence was not in doubt.