IMMEDIATELY upon my return I reported on my trip to the Working Committee of the ANC. Their principal concern was whether or not the
Congress Alliance was strong enough to halt the government’s plans. I did not give them good news. I said the Transkei was not a well-organized
ANC area and the power of the security police would soon immobilize what little influence the ANC had.
I put forth an alternative that I knew would be unpopular. Why shouldn’t the ANC participate in the new Bantu Authorities structures as a means of
remaining in touch with the masses of people? In time, such participation would become a platform for our own ideas and policies.
Any suggestion of participating in apartheid structures in any way was automatically met with angry opposition. In my early days, I, too, would
have strenuously objected. But my sense of the country was that relatively few people were ready to make the sacrifices to join the struggle. We
should meet the people on their own terms, even if that meant appearing to collaborate. My idea was that our movement should be a great tent that
included as many people as possible.
*

*

*

At the time, however, my report was given short shrift because of another related report with greater ramifications. The publication of the report of
the Tomlinson Commission for the Socio-Economic Development of the Bantu Areas had set off a nationwide debate. The government-created
commission proposed a plan for the development of the so-called Bantu Areas or bantustans. The result was in fact a blueprint for “separate
development” or grand apartheid.
The bantustan system had been conceived by Dr. H. F. Verwoerd, the minister of native affairs, as a way of muting international criticism of South
African racial policies but at the same time institutionalizing apartheid. The bantustans, or reserves as they were also known, would be separate
ethnic enclaves or homelands for all African citizens. Africans, Verwoerd said, “should stand with both feet in the reserves” where they were to
“develop along their own lines.” The idea was to preserve the status quo where three million whites owned 87 percent of the land, and relegate the
eight million Africans to the remaining 13 percent.
The central theme of the report was the rejection of the idea of integration between the races in favor of a policy of separate development of
black and white. To that end, the report recommended the industrialization of the African areas, noting that any program of development that did not
aim at providing opportunities for Africans in their own regions was doomed to failure. The commission pointed out that the present geographical
configuration of the African areas was too fragmentary, and recommended instead a consolidation of African areas into what it termed seven
“historical-logical” homelands of the principal ethnic groups.
But the creation of individual, self-contained bantustans, as proposed by the commission, was farcical. Transkei, the showpiece of the proposed
homeland system, would be broken into three geographically separate blocks. The Swazi bantustan, Lebowa, and Venda were composed of three
pieces each; Gazankule, four; the Ciskei, seventeen; Bophuthatswana, nineteen; and KwaZulu, twenty-nine. The Nationalists were creating a cruel
jigsaw puzzle out of people’s lives.
The government’s intention in creating the homeland system was to keep the Transkei — and other African areas — as reservoirs of cheap labor
for white industry. At the same time, the covert goal of the government was to create an African middle class to blunt the appeal of the ANC and the
liberation struggle.
The ANC denounced the report of the Tomlinson Commission, despite some of its more liberal recommendations. As I told Daliwonga, separate
development was a spurious solution to a problem that whites had no idea how to control. In the end, the government approved the report, but
rejected a number of its recommendations as being too progressive.

Despite the encroaching darkness and my pessimism about the government’s policies, I was thinking about the future. In February 1956, I returned
to the Transkei to purchase a plot of land in Umtata. I have always thought a man should own a house near the place he was born, where he might
find a restfulness that eludes him elsewhere.
With Walter, I journeyed down to the Transkei. Walter and I met with various ANC people in both Umtata and Durban, where we went first. Once
again, we were clumsily shadowed by Special Branch police. In Durban, we paid a call on our colleagues at the Natal Indian Congress in an effort
to boost activism in the area.
In Umtata, with Walter’s help, I made a down payment to C. K. Sakwe for a plot of land he owned in town. Sakwe was a member of the Bunga
and had served on the Natives Representative Council. While we were there he told us of an incident that had occurred the previous Saturday at
Bumbhane, the Great Place of Sabata, at a meeting of government officials and chiefs about the introduction of the bantustans. A number of the
chiefs objected to the government’s policy and verbally attacked the magistrate. The meeting broke up in anger; this gave us some sense of the
grassroots objections to the Bantu Authorities Act.
In March 1956, after several months of relative freedom, I received my third ban, which restricted me to Johannesburg for five years and
prohibited me from attending meetings for that same period. For the next sixty months I would be quarantined in the same district, seeing the same
streets, the same mine dumps on the horizon, the same sky. I would have to depend on newspapers and other people for reports on what was
occurring outside of Johannesburg, another prospect I did not relish.
But this time my attitude toward my bans had changed radically. When I was first banned I abided by the rules and regulations of my persecutors.
I had now developed contempt for these restrictions. I was not going to let my involvement in the struggle and the scope of my political activities be
determined by the enemy I was fighting against. To allow my activities to be circumscribed by my opponent was a form of defeat, and I resolved not
to become my own jailer.
I soon became involved in mediating a bitter political dispute right in Johannesburg. It pitted two sides against each other, both of which were
seeking my support. Each side within this particular organization had legitimate grievances and each side was implacably opposed to the other.
The altercation threatened to descend into an acrimonious civil war, and I did my best to prevent a rupture. I am speaking, of course, of the struggle
at the boxing and weight lifting club at the Donaldson Orlando Community Center where I trained almost every evening.
I had joined the club in 1950, and on almost every free night I worked out at the Community Center. For the previous few years I had taken my
son, Thembi, with me, and by 1956, when he was ten years old, he was a keen if spindly paperweight boxer. The club was managed by Johannes
(Skipper Adonis) Molotsi, and its membership consisted of both professional and amateur boxers, as well as a variety of dedicated weight lifters.
Our star boxer, Jerry (Uyinja) Moloi, later became the Transvaal lightweight champion and number one contender for the national title.
The gym was poorly equipped. We could not afford a ring and trained on a cement floor, which was particularly dangerous when a boxer was

knocked down. We boasted a single punching bag and a few pairs of boxing gloves. We had no medicine or speed balls, no proper boxing trunks
or shoes, and no mouth guards. Almost no one owned head guards. Despite the lack of equipment, the gym produced such champions as Eric
(Black Material) Ntsele, bantamweight champion of South Africa, and Freddie (Tomahawk) Ngidi, the Transvaal flyweight champion, who spent his
days working for me as an assistant at Mandela and Tambo. Altogether, we had perhaps twenty or thirty members.
Although I had boxed a bit at Fort Hare, it was not until I had lived in Johannesburg that I took up the sport in earnest. I was never an outstanding
boxer. I was in the heavyweight division, and I had neither enough power to compensate for my lack of speed nor enough speed to make up for my
lack of power. I did not enjoy the violence of boxing so much as the science of it. I was intrigued by how one moved one’s body to protect oneself,
how one used a strategy both to attack and retreat, how one paced oneself over a match. Boxing is egalitarian. In the ring, rank, age, color, and
wealth are irrelevant. When you are circling your opponent, probing his strengths and weaknesses, you are not thinking about his color or social
status. I never did any real fighting after I entered politics. My main interest was in training; I found the rigorous exercise to be an excellent outlet for
tension and stress. After a strenuous workout, I felt both mentally and physically lighter. It was a way of losing myself in something that was not the
struggle. After an evening’s workout I would wake up the next morning feeling strong and refreshed, ready to take up the fight again.
I attended the gym for one and a half hours each evening from Monday through Thursday. I would go home directly after work, pick up Thembi,
then drive to the Community Center. We did an hour of exercise, some combination of roadwork, skipping rope, calisthenics, or shadow boxing,
followed by fifteen minutes of body work, some weight lifting and then sparring. If we were training for a fight or a tournament, we would extend the
training time to two and a half hours.
We each took turns leading the training sessions in order to develop leadership, initiative, and self-confidence. Thembi particularly enjoyed
leading these sessions. Things would get a bit rough for me on the nights that my son was in charge, for he would single me out for criticism. He
was quick to chastise me whenever I got lazy. Everybody in the gym called me “Chief,” an honorific he avoided, calling me “Mister Mandela,” and
occasionally, when he felt sympathy for his old man, “My bra,” township slang meaning “My brother.” When he saw me loafing, he would say in a
stern voice, “Mister Mandela, you are wasting our time this evening. If you cannot keep up, why not go home and sit with the old women.” Everyone
enjoyed these jibes immensely, and it gave me pleasure to see my son so happy and confident.
The camaraderie of the club was shattered that year because of a spat between Skipper Molotsi and Jerry Moloi. Jerry and the other boxers felt
that Skipper was not paying enough attention to the club. Skipper was a skillful coach, but was rarely present to impart his knowledge. He was a
historian of boxing lore and could narrate all twenty-six rounds of Jack Johnson’s famous bout in Havana in 1915 when the first black heavyweight
champion of the world lost his title. But Skipper tended to appear only before a match or a tournament to collect the small fee that was his due. I
myself was sympathetic to Jerry’s point of view but did my best to patch up the quarrel in the interest of keeping harmony. In the end, even my son
agreed with Jerry’s criticism of Skipper and there was nothing I could do to prevent a rupture.
The boxers, under Jerry’s leadership, threatened to secede from the club and start their own. I called a meeting for all the members and it was a
lively session — conducted in Sesotho, Zulu, Xhosa, and English. Shakespeare was even cited by Skipper in his attack against the rebellious
boxers, accusing Jerry of double-crossing him as Brutus had betrayed Caesar. “Who are Caesar and Brutus?” my son asked. Before I could
answer, someone said, “Aren’t they dead?” To which Skipper replied, “Yes, but the truth about the betrayal is very much alive!”
The meeting resolved nothing and the boxers left for another venue while the weight lifters remained at the Community Center. I joined the boxers
and for the first few weeks of the separation we trained at an uncomfortable place for a freedom fighter, the police gymnasium. Thereafter, the
Anglican Church gave us premises at a reasonable rental in Orlando East, and we trained under Simon (Mshengu) Tshabalala, who later became
one of the ANC’s leading underground freedom fighters.
Our new facilities were no better than the old, and the club was never reconstituted. African boxers, like all black athletes and artists, were
shackled by the twin handicaps of poverty and racism. What money an African boxer earned was typically used on food, rent, clothing, and
whatever was left went to boxing equipment and training. He was denied the opportunity of belonging to the white boxing clubs that had the
equipment and trainers necessary to produce a first-rate, world-class boxer. Unlike white professional boxers, African professional boxers had fulltime day jobs. Sparring partners were few and poorly paid; without proper drilling and practice, the performance greatly suffered. Yet a number of
African fighters were able to triumph over these difficulties and achieve great success. Boxers like Elijah (Maestro) Mokone, Enoch (Schoolboy)
Nhlapo, Kangaroo Maoto, one of the greatest stylists of the ring, Levi (Golden Boy) Madi, Nkosana Mgxaji, Mackeed Mofokeng, and Norman
Sekgapane, all won great victories, while Jake Tuli, our greatest hero, won the British and Empire flyweight title. He was the most eloquent example
of what African boxers could achieve if given the opportunity.