LIFE IN ALEXANDRA was exhilarating and precarious. Its atmosphere was alive, its spirit adventurous, its people resourceful. Although the
township did boast some handsome buildings, it could fairly be described as a slum, living testimony to the neglect of the authorities. The roads
were unpaved and dirty, and filled with hungry, undernourished children scampering around half-naked. The air was thick with the smoke from coal
fires in tin braziers and stoves. A single water tap served several houses. Pools of stinking, stagnant water full of maggots collected by the side of
the road. Alexandra was known as “Dark City” for its complete absence of electricity. Walking home at night was perilous, for there were no lights,
the silence pierced by yells, laughter, and occasional gunfire. So different from the darkness of the Transkei, which seemed to envelop one in a
welcome embrace.
The township was desperately overcrowded; every square foot was occupied either by a ramshackle house or a tin-roofed shack. As so often
happens in desperately poor places, the worst elements came to the fore. Life was cheap; the gun and the knife ruled at night. Gangsters — known
a s tsotsis — carrying flick-knives or switchblades were plentiful and prominent; in those days they emulated American movie stars and wore
fedoras and double-breasted suits and wide, colorful ties. Police raids were a regular feature of life. The police routinely arrested masses of people
for pass violations, possession of liquor, and failure to pay the poll tax. On almost every corner there were shebeens, illegal saloons that were
shacks where home-brewed beer was served.
In spite of the hellish aspects of life in Alexandra, the township was also a kind of heaven. As one of the few areas of the country where Africans
could acquire freehold property and run their own affairs, where people did not have to kowtow to the tyranny of white municipal authorities,
Alexandra was an urban Promised Land, evidence that a section of our people had broken their ties with the rural areas and become permanent
city dwellers. The government, in order to keep Africans in the countryside or working in the mines, maintained that Africans were by nature a rural
people, ill suited for city life. Alexandra, despite its problems and flaws, gave the lie to that argument. Its population, drawn from all African language
groups, was well adapted to city life and politically conscious. Urban life tended to abrade tribal and ethnic distinctions, and instead of being
Xhosas, or Sothos, or Zulus, or Shangaans, we were Alexandrians. This created a sense of solidarity, which caused great concern among the
white authorities. The government had always utilized divide-and-rule tactics when dealing with Africans and depended on the strength of ethnic
divisions among the people. But in places like Alexandra, these differences were being erased.
Alexandra occupies a treasured place in my heart. It was the first place I ever lived away from home. Even though I was later to live in Orlando, a
small section of Soweto, for a far longer period than I did in Alexandra, I always regarded Alexandra Township as a home where I had no specific
house, and Orlando as a place where I had a house but no home.
In that first year, I learned more about poverty than I did in all my childhood days in Qunu. I never seemed to have money and I managed to survive
on the meagerest of resources. The law firm paid me a salary of two pounds per week, having generously waived the premium the articled clerks
normally paid the firm. Out of that two pounds, I paid thirteen shillings and fourpence a month for my room at the Xhomas’. The cheapest means of
transport to and from Alexandra was the “Native” bus — for Africans only — which at one pound tenpence a month made a considerable dent in my
income. I was also paying fees to the University of South Africa in order to complete my degree by correspondence. I spent another pound or so on
food. Part of my salary was spent on an even more vital item — candles — for without them I could not study. I could not afford a kerosene lamp;
candles allowed me to read late into the night.
I was inevitably short more than a few pence each month. Many days I walked the six miles to town in the morning and the six back in the evening
in order to save bus fare. I often went days without more than a mouthful of food, and without a change of clothing. Mr. Sidelsky, who was my height,
once gave me an old suit of his and, assisted by considerable stitching and patching, I wore that suit every day for almost five years. In the end,
there were more patches than suit.
One afternoon, I was returning to Alexandra by bus and took a seat next to another fellow about my age. He was one of those young men who
affected a style of dress that mimicked the well-tailored gangsters in American movies. I realized that my suit was just touching the hem of his
jacket. He noticed it also and very carefully moved away so that my jacket would not sully his. It was a tiny gesture, comical in retrospect, but painful
at the time.
There is little favorable to be said about poverty, but it was often an incubator of true friendship. Many people will appear to befriend you when
you are wealthy, but precious few will do the same when you are poor. If wealth is a magnet, poverty is a kind of repellent. Yet, poverty often brings
out the true generosity in others. One morning, I decided to walk to town to save money and spotted a young lady who had been with me at Fort
Hare. Her name was Phyllis Maseko and she was walking toward me on the same side of the street. I was embarrassed by my threadbare clothing
and crossed to the other side hoping she would not recognize me. But I heard her call out, “Nelson . . . Nelson!” I stopped and crossed over,
pretending that I had not noticed her until that moment. She was pleased to see me, but I could tell that she observed how shabby I looked. “Nelson,”
she said, “here is my address, 234 Orlando East. Come and visit me.” I resolved not to humiliate myself again, but one day I was in need of a
proper meal and dropped by. She fed me without alluding to my poverty, and from then on I continued to visit her.
My landlord, Mr. Xhoma, was not wealthy, but he was a kind of philanthropist. Every Sunday, for all of the time I lived on his property, he and his
wife gave me lunch, and those steaming plates of pork and vegetables were often my only hot meal of the week. No matter where I was or what I
was doing, I would never fail to be at the Xhomas’ on Sunday. For the rest of the week, I would sustain myself on bread, and sometimes the
secretaries at the firm would bring me some food.
I was very backward in those days and the combination of poverty and provincialism made for some amusing incidents. One day, not long after I
had moved in with the Xhomas, I was on my way home from Johannesburg and very hungry. I had a bit of money that I had saved and decided to
splurge on some fresh meat, something I had not had in a long time. I did not see a proper butcher around, so I went into a delicatessen, a type of
shop I had never encountered until I went to Johannesburg. Through the glass, I saw a large and appetizing piece of meat and asked the man
behind the counter to carve off a piece. He wrapped it up, and I put it under my arm and headed home, dreaming of the dinner that awaited me.
When I returned to my room in Alexandra, I called to one of the young daughters in the main house. She was only seven, but a clever girl. I said to
her, “Would you take this piece of meat to one of your older sisters and ask her to cook it for me?” I could see her trying to suppress a smile, but
she was too respectful of her elders to laugh. With some irritation, I asked her whether something was wrong. Very softly, she said, “This meat is
cooked.” I asked her what she was talking about. She explained that I had bought a piece of smoked ham, and that it was meant to be eaten just as
it was. This was entirely new to me, and rather than confess complete ignorance, I told her that I knew it was smoked ham but that I wanted it
warmed up. She knew I was bluffing, but ran off anyway. The meat was very tasty.
In Alexandra I rekindled a friendship with the lively, ever-cheerful Ellen Nkabinde, whom I had known from Healdtown, and who was then teaching
at one of the township schools. In fact, Ellen and I fell in love. I had known her only slightly at Healdtown, and it was not until I saw her again in
Alexandra that our relationship blossomed. What little spare time I had in those months I spent with Ellen. Courtship was difficult; we were always

surrounded by people, and there were few places to go. The only place we could be alone was outside under the sun or the stars. So, Ellen and I
wandered together in the veld and hills surrounding the township. Mostly, we would just walk, and when we both had the time, we might have a
picnic.
Ellen was a Swazi, and though tribalism was fading in the township, a close friend of mine condemned our relationship on purely tribal grounds. I
categorically rejected this. But our different backgrounds posed certain problems. Mrs. Mabutho, the reverend’s wife, did not care for Ellen, largely
because she was a Swazi. One day, while I was at the Mabuthos’, Mrs. Mabutho answered a knock at the door. It was Ellen, who was looking for
me, and Mrs. Mabutho told her I was not inside. Only later did Mrs. Mabutho say to me, “Oh, Nelson, some girl was here looking for you.” Mrs.
Mabutho then said to me, “Is that girl a Shangaan?” Although the Shangaans are a proud and noble tribe, at the time, Shangaan was considered a
derogatory term. I took offense at this and I said, “No, she is not a Shangaan, she is a Swazi.” Mrs. Mabutho felt strongly that I should take out only
Xhosa girls.
Such advice did not deter me. I loved and respected Ellen, and felt not a little bit noble in discarding the counsel of those who disapproved. The
relationship was to me a novelty, and I felt daring in having a friendship with a woman who was not a Xhosa. I was young and a bit lost in the city,
and Ellen played the role not only of romantic partner, but of a mother, supporting me, giving me confidence, and endowing me with strength and
hope. But within a few months Ellen moved away, and sadly, we lost touch with one another.
The Xhoma family had five daughters, each of them lovely, but the loveliest of all was named Didi. Didi was about my age and spent most of the
week working as a domestic worker in a white suburb of Johannesburg. When I first moved to the house, I saw her only seldom and fleetingly. But
later, when I made her acquaintance properly, I also fell in love with her. But Didi barely took any notice of me, and what she did notice was the fact
that I owned only one patched-up suit and a single shirt, and that I did not present a figure much different from a tramp.
Every weekend Didi returned to Alexandra. She was brought home by a young man who I assumed was her boyfriend, a flashy, well-to-do fellow
who had a car, something that was most unusual. He wore expensive, double-breasted American suits and wide-brimmed hats, and paid a great
deal of attention to his appearance. He must have been a gangster of some sort, but I cannot be sure. He would stand outside in the yard and put
his hands in his waistcoat and look altogether superior. He greeted me politely, but I could see that he did not regard me as much competition.
I yearned to tell Didi I loved her, but I was afraid that my advances would be unwanted. I was hardly a Don Juan. Awkward and hesitant around
girls, I did not know or understand the romantic games that others seemed to play effortlessly. On weekends, Didi’s mother would sometimes ask
her to bring out a plate of food to me. Didi would arrive on my doorstep with the plate and I could tell that she simply wanted to perform her errand
as quickly as possible, but I would do my best to delay her. I would query her opinion on things, ask her all sorts of questions. “Now, what standard
did you attain in school?” I would say. Standard five, she replied. “Why did you leave?” I asked. She was bored, she replied. “Ah, well, you must go
back to school,” I said. “You are about the same age as I am,” I continued, “and there is nothing wrong with returning to school at this age. Otherwise
you will regret it when you are old. You must think seriously about your future. It is nice for you now because you are young and beautiful and have
many admirers, but you need to have an independent profession.”
I realize that these are not the most romantic words that have ever been uttered by a young man to a young woman with whom he was in love, but
I did not know what else to talk to her about. She listened seriously, but I could tell that she was not interested in me, that in fact she felt a bit
superior to me.
I wanted to propose to her but I was unwilling to do so unless I was certain she would say yes. Although I loved her, I did not want to give her the
satisfaction of rejecting me. I kept up my pursuit of her, but I was timid and hesitant. In love, unlike politics, caution is not usually a virtue. I was
neither confident enough to think that I might succeed nor secure enough to bear the sense of failure if I did not.
I stayed at that house for about a year, and in the end, I uttered nothing about my feelings. Didi did not show any less interest in her boyfriend or
any more interest in me. I bade her good-bye with expressions of gratitude for her friendliness and the hospitality of the family. I did not see Didi
again for many years. One day, much later, when I was practicing law in Johannesburg, a young woman and her mother walked into my office. The
woman had had a child, and her boyfriend did not want to marry her; she was seeking to institute an action against him. That young woman was
Didi, only now she looked haggard and wore a faded dress. I was distressed to see her, and thought how things might have turned out differently. In
the end, she did not bring a suit against her boyfriend, and I never saw her again.
Despite my romantic deficiencies, I gradually adjusted to township life, and began to develop a sense of inner strength, a belief that I could do
well outside the world in which I had grown up. I slowly discovered I did not have to depend on my royal connections or the support of family in order
to advance, and I forged relationships with people who did not know or care about my link to the Thembu royal house. I had my own home, humble
though it was, and I was developing the confidence and self-reliance necessary to stand on my own two feet.

At the end of 1941, I received word that the regent was visiting Johannesburg and wanted to see me. I was nervous, but knew that I was obligated
to see him, and indeed wanted to do so. He was staying at the WNLA compound, the headquarters of the Witwatersrand Native Labor Association,
the recruiting agency for mine-workers along the Reef.
The regent seemed greatly changed, or perhaps it was I who had changed. He never once mentioned the fact that I had run away, Fort Hare, or
the arranged marriage that was not to be. He was courteous and solicitous, questioning me in a fatherly way about my studies and future plans. He
recognized that my life was starting in earnest and would take a different course from the one he had envisaged and planned for. He did not try to
dissuade me from my course, and I was grateful for this implicit acknowledgment that I was no longer his charge.
My meeting with the regent had a double effect. I had rehabilitated myself and at the same time restored my own regard for him and the Thembu
royal house. I had become indifferent to my old connections, an attitude I had adopted in part to justify my flight and somehow alleviate the pain of
my separation from a world I loved and valued. It was reassuring to be back in the regent’s warm embrace.
While the regent seemed satisfied with me, he was vexed with Justice, who he said must return to Mqhekezweni. Justice had formed a liaison
with a young woman, and I knew he had no intention of going home. After the regent departed, Bangindawo, one of his headmen, instituted
proceedings against Justice, and I agreed to help Justice when he was called before the native commissioner. At the hearing, I pointed out that
Justice was an adult, and was not obligated to return to Mqhekezweni merely because his father ordered it. When Bangindawo spoke, he did not
reply to my argument but played on my own loyalties. He addressed me as Madiba, my clan name, something that was well calculated to remind
me of my Thembu heritage. “Madiba,” he said, “the regent has cared for you, educated you, and treated you like his own son. Now you want to keep
his true son from him. This is contrary to the wishes of the man who has been your faithful guardian, and contrary to the path that has been laid out
for Justice.”
Bangindawo’s speech hit me hard. Justice did have a different destiny from that of myself. He was the son of a chief, and a future chief in his own
right. After the hearing, I told Justice that I had changed my mind, and that I thought he should return. Justice was mystified by my reaction and
refused to listen to me. He resolved to stay and must have informed his girlfriend of my advice, for she never thereafter spoke to me.

At the beginning of 1942, in order to save money and be closer to downtown Johannesburg, I moved from the room at the back of the Xhomas’ to
the WNLA compound. I was assisted by Mr. Festile, the induna at the Chamber of Mines, who was once again playing a fateful role in my life. On
his own initiative he had decided to offer me free accommodation in the mining compound.
The WNLA compound was a multiethnic, polyglot community of modern, urban South Africa. There were Sothos, Tswanas, Vendas, Zulus, Pedis,
Shangaans, Namibians, Mozambicans, Swazis, and Xhosas. Few spoke English, and the lingua franca was an amalgam of many tongues known
as Fanagalo. There, I saw not only flare-ups of ethnic animosity, but the comity that was also possible among men of different backgrounds. Yet I
was a fish out of water there. Instead of spending my days underground, I was studying or working in a law office where the only physical activity
was running errands or putting files in a cabinet.
Because the WNLA was a way station for visiting chiefs, I had the privilege of meeting tribal leaders from all over southern Africa. I recall on one
occasion meeting the queen regent of Basutoland, or what is now Lesotho, Mantsebo Moshweshwe. She was accompanied by two chiefs, both of
whom knew Sabata’s father, Jongilizwe. I asked them about Jongilizwe, and for an hour I seemed to be back in Thembuland as they told colorful
tales about his early years.
The queen took special notice of me and at one point addressed me directly, but she spoke in Sesotho, a language in which I knew few words.
Sesotho is the language of the Sotho people as well as the Tswana, a large number of whom live in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. She
looked at me with incredulity, and then said in English, “What kind of lawyer and leader will you be who cannot speak the language of your own
people?” I had no response. The question embarrassed and sobered me; it made me realize my parochialism and just how unprepared I was for
the task of serving my people. I had unconsciously succumbed to the ethnic divisions fostered by the white government and I did not know how to
speak to my own kith and kin. Without language, one cannot talk to people and understand them; one cannot share their hopes and aspirations,
grasp their history, appreciate their poetry, or savor their songs. I again realized that we were not different people with separate languages; we
were one people, with different tongues.

Less than six months after the regent’s visit, Justice and I learned of his father’s death in the winter of 1942. He had seemed weary when last I saw
him, and his death did not come as a great surprise. We read of the regent’s death in the newspaper because the telegram that had been sent to
Justice had gone astray. We hastened down to the Transkei, arriving the day after the regent’s funeral.
Though I was disappointed to miss the regent’s burial, I was inwardly glad that I had reconciled with him before his death. But I was not without
stabs of guilt. I always knew, even when I was estranged from the regent, that all my friends might desert me, all my plans might founder, all my
hopes be dashed, but the regent would never abandon me. Yet I had spurned him, and I wondered whether my desertion might have hastened his
death.
The passing of the regent removed from the scene an enlightened and tolerant man who achieved the goal that marks the reign of all great
leaders: he kept his people united. Liberals and conservatives, traditionalists and reformers, white-collar officials and blue-collar miners, all
remained loyal to him, not because they always agreed with him, but because the regent listened to and respected all different opinions.
I spent nearly a week in Mqhekezweni after the funeral and it was a time of retrospection and rediscovery. There is nothing like returning to a
place that remains unchanged to find the ways in which you yourself have altered. The Great Place went on as before, no different from when I had
grown up there. But I realized that my own outlook and worldviews had evolved. I was no longer attracted by a career in the civil service, or being an
interpreter in the Native Affairs Department. I no longer saw my future bound up with Thembuland and the Transkei. I was even informed that my
Xhosa was no longer pure and was now influenced by Zulu, one of the dominant languages in the Reef. My life in Johannesburg, my exposure to
men like Gaur Radebe, my experiences at the law firm, had radically altered my beliefs. I looked back on that young man who had left Mqhekezweni
as a naive and parochial fellow who had seen very little of the world. I now believed I was seeing things as they were. That too, of course, was an
illusion.
I still felt an inner conflict between my head and my heart. My heart told me that I was a Thembu, that I had been raised and sent to school so that I
could play a special role in perpetuating the kingship. Had I no obligations to the dead? To my father, who had put me in the care of the regent? To
the regent himself, who had cared for me like a father? But my head told me that it was the right of every man to plan his own future as he pleased
and choose his role in life. Was I not permitted to make my own choices?
Justice’s circumstances were different from my own, and after the regent’s death he had important new responsibilities thrust upon him. He was
to succeed the regent as chief and had decided to remain in Mqhekezweni and take up his birthright. I had to return to Johannesburg, and I could
not even stay to attend his installation. In my language there is a saying: “Ndiwelimilambo enamagama” (I have crossed famous rivers). It means
that one has traveled a great distance, that one has had wide experience and gained some wisdom from it. I thought of this as I returned to
Johannesburg alone. I had, since 1934, crossed many important rivers in my own land: the Mbashe and the Great Kei, on my way to Healdtown;
and the Orange and the Vaal, on my way to Johannesburg. But I had many rivers yet to cross.

At the end of 1942 I passed the final examination for my B.A. degree. I had now achieved the rank I once considered so exalted. I was proud to
have achieved my B.A., but I also knew that the degree itself was neither a talisman nor a passport to easy success.
At the firm, I had become closer to Gaur, much to Mr. Sidelsky’s exasperation. Education, Gaur argued, was essential to our advancement, but
he pointed out that no people or nation had ever freed itself through education alone. “Education is all well and good,” Gaur said, “but if we are to
depend on education, we will wait a thousand years for our freedom. We are poor, we have few teachers and even fewer schools. We do not even
have the power to educate ourselves.”
Gaur believed in finding solutions rather than in spouting theory. For Africans, he asserted, the engine of change was the African National
Congress; its policies were the best way to pursue power in South Africa. He stressed the ANC’s long history of advocating change, noting that the
ANC was the oldest national African organization in the country, having been founded in 1912. Its constitution denounced racialism, its presidents
had been from different tribal groups, and it preached the goal of Africans as full citizens of South Africa.
Despite Gaur’s lack of formal education, he was my superior in virtually every sphere of knowledge. During lunch breaks he would often give
impromptu lectures; he loaned me books to read, recommended people for me to talk to, meetings for me to attend. I had taken two courses in
modern history at Fort Hare, and while I knew many facts, Gaur was able to explain the causes for particular actions, the reasons that men and
nations had acted as they did. I felt as though I was learning history afresh.

What made the deepest impression on me was Gaur’s total commitment to the freedom struggle. He lived and breathed the quest for liberation.
Gaur sometimes attended several meetings a day where he featured prominently as a speaker. He seemed to think of nothing but revolution.
I went along with Gaur to meetings of both the Township Advisory Board and the ANC. I went as an observer, not a participant, for I do not think I
ever spoke. I wanted to understand the issues under discussion, evaluate the arguments, see the caliber of the men involved. The Advisory Board
meetings were perfunctory and bureaucratic, but the ANC meetings were lively with debate and discussion about Parliament, the pass laws, rents,
bus fares — any subject under the sun that affected Africans.
In August 1943, I marched with Gaur, and ten thousand others, in support of the Alexandra bus boycott, a protest against the raising of fares from
fourpence to five. Gaur was one of the leaders and I watched him in action. This campaign had a great effect on me. In a small way, I had departed
from my role as an observer and become a participant. I found that to march with one’s people was exhilarating and inspiring. But I was also
impressed by the boycott’s effectiveness: after nine days, during which the buses ran empty, the company returned the fare to fourpence.

Gaur’s views were not the only ones I paid attention to at the firm. Hans Muller was a white estate agent who did business with Mr. Sidelsky and
would engage me in discussion. He was the prototypical businessman who saw the world through the prism of supply and demand. One day, Mr.
Muller pointed out the window. “Look out there, Nelson,” he said. “Do you see those men and women scurrying up and down the street? What is it
that they are pursuing? What is it they are working for so feverishly? I’ll tell you: all of them, without exception, are after wealth and money. Because
wealth and money equal happiness. That is what you must struggle for: money, and nothing but money. Once you have enough cash, there is
nothing else you will want in life.”
William Smith was a Coloured man involved in the African real estate trade who was often around the office. Smith was a veteran of the ICU (the
Industrial and Commercial Workers Union), South Africa’s first black trade union, founded by Clements Kadalie, but his views had shifted
dramatically since those days. “Nelson,” he said, “I have been involved in politics for a long time, and I regret every minute of it. I wasted the best
years of my life in futile efforts serving vain and selfish men who placed their interests above those of the people they pretended to serve. Politics, in
my experience, is nothing but a racket to steal money from the poor.”
Mr. Sidelsky did not join these discussions. He seemed to regard discussing politics as almost as much of a waste of time as participating in it.
Again and again, he would counsel me to avoid politics. He warned me about Gaur and Walter Sisulu. These men will poison your mind, he said.
“Nelson,” he asked, “you want to be a lawyer, don’t you?” I said yes. “And if you are a lawyer, you want to be a successful lawyer, do you not?”
Again, I said yes. “Well, if you get into politics,” he said, “your practice will suffer. You will get into trouble with the authorities who are often your
allies in your work. You will lose all your clients, you will go bankrupt, you will break up your family, and you will end up in jail. That is what will happen
if you go into politics.”
I listened to these men and weighed their views carefully. All of the arguments had some merit. I was already leaning toward some type of
political involvement, but I did not know what or how, and I lingered on the sidelines, uncertain what to do.
As far as my profession was concerned, it was Gaur who did more than just offer advice. One day in early 1943, when I had been at the firm for
less than two years, Gaur took me aside and said, “My boy, as long as I am here at the firm, they will never article you, whether or not you have a
degree.” I was startled, and told Gaur that it could not be true, as he was not even in training to be a lawyer. “That does not make a difference,
Nelson,” he continued. “They will say, ‘We have Gaur, he can speak law to our people, why do we need someone else? Gaur is already bringing in
clients to the firm.’ But they will not tell you this to your face; they will just postpone and delay. It is important to the future of our struggle in this country
for you to become a lawyer, and so I am going to leave the firm and start my own estate agency. When I am gone, they will have no choice but to
article you.”
I pleaded with him not to resign, but he was immovable. Within a few days, he gave Mr. Sidelsky his resignation, and Mr. Sidelsky eventually
articled me as promised. I cannot say whether Gaur’s absence had anything at all to do with it, but his resignation was another example of his
generosity.

Early in 1943, after passing my examination through UNISA, I returned to Fort Hare for my graduation. Before leaving for the university, I decided to
outfit myself in a proper suit. In order to do so, I had to borrow the money from Walter Sisulu. I had had a new suit when I went up to Fort Hare,
purchased for me by the regent, and now I would have a new suit when I went down. I borrowed academic dress from Randall Peteni, a friend and
fellow alumnus.
My nephew, K. D. Matanzima, who had graduated several years before, drove my mother and No-England, the regent’s widow, to the ceremony. I
was gratified to have my mother there, but the fact that No-England came made it seem as though the regent himself had blessed the event.
After the graduation, I spent a few days with Daliwonga (K.D.’s clan name, which is what I called him), at his home in Qamata. Daliwonga had
already chosen the path of traditional leadership. He was in the line of succession to become the head of Emigrant Thembuland, which lies in the
westernmost part of the Transkei, and while I was staying with him he pressed me to return to Umtata after qualifying as an attorney. “Why do you
stay in Johannesburg?” he said. “You are needed more here.”
It was a fair point; there were certainly more professional Africans in the Transvaal than in the Transkei. I told Daliwonga that his suggestions
were premature. But in my heart, I knew I was moving toward a different commitment. Through my friendship with Gaur and Walter, I was beginning
to see that my duty was to my people as a whole, not just a particular section or branch. I felt that all the currents in my life were taking me away from
the Transkei and toward what seemed like the center, a place where regional and ethnic loyalties gave way before a common purpose.
The graduation at Fort Hare offered a moment of introspection and reflection. I was struck most forcefully by the discrepancy between my old
assumptions and my actual experience. I had discarded my presumptions that graduates automatically became leaders and that my connection to
the Thembu royal house guaranteed me respect. Having a successful career and a comfortable salary were no longer my ultimate goals. I found
myself being drawn into the world of politics because I was not content with my old beliefs.
In Johannesburg, I moved in circles where common sense and practical experience were more important than high academic qualifications.
Even as I was receiving my degree, I realized that hardly anything I had learned at university seemed relevant in my new environment. At the
university, teachers had shied away from topics like racial oppression, lack of opportunities for Africans, and the nest of laws and regulations that
subjugate the black man. But in my life in Johannesburg, I confronted these things every day. No one had ever suggested to me how to go about
removing the evils of racial prejudice, and I had to learn by trial and error.

When I returned to Johannesburg at the beginning of 1943, I enrolled at the University of the Witwatersrand for an LL.B., a bachelor of laws degree,
the preparatory academic training for a lawyer. The University of the Witwatersrand, known to all as “Wits,” is located in Braamfontein in northcentral Johannesburg, and is considered by many to be the premier English-speaking university in South Africa.
While working at the law firm brought me into regular contact with whites for the first time, the university introduced me to a group of whites my
own age. At Fort Hare we had occasional contacts with white students from Rhodes University in Grahamstown, but at Wits, I was attending
classes with white students. This was as new to them as it was to me, for I was the only African student in the law faculty.
The English-speaking universities of South Africa were great incubators of liberal values. It was a tribute to these institutions that they allowed
black students. For the Afrikaans universities, such a thing was unthinkable.
Despite the university’s liberal values, I never felt entirely comfortable there. Always to be the only African, except for menial workers, to be
regarded at best as a curiosity and at worst as an interloper, is not a congenial experience. My manner was guarded, and I met both generosity and
animosity. Although I was to discover a core of sympathetic whites who became friends and later colleagues, most of the whites at Wits were not
liberal or color-blind. I recall getting to a lecture a few minutes late one day and taking a seat next to Sarel Tighy, a classmate who later became a
member of Parliament for the United Party. Though the lecture had already started and there were only a few empty seats, he ostentatiously
collected his things and moved to a seat distant from me. This type of behavior was the rule rather than the exception. No one uttered the word
kaffir; their hostility was more muted, but I felt it just the same.
Our law professor, Mr. Hahlo, was a strict, cerebral sort, who did not tolerate much independence on the part of his students. He held a curious
view of the law when it came to women and Africans: neither group, he said, was meant to be lawyers. His view was that law was a social science
and that women and Africans were not disciplined enough to master its intricacies. He once told me that I should not be at Wits but studying for my
degree through UNISA. Although I disagreed with his views, I did little to disprove them. My performance as a law student was dismal.
At Wits, I met many people who were to share with me the ups and downs of the liberation struggle, and without whom I would have
accomplished very little. Many white students went out of their way to make me feel welcome. During my first term at Wits I met Joe Slovo and his
future wife, Ruth First. Then as now, Joe had one of the sharpest, most incisive minds I have ever encountered. He was an ardent Communist, and
was known for his high-spirited parties. Ruth had an outgoing personality and was a gifted writer. Both were the children of Jewish immigrants to
South Africa. I began lifelong friendships with George Bizos and Bram Fischer. George, the child of Greek immigrants, was a man who combined a
sympathetic nature with an incisive mind. Bram Fischer, a part-time lecturer, was the scion of a distinguished Afrikaner family: his grandfather had
been prime minister of the Orange River Colony and his father was judge-president of the Orange Free State. Although he could have been a prime
minister of South Africa, he became one of the bravest and staunchest friends of the freedom struggle that I have ever known. I befriended Tony
O’Dowd and Harold Wolpe, who were political radicals and members of the Communist Party, and Jules Browde and his wife, who were liberal
champions of the anti-apartheid cause.
I also formed close friendships with a number of Indian students. Although there had been a handful of Indian students at Fort Hare, they stayed in
a separate hostel and I seldom had contact with them. At Wits I met and became friends with Ismail Meer, J. N. Singh, Ahmed Bhoola, and Ramlal
Bhoolia. The center of this tight-knit community was Ismail’s apartment, flat 13, Kholvad House, four rooms in a residential building in the center of
the city. There we studied, talked, and even danced until the early hours in the morning, and it became a kind of headquarters for young freedom
fighters. I sometimes slept there when it was too late to catch the last train back to Orlando.
Bright and serious, Ismail Meer was born in Natal, and while at law school at Wits he became a key member of the Transvaal Indian Congress. J.
N. Singh was a popular, handsome fellow, who was at ease with all colors and also a member of the Communist Party. One day, Ismail, J.N., and
myself were in a rush to get to Kholvad House, and we boarded the tram despite the fact that while Indians were allowed, Africans were not. We
had not been on long when the conductor turned to Ismail and J.N. and said in Afrikaans that their “kaffir friend” was not allowed on. Ismail and J.N.
exploded at the conductor, telling him that he did not even understand the word kaffir and that it was offensive to call me that name. The conductor
promptly stopped the tram and hailed a policeman, who arrested us, took us down to the station, and charged us. We were ordered to appear in
court the following day. That night, Ismail and J.N. arranged for Bram Fischer to defend us. The next day, the magistrate seemed in awe of Bram’s
family connections. We were promptly acquitted and I saw firsthand that justice was not at all blind.
Wits opened a new world to me, a world of ideas and political beliefs and debates, a world where people were passionate about politics. I was
among white and Indian intellectuals of my own generation, young men who would form the vanguard of the most important political movements of
the next few years. I discovered for the first time people of my own age firmly aligned with the liberation struggle, who were prepared, despite their
relative privilege, to sacrifice themselves for the cause of the oppressed.