AS DILIGENT AS WE WERE in gathering news and information, our knowledge of current events was always sketchy. Happenings in the outside
world were muffled by the fact that we heard of them first through rumor; only later might they be confirmed by a newspaper account or an outside
visitor.
In June of 1976, we began to hear vague reports of a great uprising in the country. The whispers were fanciful and improbable: the youth of
Soweto had overthrown the military and the soldiers had dropped their guns and fled. It was only when the first young prisoners who had been
involved in the June 16 uprising began to arrive on Robben Island in August that we learned what truly happened.
On June 16, 1976, fifteen thousand schoolchildren gathered in Soweto to protest the government’s ruling that half of all classes in secondary
schools must be taught in Afrikaans. Students did not want to learn and teachers did not want to teach in the language of the oppressor. Pleadings
and petitions by parents and teachers had fallen on deaf ears. A detachment of police confronted this army of earnest schoolchildren and without
warning opened fire, killing thirteen-year-old Hector Pieterson and many others. The children fought with sticks and stones, and mass chaos
ensued, with hundreds of children wounded, and two white men stoned to death.
The events of that day reverberated in every town and township of South Africa. The uprising triggered riots and violence across the country.
Mass funerals for the victims of state violence became national rallying points. Suddenly the young people of South Africa were fired with the spirit
of protest and rebellion. Students boycotted schools all across the country. ANC organizers joined with students to actively support the protest.
Bantu Education had come back to haunt its creators, for these angry and audacious young people were its progeny.

In September, the isolation section was filled with young men who had been arrested in the aftermath of the uprising. Through whispered
conversations in an adjacent hallway we learned firsthand what had taken place. My comrades and I were enormously cheered; the spirit of mass
protest that had seemed dormant through the 1960s was erupting in the 1970s. Many of these young people had left the country to join our own
military movement, and then smuggled themselves back home. Thousands of them were trained in our camps in Tanzania, Angola, and
Mozambique. There is nothing so encouraging in prison as learning that the people outside are supporting the cause for which you are inside.
These young men were a different breed of prisoner than we had ever seen before. They were brave, hostile, and aggressive; they would not
take orders, and shouted “Amandla!” at every opportunity. Their instinct was to confront rather than cooperate. The authorities did not know how to
handle them, and they turned the island upside down. During the Rivonia Trial, I remarked to a security policeman that if the government did not
reform itself, the freedom fighters who would take our place would someday make the authorities yearn for us. That day had indeed come on
Robben Island.
In these young men we saw the angry revolutionary spirit of the times. I had had some warning. At a visit with Winnie a few months before, she
had managed to tell me through our coded conversation that there was a rising class of discontented youth who were militant and Africanist in
orientation. She said they were changing the nature of the struggle and that I should be aware of them.
The new prisoners were appalled by what they considered the barbaric conditions of the island, and said they could not understand how we could
live in such a way. We told them that they should have seen the island in 1964. But they were almost as skeptical of us as they were of the
authorities. They chose to ignore our calls for discipline and thought our advice feeble and unassertive.
It was obvious that they regarded us, the Rivonia Trialists, as moderates. After so many years of being branded a radical revolutionary, to be
perceived as a moderate was a novel and not altogether pleasant feeling. I knew that I could react in one of two ways: I could scold them for their
impertinence or I could listen to what they were saying. I chose the latter.
When some of these men, such as Strini Moodley of the South African Students’ Organization and Saths Cooper of the Black People’s
Convention, came into our section, I had them give us papers on their movement and philosophy. I wanted to know what had brought them to the
struggle, what motivated them, what their ideas were for the future.
Shortly after their arrival on the island, the commanding officer came to me and asked me as a favor to address the young men. He wanted me to
tell them to restrain themselves, to recognize the fact that they were in prison and to accept the discipline of prison life. I told him that I was not
prepared to do that. Under the circumstances, they would have regarded me as a collaborator of the oppressor.

These fellows refused to conform to even basic prison regulations. One day I was at the Head Office conferring with the commanding officer. As I
was walking out with the major, we came upon a young prisoner being interviewed by a prison official. The young man, who was no more than
eighteen years old, was wearing his prison cap in the presence of senior officers, a violation of regulations. Nor did he stand up when the major
entered the room, another violation.
The major looked at him and said, “Please, take off your cap.” The prisoner ignored him. Then in an irritated tone, the major said, “Take off your
cap.” The prisoner turned and looked at the major, and said, “What for?”
I could hardly believe what I had just heard. It was a revolutionary question: What for? The major also seemed taken aback, but managed a reply.
“It is against regulations,” he said. The young prisoner responded, “Why do you have this regulation? What is the purpose of it?” This questioning on
the part of the prisoner was too much for the major, and he stomped out of the room, saying, “Mandela, you talk to him.” But I would not intervene on
his behalf, and simply bowed in the direction of the prisoner to let him know that I was on his side.
*

*

*

This was our first exposure to the Black Consciousness Movement. With the banning of the ANC, PAC, and Communist Party, the Black
Consciousness Movement helped fill a vacuum among young people. Black Consciousness was less a movement than a philosophy and grew out
of the idea that blacks must first liberate themselves from the sense of psychological inferiority bred by three centuries of white rule. Only then could
the people rise up in confidence and truly liberate themselves from repression. While the Black Consciousness Movement advocated a nonracial
society, they excluded whites from playing a role in achieving that society.
These concepts were not unfamiliar to me: they closely mirrored ideas I myself held at the time of the founding of the ANC Youth League a
quarter-century before. We, too, were Africanists; we, too, stressed ethnic pride and racial self-confidence; we, too, rejected white assistance in the
struggle. In many ways, Black Consciousness represented the same response to the same problem that had never gone away.
But just as we had outgrown our Youth League outlook, I was confident that these young men would transcend some of the strictures of Black

Consciousness. While I was encouraged by their militancy, I thought that their philosophy, in its concentration on blackness, was exclusionary, and
represented an intermediate view that was not fully mature. I saw my role as an elder statesman who might help them move on to the more inclusive
ideas of the Congress Movement. I knew also that these young men would eventually become frustrated because Black Consciousness offered no
program of action, no outlet for their protest.
Although we viewed the ranks of the BCM as a fertile ground for the ANC, we did not attempt to recruit these men. We knew that this would
alienate both them and the other parties on the island. Our policy was to be friendly, to take an interest, to compliment them on their achievements,
but not to proselytize. If they came to us and asked questions — “What is the ANC policy on the bantustans?” “What does the Freedom Charter say
about nationalization?” — we would answer them — and a great many of them did come to us with questions.
I myself contacted some of these men through smuggled notes. I spoke with some who were from the Transkei and asked questions about my
old home. Some of the men who arrived were already well known in the struggle. I had heard reports of the bravery of Patrick “Terror” Lekota, a
leader of the South African Students’ Organization, and sent him a note of welcome to Robben Island.
Terror’s nickname comes from his prowess on the soccer field, but he was just as formidable in a debate. He disagreed with some of his
colleagues on the issue of racial exclusiveness and inched closer to the ideas of the ANC. Once on the island, Terror decided that he wanted to join
us, but we discouraged him — not because we did not want him but because we thought such a maneuver would create tensions in the general
section.
But Terror would not take no for an answer and publicly switched his allegiance to the ANC. One day, not long afterward, he was assaulted with a
garden fork by disgruntled BC members. After he was treated, the authorities charged the attackers and planned to put them on trial. But in the
interest of harmony, we advised Terror not to lodge a complaint. He agreed, and refused to testify against those who had hurt him. The case was
dropped. Such a trial, I felt, would only play into the hands of the authorities. I wanted these young men to see that the ANC was a great tent that
could accommodate many different views and affiliations.
After that incident, the floodgates seemed to open and dozens of BC men decided to join the ANC, including some of those who had planned the
attack on Terror. Terror rose to the top of the ANC hierarchy in the general section, and was soon teaching ANC policies to other prisoners. The
courage and vision of men like Lekota confirmed to us that our views remained potent, and still represented the best hope for unifying the liberation
struggle as a whole.

Political feuding continued in F and G. We learned of a clash among the ANC, the PAC, and the BCM in the general section. A number of ANC
people had been beaten. A large number of ANC members were charged by the authorities, and a trial was set for the island’s administrative court.
The ANC men brought in an outside lawyer to handle the case. Although I had not witnessed the fight, I was asked to be a character witness. This
was a troubling prospect. While I was more than willing to give testimonials for my comrades, I did not want to take any action that would heighten
the bitterness between the ANC, the PAC, and the BCM.
I regarded my role in prison not just as the leader of the ANC, but as a promoter of unity, an honest broker, a peacemaker, and I was reluctant to
take a side in this dispute, even if it was the side of my own organization. If I testified on behalf of the ANC, I would jeopardize my chances of
bringing about reconciliation among the different groups. If I preached unity, I must act like a unifier, even at the risk of perhaps alienating some of
my own colleagues.
I decided not to testify. This disappointed some of my colleagues, but I thought the issue was serious enough to risk their displeasure. It was
more important to show the young Black Consciousness men that the struggle was indivisible and that we all had the same enemy.
