IN THE WAKE of the Soweto student uprising, I learned that Winnie, along with my old friend and physician, Dr. Nthato Motlana, had become
involved with the Black Parents Association, an organization of concerned local professionals and church leaders who acted as a guiding hand and
intermediary for the students. The authorities seemed to be as wary of the parents association as of the young rebels. In August, less than two
months after the student revolt, Winnie was detained under the Internal Security Act and imprisoned without charge in the Fort in Johannesburg,
where she was held for five months. During that time, I was able to write to her and my daughters, who were at boarding school in Swaziland,
expressing support and solidarity. I was greatly distressed by her imprisonment, though she was apparently not mistreated this time and emerged
from jail in December even firmer in her commitment to the struggle.
Though banned, Winnie picked up where she left off, and the authorities were dismayed about her popularity with the young radicals of Soweto.
They were determined to lessen her influence and did it with a brazen and shameless act: they sent her into internal exile. On the night of May 16,
1977, police cars and a truck pulled up outside of the house in Orlando West and began loading furniture and clothing into the back of the truck.
This time Winnie was not being arrested, or detained, or interrogated; she was being banished to a remote township in the Free State called
Brandfort. I discovered the details from Kathy, who had been given the information from a visiting Hindu priest.
Brandfort is about two hundred fifty miles southwest of Johannesburg, just north of Bloemfontein, in the Free State. After a long and rough ride,
Winnie, Zindzi, and all their possessions were dumped in front of a three-room tin-roofed shack in Brandfort’s bleak African township, a desperately
poor and backward place where the people were under the thumb of the local white farmers. Winnie was regarded with wariness and trepidation.
The local language was Sesotho, which Winnie did not speak.
Her new circumstances saddened and angered me. At least when she was home in Soweto, I could picture her cooking in the kitchen or reading
in the lounge, I could imagine her waking up in the house I knew so well. That was a source of comfort to me. In Soweto, even if she was banned,
there were friends and family nearby. In Brandfort she and Zindzi would be alone.
I had passed through this township once on my way to Bloemfontein, and took no notice of it. There was nothing memorable in its all too typical
poverty and desolateness. I did not know at the time how familiar the address — house number 802, Brandfort — would one day become to me.
Once again, I felt as though Winnie and I were in prison at the same time.

Life in Brandfort was hard, as I learned from Winnie’s letters. They had no heat, no toilet, no running water. The township had no shops and the
stores in town were hostile to African customers. The whites for the most part were Afrikaans-speaking and deeply conservative.
Winnie and Zindzi were under constant police surveillance and intermittent harassment. Within a few months Zindzi — who was not banned —
was upset by the security police’s intimidation. In September, with the help of Winnie’s lawyers, I brought an urgent application for an interdict
against the local Brandfort security police to restrain them from harassing my daughter. Affidavits filed before the judge described policemen
bursting into the house and threatening Zindzi. The judge ruled that Zindzi could receive visitors in peace.
Winnie is a resilient person, and within a relatively short time, she had won over the people of the township, including some sympathetic whites in
the vicinity. She supplied food to the people in the township with the help of Operation Hunger, started a crèche or nursery school for the township’s
children, and raised funds to create a medical clinic in a place where few people had ever seen a doctor.

In 1978, Zeni, my second-youngest daughter and my first child with Winnie, married Prince Thumbumuzi, a son of King Sobhuza of Swaziland. They
had met while Zeni was away at school. Being in prison, I was not able to fulfill the father’s traditional duties. In our culture, the father of the bride
must interview the prospective groom and assess his prospects. He must also determine lobola, the bride-price, which is paid by the groom to the
bride’s family. On the wedding day itself, the father gives away his daughter. Although I had no doubts about the young man, I asked my friend and
legal adviser George Bizos to be a stand-in for me. I instructed George to interview the prince about how he intended to look after my daughter.
George met with the prince in his office and then arranged to consult with me on Robben Island. Because Zeni was under twenty-one years of
age, it was necessary for me to give my legal consent for her to marry. I met George in the consulting room and he was surprised to find a warder in
the consulting room with us. I explained that this was according to regulations because this was considered a family visit not a legal one. I jestingly
reassured George by saying that I had no secrets from my guards.
George reported how much the two children loved one another and the bright prospects of my future son-in-law. His father, King Sobhuza, was an
enlightened traditional leader and also a member of the ANC. As George relayed to me some of the requirements made by the young man’s family,
he was at pains to point out that the boy was a Swazi prince. I told George to tell the young man that he was getting a Thembu princess.

There was a tremendous advantage in Zeni’s becoming a member of the Swazi royal family: she was immediately granted diplomatic privileges
and could visit me virtually at will. That winter, after she and Thumbumuzi were married, they came to see me, along with their newborn baby
daughter. Because of the prince’s status, we were allowed to meet one another in the consulting room, not the normal visiting area where one is
separated from one’s family by thick walls and glass. I waited for them with some nervousness.
It was a truly wondrous moment when they came into the room. I stood up, and when Zeni saw me, she practically tossed her tiny daughter to her
husband and ran across the room to embrace me. I had not held my now-grown daughter virtually since she was about her own daughter’s age. It
was a dizzying experience, as though time had sped forward in a science fiction novel, to suddenly hug one’s fully grown child. I then embraced my
new son and he handed me my tiny granddaughter whom I did not let go of for the entire visit. To hold a newborn baby, so vulnerable and soft in my
rough hands, hands that for too long had held only picks and shovels, was a profound joy. I don’t think a man was ever happier to hold a baby than I
was that day.
The visit had a more official purpose and that was for me to choose a name for the child. It is a custom for the grandfather to select a name, and
the one I had chosen was Zaziwe — which means “Hope.” The name had special meaning for me, for during all my years in prison hope never left
me — and now it never would. I was convinced that this child would be a part of a new generation of South Africans for whom apartheid would be a
distant memory — that was my dream.