ON FRIDAY, JUNE 12, 1964, we entered court for the last time. Nearly a year had passed since the fateful arrests at Rivonia. Security was
extraordinarily high. Our convoy raced through the streets with sirens wailing. All the roads leading to the courthouse had been blocked off to normal
traffic. The police checked the identification of anyone attempting to go near the Palace of Justice. They had even set up checkpoints at the local
bus and railway stations. Despite the intimidation, as many as two thousand people assembled in front of the courthouse holding banners and
signs such as “WE STAND BY OUR LEADERS.” Inside, the spectators’ gallery was full, and it was standing room only for the local and foreign
press.
I waved hello to Winnie and my mother. It was heartening to see them there; my mother had journeyed all the way from the Transkei. It must be a
very odd sensation to come to a courtroom to see whether or not your son will be sentenced to death. Though I suspect my mother did not
understand all that was going on, her support never wavered. Winnie was equally stalwart, and her strength gave me strength.
The registrar called out the case: “The State against Mandela and others.” Before the sentence was to be passed, there were two pleas in
mitigation. One was delivered by Harold Hanson and the other by the author Alan Paton, who was also national president of the Liberal Party.
Hanson spoke eloquently, saying that a nation’s grievances cannot be suppressed, that people will always find a way to give voice to those
grievances. “It was not their aims which had been criminal,” said Hanson, “only the means to which they had resorted.” Hanson said the judge would
do well to recall that his own people, the Afrikaners, had struggled violently for their freedom.
Though Paton did not himself support violence, he said the accused had had only two alternatives: “to bow their heads and submit, or to resist by
force.” The defendants should receive clemency, he said, otherwise the future of South Africa would be bleak.
But de Wet did not seem to be listening to either man. He neither looked up nor took any notes while they spoke. He seemed absorbed in his
own thoughts. He had obviously already decided; he was merely waiting for the moment to reveal his decision.

He nodded for us to rise. I tried to catch his eye, but he was not even looking in our direction. His eyes were focused on the middle distance. His
face was very pale, and he was breathing heavily. We looked at each other and seemed to know: it would be death, otherwise why was this
normally calm man so nervous? And then he began to speak.
I have heard a great deal during the course of this case about the grievances of the non-European population. The accused have told me and their counsel have told me that the
accused who were all leaders of the non-European population were motivated entirely by a desire to ameliorate these grievances. I am by no means convinced that the motives of
the accused were as altruistic as they wish the court to believe. People who organize a revolution usually take over the government and personal ambition cannot be excluded as a
motive.

He paused for a moment as if to catch his breath. De Wet’s voice, which was muted before, was now barely audible.
The function of this court as is the function of the court in any other country is to enforce law and order and to enforce the laws of the state within which it functions. The crime of
which the accused have been convicted, that is the main crime, the crime of conspiracy, is in essence one of high treason. The state has decided not to charge the crime in this
form. Bearing this in mind and giving the matter very serious consideration I have decided not to impose the supreme penalty which in a case like this would usually be the proper
penalty for the crime, but consistent with my duty that is the only leniency which I can show. The sentence in the case of all the accused will be one of life imprisonment.

We looked at each other and smiled. There had been a great collective gasp in the courtroom when de Wet announced that he was not
sentencing us to death. But there was consternation among some spectators because they had been unable to hear de Wet’s sentence. Dennis
Goldberg’s wife called to him, “Dennis, what is it!?”
“Life!” he yelled back, grinning. “Life! To live!”
I turned and smiled broadly to the gallery, searching out Winnie’s face and that of my mother, but it was extremely confused in the court, with
people shouting, police pushing the crowd this way and that. I could not see them. I flashed the thumbs-up ANC salute as many of the spectators
were dashing outside to tell the crowd the verdict. Our police guardians began to hustle us out of the dock and toward the door leading
underground, and although I looked again for Winnie’s face, I was not able to see her before I ducked through the door leading to the cells below.

We were kept handcuffed in the cells underneath the courthouse. The police were extremely nervous about the crowd outside. They kept us
underground for more than half an hour, hoping people would disperse. We were taken through the back of the building and entered the black van.
We could hear the motorcycle escort revving up beside us. To avoid the crowd, the van took a different course, but even so, we could hear the
crowd shouting “Amandla!” and the slow beautiful rhythms of “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika.” We made clenched fists through the bars of the window,
hoping the crowd could see us, not knowing if they could.
All of us were now convicted prisoners. We were separated from Dennis Goldberg because he was white and he was taken to a different facility.
The rest of us were locked up in cells in Pretoria Local away from all the other prisoners. Instead of shouts and songs, we now heard only the
clanging of doors and gates.
* * *
That night, as I lay on my mat on the floor of my cell, I ran over the reasons for de Wet’s decision. The demonstrations throughout South Africa and
the international pressure undoubtedly weighed on his mind. International trade unions had protested the trial. Dockworkers’ unions around the
world threatened not to handle South African goods. The Russian prime minister, Leonid Brezhnev, wrote to Dr. Verwoerd asking for leniency.
Members of the United States Congress protested. Fifty members of the British Parliament had staged a march in London. Alex Douglas-Home,
the British foreign secretary, was rumored to be working behind the scenes to help our cause. Adlai Stevenson, the U.S. representative at the U.N.,
wrote a letter saying that his government would do everything it could to prevent a death sentence. I thought that once de Wet had accepted that we
had not yet initiated guerrilla warfare and that the ANC and MK were separate entities, it would have been difficult to impose the death penalty; it
would have seemed excessive.
Verwoerd told Parliament that the judgment had not been influenced by the telegrams of protest and representations that had come in from
around the world. He boasted that he had tossed into the wastebasket all the telegrams from socialist nations.
Towards the end of the proceedings, Judge de Wet had remarked in passing to Bram Fischer that the defense had generated a great deal of

worldwide propaganda in the case. This was perhaps his own way of acknowledging the pressure. He knew that if we were executed, the great
majority of the people would regard him as our killer.
Yet he was under even greater pressure from his own people. He was a white Afrikaner, a creature of the South African system and mind-set. He
had no inclination to go against the belief system that had formed him. He had succumbed to these pressures by sentencing us to life and resisted
them by not giving us death.
I was surprised and displeased by the sentences de Wet imposed on Kathrada, Motsoaledi, and Mlangeni. I had expected him to discharge
Kathy, and to give Elias and Andrew lighter sentences. The latter two were comparatively junior members of MK, and the combined offenses of the
three of them could hardly be compared with those of the rest of us. But by not appealing, we undoubtedly cost Kathy, Andrew, and Elias: an
appeals court might have cut down their sentences.
Every evening, in Pretoria Local, before lights were out, the jail would echo to African prisoners singing freedom songs. We too would sing in this
great swelling chorus. But, each evening, seconds before the lights were dimmed, as if in obedience to some silent command, the hum of voices
would stop and the entire jail would become silent. Then, from a dozen places throughout the prison, men would yell “Amandla!” This would be met
by hundreds of voices replying “Ngawethu!” Often, we would start this call-and-response ourselves, but that night, other nameless prisoners took the
initiative, and the voices from around the prison seemed uncommonly strong as though steeling us for what lay ahead.