I AWOKE ON THE DAY of my release after only a few hours’ sleep at 4:30 A.M. February 11 was a cloudless, end-of-summer Cape Town day. I did
a shortened version of my usual exercise regimen, washed, and ate breakfast. I then telephoned a number of people from the ANC and the UDF in
Cape Town to come to the cottage to prepare for my release and work on my speech. The prison doctor came by to give me a brief checkup. I did
not dwell on the prospect of my release, but on all the many things I had to do before then. As so often happens in life, the momentousness of an
occasion is lost in the welter of a thousand details.
There were numerous matters that had to be discussed and resolved with very little time to do so. A number of comrades from the reception
committee, including Cyril Ramaphosa and Trevor Manuel, were at the house bright and early. I wanted initially to address the people of Paarl, who
had been very kind to me during my incarceration, but the reception committee was adamant that that would not be a good idea: it would look
curious if I gave my first speech to the prosperous white burghers of Paarl. Instead, as planned, I would speak first to the people of Cape Town at
the Grand Parade in Cape Town.
One of the first questions to be resolved was where I would spend my first night of freedom. My inclination was to spend the night in the Cape
Flats, the bustling black and Coloured townships of Cape Town, in order to show my solidarity with the people. But my colleagues and, later, my
wife argued that for security reasons I should stay with Archbishop Desmond Tutu in Bishop’s Court, a plush residence in a white suburb. It was not
an area where I would have been permitted to live before I went to prison, and I thought it would send the wrong signal to spend my first night of
freedom in a posh white area. But the members of the committee explained that Bishop’s Court had become multiracial under Tutu’s tenure, and
symbolized an open, generous nonracialism.
The prison service supplied me with boxes and crates for packing. During my first twenty or so years in prison, I accumulated very few
possessions, but in the last few years I had amassed enough property — mainly books and papers — to make up for previous decades. I filled over
a dozen crates and boxes.

My actual release time was set for 3 P.M., but Winnie and Walter and the other passengers from the chartered flight from Johannesburg did not
arrive until after two. There were already dozens of people at the house, and the entire scene took on the aspect of a celebration. Warrant Officer
Swart prepared a final meal for all of us, and I thanked him not only for the food he had provided for the last two years but the companionship.
Warrant Officer James Gregory was also there at the house, and I embraced him warmly. In the years that he had looked after me from Pollsmoor
through Victor Verster, we had never discussed politics, but our bond was an unspoken one and I would miss his soothing presence. Men like
Swart, Gregory, and Warrant Officer Brand reinforced my belief in the essential humanity even of those who had kept me behind bars for the
previous twenty-seven and a half years.
There was little time for lengthy farewells. The plan was that Winnie and I would be driven in a car to the front gate of the prison. I had told the
authorities that I wanted to be able to say good-bye to the guards and warders who had looked after me and I asked that they and their families wait
for me at the front gate, where I would be able to thank them individually.
At a few minutes after three, I was telephoned by a well-known SABC presenter who requested that I get out of the car a few hundred feet before
the gate so that they could film me walking toward freedom. This seemed reasonable, and I agreed to do it. This was my first inkling that things
might not go as calmly as I had imagined.
By 3:30, I began to get restless, as we were already behind schedule. I told the members of the reception committee that my people had been
waiting for me for twenty-seven years and I did not want to keep them waiting any longer. Shortly before four, we left in a small motorcade from the
cottage. About a quarter of a mile in front of the gate, the car slowed to a stop and Winnie and I got out and began to walk toward the prison gate.
At first, I could not really make out what was going on in front of us, but when I was within one hundred fifty feet or so, I saw a tremendous
commotion and a great crowd of people: hundreds of photographers and television cameras and newspeople as well as several thousand wellwishers. I was astounded and a little bit alarmed. I had truly not expected such a scene; at most, I had imagined that there would be several dozen
people, mainly the warders and their families. But this proved to be only the beginning; I realized we had not thoroughly prepared for all that was
about to happen.
Within twenty feet or so of the gate, the cameras started clicking, a noise that sounded like some great herd of metallic beasts. Reporters started
shouting questions; television crews began crowding in; ANC supporters were yelling and cheering. It was a happy, if slightly disorienting chaos.
When a television crew thrust a long, dark, furry object at me, I recoiled slightly, wondering if it were some newfangled weapon developed while I
was in prison. Winnie informed me that it was a microphone.
When I was among the crowd I raised my right fist and there was a roar. I had not been able to do that for twenty-seven years and it gave me a
surge of strength and joy. We stayed among the crowd for only a few minutes before jumping back into the car for the drive to Cape Town. Although
I was pleased to have such a reception, I was greatly vexed by the fact that I did not have a chance to say good-bye to the prison staff. As I finally
walked through those gates to enter a car on the other side, I felt — even at the age of seventy-one — that my life was beginning anew. My ten
thousand days of imprisonment were over.

Cape Town was thirty-five miles to the southwest, but because of the unexpected crowds at the gate, the driver elected to take a different path to
the city. We drove round to the back of the prison, and our convoy took small roads and byways into town. We drove through beautiful green
vineyards and manicured farms, and I relished the scenery around me.
The countryside was lush and well cared for, but what surprised me was how many white families were standing beside the road to get a glimpse
of our motorcade. They had heard on the radio that we were taking an alternate route. Some, perhaps a dozen, even raised their clenched right
fists in what had become the ANC power salute. This astonished me; I was tremendously encouraged by these few brave souls from a conservative
farming area who expressed their solidarity. At one point, I stopped and got out of the car to greet and thank one such white family and tell them
how inspired I was by their support. It made me think that the South Africa I was returning to was far different from the one I had left.
As we entered the outskirts of the city, I could see people streaming toward the center. The reception committee had organized a rally at the
Grand Parade in Cape Town, a great open square that stretched out in front of the old City Hall. I would speak to the crowd from the balcony of that
building, which overlooked the entire area. We heard sketchy reports that a great sea of people had been waiting there since morning. The plan
was for our motorcade to avoid the crowd and drive around to the back of City Hall, where I would quietly enter the building.
The drive to Cape Town took forty-five minutes, and as we neared the Grand Parade we could see an enormous crowd. The driver was meant to

turn right and skirt its edges, but instead, he inexplicably plunged straight into the sea of people. Immediately the crowd surged forward and
enveloped the car. We inched forward for a minute or two but were then forced to stop by the sheer press of bodies. People began knocking on the
windows, and then on the boot and the bonnet. Inside it sounded like a massive hailstorm. Then people began to jump on the car in their
excitement. Others began to shake it and at that moment I began to worry. I felt as though the crowd might very well kill us with their love.
The driver was even more anxious than Winnie and I, and he was clamoring to jump out of the car. I told him to stay calm and remain inside, that
others from the cars behind us would come to our rescue. Allan Boesak and others began to attempt to clear a way for our vehicle and push the
people off the car, but with little success. We sat inside — it would have been futile to even attempt to open the door, so many people were
pressing on it — for more than an hour, imprisoned by thousands of our own supporters. The scheduled beginning of the speech had long passed.
Several dozen marshals eventually came to the rescue and managed slowly to clear an exit path. When we finally broke free, the driver set off at
great speed in the opposite direction from City Hall. “Man, where are you going?” I asked him in some agitation. “I don’t know!” he said, his voice
tense with anxiety. “I’ve never experienced anything like that before,” he said, and then continued driving without any destination in mind.
When he began to calm down I gave him directions to the house of my friend and attorney Dullah Omar, who lived in the Indian area of the city.
We could go there, I said, and relax for a few minutes. This appealed to him. Fortunately, Dullah and his family were home, but they were more than
a bit surprised to see us. I was a free man for the first time in twenty-seven years, but instead of greeting me, they said with some concern, “Aren’t
you meant to be at the Grand Parade?”
We were able to sip some cold drinks at Dullah’s, but we had only been there a few minutes when Archbishop Tutu telephoned. How he knew we
were there I do not know. He was quite distressed and said, “Nelson, you must come back to the Grand Parade immediately. The people are
growing restless. If you do not return straightaway I cannot vouch for what will happen. I think there might be an uprising!” I said I would return at
once.
Our problem was the driver: he was deeply reluctant to return to the Grand Parade. But I remonstrated with him and soon we were on our way
back to City Hall. The building was surrounded by people on all sides, but it was not as dense in the back, and the driver managed to make his way
through to the rear entrance. It was almost dusk when I was led up to the top floor of this stately building whose halls had always been filled with
shuffling white functionaries. I walked out onto the balcony and saw a boundless sea of people cheering, holding flags and banners, clapping, and
laughing.
I raised my fist to the crowd and the crowd responded with an enormous cheer. Those cheers fired me anew with the spirit of the struggle.
“Amandla!” I called out. “Ngawethu!” they responded. “iAfrika!” I yelled; “Mayibuye!” they answered. Finally, when the crowd had settled down a bit, I
took out my speech and then reached into my breast pocket for my glasses. They were not there; I had left them at Victor Verster. I knew Winnie’s
glasses were a similar prescription and I borrowed hers.
Friends, comrades and fellow South Africans. I greet you all in the name of peace, democracy and freedom for all! I stand here before you not as a prophet but as a humble servant
of you, the people. Your tireless and heroic sacrifices have made it possible for me to be here today. I therefore place the remaining years of my life in your hands.

I spoke from the heart. I wanted first of all to tell the people that I was not a messiah, but an ordinary man who had became a leader because of
extraordinary circumstances. I wanted immediately to thank the people all over the world who had campaigned for my release. I thanked the people
of Cape Town, and I saluted Oliver Tambo and the African National Congress, Umkhonto we Sizwe, the South African Communist Party, the UDF,
the South African Youth Congress, COSATU, the Mass Democratic Movement, the National Union of South African Students, and the Black Sash,
a group formed by women that had long been a voice of conscience. I also publicly expressed my gratitude to my wife and family, saying, “I am
convinced that [their] pain and suffering was far greater than my own.”
I told the crowd in no uncertain terms that apartheid had no future in South Africa, and that the people must not let up their campaign of mass
action. “The sight of freedom looming on the horizon should encourage us to redouble our efforts.” I felt it was important publicly to explain my talks
with the government. “Today,” I said, “I wish to report to you that my talks with the government have been aimed at normalizing the political situation
in the country. I wish to stress that I myself have at no time entered into negotiations about the future of our country except to insist on a meeting
between the ANC and the government.”
I said I hoped that a climate conducive to a negotiated settlement could soon be achieved, ending the need for the armed struggle. The steps to
achieving such a climate, I said, had been outlined in the ANC’s 1989 Harare Declaration. As a condition to real negotiations, I said, the
government must immediately end the State of Emergency and free all political prisoners.
I told the people that de Klerk had gone further than any other Nationalist leader to normalize the situation and then, in words that came back to
haunt me, I called Mr. de Klerk “a man of integrity.” These words were flung back at me many times when Mr. de Klerk seemed not to live up to
them.
It was vital for me to show my people and the government that I was unbroken and unbowed, and that the struggle was not over for me but
beginning anew in a different form. I affirmed that I was “a loyal and disciplined member of the African National Congress.” I encouraged the people
to return to the barricades, to intensify the struggle, and we would walk the last mile together.

It was evening by the time my speech was finished, and we were hustled back into our cars for the trip to Bishop’s Court. As we entered its pristine
environs, I saw hundreds of black faces waiting to greet me. When they saw us, the people burst into song. When I greeted Archbishop Tutu, I
enveloped him in a great hug; here was a man who had inspired an entire nation with his words and his courage, who had revived the people’s
hope during the darkest of times. We were led inside the house where more family and friends met us, but for me, the most wonderful moment was
when I was told that I had a telephone call from Stockholm. I knew immediately who it was. Oliver’s voice was weak, but unmistakable, and to hear
him after all those years filled me with great joy. Oliver was in Sweden recuperating from a debilitating stroke he had suffered in August 1989. We
agreed that we would meet as soon as possible.
My dream upon leaving prison was to take a leisurely drive down to the Transkei, and visit my birthplace, the hills and streams where I had played
as a boy, and the burial ground of my mother, which I had never seen. But my dream had to be deferred, for I learned very quickly of the extensive
plans that the ANC had for me, and none of them involved a relaxing journey to the Transkei.