IN 1978, after we had spent almost fifteen years agitating for the right to receive news, the authorities offered us a compromise. Instead of
permitting us to receive newspapers or listen to radio, they started their own radio news service, which consisted of a daily canned summary of the
news read over the prison’s intercom system.
The broadcasts were far from objective or comprehensive. Several of the island’s censors would compile a brief news digest from other daily
radio bulletins. The broadcasts consisted of good news for the government and bad news for all its opponents.
The first broadcast opened with a report about the death of Robert Sobukwe. Other early reports concerned the victories of Ian Smith’s troops in
Rhodesia and detentions of government opponents in South Africa. Despite the slanted nature of the news, we were glad to have it, and prided
ourselves on reading between the lines and making educated guesses based on the obvious omissions.
That year, we learned via the intercom that P. W. Botha had succeeded John Vorster as prime minister. What the warders did not tell us was that
Vorster resigned as a result of press revelations about the Department of Information’s misuse of government funds. I knew little about Botha apart
from the fact that he had been an aggressive defense minister and had supported a military strike into Angola in 1975. We had no sense that he
would be a reformer in any way.
I had recently read an authorized biography of Vorster (this was one of the books the prison library did have) and found that he was a man willing
to pay for his beliefs; he went to prison for his support of Germany during the Second World War. We were not sorry to see Vorster go. He had
escalated the battle against freedom to new heights of repression.
But even without our expurgated radio broadcast, we had learned what the authorities did not want us to know. We learned of the successful
liberation struggles in Mozambique and Angola in 1975 and their emergence as independent states with revolutionary governments. The tide was
turning our way.

In keeping with the increased openness on the island, we now had our own cinema. Almost every week, we watched films on a sheet in a large
room adjacent to our corridor. Later, we had a proper screen. The films were a wonderful diversion, a vivid escape from the bleakness of prison
life.
The first films we saw were silent, black-and-white Hollywood action movies and westerns that were even before my time. I recall one of the first
ones was The Mark of Zorro, with the swashbuckling Douglas Fairbanks, a movie that was made in 1920. The authorities seemed to have a
weakness for historical films, particularly ones with a stern moral message. Among the early films we saw — now in color, with dialogue — were
The Ten Commandments with Charlton Heston as Moses, The King and I, with Yul Brynner, and Cleopatra, with Richard Burton and Elizabeth
Taylor.
We were intrigued by The King and I, for to us it depicted the clash between the values of East and West, and seemed to suggest that the West
had much to learn from the East. Cleopatra proved controversial; many of my comrades took exception to the fact that the queen of Egypt was
depicted by a raven-haired, violet-eyed American actress, however beautiful. The detractors asserted that the movie was an example of Western
propaganda that sought to erase the fact that Cleopatra was an African woman. I related how on my trip to Egypt I saw a splendid sculpture of a
young, ebony-skinned Cleopatra.
Later, we also saw local South African films with black stars whom we all knew from the old days. On those nights, our little makeshift theater
echoed with the shouts, whistles, and cheers that greeted the appearance of an old friend on screen. Later, we were permitted to select
documentaries — a form that I preferred — and I began to skip the conventional films. (Although I would never miss a movie with Sophia Loren in
it.) The documentaries were ordered from the state library and usually selected by Ahmed Kathrada, who was our section’s librarian. I was
particularly affected by a documentary we saw about the great naval battles of World War II, which showed newsreel footage of the sinking of the
H.M.S. Prince of Wales by the Japanese. What moved me most was a brief image of Winston Churchill weeping after he heard the news of the
loss of the British vessel. The image stayed in my memory a long time, and demonstrated to me that there are times when a leader can show
sorrow in public, and that it will not diminish him in the eyes of his people.

One of the documentaries we watched concerned a controversial American motorcycle group, the Hell’s Angels. The film depicted the Hell’s
Angels as reckless, violent, and antisocial, and the police as decent, upstanding, and trustworthy. When the film ended, we immediately began to
discuss its meaning. Almost without exception the men criticized the Hell’s Angels for their lawless ways. But then Strini Moodley, a bright, young
Black Consciousness member, stood up and accused the assembled group of being out of touch with the times, for the bikers represented the
equivalent of the Soweto students of 1976 who rebelled against the authorities. He reproached us for being elderly middle-class intellectuals who
identified with the movie’s right-wing authorities instead of with the bikers.
Strini’s accusations caused a furor, and a number of men rose to speak against him, saying the Hell’s Angels were indefensible and it was an
insult to compare our struggle with this band of amoral sociopaths. But I considered what Strini said, and while I did not agree with him, I came to
his defense. Even though the Hell’s Angels were unsympathetic, they were the rebels against the authorities, unsavory rebels though they were.
I was not interested in the Hell’s Angels, but the larger question that concerned me was whether we had, as Strini suggested, become stuck in a
mind-set that was no longer revolutionary. We had been in prison for more than fifteen years; I had been in prison for nearly eighteen. The world that
we left was long gone. The danger was that our ideas had become frozen in time. Prison is a still point in a turning world, and it is very easy to
remain in the same place in jail while the world moves on.
I had always attempted to remain open to new ideas, not to reject a position because it was new or different. During our years on the island we
kept up a continuing dialogue about our beliefs and ideas; we debated them, questioned them, and thereby refined them. I did not think we had
stayed in one place; I believe we had evolved.
Although Robben Island was becoming more open, there was as yet still no sign that the state was reforming its views. Even so, I did not doubt
that I would someday be a free man. We may have been stuck in one place, but I was confident the world was moving toward our position, not away
from it. The movie reminded me once again that on the day I did walk out of prison, I did not want to appear to be a political fossil from an age long
past.

It took fifteen years, but in 1979, the authorities announced over the intercom system that the diet for African, Coloured, and Indian prisoners would
henceforth be the same. But just as justice delayed is justice denied, a reform so long postponed and so grudgingly enacted was hardly worth
celebrating.
All prisoners were to receive the same amount of sugar in the morning: a spoonful and a half. But instead of simply increasing the African quota,
the authorities reduced the amount of sugar that Coloured and Indian prisoners received by half a spoonful, while adding that amount for African
prisoners. A while before, African prisoners had begun to receive bread in the morning, but that made little difference. We had been pooling bread
for years.
Our food had already improved in the previous two years, but not because of the authorities. In the wake of the Soweto uprising, the authorities
had decided that the island would become the exclusive home of South Africa’s “security prisoners.” The number of general prisoners had been
drastically reduced. As a result, political prisoners were recruited to work in the kitchen for the first time. Once political prisoners were in the
kitchen, our diet improved dramatically. This was not because they were better chefs, but because the smuggling of food immediately stopped.
Instead of siphoning off food for themselves or to bribe the warders, the new cooks used all the food allotted us. Vegetables became more
abundant, and chunks of meat began to appear in our soups and stews. Only then did we realize we should have been eating such food for years.