IN 1946, a number of critical events occurred that shaped my political development and the direction of the struggle. The mineworkers’ strike of
1946, in which 70,000 African miners along the Reef went on strike, affected me greatly. At the initiative of J. B. Marks, Dan Tloome, Gaur Radebe,
and a number of ANC labor activists, the African Mine Workers Union (AMWU) had been created in the early 1940s. There were as many as
400,000 African miners working on the Reef, most of them making no more than two shillings a day. The union leadership had repeatedly pressed
the Chamber of Mines for a minimum wage of ten shillings a day, as well as family housing and two weeks’ paid leave. The chamber ignored the
union’s demands.
In one of the largest such actions in South African history, the miners went on strike for a week and maintained their solidarity. The state’s
retaliation was ruthless. The leaders were arrested, the compounds surrounded by police, and the AMWU offices ransacked. A march was brutally
repulsed by police; twelve miners died. The Natives Representative Council adjourned in protest. I had a number of relations who were
mineworkers, and during the week of the strike I visited them, discussed the issues, and expressed my support.
J. B. Marks, a longtime member of the ANC and the Communist Party, was then president of the African Mine Workers Union. Born in the
Transvaal, of mixed parentage, Marks was a charismatic figure with a distinctive sense of humor. He was a tall man with a light complexion. During
the strike I sometimes went with him from mine to mine, talking to workers and planning strategy. From morning to night, he displayed cool and
reasoned leadership, with his humor leavening even the most difficult crisis. I was impressed by the organization of the union and its ability to
control its membership, even in the face of such savage opposition.
In the end, the state prevailed: the strike was suppressed and the union crushed. The strike was the beginning of my close relationship with
Marks. I visited him often at his house, and we discussed my opposition to communism at great length. Marks was a stalwart member of the party,
but he never personalized my objections, and felt that it was natural for a young man to embrace nationalism, but that as I grew older and more
experienced, my views would broaden. I had these same discussions with Moses Kotane and Yusuf Dadoo, both of whom believed, like Marks,
that communism had to be adapted to the African situation. Other Communist members of the ANC condemned me and the other Youth Leaguers,
but Marks, Kotane, and Dadoo never did.
After the strike, fifty-two men, including Kotane, Marks, and many other Communists, were arrested and prosecuted, first for incitement then for
sedition. It was a political trial, an effort by the state to show that it was not soft on the Red Menace.
That same year, another event forced me to recast my whole approach to political work. In 1946, the Smuts government passed the Asiatic Land
Tenure Act, which curtailed the free movement of Indians, circumscribed the areas where Indians could reside and trade, and severely restricted
their right to buy property. In return, they were provided with representation in Parliament by token white surrogates. Dr. Dadoo, president of the
Transvaal Indian Congress, castigated the restrictions and dismissed the offer of parliamentary representation as “a spurious offer of a sham
franchise.” This law — known as the Ghetto Act — was a grave insult to the Indian community and anticipated the Group Areas Act, which would
eventually circumscribe the freedom of all South Africans of color.
The Indian community was outraged and launched a concerted, two-year campaign of passive resistance to oppose the measures. Led by Drs.
Dadoo and G. M. Naicker, president of the Natal Indian Congress, the Indian community conducted a mass campaign that impressed us with its
organization and dedication. Housewives, priests, doctors, lawyers, traders, students, and workers took their place in the front lines of the protest.
For two years, people suspended their lives to take up the battle. Mass rallies were held; land reserved for whites was occupied and picketed. No
less than two thousand volunteers went to jail, and Drs. Dadoo and Naicker were sentenced to six months’ hard labor.
The campaign was confined to the Indian community and the participation of other groups was not encouraged. Even so, Dr. Xuma and other
African leaders spoke at several meetings and along with the Youth League gave full moral support to the struggle of the Indian people. The
government crippled the rebellion with harsh laws and intimidation, but we in the Youth League and the ANC had witnessed the Indian people
register an extraordinary protest against color oppression in a way that Africans and the ANC had not. Ismail Meer and J. N. Singh suspended their
studies, said good-bye to their families, and went to prison. Ahmed Kathrada, who was still a high-school student, did the same thing. I often visited
the home of Amina Pahad for lunch, and then suddenly, this charming woman put aside her apron and went to jail for her beliefs. If I had once
questioned the willingness of the Indian community to protest against oppression, I no longer could.
The Indian campaign became a model for the type of protest that we in the Youth League were calling for. It instilled a spirit of defiance and
radicalism among the people, broke the fear of prison, and boosted the popularity and influence of the NIC and TIC. They reminded us that the
freedom struggle was not merely a question of making speeches, holding meetings, passing resolutions, and sending deputations, but of
meticulous organization, militant mass action, and, above all, the willingness to suffer and sacrifice. The Indian campaign hearkened back to the
1913 passive resistance campaign in which Mahatma Gandhi led a tumultuous procession of Indians crossing illegally from Natal to the Transvaal.
That was history; this campaign was taking place before my own eyes.

Early in 1946, Evelyn and I moved to a two-room municipal house of our own in Orlando East and thereafter to a slightly larger house at No. 8115
Orlando West. Orlando West was a dusty, spartan area of boxy municipal houses that would later become part of Greater Soweto, Soweto being
an acronym for South-Western Townships. Our house was situated in an area nicknamed Westcliff by its residents after the fancy white suburb to
the north.
The rent of our new home was seventeen shillings and sixpence per month. The house itself was identical to hundreds of others built on postagestamp-size plots on dirt roads. It had the same standard tin roof, the same cement floor, a narrow kitchen, and a bucket toilet in back. Although
there were streetlamps outside, we used kerosene lamps inside as the homes were not yet electrified. The bedroom was so small that a double
bed took up almost the entire floor space. These houses were built by the municipal authorities for workers who needed to be near town. To relieve
the monotony, some people planted small gardens or painted their doors bright colors. It was the very opposite of grand, but it was my first true
home of my own and I was mightily proud. A man is not a man until he has a house of his own. I did not know then that it would be the only residence
that would be entirely mine for many, many years.
The state had allocated the house to Evelyn and me because we were no longer just two, but three. That year, our first son, Madiba Thembekile,
was born. He was given my clan name of Madiba, but was known by the nickname Thembi. He was a solid, happy little boy who most people said
resembled his mother more than his father. I had now produced an heir, though I had little as yet to bequeath to him. But I had perpetuated the
Mandela name and the Madiba clan, which is one of the basic responsibilities of a Xhosa male.
I finally had a stable base, and I went from being a guest in other people’s homes to having guests in my own. My sister Leabie joined us and I
took her across the railroad line to enroll her at Orlando High School. In my culture, all the members of one’s family have a claim to the hospitality of

any other member of the family; the combination of my large extended family and my new house meant a great number of guests.
I enjoyed domesticity, even though I had little time for it. I delighted in playing with Thembi, bathing him and feeding him, and putting him to bed
with a little story. In fact, I love playing with children and chatting with them; it has always been one of the things that make me feel most at peace. I
enjoyed relaxing at home, reading quietly, taking in the sweet and savory smells emanating from pots boiling in the kitchen. But I was rarely at home
to enjoy these things.
During the latter part of that year, the Reverend Michael Scott came to stay with us. Scott was an Anglican clergyman and a great fighter for
African rights. He had been approached by a man named Komo, who was representing a squatter camp outside of Johannesburg that the
government was seeking to relocate. Komo wanted Scott to make a protest against the removal. Scott said, “If I am going to help you I must be one
of you,” and he proceeded to move to the squatter camp and start a congregation there. Scott’s shantytown for the homeless was built near a rocky
knoll and the residents christened it Tobruk, after the battle in the North Africa campaign of the war. It was a place I sometimes took Thembi on
Sunday morning, as he liked to play hide-and-seek among the rocks. After Scott had set up his congregation, he found that Komo was embezzling
money from people who were contributing to the fight against the removal. When Scott confronted Komo, Komo drove Scott out of camp and
threatened his life.
Scott took refuge with us in Orlando and brought along an African priest named Dlamini, who also had a wife and children. Our house was tiny,
and Scott slept in the sitting room, Dlamini and his wife slept in another room, and we put all the children in the kitchen. Reverend Scott was a
modest, unassuming man, but Dlamini was a bit hard to take. At mealtimes, he would complain about the food. “Look, here,” he would say, “this
meat of yours, it’s very lean and hard, not properly cooked at all. I’m not used to meals like this.” Scott was appalled by this, and admonished
Dlamini, but Dlamini took no heed. The next night he might say, “Well, this is a bit better than yesterday, but far from well prepared. Mandela, you
know your wife just cannot cook.”
Dlamini indirectly caused the situation to be resolved because I was so eager to have him out of the house that I went to the squatter camp myself
and explained that Scott was a true friend of theirs, unlike Komo, and that they had to choose between the two. They then organized an election in
which Scott triumphed, and he moved back to the squatter camp, taking Father Dlamini with him.

Early in 1947, I completed the requisite period of three years for articles and my time at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman came to an end. I resolved
to become a full-time student in order to earn my LL.B. so that I could go out on my own and practice as an attorney. The loss of the eight pounds,
ten shillings, and one penny per month that I earned at Sidelsky was devastating. I applied to the Bantu Welfare Trust at the South African Institute of
Race Relations in Johannesburg for a loan of £250 sterling to help finance my law studies, which included university fees, textbooks, and a monthly
allowance. I was given a loan of £150.
Three months later, I wrote to them again, noting that my wife was about to take maternity leave, and we would lose her salary of seventeen
pounds per month, which was absolutely necessary to our survival. I did receive the additional money, for which I was grateful, but the
circumstances which warranted it were unfortunate. Our daughter Makaziwe’s birth was not difficult, yet she was frail and sickly. From the start, we
feared the worst. Many nights, Evelyn and I took turns looking after her. We did not know the name of whatever was consuming this tiny girl and the
doctors could not explain the nature of the problem. Evelyn monitored the baby with the combination of a mother’s tirelessness and a nurse’s
professional efficiency. When she was nine months old, Makaziwe passed away. Evelyn was distraught, and the only thing that helped temper my
own grief was trying to alleviate hers.

In politics, no matter how much one plans, circumstances often dictate events. In July of 1947, during an informal discussion with Lembede about
Youth League business, he complained to me of a sudden pain in his stomach and an accompanying chill. When the pain worsened, we drove him
to Coronation Hospital, and that same night, he was dead at the age of thirty-three. Many were deeply affected by his death. Walter Sisulu seemed
almost prostrate with grief. His passing was a setback to the movement, for Lembede was a fount of ideas and attracted others to the organization.
Lembede was succeeded by Peter Mda, whose analytical approach, ability to express himself clearly and simply, and tactical experience made
him an excellent politician and an outstanding leader of the Youth League. Mda was a lean fellow; he had no excess weight, just as he used no
excess words. In his broad-minded tolerance of different views, his own thinking was more mature than that of Lembede. It took Mda’s leadership
to advance Lembede’s cause.
Mda believed the Youth League should function as an internal pressure group, a militant nationalistic wing within the ANC as a whole that would
propel the organization into a new era. At the time, the ANC did not have a single full-time employee, and was generally poorly organized, operating
in a haphazard way. (Later, Walter became the first and only full-time ANC staff member at an extremely meager salary.)
Mda quickly established a branch of the Youth League at Fort Hare under the guidance of Z. K. Matthews and Godfrey Pitje, a lecturer in
anthropology. They recruited outstanding students, bringing in fresh blood and new ideas. Among the most outstanding were Professor Matthews’s
brilliant son Joe, and Robert Sobukwe, a dazzling orator and incisive thinker.
Mda was more moderate in his nationalism than Lembede, and his thinking was without the racial tinge that characterized Lembede’s. He hated
white oppression and white domination, not white people themselves. He was also less extreme in his opposition to the Communist Party than
Lembede — or myself. I was among the Youth Leaguers who were suspicious of the white left. Even though I had befriended many white
Communists, I was wary of white influence in the ANC, and I opposed joint campaigns with the party. I was concerned that the Communists were
intent on taking over our movement in the guise of joint action. I believed that it was an undiluted African nationalism, not Marxism or multiracialism,
that would liberate us. With a few of my colleagues in the league, I even went so far as breaking up CP meetings by storming the stage, tearing up
signs, and capturing the microphone. At the national conference of the ANC in December, the Youth League introduced a motion demanding the
expulsion of all members of the Communist Party, but we were soundly defeated. Despite the influence the Indian passive resistance campaign of
1946 had on me, I felt about the Indians the same way I did about the Communists: that they would tend to dominate the ANC, in part because of
their superior education, experience, and training.

In 1947, I was elected to the Executive Committee of the Transvaal ANC and served under C. S. Ramohanoe, president of the Transvaal region.
This was my first position in the ANC proper, and represented a milestone in my commitment to the organization. Until that time, the sacrifices I had
made had not gone much further than being absent from my wife and family during weekends and returning home late in the evening. I had not been
directly involved in any major campaign, and I did not yet understand the hazards and unending difficulties of the life of a freedom fighter. I had

coasted along without having to pay a price for my commitment. From the time I was elected to the Executive Committee of the Transvaal region, I
came to identify myself with the congress as a whole, with its hopes and despairs, its successes and failures; I was now bound heart and soul.
Ramohanoe was another one of those from whom I learned. He was a staunch nationalist and a skillful organizer who was able to balance
divergent views and come forward with a suitable compromise. While Ramohanoe was unsympathetic to the Communists, he worked well with
them. He believed that the ANC was a national organization that should welcome all those who supported our cause.

In 1947, in the wake of the Indian passive resistance campaign, Drs. Xuma, Dadoo, and Naicker, presidents, respectively, of the ANC, the
Transvaal Indian Congress, and the Natal Indian Congress, signed the Doctors’ Pact agreeing to join forces against a common enemy. This was a
significant step toward the unity of the African and Indian movements. Rather than create a central political body to direct all the various movements,
they agreed to cooperate on matters of common interest. Later, they were joined by the APO, the African People’s Organization, a Coloured
organization.
But such an agreement was at best tentative, for each national group faced problems peculiar to itself. The pass system, for example, barely
affected Indians or Coloureds. The Ghetto Act, which had prompted the Indian protests, barely affected Africans. Coloured groups at the time were
more concerned about the race classification and job reservation, issues that did not affect Africans and Indians to the same degree.
The Doctors’ Pact laid a foundation for the future cooperation of Africans, Indians, and Coloureds, since it respected the independence of each
individual group, but acknowledged the achievements that could be realized from acting in concert. The Doctors’ Pact precipitated a series of
nonracial, antigovernment campaigns around the country, which sought to bring together Africans and Indians in the freedom struggle. The first of
these campaigns was the First Transvaal and Orange Free State Peoples Assembly for Votes for All, a campaign for the extension of the franchise
to all black South Africans. Dr. Xuma announced ANC participation at a press conference over which I presided. At the time, we believed the
campaign would be run by the ANC, but when we learned that the ANC would not be leading the campaign, the Transvaal Executive Committee
decided that the ANC should withdraw. My idea at the time was that the ANC should be involved only in campaigns that the ANC itself led. I was
more concerned with who got the credit than whether the campaign would be successful.
Even after the withdrawal, Ramohanoe, the president of the Transvaal region of the ANC, issued a press statement calling on Africans in the
province to take part in the campaign of Votes for All in clear contravention of the decision of the Transvaal Executive Committee. This was an act
of disobedience the committee could not tolerate. At a conference called to resolve this dispute, I was asked to move a no-confidence motion
against Ramohanoe for his disobedience. I felt an acute conflict between duty and personal loyalty, between my obligations to my organization and
to my friend. I well knew that I would be condemning the action of a man whose integrity and devotion to the struggle I never questioned, a man
whose sacrifice in the liberation struggle was far greater than my own. I knew that the action that he had called for was in fact a noble one; he
believed that Africans should help their Indian brothers.
But the seriousness of Ramohanoe’s disobedience was too strong. While an organization like the ANC is made up of individuals, it is greater
than any of its individual parts, and loyalty to the organization takes precedence over loyalty to an individual. I agreed to lead the attack and offered
the motion condemning him, which was seconded by Oliver Tambo. This caused an uproar in the house, with verbal battles between those in the
region who supported their president and those who were on the side of the executive. The meeting broke up in disorder.