THE ROAD TO FREEDOM was far from smooth. Although the Transitional Executive Council began functioning in the new year, some parties
opted out. Inkatha rejected participation in the election and gave itself over to the politics of resistance. King Zwelithini, supported by Chief
Buthelezi, called for an autonomous and sovereign KwaZulu, and discouraged everyone in his province from voting. The white right called the
elections a betrayal and clamored for a volkstaat, yet they still had not proposed where it would be located or how it would work. There was no
magisterial district in all of South Africa where whites constituted a majority of residents.
February 12, 1994, was the deadline for registration of all parties, and on that day, Inkatha, the Conservative Party, and the Afrikaner Volksfront
failed to sign. The government of the Bophuthatswana homeland also refused to participate and resisted reincorporation into a united South Africa.
I was disturbed that these important groups were choosing not to participate. To bring them on board, we proposed certain significant
compromises: we agreed to the use of double ballots for provincial and national legislatures; guarantees of greater provincial powers; the renaming
of Natal province as KwaZulu/Natal; and the affirmation that a principle of “internal” self-determination would be included in the constitution for
groups sharing a common cultural and language heritage.
I arranged to meet Chief Buthelezi in Durban on March 1. “I will go down on my knees to beg those who want to drag our country into bloodshed,”
I told a rally before this meeting. Chief Buthelezi agreed to provisionally register for the elections in exchange for a promise to subject our
differences over constitutional issues to international mediation. To this I gladly assented. Before the final registration deadline, General Viljoen
also registered under a new party known as the Freedom Front.
Though Lucas Mangope, the president of Bophuthatswana, had chosen to keep his homeland out of the election, the tide of events soon altered
the situation. I spoke to him on a number of occasions urging him to let his people decide, but he would not listen. Those who wanted to participate
launched mass demonstrations and strikes, which soon spread to the Bophuthatswana civil service. The radio and television networks went off the
air. On the streets of Mafikeng, battles broke out between the homeland police and striking workers and students. Mangope called in military help
from his white right-wing allies. Soon, his own forces deserted him and he was ousted in a coup in early March. A few weeks later, Brigadier Gqozo
in the Ciskei capitulated and asked South Africa to take over the homeland.
Violence in Natal worsened. Inkatha supporters were blocking our efforts to campaign in Natal. Fifteen ANC election workers were shot and
hacked to death after putting up ANC posters. In March, Judge Johann Kriegler reported to me and Mr. de Klerk that because of the lack of
cooperation from the KwaZulu government, free elections could not be held there without direct political intervention. To demonstrate our strength in
Natal, the ANC held a mass march through the center of Durban. Then Inkatha attempted to do the same in Johannesburg, with dire results.
On March 28, thousands of Inkatha members, brandishing spears and knobkerries, marched through Johannesburg to a rally in the center of
town. At the same time, an armed Inkatha group attempted to enter Shell House, the ANC headquarters, but were repulsed by armed guards. Shots
by unidentified gunmen were also fired in the city center, and altogether fifty-three people died. It was a grisly spectacle that made South Africa
appear as if it was on the brink of internal war. Inkatha was attempting to postpone the election, but neither Mr. de Klerk nor I would budge. That day
was sacrosanct.
I had agreed to international mediation, and on April 13 a delegation arrived led by Lord Carrington, the former British foreign secretary, and
Henry Kissinger, the former American secretary of state. But when Inkatha was informed that the election date was not subject to mediation, they
refused to see the mediators, who left without talking to anyone. Now Chief Buthelezi knew the election would take place no matter what. On April
19, barely a week before the election, Chief Buthelezi accepted the offer of a constitutional role for the Zulu monarchy and agreed to participate.

Ten days before the vote, Mr. de Klerk and I held our single television debate. I had been a fair debater at Fort Hare, and in my early years in the
organization I had engaged in many impassioned debates on the platform. On Robben Island, we had honed our debating skills while we chipped
away at limestone. I was confident, but the day before, we held a mock debate in which the journalist Allister Sparks ably performed as Mr. de
Klerk. Too ably, according to my campaign advisers, for they chided me for speaking too slowly and not aggressively enough.
When the time came for the actual debate, however, I attacked the National Party quite firmly. I accused the National Party of fanning race hatred
between Coloureds and Africans in the Cape by distributing an inflammatory comic book that said the ANC’s slogan was “Kill a Coloured, kill a
farmer.” “There is no organization in this country as divisive as the new National Party,” I declared. When Mr. de Klerk criticized the ANC’s plan to
spend billions of dollars on housing and social programs, I scolded him, saying he was alarmed that we would have to devote so many of our
resources to blacks.
But as the debate was nearing an end, I felt I had been too harsh with the man who would be my partner in a government of national unity. In
summation, I said, “The exchanges between Mr. de Klerk and me should not obscure one important fact. I think we are a shining example to the
entire world of people drawn from different racial groups who have a common loyalty, a common love, to their common country. . . . In spite of
criticism of Mr. de Klerk,” I said, and then looked over at him, “sir, you are one of those I rely upon. We are going to face the problem of this country
together.” At which point I reached over to take his hand and said, “I am proud to hold your hand for us to go forward.” Mr. de Klerk seemed
surprised, but pleased.
