AFTER THE LIFTING of the Emergency, the National Executive Committee met secretly in September to discuss the future. We had had
discussions in jail during the trial, but this was our first formal session. The state was arming itself not for an external threat but an internal one. We
would not disband but carry on from underground. We would have to depart from the democratic procedures, outlined in the ANC’s constitution, of
holding conferences, branch meetings, and public gatherings. New structures had to be created for communication with unbanned Congress
organizations. But all of these new structures were illegal and would subject the participants to arrest and imprisonment. The executive committee
and its subordinate structures would have to be severely streamlined to adapt to illegal conditions. Of necessity, we dissolved the ANC Youth
League and Women’s League. Some fiercely resisted these changes; but the fact was that we were now an illegal organization. For those who
would continue to participate, politics went from being a risky occupation to a truly perilous one.
Though Mandela and Tambo had closed its doors and settled its remaining accounts, I continued to do whatever legal work I could. Numerous
colleagues readily made their offices, staff, and phone facilities available to me, but most of the time I preferred to work from Ahmed Kathrada’s
flat, number 13 Kholvad House. Although my practice had dissolved, my reputation as a lawyer was undimmed. Soon, the lounge of number 13 and
the hallway outside were crammed with clients. Kathy would return home and discover to his dismay that the only room in which he could be alone
was his kitchen.
During this period, I hardly had time for meals and saw very little of my family. I would stay late in Pretoria preparing for our case, or rush back to
handle another case. When I could actually sit down to supper with my family, the telephone would ring and I would be called away. Winnie was
pregnant again and infinitely patient. She was hoping her husband might actually be at the hospital when she gave birth. But it was not to be.
During the Christmas adjournment in 1960, I learned that Makgatho was ill in the Transkei where he was at school and I violated my banning
orders and went down to see him. I drove the entire night, stopping only for petrol. Makgatho required surgery, and I decided to bring him back with
me to Johannesburg. I again drove all night, and took Makgatho to his mother’s place while I went to arrange for his surgery. When I returned, I
learned that Winnie had already gone into labor. I rushed to the non-European wing of Bridgman Memorial Hospital to find that mother and daughter
were already in residence. The newborn girl was fine, but Winnie was very weak.
We named our new daughter Zindziswa, after the daughter of the poet laureate of the Xhosa people, Samuel Mqhayi, who had inspired me so
many years before at Healdtown. The poet returned home after a very long trip to find that his wife had given birth to a daughter. He had not known
that she was pregnant and assumed that the child had been fathered by another man. In our culture, when a woman gives birth, the husband does
not enter the house where she is confined for ten days. In this case, the poet was too enraged to observe this custom, and he stormed into the
house with an assegai, ready to stab both mother and daughter. But when he looked at the baby girl and saw that she was the image of himself, he
stepped back, and said, “u zindzile,” which means, “You are well established.” He named her Zindziswa, the feminine version of what he had said.