IN JAIL, all prisoners are classified by the authorities as one of four categories: A, B, C, or D. A is the highest classification and confers the most
privileges; D is the lowest and confers the least. All political prisoners, or what the authorities called “security prisoners,” were automatically
classified as D on admission. The privileges affected by these classifications included visits and letters, studies, and the opportunity to buy
groceries and incidentals — all of which are the lifeblood of any prisoner. It normally took years for a political prisoner to raise his status from D to
C.
We disdained the classification system. It was corrupt and demeaning, another way of repressing prisoners in general and political prisoners in
particular. We demanded that all political prisoners be in one category. Although we criticized it, we could not ignore it: the classification system
was an inflexible feature of prison life. If you protested that, as a D Group prisoner, you could receive only one letter every six months, the authorities
would say, Improve your behavior, become a C Group prisoner, and you will be able to receive two letters every six months. If you complained that
you did not receive enough food, the authorities would remind you that if you were in A Group, you would be able to receive money orders from the
outside and purchase extra food at the prison canteen. Even a freedom fighter benefits from the ability to buy groceries and books.
The classifications generally ran parallel to the length of one’s sentence. If you were sentenced to eight years, you would generally be classified
as D for the first two years, C for the next two, B for the following two, and A for the last two. But the prison authorities wielded the classification
system as a weapon against political prisoners, threatening to lower our hard-won classifications in order to control our behavior.
Though I had been in prison for nearly two years before I was taken to Robben Island, I was still in D Group when I arrived. While I desired the
privileges that came with higher classifications, I refused to compromise my conduct. The fastest way to raise one’s classification was to be docile
and not complain. “Ag, Mandela, you are a troublemaker,” the warders would say. “You will be in D Group for the rest of your life.”
Every six months, prisoners were called before the prison board to have their classifications evaluated. The board was meant to assess our
behavior in terms of prison regulations, but we found that it preferred to act as a political tribunal rather than a mere evaluator of behavior. During
my first meeting with the board, the officials asked me questions about the ANC and my beliefs. Although this had nothing to do with the
classification system, I was vain enough to answer and think that I might convert them to my beliefs. It was one of the few times we were treated as
human beings, and I for one responded. Later I realized that this was simply a technique on the part of the authorities to glean information from us,
and I had fallen for it. Shortly afterward, we agreed among ourselves not to discuss politics with the prison board.

As a D Group prisoner, I was entitled to have only one visitor, and to write and receive only one letter, every six months. I found this one of the most
inhumane restrictions of the prison system. Communication with one’s family is a human right; it should not be restricted by the artificial gradations
of a prison system. But it was one of the facts of prison life.
Visits and letters were restricted to “first degree” relatives. This was a restriction we not only found irksome but racist. The African sense of
immediate family is far different from that of the European or Westerner. Our family structures are larger and more inclusive; anyone who claims
descent from a common ancestor is deemed part of the same family.
In prison, the only thing worse than bad news about one’s family is no news at all. It is always harder to cope with the disasters and tragedies one
imagines than with the reality, however grim or disagreeable. A letter with ill tidings was always preferable to no letter at all.
But even this miserable restriction was abused by the authorities. The anticipation of mail was overwhelming. Mail call took place once a month,
and sometimes six months would go by without a letter. To be allowed one letter in six months and then not to receive it is a great blow. One
wonders: What has happened to my wife and children, to my mother and my sisters? When I did not receive a letter I felt as dry and barren as the
Great Karroo desert. Often the authorities would withhold mail out of spite. I can remember warders saying, “Mandela, we have received a letter for
you, but we cannot give it to you.” No explanation of why, or whom the letter was from. It required all my self-discipline not to explode at such times.
Afterward, I would protest through the proper channels, and sometimes get it.
When letters did arrive, they were cherished. A letter was like the summer rain that could make even the desert bloom. When I was handed a
letter by the authorities, I would not rush forward and grab it as I felt like doing, but take it in a leisurely manner. Though I yearned to tear it open and
read it on the spot, I would not give the authorities the satisfaction of seeing my eagerness, and I would return slowly to my cell as though I had many
things to occupy me before opening a letter from my family.
During the first few months, I received one letter from Winnie, but it was so heavily censored that not much more than the salutation was left. The
island’s censors would black out the offending passages in ink, but they later changed this when they realized we could wash away the ink and see
what was underneath. They began to use razors to slice out whole paragraphs. Since most letters were written on both sides of a single piece of
paper, the material on the other side would also be excised. They seemed to relish delivering letters in tatters. The censorship delayed the delivery
of mail because warders, some of whom were not proficient in English, might take as long as a month to censor a letter. The letters we wrote were
censored as well; they were often as cut up as the letters we received.

At the end of August, after I had been on the island less than three months, I was informed by the authorities that I would have a visitor the following
day. They would not tell me who it was. Walter was informed that he, too, would have a visitor, and I suspected, I hoped, I wished — I believed —
that it would be a visit from Winnie and Albertina.
From the moment Winnie learned we had been brought to the island, she had been trying to arrange a visit. As a banned person, Winnie had to
receive a special dispensation from the minister of justice, for she was technically not permitted to communicate with me.
Even with the help of the authorities, visiting Robben Island was not an easy proposition. Visits were a maximum of thirty minutes long, and
political prisoners were not permitted contact visits, in which the visitor and prisoner were in the same room.
Visits did not seem to be planned in advance by the authorities. One day, they would contact your wife and say, “You have permission to visit your
husband tomorrow.” This was enormously inconvenient, and often had the effect of making visits impossible. If a family member was able to plan a
visit in advance, the authorities would sometimes deliberately delay issuing a permit until after the plane had departed. Since most of the men’s
families lived far from the Cape and had very little money, visits by family members were often far beyond their means. Some men who came from
poor families did not see their wives for many years at a time, if at all. I knew of men who spent a decade or more on Robben Island without a single
visit.

The visiting room for noncontact visits was cramped and windowless. On the prisoner’s side, there was a row of five cubicles with small square
pieces of glass that looked out on identical cubicles on the other side. One sat in a chair and looked through the thick, smudged glass that had a
few small holes drilled into it to permit conversation. One had to talk very loudly to be heard. Later the authorities installed microphones and
speakers in front of the glass, a marginal improvement.
Walter and I were called to the visitors’ office in the late morning and took seats at the far end of the room. I waited with some anxiety, and
suddenly, filling out the glass on the other side of the window was Winnie’s lovely face. Winnie always dressed up for prison visits, and tried to wear
something new and elegant. It was tremendously frustrating not to be able to touch my wife, to speak tenderly to her, to have a private moment
together. We had to conduct our relationship at a distance under the eyes of people we despised.
I could see immediately that Winnie was under tremendous strain. Seeing me in such circumstances must have been trying. Just getting to the
island itself was difficult, and added to that were the harsh rituals of the prison, the undoubted indignities of the warders, and the impersonality of
the contact.
Winnie, I later discovered, had recently received a second banning order and had been terminated from her job at the Child Welfare Office as a
result. Her office was searched by the police shortly before she was fired. The authorities were convinced that Winnie was in secret communication
with me. Winnie loved her job as a social worker. It was the hands-on end of the struggle: placing babies with adoptive parents, finding work for the
unemployed and medical help for the uninsured. The banning and harassment of my wife greatly troubled me: I could not look after her and the
children, and the state was making it difficult for her to look after herself. My powerlessness gnawed at me.
Our conversation was awkward at first, and was not made easier by the presence of two warders standing directly behind her and three behind
me. Their role was not only to monitor but to intimidate. Regulations dictated that conversation had to be in either English or Afrikaans — African
languages were forbidden — and could involve family matters only. Any line of talk that departed from the family and verged on the political might
mean the abrupt termination of the visit. If one mentioned a name unfamiliar to the warders, they would interrupt the conversation, and ask who the
person was and the nature of the relationship. This happened often, as the warders were generally unfamiliar with the variety and nature of African
names. It was frustrating to spend precious minutes of one’s visit explaining to a warder the different branches of one’s family tree. But their
ignorance also worked in our favor: it allowed us to invent code names for people we wanted to talk about and pretend that we were referring to
family members.
That first visit was important, for I knew that Winnie was anxious about my health: she had heard stories that we were being physically abused. I
quickly informed her that I was fine and she could see that I was fit, though a bit thinner than before. She, too, was thinner, something I always
attributed to stress. After a visit in which Winnie’s face looked drawn or tense, I would urge her to put on a bit of weight. She was always dieting,
and I was always telling her not to. I inquired one by one about all the children, about my mother and sisters, and Winnie’s own family.
Suddenly, I heard the warder behind me say, “Time up! Time up!” I turned and looked at him with incredulity. It was impossible that half an hour
had passed. But, in fact, he was right; visits always seemed to go by in the blink of an eye. For all the years that I was in prison, I never failed to be
surprised when the warder called, “Time up!” Winnie and I were both hustled from our chairs and we waved a quick farewell. I always felt like
lingering after Winnie left, just to retain the sense of her presence, but I would not let the warders see such emotion. As I walked back to the cell, I
reviewed in my head what we had talked about. Over the next days, weeks, and months, I would return to that one visit again and again. I knew I
would not be able to see my wife again for at least six months. As it turned out, Winnie was not able to visit me for another two years.
