IN MAY OF 1992, after a four-month interruption, the multiparty conference held its second plenary session at the World Trade Centre. Known as
CODESA 2, the talks had been prepared by secret meetings between negotiators from both the ANC and the government as well as talks between
the ANC and other parties. These meetings culminated in a final session between me and Mr. de Klerk the day before the opening of CODESA 2,
the first time the two of us had met since before CODESA 1.
Only days before CODESA 2 was to begin, the government was hit by two scandals. The first involved the revelation of massive corruption and
bribery at the Department of Development Aid, which was responsible for improving black life in the homelands, and the second was the
implication of high government security officials in the 1985 murder of four UDF activists, the best known of whom was Matthew Goniwe. These
revelations were added to the recent evidence implicating the police in murders in Natal and suspicions that the Department of Military Intelligence
was conducting covert operations against the ANC. These two scandals coming together undermined the credibility of the government and
strengthened our hand.
Over the previous months, the government had made numerous proposals that fell by the wayside. Most of them, like the idea of a rotating
presidency, sought to preserve their power. But through negotiations over the past months, the ANC and government teams had put together a
tentative agreement involving a two-stage transitional period to a fully democratic South Africa. In the first stage, a multiparty “transitional executive
council” would be appointed from the CODESA delegations to function as a temporary government in order to “level the playing field” for all parties
and create an interim constitution. In the second stage, general elections would be held for a constituent assembly and legislature in which all
political parties winning 5 percent or more of the vote would participate in the cabinet. Half the members of the assembly would be elected on a
national basis and half on a regional one, and the assembly would be empowered both to write a new constitution and to pass legislation. An
independent commission would preside over the election and make sure it was free and fair.
Yet there were many matters on which the ANC and the government could not reach agreement, such as the percentage of voting necessary in
the assembly to decide constitutional issues and to agree on a bill of rights. Only days before CODESA 2, the government proposed a second
body, a senate, composed of regional representatives, as a way of ensuring a minority veto. They also proposed that before all this, CODESA 2
first agree on an interim constitution, which would take months to draw up.
All of this bargaining was going on behind the scenes and by the time CODESA 2 opened on May 15, 1992, prospects for agreement looked
bleak. What we disagreed about was threatening all that we had agreed upon. Mr. de Klerk and I had not managed to find a consensus on most of
the outstanding issues. The government seemed prepared to wait indefinitely; their thinking was that the longer we waited, the more support we
would lose.
The convention was deadlocked at the end of the first day. At that time, the two judges presiding over the talks told Mr. de Klerk and me to meet
that evening to attempt to find a compromise. We did meet that night over coffee, and though we did not find a way out of the impasse, we agreed
that the negotiations must not founder. “The whole of South Africa and the world is looking at you and me,” I told Mr. de Klerk. “Let us save the
peace process. Let us reach some kind of agreement. Let us at least fix a date for the next round of talks.” We decided that we would each speak
the following day in a spirit of constructive compromise.
The next afternoon we spoke in the reverse order that we had agreed to at CODESA 1: Mr. de Klerk first and I last. In his remarks, Mr. de Klerk
insisted that the National Party did not seek a “minority veto,” but that he did want a system of “checks and balances” so that the majority would not
be able “to misuse its power.” Although this certainly sounded to me like outright opposition to the idea of majority rule, when I spoke after Mr. de
Klerk, I merely said we needed to work in a constructive manner and dispel the tensions around the negotiations.
Despite our attempts to put a positive face on the matter, the convention ended the second day in a stalemate. The impasse, as I saw it, was
caused by the National Party’s continuing reluctance to submit their fate to the will of the majority. They simply could not cross that hurdle.
Ultimately, CODESA 2 broke down on four fundamental issues: the government’s insistence on an unacceptably high percentage of votes in the
assembly to approve the constitution (essentially a backdoor veto); entrenched regional powers that would be binding on a future constitution; an
undemocratic and unelected senate that had veto power over legislation from the main chamber; and a determination to make an interim
constitution negotiated by the convention into a permanent constitution.
These were all difficult issues, but not insoluble ones, and I was determined not to let the deadlock at CODESA 2 subvert the negotiation
process. The government and the ANC agreed to continue bilateral talks to work toward a solution. But, then, other matters intruded to render this
impossible.

With negotiations stalled, the ANC and its allies agreed on a policy of “rolling mass action,” which would display to the government the extent of our
support around the country and show that the people of South Africa were not prepared to wait forever for their freedom. The mass action consisted
of strikes, demonstrations, and boycotts. The date chosen for the start of mass action was June 16, 1992, the anniversary of the 1976 Soweto
revolt, and the campaign was meant to culminate in a two-day national strike set for August 3 and 4.
But before that happened, another event occurred that drove the ANC and the government even further apart. On the night of June 17, 1992, a
heavily armed force of Inkatha members secretly raided the Vaal township of Boipatong and killed forty-six people. Most of the dead were women
and children. It was the fourth mass killing of ANC people that week. People across the country were horrified by the violence and charged the
government with complicity. The police did nothing to stop the criminals and nothing to find them; no arrests were made, no investigation begun. Mr.
de Klerk said nothing. I found this to be the last straw, and my patience snapped. The government was blocking the negotiations and at the same
time waging a covert war against our people. Why then were we continuing to talk with them?
Four days after the murders, I addressed a crowd of twenty thousand angry ANC supporters and told them I had instructed ANC secretarygeneral Cyril Ramaphosa to suspend direct dealings with the government. I also announced an urgent meeting of the National Executive
Committee to examine our options. It was as if we had returned to the dark days of Sharpeville. I likened the behavior of the National Party to the
Nazis in Germany, and publicly warned de Klerk that if he sought to impose new measures to restrict demonstrations or free expression, the ANC
would launch a nationwide defiance campaign with myself as the first volunteer.
At the rally, I saw signs that read, “MANDELA, GIVE US GUNS” and “VICTORY THROUGH BATTLE NOT TALK.” I understood such sentiments;
the people were frustrated. They saw no positive results of the negotiations. They were beginning to think that the only way to overthrow apartheid
was through the barrel of a gun. After Boipatong, there were those in the NEC who said, “Why did we abandon the armed struggle? We should
abandon negotiations instead; they will never advance us to our goal.” I was initially sympathetic to this group of hardliners, but gradually realized
that there was no alternative to the process. It was what I had been urging for so many years, and I would not turn my back on negotiations. But it

was time to cool things down. Mass action in this case was a middle course between armed struggle and negotiations. The people must have an
outlet for their anger and frustration, and a mass action campaign was the best way to channel those emotions.
When we informed the government that we were suspending talks, we sent Mr. de Klerk a memo outlining the reasons for our withdrawal. In
addition to resolving the constitutional deadlocks at CODESA 2, we demanded that the people responsible for the violence be tracked down and
brought to justice and that some mechanism be found for fencing in and policing the hostels, the seedbeds of so much violence. Mr. de Klerk sent
us back a memo asking for a face-to-face meeting with me, which we rebuffed. I felt such a meeting would suggest that we had something to talk
about, and at the time we did not.
* * *
The mass action campaign culminated in a general strike on August 3 and 4 in support of the ANC’s negotiation demands and in protest against
state-supported violence. More than four million workers stayed home in what was the largest political strike in South African history. The
centerpiece of the strike was a march of one hundred thousand people to the Union Buildings in Pretoria, the imposing seat of the South African
government, where we held an enormous outdoor rally on the great lawn in front of the buildings. I told the crowd that we one day would occupy
these buildings as the first democratically elected government of South Africa.
In the face of this mass action, Mr. de Klerk said that if the ANC made the country ungovernable, the government might be forced to consider
some unpleasant options. I warned Mr. de Klerk that any antidemocratic actions would have serious repercussions. It was because of such threats,
I said, that it was absolutely critical to set up a transitional government.
Inspired by the success of the mass action campaign, a group within the ANC decided to march on Bisho, the capital of the Ciskei homeland in
the eastern Cape, a bantustan led by Brigadier Oupa Gqozo. The Ciskei had a history of repression against the ANC and in 1991 Brigadier Gqozo
had declared a State of Emergency in the Ciskei to curtail what he called ANC-sponsored terrorism. On the morning of September 7, 1992,
seventy thousand protesters set out on a march to Bisho’s main stadium. When a group of marchers attempted to run through an opening in a fence
and take a different path to town, the poorly trained homeland troops opened fire on the marchers and killed twenty-nine people, wounding over two
hundred. Now Bisho joined Boipatong as a byword for brutality.

Like the old proverb that says that the darkest hour is before the dawn, the tragedy of Bisho led to a new opening in the negotiations. I met with Mr.
de Klerk in order to find common ground and avoid a repetition of another tragedy like Bisho. Our respective negotiators began meeting regularly.
Both sides were making a good-faith effort to get the negotiations back on track, and on September 26, Mr. de Klerk and I met for an official
summit.
On that day, Mr. de Klerk and I signed the Record of Understanding, an agreement which set the mold for all the negotiations that followed. The
agreement established an independent body to review police actions, created a mechanism to fence in the hostels, and banned the display of
“traditional weapons” at rallies. But the real importance of the Record of Understanding was that it broke the constitutional deadlock of CODESA 2.
The government finally agreed to accept a single, elected constitutional assembly, which would adopt a new constitution and serve as a transitional
legislature for the new government. All that was left to negotiate was a date for the election of the assembly and the percentage of majorities
necessary for it to reach its decisions. We were now aligned on the basic framework that would take the country into a democratic future.
The Record of Understanding prompted Inkatha to announce its withdrawal from all negotiations involving the government and the ANC. The
agreement infuriated Chief Buthelezi, who severed relations with the NP and formed an alliance with a group of discredited homeland leaders and
white right-wing parties solely concerned with obtaining an Afrikaner homeland. Chief Buthelezi called for the abolition of the Record of
Understanding, the ending of CODESA, and the disbanding of Umkhonto we Sizwe.
Just as Joe Slovo had taken the initiative concerning the suspension of the armed struggle, he again took the lead in making another
controversial proposal: a government of national unity. In October, Joe published a paper in which he wrote that negotiations with the government
were not armistice talks in which we could dictate terms to a defeated enemy. It would probably take years for the ANC to control the levers of
government, even after an election. An ANC government would still require much of the present civil service to run the country. Joe proposed a
“sunset clause” providing for a government of national unity that would include power-sharing with the National Party for a fixed period of time, an
amnesty for security officers, and the honoring of contracts of civil servants. “Power-sharing” was a debased term within the ANC, considered a
code-phrase for the government’s quest for a minority veto. But in this context it merely meant that the National Party would be part of any popularly
elected government provided it polled enough votes.
After much discussion, I supported Joe’s proposal and it was endorsed by the National Executive Committee on November 18. The NEC agreed
to support power-sharing, provided the minority parties did not have a veto. In December, we began a new round of secret bilateral talks with the
government. These were held over a five-day period at a game lodge in the bush. The talks proved to be critical, for they built on the foundation
established in the Record of Understanding. At this bush meeting we agreed in principle on a five-year government of national unity in which all
parties polling over 5 percent in a general election would be proportionally represented in the cabinet. After five years, the government of national
unity would become a simple majority-rule government. In February, the ANC and the government announced an agreement in principle on the fiveyear government of national unity, a multiparty cabinet, and the creation of a transitional executive council. Elections would be held as early as the
end of 1993.