UNTIL 1960, the University College of Fort Hare, in the municipality of Alice, about twenty miles due east from Healdtown, was the only residential
center of higher education for blacks in South Africa. Fort Hare was more than that: it was a beacon for African scholars from all over Southern
Central and Eastern Africa. For young black South Africans like myself, it was Oxford and Cambridge, Harvard and Yale, all rolled into one.
The regent was anxious for me to attend Fort Hare and I was gratified to be accepted there. Before I went up to the university, the regent bought
me my first suit. Double-breasted and gray, the suit made me feel grown-up and sophisticated; I was twenty-one years old and could not imagine
anyone at Fort Hare smarter than I.
I felt that I was being groomed for success in the world. I was pleased that the regent would now have a member of his clan with a university
degree. Justice had remained at Healdtown to pursue his junior certificate. He enjoyed playing more than studying, and was an indifferent scholar.
Fort Hare had been founded in 1916 by Scottish missionaries on the site of what was the largest nineteenth-century frontier fort in the eastern
Cape. Built on a rocky platform and moated by the winding are of the Tyume River, Fort Hare was perfectly situated to enable the British to fight the
gallant Xhosa warrior Sandile, the last Rharhabe king, who was defeated by the British in one of the final frontier battles in the 1800s.

Fort Hare had only one hundred fifty students, and I already knew a dozen or so of them from Clarkebury and Healdtown. One of them, whom I was
meeting for the first time, was K. D. Matanzima. Though K.D. was my nephew according to tribal hierarchy, I was younger and far less senior to him.
Tall and slender and extremely confident, K.D. was a third-year student and he took me under his wing. I looked up to him as I had to Justice.
We were both Methodists, and I was assigned to his hostel, known as Wesley House, a pleasant two-story building on the edge of the campus.
Under his tutelage, I attended church services with him at nearby Loveday, took up soccer (in which he excelled), and generally followed his advice.
The regent did not believe in sending money to his children at school and I would have had empty pockets had not K.D. shared his allowance with
me. Like the regent, he saw my future role as counselor to Sabata, and he encouraged me to study law.
* * *
Fort Hare, like Clarkebury and Healdtown, was a missionary college. We were exhorted to obey God, respect the political authorities, and be
grateful for the educational opportunities afforded to us by the church and the government. These schools have often been criticized for being
colonialist in their attitudes and practices. Yet, even with such attitudes, I believe their benefits outweighed their disadvantages. The missionaries
built and ran schools when the government was unwilling or unable to do so. The learning environment of the missionary schools, while often morally
rigid, was far more open than the racist principles underlying government schools.
Fort Hare was both home and incubator of some of the greatest African scholars the continent has ever known. Professor Z. K. Matthews was the
very model of the African intellectual. A child of a miner, Z.K. had been influenced by Booker Washington’s autobiography, Up from Slavery, which
preached success through hard work and moderation. He taught social anthropology and law and bluntly spoke out against the government’s social
policies.
Fort Hare and Professor D. D. T. Jabavu are virtually synonymous. He was the first member of the staff when the university opened in 1916.
Professor Jabavu had been awarded a baccalaureate in English at the University of London, which seemed an impossibly rare feat. Professor
Jabavu taught Xhosa, as well as Latin, history, and anthropology. He was an encyclopedia when it came to Xhosa genealogy and told me facts
about my father that I had never known. He was also a persuasive spokesman for African rights, becoming the founding president of the All-African
Convention in 1936, which opposed legislation in Parliament designed to end the common voters’ roll in the Cape.
I recall once traveling from Fort Hare to Umtata by train, riding in the African compartment, which were the only seats open to blacks. The white
train conductor came to check our tickets. When he saw that I had gotten on at Alice, he said, “Are you from Jabavu’s school?” I nodded yes,
whereupon the conductor cheerfully punched my ticket and mumbled something about Jabavu being a fine man.

In my first year, I studied English, anthropology, politics, native administration, and Roman Dutch law. Native administration dealt with the laws
relating to Africans and was advisable for anyone who wanted to work in the Native Affairs Department. Although K.D. was counseling me to study
law, I had my heart set on being an interpreter or a clerk in the Native Affairs Department. At that time, a career as a civil servant was a glittering
prize for an African, the highest that a black man could aspire to. In the rural areas, an interpreter in the magistrate’s office was considered second
only in importance to the magistrate himself. When, in my second year, Fort Hare introduced an interpreting course taught by a distinguished retired
court interpreter, Tyamzashe, I was one of the first students to sign up.
Fort Hare could be a rather elitist place and was not without the hazing common to many institutions of higher learning. Upperclassmen treated
their juniors with haughtiness and disdain. When I first arrived on campus, I spotted Gamaliel Vabaza across the central courtyard. He was several
years older and I had been with him at Clarkebury. I greeted him warmly, but his response was exceedingly cool and superior, and he made a
disparaging remark about the fact that I would be staying in the freshman dormitory. Vabaza then informed me that he was on the House
Committee of my dormitory even though, as a senior, he no longer shared the dormitory. I found this odd and undemocratic, but it was the accepted
practice.
One night, not long after that, a group of us discussed the fact that no residents or freshmen were represented on the House Committee. We
decided that we should depart from tradition and elect a House Committee made up of these two groups. We caucused among ourselves and
lobbied all the residents of the house, and within weeks elected our own House Committee, defeating the upperclassmen. I myself was one of the
organizers and was elected to this newly constituted committee.
But the upperclassmen were not so easily subdued. They held a meeting at which one of them, Rex Tatane, an eloquent English-speaker, said,
“This behavior on the part of freshers is unacceptable. How can we seniors be overthrown by a backward fellow from the countryside like Mandela,
a fellow who cannot even speak English properly!” Then he proceeded to mimic the way I spoke, giving me what he perceived to be a Gcaleka
accent, at which his own claque laughed heartily. Tatane’s sneering speech made us all more resolute. We freshers now constituted the official
House Committee and we assigned the seniors the most unpleasant chores, which was a humiliation for them.
The warden of the college, Reverend A. J. Cook, learned of this dispute and called us into his office. We felt we had right on our side and were
not prepared to yield. Tatane appealed to the warden to overrule us, and in the midst of his speech, broke down and wept. The warden asked us to
modify our stand, but we would not bend. Like most bullies, Tatane had a brittle but fragile exterior. We informed the warden that if he overruled us

we would all resign from the House Committee, depriving the committee itself of any integrity or authority. In the end, the warden decided not to
intervene. We had remained firm, and we had won. This was one of my first battles with authority, and I felt the sense of power that comes from
having right and justice on one’s side. I would not be so lucky in the future in my fight against the authorities at the college.

My education at Fort Hare was as much outside as inside the classroom. I was a more active sportsman than I had been at Healdtown. This was
due to two factors: I had grown taller and stronger, but more important, Fort Hare was so much smaller than Healdtown, I had less competition. I was
able to compete in both soccer and cross-country running. Running taught me valuable lessons. In cross-country competition, training counted more
than intrinsic ability, and I could compensate for a lack of natural aptitude with diligence and discipline. I applied this in everything I did. Even as a
student, I saw many young men who had great natural ability, but who did not have the self-discipline and patience to build on their endowment.
I also joined the drama society and acted in a play about Abraham Lincoln that was adapted by my classmate Lincoln Mkentane. Mkentane
came from a distinguished Transkeian family, and was another fellow whom I looked up to. This was literally true, as he was the only student at Fort
Hare taller than I was. Mkentane portrayed his namesake, while I played John Wilkes Booth, Lincoln’s assassin. Mkentane’s depiction of Lincoln
was stately and formal, and his recitation of one of the greatest of all speeches, the Gettysburg Address, won a standing ovation. My part was the
smaller one, though I was the engine of the play’s moral, which was that men who take great risks often suffer great consequences.
I became a member of the Students Christian Association and taught Bible classes on Sundays in neighboring villages. One of my comrades on
these expeditions was a serious young science scholar whom I had met on the soccer field. He came from Pondoland, in the Transkei, and his
name was Oliver Tambo. From the start, I saw that Oliver’s intelligence was diamond-edged; he was a keen debater and did not accept the
platitudes that so many of us automatically subscribed to. Oliver lived in Beda Hall, the Anglican hostel, and though I did not have much contact with
him at Fort Hare, it was easy to see that he was destined for great things.
On Sundays, a group of us would sometimes walk into Alice, to have a meal at one of the restaurants in town. The restaurant was run by whites,
and in those days it was inconceivable for a black man to walk in the front door, much less take a meal in the dining hall. Instead, we would pool our
resources, go round to the kitchen, and order what we wanted.
I not only learned about physics at Fort Hare, but another precise physical science: ballroom dancing. To a crackly old phonograph in the dining
hall, we spent hours practicing fox-trots and waltzes, each of us taking turns leading and following. Our idol was Victor Sylvester, the world
champion of ballroom dancing, and our tutor was a fellow student, Smallie Siwundla, who seemed a younger version of the master.
In a neighboring village, there was an African dance-hall known as Ntselamanzi, which catered to the cream of local black society and was offlimits to undergraduates. But one night, desperate to practice our steps with the gentler sex, we put on our suits, stole out of our dormitory, and
made it to the dance-hall. It was a sumptuous place, and we felt very daring. I noticed a lovely young woman across the floor and politely asked her
to dance. A moment later, she was in my arms. We moved well together and I imagined what a striking figure I was cutting on the floor. After a few
minutes, I asked her her name. “Mrs. Bokwe,” she said softly. I almost dropped her right there and scampered off the floor. I glanced across the
floor and saw Dr. Roseberry Bokwe, one of the most respected African leaders and scholars of the time, chatting with his brother-in-law and my
professor, Z. K. Matthews. I apologized to Mrs. Bokwe and then sheepishly escorted her to the side under the curious eyes of Dr. Bokwe and
Professor Matthews. I wanted to sink beneath the floorboards. I had violated any number of university regulations. But Professor Matthews, who
was in charge of discipline at Fort Hare, never said a word to me. He was willing to tolerate what he considered high spirits as long as it was
balanced by hard work. I don’t think I ever studied more diligently than in the weeks after our evening at Ntselamanzi.
Fort Hare was characterized by a level of sophistication, both intellectual and social, that was new and strange to me. By Western standards,
Fort Hare’s worldliness may not seem like much, but to a country boy like myself, it was a revelation. I wore pajamas for the first time, finding them
uncomfortable in the beginning, but gradually growing used to them. I had never used a toothbrush and toothpaste before; at home, we used ash to
whiten our teeth and toothpicks to clean them. The water-flush toilets and hot-water showers were also a novelty to me. I used toilet soap for the first
time, not the blue detergent that I had washed with for so many years at home.
Perhaps as a result of all this unfamiliarity, I yearned for some of the simple pleasures that I had known as a boy. I was not alone in this feeling
and I joined a group of young men who engaged in secret evening expeditions to the university’s farmland, where we built a fire and roasted
mealies. We would then sit around, eating the ears of corn and telling tall tales. We did not do this because we were hungry, but out of a need to
recapture what was most homelike to us. We boasted about our conquests, our athletic prowess, and how much money we were going to make
once we had graduated. Although I felt myself to be a sophisticated young fellow, I was still a country boy who missed country pleasures.

While Fort Hare was a sanctuary removed from the world, we were keenly interested in the progress of World War II. Like my classmates, I was an
ardent supporter of Great Britain, and I was enormously excited to learn that the speaker at the university’s graduation ceremony at the end of my
first year would be England’s great advocate in South Africa, the former prime minister Jan Smuts. It was a great honor for Fort Hare to play host to
a man acclaimed as a world statesman. Smuts, then deputy prime minister, was campaigning around the country for South Africa to declare war on
Germany while the prime minister, J. B. Hertzog, advocated neutrality. I was extremely curious to see a world leader like Smuts from up close.
While Hertzog had, three years earlier, led the drive to remove the last African voters from the common voters roll in the Cape, I found Smuts a
sympathetic figure. I cared more that he had helped found the League of Nations, promoting freedom around the world, than the fact that he had
repressed freedom at home.
Smuts spoke about the importance of supporting Great Britain against the Germans and the idea that England stood for the same Western
values that we, as South Africans, stood for. I remember thinking that his accent in English was almost as poor as mine! Along with my fellow
classmates, I heartily applauded him, cheering Smuts’s call to do battle for the freedom of Europe, forgetting that we did not have that freedom here
in our own land.
Smuts was preaching to the converted at Fort Hare. Each evening, the warden of Wesley House used to review the military situation in Europe,
and late at night, we would huddle around an old radio and listen to BBC broadcasts of Winston Churchill’s stirring speeches. But even though we
supported Smuts’s position, his visit provoked much discussion. During one session, a contemporary of mine, Nyathi Khongisa, who was
considered an extremely clever fellow, condemned Smuts as a racist. He said that we might consider ourselves “black Englishmen,” but the English
had oppressed us at the same time they tried to “civilize” us. Whatever the mutual antagonism between Boer and British, he said, the two white
groups would unite to confront the black threat. Khongisa’s views stunned us and seemed dangerously radical. A fellow student whispered to me
that Nyathi was a member of the African National Congress, an organization that I had vaguely heard of but knew very little about. Following South
Africa’s declaration of war against Germany, Hertzog resigned and Smuts became prime minister.

During my second year at Fort Hare, I invited my friend Paul Mahabane to spend the winter holidays with me in the Transkei. Paul was from
Bloemfontein and was well known on campus because his father, the Reverend Zaccheus Mahabane, had twice been president-general of the
African National Congress. His connection to this organization, about which I still knew very little, gave him the reputation of a rebel.
One day, during the holiday, Paul and I went to Umtata, the capital of the Transkei, which then consisted of a few paved streets and some
government buildings. We were standing outside the post office when the local magistrate, a white man in his sixties, approached Paul and asked
him to go inside to buy him some postage stamps. It was quite common for any white person to call on any black person to perform a chore. The
magistrate attempted to hand Paul some change, but Paul would not take it. The magistrate was offended. “Do you know who I am?” he said, his
face turning red with irritation. “It is not necessary to know who you are,” Mahabane said. “I know what you are.” The magistrate asked him exactly
what he meant by that. “I mean that you are a rogue!” Paul said heatedly. The magistrate boiled over and exclaimed, “You’ll pay dearly for this!” and
then walked away.
I was extremely uncomfortable with Paul’s behavior. While I respected his courage, I also found it disturbing. The magistrate knew precisely who I
was and I know that if he had asked me rather than Paul, I would have simply performed the errand and forgotten about it. But I admired Paul for
what he had done, even though I was not yet ready to do the same thing myself. I was beginning to realize that a black man did not have to accept
the dozens of petty indignities directed at him each day.
After my holiday, I returned to school early in the new year feeling strong and renewed. I concentrated on my studies, pointing toward
examinations in October. In a year’s time, I imagined that I would have a B.A., just like clever Gertrude Ntlabathi. A university degree, I believed,
was a passport not only to community leadership but to financial success. We had been told over and over again by the principal, Dr. Alexander
Kerr, and Professors Jabavu and Matthews how, as graduates of Fort Hare, we were the African elite. I believed that the world would be at my feet.
As a B.A., I would finally be able to restore to my mother the wealth and prestige that she had lost after my father’s death. I would build her a
proper home in Qunu, with a garden and modern furniture and fittings. I would support her and my sisters so that they could afford the things that
they had so long been denied. This was my dream and it seemed within reach.
During that year, I was nominated to stand for the Student Representative Council, which was the highest student organization at Fort Hare. I did
not know at the time that the events surrounding a student election would create difficulties that would change the course of my life. The SRC
elections were held in the final term of the year, while we were in the midst of examination preparations. According to the Fort Hare constitution, the
entire student body elected the six members of the SRC. Shortly before the election, a meeting of all students was held to discuss problems and
voice our grievances. The students unanimously felt that the diet at Fort Hare was unsatisfactory and that the powers of the SRC needed to be
increased so that it would be more than a rubber stamp for the administration. I agreed with both motions, and when a majority of students voted to
boycott the elections unless the authorities accepted our demands, I voted with them.
Shortly after this meeting, the scheduled voting took place. The lion’s share of students boycotted the election, but twenty-five students, about
one-sixth of the student body, showed up and elected six representatives, one of whom was myself. That same day, the six elected in absentia met
to discuss these events. We unanimously decided to tender our resignations on the grounds that we supported the boycott and did not enjoy the
support of the majority of the students. We then drafted a letter, which we handed to Dr. Kerr.
But Dr. Kerr was clever. He accepted our resignations and then announced that new elections were to be held the next day in the dining hall at
suppertime. This would ensure that all the students would be present and that there would be no excuse that the SRC did not have the support of the
entire student body. That evening the election was held, as the principal ordered, but only the same twenty-five voted, returning the same six SRC
members. It would seem we were back where we started.
Only this time when the six of us met to consider our position, the voting was very different. My five colleagues held to the technical view that we
had been elected at a meeting in which all students were present and therefore we could no longer argue that we did not represent the student
body. The five believed we should now accept office. I countered that nothing in fact had changed; while all the students had been there, a majority
of them had not voted, and it would be morally incorrect to say that we enjoyed their confidence. Since our initial goal was to boycott the election, an
action that had the confidence of the student body, our duty was still to abide by that resolution, and not be deterred by some trickery on the part of
the principal. Unable to persuade my colleagues, I resigned for the second time, the only one of the six to do so.
The following day I was called in to see the principal. Dr. Kerr, a graduate of Edinburgh University, was virtually the founder of Fort Hare and was
a greatly respected man. He calmly reviewed the events of the past few days and then asked me to reconsider my decision to resign. I told him I
could not. He told me to sleep on it and give him my final decision the following day. He did warn me, however, that he could not allow his students
to act irresponsibly, and he said that if I insisted on resigning, he would be compelled to expel me from Fort Hare.
I was shaken by what he had said and I spent a restless night. I had never had to make such a consequential decision before. That evening, I
consulted with my friend and mentor, K.D., who felt that as a matter of principle I was correct to resign, and should not capitulate. I think at the time I
feared K.D. even more than I did Dr. Kerr. I thanked K.D. and returned to my room.
Even though I thought what I was doing was morally right, I was still uncertain as to whether it was the correct course. Was I sabotaging my
academic career over an abstract moral principle that mattered very little? I found it difficult to swallow the idea that I would sacrifice what I regarded
as my obligation to the students for my own selfish interests. I had taken a stand, and I did not want to appear to be a fraud in the eyes of my fellow
students. At the same time, I did not want to throw away my career at Fort Hare.
I was in a state of indecision when I reached Dr. Kerr’s office the next morning. It was only when he asked me if I had reached a decision, that I
actually made up my mind. I told him that I had and that I could not in good conscience serve on the SRC. Dr. Kerr seemed a bit taken aback by my
response. He thought for a moment or two before speaking. “Very well,” he said. “It is your decision, of course. But I have also given the matter
some thought, and I propose to you the following: you may return to Fort Hare next year provided you join the SRC. You have all summer to consider
it, Mr. Mandela.”
I was, in a way, as surprised by my response as Dr. Kerr. I knew it was foolhardy for me to leave Fort Hare, but at the moment I needed to
compromise, I simply could not do so. Something inside me would not let me. While I appreciated Dr. Kerr’s position and his willingness to give me
another chance, I resented his absolute power over my fate. I should have had every right to resign from the SRC if I wished. This injustice rankled,
and at that moment I saw Dr. Kerr less as a benefactor than as a not-altogether-benign dictator. When I left Fort Hare at the end of the year, I was in
an unpleasant state of limbo.