AT POLLSMOOR, we were more connected to outside events. We were aware that the struggle was intensifying, and that the efforts of the enemy
were similarly increasing. In 1981, the South African Defense Force launched a raid on ANC offices in Maputo, Mozambique, killing thirteen of our
people, including women and children. In December 1982, MK set off explosions at the unfinished Koeberg nuclear power plant outside Cape
Town and placed bombs at many other military and apartheid targets around the country. That same month, the South African military again
attacked an ANC outpost in Maseru, Lesotho, killing forty-two people, including a dozen women and children.
In August of 1982, activist Ruth First was opening her mail in Maputo, where she was living in exile, when she was murdered by a letter bomb.
Ruth, the wife of Joe Slovo, was a brave anti-apartheid activist who had spent a number of months in prison. She was a forceful, engaging woman
whom I first met when I was studying at Wits, and her death revealed the extent of the state’s cruelty in combating our struggle.
MK’s first car bomb attack took place in May of 1983, and was aimed at an air force and military intelligence office in the heart of Pretoria. This
was an effort to retaliate for the unprovoked attacks the military had launched on the ANC in Maseru and elsewhere and was a clear escalation of
the armed struggle. Nineteen people were killed and more than two hundred injured.
The killing of civilians was a tragic accident, and I felt a profound horror at the death toll. But as disturbed as I was by these casualties, I knew that
such accidents were the inevitable consequence of the decision to embark on a military struggle. Human fallibility is always a part of war, and the
price for it is always high. It was precisely because we knew that such incidents would occur that our decision to take up arms had been so grave
and reluctant. But as Oliver said at the time of the bombing, the armed struggle was imposed upon us by the violence of the apartheid regime.
Both the government and the ANC were working on two tracks: military and political. On the political front, the government was pursuing its
standard divide-and-rule strategy in attempting to separate Africans from Coloureds and Indians. In a referendum of November 1983, the white
electorate endorsed P. W. Botha’s plan to create a so-called tricameral Parliament, with Indian and Coloured chambers in addition to the white
Parliament. This was an effort to lure Indians and Coloureds into the system, and divide them from Africans. But the offer was merely a “toy
telephone,” as all parliamentary action by Indians and Coloureds was subject to a white veto. It was also a way of fooling the outside world into
thinking that the government was reforming apartheid. Botha’s ruse did not fool the people, as more than 80 percent of eligible Indian and Coloured
voters boycotted the election to the new houses of Parliament in 1984.
Powerful grassroots political movements were being formed inside the country that had firm links to the ANC, the principal one being the United
Democratic Front, of which I was named a patron. The UDF had been created to coordinate protest against the new apartheid constitution in 1983,
and the first elections to the segregated tricameral Parliament in 1984. The UDF soon blossomed into a powerful organization that united over six
hundred anti-apartheid organizations — trade unions, community groups, church groups, student associations.
The ANC was experiencing a new birth of popularity. Opinion polls showed that the Congress was far and away the most popular political
organization among Africans even though it had been banned for a quarter of a century. The anti-apartheid struggle as a whole had captured the
attention of the world; in 1984, Bishop Desmond Tutu was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. (The authorities refused to send Bishop Tutu my letter
of congratulations.) The South African government was under growing international pressure, as nations all across the globe began to impose
economic sanctions on Pretoria.

The government had sent “feelers” to me over the years, beginning with Minister Kruger’s efforts to persuade me to move to the Transkei. These
were not efforts to negotiate, but attempts to isolate me from my organization. On several other occasions, Kruger said to me: “Mandela, we can
work with you, but not your colleagues. Be reasonable.” Although I did not respond to these overtures, the mere fact that they were talking rather
than attacking could be seen as a prelude to genuine negotiations.
The government was testing the waters. In late 1984 and early 1985, I had visits from two prominent Western statesmen, Lord Nicholas Bethell, a
member of the British House of Lords and the European Parliament, and Samuel Dash, a professor of law at Georgetown University and a former
counsel to the U.S. Senate Watergate Committee. Both visits were authorized by the new minister of justice, Kobie Coetsee, who appeared to be
a new sort of Afrikaner leader.
I met Lord Bethell in the prison commander’s office, which was dominated by a large photograph of a glowering President Botha. Bethell was a
jovial, rotund man and when I first met him, I teased him about his stoutness. “You look like you are related to Winston Churchill,” I said as we shook
hands, and he laughed.
Lord Bethell wanted to know about our conditions at Pollsmoor and I told him. We discussed the armed struggle and I explained to him it was not
up to us to renounce violence, but the government. I reaffirmed that we aimed for hard military targets, not people. “I would not want our men to
assassinate, for instance, the major here,” I said, pointing to Major Fritz van Sittert, who was monitoring the talks. Van Sittert was a good-natured
fellow who did not say much, but he started at my remark.
In my visit with Professor Dash, which quickly followed that of Lord Bethell, I laid out what I saw as the minimum for a future nonracial South Africa:
a unitary state without homelands; nonracial elections for the central Parliament; and one-person-one-vote. Professor Dash asked me whether I
took any encouragement from the government’s stated intention of repealing the mixed-marriage laws and certain other apartheid statutes. “This is
a pinprick,” I said. “It is not my ambition to marry a white woman or swim in a white pool. It is political equality that we want.” I told Dash quite
candidly that at the moment we could not defeat the government on the battlefield, but could make governing difficult for them.
I had one not-so-pleasant visit from two Americans, editors of the conservative newspaper the Washington Times. They seemed less intent on
finding out my views than on proving that I was a Communist and a terrorist. All of their questions were slanted in that direction, and when I
reiterated that I was neither a Communist nor a terrorist, they attempted to show that I was not a Christian either by asserting that the Reverend
Martin Luther King never resorted to violence. I told them that the conditions in which Martin Luther King struggled were totally different from my own:
the United States was a democracy with constitutional guarantees of equal rights that protected nonviolent protest (though there was still prejudice
against blacks); South Africa was a police state with a constitution that enshrined inequality and an army that responded to nonviolence with force. I
told them that I was a Christian and had always been a Christian. Even Christ, I said, when he was left with no alternative, used force to expel the
moneylenders from the temple. He was not a man of violence, but had no choice but to use force against evil. I do not think I persuaded them.

Faced with trouble at home and pressure from abroad, P. W. Botha offered a tepid, halfway measure. On January 31, 1985, in a debate in
Parliament, the state president publicly offered me my freedom if I “unconditionally rejected violence as a political instrument.” This offer was

extended to all political prisoners. Then, as if he were staking me to a public challenge, he added, “It is therefore not the South Africa government
which now stands in the way of Mr. Mandela’s freedom. It is he himself.”
I had been warned by the authorities that the government was going to make a proposal involving my freedom, but I had not been prepared for
the fact that it would be made in Parliament by the state president. By my reckoning, it was the sixth conditional offer the government had made for
my release in the past ten years. After I listened to the speech on radio, I made a request to the commander of the prison for an urgent visit by my
wife and my lawyer, Ismail Ayob, so that I could dictate my response to the state president’s offer.
Winnie and Ismail were not given permission to visit for a week, and in the meantime I wrote a letter to the foreign minister, Pik Botha, rejecting
the conditions for my release, while also preparing a public response. I was keen to do a number of things in this response, because Botha’s offer
was an attempt to drive a wedge between me and my colleagues by tempting me to accept a policy the ANC rejected. I wanted to reassure the
ANC in general and Oliver in particular that my loyalty to the organization was beyond question. I also wished to send a message to the government
that while I rejected its offer because of the conditions attached to it, I nevertheless thought negotiation, not war, was the path to a solution.
Botha wanted the onus of violence to rest on my shoulders and I wanted to reaffirm to the world that we were only responding to the violence done
to us. I intended to make it clear that if I emerged from prison into the same circumstances in which I was arrested, I would be forced to resume the
same activities for which I was arrested.
I met with Winnie and Ismail on a Friday; on Sunday, a UDF rally was to be held in Soweto’s Jabulani Stadium, where my response would be
made public. Some guards with whom I was not familiar supervised the visit, and as we began discussing my response to the state president, one
of the warders, a relatively young fellow, interrupted to say that only family matters were permitted to be discussed. I ignored him, and he returned
minutes later with a senior warder whom I barely knew. This warder said that I must cease discussing politics, and I told him that I was dealing with
a matter of national importance involving an offer from the state president. I warned him that if he wanted to halt the discussion he must get direct
orders from the state president himself. “If you are not willing to telephone the state president to get those orders,” I said coldly, “then kindly do not
interrupt us again.” He did not.
I gave Ismail and Winnie the speech I had prepared. In addition to responding to the government, I wanted to thank publicly the UDF for its fine
work and to congratulate Bishop Tutu on his prize, adding that his award belonged to all the people. On Sunday, February 10, 1985, my daughter
Zindzi read my response to a cheering crowd of people who had not been able to hear my words legally anywhere in South Africa for more than
twenty years.
Zindzi was a dynamic speaker like her mother, and said that her father should be at the stadium to speak the words himself. I was proud to know
that it was she who spoke my words.
I am a member of the African National Congress. I have always been a member of the African National Congress and I will remain a member of the African National Congress until
the day I die. Oliver Tambo is more than a brother to me. He is my greatest friend and comrade for nearly fifty years. If there is any one amongst you who cherishes my freedom,
Oliver Tambo cherishes it more, and I know that he would give his life to see me free. . . .
I am surprised at the conditions that the government wants to impose on me. I am not a violent man. . . . It was only then, when all other forms of resistance were no longer open
to us, that we turned to armed struggle. Let Botha show that he is different to Malan, Strijdom and Verwoerd. Let him renounce violence. Let him say that he will dismantle
apartheid. Let him unban the people’s organization, the African National Congress. Let him free all who have been imprisoned, banished or exiled for their opposition to apartheid.
Let him guarantee free political activity so that people may decide who will govern them.
I cherish my own freedom dearly, but I care even more for your freedom. Too many have died since I went to prison. Too many have suffered for the love of freedom. I owe it to
their widows, to their orphans, to their mothers, and to their fathers who have grieved and wept for them. Not only I have suffered during these long, lonely, wasted years. I am not
less life-loving than you are. But I cannot sell my birthright, nor am I prepared to sell the birthright of the people to be free. . . .
What freedom am I being offered while the organization of the people remains banned? What freedom am I being offered when I may be arrested on a pass offense? What
freedom am I being offered to live my life as a family with my dear wife who remains in banishment in Brandfort? What freedom am I being offered when I must ask for permission
to live in an urban area? . . . What freedom am I being offered when my very South African citizenship is not respected?
Only free men can negotiate. Prisoners cannot enter into contracts. . . . I cannot and will not give any undertaking at a time when I and you, the people, are not free. Your freedom
and mine cannot be separated. I will return.
