USUALLY, when I returned to Mqhekezweni I did so with a sense of ease and completion. But not so this time. After passing my exams and
returning home, I told the regent what had transpired. He was furious, and could not comprehend the reasons for my actions. He thought it utterly
senseless. Without even hearing my full explanation, he bluntly informed me that I would obey the principal’s instructions and return to Fort Hare in
the fall. His tone invited no discussion. It would have been pointless as well as disrespectful for me to debate my benefactor. I resolved to let the
matter rest for a while.
Justice had also returned to Mqhekezweni and we were mightily glad to see one another. No matter how long Justice and I were apart, the
brotherly bonds that united us were instantly renewed. Justice had left school the year before and was living in Cape Town.
Within a few days, I resumed my old life at home. I looked after matters for the regent, including his herd and his relations with other chiefs. I did
not dwell on the situation at Fort Hare, but life has a way of forcing decisions on those who vacillate. It was an entirely different matter unrelated to
my studies that forced my hand.
A few weeks after my homecoming, the regent summoned Justice and me to a meeting. “My children,” he said in a very somber tone, “I fear that I
am not much longer for this world, and before I journey to the land of the ancestors, it is my duty to see my two sons properly married. I have,
accordingly, arranged unions for both of you.”
This announcement took us both by surprise, and Justice and I looked at each other with a mixture of shock and helplessness. The two girls
came from very good families, the regent said. Justice was to marry the daughter of Khalipa, a prominent Thembu nobleman, and Rolihlahla, as the
regent always called me, was to marry the daughter of the local Thembu priest. The marriages, he said, were to take place immediately. Lobola,
the brideprice or dowry, is normally paid in the form of cattle by the groom’s father, and would be paid by the community in Justice’s case and in my
own by the regent himself.
Justice and I said little. It was not our place to question the regent, and as far as he was concerned, the matter was settled. The regent brooked
no discussion: the bride had already been selected and lobola paid. It was final.
Justice and I walked out of our interview with our heads down, dazed and dejected. The regent was acting in accordance with Thembu law and
custom, and his own motives could not be maligned: he wanted us to be settled during his lifetime. We had always known that the regent had the
right to arrange marriages for us, but now it was no longer an abstract possibility. The brides were not fantasies, but flesh-and-blood women whom
we actually knew.
With all due respect to the young woman’s family, I would be dishonest if I said that the girl the regent had selected for me was my dream bride.
Her family was prominent and respected and she was attractive in a rather dignified way, but this young lady, I am afraid, had long been in love with
Justice. The regent would not have known this, as parents rarely know the romantic side of their children’s lives. My intended partner was
undoubtedly no more eager to be burdened with me than I was with her.
At that time, I was more advanced socially than politically. While I would not have considered fighting the political system of the white man, I was
quite prepared to rebel against the social system of my own people. Ironically, it was the regent himself who was indirectly to blame for this, for it
was the education he had afforded me that had caused me to reject such traditional customs. I had attended college and university with women for
years, and had had a small handful of love affairs. I was a romantic, and I was not prepared to have anyone, even the regent, select a bride for me.
I made an appointment with the queen, the regent’s wife, and put my case to her. I could not tell her that I did not want the regent to arrange a
bride for me under any circumstances, as she would naturally have been unsympathetic. Instead, I devised an alternative plan, and told her that I
preferred to marry a girl who was a relative of the queen’s, whom I found desirable as a prospective partner. This young lady was in fact very
attractive, but I had no idea as to what she thought of me. I said I would marry her as soon as I completed my studies. This was half a ruse, but it
was a better alternative than the regent’s plan. The queen took my side in the matter, but the regent could not be dissuaded. He had made his
decision and he was not going to alter it.
I felt as though he had left me no choice. I could not go through with this marriage, which I considered unfair and ill-advised. At the same time, I
believed that I could no longer remain under the regent’s guidance if I rejected his plan for me. Justice agreed, and the two of us decided that the
only option remaining was to run away, and the only place to run to was Johannesburg.
In retrospect, I realize that we did not exhaust all the options available to us. I could have attempted to discuss the matter with the regent through
intermediaries and perhaps come to some settlement within the framework of our tribe and family. I could have appealed to the regent’s cousin,
Chief Zilindlovu, one of the most enlightened and influential chiefs at the court of Mqhekezweni. But I was young and impatient, and did not see any
virtue in waiting. Escape seemed the only course.
We kept our plot secret while we worked out its details. First, we needed an opportunity. The regent believed Justice and I brought out the worst
in each other, or at least Justice’s penchant for adventures and high-jinks influenced my more conservative disposition. As a result, he took pains to
keep us separate as much as possible. When the regent was traveling, he generally asked one of us to accompany him so that we would not be
alone together in his absence. More often than not, he took Justice with him, as he liked me to remain in Mqhekezweni to look after his affairs. But
we learned that the regent was preparing to leave for a full week to attend a session of the Bunga, the Transkeian legislative assembly, without
either of us, and we decided this was the ideal time to steal away. We resolved that we would depart for Johannesburg shortly after the regent left
for the Bunga.
I had few clothes and we managed to get whatever we had in a single suitcase. The regent left early on Monday, and by late morning we were
ready to go. But just as we were preparing to leave, the regent unexpectedly returned. We saw his car drive in and we ran into the garden and hid
among the mealie stalks. The regent came into the house and his first question was “Where are those boys?” Someone replied, “Oh, they are
around.” But the regent was suspicious, and was not content with that explanation. He had returned, he said, because he had forgotten to take his
Epsom salts. He looked around a bit, and then seemed satisfied. I realized that he must have had some kind of premonition because he could
easily buy Epsom salts in town. When his car disappeared behind the hills, we were on our way.
We had almost no money between us, but that morning, we went to see a local trader and made a deal to sell him two of the regent’s prize oxen.
The trader assumed that we were selling the animals at the regent’s behest, and we did not correct him. He paid us a very good price, and with that
money we hired a car to take us to the local train station where we would catch a train to Johannesburg.
All seemed to be going smoothly, but unbeknown to us, the regent had driven to the local train station and instructed the manager that if two boys
fitting our description came to buy tickets for Johannesburg, the manager must turn them away because we were not to leave the Transkei. We
arrived at the station only to find that the manager would not sell us tickets. We asked him why and he said, “Your father has been here and says
you are trying to run away.” We were stunned by this, and dashed back to our hired car and told him to drive to the next station. It was nearly fifty
miles away, and it took us more than an hour to get there.

We managed to get on a train there but it only went as far as Queenstown. In the 1940s, traveling for an African was a complicated process. All
Africans over the age of sixteen were compelled to carry “Native passes” issued by the Native Affairs Department and were required to show that
pass to any white policeman, civil servant, or employer. Failure to do so could mean arrest, trial, a jail sentence or fine. The pass stated where the
bearer lived, who his chief was, and whether he had paid the annual poll tax, which was a tax levied only on Africans. Later, the pass took the form
of a booklet or “reference book,” as it was known, containing detailed information that had to be signed by one’s employer every month.
Justice and I had our passes in order, but for an African to leave his magisterial district and enter that of another for the purpose of working or
living, he needed traveling documents, a permit, and a letter from his employer or, as in our case, his guardian — none of which we had. Even at
the best of times, when one had all these documents, a police officer might harass you because one was missing a signature or had an incorrect
date. Not having any of them was extremely risky. Our plan was to disembark in Queenstown, make our way to the house of a relative, and then
make arrangements for the necessary documents. This was also an ill-considered plan, but we came in for a bit of luck because at the house in
Queenstown we accidentally met Chief Mpondombini, a brother of the regent’s, who was fond of Justice and myself.
Chief Mpondombini greeted us warmly and we explained that we needed the requisite travel documents from the local magistrate. We lied about
why we required them, claiming that we were on an errand for the regent. Chief Mpondombini was a retired interpreter from the Native Affairs
Department and knew the chief magistrate well. He had no reason to doubt our story and not only escorted us to the magistrate, but vouched for us
and explained our predicament. After listening to the chief, the magistrate rapidly made out the necessary traveling documents and affixed the
official stamp. Justice and I looked at each other and smiled in complicity. But just as the magistrate was handing over the documents to us, he
recalled something and said that, as a matter of courtesy, he ought to inform the chief magistrate of Umtata, in whose jurisdiction we fell. This made
us uneasy, but we stayed seated in his office. The magistrate cranked the telephone and reached his colleague in Umtata. As luck would have it,
the regent was just then paying a call on the chief magistrate of Umtata and was in his very office.
As our magistrate was explaining our situation to the chief magistrate of Umtata, the latter gentleman said something like, “Oh, their father just
happens to be right here,” and then put the regent on the telephone. When the magistrate informed the regent what we were requesting, the regent
exploded. “Arrest those boys!” he shouted, loud enough that we could hear his voice through the receiver. “Arrest them and bring them back here
immediately!” The chief magistrate put down the phone. He regarded us angrily. “You boys are thieves and liars,” he told us. “You have presumed
upon my good offices and then deceived me. Now, I am going to have you arrested.”
I immediately rose to our defense. From my studies at Fort Hare, I had a little knowledge of law and I put it to use. I said that we had told him lies,
that was true. But we had committed no offense and violated no laws, and we could not be arrested simply on the recommendation of a chief, even
if he happened to be our father. The magistrate backed off and did not arrest us, but told us to leave his office and never to darken his door again.
Chief Mpondombini was also annoyed, and left us to our own devices. Justice remembered that he had a friend in Queenstown named Sidney
Nxu who was working in the office of a white attorney. We went to see this fellow, explained our situation, and he told us that the mother of the
attorney he worked for was driving into Johannesburg and he would see if she would offer us a lift. He told us that his mother would give us a ride if
we paid a fee of fifteen pounds sterling. This was a vast sum, far more than the cost of a train ticket. The fee virtually depleted our savings, but we
had no choice. We decided to risk getting our passes stamped and the correct travel documents once we were in Johannesburg.
We left early the following morning. In those days, it was customary for blacks to ride in the back seat of the car if a white was driving. The two of
us sat in that fashion, with Justice directly behind the woman. Justice was a friendly, exuberant person and immediately began chatting to me. This
made the old woman extremely uncomfortable. She had obviously never been in the company of a black who had no inhibitions around whites. After
only a few miles, she told Justice that she wanted him to switch seats with me, so that she could keep an eye on him, and for the rest of the journey
she watched him like a hawk. But after a while, Justice’s charm worked on her and she would occasionally laugh at something he said.

At about ten o’clock that evening, we saw before us, glinting in the distance, a maze of lights that seemed to stretch in all directions. Electricity, to
me, had always been a novelty and a luxury, and here was a vast landscape of electricity, a city of light. I was terribly excited to see the city I had
been hearing about since I was a child. Johannesburg had always been depicted as a city of dreams, a place where one could transform oneself
from a poor peasant to a wealthy sophisticate, a city of danger and of opportunity. I remembered the stories that Banabakhe had told us at
circumcision school, of buildings so tall you could not see the tops, of crowds of people speaking languages you had never heard of, of sleek
motorcars and beautiful women and dashing gangsters. It was eGoli, the city of gold, where I would soon be making my home.
On the outskirts of the city the traffic became denser. I had never seen so many cars on the road at one time — even in Umtata, there were never
more than a handful of cars and here there were thousands. We drove around the city, rather than through it, but I could see the silhouette of the tall,
blocky buildings, even darker against the dark night sky. I looked at great billboards by the side of the road, advertising cigarettes and candy and
beer. It all seemed tremendously glamorous.
Soon we were in an area of stately mansions, even the smallest of which was bigger than the regent’s palace, with grand front lawns and tall iron
gates. This was the suburb where the old lady’s daughter lived, and we pulled into the long driveway of one of these beautiful homes. Justice and I
were dispatched to the servants’ wing, where we were to spend the night. We thanked the old lady, and then crawled off to sleep on the floor. But
the prospect of Johannesburg was so exciting to me that I felt like I slept on a beautiful feather bed that night. The possibilities seemed infinite. I had
reached the end of what seemed like a long journey, but was actually the very beginning of a much longer and more trying journey that would test me
in ways that I could not then have imagined.