THE STATE CASE continued through the Christmas season of 1963, ending on February 29, 1964. We had a little over a month to examine the
evidence and prepare our defense. We were not all equally affected by the evidence. There was no evidence against James Kantor; he was not
even a member of our organization and should not have been on trial at all. For Rusty Bernstein, Raymond Mhlaba, and Ahmed Kathrada, the
evidence of involvement in conspiracy was slight and we decided they should not incriminate themselves. In Rusty’s case, the evidence was
negligible; he had merely been found at Rivonia with the others. The remaining six of us would make admissions of guilt on certain charges.
Bram was deeply pessimistic. He avowed that even if we proved that guerrilla war had not been approved and our policy of sabotage was
designed not to sacrifice human life, the state could still impose the death sentence. The defense team was divided on whether or not we should
testify. Some asserted that it would hurt our case if we testified. George Bizos, though, suggested that unless we gave evidence and convinced the
judge that we had not decided on guerrilla warfare, he would certainly impose the supreme penalty.
Right from the start we had made it clear that we intended to use the trial not as a test of the law but as a platform for our beliefs. We would not
deny, for example, that we had been responsible for acts of sabotage. We would not deny that a group of us had turned away from nonviolence. We
were not concerned with getting off or lessening our punishment, but with having the trial strengthen the cause for which we were all struggling — at
whatever cost to ourselves. We would not defend ourselves in a legal sense so much as in a moral sense. We saw the trial as a continuation of the
struggle by other means. We would readily admit what was known by the state to be true but refuse to give away any information we thought might
implicate others.
We would dispute the state’s central contention that we had embarked on guerrilla warfare. We would admit that we had made contingency plans
to undertake guerrilla warfare in the event sabotage failed. But we would claim it had not yet failed, for it had not been sufficiently attempted. We
would deny the claims of murder and damage to innocent bystanders that the state alleged; either these claims were outright lies, or the incidents
were the work of someone else. We had never contemplated the intervention of foreign military forces. In order to make these claims, we believed
we would have to explain Operation Mayibuye to the court.
In my own case, the court had sufficient evidence for a conviction. Documents in my handwriting showed that I had left the country illegally, had
arranged for military training for our men, and had been behind the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe. There was also a document in my handwriting
called “How to be a good Communist,” which the state suggested was proof that I was a card-carrying Communist. In fact the document’s title was
taken from the work of a Chinese theoretician named Liu Shao Chi, and was written by me to prove a point to Moses Kotane. We had been
engaged in a running debate about the appeal of communism to ordinary South Africans. I had long argued that Communist literature was, for the
most part, dull, esoteric, and Western-centered, but ought to be simple, clear, and relevant to the African masses. Moses insisted it could not be
done. To prove my point, I had taken Liu’s essay and rewritten it for an African audience.

I would be the first witness and therefore set the tone for the defense. In South African courts, evidence from the witness box can be given only in the
form of an answer to a question. I did not want to be limited to that format. We decided that instead of giving testimony, I would read a statement
from the dock, while the others would testify and go through cross-examination.
Because a witness making a statement from the dock does not submit to cross-examination or questions from the bench, the statement does not
have the same legal weight as ordinary testimony. Those who choose to make such a statement usually do so to avoid cross-examination. Our
attorneys warned me that it would put me in a more precarious legal situation; anything I said in my statement regarding my own innocence would
be discounted by the judge. But that was not our highest priority. We believed it was important to open the defense with a statement of our politics
and ideals, which would establish the context for all that followed. I wanted very much to cross swords with Percy Yutar, but it was more important
that I use the platform to highlight our grievances.
All of this was agreed upon in consultation, mainly through notes because the consultation room was bugged. We even used the state’s
eavesdropping to our advantage by supplying them with disinformation. We gave every indication that I was going to testify so that they would
spend their time planning their cross-examination. In a staged conversation, I told our attorney Joel Joffe that I would need the Treason Trial record
to prepare my testimony. We smiled at the notion of Yutar poring over the hundred or so volumes of Treason Trial transcripts.

I spent about a fortnight drafting my address, working mainly in my cell in the evenings. When I was finished, I read it first to my comrades and fellow
accused. They approved of it, suggesting a few changes, and then I asked Bram Fischer to look it over. Bram became concerned after reading it
and had a respected advocate named Hal Hanson read it. Hanson told Bram, “If Mandela reads this in court they will take him straight out in back of
the courthouse and string him up.” That confirmed Bram’s anxieties and he came to me the next day and urged me to modify the speech. I felt we
were likely to hang no matter what we said, so we might as well say what we truly believed. The atmosphere at the time was extremely grim, with
newspapers routinely speculating that we would receive the death sentence. Bram begged me not to read the final paragraph, but I was adamant.

On Monday, the twentieth of April, under the tightest of security, we were taken to the Palace of Justice, this time to begin our defense. Winnie was
there with my mother, and I nodded to them as we entered the court, which was again full.
Bram announced that certain parts of the state’s evidence would be conceded by the accused, and there was a buzz in the court. But he went on
to say that the defense would deny a number of the state’s assertions, including the contention that Umkhonto we Sizwe was the military wing of the
ANC. He said that the leaders of MK and the ANC “endeavored to keep these two organizations entirely separate. They did not always succeed in
this,” he said, “but . . . every effort was made to achieve that object.” He emphatically denied that the ANC took orders from the Communist Party.
He said the defense would challenge the allegation that Goldberg, Kathrada, Bernstein, and Mhlaba were members of Umkhonto. He stated that
the defense would show that Umkhonto had not in fact adopted Operation Mayibuye, and that MK had not embarked on preparations for guerrilla
warfare.
“That will be denied?” asked Justice de Wet incredulously.
“That will be denied,” replied Bram. “The evidence will show that while preparations for guerrilla warfare were being made, no plan was ever
adopted. It was hoped throughout that such a step could be avoided.”
Then, in his soft voice, Bram said, “The defense case, My Lord, will commence with a statement from the dock by accused number one, who

personally took part in the establishment of Umkhonto, and who will be able to inform the court of the beginnings of that organization.”
At this, Yutar popped up from the table and cried, “My Lord! My Lord!” He was distressed that I would not be testifying for he had undoubtedly
prepared for my cross-examination. “My Lord,” he said rather despondently, “a statement from the dock does not carry the same weight as
evidence under oath.”
“I think, Dr. Yutar,” Justice de Wet responded dryly, “that counsel for the defense have sufficient experience to advise their clients without your
assistance.” Yutar sat down.
“Neither we nor our clients are unaware of the provisions of the criminal code,” replied Bram. “I call on Nelson Mandela.”
I rose and faced the courtroom and read slowly.
I am the first accused.
I hold a Bachelor’s degree in Arts, and practiced as an attorney in Johannesburg for a number of years in partnership with Mr. Oliver Tambo. I am a convicted prisoner, serving
five years for leaving the country without a permit and for inciting people to go on strike at the end of May 1961.
I admit immediately that I was one of the persons who helped to form Umkhonto we Sizwe and that I played a prominent role in its affairs until I was arrested in August 1962.
At the outset, I want to say that the suggestion made by the state in its opening that the struggle in South Africa is under the influence of foreigners or Communists is wholly
incorrect. I have done whatever I did, both as an individual and as a leader of my people, because of my experience in South Africa, and my own proudly felt African background, and
not because of what any outsider might have said.
In my youth in the Transkei, I listened to the elders of my tribe telling stories of the old days. Amongst the tales they related to me were those of wars fought by our ancestors in
defense of the fatherland. The names of Dingane and Bambatha, Hintsa and Makanna, Squngthi and Dalasile, Moshoeshoe and Sekhukhuni, were praised as the pride and glory
of the entire African nation. I hoped then that life might offer me the opportunity to serve my people and make my own humble contribution to their freedom struggle. This is what has
motivated me in all that I have done in relation to the charges made against me in this case.
Having said this, I must deal immediately and at some length with the question of violence. Some of the things so far told the court are true and some are untrue. I do not,
however, deny that I planned sabotage. I did not plan it in a spirit of recklessness nor because I have any love of violence. I planned it as a result of a calm and sober assessment
of the political situation that had arisen after many years of tyranny, exploitation, and oppression of my people by whites.

I wanted to impress upon the court that we had not acted irresponsibly or without thought to the ramifications of taking up violent action. I laid
particular emphasis on our resolve to cause no harm to human life.
We of the ANC have always stood for a nonracial democracy, and we shrank from any action which might drive the races further apart than they already were. But the hard facts
were that fifty years of nonviolence had brought the African people nothing but more repressive legislation, and fewer and fewer rights. It may not be easy for this court to
understand, but it is a fact that for a long time the people had been talking of violence — of the day when they would fight the white man and win back their country, and we, the
leaders of the ANC, had nevertheless always prevailed upon them to avoid violence and to use peaceful methods. While some of us discussed this in May and June of 1961, it
could not be denied that our policy to achieve a nonracial state by nonviolence had achieved nothing, and that our followers were beginning to lose confidence in this policy and
were developing disturbing ideas of terrorism. . . .
Umkhonto was formed in November 1961. When we took this decision, and subsequently formulated our plans, the ANC heritage of nonviolence and racial harmony was very
much with us. We felt that the country was drifting towards a civil war in which blacks and whites would fight each other. We viewed the situation with alarm. Civil war would mean
the destruction of what the ANC stood for; with civil war racial peace would be more difficult than ever to achieve. We already have examples in South African history of the results of
war. It has taken more than fifty years for the scars of the South African [Anglo-Boer] War to disappear. How much longer would it take to eradicate the scars of interracial civil war,
which could not be fought without a great loss of life on both sides?

Sabotage, I said, offered the best hope for future race relations. The reaction of the white rulers to our first efforts was swift and brutal: sabotage
was declared to be a crime punishable by death. We did not want civil war, I said, but we needed to be prepared for it.
Experience convinced us that rebellion would offer the government limitless opportunities for the indiscriminate slaughter of our people. But it was precisely because the soil of
South Africa is already drenched with the blood of innocent Africans that we felt it our duty to make preparations as a long-term undertaking to use force in order to defend ourselves
against force. If war were inevitable, we wanted the fight to be conducted on terms most favorable to our people. The fight which held out prospects best for us and the least risk of
life to both sides was guerrilla warfare. We decided, therefore, in our preparations for the future, to make provision for the possibility of guerrilla warfare.
All whites undergo compulsory military training, but no such training was given to Africans. It was in our view essential to build up a nucleus of trained men who would be able to
provide the leadership which would be required if guerrilla warfare started. We had to prepare for such a situation before it became too late to make proper preparations.

I explained that at this stage in our discussions I left the country to attend the PAFMECSA conference and undergo military training. I said that I
underwent training because if there was to be a guerrilla war, I wanted to be able to stand and fight beside my own people. Even so, I believed that
the possibilities of sabotage were far from exhausted and should be pursued with vigor.
I told the court of the dividing line between the ANC and MK, and how we made good-faith attempts to keep the two separate. This was our
policy, but in practice, it was not so simple. Because of bannings and imprisonment, people often had to work in both organizations. Though this
might have sometimes blurred the distinction, it did not abolish it. I disputed the allegations of the state that the aims and objects of the ANC and
the Communist Party were one and the same.
The ideological creed of the ANC is, and always has been, the creed of African Nationalism. It is not the concept of African Nationalism expressed in the cry, “Drive the white man
into the sea.” The African Nationalism for which the ANC stands is the concept of freedom and fulfillment for the African people in their own land. The most important political
document ever adopted by the ANC is the Freedom Charter. It is by no means a blueprint for a socialist state. . . . The ANC has never at any period of its history advocated a
revolutionary change in the economic structure of the country, nor has it, to the best of my recollection, ever condemned capitalist society. . . .
The ANC, unlike the Communist Party, admitted Africans only as members. Its chief goal was, and is, for the African people to win unity and full political rights. The Communist
Party’s main aim, on the other hand, was to remove the capitalists and to replace them with a working-class government. The Communist Party sought to emphasize class
distinctions whilst the ANC seeks to harmonize them.
It is true that there has often been close cooperation between the ANC and the Communist Party. But cooperation is merely proof of a common goal — in this case the removal
of white supremacy — and is not proof of a complete community of interests. The history of the world is full of similar examples. Perhaps the most striking illustration is to be found
in the cooperation between Great Britain, the United States of America and the Soviet Union in the fight against Hitler. Nobody but Hitler would have dared to suggest that such
cooperation turned Churchill or Roosevelt into Communists or Communist tools, or that Britain and America were working to bring about a Communist world. . . .
It is perhaps difficult for white South Africans, with an ingrained prejudice against communism, to understand why experienced African politicians so readily accepted
Communists as their friends. But to us the reason is obvious. Theoretical differences amongst those fighting against oppression is a luxury we cannot afford at this stage. What is
more, for many decades Communists were the only political group in South Africa who were prepared to treat Africans as human beings and their equals; who were prepared to
eat with us; talk with us, live with and work with us. Because of this, there are many Africans who, today, tend to equate freedom with communism.

I told the court that I was not a Communist and had always regarded myself as an African patriot. I did not deny that I was attracted by the idea of
a classless society, or that I had been influenced by Marxist thought. This was true of many leaders of the newly independent states of Africa, who
accepted the need for some form of socialism to enable their people to catch up with the advanced countries of the West.
From my reading of Marxist literature and from conversations with Marxists, I have gained the impression that Communists regard the parliamentary system of the West as
undemocratic and reactionary. But, on the contrary, I am an admirer of such a system.
The Magna Carta, the Petition of Rights and the Bill of Rights, are documents which are held in veneration by democrats throughout the world. I have great respect for British
political institutions, and for the country’s system of justice. I regard the British Parliament as the most democratic institution in the world, and the independence and impartiality of

its judiciary never fail to arouse my admiration. The American Congress, the country’s doctrine of separation of powers, as well as the independence of its judiciary, arouse in me
similar sentiments.

I detailed the terrible disparities between black and white life in South Africa. In education, health, income, every aspect of life, blacks were
barely at a subsistence level while whites had the highest standards in the world — and aimed to keep it that way. Whites, I said, often claim that
Africans in South Africa were better off than Africans in the rest of the continent. Our complaint, I said, was not that we were poor by comparison
with the people in the rest of Africa, but that we were poor by comparison with the whites in our country, and that we were prevented by legislation
from righting that imbalance.
The lack of human dignity experienced by Africans is the direct result of the policy of white supremacy. White supremacy implies black inferiority. Legislation designed to preserve
white supremacy entrenches this notion. Menial tasks in South Africa are invariably performed by Africans. When anything has to be carried or cleaned the white man looks around
for an African to do it for him, whether the African is employed by him or not. . . .
Poverty and the breakdown of family life have secondary effects. Children wander about the streets of the townships because they have no schools to go to, or no money to
enable them to go to school, or no parents at home to see that they go to school, because both parents (if there be two) have to work to keep the family alive. This leads to a
breakdown in moral standards, to an alarming rise in illegitimacy and to growing violence which erupts, not only politically, but everywhere. . . .
Africans want a just share in the whole of South Africa; they want security and a stake in society. Above all, we want equal political rights, because without them our disabilities
will be permanent. I know this sounds revolutionary to the whites in this country, because the majority of voters will be Africans. This makes the white man fear democracy. . . .
This then is what the ANC is fighting for. Their struggle is a truly national one. It is a struggle of the African people, inspired by their own suffering and their own experience. It is a
struggle for the right to live.

I had been reading my speech, and at this point I placed my papers on the defense table, and turned to face the judge. The courtroom became
extremely quiet. I did not take my eyes off Justice de Wet as I spoke from memory the final words.
During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the African people. I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black domination. I have
cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

The silence in the courtroom was now complete. At the end of the address, I simply sat down. I did not turn and face the gallery, though I felt all
their eyes on me. The silence seemed to stretch for many minutes. But in fact it lasted probably no more than thirty seconds, and then from the
gallery I heard what sounded like a great sigh, a deep, collective “ummmm,” followed by the cries of women.
I had read for over four hours. It was a little after four in the afternoon, the time court normally adjourned. But Justice de Wet, as soon as there was
order in the courtroom, asked for the next witness. He was determined to lessen the impact of my statement. He did not want it to be the last and
only testimony of the day. But nothing he did could weaken its effect. When I finished my address and sat down, it was the last time that Justice de
Wet ever looked me in the eye.
The speech received wide publicity in both the local and foreign press, and was printed, virtually word for word, in the Rand Daily Mail. This
despite the fact that all my words were banned. The speech both indicated our line of defense and disarmed the prosecution, which had prepared
its entire case based on the expectation that I would be giving evidence denying responsibility for sabotage. It was now plain that we would not
attempt to use legal niceties to avoid accepting responsibility for actions we had taken with pride and premeditation.

Accused number two, Walter Sisulu, was next. Walter had to bear the brunt of the cross-examination that Yutar had prepared for me. Walter
withstood a barrage of hostile questions and rose above Yutar’s petty machinations to explain our policy in clear and simple terms. He asserted
that Operation Mayibuye and the policy of guerrilla warfare had not been adopted as ANC policy. In fact, Walter told the court that he had personally
opposed its adoption on the grounds that it was premature.
Govan followed Walter in the witness box and proudly related to the court his longtime membership in the Communist Party. The prosecutor
asked Govan why, if he admitted many of the actions in the four counts against him, he did not simply plead guilty to the four counts? “First,” Govan
said, “I felt I should come and explain under oath some of the reasons that led me to join these organizations. There was a sense of moral duty
attached to it. Secondly, for the simple reason that to plead guilty would to my mind indicate a sense of moral guilt. I do not accept there is moral
guilt attached to my answers.”
Like Govan, Ahmed Kathrada and Rusty Bernstein testified to their membership of the Communist Party as well as the ANC. Although Rusty was
captured at Rivonia during the raid, the only evidence of a direct nature that the state had against him was that he had assisted in the erection of a
radio aerial at the farm. Kathy, in his sharp-witted testimony, denied committing acts of sabotage or inciting others to do so, but he said he
supported such acts if they advanced the struggle.
We had all been surprised when accused number eight, James Kantor, had been arrested and grouped with us. Apart from being the brother-inlaw and legal partner of Harold Wolpe, who performed a number of transactions for us through his office, he had no involvement whatsoever with the
ANC or MK. There was virtually no evidence against him, and I assumed the only reason the state kept up the charade of prosecuting him in prison
was to intimidate progressive lawyers.
On the day that Justice de Wet was to rule on Jimmy’s case, we were waiting in the cells underneath the court and I said to Jimmy, “Let us
exchange ties for good luck.” But when he saw the wide, old-fashioned tie I gave him compared to the lovely, silk tie he gave me, he probably
thought I was merely trying to improve my wardrobe. Jimmy was something of a clotheshorse, but he wore the tie to court and when Justice de Wet
dismissed the charges against him, he lifted the tie up to me as a kind of salute and farewell.
Raymond Mhlaba was one of the leading ANC and MK figures in the eastern Cape, but because the state did not have much evidence against
him, he denied he was a member of MK and that he knew anything about sabotage. We all decided that neither Elias Motsoaledi, accused number
nine, nor Andrew Mlangeni, accused number ten, should testify. They were low-level members of MK, and could not add much to what had already
been said. Elias Motsoaledi, despite having been beaten and tortured in prison, never broke down. Andrew Mlangeni, the last accused, made an
unsworn statement admitting that he carried messages and instructions for MK and had disguised himself as a priest to facilitate this work. He, too,
informed the court that he had been assaulted while in prison, and subjected to electric shock treatment. Andrew was the last witness. The defense
rested. All that remained were the final arguments and then judgment.

On the twentieth of May, Yutar handed out a dozen blue leather-bound volumes of his final speech to the press and one to the defense. Despite its
handsome packaging, Yutar’s address was a garbled summary of the prosecution’s case and did not explain the indictment or assess the

evidence. It was filled with ad hominem insults. “The deceit of the accused is amazing,” he said at one point. “Although they represented scarcely
1% of the Bantu population they took it upon themselves to tell the world that the Africans in South Africa are suppressed, oppressed and
depressed.” Even Judge de Wet seemed mystified by Yutar’s speech, and at one point interrupted him to say, “Mr. Yutar, you do concede that you
failed to prove guerrilla warfare was ever decided upon, do you not?”
Yutar was stunned. He had assumed precisely the opposite. We were surprised as well, for the judge’s question gave us hope. Yutar haltingly
told the court that preparations for guerrilla warfare were indeed made.
“Yes, I know that,” de Wet replied impatiently, “the defense concedes that. But they say that prior to their arrest they took no decision to engage in
guerrilla warfare. I take it that you have no evidence contradicting that and that you accept it?”
“As Your Worship wishes,” Yutar said in a strangled voice.
Yutar finished by saying that the case was not only one of high treason “par excellence,” but of murder and attempted murder — neither of which
was mentioned in the indictment. In a fit of bluster, he proclaimed, “I make bold to say that every particular allegation in the indictment has been
proved.” He knew, even as he uttered those words, that they were patently false.

Defense counsel Arthur Chaskalson rose first to deal with some of the legal questions raised by the prosecution. He rejected Yutar’s statement that
the trial had anything to do with murder, and reminded the court that MK’s express policy was that there should be no loss of life. When Arthur
began to explain that other organizations committed acts of sabotage for which the accused were blamed, de Wet interrupted to say he already
accepted that as a fact. This was another unexpected victory.
Bram Fischer spoke next and was prepared to tackle the state’s two most serious contentions: that we had undertaken guerrilla warfare and that
the ANC and MK were the same. Though de Wet had said he believed that guerrilla warfare had not yet begun, we were taking no chances. But as
Bram launched into his first point, de Wet interjected somewhat testily, “I thought I made my attitude clear. I accept that no decision or date was
fixed upon for guerrilla warfare.”
When Bram began his second point, de Wet again interrupted him to say that he also conceded the fact that the two organizations were
separate. Bram, who was usually prepared for anything, was hardly prepared for de Wet’s response. He then sat down; the judge had accepted his
arguments even before he made them. We were jubilant — that is, if men facing the death sentence can be said to be jubilant. Court was adjourned
for three weeks while de Wet considered the verdict.