ON APRIL 25, the day before the trial was to resume, Issy Maisels called us together to discuss the grave effect the State of Emergency was
having on the conduct of the trial. Because of the Emergency Regulations, consultations between the accused and our lawyers had become virtually
impossible. Our lawyers, who were based in Johannesburg, had trouble seeing us in prison and were unable to prepare our case. They would often
drive up and be informed that we were not available. Even when we were able to see them, consultations were harassed and cut short. More
important, Maisels explained that under the Emergency Regulations, those already in detention would be exposing themselves to further detention
merely by testifying, for they would inevitably make statements regarded as “subversive,” thereby subjecting themselves to greater penalties.
Defense witnesses who were not imprisoned now risked detainment if they testified.
The defense team proposed that they withdraw from the case in protest. Maisels explained the serious implications of such a withdrawal and the
consequences of our conducting our own defense in a capital case. Under the hostile atmosphere at the time, he said, the judges might see fit to
give us longer terms of imprisonment. We discussed the proposal among ourselves, and each of the twenty-nine accused — we were now minus
Wilton Mkwayi — was able to express his opinion. The resolution was unanimously endorsed, and it was agreed that Duma Nokwe and I would
help in preparing the case in the absence of our lawyers. I was in favor of this dramatic gesture, for it highlighted the iniquities of the State of
Emergency.
On April 26, Duma Nokwe, the first African advocate in the Transvaal, rose in court and made the sensational announcement that the accused
were instructing defense counsel to withdraw from the case. Maisels then said simply, “We have no further mandate and we will consequently not
trouble Your Lordships any further,” after which the defense team silently filed out of the synagogue. This shocked the three-judge panel, who
warned us in direst terms about the dangers of conducting our own defense. But we were angry and eager to take on the state. For the next five
months, until the virtual end of the Emergency, we conducted our own defense.
Our strategy was simple and defensive in nature: to drag out the case until the State of Emergency was lifted and our lawyers could return. The
case had gone on so long already that it did not seem to matter if we stretched it out even further. In practice, this strategy became rather comical.
Under the law, each one of us was now entitled to conduct his own defense and was able to call as a witness each of the other accused; and each
of the accused was entitled to cross-examine each witness. We were arranged in alphabetical order according to the docket and accused number
one was Farid Adams, of the Transvaal Indian Youth Congress. Farid would open his case by calling accused number two, Helen Joseph, as his
first witness. After being examined by Farid, Helen would then be cross-examined by the twenty-seven other co-accused. She would then be crossexamined by the Crown and reexamined by accused number one. Adams would then proceed to call accused number three, and so on, and the
whole procedure would duplicate itself until every accused was called in this fashion. At that rate, we would be at trial until the millennium.

It is never easy to prepare a case from prison, and in this instance we were hampered by the customary apartheid barriers. All of the accused
needed to be able to meet together but prison regulations prohibited meetings between male and female prisoners, and between black and white,
so we were not permitted to consult with Helen Joseph, Leon Levy, Lilian Ngoyi, and Bertha Mashaba.
Helen, as the first witness to be called, needed to prepare her evidence in the presence of Duma, myself, and Farid Adams, who would be
examining her. After protracted negotiations with the prison authorities, we were permitted to have consultations under very strict conditions. Helen
Joseph, Lilian, Leon, and Bertha were to be brought from their various prisons and sections (separated by race and gender) to the African men’s
prison. The first stipulation was that there could be no physical contact between white and black prisoners, and between male and female
prisoners. The authorities erected an iron grille to separate Helen and Leon (as whites) from us and a second partition to separate them from
Lilian, who was also participating in the preparations. Even a master architect would have had trouble designing such a structure. In prison we were
separated from each other by this elaborate metal contraption, while in court we all mingled freely.
We first needed to coach Farid in the art of courtroom etiquette, and rehearse Helen’s testimony. To help Helen, I was playing the role that Farid
would play in court. I assumed the proper courtroom manner and began the examination.
“Name?” I said.
“Helen Joseph,” she replied.
“Age?”
Silence. I repeated, “Age?”
Helen pursed her lips and waited. Then, after some moments, she scowled at me and said sharply, “What has my age to do with this case,
Nelson?”
Helen was as charming as she was courageous, but she also had an imperious side. She was a woman of a certain age, and sensitive about it. I
explained that it was customary to note down the witness’s particulars, such as name, age, address, and place of birth. A witness’s age helps the
court to weigh her testimony and influences sentencing.
I continued: “Age?”
Helen stiffened. “Nelson,” she said, “I will cross that bridge when I come to it in court, but not until then. Let us move on.”
I then asked her a series of questions that she might expect from the Crown in a manner perhaps too realistic for her, because at one point Helen
turned to me and said, “Are you Mandela or are you the prosecutor?”
There were other light moments, some of which were quite encouraging.
I was permitted to visit Helen Joseph on weekends and bring her records of the proceedings. On these occasions I met other women detainees
and consulted with them as possible witnesses. I was always very cordial with the white wardresses, and I noticed that my visits caused
considerable interest. The wardresses had never known there was even such a species as an African lawyer or doctor, and regarded me as an
exotic creature. But as I became more familiar they became more friendly and at ease, and I joked with them that I would handle any of their legal
problems. Seeing prominent and educated white women discussing serious matters with a black man on the basis of perfect equality could only
lead to the weakening of the wardresses’ apartheid assumptions.
Once during a long interview with Helen, I turned to the wardress who was required to sit in on our conversation and said, “I’m sorry to bore you
with this endless consultation.” “No,” she said, “you are not boring me at all, I am enjoying it.” I could see she was following our conversation, and
once or twice she even offered small suggestions. I saw this as one of the side benefits of the trial. Most of these wardresses had no idea why we
were in prison, and gradually began to discover what we were fighting for and why we were willing to risk jail in the first place.
This is precisely why the National Party was violently opposed to all forms of integration. Only a white electorate indoctrinated with the idea of the
black threat, ignorant of African ideas and policies, could support the monstrous racist philosophy of the National Party. Familiarity, in this case,

would not breed contempt, but understanding, and even, eventually, harmony.
The light moments in prison could not make up for the low ones. Winnie was allowed to visit on a number of occasions while I was in Pretoria,
and each time she brought Zenani, who was then beginning to walk and talk. I would hold her and kiss her if the guards permitted me, and toward
the end of the interview, hand her back to Winnie. As Winnie was saying good-bye, and the guards were ushering them out, Zeni would often
motion for me to come with them, and I could see on her small puzzled face that she did not understand why I could not.

In court, Farid Adams deftly led Helen through her evidence-in-chief. He argued frequently and fairly competently with the judges. We were now
energized: no longer was anyone doing crossword puzzles to pass the time. As the accused took turns cross-examining the witnesses, the Crown
and the prosecution began to get a sense for the first time of the true caliber of the men and women on trial.
According to South African law, since we were in the Supreme Court, Duma, as an advocate, was the only one permitted to address the judges
directly. I, as an attorney, could instruct him, but I was not technically permitted to address the court, and neither were any of the other defendants.
We dismissed our advocates under the correct assumption that an accused, in the absence of representation, would be permitted to address the
court. I addressed the court and Justice Rumpff, trying to frustrate us, interrupted me. “You appreciate the fact, Mr. Mandela,” he said, “that Mr.
Nokwe, as an advocate, is the only lawyer who is permitted to address the court.” To which I replied, “Very well, My Lord, I believe we are all
prepared to abide by that as long as you are prepared to pay Mr. Nokwe his fees.” From then on no one objected to any of the accused addressing
the court.
While Farid was questioning Helen and the subsequent witnesses, Duma and I sat on either side of him, supplying him with questions, helping
him to deal with legal issues as they arose. In general, he did not need much prompting. But one day, when we were under constant pressure, we
were whispering suggestions to him every few seconds. Farid seemed weary, and Duma and I were running out of material. Then, without
consulting us, Farid suddenly asked the judges for a postponement, saying he was fatigued. The judges refused his application, saying it was not
sufficient reason for a postponement and reiterating the warning they gave us the day our lawyers withdrew.
That afternoon there was no singing as we returned to prison, and everyone sat with sullen faces. A crisis was brewing among the accused.
Upon our arrival in prison, a handful of the accused demanded a meeting. I called all the men together, and J. Nkampeni, a businessman from Port
Elizabeth who had helped out the families of defiers during the Defiance Campaign, led what turned out to be an attack.
“Madiba,” he said, using my clan name as a sign of respect, “I want you to tell us why you drove away our lawyers.” I reminded him that the
lawyers were not released by any one individual; their withdrawal had been approved by all, including himself. “But what did we know about court
procedure, Madiba?” he said. “We relied on you lawyers.”
A substantial number of men shared Nkampeni’s misgivings. I warned them against the dangers of being disheartened and insisted we were
doing quite well. I said that today was a minor setback, and that we would face worse difficulties. Our case was far more than a trial of legal issues
between the Crown and a group of people charged with breaking the law. It was a trial of strength, a test of the power of a moral idea versus an
immoral one, and I said we needed to worry about more than just the legal technique of our advocates. The protest abated.
After Helen Joseph had been cross-examined and reexamined, accused number three, Ahmed Kathrada, opened his case. It was during the
testimony of Kathy’s second witness, accused number four, Stanley Lollan, a member of the executive of the Coloured People’s Congress, that
Prime Minister Verwoerd announced that the State of Emergency would soon be lifted. The Emergency had never been intended to be permanent,
and the government believed that it had successfully stifled the liberation struggle. At this point, our defense lawyers returned, to the general relief of
all of us, though we remained in prison for another few weeks. We had been kept in detention and had functioned without our lawyers for more than
five months.

My own testimony began on August 3. I felt well prepared through my preparation of the others. After three years of silence, banning, and internal
exile, I looked forward to the chance to speak out before the people attempting to judge me. During my evidence-in-chief I preached moderation
and reaffirmed the ANC’s commitment to nonviolent struggle. In answer to a question as to whether democracy could be achieved through gradual
reforms, I suggested it could.
We demand universal adult franchise and we are prepared to exert economic pressure to attain our demands. We will launch defiance campaigns, stay-at-homes, either singly or
together, until the Government should say, “Gentlemen, we cannot have this state of affairs, laws being defied, and this whole situation created by stay-at-homes. Let’s talk.” In my
own view I would say, “Yes, let us talk” and the Government would say, “We think that the Europeans at present are not ready for a type of government where they might be
dominated by non-Europeans. We think we should give you 60 seats. The African population to elect 60 Africans to represent them in Parliament. We will leave the matter over for
five years and we will review it at the end of five years.” In my view, that would be a victory, My Lords; we would have taken a significant step toward the attainment of universal adult
suffrage for Africans, and we would then for the five years say, We will suspend civil disobedience.

The state was determined to prove that I was a dangerous, violence-spouting Communist. While I was not a Communist or a member of the
party, I did not want to be seen as distancing myself from my Communist allies. Although I could have been sent back to jail for voicing such views, I
did not hesitate to reaffirm the tremendous support the Communists had given us. At one point, the bench posed the question as to whether or not I
thought a one-party state was a viable option for South Africa.
NM: My Lord, it is not a question of form, it is a question of democracy. If democracy would be best expressed by a one-party system then I would examine the proposition very
carefully. But if a democracy could best be expressed by a multiparty system then I would examine that carefully. In this country, for example, we have a multiparty system at
present, but so far as the non-Europeans are concerned this is the most vicious despotism that you could think of.

I became testy with Judge Rumpff when he fell into the same mistake made by so many white South Africans about the idea of a universal
franchise. Their notion was that to exercise this responsibility, voters must be “educated.” To a narrow-thinking person, it is hard to explain that to
be “educated” does not only mean being literate and having a B.A., and that an illiterate man can be a far more “educated” voter than someone with
an advanced degree.
JUSTICE RUMPFF: What is the value of participation in the Government of a state of people who know nothing?
NM: My Lord, what happens when illiterate whites vote . . .
JUSTICE RUMPFF: Are they not subject as much to the influence of election leaders as children would be?
NM: No, My Lord, this is what happens in practice. A man stands up to contest a seat in a particular area; he draws up a manifesto, and he says, “These are the ideas for which I
stand”; it is a rural area and he says, “I am against stock limitation”; then, listening to the policy of this person, you decide whether this man will advance your interests if you
return him to Parliament, and on that basis you vote for a candidate. It has nothing to do with education.

JUSTICE RUMPFF: He only looks to his own interests?
NM: No, a man looks at a man who will be able to best present his point of view and votes for that man.

I told the court that we believed we could achieve our demands without violence, through our numerical superiority.
We had in mind that in the foreseeable future it will be possible for us to achieve these demands, and we worked on the basis that Europeans themselves in spite of the wall of
prejudice and hostility which we encountered, that they can never remain indifferent indefinitely to our demands, because we are hitting them in the stomach with our policy of
economic pressure. The Europeans dare not look at it with indifference. They would have to respond to it and indeed, My Lord, they are responding to it.

The Emergency was lifted on the last day of August. We would be going home for the first time in five months. When people in Johannesburg
heard about the end of the Emergency, they drove up on the chance that we might be released; when we were let go, we were met with a jubilant
reception from friends and family. Winnie had gotten a ride to Pretoria and our reunion was joyous. I had not held my wife in five months or seen her
smile with joy. For the first time in five months, I slept in my own bed that night.
After one has been in prison, it is the small things that one appreciates: being able to take a walk whenever one wants, going into a shop and
buying a newspaper, speaking or choosing to remain silent. The simple act of being able to control one’s person.

Even after the end of the Emergency, the trial continued for another nine months until March 29, 1961. In many ways, these were the glory days for
the accused, for our own people were on the stand fearlessly enunciating ANC policy. Robert Resha forcefully disputed the government’s absurd
contention that the ANC wanted to induce the government to use violence so we could use violence in return. Gert Sibande eloquently told the court
of the miseries of African farmworkers. Venerable Isaac Behndy of Ladysmith, eighty-one years old, a lay preacher of the African Native Mission
Church, explained why we opted for stay-at-homes instead of strikes.
In October, the redoubtable Professor Matthews was called as our final witness. He was imperturbable on the witness stand and treated the
prosecutors as though they were errant students who needed stern admonishment. Often he would reply to the overmastered prosecutor with some
version of the following: “What you really want me to say is that the speech which you allege is violent represents the policy of my organization. First,
your contention is incorrect and second, I am not going to say that.”
He explained in beautiful language that the African people knew that a nonviolent struggle would entail suffering but had chosen it because they
prized freedom above all else. People, he said, will willingly undergo the severest suffering in order to free themselves from oppression. With
Professor Matthews in the dock, the defense ended on a high note. After he finished testifying, Justice Kennedy shook his hand and expressed the
hope that they would meet again under better circumstances.