SITUATED FOUR MILES WEST of Johannesburg’s center, on the face of a rocky outcrop overlooking the city, was the African township of
Sophiatown. Father Trevor Huddleston, one of the township’s greatest friends, once compared Sophiatown to an Italian hill town and from a
distance the place did indeed have a good deal of charm: the closely packed, red-roofed houses; the smoke curling up into a pink sky; the tall and
slender gum trees that hugged the township. Up close one saw the poverty and squalor in which too many of Sophiatown’s people lived. The streets
were narrow and unpaved, and every lot was filled with dozens of shanties huddled close together.
Sophiatown was part of what was known as the Western Areas townships, along with Martindale and Newclare. The area was originally intended
for whites, and a real estate developer actually built a number of houses there for white buyers. But because of a municipal refuse dump in the area,
whites chose to live elsewhere. Reluctantly, the developer sold his houses to Africans. Sophiatown was one of the few places in the Transvaal
where Africans had been able to buy stands, or plots, prior to the 1923 Urban Areas Act. Many of these old brick and stone houses, with their tinroofed verandas, still stood in Sophiatown, giving the township an air of Old World graciousness. As industry in Johannesburg grew, Sophiatown
became the home of a rapidly expanding African workforce. It was convenient and close to town. Workers lived in shanties that were erected in the
back and front yards of older residences. Several families might all be crowded into a single shanty. Up to forty people could share a single water
tap. Despite the poverty, Sophiatown had a special character; for Africans, it was the Left Bank in Paris, Greenwich Village in New York, the home
of writers, artists, doctors, and lawyers. It was both bohemian and conventional, lively and sedate. It was home to both Dr. Xuma, where he had his
practice, and assorted tsotsis (gangsters), like the Berliners and the Americans, who adopted the names of American movie stars like John Wayne
and Humphrey Bogart. Sophiatown boasted the only swimming pool for African children in Johannesburg.

In Johannesburg, the Western Areas Removal scheme meant the evacuation of Sophiatown, Martindale, and Newclare, with a collective population
that was somewhere between 60,000 and 100,000. In 1953, the Nationalist government had purchased a tract of land called Meadowlands,
thirteen miles from the city. People were to be resettled there in seven different “ethnic groups.” The excuse given by the government was slum
clearance, a smoke screen for the government policy that regarded all urban areas as white areas where Africans were temporary residents.
The government was under pressure from its supporters in the surrounding areas of Westdene and Newlands, which were comparatively poor
white areas. These working-class whites were envious of some of the fine houses owned by blacks in Sophiatown. The government wanted to
control the movements of all Africans, and such control was far more difficult in freehold urban townships, where blacks could own property, and
people came and went as they pleased. Though the pass system was still in effect, one did not need a special permit to enter a freehold township
as was the case with municipal locations. Africans had lived and owned property in Sophiatown for over fifty years; now the government was
callously planning on relocating all Sophiatown’s African residents to another black township. So cynical was the government’s plan that the
removal was to take place even before the houses were built to accommodate the evacuated people. The removal of Sophiatown was the first
major test of strength for the ANC and its allies after the Defiance Campaign.
Although the government’s removal campaign for Sophiatown had started in 1950, efforts by the ANC to combat it did not begin in earnest until
1953. By the middle of the year, the local branches of the ANC and the TIC and the local Ratepayers Association were mobilizing people to resist.
In June of 1953, a public meeting was called by the provincial executive of the ANC and the TIC at Sophiatown’s Odin cinema to discuss
opposition to the removal. It was a lively, exuberant meeting attended by more than twelve hundred people, none of whom seemed intimidated by
the presence of dozens of heavily armed policemen.
Only a few days before the meeting, my banning orders, as well as Walter’s, had expired. This meant that we were no longer prevented from
attending or speaking at gatherings, and arrangements were quickly made for me to speak at the theater.
Shortly before the meeting was to begin, a police officer saw Walter and me outside the cinema talking with Father Huddleston, one of the
leaders of the opposition to the removal. The officer informed the two of us that as banned individuals we had no right to be there, and he then
ordered his officers to arrest us. Father Huddleston shouted to the policemen coming toward us, “No, you must arrest me instead, my dears.” The
officer ordered Father Huddleston to stand aside, but he refused. As the policemen moved Father Huddleston out of the way, I said to the officer,
“You must make sure if we are under a ban or not. Be careful, because it would be a wrongful arrest to take us in if our bans have expired. Now, do
you think we would be here tonight talking to you if our bans had not expired?”
The police were notorious for keeping very poor records and were often unaware when bans ended. The officer knew this as well as I did. He
pondered what I had said, then told his officers to pull back. They stood aside as we entered the hall.
Inside, the police were provocative and contemptuous. Equipped with pistols and rifles, they strutted around the hall pushing people around,
making insulting remarks. I was sitting onstage with a number of other leaders, and as the meeting was about to begin, I saw Major Prinsloo come
swaggering in through the stage door, accompanied by a number of armed officers. I caught his eye, and I made a gesture as if to say, “Me?” and
he shook his head no. He then walked over to the podium, where Yusuf Cachalia had already begun to speak, and ordered the other officers to
arrest him, whereupon they took him by the arms and started to drag him off. Outside, the police had already arrested Robert Resha and Ahmed
Kathrada.
The crowd began yelling and booing, and I saw that matters could turn extremely ugly if the crowd did not control itself. I jumped to the podium and
started singing a well-known protest song, and as soon as I pronounced the first few words the crowd joined in. I feared that the police might have
opened fire if the crowd had become too unruly.

The ANC was then holding meetings every Sunday evening in Freedom Square, in the center of Sophiatown, to mobilize opposition to the removal.
These were vibrant sessions, punctuated by repeated cries of “Asihambi!” (We are not moving!) and the singing of “Sophiatown likhaya lam
asihambi” (Sophiatown is my home; we are not moving). The meetings were addressed by leading ANC members, standholders, tenants, city
councillors, and often by Father Huddleston, who ignored police warnings to confine himself to church affairs.
One Sunday evening, not long after the incident at the Odin, I was scheduled to speak in Freedom Square. The crowd that night was passionate,
and their emotion undoubtedly influenced mine. There were a great many young people present, and they were angry and eager for action. As
usual, policemen were clustered around the perimeter, armed with both guns and pencils, the latter to take notes as to who was speaking and what
the speaker was saying. We tried to make this into a virtue by being as open with the police as possible to show them that in fact we had nothing to
hide, not even our distaste for them.

I began by speaking about the increasing repressiveness of the government in the wake of the Defiance Campaign. I said the government was
now scared of the might of the African people. As I spoke, I grew more and more indignant. In those days, I was something of a rabble-rousing
speaker. I liked to incite an audience, and I was doing so that evening.
As I condemned the government for its ruthlessness and lawlessness, I stepped across the line: I said that the time for passive resistance had
ended, that nonviolence was a useless strategy and could never overturn a white minority regime bent on retaining its power at any cost. At the end
of the day, I said, violence was the only weapon that would destroy apartheid and we must be prepared, in the near future, to use that weapon.
The crowd was excited; the youth in particular were clapping and cheering. They were ready to act on what I said right then and there. At that
point I began to sing a freedom song, the lyrics of which say, “There are the enemies, let us take our weapons and attack them.” I sang this song
and the crowd joined in, and when the song was finished, I pointed to the police and said, “There, there are our enemies!” The crowd again started
cheering and made aggressive gestures in the direction of the police. The police looked nervous, and a number of them pointed back at me as if to
say, “Mandela, we will get you for this.” I did not mind. In the heat of the moment I did not think of the consequences.
But my words that night did not come out of nowhere. I had been thinking of the future. The government was busily taking measures to prevent
anything like the Defiance Campaign from reoccurring. I had begun to analyze the struggle in different terms. The ambition of the ANC was to wage
a mass struggle, to engage the workers and peasants of South Africa in a campaign so large and powerful that it might overcome the status quo of
white oppression. But the Nationalist government was making any legal expression of dissent or protest impossible. I saw that they would ruthlessly
suppress any legitimate protest on the part of the African majority. A police state did not seem far off.
I began to suspect that both legal and extra-constitutional protests would soon be impossible. In India, Gandhi had been dealing with a foreign
power that ultimately was more realistic and farsighted. That was not the case with the Afrikaners in South Africa. Nonviolent passive resistance is
effective as long as your opposition adheres to the same rules as you do. But if peaceful protest is met with violence, its efficacy is at an end. For
me, nonviolence was not a moral principle but a strategy; there is no moral goodness in using an ineffective weapon. But my thoughts on this matter
were not yet formed, and I had spoken too soon.
That was certainly the view of the National Executive Committee. When they learned of my speech, I was severely reprimanded for advocating
such a radical departure from accepted policy. Although some on the executive sympathized with my remarks, no one could support the
intemperate way that I had made them. The executive admonished me, noting that the impulsive policy I had called for was not only premature but
dangerous. Such speeches could provoke the enemy to crush the organization entirely while the enemy was strong and we were as yet still weak. I
accepted the censure, and thereafter faithfully defended the policy of nonviolence in public. But in my heart, I knew that nonviolence was not the
answer.
In those days, I was often in hot water with the executive. In early 1953, Chief Luthuli, Z. K. Matthews, and a handful of other high-ranking ANC
leaders were invited to a meeting with a group of whites who were in the process of forming the Liberal Party. A meeting of the ANC executive took
place afterward at which a few of us asked for a report of the earlier meeting with the white liberals. The attendees refused, saying that they had
been invited in their private capacity, not as members of the ANC. We continued to pester them, and finally Professor Matthews, who was a lawyer,
said that it had been a privileged conversation. In a fit of indignation, I said, “What kind of leaders are you who can discuss matters with a group of
white liberals and then not share that information with your colleagues at the ANC? That’s the trouble with you, you are scared and overawed of the
white man. You value his company more than that of your African comrades.”
This outburst provoked the wrath of both Professor Matthews and Chief Luthuli. First, Professor Matthews responded: “Mandela, what do you
know about whites? I taught you whatever you know about whites and you are still ignorant. Even now, you are barely out of your student uniform.”
Luthuli was burning with a cold fire and said, “All right, if you are accusing me of being afraid of the white man then I have no other recourse but to
resign. If that is what you say then that is what I intend to do.” I did not know whether Luthuli was bluffing or not, but his threat frightened me. I had
spoken hastily, without thinking, without a sense of responsibility, and I now greatly regretted it. I immediately withdrew my charge and apologized. I
was a young man who attempted to make up for his ignorance with militancy.

At the same time as my speech in Sophiatown, Walter informed me that he had been invited to attend the World Festival of Youth and Students for
Peace and Friendship in Bucharest as a guest of honor. The timing of the invitation gave Walter virtually no opportunity to consult with the National
Executive Committee. I was keen that he should go and encouraged him to do so, whether or not he conferred with the executive. Walter resolved
to go and I helped him arrange for a substitute passport, an affidavit stating his identity and citizenship. (The government would never have issued
him a proper passport.) The group, which was headed by Walter Sisulu and Duma Nokwe, traveled on the only airline that would accept such an
affidavit: the Israeli airline, El Al.
I was convinced, despite my reprimand from the executive, that the policies of the Nationalists would soon make nonviolence an even more
limited and ineffective policy. Walter was privy to my thoughts and before he left, I made a suggestion: he should arrange to visit the People’s
Republic of China and discuss with them the possibility of supplying us with weapons for an armed struggle. Walter liked the idea and promised to
make the attempt.
This action was taken purely on my own and my methods were highly unorthodox. To some extent, they were the actions of a hotheaded
revolutionary who had not thought things through and who acted without discipline. They were the actions of a man frustrated with the immorality of
apartheid and the ruthlessness of the state in protecting it.
Walter’s visit caused a storm within the executive. I undertook the task of personally conveying his apologies. I did not mention my secret request.
Luthuli objected to the flouting of the ANC’s code of conduct, and Professor Matthews expressed dismay about Walter visiting socialist countries.
The executive was skeptical about Walter’s motives, and questioned my explanation of the circumstances. A few wanted to formally censure Walter
and me, but in the end did not.
Walter managed to reach China, where the leadership received him warmly. They conveyed their support of our struggle, but they were wary and
cautious when he broached the idea of an armed struggle. They warned him that an armed struggle was an extremely grave undertaking and they
questioned whether the liberation movement had matured sufficiently to justify such an endeavor. Walter came back with encouragement but no
guns.