ONE NIGHT, toward the end of May, a warder came to my cell and ordered me to pack my things. I asked him why, but he did not answer. In less
than ten minutes, I was escorted down to the reception office where I found three other political prisoners: Tefu, John Gaetsewe, and Aaron Molete.
Colonel Aucamp curtly informed us that we were being transferred. Where? Tefu asked. Someplace very beautiful, Aucamp said. Where? said
Tefu. “Die Eiland,” said Aucamp. The island. There was only one. Robben Island.
The four of us were shackled together and put in a windowless van that contained only a sanitary bucket. We drove all night to Cape Town, and
arrived at the city’s docks in the late afternoon. It is not an easy or pleasant task for men shackled together to use a sanitary bucket in a moving van.
The docks at Cape Town were swarming with armed police and nervous plainclothes officials. We had to stand, still chained, in the hold of the
old wooden ferry, which was difficult as the ship rocked in the swells off the coast. A small porthole above was the only source of light and air. The
porthole served another purpose as well: the warders enjoyed urinating on us from above. It was still light when we were led on deck and we saw
the island for the first time. Green and beautiful, it looked at first more like a resort than a prison.
Esiquithini. At the island. That is how the Xhosa people describe the narrow, windswept outcrop of rock that lies eight miles off the coast of
Cape Town. Everyone knows which island you are referring to. I first heard about the island as a child. Robben Island was well known among the
Xhosas after Makanna (also known as Nxele), the six foot six inch commander of the Xhosa army in the Fourth Xhosa War, was banished there by
the British after leading ten thousand warriors against Grahamstown in 1819. He tried to escape from Robben Island by boat, but drowned before
reaching shore. The memory of that loss is woven into the language of my people who speak of a “forlorn hope” by the phrase “Ukuza kuka Nxele.”
Makanna was not the first African hero confined on the island. In 1658, Autshumao, known to European historians as Harry the Strandloper, was
banished by Jan Van Riebeeck during a war between the Khoi Khoi and the Dutch. I took solace in the memory of Autshumao, for he is reputed to
be the first and only man to ever escape from Robben Island, and he did so by rowing to the mainland in a small boat.
The island takes its name from the Dutch word for seal, hundreds of which once cavorted in the icy Benguela currents that wash the shores. Later
the island was turned into a leper colony, a lunatic asylum, and a naval base. The government had only recently turned the island back into a prison.
* * *
We were met by a group of burly white warders shouting: “Dis die Eiland! Hier gaan julle vrek!” (This is the island. Here you will die.) Ahead of us
was a compound flanked by a number of guardhouses. Armed guards lined the path to the compound. It was extremely tense. A tall, red-faced
warder yelled at us: “Hier is ek jou baas?” (Here I am your boss!) He was one of the notorious Kleynhans brothers, known for their brutality to
prisoners. The warders always spoke in Afrikaans. If you replied in English they would say, “Ek verstaan nie daardie kafferboetie se taal nie.” (I
don’t understand that kaffir-lover’s language.)
As we walked toward the prison, the guards shouted “Two-two! Two-two!” — meaning we should walk in pairs, two in front, two behind. I linked up
with Tefu. The guards started screaming, “Haas! . . . Haas?” The word haas means “move” in Afrikaans, but it is customarily reserved for cattle.
The warders were demanding that we jog, and I turned to Tefu and under my breath said that we must set an example; if we gave in now we
would be at their mercy. Tefu nodded his head in agreement. We had to show them that we were not everyday criminals but political prisoners
being punished for our beliefs.
I motioned to Tefu that we two should walk in front, and we took the lead. Once in front, we actually decreased the pace, walking slowly and
deliberately. The guards were incredulous. “Listen,” Kleynhans said, “this is not Johannesburg, this is not Pretoria, this is Robben Island, and we will
tolerate no insubordination here. Haas! Haas!” But we continued at our stately pace. Kleynhans ordered us to halt, and stood in front of us: “Look,
man, we will kill you, we are not fooling around, your wives and children and mothers and fathers will never know what happened to you. This is the
last warning. Haas! Haas!”
To this I said: “You have your duty and we have ours.” I was determined that we would not give in, and we did not, for we were already at the cells.
We were ushered into a rectangular stone building and taken to a large open room. The floor was covered with water a few inches deep. The
guards yelled: “Trek uit! Trek uit!” (Undress! Undress!) As we removed each item of clothing, the guards would grab it, search it quickly, and then
throw it in the water. Jacket off, searched, thrown in the water. Then the guards commanded us to get dressed, by which they meant for us to put on
our soaking clothes.
Two officers entered the room. The less senior of the two was a captain whose name was Gericke. From the start, we could see that he was
intent on manhandling us. The captain pointed to Aaron Molete, the youngest of the four of us and a very mild and gentle person, and said, “Why is
your hair so long?” Aaron said nothing. The captain shouted, “I’m talking to you! Why is your hair so long? It is against regulations. Your hair should
have been cut. Why is it long . . .” and then he paused and turned to look at me, and said, “. . . like this boy’s!” pointing at me. I began to speak:
“Now, look here, the length of our hair is determined by the regulations . . .”
Before I could finish, he shouted in disbelief: “Never talk to me that way, boy!” and began to advance. I was frightened; it is not a pleasant
sensation to know that someone is about to hit you and you are unable to defend yourself.
When he was just a few feet from me, I said, as firmly as I could, “If you so much as lay a hand on me, I will take you to the highest court in the land
and when I finish with you, you will be as poor as a church mouse.” The moment I began speaking, he paused, and by the end of my speech, he was
staring at me with astonishment. I was a bit surprised myself. I had been afraid, and spoke not from courage, but out of a kind of bravado. At such
times, one must put up a bold front despite what one feels inside.
“Where’s your ticket?” he asked, and I handed it to him. I could see he was nervous. “What’s your name?” he said. I nodded my head toward the
ticket, and said, “It is written there.” He said, “How long are you in for?” I said again, gesturing toward the ticket, “It is written there.” He looked down
and said, “Five years! You are in for five years and you are so arrogant! Do you know what it means to serve five years?” I said, “That is my
business. I am ready to serve five years but I am not prepared to be bullied. You must act within the law.”
No one had informed him who we were, or that we were political prisoners, or that I was a lawyer. I had not noticed it myself, but the other officer,
a tall, quiet man, had vanished during our confrontation; I later discovered that he was Colonel Steyn, the commanding officer of Robben Island. The
captain then left, much quieter than he had entered.

We were then by ourselves and Steve, his nerves jangling, could not stop speaking. “We have provoked the Boere,” he said. “Now we are in for a
rough time.” He was in the midst of speaking when a stocky fellow named Lieutenant Pretorius walked in. To our surprise, Pretorius spoke to us in
Xhosa, which he seemed to know quite well. “We have looked at your records and they are not so bad. All except this one,” he said, nodding

toward Steve. “Your record is filthy.”
Steve exploded. “Who are you to talk to me like that? You say I have a filthy record. You have read my files, eh. Well, you will find that all those
convictions were for cases I was fighting for the rights of my people. I am not a criminal; you are the criminal.” The lieutenant then warned Steve that
he would charge him if he ever addressed him in that way again. Before leaving, the lieutenant said he was placing us in a single large cell with
windows that faced outside and then added, rather ominously, “But I don’t want you to talk to anyone through those windows, especially you,
Mandela.”
We were then taken to our cell, one of the best I had ever seen. The windows were large and within easy reach. From one set of windows we
could see other prisoners and warders as they walked past. It was spacious, certainly large enough for the four of us, and had its own toilets and
showers.
It had been an exhausting day and a short while later, after a supper of cold porridge, the others went to sleep. I was lying on my blanket on the
floor, when I heard a tapping at the window. I looked up and saw a white man, beckoning me to come to the glass. I remembered the lieutenant’s
admonition and stayed put.
Then I heard the fellow whisper: “Nelson, come here.” The fact that he knew my name intrigued me and I decided to take a chance. I went over to
the window and looked at him. He must have realized that I thought he was white, because the first thing he whispered was, “I’m a Coloured warder
from Bloemfontein.” He then gave me news of my wife. There had been a report in the Johannesburg newspapers that my wife had come to see me
at Pretoria Local, but that they had not informed her that I had been taken to Robben Island. I thanked him for the information.
“Do you smoke?” he said. I told him that I did not and he seemed disappointed. I then got the idea: “Yes, but my comrades do.” He brightened at
this and said he would return in a few minutes with tobacco and sandwiches. Everyone was now awake. Tefu and John Gaetsewe smoked, and I
split the pouch of tobacco between them, and we all divided the sandwiches.
For the next few weeks the Coloured warder came almost every night with tobacco and sandwiches. And each night I would divide up the
tobacco evenly between Tefu and Gaetsewe. The warder was taking great risks, and he warned me that he was only prepared to deal directly with
me, or the arrangement was off.

When we arrived on the island we had no idea how many other prisoners were there. Within a few days we learned there were about a thousand
men, all Africans, all recent arrivals. Most of these men were common-law prisoners, but I knew there would be some political prisoners among
them. I wanted to contact them, but we were completely isolated. For the first few days we were kept locked in our cell and not even permitted
outside. We demanded to be taken to work like the other prisoners, and this was soon granted, but we were taken out alone, supervised by
Kleynhans. Our first job was covering up some newly laid pipe and we were on a small hill and could see some of the island, which was wild and
lovely.
We worked hard that first day, but on each succeeding day Kleynhans pushed us harder. He did this crudely, as one would urge on a horse or
cow. “Nee, man. Kom aan! Gaan aan!” (No, man. Come on. Go on.) At one point, Steve, who was older than the rest of us, put down his shovel and
was immediately threatened by Kleynhans. But Steve, in Afrikaans, responded: “You ignoramus who cannot even speak your own language
properly — you cannot tell me what to do. I will work at my own rate, that is what I am prepared to do, and that is all I can do.” Then, with great
dignity, he picked up his shovel and resumed work. Steve had been a teacher of Afrikaans, and he not only spoke perfect Afrikaans but its
antecedent, High Dutch. Steve would speak to the warders in a condescending and grandiloquent style that they probably did not understand. But
they knew better than to engage him in a verbal battle.
There were two Kleynhans brothers on the island, both reputed to have viciously assaulted prisoners. We were looked after by the older brother,
who must have been warned to restrain himself, for he never touched us. The younger one was under no such constraints. One day, we were
walking back from work along a road and passed a workspan of several hundred prisoners carting sand in wheelbarrows. They were nonpolitical
prisoners and both of our groups were ordered to halt while the two brothers had a chat; the younger brother ordered one of his men to polish his
boots while he talked. I recognized some of the men in the other workspan as those who had been sentenced to death in the Sekhukhuneland
peasant revolt of 1958, and I turned around to get a better look at them. The younger brother rudely ordered me to look the other way. I do not know
how I would have reacted had I not been standing in full view of the other prisoners, but my pride was now at stake. I refused to turn around. The
younger Kleynhans advanced with the obvious intent of assaulting me, but when he was a few steps away, his brother ran over, grabbed him,
whispered a few words, and the incident passed.
One day we were visited by the head of prison, who was responsible for running all of Robben Island and had come to hear our complaints.
Theron was a sour fellow who did not like to deal with prisoners face to face. I did not want to alienate him but I was not going to cringe. “We are
grateful that you have come to see us,” I said, speaking for the group, “because we have a number of problems which I am certain you will be able
to sort out.” I enumerated the problems and when I finished, he said, “I will see what I can do.”
Perhaps he thought he had given in too easily because as he was walking out he turned to Tefu, who had a large belly, and said, “Jou groot pens
sal in die plek verdwyn,” Afrikaans for “That great stomach of yours is going to disappear here in prison.” Pens means stomach, but is used to refer
to the stomach of animals like sheep or cattle. The word for the stomach of a human being is maag.
Steve did not take kindly to the prison head’s jab, and he was incapable of letting an insult go unanswered. “You know, Captain,” he said, “there
is nothing you can do to me that can truly affect me for I am a member of the most revolutionary political organization in the world, the Communist
Party, which has a distinguished record of service to oppressed people around the globe. You and your poor National Party will be on the ash-heap
of history while we are ruling the world. I am better known internationally than your witless state president. Who are you? A small functionary not
even worth paying attention to. By the time I leave prison I won’t even know your name.” Theron turned on his heel and left.

The nightly visits of our Coloured warder went a long way to mitigate the harshness of the island. But even with this luxury, Steve was still
dissatisfied. Tefu was a heavy smoker; he would sometimes puff away the entire night, leaving himself no tobacco for the next day. Gaetsewe,
however, conserved his tobacco, and never ran out. One evening, in a particularly irritable mood, Tefu confronted me. “Nelson,” he said, “you are
shortchanging me. You are giving Gaetsewe more tobacco than me.”
This was not true, but I thought I would play a game with him. “Very well then,” I said. “Every night when I get the tobacco I will first divide it into two
portions and then I will let you choose which one you want.” That night, and each night afterward, I separated the tobacco into equal piles and said
to Steve, “Choose.”
Tefu would be in an agony of indecision. He would look at both piles, his head swinging back and forth between the two. Finally, in frustration, he

would grab one of the piles and go off and begin to smoke. Though this process seemed to me eminently fair — and also humorous — Tefu was
still unhappy. He began to hover about when the warder came to the window in order to make sure that I was not hoarding the tobacco. This made
the warder uncomfortable. “Look,” he said to me, “I only deal with you. It is a question of security.” I said I understood, and told Tefu that he could not
be around when I was dealing with the warder.
The next night, however, when the warder came to the window, Tefu strode up to the bars and said to him, “From now on I want my own tobacco.
Just give it to me directly.” The warder panicked. “Mandela,” he said, “you have broken our agreement. No more. I won’t be bringing you these
things.” I shooed Tefu away and remonstrated with the warder. I said, “Look, man, this is an old chap,” meaning Tefu. “And he’s not very normal,” I
said pointing to my head. “Make an exception.” So he softened and gave me the supplies, but warned if it happened again, that would be the end.
That night, I thought it necessary to punish Tefu. I said, “Now, look, you have jeopardized our supplies. You are not going to have any tobacco or
sandwiches tonight. You have almost lost us these privileges. So we’re cutting you off until you improve.” Tefu was silent.
We stayed in one corner of the cell that night, eating our sandwiches and reading the paper the warder also brought for us. Tefu sat by himself in
the opposite corner. Eventually we drifted off to sleep. At about midnight, I felt an arm on my shoulder, jostling me awake. “Nelson . . . Nelson.” It was
Tefu.
“Nelson,” he said, speaking softly, “you have hit me in a weak spot. You have deprived me of my tobacco. I am an old man. I have suffered for my
commitment to my people. You are the leader here in jail, and you are punishing me like this. It is not fair, Nelson.”
He had hit me in a weak spot. I felt as though I had abused my power. He had indeed suffered, far more than I had. I had not eaten half my
sandwich, and I immediately gave it to him. I roused Gaetsewe — I had given him all the tobacco — and asked him if he would share it with Tefu.
Tefu was always difficult, but from that point on he behaved much better.

Once we started working, I got some sense of what life was like for other prisoners on the island. The authorities also moved some young political
prisoners from the PAC into the cells opposite ours. At night, we were able to talk with them through the barred door. Among these young men, I
discovered, was Nqabeni Menye, a nephew of mine from Mqhekezweni whom I had last seen when he was a baby in 1941.
We conversed about the Transkei and caught up on family history. One night, while his friends were gathered around him, he said, “Uncle, what
organization do you belong to?” The ANC, I said, of course. My response caused consternation among those young men and suddenly their faces
disappeared from the window. After some time, my nephew reappeared and asked me whether or not I had ever been a member of the PAC. I
replied that I had not. He then said he had understood that I joined the PAC during my Africa tour. I told him that I had not, that I had always been a
member of the ANC, and that I always would be. This again caused dismay among them and they vanished.
I later learned that PAC propaganda claimed that I had joined the organization when I was traveling elsewhere on the continent. Although I was
not pleased to hear this, it did not surprise me. In politics, one can never underestimate how little people know about a situation. A short while later
my nephew was back and asked me if I had met and talked with Sobukwe at Pretoria Local. I said that I had and that we had very good
discussions. This pleased them and they said good night, and that was the last I saw of them.

A few hours later that same evening a captain came to our cell and commanded the four of us to pack our belongings. Within minutes my comrades
were taken away, leaving me in the cell by myself. In prison, one counts oneself lucky to be able to wave good-bye to one’s comrades. One can be
in extraordinarily intimate circumstances with someone for months, and then never see the person again. It is dehumanizing, for it forces one to
adapt by becoming more self-contained and insulated.
Now that I was alone, I was also somewhat anxious. There is sometimes safety in numbers; when you are alone, there are no witnesses. I
realized I had not been served any food, and banged on the door: “Warder, I have not received my supper.”
“You must call me baas,” he yelled. I went hungry that night.
Very early the next morning I was taken back to Pretoria. The Department of Prisons released a statement to the press that I had been removed
from the island for my own safety because PAC prisoners were planning to assault me. This was patently false; they had brought me back to
Pretoria for their own motives, which soon became clear.
I was kept in solitary confinement at Pretoria Local. But prisoners are resourceful and I was soon receiving secret notes and other
communications from some of the ANC people there. I had a communication from Henry Fazzie, one of the MK cadres who had undergone military
training in Ethiopia and been arrested while attempting to return to South Africa. They were among the first ANC members to be tried under the
Sabotage Act.
Through the prison grapevine, I attempted to help them with their defense and suggested they contact Harold Wolpe. I later heard that Wolpe was
in police detention. This was my first intimation that something had gone seriously wrong. One day, as I was being led away from the courtyard after
exercise, I saw Andrew Mlangeni. I had last seen him in September of 1961 when he was leaving the country for military training. Wolpe, Mlangeni
— who else was under arrest?
Early in 1961, Winnie had been banned for two years. I heard from another prisoner that Winnie had recently been charged with violating her
bans, which could lead to imprisonment or house arrest. Winnie was headstrong; a banning order was just the type of thing that would make her
angry. I had no doubt that she violated her orders, and I would never counsel her not to do so, but it concerned me greatly that she might spend time
in prison.
One morning in July 1963, as I was walking along the passage to my cell, I saw Thomas Mashifane, who had been the foreman at Liliesleaf
Farm. I greeted him warmly, though I realized that the authorities had undoubtedly led him to my passage to see if I recognized or acknowledged
him. I could not help but do otherwise. His presence there could mean only one thing: the authorities had discovered Rivonia.
A day or two later I was summoned to the prison office where I found Walter; Govan Mbeki; Ahmed Kathrada; Andrew Mlangeni; Bob Hepple;
Raymond Mhlaba, a member of the MK High Command who had recently returned from training in China; Elias Motsoaledi, also a member of MK;
Dennis Goldberg, an engineer and a member of the Congress of Democrats; Rusty Bernstein, an architect and also a member of the COD; and
Jimmy Kantor, an attorney who was Harold Wolpe’s brother-in-law. We were all charged with sabotage, and scheduled to appear in court the next
day. I had served just nine months of my five-year sentence.

In bits and pieces, I learned what had happened. On the afternoon of July 11, a dry cleaner’s van entered the long driveway of the farm. No one at
Liliesleaf had ordered a delivery. The vehicle was stopped by a young African guard, but he was overwhelmed when dozens of armed policemen

and several police dogs sprang from the vehicle. They surrounded the property and a handful of officers entered the main building and the principal
outbuilding. In the latter they found a dozen men around a table discussing a document. Walter jumped out a window but was cut off by a snarling
police dog. The arrests also included Arthur Goldreich, who had driven into the farm as the police raid was in progress.
The police searched the entire farm and confiscated hundreds of documents and papers, though they found no weapons. One of the most
important documents remained right on the table: Operation Mayibuye, a plan for guerrilla warfare in South Africa. In one fell swoop, the police had
captured the entire High Command of Umkhonto we Sizwe. Everyone was detained under the new Ninety-Day Detention Law.
Joe Slovo and Bram Fischer were fortunately not there at the time of the raid. But Joe and Bram often went to the farm two or three times a day.
In hindsight, it is extraordinary that Liliesleaf was not discovered sooner. The regime had become stricter and more sophisticated. Wiretaps had
become common, as was twenty-four-hour surveillance. The raid was a coup for the state.

On our first day in court we were not given the opportunity to instruct counsel. We were brought before a magistrate and charged with sabotage. A
few days later we were allowed to meet with Bram, Vernon Berrangé, Joel Joffe, George Bizos, and Arthur Chaskalson, all of whom were acting for
us. I was still being kept separately as I was a convicted prisoner, and these sessions were my first opportunity to talk with my colleagues.
Bram was very somber. In his quiet voice, he told us that we were facing an extremely serious trial and that the state had formally advised him
they would ask for the supreme penalty permitted by law, the death sentence. Given the climate of the times, Bram said, this result was a very real
possibility. From that moment on we lived in the shadow of the gallows. The mere possibility of a death sentence changes everything. From the
start, we considered it the most likely outcome of the trial. Far lesser crimes than ours had recently been punished by life sentences.
Prison officials never let you forget that you might hang. That night, a warder rapped on my cell door at bedtime. “Mandela, you don’t have to
worry about sleep,” he said. “You are going to sleep for a long, long time.” I waited a moment and said, “All of us, you included, are going to sleep
for a long, long time.” It was small consolation.