IN 1976, I RECEIVED an extraordinary visit: Jimmy Kruger, the minister of prisons, a prominent member of the prime minister’s cabinet, came to
see me. Kruger was not only influential about prisons policy but he was critical to the government’s handling of the liberation struggle.
I had an inkling as to why he had come. The government was then engaged in a massive effort to make a success of its separate development
policy, and “quasi-independent” homelands. The showpiece of separate development was the Transkei, led by my nephew and one-time
benefactor, K. D. Matanzima, who had successfully repressed almost all legitimate opposition to his rule. I recalled that the commanding officer had
recently said to me in a bantering way, “Mandela, you ought to retire to the Transkei and take a good long rest.”
As it turned out, that was precisely what Jimmy Kruger was proposing as well. He was a stout, blunt man, not nearly as polished as I would have
expected from a cabinet minister. I approached the meeting as another opportunity to present our grievances, and at first he seemed content to
listen. I began by reminding him of the letter we had sent him in 1969, which had gone unanswered. He merely shrugged. I then detailed the poor
conditions on the island, reiterating once more that we were political prisoners, not criminals, and expected to be treated as such. But Kruger
scoffed at this, saying, “Nah, you are all violent Communists!”
I then began to tell him a bit about the history of our organization and why we had turned to violence. It was clear that he knew almost nothing
about the ANC, and what he did know was gleaned from the propaganda of the right-wing press. When I told him the organization was far older
than the National Party, he was dumbfounded. I said that if he considered us Communists he should reread the Freedom Charter. He looked at me
blankly. He had never heard of the Freedom Charter. I found it extraordinary that a cabinet minister should be so uninformed. Yet I should not have
been surprised; Nationalist politicians routinely condemned what they didn’t understand.
I raised the question of our release and reminded him of the case of the 1914 Afrikaner rebels, who had resorted to violence though they were
represented in Parliament, could hold meetings, and could even vote. Even though General de Wet and General Kemp had led a force of twelve
thousand and occupied towns and caused many deaths, they were both released soon after their convictions for high treason. I mentioned the case
of Robey Leibbrandt, who set up an underground organization during the Second World War to oppose South Africa’s support for the Allies; he
was sentenced to life imprisonment but soon pardoned. Kruger seemed as ignorant of these episodes in the history of his own people as he was of
the Freedom Charter. It is difficult to negotiate with those who do not share the same frame of reference.
Kruger waved all of this aside. “That is ancient history,” he said. He came armed with a specific offer. Despite his reputation for brusqueness, he
made his proposal in a deferential manner. He stated the matter simply: if I recognized the legitimacy of the Transkei government and was willing to
move there, my sentence would be dramatically reduced.
I listened respectfully until he had finished. First, I said, I wholly rejected the bantustan policy, and would do nothing to support it, and second, I
was from Johannesburg, and it was to Johannesburg that I would return. Kruger remonstrated with me, but to no avail. A month later he returned with
the same proposal, and again I turned him down. It was an offer only a turncoat could accept.