IN THE MEANTIME, court resumed, in our absence, on March 31, but the witness box was conspicuously empty. Those who did attend were the
accused whom the police had failed to pick up under the State of Emergency. Chief Luthuli had been in the middle of his evidence, and Judge
Rumpff asked for an explanation for his absence. He was informed that the chief had been taken into custody the night before. Judge Rumpff
expressed irritation with the explanation and said he did not see why the State of Emergency should stand in the way of his trial. He demanded that
the police bring the chief to court so that he could resume his testimony, and court was adjourned.
Later we discovered that after the chief’s arrest, he had been assaulted. He had been walking up some stairs when he was jostled by a warder,
causing his hat to fall to the floor. As he bent to pick it up, he was smacked across the head and face. This was hard for us to take. A man of
immense dignity and achievement, a lifelong devout Christian, and a man with a dangerous heart condition, was treated like a barnyard animal by
men who were not fit to tie his shoes.
When we were called back into session that morning, Judge Rumpff was informed that the police refused to bring the chief to court. The judge
then adjourned court for the day, and we expected to go home. But as they were leaving the court grounds to find transportation, we were all once
again rearrested.
But the police, with their usual disorganized overzealousness, made a comical mistake. Wilton Mkwayi, one of the accused and a longtime union
leader and ANC man, had traveled to Pretoria for the trial from Port Elizabeth. Somehow he had gotten separated from his colleagues and when he
approached the gate and saw the commotion of his fellow accused being arrested, he asked a policeman what was going on. The policeman
ordered him to leave. Wilton stood there. The policeman again ordered him to leave, whereupon Wilton informed the officer he was one of the
accused. The officer called him a liar, and threatened to arrest him for obstruction of justice. The officer then angrily ordered him to leave the area.
Wilton shrugged his shoulders, walked out of the gate, and that was the last anyone saw of Wilton in court. He went underground for the next two
months, successfully evading arrest, and then was smuggled out of the country, soon emerging as a foreign representative for the Congress of
Trade Unions and later going for military training in China.
That night, we were joined by detainees from other parts of the Transvaal. The countrywide police raid had led to the detention without trial of
more than two thousand people. These men and women belonged to all races and all anti-apartheid parties. A call-up of soldiers had been
announced, and units of the army had been mobilized and stationed in strategic areas around the country. On April 8, both the ANC and the PAC
were declared illegal organizations, under the Suppression of Communism Act. Overnight, being a member of the ANC had become a felony
punishable by a term in jail and a fine. The penalty for furthering the aims of the ANC was imprisonment for up to ten years. Now even nonviolent
law-abiding protests under the auspices of the ANC were illegal. The struggle had entered a new phase. We were now, all of us, outlaws.
For the duration of the State of Emergency we stayed at Pretoria Local, where the conditions were as bad as those at Newlands. Groups of five
prisoners were pressed into cells measuring nine feet by seven feet; the cells were filthy, with poor lighting and worse ventilation. We had a single
sanitary pail with a loose lid and vermin-infested blankets. We were allowed outside for an hour a day.
On our second day in Pretoria, we sent a deputation to complain about the conditions to the prison’s commanding officer, Colonel Snyman. The
colonel’s response was rude and abrupt. He demanded that we produce evidence, calling our complaints lies. “You have brought the vermin into my
prison from your filthy homes,” he sneered.
I said we also required a room that was quiet and well lit so that we could prepare for our case. The colonel was again contemptuous:
“Government regulations do not require prisoners to read books, if you can read at all.” Despite the colonel’s disdainful attitude, the cells were soon
painted and fumigated and we were supplied with fresh blankets and sanitary pails. We were permitted to stay out in the yard for much of the day,
while those of us involved in the Treason Trial were provided with a large cell for consultations, in which we were also permitted to keep legal
books.
Pretoria Local would be our home for the foreseeable future. We would leave for the trial in the morning and return to the prison in the afternoon.
The prison, according to apartheid dictates, separated detainees by color. We were of course already separated from our white colleagues, but the
separation from our Indian and Coloured comrades within the same non-White facility seemed like madness. We demanded to be accommodated
together, and were given all sorts of absurd explanations why this was impossible. When the proverbial inflexibility of red tape is combined with the
petty small-mindedness of racism, the result can be mind-boggling. But the authorities eventually yielded, allowing the Treason Trialists to be kept
together.
Although we were kept together, our diet was fixed according to race. For breakfast, Africans, Indians, and Coloureds received the same
quantities, except that Indians and Coloureds received a half-teaspoonful of sugar, which we did not. For supper, the diets were the same, except
that Indians and Coloureds received four ounces of bread while we received none. This latter distinction was made on the curious premise that
Africans did not naturally like bread, which was a more sophisticated or “Western” taste. The diet for white detainees was far superior to that for
Africans. So color-conscious were the authorities that even the type of sugar and bread supplied to whites and nonwhites differed: white prisoners
received white sugar and white bread, while Coloured and Indian prisoners were given brown sugar and brown bread.
We complained vociferously about the inferior quality of the food, and as a result, our advocate Sydney Kentridge made a formal complaint in
court. I stated that the food was unfit for human consumption. Judge Rumpff agreed to sample the food himself and that day went out to do so.
Samp and beans was the best meal that the prison prepared, and in this case, the authorities put in more beans and gravy than usual. Judge
Rumpff ate a few spoonfuls and pronounced the food well cooked and tasty. He did allow that it should be served warm. We laughed among
ourselves at the idea of “warm” jail food; it was a contradiction in terms. Eventually, the authorities supplied the detainees with what they called an
Improved Diet: Africans received bread, while Indians and Coloureds received the same food provided to white prisoners.

I enjoyed one extraordinary privilege during our detention: weekend trips to Johannesburg. These were not a vacation from prison but a busman’s
holiday. Shortly before the State of Emergency, Oliver left South Africa on the instructions of the ANC. We had long suspected a clamp-down was
coming, and the Congress decided that certain members needed to leave the country to strengthen the organization abroad in anticipation of the
time it would be banned entirely.
Oliver’s departure was one of the most well-planned and fortunate actions ever taken by the movement. At the time we hardly suspected how
absolutely vital the external wing would become. With his wisdom and calmness, his patience and organizational skills, his ability to lead and
inspire without stepping on toes, Oliver was the perfect choice for this assignment.
Before leaving, Oliver had retained a mutual friend of ours, Hymie Davidoff, a local attorney, to close up our office and wind up our practice.
Davidoff made a special request to Colonel Prinsloo to permit me to come to Johannesburg on weekends to help him put things in order. In a fit of

generosity, Colonel Prinsloo agreed, allowing me to be driven to Johannesburg on Friday afternoons to work in the office all weekend and then be
driven back to the trial on Monday morning. Sergeant Kruger and I would leave after court adjourned at one o’clock on Friday, and after arriving at
my office, I would work with Davidoff and our accountant Nathan Marcus. I would spend the nights in Marshall Square prison and the days at the
office.
Sergeant Kruger was a tall and imposing fellow who treated us with fairness. On the way from Pretoria to Johannesburg, he would often stop the
car and leave me inside while he went into a shop to buy biltong, oranges, and chocolate for both of us. I thought about jumping out of the car,
especially on Fridays, when the sidewalks and streets were busy and one could get lost in a crowd.
While at the office, I could walk downstairs to the ground-floor café to buy incidentals, and he turned his head aside on one or two occasions
when Winnie came to visit me. We had a kind of gentleman’s code between us: I would not escape and thereby get him into trouble, while he
permitted me a degree of freedom.