AFRICANS could not vote, but that did not mean that we did not care who won elections. The white general election of 1948 matched the ruling
United Party, led by General Smuts, then at the height of his international regard, against the revived National Party. While Smuts had enlisted
South Africa on the side of the Allies in World War II, the National Party refused to support Great Britain and publicly sympathized with Nazi
Germany. The National Party’s campaign centered around the swart gevaar (the black danger), and they fought the election on the twin slogans of
Die kaffer op sy plek (The nigger in his place) and Die koelies uit die land (The coolies out of the country) — coolies being the Afrikaner’s
derogatory term for Indians.
The Nationalists, led by Dr. Daniel Malan, a former minister of the Dutch Reform Church and a newspaper editor, were a party animated by
bitterness — bitterness toward the English, who had treated them as inferiors for decades, and bitterness toward the African, who the Nationalists
believed was threatening the prosperity and purity of Afrikaner culture. Africans had no loyalty to General Smuts, but we had even less for the
National Party.
Malan’s platform was known as apartheid. Apartheid was a new term but an old idea. It literally means “apartness” and it represented the
codification in one oppressive system of all the laws and regulations that had kept Africans in an inferior position to whites for centuries. What had
been more or less de facto was to become relentlessly de jure. The often haphazard segregation of the past three hundred years was to be
consolidated into a monolithic system that was diabolical in its detail, inescapable in its reach, and overwhelming in its power. The premise of
apartheid was that whites were superior to Africans, Coloureds, and Indians, and the function of it was to entrench white supremacy forever. As the
Nationalists put it, “Die wit man moet altyd baas wees” (The white man must always remain boss). Their platform rested on the term baasskap,
literally boss-ship, a freighted word that stood for white supremacy in all its harshness. The policy was supported by the Dutch Reform Church,
which furnished apartheid with its religious underpinnings by suggesting that Afrikaners were God’s chosen people and that blacks were a
subservient species. In the Afrikaner’s worldview, apartheid and the church went hand in hand.
The Nationalists’ victory was the beginning of the end of the domination of the Afrikaner by the Englishman. English would now take second place
to Afrikaans as an official language. The Nationalist slogan encapsulated their mission: “Eie volk, eie taal, eie land” — Our own people, our own
language, our own land. In the distorted cosmology of the Afrikaner, the Nationalist victory was like the Israelites’ journey to the Promised Land. This
was the fulfillment of God’s promise, and the justification for their view that South Africa should be a white man’s country forever.
The victory was a shock. The United Party and General Smuts had beaten the Nazis, and surely they would defeat the National Party. On election
day, I attended a meeting in Johannesburg with Oliver Tambo and several others. We barely discussed the question of a Nationalist government
because we did not expect one. The meeting went on all night and we emerged at dawn and found a newspaper vendor selling the Rand Daily
Mail: the Nationalists had triumphed. I was stunned and dismayed, but Oliver took a more considered line. “I like this,” he said. “I like this.” I could
not imagine why. He explained, “Now we will know exactly who our enemies are and where we stand.”
Even General Smuts realized the dangers of this harsh ideology, decrying apartheid as “a crazy concept, born of prejudice and fear.” From the
moment of the Nationalists’ election, we knew that our land would henceforth be a place of tension and strife. For the first time in South African
history, an exclusively Afrikaner party led the government. “South Africa belongs to us once more,” Malan proclaimed in his victory speech.

That same year, the Youth League outlined its policy in a document written by Mda and issued by the league’s executive committee. It was a rallying
cry to all patriotic youth to overthrow white domination. We rejected the Communist notion that Africans were oppressed primarily as an economic
class rather than as a race, adding that we needed to create a powerful national liberation movement under the banner of African nationalism and
“led by Africans themselves.”
We advocated the redivision of land on an equitable basis; the abolition of color bars prohibiting Africans from doing skilled work; and the need
for free and compulsory education. The document also articulated the push-and-pull between two rival theories of African nationalism, between the
more extreme, Marcus Garvey–inspired, “Africa for the Africans” nationalism and the Africanism of the Youth League, which recognized that South
Africa was a multiracial country.
I was sympathetic to the ultra-revolutionary stream of African nationalism. I was angry at the white man, not at racism. While I was not prepared to
hurl the white man into the sea, I would have been perfectly happy if he climbed aboard his steamships and left the continent of his own volition.
The Youth League was marginally more friendly to the Indians and the Coloureds, stating that Indians, like Africans, were oppressed, but that
Indians had India, a mother country that they could look to. The Coloureds, too, were oppressed, but unlike the Indians had no mother country except
Africa. I was prepared to accept Indians and Coloureds provided they accepted our policies; but their interests were not identical with ours, and I
was skeptical of whether or not they could truly embrace our cause.

In short order, Malan began to implement his pernicious program. Within weeks of coming to power, the Nationalist government pardoned Robey
Leibbrandt, the wartime traitor who had organized uprisings in support of Nazi Germany. The government announced their intention to curb the
trade union movement and do away with the limited franchises of the Indian, Coloured, and African peoples. The Separate Representation of
Voters Act eventually robbed the Coloureds of their representation in Parliament. The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act was introduced in 1949
and was followed in rapid succession by the Immorality Act, making sexual relations between white and nonwhite illegal. The Population
Registration Act labeled all South Africans by race, making color the single most important arbiter of individuals. Malan introduced the Group Areas
Act — which he described as “the very essence of apartheid” — requiring separate urban areas for each racial group. In the past, whites took land
by force; now they secured it by legislation.
In response to this new and much more powerful threat from the state, the ANC embarked on an unaccustomed and historic path. In 1949, the
ANC launched a landmark effort to turn itself into a truly mass organization. The Youth League drafted a Program of Action, the cornerstone of
which was a campaign of mass mobilization.
At the ANC annual conference in Bloemfontein, the organization adopted the league’s Program of Action, which called for boycotts, strikes, stayat-homes, passive resistance, protest demonstrations, and other forms of mass action. This was a radical change: the ANC’s policy had always
been to keep its activities within the law. We in the Youth League had seen the failure of legal and constitutional means to strike at racial
oppression; now the entire organization was set to enter a more activist stage.
These changes did not come without internal upheaval. A few weeks before the conference, Walter Sisulu, Oliver Tambo, and I met privately with

Dr. Xuma at his home in Sophiatown. We explained that we thought the time had come for mass action along the lines of Gandhi’s nonviolent
protests in India and the 1946 passive resistance campaign, asserting that the ANC had become too docile in the face of oppression. The ANC’s
leaders, we said, had to be willing to violate the law and if necessary go to prison for their beliefs as Gandhi had.
Dr. Xuma was adamantly opposed, claiming that such strategies were premature and would merely give the government an excuse to crush the
ANC. Such forms of protest, he said, would eventually take place in South Africa, but at the moment such a step would be fatal. He made it clear
that he was a doctor with a wide and prosperous practice that he would not jeopardize by going to prison.
We gave Dr. Xuma an ultimatum: we would support him for reelection to the presidency of the ANC provided he supported our proposed
Program of Action. If he would not support our program, we would not support him. Dr. Xuma became heated, accusing us of blackmail and laying
down conditions on which we would vote for him. He told us that we were young and arrogant, and treating him without respect. We remonstrated
with him, but to no avail. He would not go along with our proposal.
He unceremoniously showed us out of his house at 11 P.M., and closed the gate behind him. There were no streetlights in Sophiatown and it was
a moonless night. All forms of public transport had long since ceased and we lived miles away in Orlando. Oliver remarked that Xuma could have at
the very least offered us some transport. Walter was friendly with a family that lived nearby, and we prevailed upon them to take us in for the night.

At the conference that December, we in the Youth League knew we had the votes to depose Dr. Xuma. As an alternative candidate, we sponsored
Dr. J. S. Moroka for the presidency. He was not our first choice. Professor Z. K. Matthews was the man we wanted to lead us, but Z.K. considered
us too radical and our plan of action too impractical. He called us naive firebrands, adding that we would mellow with age.
Dr. Moroka was an unlikely choice. He was a member of the All-African Convention (AAC), which was dominated by Trotskyite elements at that
time. When he agreed to stand against Dr. Xuma, the Youth League then enrolled him as a member of the ANC. When we first approached him, he
consistently referred to the ANC as the African National “Council.” He was not very knowledgeable about the ANC nor was he an experienced
activist, but he was respectable, and amenable to our program. Like Dr. Xuma, he was a doctor, and one of the wealthiest black men in South
Africa. He had studied at Edinburgh and Vienna. His great-grandfather had been a chief in the Orange Free State, and had greeted the Afrikaner
voortrekkers of the nineteenth century with open arms and gifts of land, and then been betrayed. Dr. Xuma was defeated and Dr. Moroka became
president-general of the ANC. Walter Sisulu was elected the new secretary-general, and Oliver Tambo was elected to the National Executive
Committee.
The Program of Action approved at the annual conference called for the pursuit of political rights through the use of boycotts, strikes, civil
disobedience, and noncooperation. In addition, it called for a national day of work stoppage in protest against the racist and reactionary policies of
the government. This was a departure from the days of decorous protest, and many of the old stalwarts of the ANC were to fade away in this new
era of greater militancy. Youth League members had now graduated to the senior organization. We had now guided the ANC to a more radical and
revolutionary path.
I could only celebrate the Youth League’s triumph from a distance, for I was unable to attend the conference myself. I was then working for a new
law firm and they did not give me permission to take two days off to attend the conference in Bloemfontein. The firm was a liberal one, but wanted
me to concentrate on my work and forget politics. I would have lost my job if I had attended the conference and I could not afford to do that.

The spirit of mass action surged, but I remained skeptical of any action undertaken with the Communists and Indians. The “Defend Free Speech
Convention” in March 1950, organized by the Transvaal ANC, the Transvaal Indian Congress, the African People’s Organization, and the District
Committee of the Communist Party, drew ten thousand people at Johannesburg’s Market Square. Dr. Moroka, without consulting the executive,
agreed to preside over the convention. The convention was a success, yet I remained wary, as the prime mover behind it was the party.
At the instigation of the Communist Party and the Indian Congress, the convention passed a resolution for a one-day general strike, known as
Freedom Day, on May 1, calling for the abolition of the pass laws and all discriminatory legislation. Although I supported these objectives, I believed
that the Communists were trying to steal the thunder from the ANC’s National Day of Protest. I opposed the May Day strike on the grounds that the
ANC had not originated the campaign, believing that we should concentrate on our own campaign.
Ahmed Kathrada was then barely twenty-one and, like all youth, eager to flex his muscles. He was a key member of the Transvaal Indian Youth
Congress and had heard I was opposed to the May Day strike. One day, while walking on Commissioner Street, I met Kathrada and he heatedly
confronted me, charging that I and the Youth League did not want to work with Indians or Coloureds. In a challenging tone, he said, “You are an
African leader and I am an Indian youth. But I am convinced of the support of the African masses for the strike and I challenge you to nominate any
African township for a meeting and I guarantee the people will support me.” It was a hollow threat, but it angered me all the same. I even complained
to a joint meeting of the Executive Committee of the ANC, the South African Indian Congress, and the Communist Party, but Ismail Meer calmed
me down, saying, “Nelson, he is young and hotheaded, don’t you be the same.” I consequently felt a bit sheepish about my actions and I withdrew
the complaint. Although I disagreed with Kathrada, I admired his fire, and it was an incident we came to laugh about.
The Freedom Day strike went ahead without official ANC support. In anticipation, the government banned all meetings and gatherings for May 1.
More than two-thirds of African workers stayed at home during the one-day strike. That night, Walter and I were in Orlando West on the fringes of a
Freedom Day crowd that had gathered despite the government’s restrictions. The moon was bright, and as we watched the orderly march of
protesters, we could see a group of policemen camped across a stream about five hundred yards away. They must have seen us as well, because
all of a sudden, they started firing in our direction. We dove to the ground, and remained there as mounted police galloped into the crowd,
smashing people with batons. We took refuge in a nearby nurses’ dormitory, where we heard bullets smashing into the wall of the building.
Eighteen Africans died and many others were wounded in this indiscriminate and unprovoked attack.
Despite protest and criticism, the Nationalist response was to tighten the screws of repression. A few weeks later, the government introduced the
notorious Suppression of Communism Act and the ANC called an emergency conference in Johannesburg. The act outlawed the Communist Party
of South Africa and made it a crime, punishable by a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment, to be a member of the party or to further the aims of
communism. But the bill was drafted in such a broad way that it outlawed all but the mildest protest against the state, deeming it a crime to
advocate any doctrine that promoted “political, industrial, social or economic change within the Union by the promotion of disturbance or disorder.”
Essentially, the bill permitted the government to outlaw any organization and to restrict any individual opposed to its policies.
The ANC, the SAIC, and the APO again met to discuss these new measures, and Dr. Dadoo, among others, said that it would be foolish to allow
past differences to thwart a united front against the government. I spoke and echoed his sentiments: clearly, the repression of any one liberation
group was repression against all liberation groups. It was at that meeting that Oliver uttered prophetic words: “Today it is the Communist Party.

Tomorrow it will be our trade unions, our Indian Congress, our APO, our African National Congress.”
Supported by the SAIC and the APO, the ANC resolved to stage a National Day of Protest on June 26, 1950, against the government’s murder
of eighteen Africans on May 1 and the passage of the Suppression of Communism Act. The proposal was ratified, and in preparation for the Day of
Protest, we closed ranks with the SAIC, the APO, and the Communist Party. Here, I believed, was a sufficient threat that compelled us to join hands
with our Indian and Communist colleagues.
Earlier that year I had been coopted onto the National Executive Committee of the ANC, taking the place of Dr. Xuma, who had resigned after his
failure to be reelected president-general. I was not unmindful of the fact that it had been Dr. Xuma who had tried to help me get my first job when I
came to Johannesburg ten years before, when I had no thought of entering politics. Now, as a member of the National Executive Committee, I was
playing on the first team with the most senior people in the ANC. I had moved from the role of a gadfly within the organization to one of the powers
that I had been rebelling against. It was a heady feeling, and not without mixed emotions. In some ways, it is easier to be a dissident, for then one is
without responsibility. As a member of the executive, I had to weigh arguments and make decisions, and expect to be criticized by rebels like
myself.

Mass action was perilous in South Africa, where it was a criminal offense for an African to strike, and where the rights of free speech and
movement were unmercifully curtailed. By striking, an African worker stood not only to lose his job but his entire livelihood and his right to stay in the
area in which he was living. In my experience, a political strike is always riskier than an economic one. A strike based on a political grievance
rather than on clear-cut issues like higher wages or shorter hours is a more precarious form of protest and demands particularly efficient
organization. The Day of Protest was a political rather than an economic strike.
In preparation for June 26, Walter traveled around the country consulting local leaders. In his absence, I took charge of the bustling ANC office,
the hub of a complicated national action. Every day, various leaders looked in to see that matters were going according to plan: Moses Kotane, Dr.
Dadoo, Diliza Mji, J. B. Marks, president of the Transvaal ANC, Yusuf Cachalia and his brother Maulvi, Gaur Radebe, secretary of the Council of
Action, Michael Harmel, Peter Raboroko, Nthato Motlana. I was coordinating the actions in different parts of the country, and talking by phone with
regional leaders. We had left ourselves little time, and the planning was hastily done.
The Day of Protest was the ANC’s first attempt to hold a political strike on a national scale and it was a moderate success. In the cities, the
majority of workers stayed home and black businesses did not open. In Bethal, Gert Sibande, who later became president of the Transvaal ANC,
led a demonstration of five thousand people, which received headlines in major papers all across the country. The Day of Protest boosted our
morale, made us realize our strength, and sent a warning to the Malan government that we would not remain passive in the face of apartheid. June
26 has since become a landmark day in the freedom struggle and within the liberation movement it is observed as Freedom Day.
It was the first time I had taken a significant part in a national campaign, and I felt the exhilaration that springs from the success of a well-planned
battle against the enemy and the sense of comradeship that is born of fighting against formidable odds.
The struggle, I was learning, was all-consuming. A man involved in the struggle was a man without a home life. It was in the midst of the Day of
Protest that my second son, Makgatho Lewanika, was born. I was with Evelyn at the hospital when he came into the world, but it was only a brief
respite from my activities. He was named for Sefako Mapogo Makgatho, the second president of the ANC, from 1917 until 1924, and Lewanika, a
leading chief in Zambia. Makgatho, the son of a Pedi chief, had led volunteers to defy the color bar that did not permit Africans to walk on the
sidewalks of Pretoria, and his name for me was an emblem of indomitability and courage.
One day, during this same time, my wife informed me that my elder son, Thembi, then five, had asked her, “Where does Daddy live?” I had been
returning home late at night, long after he had gone to sleep, and departing early in the morning before he woke. I did not relish being deprived of
the company of my children. I missed them a great deal during those days, long before I had any inkling that I would spend decades apart from
them.

I was far more certain in those days of what I was against than what I was for. My long-standing opposition to communism was breaking down.
Moses Kotane, the general-secretary of the party and a member of the executive of the ANC, often came to my house late at night and we would
debate until morning. Clear-thinking and self-taught, Kotane was the son of peasant farmers in the Transvaal. “Nelson,” he would say, “what do you
have against us? We are all fighting the same enemy. We do not seek to dominate the ANC; we are working within the context of African
nationalism.” In the end, I had no good response to his arguments.
Because of my friendships with Kotane, Ismail Meer, and Ruth First, and my observation of their own sacrifices, I was finding it more and more
difficult to justify my prejudice against the party. Within the ANC, party members J. B. Marks, Edwin Mofutsanyana, Dan Tloome, and David
Bopape, among others, were devoted and hardworking, and left nothing to gainsay as freedom fighters. Dr. Dadoo, one of the leaders of the 1946
resistance, was a well-known Marxist whose role as a fighter for human rights had made him a hero to all groups. I could not, and no longer did,
question the bona fides of such men and women.
If I could not challenge their dedication, I could still question the philosophical and practical underpinnings of Marxism. But I had little knowledge of
Marxism, and in political discussions with my Communist friends I found myself handicapped by my ignorance of Marxist philosophy. I decided to
remedy this.
I acquired the complete works of Marx and Engels, Lenin, Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, and others and probed into the philosophy of dialectical and
historical materialism. I had little time to study these works properly. While I was stimulated by the Communist Manifesto, I was exhausted by Das
Kapital. But I found myself strongly drawn to the idea of a classless society, which, to my mind, was similar to traditional African culture where life
was shared and communal. I subscribed to Marx’s basic dictum, which has the simplicity and generosity of the Golden Rule: “From each according
to his ability; to each according to his needs.”
Dialectical materialism seemed to offer both a searchlight illuminating the dark night of racial oppression and a tool that could be used to end it. It
helped me to see the situation other than through the prism of black and white relations, for if our struggle was to succeed, we had to transcend
black and white. I was attracted to the scientific underpinnings of dialectical materialism, for I am always inclined to trust what I can verify. Its
materialistic analysis of economics rang true to me. The idea that the value of goods was based on the amount of labor that went into them seemed
particularly appropriate for South Africa. The ruling class paid African labor a subsistence wage and then added value to the cost of the goods,
which they retained for themselves.
Marxism’s call to revolutionary action was music to the ears of a freedom fighter. The idea that history progresses through struggle and change
occurs in revolutionary jumps was similarly appealing. In my reading of Marxist works, I found a great deal of information that bore on the type of

problems that face a practical politician. Marxists gave serious attention to national liberation movements and the Soviet Union in particular
supported the national struggles of many colonial peoples. This was another reason why I amended my view of Communists and accepted the ANC
position of welcoming Marxists into its ranks.
A friend once asked me how I could reconcile my creed of African nationalism with a belief in dialectical materialism. For me, there was no
contradiction. I was first and foremost an African nationalist fighting for our emancipation from minority rule and the right to control our own destiny.
But at the same time, South Africa and the African continent were part of the larger world. Our problems, while distinctive and special, were not
entirely unique, and a philosophy that placed those problems in an international and historical context of the greater world and the course of history
was valuable. I was prepared to use whatever means to speed up the erasure of human prejudice and the end of chauvinistic and violent
nationalism. I did not need to become a Communist in order to work with them. I found that African nationalists and African Communists generally
had far more uniting them than dividing them. The cynical have always suggested that the Communists were using us. But who is to say that we
were not using them?