WHEN WINNIE VISITED, I had the illusion, however briefly, that the family was still intact. Her visits were becoming less frequent, as the police were
becoming more vigilant. Winnie would bring Zindzi and Zenani to Rivonia, but they were too young to know that I was in hiding. Makgatho, then
eleven, was old enough to know and he had been instructed never to reveal my real name in front of anyone. I could tell that he was determined, in
his own small way, to keep my identity a secret.
But one day, toward the end of that year, he was at the farm playing with Nicholas Goldreich, Arthur’s eleven-year-old son. Winnie had brought
me a copy of the magazine Drum, and Makgatho and Nicholas stumbled upon it while they were playing. They began paging through it when
suddenly Makgatho stopped at a picture of me taken before I had gone underground. “That’s my father,” he exclaimed. Nicholas did not believe
him, and his skepticism made Makgatho even keener to prove it was true. Makgatho then told his friend that my real name was Nelson Mandela.
“No, your father’s name is David,” Nicholas replied. The boy then ran to his mother and asked her whether or not my name was David. She replied
that yes, it was David. Nicholas then explained to his mother that Makgatho had told him that his father’s real name was Nelson. This alarmed Hazel
and I soon learned of this lapse. Once again I had the feeling that I had remained too long in one place. But I stayed put, for in a little over a week I
was to leave on a mission that would take me to places that I had only ever dreamed of. Now, the struggle would for the first time take me outside
the borders of my country.

In December, the ANC received an invitation from the Pan African Freedom Movement for East, Central, and Southern Africa (PAFMECSA) to
attend its conference in Addis Ababa in February 1962. PAFMECSA, which later became the Organization of African Unity, aimed to draw
together the independent states of Africa and promote the liberation movements on the continent. The conference would furnish important
connections for the ANC and be the first and best chance for us to enlist support, money, and training for MK.
The underground executive asked me to lead the ANC delegation to the conference. Although I was eager to see the rest of Africa and meet
freedom fighters from my own continent, I was greatly concerned that I would be violating the promise I had made not to leave the country but to
operate from underground. My colleagues, including Chief Luthuli, insisted that I go, but were adamant that I return immediately afterward. I decided
to make the trip.
My mission in Africa was broader than simply attending the conference; I was to arrange political and economic support for our new military force
and, more important, military training for our men in as many places on the continent as possible. I was also determined to boost our reputation in
the rest of Africa where we were still relatively unknown. The PAC had launched its own propaganda campaign and I was delegated to make our
case wherever possible.
Before leaving, I secretly drove to Groutville to confer with the chief. Our meeting — at a safe house in town — was disconcerting. As I have
related, the chief was present at the creation of MK, and was as informed as any member of the National Executive Committee about its
development. But the chief was not well and his memory was not what it had once been. He chastised me for not consulting with him about the
formation of MK. I attempted to remind the chief of the discussions that we had in Durban about taking up violence, but he did not recall them. This
is in large part why the story has gained currency that Chief Luthuli was not informed about the creation of MK and was deeply opposed to the ANC
taking up violence. Nothing could be further from the truth.

I had spent the night before my departure with Winnie at the house of white friends in the northern suburbs and she brought me a new suitcase that
she had packed. She was anxious about my leaving the country, but once again remained stoic. She behaved as much like a soldier as a wife.
The ANC had to arrange for me to travel to Dar es Salaam in Tanganyika. The flight to Addis Ababa would originate in Dar es Salaam. The plan
was for Walter, Kathrada, and Duma Nokwe to meet me at a secret rendezvous in Soweto and bring me my credentials for the trip. It would also be
a moment for last-minute consultations before I left the country.
Ahmed Kathrada arrived at the appointed hour, but Walter and Duma were extremely late. I finally had to make alternative arrangements and
Kathy managed to locate someone to drive me to Bechuanaland, where I would charter a plane. I later learned that Walter and Duma had been
arrested on their way.
The drive to Bechuanaland was trying, as I was nervous both about the police and the fact that I had never crossed the boundaries of my country
before. Our destination was Lobatse, near the South African border. We passed through the border without a problem and arrived in Lobatse in the
late afternoon, where there was a telegram for me from Dar es Salaam postponing my trip for a fortnight. I put up with my fellow Treason Trialist
Fish Keitsing, who had since moved to Lobatse.
That afternoon I met with Professor K. T. Motsete, the president of the Bechuanaland People’s Party, which had been formed mainly by ex-ANC
members. I now had unexpected spare time, which I used for reading, preparing my speech for the conference, and hiking the wild and beautiful
hills above the town. Although I was not far outside my own country’s borders, I felt as though I were in an exotic land. I was often accompanied by
Max Mlonyeni, the son of a friend from the Transkei and a young member of the PAC. It was as though we were on safari, for we encountered all
manner of animals, including a battalion of sprightly baboons, which I followed for some time, admiring their military-like organization and
movements.
I was soon joined by Joe Matthews, who had come from Basutoland, and I insisted we should make haste for Dar es Salaam. An ANC colleague
in Lobatse had recently been kidnapped by the South African police and I thought the sooner we could leave, the better. A plane was arranged, and
our first destination was a town in northern Bechuanaland called Kasane, strategically situated near a point where the borders of four countries met
— Bechuanaland, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, and South West Africa, as these colonies were then known. The landing strip at Kasane was
water-logged and we came in at a drier strip several miles away in the middle of the bush. The manager of a local hotel came to fetch us armed
with rifles and reported that he had been delayed by a herd of rogue elephants. He was in an open van and Joe and I sat in the back, and I watched
a lioness lazily emerge from the bush. I felt far from my home streets of Johannesburg; I was in the Africa of myth and legend for the first time.
Early the next morning we left for Mbeya, a Tanganyikan town near the Northern Rhodesian border. We flew near Victoria Falls and then headed
north through a mountain range. While over the mountains, the pilot tried to contact Mbeya, but there was no answer. “Mbeya, Mbeya!” he kept
saying into the microphone. The weather had changed and the mountains were full of air pockets that made the plane bounce up and down like a
cork on a rough sea. We were now flying through clouds and mists and in desperation the pilot descended and followed a twisting road through the
mountains. By this time the mist had become so thick we could not see the road and when the pilot abruptly turned the plane I realized that we

narrowly missed a mountain that seemed to rear up out of nowhere. The emergency alarm went off, and I remember saying to myself, “That’s the
end of us.” Even the ever-loquacious Joe was stone silent. But then just as we could see no farther in the clouds and I imagined we were about to
crash into a mountain, we emerged from the bad weather into a gloriously clear sky. I have never enjoyed flying much, and while this was the most
frightening episode I have ever had on a plane, I am sometimes adept at appearing brave and I pretended that I was unconcerned.
We booked in a local hotel and found a crowd of blacks and whites sitting on the veranda making polite conversation. Never before had I been in
a public place or hotel where there was no color bar. We were waiting for Mr. Mwakangale of the Tanganyika African National Union, a member of
Parliament, and unbeknown to us he had already called looking for us. An African guest approached the white receptionist. “Madam, did a Mr.
Mwakangale inquire after these two gentlemen?” he asked, pointing to us. “I’m sorry, sir,” she replied. “He did but I forgot to tell them.”
“Please be careful, madam,” he said in a polite but firm tone. “These men are our guests and we would like them to receive proper attention.” I
then truly realized that I was in a country ruled by Africans. For the first time in my life, I was a free man. Though I was a fugitive and wanted in my
own land, I felt the burden of oppression lifting from my shoulders. Everywhere I went in Tanganyika my skin color was automatically accepted rather
than instantly reviled. I was being judged for the first time not by the color of my skin but by the measure of my mind and character. Although I was
often homesick during my travels, I nevertheless felt as though I were truly home for the first time.
We arrived in Dar es Salaam the next day and I met with Julius Nyerere, the newly independent country’s first president. We talked at his house,
which was not at all grand, and I recall that he drove himself in a simple car, a little Austin. This impressed me, for it suggested that he was a man of
the people. Class, Nyerere always insisted, was alien to Africa; socialism indigenous.
I reviewed our situation for him, ending with an appeal for help. He was a shrewd, soft-spoken man who was well-disposed to our mission, but his
perception of the situation surprised and dismayed me. He suggested we postpone the armed struggle until Sobukwe came out of prison. This was
the first of many occasions when I learned of the PAC’s appeal in the rest of Africa. I described the weakness of the PAC, and argued that a
postponement would be a setback for the struggle as a whole. He suggested I seek the favor of Emperor Haile Selassie and promised to arrange
an introduction.
I was meant to meet Oliver in Dar, but because of my delay he was unable to wait and left a message for me to follow him to Lagos, where he
was to attend the Lagos Conference of Independent States. On the flight to Accra I ran into Hymie Basner and his wife. Basner, who had once been
my employer, had been offered a position in Accra. His radical politics and left-wing activities in South Africa had made him persona non grata
there and he was seeking political asylum in Ghana.
The plane stopped in Khartoum and we lined up to go through customs. Joe Matthews was first, then myself, followed by Basner and his wife.
Because I did not have a passport, I carried with me a rudimentary document from Tanganyika that merely said, “This is Nelson Mandela, a citizen
of the Republic of South Africa. He has permission to leave Tanganyika and return here.” I handed this paper to the old Sudanese man behind the
immigration counter and he looked up with a smile and said, “My son, welcome to the Sudan.” He then shook my hand and stamped my document.
Basner was behind me and handed the old man the same type of document. The old man looked at it for a moment, and then said in a rather
agitated manner: “What is this? What is this piece of paper? It is not official!”
Basner calmly explained it was a document he had been given in Tanganyika because he did not have a passport. “Not have a passport?” the
immigration official said with disdain. “How can you not have a passport — you are a white man!” Basner replied that he was persecuted in his own
country because he fought for the rights of blacks. The Sudanese looked skeptical: “But you are a white man!” Joe looked at me and knew what I
was thinking: he whispered to me not to intervene, as we were guests in the Sudan and did not want to offend our host’s hospitality. But apart from
being my employer, Basner was one of those whites who had truly taken risks on the behalf of black emancipation, and I could not desert him.
Instead of leaving with Joe, I remained and stood close to the official and every time Basner said something, I simply bowed and nodded to the
official as if to verify what he was saying. The old man realized what I was doing, softened his manner, and finally stamped his document and said
quietly, “Welcome to the Sudan.”

I had not seen Oliver in nearly two years, and when he met me at the airport in Accra I barely recognized him. Once clean shaven and conservatively
groomed, he now had a beard and longish hair and affected the military-style clothing characteristic of freedom fighters around the continent. (He
probably had exactly the same reaction to me.) It was a happy reunion, and I complimented him on the tremendous work he had done abroad. He
had already established ANC offices in Ghana, England, Egypt, and Tanganyika, and had made valuable contacts for us in many other countries.
Everywhere I subsequently traveled, I discovered the positive impression Oliver had made on diplomats and statesmen. He was the best possible
ambassador for the organization.
The goal of the Lagos Conference of Independent States was to unite all African states, but it eventually disintegrated into bickering about which
states to include or exclude. I kept a low profile and avoided the conference, for we did not want the South African government to know that I was
abroad until I appeared at the PAFMECSA conference in Addis.

On the plane from Accra to Addis, we found Gaur Radebe, Peter Molotsi, and other members of the PAC who were also on their way to
PAFMECSA. They were all surprised to see me, and we immediately plunged into discussions concerning South Africa. The atmosphere was
enjoyable and relaxed. Though I had been dismayed to learn of Gaur’s leaving the ANC, that did not diminish my pleasure in seeing him. High
above the ground and far from home, we had much more that united us than separated us.
We put down briefly in Khartoum, where we changed to an Ethiopian Airways flight to Addis. Here I experienced a rather strange sensation. As I
was boarding the plane I saw that the pilot was black. I had never seen a black pilot before, and the instant I did I had to quell my panic. How could a
black man fly an airplane? But a moment later I caught myself: I had fallen into the apartheid mind-set, thinking Africans were inferior and that flying
was a white man’s job. I sat back in my seat, and chided myself for such thoughts. Once we were in the air, I lost my nervousness and studied the
geography of Ethiopia, thinking how guerrilla forces hid in these very forests to fight the Italian imperialists.