 18 A Son Departs, A Mentor Arrives   In the last months of 1910, Gandhi’s relationship with his eldest son had once more come under strain. Harilal was now twenty-two, and had a daughter of his own. His wife Chanchi and their child were due to visit India, and Harilal wanted to accompany them, but Gandhi refused to give permission, saying, ‘We are poor and cannot spend money like that. Moreover, a man who has joined the struggle cannot go away like that for three months.’ Someone else would escort Chanchi home instead.1 Harilal stayed behind and courted arrest, but his resentment would not go away. In March 1911 he accused Gandhi of shifting Kasturba to Tolstoy Farm against her will. His mother, he claimed, wished to stay on at Phoenix. With the provisional settlement in place, Harilal wanted to return to India and take the matriculation examination. He keenly felt his lack of proficiency in mathematics and literature; besides, he wished to join his wife, who had just given birth to a baby boy. Harilal was at Phoenix, so Gandhi asked his nephew Maganlal to take the boy in hand. ‘The more defects you discover in Harilal, the more love you should have for him. One requires a great deal of water to put out a big fire. To overcome the baser elements in Harilal’s nature, you have to develop in yourself and pit against it a more powerful force of goodness.’ Maganlal failed, as Gandhi had failed before him. In the first week of May, Harilal came to Johannesburg to attend a function in honour of his fellow satyagrahis. Then he collected his belongings – and apparently also a photograph of his father – and took a train to Delagoa Bay, from where he planned to take a ship to India. Before he left, he told Joseph Royeppen that when back in India he wished to live in the Punjab rather than in Ahmedabad. This may have been because the Punjab was then the epicentre of Indian nationalism, or because his  father knew no one in that province and could not monitor his movements or suppress his ambitions. When Harilal left home, two friends were deputed to find him. They scoured all of Johannesburg, in vain. A Parsi friend told Gandhi that Harilal had recently borrowed twenty pounds from him (presumably for the journey). As news of the boy’s disappearance spread, friends and clients rushed to Gandhi’s office in Rissik Street. Some Muslim merchants remonstrated with Gandhi: had he only told them of his son’s desires, they would have paid for Harilal to study law in London. That evening, a group including Gandhi left for Tolstoy Farm. On the train, Gandhi told the others not to tell Kasturba what had happened. He would wait till they were alone, and then tell her ‘in my own way’.5 Harilal had left behind a long letter explaining to his parents why he had left. To Gandhi he said, I have done what my heart dictated. I have done nothing with evil motives. Please do not consider that I have fled away. I am still the same obedient Harilal. You may not think so, but you have and will always remain the same for me to respect. Please rest assured that I shall endeavour to follow your teachings and copy your actions … Please tell mother that I have gone for the sake of earning. I shall feel the separation from her but I have done this considering it to be my duty. There was no help for me but to do this without delay. There was also a message for Kallenbach, to whom all the Gandhi boys were deeply attached, as an affectionate uncle or ‘Kaka’ (father’s brother) who indulged them with love and presents. ‘Please tell Mr Kallenbach,’ said Harilal, ‘that I hope he will not harbour any anger against me for not having returned to the farm, and that he will bless me. I shall never forget the obligation that I am under to him.’ Harilal told Gandhi that when he reached India, ‘for the moment I intend only to study. I shall certainly need money, and if you can send it please send. After I am settled, if I am [to] succeed in my ambition, I shall write to you.’ He added a telling, and moving, postscript: ‘Although I am leaving, if the struggle is to be revived, no matter in what part of the world I may be I shall present myself there and seek imprisonment.’ The letter was deeply felt, its text and subtext swirling with contradictory emotions – affection, anger, anguish, ambition. Harilal’s feelings towards his father were confusing and complicated; so, too, his reasons for leaving South Africa. He wished to break free of Gandhi, yet remained dependent on him. Not  satisfied with the schooling he had received in India, Harilal had asked his father to send him to London to qualify as a barrister. Gandhi said it was not necessary to qualify as a barrister or doctor to serve the people. The saint Ramakrishna, the reformer Dayananda Saraswati, the warriors Shivaji and Rana Pratap – none had the benefit of English education, and yet admirably served the motherland. Harilal countered with the names of Ranade, Gokhale, Tilak and Lajpat Rai, well-educated men who had served India nobly as well.7 The arguments were renewed when Pranjivan Mehta endowed two scholarships for Phoenix boys to study in London. Rather than nominate his son, Gandhi had first chosen Chhaganlal, and then a Parsi student named Sorabji Adajania. Mehta now agreed to fund a third scholarship, but Harilal’s pride would not allow him to accept.His desire to educate himself remained; this he now wished to fulfil in India, with his wife by his side, and with a subsidy from an overbearing yet indispensable father. When he reached Delagoa Bay from Johannesburg, Harilal walked into the British Consulate and said he was a poor Indian in need of a free passage to Bombay. The officials recognized him and sent word to Gandhi, who wired Harilal asking him to come back to Johannesburg.Harilal returned to the city on 15 May. Father and son talked through the night, eventually agreeing that he could continue with his plans and return to India. Gandhi’s account of their conversation is contained in a letter written immediately afterwards to Maganlal: It is just as well that Harilal has left. He was much unsettled in mind … He bears no ill-will towards any of you. He was angry with me, really. He gave vent to all his pent-up feelings on Monday evening [the 15th]. He feels that I have kept all the four boys very much suppressed, that I did not respect their wishes at any time, that I have treated them as of no account, and that I have often been hard-hearted. He made this charge against me with the utmost courtesy and seemed very hesitant as he did so … Unlike other fathers, I have not admired my sons or done anything specially for them, but always put them and [Kastur]Ba last; such was the charge. He seemed to have calmed down after this outburst. I pointed out his error in believing what he did. He saw it partly. What remains, he will correct only when he thinks further. He has now left with a calm mind. He is resolved to learn more about those things on account of which I was displeased [with him]. He is strongly inclined to study Sanskrit. Thinking that, since Gujarati is our language, his education should for the most part be in Gujarat, I have advised Harilal to stay in Ahmedabad. I believe that is what he will do. However, I have left him free. I feel it will all turn out well.10 Harilal’s version of the conversations is shorter, and written some years after the event. It diverges on some crucial points of detail and interpretation. ‘I was delayed at Delagoa Bay’, recalled the son,  you came to know of my whereabouts and caught up with me. Obeying your orders I returned. I remained steadfast in my views. Therefore, instead of giving me a patient hearing you mutilated my thoughts and clipped my wings. You made me give up the idea of going to Lahore and instead made me stay in Ahmedabad. You promised to give me thirty rupees for monthly expenditure. You did not allow me to measure my capabilities; you measured them for me.11 ‘You did not allow me to measure my capabilities; you measured them for me.’ This is a harsh but accurate judgement, confirmed – albeit in gentler and more euphemistic language – by a close observer of the Gandhi household, Millie Polak. At Phoenix and at Tolstoy Farm, Gandhi was often found cradling a baby while talking politics with an adult. Juxtaposing this with his treatment of Harilal, Millie concluded that it was easier for Gandhi to deal with the needs of young children than those of adolescence, with its warring emotions, its struggle for liberty and self-expression, and its developing mind. During that period in the life of the developing individual, he did not so easily realise the strength of the storms that can sweep reason aside.12 The clash between father and son was intensified by their closeness in age. Harilal was born when Gandhi was only eighteen. His adolescent crisis thus coincided with his father’s midlife crisis. As Harilal sought a career and education path of his own, Gandhi was moving away from the law towards social service and political activism. The desires of the one clashed with the convictions of the other. Gandhi would not, could not, recognize that there were two sides to the story. He blamed Harilal’s rebellion on his recent reading of Sarasvatichandra, a Gujarati novel by Govardhanram Tripathi whose hero, disenchanted with his father, leaves the parental home to discover himself. There is little question that Gandhi bore down heavily on his eldest son. He did not recognize his good fortune in being allowed to follow his own path independent of his parents’ wishes. Had his father Kaba Gandhi been alive when Mohandas finished his Matriculation, he might never have allowed the boy to proceed across the kala pani to London. Had his mother been alive in 1893, she might not have permitted him to make another perilous overseas journey to South Africa. Once in the diaspora, Gandhi was able to carve out a professional and activist career of his choice, without interference from family elders. With his children, Gandhi was the traditional overbearing Hindu patriarch – making them do what he intended for them. Because he had now become disenchanted with modern professions, his sons must not be permitted a modern  education. Because he had himself embraced brahmacharya they must do likewise. Harilal and Manilal, as the two elder boys, were expected to be perfect and exemplary satyagrahis, courting arrest or labouring on the land as per their father’s whims and desires. When the Hindu priest Ram Sundar Pandit had abandoned the struggle, Gandhi dryly dismissed him as a ‘bad coin’. That detachment was not possible as regards his sons. The more they disagreed with him, the more intense and impatient he became with them. Those who secretly signed permits or failed to court arrest were not worthy of redemption. But his own sons could never be permitted to become ‘bad coins’. That what was bad in terms of their conduct and what good was a matter of opinion, bias and prejudice, rather than parental fiat, was something that Gandhi – in common, it must be said, with most or all Indian fathers of his generation – did not or could not understand. Gandhi’s harsh response to Harilal may have had a deeper basis – the fact that, in South Africa, he was accustomed to enmity and suppression, but not, really, to rebellion or disagreement. The white reactionaries of Durban and the militant Pathans of Johannesburg had both physically attacked him. The regime of the Boers had several times put him in jail. But among his own flock and his own friends he was accustomed to being the leader. The mentors he recognized – Gokhale, Raychandbhai, Tolstoy – had all lived in other continents. Gandhi had a real gift for friendship – for making connections and conveying affection across racial, linguistic, religious and gender boundaries. The love he had for, and the intimacy he shared with, Henry and Millie Polak, Kallenbach, Sonja Schlesin, Ritch, the Dokes, Leung Quinn, Thambi Naidoo, A. M. Cachalia and Parsee Rustomjee was visible proof of this. But all these friends (and others like them) were ultimately in a position of deference to him. Their love for Gandhi had strong elements of reverence and adoration. Only the Polaks had the intellectual independence to argue with Gandhi on major or minor matters – and even they, in the end, recognized him as their leader. Here lay the deeper significance of Harilal’s self-assertion (‘defiance’ would be too strong a word). His cardinal mistake was in not going all the way down the road marked out for him by his father. Harilal had, several times, bravely and unselfishly courted arrest. But the desire to study, to make a career of his own, remained with him. Gandhi was, by now, accustomed to the loyal, unquestioning  support of many Indians in South Africa. (And of more than a few Europeans too.) That one of his own sons would choose to rebel was both unexpected and, for him, inexplicable. Harilal knew this, which is why he had left in the first place without telling his father directly. He was too frightened to face Gandhi. He was brought back to Johannesburg, but remained truculent. When Gandhi failed, in that all-night conversation, to persuade Harilal to abandon his plans to return to India, he reluctantly agreed not to stand in his way. But he was never really reconciled to his son’s going. When Harilal finally left, on 16 May, some students from Tolstoy Farm accompanied Gandhi to Johannesburg Station to wish the boy good-bye. One student recalled that ‘when the train was about to start, Bapu kissed Harilal, gave a gentle slap on his cheek, and said: “Forgive your father, if you think he has done you wrong”.’ Ten days after Harilal left for India, Gandhi wrote urging him to read Indian Opinion ‘carefully’. He was sent a list of Gujarati books to study – among them the works of Narmadashanker and Raychandbhai. He was advised to ‘make it a regular practice to read Tulsidas’s Ramayana’. Gandhi added that ‘most of the books I have listed at the end of Indian Home Rule are worth going through’, and ended by saying, ‘please write to me in detail and regularly’. Harilal was going back to India to break free of his father. Following him by the next boat was this letter of instruction and command. The barrage continued: in the first months of his return, Harilal was dissuaded by his father from learning French, told to give up his ‘infatuation’ with the matriculation exam, and chastised for having ‘again succumbed to passion in regard to [his wife] Chanchal’.16 Through the middle months of 1911, Gandhi was based at Tolstoy Farm. The day began with several hours of physical labour. He taught at the school from ten-thirty to four. The students, like their master, did not eat salt, vegetables and pulses between Monday and Saturday. They lived on fruits (especially apples and bananas), bread with olive oil, and rice and sago porridge. The community had dinner early, at five-thirty, and Gandhi attended to his correspondence before going to bed. He went into Johannesburg only once a week. L. W. Ritch was  taking care of his clients, to Gandhi’s relief; he ‘fervently’ hoped he never had to practise law again.17 Gandhi was now increasingly thinking of returning to India. That country presented a far wider canvas for the kind of work he was doing. He was keen to go back; even keener to see him return was his friend Pranjivan Mehta. Gandhi, thought Mehta, was the ‘Mahatma’ their country so desperately needed. Mehta was Gandhi’s oldest and – Polak and Kallenbach notwithstanding – closest friend. They had become intimate as students in London. Mehta spent several weeks with Gandhi in Durban in 1898; some years later, Gandhi had visited the doctor-turned-jeweller in Rangoon, where he was a leading light of the Indian community. In 1908, Pranjivan Mehta started the Burma Provincial Congress Committee, as a branch of the Indian National Congress. This was the first political organization in that territory, bringing together Indian migrants of all classes under one umbrella, and encouraging the native Burmese to found their own representative associations.However, the jeweller’s political ambitions were not so much for himself as for his friend Gandhi, and for their country. In the autumn of 1909 he spent several weeks in London, arguing with Gandhi late into the night as to the most plausible route to self-government for India. Those conversations were to find their way into Hind Swaraj, written as a dialogue between the oracular Editor (Gandhi) and the questioning Reader (Mehta). Pranjivan Mehta was to Mohandas Gandhi what Friedrich Engels was to Karl Marx: at once a disciple and a patron, who saw, very early, that the friend of his youth had the makings of the heroic, world-transforming figure he was to later become. Their friendship was consolidated by a shared language and culture – it mattered that Engels and Marx were both Germans, and that Mehta and Gandhi were both Gujaratis. There were differences: Engels believed Marx would redeem a class (the proletariat); Mehta believed Gandhi would save a nation, India. Both, however, had a deep, almost unquestioning faith in their compatriot’s genius. Both were prepared to reach deep into their pockets to activate and enable it. Mehta venerated Gandhi. His veneration was communicated in private letters to mutual friends, and in public through a series of articles he published in 1911 in the Indian Review of Madras, later published as a book. Here Mehta reprised  the main outlines of the struggle in the Transvaal. Gandhi, he argued, had endowed his comrades with the three cardinal virtues of ‘Truthfulness, Fearlessness, and Poverty’. The sacrifices of the satyagrahis were ‘a good augury for the high destiny’ of India itself. ‘No Indian in modern times,’ he pointed out, ‘has succeeded so well in bringing the Hindus and Mahomedans together on a common platform as Mr Gandhi.’ Of more interest to us are Mehta’s observations on Gandhi the person. ‘The one virtue which distinguishes Mr Gandhi from all others,’ he remarked, ‘is that he never puts forward an idea or extols an action, which he himself would not be prepared to act upon when circumstances required him to do so. In fact, he practises himself first what he desires to preach to others.’ Once Gandhi had decided upon a particular line of conduct, wrote his friend, ‘no risk, nothing, will deter him from going on, on that path without in the least caring whether anyone else believes in it at all, or is prepared to follow him in his footsteps.’ ‘No earthly temptations,’ continued Mehta, were ‘too strong’ for Gandhi, and ‘none of them can make him swerve from the noble path that he has chalked out for himself. It is no exaggeration to say that in this age of materialism it is not possible to come across another man who lives the Ideal life he preaches.’ Gandhi and Pranjivan Mehta corresponded regularly, and while we mostly have one side of the correspondence, it is revealing enough. Gandhi thus wrote to Mehta on 1 July 1911 that ‘it would be a mistake if you imagined that we would get the young men we wanted the moment I got to India. As I understand it, we shall have the same difficulties we had to face in this country. It will do us credit if we leave for India only after the work we have begun here has been put on a firm footing.’ In August 1911 Mehta was in London, and so was Henry Polak. The two had an acrimonious argument, an account of which was passed on by Mehta. Gandhi answered that ‘I do not think Polak will become an Anglo-Indian out and out’ (Mehta must have implied he would). Mehta had called Polak ‘hot-tempered’; Gandhi agreed, but added that ‘his heart is absolutely frank and he is unswerving in his duty’. Mehta had suggested that Polak was developing a swollen head; Gandhi answered that ‘praise is everyone’s enemy; how, then, can it be otherwise with him? But I do not so much as suspect that he would be corrupted by praise. He is as honest as he is frank.’  Among the things Mehta and Polak had argued about was Gandhi’s future. The doctor wanted his friend and hero to return to India soon – very soon – to revive and lead the nationalist movement there. Polak thought Gandhi still had much work to do in South Africa. Mehta answered that Polak himself could take on the responsibility of representing the Indians in Natal and the Transvaal. He seems to have accused Polak of shirking his duties. Polak replied angrily that no one could keep Gandhi from doing what he wanted; Gandhi’s conscience was his own, and for the moment it told him that he was to remain in South Africa rather than return to India. As it happens, Hermann Kallenbach was also in Europe at this time. Before he left, Gandhi made him take a vow that while he was away, he would not get married, would not ‘look lustfully upon any woman’, would not ‘spend any money beyond necessaries befitting the position of a simple-living poor farmer’, and would only travel third class by land or on sea. Kallenbach was enjoined not to eat meat either. The vow was uncannily similar to that extracted by his mother from young Mohandas when he left for London in 1888. To soften the blow, Gandhi and Kasturba baked their friend several tins’ worth of biscuits and cake for the journey.24 In Europe Kallenbach met Dr Mehta, and spent a day walking with him in the Ardennes.25 They got along well enough, but when he returned to England, Kallenbach, like Mehta, seems to have quarrelled with Henry Polak. He wrote to Gandhi giving his version of the disagreement. Gandhi replied that ‘your analysis of Polak is in the main true. I would only add that his virtues far outbalance his weaknesses and that not one of us is without weaknesses. I know that you know this. Still it bears repetition in order to enable us to exercise the virtue of charity.’ Mehta, Polak and Kallenbach were all competing for Gandhi’s friendship – and benediction. That they would be rivalrous was not surprising. Mehta was congenitally suspicious of white men, perhaps because he lived in Rangoon, where a small group of Britons controlled the natives with an iron hand. Characteristically, after criticizing Polak, Mehta then commented adversely on L. W. Ritch. He thought Gandhi excessive in his praise of his European associates. Gandhi agreed that  it is likely that whites entertain more hatred towards us than we do towards them. If, however, we make a great show of love in return for the little that they show us, there is another reason. It is that we fear them. Otherwise, so far as my experience goes, many Indians do not even distinguish between good and bad and take all whites to be bad. On the one hand, this needless fear must go; on the other, one must learn to distinguish between good and bad … I do not look upon Ritch, Polak or anyone else as my disciples. They will all work with us as long as they think fit. There is no reason to believe that, after my death, people would imagine that their actions would necessarily have my approval. Those who have come in contact with me know that differences of opinion do exist among us on subjects other than satyagraha. However, I shall not dismiss your suggestions from my mind. He concluded by asking Mehta to read Tolstoy’s ‘Ivan the Fool’. In October Gandhi wrote to Mehta, ‘I know you are very keen that I should leave for India at an early date, and stay there for good. The idea appeals to me and I shall go the moment I can become free here.’ Mehta seems to have complained that, by staying on for the time being in South Africa, his friend was neglecting their homeland. ‘Please do not think,’ answered Gandhi, ‘that I shall incur the sin of falling into the delusion that I should serve the entire world. I well realize that my work can only be in India.’ Mehta, meanwhile, had sent a journalist named Manilal Doctor to work with Gandhi. Doctor had once run a newspaper in Mauritius; the hope was that he would take over Indian Opinion when Gandhi returned to India. He was also Mehta’s son-in-law, married to his daughter Jayakunwar (Jeki). Gandhi thought the young man ‘pleasant and good-natured’, but complained that he shirked physical labour. Jeki, who followed some months later, was more useful; she was, wrote Gandhi to his daughter-in-law Chanchi, ‘a great help to me in teaching the children’.29 Gandhi’s verdict was endorsed by Kallenbach, who wrote to Pranjivan Mehta that ‘your daughter has indeed been a very desirable addition at the farm. We all feel that she has fallen in with our ideas and ways, as if she had been one of us for years.’ The architect now hoped that her father, his fellow Gandhi worshipper, would come visit them soon. Mehta visited Europe almost every year, and it was not, as Kallenbach reminded him, ‘much of a detour’ to go there via South Africa. ‘We are all very anxious to see you here, and so many matters which we all have in common, could then be thoroughly thrashed out’.30 With Gandhi based in the Transvaal, the Durban journalist P. S. Aiyar offered himself as a standin leader for the Indians of Natal. His ambitions were, at first,  delicately worded. ‘Since Mr Gandhi left Natal,’ wrote the African Chronicle in June 1910, ‘the Indian public work in this colony has not been conducted in that steady manner which predominates in him as one of the excellent qualities.’ Slowly, however, the language became more bold. Gandhi was still praised, but his policies questioned. In March 1911, Aiyar called Gandhi ‘our great leader’, ‘that noble soul’, the ‘originator and architect’ of the Indian struggle, yet wondered why he asked only for the form rather than the substance of theoretical equality. The fight, thought Aiyar, should be for the free movement of all Indians throughout the Union, not merely for the entry of a few educated professionals into the Transvaal. Gandhi was urged to ‘fight for our birthright of British citizenship to a finish in honour and glory of our motherland.’ In September 1911 Aiyar got entangled in a bitter fight with Gandhi’s former clerk and long-time devotee, Joseph Royeppen. Now back with a law degree from London, Royeppen thought that if anyone should be Gandhi’s second-in- command in Natal, it was he. P. S. Aiyar naturally disagreed. Royeppen taunted Aiyar that he was unwilling to go to jail for the cause; the journalist accused him of seeking funds from the Durban merchants for a trip to India. Aiyar and Albert West also clashed; African Chronicle had carried reports of ill-treatment of indentured labourers that West believed were untrue. Aiyar now sneeringly asked, ‘Has the glory departed from Phoenix? Has the sword grown rusty in the scabbard and is the strenuous fight against injustice to be hampered by tedious rivalry?’ Indian Opinion itself he dismissed as ‘apparently the vehicle of expression for Mr Royeppen and his confrères’.33 While Royeppen was concerned with the entry of educated men like himself into the Transvaal, Aiyar focused more on the abolition of the £3 tax. Here he had support from, among other bodies, the Natal Indian Congress, which had termed the cess ‘oppressive, unjust and immoral’.In December 1911 Aiyar wrote a long pamphlet giving flesh to these accusatory adjectives. He estimated that the tax constituted 25 per cent of the average annual income of an Indian in Natal. Levied on boys when they turned sixteen, and on girls older than thirteen, the tax had ‘been the ruin of many a home, and it has blighted the future career of many girls and youths by driving them to destruction and immorality’. Addressed to white voters (and legislators), the pamphlet characterized the tax as manifestly unChristian. ‘It seems to me’, wrote Aiyar,  that whatever opinion one may hold regarding the colour and Asiatic questions, the disabilities of the people referred to in this pamphlet do not become the subject of party or colour controversy. Thousands of poor, illiterate, voiceless, creatures, ground down by a heavy tax, cry aloud for relief.35 The Indians sent this pamphlet and other materials to the Colonial Office. They, in turn, asked the South African Government to consider the request sympathetically. The Prime Minister, Louis Botha, wrote back that ‘in view of the state of [white] public feeling in South Africa on the Indian question’, legislation repealing the £3 tax was not possible at ‘the present juncture’. Despite their professional (and/or personal) rivalry, the Phoenix crowd in fact agreed with P. S. Aiyar on the question of the tax. In late 1911, A. E. West wrote to Gandhi proposing an immediate satyagraha asking for its abolition. Gandhi, in reply, advocated a more incrementalist approach. ‘With reference to the £3 tax’, he told West, the first step to take is not to advise the men to refuse to pay the tax, but for the [Natal Indian] Congress to send a petition to the Prime Minister, signed by all the Indians in Natal – say 15,000 signatures. There should be a mass meeting held. The Congress should then ask the Indians in the other Provinces to support. We must then await the reply from the Prime Minister. Then there should be a petition to Parliament next year, and, if Parliament rejects the petition, there should be an appeal to the Imperial Government by the Congress aided by the other Associations in South Africa. Finally the refusal to pay the tax! Then, undoubtedly, the Congress should undertake to feed the wives and families of those who may be imprisoned. The men would undoubtedly go to gaol, if there is a body of earnest workers. For this purpose, either you will have to be in Durban continuously, or someone else will. The thing cannot be taken up haphazard. If the men were asked to go to gaol today, I do not think you would find anybody taking up the suggestion, but if the preliminary steps as described above, are taken, by the time a final reply is received the men will have been thoroughly prepared to face the music. I know, too, that the thing is quite capable of being done, but one man at least must be prepared to devote the whole of his time to the matter.37 The letter concisely captures Gandhi’s philosophy of non-violent resistance to unjust laws. He was a strategist of slow reform, of protesting by stages, of systematically preparing himself and his colleagues rather than spontaneously (or, as he would have it, haphazardly) rushing into confrontation.  In April 1912, Gandhi wrote to Ratan Tata, giving an account of the struggle he had so generously supported. He described the teaching methods, the regime of labour and the student profile at Tolstoy Farm. There were currently eighteen Gujaratis, six Tamils and one North Indian in the school. These students were taught that ‘they are first Indians and everything else after that, and that, while  they must remain absolutely true to their own faiths, they should regard with equal respect those of their fellow-pupils.’ With his letter, Gandhi enclosed a statement of accounts. They had received £8,509 (equivalent to about £680,000 today). £6,723 came from India (about half of this from Tata himself), £972 from Rangoon, £59 from Zanzibar, £61 from Mozambique, £18 from Mombasa and £159 from London. Turning to their expenses, £2,335 was spent on relief for passive resisters and families, £1,490 on the London committee, £1,200 on Indian Opinion, £530 on salaries, and lesser amounts on rent, legal expenses, travel, stamps and stationery. The account – and accounts – pleased Ratan Tata, so much so that he pledged a third gift of Rs 25,000. This was announced at a public meeting held in Bombay on 31 July 1912. The Parsi magnate Sir Jamshetjee Jeejebhoy presided over the meeting, which discussed the handicaps faced by Indians in different parts of the Empire. A memorial forwarded by Sir Jamshetjee urged the Imperial Government to put an end to discriminatory statutes and practices. ‘South Africa has long been the worst offender against Indian national sentiment,’ it declared; it was ‘hardly to be expected that the people of this country will acquiesce in the treatment of Indians as an inferior race in order that the rights of self- government accorded to the Colonies may remain intact’.39 In the last week of July 1911, Indian Opinion had written about a proposal to unite the various native associations in South Africa. Its prime mover was a young Zulu attorney in Johannesburg named Pixley Seme. Seme took a first degree at Columbia University in New York and later studied law in London. Now, asked by a reporter about the aims of the new initiative, Seme was at pains to remove any suspicion that force in any degree would be countenanced, but it is clear that the lessons of the Indian agitation have not been lost on the natives, and though nothing definite was said to indicate reliance on passive resistance, it is not improbable that in certain eventualities recourse will be had to it.40 These links between the Indian struggle and the new African initiative were also personal. In an unpublished memoir that has recently come to light – written by a lady of Russian extraction living in Johannesburg – it seems that Pixley Seme visited Tolstoy Farm sometime in 1911. Here, ‘Mr Gandhi told Dr Seme  about his passive resistance movement and how he had settled the women and children on the farm. He remarked on how satisfactorily it had all worked out.’ In the last week of October 1911, Seme published an article advocating the formation of a South African native congress. ‘The demons of racialism,’ he wrote, ‘the aberrations of the Xhosa–Fingo feud, the animosity that exists between the Zulus and the Tongas, between the Basutos and every other Native must be buried and forgotten … We are one people. These divisions, these jealousies, are the cause of all our woes and of all our backwardness and ignorance today.’ On his visit to Tolstoy Farm, Pixley Seme may have noticed that its residents included, by ethnicity, Gujaratis, Tamils, North Indians and Europeans – and, by faith, Parsis, Muslims, Christians, Jews and Hindus. It is hard to decisively establish a chain of influence. Still, there is no doubt that there was a family resemblance between what Seme sought to do with the Africans and what Gandhi had already done with the Indians – that is to help them overcome distinctions of sect and tribe, and present a united front to the rulers. As a result of Pixley Seme’s efforts, some sixty Africans met in Bloemfontein in the second week of January 1912. They included chiefs, journalists and community lawyers. The meeting led to the formation of a body called the South African Native National Congress. The veteran Zulu reformer John Dube was elected its first president, in absentia, since previous commitments prevented him from attending the meeting. The new Congress was a response to the white Union of South Africa, in which Africans had no voice in administration or law-making. Their Congress, said Seme, would ‘together devise ways and means of forming our national union for the purpose of creating national unity and defending our rights and privileges.’ The attorney noted that this was ‘the first time that so many elements representing different tongues and tribes ever attempted to co-operate under one umbrella in one great house.’ John Dube, the first president of the Native National Congress, was a neighbour and acquaintance of Gandhi’s in Natal. The two men had written appreciatively about one another. Congratulating him on his elevation, Indian Opinion now reproduced two paragraphs of the ‘excellent’ manifesto he had issued ‘to his countrymen’. Although the natives were ‘the first-born sons of this  great and beautiful continent,’ remarked Dube, ‘as citizens of the glorious British Empire, we are the last-born children, just awakening into political life’ – after the whites, the Indians and the Cape Coloureds. They had therefore to tread ‘softly, ploddingly, along the bright path illuminated by righteousness and reason … that will surely and safely lead us to our goal, the attainment of our rightful inheritance as sons of Africa and citizens of the South African Commonwealth.’ Dube understood that this would be an ‘uphill fight’, with ‘enemies without’ and ‘dangers within’. Yet he insisted that ‘by dint of our patience, our reasonableness, our law-abiding methods and the justice of our demands, all these obstacles shall be removed and enemies overcome.’ By ‘the nobility of our character,’ he said, ‘shall we break down the adamantine wall of colour prejudice and force even our enemies to be our admirers and friends.’ Despite the proximity of Ilanga and Phoenix, Dube and Gandhi met rarely, in part because in these years Gandhi was based mostly in the Transvaal. The resemblances in their political views are striking. The African reformer and the Indian reformer both practised – and preached – a principled incrementalism. Their opposition to racial prejudice was unswerving, yet they thought – or hoped – that a combination of patience and courtesy would make their adversaries see reason and finally dispense justice.  Gandhi’s law practice was now in the hands of L. W. Ritch. His visits to the city were mostly to take advantage of the skills of his secretary Sonja Schlesin. Through the first half of 1912, Gandhi was in correspondence with the Ministry of Interior with regard to a new Immigration Bill. The issues he raised included the rights of domicile of women and minor children, the arbitrary powers of immigration officers, the right of appeal to courts, and the right of inter- provincial migration for educated Indians. In May 1912, General Smuts introduced a fresh ‘Immigrants Restrictions Bill’ in Parliament. The General said that to work out a satisfactory immigration law was like a ‘Chinese puzzle’. For, ‘whilst, on one hand, they were most anxious to foster immigration of white people, they were most anxious to keep Asiatics out of the country. (Hear! Hear!).’ The Government was thinking of applying an education test on the Australian model, since that test ‘admitted of being applied with rigour in the one case and treated with some laxity in the other. The white  people would thus be encouraged to come into the country and the Asiatics kept out.’ In the debate that followed, a member from Bechuanaland said the exclusion of Asiatics ‘was the one question upon which Dutch and English agreed’. He claimed that since the coming of the Indians, hundreds, he might say thousands, of white people who used to do a respectable business had been entirely ousted. The competition of the Asiatic was such that no European could stand up against him, and he would like it to be laid down clearly that in future no Asiatic should be allowed to come into the country.46 The signs were unmistakable, and this time too the bill failed to pass through the Senate. The Interior Ministry wrote to Gandhi saying they hoped still to pass an amended Bill in the next session. In late June, Gandhi spent a week in Durban. The Natal Indians were now divided down the middle. One K. D. Naidoo was canvassing signatures of people who opposed Gandhi; he alleged the lawyer represented the interests only of Gujarati merchants, of those ‘Banyans in South Africa who make money and make cheap living’. On the other side, Gandhi’s old friend Parsee Rustomjee charged K. D. Naidoo and his colleagues of ‘assuming titles of leadership and undertaking public work without the public mandate’. Some Indians in Natal were unhappy with Gandhi’s wait-and-see policy. He had not, they thought, campaigned hard enough for the abolition of the £3 tax on Indians in the province. The hostility of this faction worried Gandhi’s friends, who had seen him attacked for his views before. On 27 June, Kallenbach wrote to Chhaganlal Gandhi asking him and his brother Maganlal ‘to be on the look- out and observe matters’ during Gandhi’s stay in Natal. ‘One of you’, said Kallenbach, should always accompany him to Durban and not lose sight of him. At the present moment the feeling runs rather high at Durban and therefore be on your guard … [L]et us keep our eyes open. We all know Mr Gandhi dislikes and refuses bodyguards, but under one or another pretext, you and Maganlal will, I hope, be able, without attracting Mr Gandhi’s attention, to accomplish the above. May we jointly be able to guide him from some fanatic in this country.49 Gandhi returned to the Transvaal unscathed. Meanwhile, he had asked Gokhale to visit South Africa. To have an established ‘Imperial’ statesman lobby for the Indians might finally get them the concessions they desired. Gandhi must also  have hoped that the arrival of Gokhale would tame and shame his critics in Durban. Gokhale had in fact planned to come to South Africa the previous year, on his way back from the United Kingdom, but his doctors had advised against it. So had Gandhi’s friend Pranjivan Mehta. Meeting him in London in August 1911, Mehta reported that ‘Mr Gokhale’s body looks like a paper bag’. A chronic diabetic, he had recently been diagnosed with an excess of albumin, and he was also overweight. Mehta told Gandhi that while Gokhale was indeed very keen to visit South Africa, he worried that the myriad public functions he would have to attend (and speak at) would strain him further. As things stood, it was ‘necessary for his health that he gets as much rest as possible’. The trip was aborted, but a year later Gokhale was in somewhat better shape. In London for the summer (as usual), he booked a passage to Cape Town for October. He asked for one of two berths in a first-class cabin; the shipping company answered that if he paid £10 extra he could have the cabin to himself. Gokhale answered that he had made nine voyages between India and the United Kingdom by ship, and never has such an insult been offered to me … I feel it is grossly unjust that I should be penalised and compelled to pay more than my fare because some Europeans have a prejudice against travelling with Indians. I think the Company should give me one berth and then leave it to those who come after me to take the second or not as they like.51 Gokhale had made many voyages between India and England; but none, before this, to South Africa. The experience with the shipping company prepared him for the sort of racism that Indians in that country experienced on a daily basis. Before making the booking, he had suggested to Gandhi that Maud Polak also come to South Africa. He had been impressed by the work she was doing for the South African British Indian Committee, and thought some first-hand experience would enable her to lobby even more effectively. Gandhi was lukewarm about the proposal, perhaps because he knew what Gokhale did not – namely, that Maud Polak’s interest was principally in one Indian in Johannesburg rather than in Indians in South Africa in general. When the news of Gokhale’s trip became public, a liberal editor in Cape Town wrote to the South African Prime Minister, General Botha, urging that the visitor be treated with courtesy. The editor had met Gokhale in India, and thus knew  that he was not ‘a coolie or a mere agitator’, but ‘a man of the highest birth, character and intellect, a member of the Council of the Viceroy of India, and perhaps the strongest individual force in Indian politics at the present time.’ Botha agreed that the guest should be treated well. Nonetheless, the risks associated with Gokhale’s visit were ‘considerable’. For instance, the municipal authorities in Johannesburg, Cape Town and other cities did not allow Coloured people to travel in trams. ‘What would Mr Gokhale say,’ asked Botha, ‘if he were to enter a tram and be asked to get out!’ In the last week of August 1912, Pranjivan Mehta wrote to Gokhale about what he might expect to see in South Africa. Mehta worried that ‘too much strain’ would be put on Gokhale’s ‘mind and body by the gatherings and ceremonies that may have to be unavoidably held in your honour’. He then continued: So, you will soon have an opportunity of meeting and discussing things with him. From what little conversation we have had about him, I was led to believe that you had not studied G[andhi] quite well. In my humble opinion, men like him are born on very rare occasions and then in India alone. As far as I can see, it seems to me that India has not produced an equally far-seeing prophet like him, during the last five or six centuries and that [if] he was born in the eighteenth century, India would have been a far different land from what it is now and its history would have been altogether differently written. I shall be anxiously waiting to hear from you that your present view of his capacity has altered considerably since coming in greater personal contact with him and that you see in him one of those rare men who are occasionally born to elevate humanity in the land of their birth.54 Gandhi was being placed by his friend in very elevated company. Although Mehta mentioned no names, it is clear that he was comparing Gandhi to the medieval saints Nanak and Kabir, and, going further back, to Mahavira and Gautama Buddha, founders of Jainism and Buddhism respectively. He suggested that had Gandhi been born in the eighteenth century, India would not have been colonized by the British. To place a mere lawyer and diasporic leader in this pantheon was an act of faith, and friendship. Gokhale’s answer is unavailable. How might he have reacted to Mehta’s letter? He was a generous man, and had praised Gandhi in private and in public. He probably considered Gandhi his most able protégé. He hoped that Gandhi would come back to India and take over the Servants of India Society. But surely he must have been puzzled, if not offended, by this implicit reversal of their roles and place in Indian history. Gokhale was widely  acknowledged to be the ‘strongest individual force in Indian politics’; it was in that capacity that he had been asked by Gandhi to visit South Africa. But here was Pranjivan Mehta telling him that a man he considered his follower was actually far greater than himself.  In September 1912 Gandhi executed a deed transferring ownership of Phoenix Farm to five trustees, these being the Durban merchant Omar Hajee Amod Johari, Parsee Rustomjee, Kallenbach, Ritch and Pranjivan Mehta – a Muslim, a Parsi, two Jews and a Hindu respectively. The document transferred to these five others Gandhi’s right, title and interest in the land and machinery of Phoenix, and listed eight aims by which the Farm would be run: namely, to earn a livelihood as far as possible by one’s own labour; to promote better relations between Indians and Europeans; to ‘follow and promote the ideas’ set forth by Tolstoy and Ruskin; to promote ‘purity of private life in individuals by living pure lives themselves’; to start a school to educate children mainly in their own vernaculars; to establish a sanitation and hygiene institute; to ‘train themselves generally for the service of humanity’; and to publish Indian Opinion for the advancement of these ideals. Gandhi was to be manager of the trust during his lifetime, and have two acres and a building for the use of his family. He would draw the same allowance as other settlers, which was £5 a month. If he died, or left the settlement, the trustees would appoint a manager from among themselves. At the same time, Gandhi announced that Indian Opinion would no longer carry any advertisements. He had come round to the view that ‘the system of advertisement is bad in itself, in that it sets up insidious competition, to which we are opposed, and often lends itself to misrepresentation on a large scale’. In the past, the journal had ‘always used our discrimination and rejected many advertisements which we could not conscientiously take’. Now it would stop taking ads altogether. The affairs of Phoenix sorted, Gandhi turned his attention to welcoming Gokhale. He had not seen the older man for ten years, but they had been in regular correspondence. More recently, Gandhi’s nephew Chhaganlal had visited Poona. While studying law in London, Chhagan had fallen ill with tuberculosis, and had to abort his studies and return to India to recover, before rejoining his  uncle in South Africa. While in Poona he had written of Gokhale’s work in less- than-flattering terms. Writing to Maganlal, Gandhi said, I felt sad when I read Chi. Chhaganlal’s description of the Servants of India Society. It is a matter of regret that a great man like Prof. Gokhale is engrossed in it. I believe he will come out of it, for he is honest. It is simply an indifferent imitation of the West. Is it proper for the servants to have servants? And who are the servants? Why was it necessary to engage them? Why do they have others cook for them? Why should there be large buildings in India? Why should not huts be enough? … What a superstition that only an M. A. or B. A. could become a ‘servant’? … I do feel that the aims of Phoenix as well as the way of life there surpass those of the [Servants of India] Society.57 There is a clear sense here that, as a person, social worker and political activist, Gandhi had equalled, if not surpassed, Gokhale. But respect was due to the latter’s status in Indian politics and his early encouragement of the then unknown Gandhi. So when Gokhale came to South Africa, his one-time disciple made sure he would get a stirring reception. He knew his mentor to have a fetish about etiquette and attire; so, to humour and honour him, he would, for the first time in years, wear a formal Kathiawari turban when meeting him off the ship in Cape Town. The ship carrying Gokhale, the RMS Saxon, landed at Cape Town on Tuesday, 22 October 1912. A large crowd of Indians had gathered at the quayside, making what Kallenbach (who was present) called ‘peculiar scenes’, a reference to the raising of flags and the shouting of slogans.59 Gandhi and a senior Muslim cleric, Imam Bawazeer, boarded the ship to escort the visitor ashore. They then took Gokhale to the home of his local hosts, the Gools, in a procession of fifty carriages. Gokhale was presented an address on behalf of the local Indians. This was suitably ecumenical, with Hindus, Muslims and Parsis, and Gujaratis, Tamils and Hindi-speakers all signing on. Later, at a public meeeting, he was welcomed by the leading white liberal of the city, Senator W. P. Schreiner. In his speech, Schreiner praised Gandhi for his unselfishness of spirit; Gandhi, speaking next, doffed his hat in turn to the visitor, his ‘political teacher’, whose name was sacred to all Indians. It was left to Gokhale to deal with the substantive issues. He reminded the Europeans that since ‘everything in India was open to all’, they ‘could not hope to shut the Indian out of their territory altogether without inflicting a very serious blow on the prestige of the Empire’. He had not come to South Africa ‘to light a  flame’; he had come in a ‘spirit of compromise’, with the desire to ‘aid the cause of justice’. He noted however that India is now watching what is being done to her sons. There is a new awakening throughout the East, not merely in India, but all through Eastern lands. You feel a new life throbbing, a new national consciousness everywhere; and however indifferent India may have been in the past to the sufferings of her children and to her own humiliations, there will be more and more self-respect in the future in her dealings with such matters.60 Gokhale also met the leading Cape politician J. X. Merriman at Cape Town. Unlike Schreiner, Merriman had been too timid to attend the public reception in Gokhale’s honour. But he met him privately, later writing to Smuts that the Indian had ‘impressed me very favourably – an educated gentleman who speaks English as well as we do, is not a Baboo but a High Caste Mahratta, who were, as you know, a fighting race who gave us many a twister’. In Gokhale, Merriman saw ‘the new spirit that has arisen in the East of disgust at Western domination’. He urged Smuts to ‘do away with all the odious and illiberal machinery of repression’ against the Indians, to recognize that ‘there are other and surely greater interests at stake [in South Africa] than the conveniences of [white] traders and the prejudices of the [white] community’. For the next four weeks, as Gokhale travelled through South Africa, Gandhi was at his side. Everywhere, mentor and disciple made similar speeches, with Gandhi professing his admiration for Gokhale, and Gokhale asking the Europeans to look at the question not from their narrow communal interest but from the standpoint of Justice and Empire. Everywhere, Indians turned out in numbers to receive him, and to pass on messages from community groups to which they belonged – which included the Madras Indians, the United Hindu Association, the Hamidia Islamia Society, the Patidar Association, the Transvaal Indian Women’s Association, the Brahman Mandal, the Zoroastrian Anjuman, even the Ottoman Cricket Club. From Cape Town, Gokhale carried on to Kimberley, where among those who received him was the novelist Olive Schreiner.62 Indians and Europeans sat down together for a meal for the first time in the history of the mining town. Here, Gandhi praised Gokhale for, among other things, having ‘brought with him the much-needed rain which the parched land of Kimberley required so badly’.  Gokhale and Gandhi carried on northwards, halting at the small towns of the Rand – Bloemhof, Klerksdorf, Potchefstroom, Krugersdorp, etc. – to allow the local Indians to pay their respects. At Krugersdorp the mayor turned up at the station to receive Gokhale, earning the ire of his fellow whites, who demanded why he had gone to meet the ‘Coolie Gentleman’ who had ‘evidently come here with the express purpose of stirring up strife’. Just because the mayor of Cape Town had met Gokhale, ‘it was not necessary that the Mayors of the Transvaal towns should follow suit.’ A meeting of whites affirmed that ‘they in Krugersdorp would do their share to help to keep this a white man’s country.’ On 28 October, Gokhale’s party arrived at Johannesburg’s Park Station, whose ‘sombre grey of corrugated iron and girders’ had been ‘transformed for the time at least into a brilliant blaze of colours’. Gokhale exited the station through a giant arch of flowers, designed by Kallenbach, which had ‘Hearty Welcome’ written in Gujarati, and twin domes shaped in the form of the Muslim crescent and the Hindu trident. Among the speakers at the Johannesburg meeting were two Europeans. William Hosken said that the recent incarceration of 2,700 out of 9,000 Indians in the Transvaal was ‘a horrible disgrace to our Christianity and our civilisation’. Joseph Doke asked that under the British flag ‘there should be justice for every man as a man, whether he was an Indian or a Chinese, or whatever his nationality’. In his speech, Gokhale praised Gandhi in terms that might not have displeased Pranjivan Mehta. The Indians in South Africa, he said, ‘had self-reliance and they had a great leader’. Gandhi, ‘his friend, their friend, the friend of everyone in the room’, was ‘a great and illustrious son of whom she [India] was proud beyond words, and he was sure that men of all races and creeds would recognise in him one of the most remarkable personalities of their time’. On 30 October, Gandhi was interviewed by the Transvaal Leader on the progress of Gokhale’s visit. His mentor, he said, had ‘come to the general conclusion that the Indians resident here are entitled to civic equality. That is to say, their movement within the Union should not be hampered and, under restrictions of a general character applying to the community at large, they should be allowed freedom of trade.’ The caveat was crucial: civic, not social or political equality: the freedom to practise one’s trade and to live where one  wished, not the right to vote or be treated as equal in all respects with the ruling race. Gandhi was also asked about the attitude of the Orange Free State. In his view, it was ‘part of the compromise that under the new Act the few fresh immigrants that will be allowed to come in will be free to move in any part of the Union’. In other words, Indians would or should be allowed to enter the Free State, but not perhaps to trade or farm in it. ‘But some day or other,’ added Gandhi, ‘the Free State barrier [to holding property or trading] must entirely disappear. Otherwise the Union will be a farce.’ On 1 November, Gokhale was hosted for breakfast by the Chinese Association of Johannesburg. He was welcomed by Leung Quinn, now back in the Transvaal. Quinn spoke of how the Chinese ‘stood shoulder to shoulder with their brother Asiatics’. Theirs was ‘a fraternity larger than that of common religion and race … They hoped for the passing of British antagonism, and looked forward to the reign of sweet reason instead of stupid prejudice.’ Gokhale, in reply, spoke of the two communities having much in common, ‘both being old peoples and India having given China one of her oldest religions’. Gokhale then spent a few days resting at Tolstoy Farm. On the 6th Gandhi and he left for Natal. They stopped at the smaller mining and plantation towns, such as Newcastle and Dundee, before arriving in Durban on the morning of the 8th. A crowded meeting was attended by very many Indians, ‘who, at least for that night, felt that the Town Hall really belonged to them and that they enjoyed the rights of citizenship’. Among those who spoke was F. A. Laughton, KC, he who had bravely stood by Gandhi when the white mob attacked him in 1897. The next day, Gokhale presented the prizes at a sports meeting and then heard grievances against the £3 tax. Some sixty individuals filed up, one by one, and spoke of how their inability to pay the tax had led to their imprisonment. They were heard by a crowd of several thousand, who had come from the outlying districts by train, cycle, cart, wagon or on foot. The testimonies were offered in Tamil and Gujarati, and then translated for Gokhale’s benefit, the narration often interrupted by cries of ‘Shame! Shame!’. On Sunday, 10 November Gokhale and Gandhi visited the Ohlange Industrial School and ‘spent some time discussing the Native question with the Rev. John Dube’. The students sang Zulu songs for the visitors.Later that week Gokhale  returned to the Transvaal. On Thursday 14 November he travelled to Pretoria to meet the Prime Minister and the Minister of the Interior. General Botha had followed Gokhale’s progress through the country with dismay. He was offended that the Indian leader had not come to see him soon after landing. That Gokhale was warmly received in most places did not please him either. Gokhale’s statements, grumbled Prime Minister Botha to the Governor-General, had raised ‘false hopes among our Indian population’. They had ‘put up the backs of our European population – Dutch as well as English-speaking, and made them more than ever opposed to any kind of concession’. But, said Botha to the Governor- General, he would still ‘meet him in the most reasonable spirit’. Gokhale had asked that Gandhi be allowed to come with him, but the request was refused.71 Meeting the ministers, he urged the abolition of the £3 tax and the admission of a select number of educated Indians to the Transvaal. The next day Gokhale and the Prime Minister independently met the Governor-General, Lord Gladstone (a son of the great Liberal prime minister, who had served as home secretary before coming out to South Africa). Later, Gladstone sent London this report: ‘As regards the £3 tax, the Prime Minister told me that he thought it would be possible to meet Mr Gokhale’s views, though there might be strong opposition in Natal. From what Mr Gokhale said I gathered that the Prime Minister had given him a satisfactory assurance.’ The Governor-General was also hopeful that the Immigration Bill would finally be passed in an acceptable form. He was ‘convinced that the Prime Minister and General Smuts are sincerely anxious to put it through’. Gokhale came away from these meetings convinced that the Indians’ demands would be met. ‘You must return to India in a year,’ he told Gandhi. ‘Everything has been settled. The Black Act will be repealed. The racial bar will be removed from the immigration law. The £3 tax will be abolished.’ In a farewell speech in Pretoria, Gokhale appealed to ‘the better mind of the two communities, European and Indian’. To the former he said, ‘the Government must exist for promoting the prosperity not of the European community only, but of all its subjects.’ To the latter he said, ‘your future is largely in your own hands.’ He hoped that a struggle of the kind waged in the Transvaal between 1907 and 1910 would not have to be fought again. But ‘if it has to be resumed,’ said Gokhale, ‘or if you have to enter on other struggles of a like nature for  justice denied or injustice forced on you, remember that the issue will largely turn on the character you show, on your capacity for combined action, on your readiness to suffer and sacrifice in a just cause.’ Overlapping with Gokhale’s trip to South Africa was the visit of a rather more obscure friend of Gandhi’s. This was Maud Polak, who had managed to travel to South Africa after all. She had come to study the Indian situation at first-hand – the better to aid her lobbying work in London – and perhaps also to spend time with Mohandas Gandhi. She succeeded in the first endeavour but not in the second. Indian Opinion reported her movements – a tea party for her in Johannesburg on 14 October, another on the 19th, both hosted and attended by women, Europeans as well as Indians. Then she crossed over to Natal, where she spent two weeks, speaking to labourers and merchants, and attending at least two parties in her honour.75 Her arrival and stay in South Africa was drowned out by the visit of Gopal Krishna Gokhale. Gandhi himself was criss-crossing the country with his mentor, and appears to have hardly seen Maud at all. Whether this was by accident or design the sources do not say. In London, Gokhale had been impressed by Maud Polak’s commitment; now, in South Africa, he was even more impressed by Sonja Schlesin, a young woman who worked for Gandhi without having a romantic interest in him. In his travels through Natal and the Transvaal he met many among Gandhi’s friends and associates – those who ran his journal and his ashrams, those who went to jail with him, those who raised money for him. Having seen them all, and seen some admirable social workers in India and England too, Gokhale told Gandhi, ‘I have rarely met with the sacrifice, the purity and the fearlessness I have seen in Miss [Sonja] Schlesin. Amongst your co-workers, she takes the first place in my estimation.’ Gokhale spent his last weekend in South Africa at Tolstoy Farm. On the evening of 17 November, he left Johannesburg by train for the Portuguese port of Lourenço Marques. Gandhi and Kallenbach accompanied him. At a reception in the town hall, Gandhi used the chance to flog his ideas on diet, health and religious pluralism. He said he remembered Lourenço Marques when it had the reputation of being a malarious place, but it was almost superfluous to drink the health of the European guests in a town so admittedly healthy as the town was to-day. They also had partaken of a vegetarian, non-alcoholic repast – these things were  also considered consistent with good health. He considered the gathering unique; they had with them Christians, Jews, Hindus, Mahomedans, and Parsees. The British Consul General, speaking next, ‘referred to the trouble this same Mr Gandhi had given to the Consulate in days past [with regard to permits, etc.], but he remembered that the proposer of the toast had also done good service to the Empire during the [Boer] War, and after all loyalty was the chief thing’. Gokhale now proceeded, his disciples in tow, to Dar-es-Salaam by ship. On board, Gandhi promised Gokhale that he ‘would not leave for I[ndia] without making arrangements for the work in S[outh] A[frica] to be carried on in my absence. Most probably the management of affairs will be left in Polak’s hands.’ En route, they stopped at Zanzibar. The island had an active Indian community, who, it turned out, knew all about the satyagraha in South Africa, and its leader, whose struggle deeply resonated with them. ‘Remarkable how the men’s faces light up when they hear the name “Gandhi”,’ wrote Kallenbach in his diary, ‘and how eager they are to shake hands.’ There was one last public meeting in Africa, this ‘the largest gathering Indians at Dar-es-Salam have ever had’,before Gokhale took leave of his companions and headed east to Bombay. The next day, Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that ‘I want to be a worthy pupil of yours. This is not mock humility but Indian seriousness. I want to realize in myself the conception I have of an Eastern pupil. We have many differences of opinion, but you shall still be my pattern in political life.’ After this expression of qualified devotion, he continued: One word from the quack physician. Ample fasting, strict adherence to two meals, entire absence of condiments of all kinds from your food, omission of pulses, tea, coffee, etc., regular taking of Kuhne baths, regular and brisk walking in the country (not the pacing up and down for stimulating thought), ample allowance of olive oil and acid fruit and gradual elimination of cooked food – and you will get rid of your diabetes and add a few more years than you think to your life of service in your present body.81 In a month spent in each other’s company, Gokhale and Gandhi must have made manifest their many differences of opinion – with regard to the respective merits of petitioning versus protest, modern versus traditional civilization, allopathic versus naturopathic systems of medicine. Speaking to Gandhi, watching him at work among his compatriots, Gokhale nonetheless came away with a distinctly elevated view of his protégé’s personality and achievements. In  a public meeting on his return to Bombay – held on 13 December – Gokhale said Gandhi was ‘without doubt made of the stuff of which heroes and martyrs are made. Nay, more. He has in him the marvellous spiritual power to turn ordinary men around him into heroes and martyrs.’ He told the assembled Indians of Gandhi’s sacrfices, of how he built up the movement in South Africa, and how he inspired others to follow him. Some among the several thousand satyagrahis who went to jail at his behest were established traders and professionals, but the bulk, observed Gokhale, were poor humble individuals, hawkers, working men and so forth, men without education, men not accustomed in their life to think or talk of their country. And yet these men braved the horrors of gaol-life in the Transvaal and some of them braved them again and again rather than submit to degrading legislation directed against their country … [T]hey were touched by Gandhi’s spirit and that had wrought the transformation, thus illustrating the great power which the spirit of man can exercise over human minds and even over physical surroundings. Gokhale defended Gandhi against his critics at home and abroad. Some radicals thought Gandhi should have argued for an ‘open door’ policy, whereby Indians could freely migrate to South Africa. But, said Gokhale, it was precisely ‘the fear of an indiscriminate influx which haunted the European mind’. The demand for free migration would have made ‘the Europeans more implacable in their determination to get rid of the Indians at all costs and the eventual expulsion of the Indians from the [South African] sub-continent would only have been hastened by such a move’. He claimed that the ‘theoretical rights’ that Gandhi had so valiantly fought for ‘would no doubt steadily grow more and more into rights actually enjoyed in practice, but that was a matter of slow growth and it depended on a large measure upon the improvement of their position in India itself.’ Saints, it appears, could or should be pragmatists as well. Thus argued Gokhale, in whose view Gandhi’s distinctive combination of personal saintliness and social meliorism was necessary to safeguard the position of Indians in South Africa. Gokhale’s visit, important in itself, also helped consolidate Gandhi’s position within the community. That the great Indian leader placed himself entirely in Gandhi’s hands, that Gandhi accompanied him wherever he went, that Gandhi’s public words of praise for Gokhale were often answered by Gokhale’s public  words of praise for Gandhi – none of this was lost on the varied audiences in Natal, Transvaal and the Cape. Gokhale’s endorsement of Gandhi irritated and angered the Durban journalist P. S. Aiyar. For some time now, Aiyar had pressed for a more prominent place for himself. In his call for attention he had attacked Gandhi’s followers, but not, as yet, Gandhi himself. As late as June 1912 he was writing that while Swami Shankeranand was ‘the leader of the reactionary group’ among Indians, ‘Mr Gandhi is and has been recognised as the leader of the progressive party’.83 When Gokhale arrived in South Africa later in the year, and Gandhi was always at his side, Aiyar was not pleased, although he was not yet willing to confront Gandhi directly. An essay of November 1912 started by expressing ‘the highest admiration and respect for Mr Gandhi’, while claiming there was nonetheless ‘a considerable body of opinion outside the Transvaal which do not apparently fall in line with all his views and conclusions’. Aiyar then set out his own view of the Indian predicament in South Africa. As inheritors of an ancient civilization, they could not allow themselves to be submerged by ‘materialistic western civilization’; nor, however, could they identify with the ‘savagery’ of the Africans. The way forward was to ‘improve themselves on their traditional lines of civilisation. For doing so, they must have social and commercial intercourse with the country of their origin’. This continuous intercourse was what the proposed Asiatic Act forbade.84 Aiyar’s position was not dissimilar to that held by Gandhi before the Anglo- Boer War, when he had likewise argued for equal rights for all British subjects, which implied the free movement of Indians into (and across) South Africa. As white attitudes hardened, however, Gandhi modified his stand, now asking only for guaranteed rights of residence and work for Indians already in South Africa. That was what he asked Lord Milner for in 1904, and what he had asked General Smuts for between 1906 and 1911. Aiyar also grumbled that Gokhale’s itinerary in South Africa was dictated by Gandhi and company. The journalist was able to get only a half-hour appointment with the visitor, which left him deeply dissatisfied. Gokhale told him that the demand for free immigration and free movement was impractical, and the further demand for an Indian franchise highly premature. Aiyar wrote bitterly that ‘instead of endeavouring to find a remedy to put our countrymen on  our legs he [Gokhale] simply evaded to tackle the real and lectured on the maintenance of European civilisation and praised Mr Gandhi as a wonderful personage and all ended there.’ Gokhale departed for India, with Aiyar’s complaints following him across the ocean. Aiyar now wanted a deputation to proceed to the motherland and stir up the Indian public. ‘Of course,’ he wrote, ‘such a deputation must be absolutely free from the influence of Messrs Gandhi, Polak, Rustomjee and Co.’ When Gokhale praised Gandhi in a public meeting in Bombay, Aiyar erupted again. It ‘is a national misfortune,’ said the angry journalist, that a man of Gokhale’s intellectual calibre should have been hypnotised by Messrs Gandhi and Pollock [sic] who are notoriously lacking in those ingredients [necessary] for political work, and but for the regrettable influence that these two men possess over Mr Gokhale, he would have been able to do more solid work for the Indians of South Africa.86 P. S. Aiyar’s animus was in part born out of jealousy. He would have liked Gandhi to consult him, to work with him, to substitute Polak with him as his second-in-command. While Aiyar himself had marginal influence, for the biographer he merits attention as the only articulate opponent of Gandhi within the Indian community. From 1895 or thereabouts the whites of Natal had poured a steady stream of abuse at Gandhi. From 1907 or thereabouts they had been joined by their colleagues in the Transvaal. Polak, Kallenbach, Doke and Sonja Schlesin notwithstanding, Gandhi was an object of hate and ridicule to the majority of Europeans. Conversely, he was the acknowledged popular leader of the Indians in Natal and the Transvaal. To be sure, the respect he commanded among his people was not universal: some Pathans had attacked him physically when he sought to compromise with the rulers, some merchants had refused to follow him into jail when he resumed the struggle. P. S. Aiyar, however, was sui generis – the only Indian in South Africa who expressed his disagreements with Gandhi in print and in sometimes splendidly vituperative prose.            