 7 White Against Brown   Gandhi sailed from Bombay in the last week of November 1902. With him were his nephews Maganlal and Anandlal, who had decided to try their luck in South Africa. Their ship reached Durban in the third week of December. The boys proceeded to the village of Tongat, where they planned to open a shop. Their uncle, meanwhile, placed himself at the service of the community. The Mayor of Durban had fixed an appointment for an Indian delegation to meet Joseph Chamberlain – the visiting Secretary of State for the Colonies – on the afternoon of 26 December. Gandhi asked for, and received, a day’s postponement, on the grounds that the 26th was a Friday, ‘the very time for prayer which most of the [Muslim] gentlemen, who are to form the deputation, would be quite unable to forgo’. At the meeting on the 27th, Chamberlain was presented with a petition asking for, among other things, the relaxation of the licensing laws in Natal and the provision of schools for Indian children. Chamberlain then took a train inland to Johannesburg, with Gandhi following some days later. The Indians in the Transvaal had asked that, since they had for some years past been ‘guided by the advice of Advocate M. K. Gandhi’, he also come along with them to meet the dignitary. The government wrote back stiffly that ‘the deputation will consist of not more than 15 people, of whom Mr Gandhi cannot be one as he is not a resident of the Transvaal.’ The merchants could not take their man along, but they could at least present to Chamberlain the petition he had drafted on their behalf. This asked that Indians be allowed to own property and trade anywhere, instead of being restricted to specific locations. It claimed that Indians in the Transvaal were ‘worse [off] than before’ the Anglo-Boer War. The next week, Gandhi posted a petition to his Indian friends in Cape Town, which they would present to Chamberlain when he visited that city. Thus, within two weeks of his return to  South Africa, Gandhi had written three different petitions on behalf of his countrymen, dealing with their predicament in three different provinces. However, he was less than hopeful of their impact, writing to Dadabhai Naoroji in the last week of January 1903 that he found Chamberlain had been swayed by the colonists’ claim that unless stringent measures were put in place, ‘this sub- continent would be swamped by the Indians’. With his family in India, Gandhi corresponded mainly with his nephew Chhaganlal. It was through him that he communicated with Kasturba and the children. Kasturba could read Gujarati, but not, it appears, write it with any fluency. She, in turn, passed on her news by using their nephew as a scribe. In the first week of February, Gandhi told Chhaganlal that it was not right to have withdrawn Manilal from music lessons, adding: ‘The blame is not yours, but your aunt’s.’ He then turned to his own predicament. There was ‘great uncertainty’ about his future; life as a lawyer-activist was ‘no bed of roses’. The next month was crucial – if he found that it was not possible for him to continue in South Africa, he would return to India and rejoin the family. On the other hand, if he chose to stay on, ‘it will be possible to bring you all after six months.’ For the moment, Gandhi chose to base himself in Johannesburg. After the war, the Transvaal had been constituted as a ‘Crown Colony’. The Governor, Lord Milner, was the head of its administration. In time, the colony would, on the model of Natal, have its own elected government, run by white legislators elected by white males alone. In this transitional period, it was crucial that Gandhi was at hand to lobby for the Indians. In the last week of March 1903, Gandhi asked to be enrolled as a practising attorney in the Supreme Court of the Transvaal. He attached a certificate from the Inner Temple and proof that he had practised both at the High Court of Bombay and the Supreme Court of Natal. On 14 April his application was approved.5 A few months later, he found office space at the corner of Rissik and Anderson Streets, and a room to live in the same block.6 Johannesburg in the early 1900s was very much a work-in-progress. The journalist Flora Shaw captured its mood well, remarking that the city was ‘much too busy with material problems. It is hideous and detestable, luxury without  order, sensual enjoyment without art, riches without refinement, display without dignity.’Another British journalist observed that everyday life in Johannesburg partook of an ‘inborn restlessness. Everybody seems to be always shifting his place of abode. At the end of each month waggonloads of miscellaneous furniture jolt slowly to some new suburb.’ There was an overwhelming preponderance of men in Johannesburg, the gender ratio being two males to each female among the white population, and close to ten males for each female among the black population. The social diversity was enormous – with almost every nation in Europe represented in the city, and almost every tribe in southern Africa too. Fortune seekers and job hunters descended on Johannesburg ‘from the ends of the earth: miners from Mozambique, Nyasaland, Cornwall, and Australia; artisans and engineers from Scotland; shopkeepers from Lithuania and Gujarat; financiers from England and Germany’. This was a city where ‘everybody came from somewhere else, social arrangements had to be constructed from scratch and everything was up for grabs’. A census conducted shortly after Gandhi moved there estimated Johannesburg’s population to be a little over 150,000. It was growing at almost 10 per cent a year. The city’s residents seemed to be in ‘a state of perpetual haste’. New roads were being dug, new homes and offices constructed. Wood and other building materials lay piled up on the ground, and a cloud of dust hung in the air. To moderate private enterprise and manage its excesses, the elements of a municipal administration were being put in place. In 1903, as Gandhi made his home in Johannesburg, the first sewage pipes were laid under the ground, and the first storm-water drains constructed above them. In this decade, gas and electricity also made their first appearance in the city.10 The year Gandhi moved to Johannesburg, the writer John Buchan published a short, sharp portrait of the city. Buchan was then working on the staff of the Governor, Lord Milner. He saw Johannesburg as ‘a city still on trial, sensitive, ambitious, profoundly ignorant of her own mind’. It had a ‘short and checkered past’; once a mining camp, then a mining city, would it ever become a cosmopolitan centre of culture and the arts? Would Johannesburg, asked Buchan, ‘go the way of many colonial cities, and become vigorous, dogmatic, proud, remotely English in sentiment, consistently material in her outlook, and narrow  with the intense narrowness of those to whom politics mean local interests spiced with rhetoric’; or, as she was ‘already richer, more enlightened, and more famous than her older sisters’ (such as Melbourne in Australia or Wellington in New Zealand), would Johannesburg ‘advance on a higher plane, and become in the true sense an imperial city, with a closer kinship [to the mother country] and a more liberal culture’? The Indians in Johannesburg lived chiefly in two suburbs – Fordsburg, to the west, and Vrededorp, to the north-west. Mohandas Gandhi, however, worked and slept in the very heart of the city, within a stone’s throw of its stock exchange, its main post office and its law courts. Records of Gandhi’s law practice in Johannesburg, preserved in the National Archives of South Africa, tell us his clients were almost all Indian. Some had lived in Transvaal before the war and wanted to re-enter the province. Others were already based in Transvaal but wanted a relaxation of the trading laws. Yet others wanted permits facilitating travel between the different provinces of South Africa. Their appeals were drafted and put before the authorities by Gandhi. As in Natal, Gandhi’s law practice was conducted side-by-side with his public work. The first was necessary to make a living; the second (so to speak) to live. There was a British Indian Association in Transvaal. Its chairman was a Muslim merchant, Abdul Gani, whose firm, Messrs Mahomed Cassim Camrooden and Co., had offices in both Durban and Johannesburg. The organization’s name was noteworthy: these were not just Indians, but ‘British Indians’, appealing to His Majesty for their rights as subjects of the Empire. In the third week of May 1903, the Association sought an appointment with Lord Milner. Milner’s ambivalent attitude towards the coloured races is manifest in two letters sent in quick succession to his superiors in London. On 11 May he had proposed making Indians and Chinese live (and work) in designated areas, because of their ‘very insanitary habits’, and because it would ‘mitigate the intense hostility felt towards them by the European element, a hostility which, in view of the possible introduction of self-government, is the greatest danger by which they are confronted’.13 The next day, Milner wrote that he was in favour of importing Chinese and Indian workers for the railways and the mines. The ‘enormous resources’ of  South Africa could not be exploited because of a shortage of labour, which was ‘beginning to assume a really alarming aspect’. ‘At present,’ complained Milner, ‘we are in the absurd position of being flooded by petty Indian traders and hawkers, who are no benefit whatever to the community, and not allowed to have Indian labourers, whom we greatly need.’ When he met Milner, on 22 May, Gandhi told the proconsul that his people ‘needed rest from the constant changes of passes and permits’. Milner answered that it was ‘no use forcing the position here against the overwhelming body of white opinion’. He defended the policy of creating Asian-only bazaars, arguing that ‘it would be a distinct advantage to the Indian community to occupy them instead of causing general opposition to themselves by settling down here, there, and everywhere, among people who do not want them.’ Ten days later, Milner met with members of an organization named the ‘White League’. They told the Governor they were opposed to Asians whether as merchants or labourers. The ‘Chinese are most immoral’, they claimed; as for the Indians, ‘coolies are traders, not producers’. One White Leaguer angrily asked Milner: ‘How is it that in Canada we do not hear of this sort of thing? There, when they want labour they get white labour from home.’ The Indians held a meeting to counteract the White Leaguers. They gathered in a hall in Johannesburg’s Fox Street to hear the BIA chairman, Abdul Gani, complain that the Crown had betrayed them. If the soil of the Transvaal was ‘watered with the blood of Englishmen, have not the Indians, too, done their share?’ They had hoped that a British victory would bring justice, that their handicaps would ‘vanish, as if by magic, as soon as the Union Jack waved over the capital’. This was not to be. For someone in authority soon discovered that, though British subjects, we were Asiatics after all, so the yoke of the Asiatic Office was placed on our necks. The Asiatic officers naturally, to justify their existence, unearthed the Asiatic laws for us. And now here we are faced with total social destruction … We are to be branded as a class apart, cooped up in locations, euphemistically to be called bazaars, and probably prevented from owing a patch of land, except in bazaars, and compelled to pay a registration tax of £3. In short, if we would live in the Transvaal we would be content to live as social lepers.17 In 1897–8, when he was based in Natal, Gandhi had thought of starting a newspaper focusing on the Indian question in South Africa. Now, in the summer of 1903, he reactivated the idea, and found two men willing to help him. The  first, Mansukhal Hiralal Nazar, was a widely travelled Gujarati who had studied medicine in Bombay and run a business in London before migrating to South Africa. The second, Madanjit Vyavaharik, was a former school teacher who owned a printing press in Grey Street in Durban. The press printed wedding cards, business cards, menus, account forms, memoranda, circulars, receipt books, and so on, in ‘Gujarati, Tamil, Hindi, Urdoo, Hebrew, Marathi, Sanscrit, French, Dutch, Zulu, &c. &c.’To this already extensive list would now be added a weekly journal of opinion. Both Vyavaharik and Nazar were active members of the Natal Indian Congress. In 1895 and 1896, Vyavaharik had been asked by Gandhi to go from door to door in Grey Street and around, collecting money for the Congress. Since he had a beautiful hand and Gandhi an illegible one, he had also put the lawyer’s words on paper in petitions sent to the government. Nazar, meanwhile, had travelled to London in 1897, sent by Gandhi to counter the colonists’ propaganda against the Indians and their ways. Gandhi’s collaborators were based in Durban, the centre of Indian life in South Africa. Vyavaharik’s task now was to raise money from merchants and acquire type in the four languages the weekly would print in – English, Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil. Nazar’s job was to plan each issue, arrange for articles and translations, edit copy, and see the magazine through the press. From Johannesburg, Gandhi would provide intellectual and moral direction, which included writing many articles himself. In 1903 there were fourteen printing presses in Durban. All were owned and staffed by whites – with the exception of the press run by Vyavaharik. The new, multilingual journal stood out against a monochromatic background of periodicals written, printed and read in English alone. The staff was suitably diverse – including a Cape Coloured, a man from Mauritius, several Gujaratis and at least two Tamils.21 The journal was named Indian Opinion. The first issue, appearing on 4 June 1903, announced itself as the voice of the Indian community, now ‘a recognized factor in the body politic’ of South Africa. The ‘prejudice’ against them in ‘the minds of the Colonists’ was based on an ‘unhappy forgetfulness of the great services India has always rendered to the Mother Country ever since Providence brought loyal Hind under the flag of Britannia’. An article in the same issue  qualified this loyalism, noting that in South Africa, ‘if an European commits a crime or a moral delinquency, it is the individual: if it is an Indian, it is the nation.’ In starting Indian Opinion, Gandhi was setting himself up as a knowledge- broker and bridge-builder. The journal would carry news of Indians in South Africa, of Indians in India, and general articles on ‘all subjects – Social, Moral, and Intellectual’. It would ‘advocate’ the Indian cause, while giving Europeans ‘an idea of Indian thought and aspiration’. Missing from this statement of the journal’s aims was any mention of the largest section of the population of South Africa – the Africans themselves. Each issue of Indian Opinion ran to eight pages. A cover page listed the journal’s title and the languages it was printed in. A series of advertisements followed. A shop in Durban drew attention to its Raleigh cycles of ‘the rigid, rapid, reliable kind’; another shop alerted readers to its stocks of ‘Oriental Jewellery’. General merchants in the towns of Natal placed insertions, as did specialized shops selling cigarettes and clothing. Other ads were issued by the paper itself; these asked for a ‘good machine boy’, for ‘a first class Tamil compositor’, and for someone who could read both Hindi and English. Such was the first page; news and commentary in English followed. Later pages carried material in Gujarati and, at the end, in Hindi and Tamil. The annual subscription was twelve shillings and sixpence in Natal and seventeen shillings elsewhere (payable in advance). Single copies sold at threepence each. New laws in Natal or the Transvaal that affected Indians, news from the Motherland about protests, plagues and great patriots – these were reproduced in Indian Opinion in all the languages it printed in. Other articles were tailored to individual communities. The Tamil section covered festivals observed only in South India. It also focused rather more on schools for girls, since – at this stage – Tamils were more keen to educate their women than the Gujaratis.24 The English and Gujarati sections of Indian Opinion both depended heavily on Gandhi’s contributions (often printed without a byline). He wrote short notes and leaders on a variety of topics. The statements of mayors and governors were reproduced. Government dispatches and documents were summarized. Cases of harassment and discrimination were analysed.  The post between Durban and Johannesburg was kept busy by a ceaseless flow of letters, articles and proofs between the editor of Indian Opinion and the lawyer who, from several hundred miles away, directed its operations. M. H. Nazar worked ferociously hard, planning issues a week in advance, soliciting and editing articles, and supervising translations. Funds ran low, as did stocks of type – a compositor told Nazar that he had better go slow on the Gujarati equivalent of the letter ‘a’ since they had not enough in stock. Nazar wrote to Gandhi that he was ‘quite done up’ and ‘too fagged to think of anything’. The editor worked well past midnight on press days, which meant that he often missed the last tram and had to walk home through the unlit streets of Durban.25 As for Gandhi, his writings for this period are very heavily dominated by his public activities. Amidst hundreds of pages of editorials and reports for Indian Opinion, petitions to officials and legislators, legal notes and letters to sympathizers in the United Kingdom and India, there are rare, brief, glimpses into his personal life. These include two letters written on the same day, 30 June 1903, six months after his return to South Africa. The first letter was addressed to his friend Haridas Vora, a fellow lawyer based in Rajkot. Gandhi’s eldest son Harilal, now fourteen, had been unwell. Vora had helped him through his recovery. Gandhi thanked his friend for having ‘supplied my place to Harilal…. I can only wish that he was here to be attended by me and regret that he should have been a source of anxiety and worry….’ He then turned to his own life in Johannesburg. He had ‘built up a decent practice’, but his public work was causing him ‘very great anxiety.’ It kept him busy from nine in the morning until ten at night, with intervals only for meals and a short walk. Gandhi saw no chance of the pace slackening, as the Transvaal Government was planning new legislation aimed at the Indians. Before he left Bombay, he had told his wife that ‘either I should return to India at the end of the year or that she should come here by that time.’ He did not think he could fulfil the promise. Kasturba could join him, but, he warned, ‘she had very little of my company in Natal; probably, she would have less in Johannesburg.’ If the family came to South Africa, the time spent with them, away from work, might mean it would take up to ten years to meet his obligations. On the other hand, if they stayed on in India, that ‘would enable me to give undivided attention to public  work’, and he could return more quickly, say in ‘three or four years’. Would Kasturba ‘consent to remaining there all that time?’ Having posed the question, he told his friend that ‘I wish to be guided entirely by her sentiments and I place myself absolutely in her hands.’ Also on 30 June 1903, Gandhi wrote to his nephew Chhaganlal enclosing a copy of his letter to Haridas Vora. Chhagan was told to read it out and explain the situation here to your aunt. It is highly desirable that she should decide to stay on there as life here is rather expensive. If she remains there, savings made in this place will enable her and the children to lead a comparatively easy life in India. In that case, I may be able to return home in two or three years time … If, however, she decides to leave, make all requisite preparations by October and take the first available boat in November. But do try to convince her that it will be best for her to remain in India.26 From his earliest days in South Africa, Gandhi had collected news clippings on relations between the races. Now, these were raided for publication in Indian Opinion. A report from the Transvaal Leader featured a white Labour League which opposed Asiatic immigration. The League believed that ‘this nation, occupying the strongest geographical position in the Southern hemisphere, will hold in the event of any great European war, the key to the South and the East, and that its future must never depend on a race of helots.’A liberal paper, the Standard, remarked that ‘the Hindus appear to have been treated throughout South Africa much as the Jews were in Europe during the Middle Ages, and as they are, to a considerable extent, in Russia at this very day.’ In September 1903, an official in the Transvaal Government named W. H. Moor prepared a report on the Indian question. There were, he estimated, about 13,000 Indians at the time of the war. When hostilities broke out most left for Natal, the Cape, or Portuguese territory. From September 1901 they had begun returning, with a ‘committee of influential Asiatics’ consulted on whom to award permits. In September 1902 this committee was disbanded, and a Department of Asiatic Affairs formed to regulate re-entry into the Transvaal. From the end of war to March 1903, some 4,900 permits were issued. The report was reproduced in full by Indian Opinion. Moor had summarized the ‘popular feeling’ of the whites in the Transvaal and the counter arguments of the British Indians. He did so sequentially, but I have clubbed them together in a chart, so that they can be read side by side. Interestingly, if not unexpectedly, the official spelt out the European position at greater length than the Indian one.     Popular Feeling about Indians	Arguments of British Indians  That their mode of life is mean and dirty.	They deny that they are worse citizens than their fellow subjects; they are ready to submit to sanitary and municipal regulations.  That their low standard of living enables them to accept wages on which a white man cannot thrive and live.   That they are not good colonists inasmuch as they do not bring money with them, and send their savings to their own countries.     That South Africa is a country where white people can live and make their homes and establish their race; that the Oriental races have ample opportunity for exclusive colonization where the climate suits them, and where white people cannot settle.   That the invincible hostility and repugnance felt towards the indigenous black races has produced so marked a line of cleavage on the basis of colour that the Asiatic races cannot 
They are anxious for education and capable of benefiting by it. They are industrious, temperate, frugal, law-abiding, and are prepared to settle in the country. As British subjects, they are entitled to equal treatment with others, regardless of colour, caste or creed. They have proved themselves to be public spirited,  ever be treated on a basis of equality with the white races; so liberal and that the introduction of the Asiatic races adds unnecessarily a charitable, and  third element which cannot be refused and an additional complication in the settlement of the disturbances in South Africa. 
they maintain their poor.  An editorial in an early issue of Indian Opinion sought to see ‘The Bright Side of the Picture’. The situation now looked bleak, but the hope, in the long-term, was that as the European community grows older, the awkward corners would be rubbed out, and that the different members of the Imperial family in South Africa would be able to live in perfect peace in the near future. The time may not come within the present generation; we may not live to see it, but that it will come no sane man will deny; and that being so, let us all strain our every nerve to hasten its coming … by trying to step into the shoes of our opponents and endeavouring to find out what may be running in their minds – to find out, that is to say, not merely the points of difference, but also points of agreement.31 It was barely five years since Gandhi had been attacked by a mob that spoke for the white population of Durban, a handful of liberals excepted. Even as he wrote, there was a regular flow of derisive remarks against him in the white press, and of course his compatriots were subject to racial prejudice on a daily basis. And yet, here was the leader of the Indians seeking to live in ‘perfect peace’ with their oppressors. Surely, this optimism was a product of the friendships that he had forged. Josiah Oldfield and members of the Vegetarian Society in London; the lawyer F. A. Laughton and the policeman R. C. Alexander in Durban; lay preachers like A. W. Baker in Pretoria – to this list were now added white men in Johannesburg with whom Gandhi took walks, shared meals, and debated the rights of the different races in South Africa. In his first year in Johannesburg, Gandhi befriended four Europeans with whom, for reasons of class and education, he was more temperamentally akin than the Indians whom he represented in court. Of this quartet, the first to enter his life was a man named L. W. Ritch. He was Jewish and originally from London, in which city he (like Gandhi) had sought to broaden his faith with an infusion of Theosophy. He moved to Johannesburg in 1894, and helped found a Theosophical Lodge. This met every Thursday to discuss the works of Madame Blavatsky and Annie Besant.  In a letter to The Theosophist, Ritch described the Transvaal as a republic in name only. Racial hatred, directed most strongly against any nationality of sable exterior, is its most marked feature. This is so even in Natal, where only recently an attempt was made to prevent a number of Indians landing, an attempt however which proved abortive, chiefly to the pluck and persistence of my Indian friend, Mr Gandhi, Barrister-at-Law, a gentleman who has for a long time past been fighting the Indian battle in Natal, almost single-handed. L. W. Ritch first met Gandhi before the Anglo-Boer War, on one of the lawyer’s visits from Durban to Johannesburg. During the war, Ritch left the city. He returned after the peace treaty was signed, and set about re-establishing the Theosophical Lodge. This new, syncretic, cosmopolitan creed was at odds with the prevailing ethos of a city displaying ‘the concentrated essence of selfishness, individualism, greed and mammon worship’. Gandhi, who had now moved to Johannesburg – to almost single-handedly fight the Indian battle there – began visiting the Lodge regularly. In and apart from these meetings, he and Ritch found they had much to talk about.32 Two other friends came to Gandhi as a consequence of his tastes in food. The lawyer often ate his meals at Johannesburg’s only vegetarian restaurant, the Alexandra Tea Room. Another regular visitor to the eatery was an Englishman named Albert West. He has left behind a vivid portrait of the place and its milieu, c. 1903: Around a large table sat a mixed company of men comprising a stockbroker from the United States who operated on the Exchange in gold and diamond shares, an accountant from Natal, a machinery agent, a young Jewish member of the Theosophical Society [this must have been L. W. Ritch], a working tailor from Russia, Gandhi the lawyer, and me a printer. Everybody in Johannesburg talked about the share market, but these men were food reformers interested in vegetarian diet, Khune [sic] baths, earth poultices, fasting, etc. I was specially attracted by this man from India, and Gandhi and I soon became close friends.33 It was at the same restaurant that Gandhi met Henry Solomon Leon Polak, a thin, lean, intellectually-minded Jew who had lately arrived from Britain. He, like West, was in his early twenties, a full decade younger than the lawyer he was to befriend. His family were originally from the Continent – one grandparent spoke Dutch, another German. They had moved to England, where Polak’s father worked as the advertising manager of a newspaper. Henry himself had studied at a school in Neuchâtel, in the French-speaking part of Switzerland, and then at London University.  While a student, Henry Polak began writing for a Jewish weekly on political matters. He fell in love with a girl named Millie Graham, who was both a Christian and, as an ‘ardent social reformer’, a supporter of women’s suffrage. His family were distressed by the romance, so – in an attempt to break it – they dispatched Henry to join an uncle in South Africa. However, before he left he insisted on formalizing his engagement to Millie. Polak worked at first in his uncle’s business in Cape Town. He soon moved to Johannesburg, where he joined the staff of a local weekly, the Transvaal Critic. He had begun reading the works of Leo Tolstoy, and it was a fellow Tolstoyan, a painter and stage actor, who took him to the vegetarian restaurant patronized by an Indian who also admired the Russian writer. As they entered the eatery one day in 1904, the painter pointed Gandhi out to his friend. Polak then took a swift glance at the quiet, slender, pleasant-looking man sitting at a table alone. Apart from his black professional turban and his dark complexion, there was nothing specially to mark out the already well-known East Indian leader. I was disappointed. I suppose I had expected to see a big, aggressive fellow, who had been the sergeant-major of an East Indian Ambulance Corps during the Boer War … I could not guess that, at the moment, I was gazing at the man who was to become the greatest Asiatic of his time. The two men were introduced, and found that they shared an admiration not just of Tolstoy, but of more obscure authors, such as Adolf Just, author of Return to Nature. Polak visited Gandhi at his law chambers, and as the friendship developed, ‘we met almost daily and discussed vigorously every problem and subject which interested either of us.’ These conversations usually took place over dinner at the vegetarian restaurant, where they ate salads so dominated by a particular pungent bulb that Polak joked that they should start an ‘Amalgamated Society of Onion–Eaters’.35 Just before or after he met Polak, Gandhi came into contact with Hermann Kallenbach, also a Jew, albeit of a different background and temperament. Born two years after Gandhi, and originally from Lithuania, Kallenbach grew up in Prussia and qualified as an architect. Wiry, strong and extremely athletic, he enjoyed the outdoors, spending his winters skating and his summers swimming and fishing. Body-building was another passion. In about 1896 he moved to South Africa. He was a beneficiary of the construction boom in Johannesburg, designing large buildings that went up in the heart of the city. Like Ritch and Polak, he was part of a substantial wave of Jewish emigration to South Africa,  with the population of Jews multiplying tenfold between 1880 and 1904. Many came, like Kallenbach himself, from towns in Russia and Eastern Europe that were home to a rising tide of anti-Semitism. Kallenbach’s office was very close to Gandhi’s law chambers. They first met through an Indian merchant who was a client of both lawyer and architect. The friendship with Kallenbach was an inversion of Gandhi’s earlier friendship with Sheikh Mehtab. As an athlete who was deft with his hands, Kallenbach was a sort of mature Sheikh Mehtab; except that rather than being looked up to, it was he who admired Gandhi – whose interest in matters of the spirit and steadiness of purpose were in contrast to the architect’s restlessness and conflicted sexual desires (he was a bachelor, and at this stage apparently a virgin).37 It is striking that of Gandhi’s four closest friends in Johannesburg, three were Jews. White-skinned, but not Boer or Briton, and certainly not Christian, the Jews came from families that had been subject to prejudice and persecution. They were quicker than other Europeans to deplore the unreasoning racism of rulers in the Transvaal; quicker, too, to warm to an Indian who was alive, intelligent, and less than orthodox in his own religious (or dietary) beliefs. It is also striking that none of these friends were Gujarati or even Indian. In London, there had been Indian students with whom Gandhi could converse. In Johannesburg, however, he was the only professional in the community. There were no other Indian lawyers, nor any Indian doctors, teachers, editors, or managers in the Transvaal. To be sure, Gandhi was connected to his compatriots by ties of sentiment and culture, but books and ideas were not part of their diet; nor, really, were fruit and vegetables. The Gujaratis in Johannesburg were, as Muslims, hard-core meat-eaters, as were the working-class Tamils and Telugu- speakers who represented, so to speak, the ‘other half’ of the community. These people were his clients and also his compatriots. He identified with their sufferings. His working day was spent advancing their individual and collective causes. However, for conversation and cuisine he looked elsewhere. In his ‘Guide to London’, written in Pretoria in 1893, Gandhi had said that the Indian student abroad was ‘master of his time’, with ‘no wife to tease or flatter him, no parents to indulge, no children to look after’. Ten years later, living alone once more, Gandhi used his freedom from family obligations to explore the dissenting sub-cultures of Johannesburg. Most professionals in the town were  likewise single or living apart from their wife and children. They used their time outside work to play and party. Rugby, cricket and horse-racing held no attractions for Gandhi; nor did club life and hunting expeditions. But experiments in diet and inter-faith living did. These interests or obsessions, first visible in London, were now more vigorously pursued amidst Jews, Theosophists, Nonconformists and vegetarians in this new city on a reef.  Outside South Africa, Gandhi’s most steadfast supporters were two Parsis in London: the former MP Dadabhai Naoroji and the serving MP M. M. Bhownaggree. He sent them a regular stream of letters on Indian problems in South Africa; they, in turn, passed on his concerns to His Majesty’s Government. In 1903 alone, Naoroji sent as many as nineteen letters to the India Office on Gandhi’s behalf – this a mark both of the younger man’s persistence and the older man’s patriotism. Bhownaggree was scarcely less energetic. He asked many questions in Parliament, where he termed the anti-Indian legislation in India a ‘scandal’, and in September 1903 posted a letter of twenty printed pages to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Joseph Chamberlain. Drawing on memoranda sent by Gandhi, this detailed the ‘disabilities and indignities’ suffered by British Indians in the Transvaal.’ Bhownaggree warned that ‘the affection of the Indian people for King and Empire is undermined by the continuance of the state of affairs in South Africa.’ Soon afterwards, Chamberlain resigned. Bhownaggree now sent the letter to his successor, Alfred Lyttelton, who passed it on to the Governor of the Transvaal, Lord Milner, noting that he could ‘not but feel much sympathy for the views expressed in it, and I fear it will be difficult to meet his representations with a fully satisfactory answer.’ When Lyttelton forwarded Bhownaggree’s note to him, Lord Milner asked his Lieutenant-Governor, Alfred Lawley, to prepare a rebuttal. On 13 April 1904, Lawley sent his boss a closely argued defence of the policy towards Indians. ‘There is not in this country one man in a hundred,’ he remarked, ‘who would agree to recognise the coloured man as capable of admission to the same social standard as the white.’ Then he added: ‘I do not seek to justify the prejudices  which exist; I merely desire to set them forth. They cannot be ignored. They have got to be reckoned with.’ Like Milner, Lawley thought that while Indians were acceptable as labourers, as traders they posed a serious threat to European interests in the Transvaal. There was a further danger, that if their children educated themselves they might seek a foothold in the professional class. The Asiatic question in South Africa thus drew one ‘face to face with a most difficult problem of modern civilisation’. The British Empire included territories of all climatic and vegetative types. Tropical regions like India and arid areas like central Africa were both incapable of ‘becoming the permanent home of a white nation’. On the other hand, South Africa is one of the countries inhabitable alike by Europeans and Asiatics, and it is difficult to conceive any question at the present moment more momentous than the struggle between East and West for the inheritance of these semi-vacant territories. Promises have been made without knowledge or perception of the consequence involved in their fulfilment. If the redemption of the pledges upon which Sir M. Bhownaggree depends both in letter and spirit means that in fifty or a hundred years this country will have fallen to the inheritance of the Eastern instead of Western populations, then from the point of view of civilisation they must be numbered among promises which it is a greater crime to keep than to break. Lawley therefore concluded that ‘the first duty of statesmen in this country is to multiply homes for white men.’ On 18 April, Milner wrote to the Imperial Government endorsing Lawley’s views. The challenge, on the one side, was to prevent ‘an indiscriminate influx of Asiatics’, and on the other, to facilitate ‘a great increase in the white population’. As for Indians already in the territory, Milner thought that ‘the attempt to place coloured people on an equality with whites in South Africa is wholly impracticable, and that, moreover, it is in principle wrong.’ Faced with Milner’s intransigence, M. M. Bhownaggree turned once more to the British Parliament. Between February and August 1904, he asked as many as twelve questions about the treatment of Indians in South Africa.He also took the debate to the press, telling the Daily Graphic that in the Transvaal, ‘the Indian subjects of the King are being actually worse treated than they were under Boer rule.’ When asked ‘why this reactionary course has been taken’, Bhownaggree replied: ‘I can only put it down to the influence of the White League, a militant body that … seems to have obtained a commanding influence over the Transvaal Government.’  Gandhi, meanwhile, was busy writing for Indian Opinion, shoring up the sagging spirit of his countrymen. In November 1903 he saluted Dadabhai Naoroji on his seventy-eighth birthday; the Parsi veteran, he said, was ‘loved from the Hindukush to Cape Comorin and from Karachi to Calcutta as no other living man in India is loved’. Two months later, he wrote that the lives of Christ and Joan of Arc demonstrated that ‘individuals have to sacrifice so that the community may gain a great deal’. Gandhi thought the situation did not call for ‘heroic sacrifice’ by Indians; rather, ‘well-sustained, continuous and temperate constitutional effort is the main thing needed.’ For ‘if the British machinery is slow to move, the genius of the nation being conservative, it is also quick to perceive and recognise earnestness and unity.’ In February 1904, seeking to get the machinery to move, Gandhi wrote several letters to the Chief Medical Officer complaining that the Indian Location in north-west Johannesburg was ‘over-crowded beyond description’. Since Indians had only tenancy rights, they had no incentive to keep the place clean. Gandhi warned that ‘if the present state of things is continued, the outbreak of some epidemic disease is merely a question of time.’ Sure enough, bubonic plague broke out in the bazaar in March. Gandhi led the attempts to nurse the victims. A temporary hospital was formed in an abandoned warehouse, where the sick were treated with wet-earth poultices. Many were saved, but at least twenty-one died. Having failed to provide proper sanitation, the municipality now decided to raze the bazaar to the ground. A contingent of troops evacuated the area and set fire to six whole blocks, containing at least 1,600 buildings. The residents watched in stony silence. The next day, the Indians were taken to a new location, in Klipstruit, ten miles outside the city. The site had previously served as a camp for Boer prisoners-of-war: with tents as houses and no sewage, the place was unfit to live in and to trade – who, whether white, coloured or black, would come and shop there? The Indians who had been dumped at Klipstruit made their way back to Johannesburg in dribs and drabs, living and working at the margins of the city itself. In May, a trader named Habib Motan appealed to the Supreme Court against the Government’s decision to deny him a general licence. He had traded freely before the Anglo-Boer War, and questioned why he had now to be confined to a  location. The judge, bravely and perhaps surprisingly, concurred. Gandhi congratulated the merchant for winning his case, but warned ‘against being too much elated by this success. Probably it means only the beginning of another struggle. Opposition will be raised up against them throughout the country, and the Government may bring in a bill to counteract the effects of the Supreme Court.’ He also drew attention to the problems of Chinese traders, who, in small towns across the province, were being harassed by whites who wanted the custom of Chinese mine workers for themselves. This reminded him ‘very much of similar agitation in Durban in 1896’ (conducted against the Indians, and against himself). As Gandhi had predicted, sections of the white public were outraged by the Motan judgment. A deputation of white traders met the Colonial Secretary to complain that ‘the Asiatics are getting hold of the native trade, which represents a very large part of the country’s wealth’. A hardline group, the East Rand Vigilance Association, urged the Government to ‘formulate a new and comprehensive Ordinance, with all possible despatch, such Ordinance to be retrospective and to provide that no Asiatic trading or residence of any kind be allowed in the Transvaal save in bazaars set aside for the exclusive use of Asiatics’. The East Rand Vigilantes were led by an Anglican clergyman named C. E. Greenfield, of whom Gandhi’s weekly wrote that he ‘believed justice to be absent from Heaven itself if it contained a British Indian’.The priest represented a wide spectrum of white opinion. At a meeting of European farmers in Pietersburg, one speaker described Indians as an evil-smelling race, and an eyesore on this, one of the most beautiful countries in the world. Are we to allow them here? (no). Are we to allow these human parasites to overrun a land which is the heritage of white people and for which they have fought and bled? (no). Then let us take measures before it is too late or they will gain such a foothold as they have already secured in Natal (loud applause).50 At another meeting, in Pretoria, a speaker named A. H. Green drew upon thirty years spent as a tea-planter in South India to warn the audience against any ‘sentimentalism’. The Hindu was ‘a very wily fellow’. If ‘you have the Indian with you and do not confine him to living and trading in bazaars,’ warned Green, then ‘he will enter upon the various spheres of work throughout the Transvaal’.  He spoke of an Indian he knew, who married an English lady while studying in England, and then took her home, where she had to cover her head and eat separately from him. Who was to say that if more Indians were allowed into the Transvaal, they would not first take their land, then their jobs, and, finally, their women? ‘Have you a daughter, Sir?’ asked the rabble-rouser of his excited and fearful audience: ‘Would you like to see your daughter wedded to an Indian?’ The Transvaal Government now sought to annul the judgment in favour of Habib Motan. Lord Milner was worried that if the verdict was not reversed, ‘some thousands of British Indians will be able to demand as of right a privilege from which they had been excluded prior to the recent finding of the Supreme Court.’ Sensing a hardening of the white attitude, Gandhi sought a compromise. He outlined its terms in a proposal sent to Lord Milner in September 1904; this has disappeared from the records, but a letter that accompanied it exists. It throws new light on Gandhi’s motivations at this point in time. The letter’s tone and contents are extremely conciliatory. Gandhi said his proposals meet every reasonable objection of the Colonists in that: They are intended entirely to prohibit the immigration of all but the fewest Indians of education such as may be allowed to enter the Colony for the assistance of those who are already settled in the country. They place the issue of new dealers’ licences absolutely under the control of the Government or the local bodies if thereto authorised subject to review by the Supreme Court in extreme cases. Under them compulsory segregation would not be necessary because in Johannesburg and Pretoria, which contain the largest population, there are already locations existing, and in the other places they are totally unnecessary as the present Indian population is too small. There would be very little addition in future and few, if any, new licences would be issued. Gandhi said of his proposals that they do ‘give the right to the Indians of owning fixed property, but, if necessary, certain portions – for instance, farms – may be reserved for exclusive European ownership. In towns it is submitted that there should be no opposition to Indian ownership.’ He ended his letter with a plea: Throughout my eleven years’ connection with the question, my earnest endeavour has been to look at the question from the European standpoint also and to advise my countrymen so far as possible to avoid an appeal to the Home Government. It is the same desire that prompts me to approach His Excellency in the present instance. Should my attendance be required, I would wait on His Excellency. I beg to repeat that this is written in my private capacity but should His Excellency be pleased to approve of my suggestions, I do not anticipate any difficulty in securing the acceptance of the  proposals by my countrymen in so far as such may be deemed necessary.53 Even without access to Gandhi’s original proposal, we can, with the aid of this fascinating and forgotten letter, divine its contents. The lawyer asked that Indians be permitted to own property and reside in towns alongside white populations where they already did so. This would allow them to protect their livelihoods, and their dignity. What he did not ask for was the upholding of their right, as British Indians, to migrate freely to any part of the Empire. Hence the call to limit further immigration to a few educated Indians. The concession re farm ownership was perhaps due to the fact that Boers disliked Indians even more than the British. A new party named ‘Het Volk’ was campaigning in the Transvaal countryside against ‘the free influx of Asiatics’, its leaders making what the white press was obliged to refer to as ‘violent speeches’.54 Gandhi’s proposal represented a significant softening of his views. Back in 1894 and 1895, he had asked that educated Indians be granted the franchise in Natal. He now saw more clearly that whites in South Africa (as distinct from whites in England) would not concede the right to vote. So he asked for something more modest – namely, confirmation of their rights of residence, work, travel and trade. Indians could not become equal citizens, but they might yet be treated as honourable subjects, allowed to live at peace and with dignity under the British flag in South Africa. One motivation for Gandhi’s proposal was certainly political. He understood that, in the context of the profound asymmetry of power (and of numbers), Indians could not overcome white prejudice in the Transvaal. However, with the help of sympathetic British administrators, they might moderate or placate it. Hence the compromise suggested by him – virtually no fresh immigration, but no seizures of property or forced relocations either. Another motivation was very likely personal. Although, as he reminded Milner, he had first come to South Africa eleven years ago, this country was no more ‘home’ to him than London had been. Gandhi had gone to one place to study, to the other to help fight a legal battle. For all his commitment to the Indians living there, South Africa (like the United Kingdom) remained for him a foreign land. In October 1901 he had sailed from Durban for India, in his eyes for good. In November 1902 he sailed back to Durban, but – in a sign of how  temporary he saw this stay would be – left Kasturba and the children behind in Bombay. For some sixteen years now, Mohandas Gandhi had been a journeyman between continents. Born and raised in Kathiawar, he had braved convention and community to study in England. When he boarded the SS Clyde in September 1888, he saw the voyage as his first, but also his last, journey overseas. Having burnished his credentials, he would return to make a career and name in his native Kathiawar; as his mother’s spiritual guide had advised her, with a barrister’s certificate from London a diwanship should be her son’s for the asking. His brother Laxmidas’s misdeeds rendered that plan unfruitful, and life became more complicated. Having tried, and failed, to establish himself in Rajkot and Bombay, on his third try Gandhi became a successful lawyer in Durban. Three years there alone; three more years with his family; and then, to educate his children and overcome his wife’s loneliness, in 1901 Gandhi returned to India. A year later he was back in South Africa. This time, the community desired that he be based in Johannesburg. Here he lived the life of an expatriate: working with his Indian clients during the day, and spending the evenings with (white) professionals likewise single or separated from their families. Life in Johannesburg was interesting and intriguing, for a while. But once the Indian question in the Transvaal was settled, he would make one final transcontinental journey and go back home. Kasturba very much wanted her husband to return to India. And he wished to go back himself. There may have been a lingering ambition to try – for the third time – to establish a practice in the Bombay High Court. There were also options outside the law, in the sphere of politics and social work. For an ambitious patriot, the motherland offered a far larger theatre of action than the diaspora. The experience and credibility that he had acquired in South Africa could be parleyed to great effect back home in India. There were thus compelling reasons for Gandhi to return finally – after sixteen years on the move, shuttling between three continents – to establish himself as a lawyer and/or social activist in his homeland. Hence the compromise offered to Milner. If Gandhi could secure a settlement which struck a middle ground between the desires of the colonists (the wholesale expulsion of Indians) and the  hopes of the more radical of his countrymen (the right of free entry and settlement), he could leave South Africa with his honour intact. Gandhi’s note and letter were passed on to the Governor. Milner does not appear to have called Gandhi for a meeting, or indeed to have taken his proposals very seriously. Gandhi was now losing faith in the intentions of this particular Englishman. As he wrote to Gokhale: Contrary to all expectations, Lord Milner, who on the eve of the war, was the champion of the oppressed including the British Indians, has completely turned round and … is quite prepared to deprive the Indians of even what little rights they possessed in the Transvaal before [the] war.’55 An Englishwoman who got to know Lord Milner during the Anglo-Boer War found him ‘clear-headed and narrow’, adding, ‘Everyone says he has no heart, but I think I hit on the atrophied remains of one.’To his compatriots Milner might sometimes show emotion, but to everyone (and for everything) else he was always hard-headed. As Saul Dubow has written, notwithstanding Milner’s own low opinion of Boer culture, the proconsul now understood that ‘securing a prosperous and loyal Transvaal was key to establishing and maintaining British political supremacy in South Africa’.57 In rejecting Gandhi’s proposals, Milner was merely recognizing that European sentiment, Boer as well as Briton, was overwhelmingly against the Indians.  Mohandas Gandhi was city-born and city-bred. Born in Porbandar, raised in Rajkot, educated in London; a practising professional in Bombay, Durban and Johannesburg – he had spent all his years in urban centres small, large and massive. In 1904, now thirty-five, he had not spent a night in a village, nor perhaps an entire day either. And yet he had long had a yearning for the rustic life. It was first expressed in London, in the meetings of the Vegetarian Society, where he met Henry Salt and read his friend Edward Carpenter, a Cambridge scholar who had settled in the Yorkshire hills, from where he sermonized against the ills of industrialism. In his own first writings, Gandhi had spoken admiringly of the simple life of the shepherds of Kathiawar. Later he had read Tolstoy, and learnt of the Russian’s experiments on the land. In the latter half of 1904, Gandhi travelled to Durban for work, being seen off at Johannesburg’s Park Station by Henry Polak. As the train pulled out, his friend gave him a copy of John Ruskin’s Unto this Last. This was a polemic  against the then very influential science of political economy. Ruskin deplored the tendency of Ricardo, Mill, et al. to make money the unit of all exchange and value. A science that regarded air, light and cleanliness, or peace, trust and love as worthless, was in conflict with the teachings of the great religions, and antithetical to the deeper interests of humanity itself. Whereas Ricardo and company rigorously separated economics from morality, Ruskin thought that affection and trust must govern relations between master and servant, capitalist and worker. A moral economics would be one ‘which nourishes the greatest number of noble and happy human beings’, not which promoted the greatest monetary wealth or produced the greatest number of rich people. The lawyer read Unto this Last at once, right through, and was so moved that he could not sleep that night. The impact was so immense that, as Gandhi later recalled, ‘I determined to change my life in accordance with the ideals of the book.’ The core teaching of Unto this Last, as understood by him, was that the work of farmers and labourers was as valuable as the work of lawyers and factory managers. To work with one’s hands, and on the land, was more honourable than working with one’s brains or with the aid of machines. Reading Ruskin on the train from Johannesburg to Durban consolidated Gandhi’s romantically rural orientation. It prompted him to move Indian Opinion from Durban’s Grey Street to a new home in the countryside. He bought a farm near the station of Phoenix, on the North Coast Line, some fourteen miles from town. In its issue of 24 December 1904 the journal announced the shift in location. Both printing press and operating staff would be housed in the farm, where ‘the workers could live a more simple and natural life, and the ideas of Ruskin and Tolstoy combined with strict business principles’. Those who worked on the press, whether Englishman or Indian – or neither – would be paid a modest monthly allowance (of £3) and allotted plots of land to grow their food. The scheme’s promoter described it as ‘a bold experiment and fraught with momentous consequences. We know of no non-religious organisation that is or has been managed on the principles above laid down.’ One of the first recruits to the new experiment was Albert West. Gandhi had persuaded him to leave his job in Johannesburg and take charge of the press. When West reached the farm he found it to be a pleasant enough place, with fruit trees and date-palms, and a river running through the property. A plot of twenty  acres was bought in the first instance; with another eighty acres added on soon afterwards. On this land the workers built homes of wood and corrugated iron. Meanwhile, the press was dismantled and transported from Durban to Phoenix in four large wagons, each pulled by sixteen bullocks. The machinery was then reassembled. Gandhi wanted to work the press by hand, but West insisted on the purchase of a petrol engine (there was no electricity in the neighbourhood). As a concession to his friend, the Englishman designed a hand-operated machine with a wheel mounted on a wooden frame, which could be used when the oil ran out.61 The land, the building materials and the workers’ stipends were paid for principally by two men. Gandhi supplied the substantial sum of £3,500 from his own savings. (Clearly, the ‘decent practice’ he had spoken of to his Rajkot friend was very decent indeed.) The Durban merchant Parsee Rustomjee contributed in cash and in kind – apart from writing cheques, he also donated a large number of sheets of corrugated iron. By the first week of January 1905, issues printed on the farm had begun reaching the journal’s subscribers. Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that he now hoped to establish a school at Phoenix ‘which would be second to none in South Africa’. He asked his mentor to recommend an Indian teacher with ‘a blameless character’, and to send a letter of encouragement for printing in Indian Opinion.62 Back in 1899, when the two sets of white colonists in South Africa went to war, Gandhi was an Empire loyalist, a believer in Imperial citizenship who thought that flattery and persuasion would end discrimination against Indians in South Africa. Thus he signed up to support the British in their campaign against the Boers. Thus, too, his repeated petititions to London, made in the belief that even if the colonists were sometimes bigoted and narrow-minded, they would be brought around by sagacious Imperial statesmen. Gandhi took heart from the fact that British officials in India tended to side with his people in South Africa. A leading member of the Indian Civil Service had chastised the Transvaal Government for placing members of an ‘ancient and orderly civilization’ on a par with ‘uncivilized African labourers’.63 A second ICS man told a delegation from Natal that ‘the Indian is not on a level with the  kafir; he belongs to a higher class. The Indian trader is almost as advanced as ourselves.’ These views on the hierarchy of civilizations were conventional – Gandhi shared them too (at the time). They placed Indians almost adjacent to Europeans, from which perspective the discriminatory laws in South Africa were clearly misguided, if not actively malevolent. The Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, thus criticized Lord Milner for ‘justifying the vexatious regulations’ on Indians in the Transvaal. Curzon thought it ‘much more important to conciliate the unanimous sentiment of 300,000,000 of our subjects in Asia than to defer to the prejudices of a small colony of white men in South Africa.’ When Gandhi sailed for Durban in November 1902, his hopes in British justice were largely intact. Two years later he was less naïve. He had once hoped to unite the Indians with the British against the Boers; now, after the war, the British were uniting with the Boers against them. South Africa was not England, where brown men could be elected to Parliament; or even India, where they could become judges and Imperial Councillors. Here, the bonds of race would always trump Imperial loyalties and obligations. The Indian situation in the Transvaal was now uncertain, fraught with difficulties. When, in September 1904, Lord Milner rejected the compromise Gandhi offered him, Gandhi felt he had to stay on. So he asked his wife and children to join him in Johannesburg. Kasturba arrived in South Africa towards the end of 1904. The eldest son, Harilal, now sixteen, had stayed back in India. He was keen to sit the Bombay Matriculation that his father had taken back in 1887. However, the other sons came out with their mother, as did two nephews, Gokuldas and Chhaganlal.            