 9 Trouble in the Transvaal   Once Gandhi had settled Kasturba and the children at Phoenix, he returned to Johannesburg, moving into a smaller house, which he shared with Millie and Henry Polak. This house, in Bellevue East, was half the size of the villa in Troyeville: four rooms rather than eight, each large (or small) enough to accommodate only a double bed. With Gandhi scaling back on his law practice, they had to cut back on their expenses, and this modest abode was a beginning. In their new house, noted Millie Polak grimly, there was no proper plumbing, and a make-shift bath-room had been fixed by previous tenants under the stairs; the waste water from the bath ran down the wall outside into a kind of gutter, which ran along a dark passage, and thus the walls were always damp. These conditions helped to produce big slimy slugs that got into the house.2 Millie wished to make the place more pleasant, but her austere Indian housemate got in the way. Gandhi was content with a bare floor and bare walls, whereas Millie wished to adorn them with nice rugs and pretty pictures. When Millie said a painting would hide the wall’s ugliness, Gandhi asked her to look out of the window and admire the sunset, more beautiful than anything conceived by the hand of man. She persisted, bringing Henry on to her side. Gandhi eventually conceded that a charming interior was not in competition with the glories of nature without. The next argument was about food. Gandhi asked that the household’s diet exclude sugar, since it was made through the exploitation of indentured labourers. He wanted raw onions and milk banned on the grounds that they excited the passions. Millie was fine with giving up sugar and onions, but not milk. If that liquid stimulated the passions, she asked, why was it considered the best food for babies? Gandhi answered that mother’s milk was good for children, but no kind of milk was suitable for adults. Millie commented acidly that one  would think they were gourmands; no house in Johannesburg was so concerned with what to eat and especially with what not to eat. ‘A man shall be judged by what comes out of his mouth,’ she told Gandhi, ‘not what by what he puts in it’. In making a home, Millie Polak had come up against the two stereotypical characteristics of his caste that her Indian housemate, after all these years, still retained. Born a Bania, Gandhi had in most ways radically departed from the conventions and habits of his caste. Banias were notoriously conservative in religious matters; and had a particular dislike of Muslims. Gandhi mixed freely with Muslims and Christians, and even shared homes with them. The dharma of the Bania was making and saving money, but Gandhi exchanged a lucrative profession for social service and had no desire to leave money or property for his children. Banias were averse to political movements – they had stayed away from the Indian National Congress (where Brahmins and Kshatriyas were over- represented). Gandhi, on the other hand, actively sought political engagement. Hetereodox in most matters, there were yet two areas in which Gandhi was still, so to speak, of his caste – in his comparative lack of interest in aesthetics and in his thoroughgoing obsession with food taboos. For all their disagreements, Millie retained a healthy respect for her Indian friend. She was particularly struck by how hard he worked. He attended to his clients all day, including Sunday. The Polaks became accustomed to Indians coming in at all hours, seeking the counsel of their lawyer and leader. As Millie remembered, ‘it was not an unusual thing to have four or more men return at midnight with Mr Gandhi, and when all were too worn out to continue to talk, rugs would be thrown down the passage or anywhere else for the visitors to get a few hours’ sleep ere they started to tramp back to town.’ In discussing Gandhi’s vow of celibacy in the West, one often finds a sense of outrage at his not having consulted his wife. How could he end sexual relations so abruptly? What if she still wanted to continue them? This reaction is very modern (and very Western). It is unlikely that Kasturba was greatly disturbed by Gandhi’s vow of celibacy. What worried her far more was its extension, by which Gandhi sought not just to distance himself from her physically, but also from his children, emotionally.  Kasturba was unhappy at the fraught relations between her husband and their eldest son, Harilal. Gandhi had left home (for London) shortly after Harilal was born. In 1892–3, when he was in Bombay, the children were in Rajkot. Not long after they joined him, Gandhi decided to go to South Africa. The family were reunited in 1896, and travelled together to Durban; but they were separated again in 1902. Harilal was a poor student, and failed to settle down in any of the several schools he studied in. This concerned Gandhi – perhaps because he had once been an indifferent student himself. He had asked Kasturba to bring all their sons to South Africa. However, Harilal stayed behind, ostensibly to appear for his Matriculation. It appears that by now relations between father and first-born were frosty. That, at any rate, is the impression conveyed by a letter written by Gandhi on 28 December 1905, where he told Harilal that he was ‘dissatisfied’ with him for not writing regularly. Whenever he received news from others, he continued, ‘they contain criticism regarding your conduct.’ ‘Your general conduct towards your parents betrays no love for them,’ complained Gandhi. The relationship between father and son deteriorated further when Gandhi learned of Harilal’s love for Chanchal,the daughter of his friend Haridas Vora. Gandhi thought the couple too young to get married, but his brother Laxmidas, who was in Rajkot, sanctioned the wedding, and the marriage took place on 2 May 1906. When the news reached Gandhi, he wrote to his brother saying that ‘it is well if Harilal is married; it is also well if he is not. For the present at any rate I have ceased to think of him as a son.’7 The harshness of the tone is only partially extenuated by the fact that Harilal was guilty of, as it were, serial disobedience: of not studying properly, of not joining the family in Johannesburg, of not writing letters regularly, and worst of all, of not listening to his father’s advice not to get married. Kasturba was deeply worried about the estrangement between father and son. As an (Indian) mother she was perhaps more forgiving of Harilal’s transgressions. She also saw that Gandhi’s behaviour was not above reproach: that he had alternated between being grossly neglectful and somewhat overbearing. Seeking a rapprochement, she persuaded Harilal to come to South Africa. When he agreed, Gandhi wrote Montford Chamney, the Protector of Asiatics, a long letter, which reveals the  three-way tension between husband, wife and first-born. The letter is dated 13 August 1906: Dear Mr Chamney, I have to approach you again on another personal matter. My eldest son, Harilal, has left India. He sent a wire to Phoenix from Mombasa of which my nephew has given me information … My boy is to-day over age, that is, he is nearly eighteen. His permit, however, was granted by Captain Fowle when Mrs Gandhi arrived here [in 1904]. On receipt of a cable from Mrs Gandhi I asked for a permit but Mrs Gandhi arrived without my eldest boy and my nephew. My nephew [Chhaganlal] has since come, but my son, Harilal, was not able to do so as he wished to go up for his matriculation examination, and then, unfortunately, he had to be married. He is now on his way. I kept the telegram by me for three days as I was not certain whether I should have my son with me or whether I should send him to Phoenix. I have now come to the conclusion that if you would be good enough to let him come on the strength of the permit having been previously granted or otherwise I should like to keep him under my observation. I have been separated from him now for nearly three years. If you think that you would let him come to me I should thank you to let me have his permit now. His full name is: Harilal Mohandas Gandhi. The permit that was granted by Captain Fowle to Mrs Gandhi was returned to him after her arrival. There was only one document issued for the whole family. I am not certain whether, in the event of your complying with my request, I should have Harilal through from Delagoa Bay or Durban. I should therefore like to have his permit myself so that I can make use of it wherever he has landed. His landing will depend on Mrs Gandhi’s intentions and my movements. The steamer is due at Durban on the 26th inst. It is likely that I shall have to be there at that time. In that event, I should meet my boy there and bring him with me. Otherwise, in order that I may see him earlier I should like him to land at Delagoa Bay and come straight to me. I am Yours truly M. K. Gandhi.8 Gandhi’s writings, whether public or private, were usually lucid and precise – traits that reflected a decade of practice in publishing essays for different journals. This particular letter, however, betrays an uncharacteristic disorder and sentimentalism. It was hardly appropriate that he would reveal to the Protector of Asiatics his disapproval of Harilal’s marriage – or that he would speak so frequently and so possessively of ‘my boy’. This perhaps reveals his own uncertainty about both matters – he needed to reassure himself that he was right to oppose the marriage, and that he really cared about his son. The confusion about where Harilal would or should land is also revealing. At this point Kasturba was living, with her other sons, at Phoenix. Ships from India came first to the Portuguese-held port of Delagoa Bay before Durban. From Delagoa Bay, Johannesburg was a few hours away by train. It seems that Gandhi and Kasturba were unsure as to which parent the boy should meet first. If he got  off the ship at Delagoa Bay, he could go to his father, with whom he wished to be reconciled. On the other hand, if he carried on to Durban he would first meet his mother, who was both his preferred parent and could advise him on how best to mend fences with his father. There was yet a third possibility, hinted at in the letter, which was that Gandhi himself would go to Durban, in which case Harilal would meet both parents at the same time. Where he would finally land would depend largely on what Gandhi delicately referred to as his wife’s ‘intentions’. The day after he wrote to Chamney, Gandhi phoned to urge him to grant the request. (Telephones were then relatively new, and rare, in South Africa; that the father resorted to its use shows how keen he was to have his son join him.) The appeal was successful, for the official replied promptly and with an untypical softness of tone. Within twenty-fours he had posted Gandhi a letter of authorization, which noted that, as a special exception, ‘it will not be necessary for him [Harilal] to report himself at this office. I will have his form of application filled in at Johannesburg after his arrival.’ Chamney added that ‘of course you will understand that the granting of this permit is not in any sense a precedent.’ There was a further request to be made. According to the rules, Harilal had to enter the Transvaal within two weeks of obtaining the permit. On 17 August, Gandhi wrote to Chamney asking that this period be extended to a month, ‘as Mr Harilal is at present in Durban and might be there for some time’. It seems that Kasturba had decided that she would keep her boy for a while at Phoenix before sending him on to confront his father.The reunion, when it did finally take place, was without acrimony. After they met, Gandhi wrote to Chhaganlal that ‘I am really delighted with Harilal’s taking a deck passage and managing everything himself.’One trusts the praise was passed on to the boy himself. Now in his mid-thirties, Mohandas Gandhi was no longer interested in becoming a successful, prosperous, or famous lawyer. He would work to earn a living, and to subsidize his other, to him more significant, activities. Obligations to his family were likewise undertaken more out of duty than conviction. He could not entirely and permanently separate himself from his children; however, in times of political tension or controversy they took second place.  In August 1906, even as Gandhi was seeking to reconcile with Harilal, the Transvaal Government introduced a new ‘Asiatic Ordinance’. This required every Indian resident in Transvaal to register afresh, regardless of age or gender. The certificates of registration had to be carried at all times; and produced on demand. Those not carrying them were liable for arrest, imprisonment, and even expulsion from the province.11 In Natal, too, Indians could not vote and could not own property in some places. They were subjects rather than full-fledged citizens. However, Indians in Natal did not have to carry identification papers at all times and in all places. The Transvaal Government argued that this new measure was necessary to forestall impersonation and fraud, and to remove the fear among ‘the [white] people of the Colony’ that ‘a general influx of Asiatics would displace many of the Europeans at present employed in trade and commerce, and would end in converting the Colony into an Asiatic, rather than an European, community.’ The Ordinance had been drafted by the Assistant Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal, Lionel Curtis, a protégé of Lord Milner’s, educated at Oxford. Curtis’s views on race relations, writes his (generally sympathetic) biographer, were ‘a conventional amalgam of prejudice, bad history, half-baked Darwinism, and spurious geography producing an elementary blueprint for a system of residential segregation and economic integration’. Curtis argued that ‘if the temperate zones are reserved for the white so should the tropical zones be reserved for the Asiatic’. Self-government by and for Indians he dismissed as ‘no more in the nature of the people, than it is in the nature of a billiard cue to stand on end without support’. The Ordinance was intended by Curtis to ‘shut the gate against the influx of an Asiatic population’, and thereby ‘guard the Transvaal as a white reserve’. He was proud of the legislation. It was, he told an admiring audience in Johannesburg, the most important thing he had done. He believed the Ordinance would ‘if temperately, cautiously and continually worked … keep the Transvaal a white man’s country, so far as the circumstances of the country allow. It would save the country from the fate which has overtaken Mauritius and Jamaica.’ Then he added a note of self-congratulation: ‘A debt of gratitude, the fulness of which the people of this country will never know, is due to [my] office.’  The Ordinance was viewed differently by those subject to its workings. In a letter of 25 August, the British Indian Association said that to make all Asians aged eight and over, of either sex, undergo fresh registration would ‘needlessly violate female modesty, as it is understood by millions of British Indians’. An editorial in Indian Opinion characterized the new bill as ‘abominable’. It threatened to ‘invade the sanctity of home life’, and appeared to have been drafted ‘with the deliberate intention of injuring the Indian community’. On 1 September, a delegation led by Gandhi travelled to Pretoria to meet the Colonial Secretary, Patrick Duncan. They told him ‘that the Asiatic Act would be unacceptable to the Indian community under any circumstances and that re- registration would simply not take place’. The Secretary refused to consider the withdrawal of the legislation. Indian Opinion now compared British rule in the Transvaal to the regime of the autocratic Tsar of Russia. While the Russian state ‘murder[s] people openly and directly’, it said sarcastically, the British in Transvaal ‘kill[s] them by inches’.16 At their meeting, Gandhi told Duncan that if the legislation went through, the Indians would refuse to abide by its regulations, even if it meant courting arrest. He said he was prepared to be the first to go to jail. That Gandhi was seriously thinking of courting arrest is confirmed by a letter written to him by his friend the Pretoria lawyer R. Gregorowski. Gregorowski told Gandhi that the penalties for failing to register were severe – imprisonment with hard labour and perhaps a stiff fine too. He advised the Indians to send a deputation to London, to lay their case before the new Liberal Government. Gregorowski argued that any other form of resistance than by constitutional means is … to be deprecated. It would be an offence to invite people to disobey the law and not to re-register. I think such agitation is also bound to fail as not a great number of people are made of the stuff that seek martyrdom and Asiatics are no exception to the rule. The same result could, I think, be attained by constitutional agitation.17 Gandhi accepted the advice – for the moment. The British Indian Association would send a deputation to London, whose members would be ‘Mr Gandhi and a member from the trading classes’. A thousand pounds was sanctioned for their expenses. However, to assess the mood of the community, a public meeting was proposed prior to their departure. To plan the meeting, a group of Indians met daily in the hall of the Hamidia Islamic Society, a body funded and patronized by Gujarati Muslims. Letters were sent to every small town in the Transvaal, urging  Indians to attend. Handbills and posters were discussed and drafted. A list of possible speakers was drawn up and debated. The meeting, scheduled for Sunday 11 September, was held at the Empire Theatre, a large hall with balconies that seated close to 2,000 people. On the big day, Indian shopkeepers and hawkers in Johannesburg stopped work at 10 a.m. The doors of the Empire Theatre opened at noon, to accommodate the people coming in from the countryside. By 1.30 the theatre was packed to overflowing. Describing the scene within, the Rand Daily Mail wrote that even in its palmiest days, the old variety theatre could never have boasted of a larger audience than that which assembled yesterday. From the back row of the gallery to the front row of the stalls there was not a vacant seat, the boxes were crowded as surely they had never been crowded before, and even the stage was invaded. Wherever the eye lighted was fez and turban, and it needed but little stretch of the imagination to fancy that one was thousands of miles from Johannesburg and in the heart of India’s teeming millions.18 Gandhi had invited Patrick Duncan to attend the meeting. The Colonial Secretary chose to send Montford Chamney as his representative. The Protector of the Asiatics sat on the dais, silent and uncomprehending, as a series of speakers inveighed against the new ordinance. Chairing the meeting was Abdul Gani, a Johannesburg merchant who served as the President of the British Indian Association. He sat on a sofa covered with a yellow silk cloth, the person and his background illuminated by electric light. Gani spoke in Hindustani. Whatever his inadequacies as a petition writer, he was clearly a practised orator. His main point was that they should defy the law and go to prison rather than subject themselves to a fresh process of registration. When ‘Mr Gani spoke of gaol-going’, reported Indian Opinion, ‘the audience shouted in one voice, “We shall go to gaol, but will not register ourselves again.”’ Other speeches were made in Gujarati and English. One speaker, Nanalal Shah, flourished his existing registration certificate before the crowd. This had his name, his profession, his wife’s name, his caste, his height, his age, and even his thumb impression. ‘Is all this not enough?’ demanded Mr Shah. ‘How can anyone else use this register? Does the Government want now to brand us on our foreheads? I will never return my registration certificate. Neither will I be registered again. I prefer going to gaol, and I will go there.’  Five resolutions were presented to and passed by the meeting. The first outlined what in the ordinance was repugnant; the second asked the Transvaal Government to withdraw it. The third gave formal approval to the delegation being sent to London. The fifth authorized the meeting’s Chairman, Abdul Gani, to forward the resolutions to the Transvaal administation and to the Imperial Government in London. The crucial resolution was the fourth, which said that In the event of the Legislative Council, the local Government, and the Imperial Authorities rejecting the humble prayer of the British Indian community of the Transvaal in connection with the Draft Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance, this mass meeting of British Indians here assembled solemnly and regretfully resolves that, rather than submit to the galling, tyrannous, and un-British requirements laid down in the above Draft Ordinance, every British Indian in the Transvaal shall submit himself to imprisonment and shall continue to do so until it shall please His Gracious Majesty the King- Emperor to grant relief. Moving the resolution, the Pretoria merchant Hajee Habib said, ‘Everything depends upon it. There is no disgrace in going to gaol; rather it is an honour. Only a few people knew of [the Indian patriot] Mr [Bal Gangadhar] Tilak before he went to gaol; today the whole world knows him.’ Gandhi spoke after Habib, in (as a reporter on the spot noted) ‘clear, low tones, in earnest, serious, and carefully-chosen language’. He said that the responsibility for advising them to go to prison was his. ‘The step was grave, but unavoidable. In doing so, they did not hold a threat, but showed that the time for action – over and above making speeches and submitting petitions – had arrived.’ Gandhi added that he had ‘full confidence in his countrymen’. He ‘knew he could trust them, and he knew also that, when occasion required an heroic step to be taken, he knew that every man among them would take it.’ One of the last speakers was a Tamil named Thambi Naidoo. Born in Mauritius in 1875, he had come to the Transvaal as a young man, and set up as a carrier. He probably got to know Gandhi during the plague epidemic of 1904. He was stocky, strongly built, and of firm convictions. Now he stood up to persuade his fellow Tamils to commit to a path of action drawn up by the Gujaratis. The meeting ended with a vote of thanks, proposed by an M. Lichtenstein and seconded by an I. Israelstam. They (and Gandhi) had been put up to it by Henry Polak. For these were ‘both sons of Israel, both, therefore, representative of a people that have, for centuries, suffered persecution and oppression, by reason of  the ignorance, prejudice, superstition, and jealousy of their opponents, even as the British Indians in South Africa to-day.’ Thus far, the movement to get the Indians a fair deal in South Africa had followed a strictly legalistic route. Letters, petitions, court cases, delegations – these were the means by which Gandhi and his fellows had challenged laws which bore down unfairly on them. Now, however, they were threatening to defy this new Ordinance and go to jail. It has been sometimes assumed that this resolution of 11 September 1906, mandating a move from petition to protest, was influenced by Henry David Thoreau’s classic tract on civil disobedience, first published in 1849. There is no evidence to support this conjecture. At this time, Gandhi had not read Thoreau. Another speculation, offered by the respected Gandhi scholar James D. Hunt, is that he was influenced by protests by Nonconformists against the Education Act in England, which forced Anglican instruction on state-aided schools. Baptists, Wesleyans and Congregationalists had courted arrest rather than allow their children to be indoctrinated in the official faith of the state. Gandhi did know some Baptist and Methodist priests in Johannesburg. He did read the British press. The term ‘passive resistance’, used by him, was one made popular by Nonconformists, although it also had a more distant origin in the term ‘non-resistance to evil’, made famous in a book Gandhi knew well, Tolstoy’s The Kingdom of God is Within You.22 These influences may be inferred but they cannot, alas, be demonstrated. Prior to the 11 September meeting, there are no references in Gandhi’s writings and speeches to Nonconformist protests against the Education Act in England. On the other hand, Gandhi had conveyed in Indian Opinion his admiration for the Swadeshi movement in British India. This admiration was shared by his colleagues – hence the appreciative reference in Hajee Habib’s speech to the incarceration of the militant nationalist Bal Gangadhar Tilak. The idea of protest and sacrifice was more directly influenced by the events in India in 1905–6. But, as Gandhi pointed out, even the defiance of a specific law had indigenous precedents. Writing in Gujarati in Indian Opinion, he said of the resolution threatening mass resistance that it  is, and at the same time is not, unique. We consider it unique, because nowhere else in the world have Indians so far resolved, as they have done now, to go to gaol rather than submit to a law. On the other hand, we do not consider it unique because a number of similar instances are found [in history]. When we are dissatisfied with anything, we resort to hartal. In India we often consider it our duty to do so, in order to obtain redress of our grievances, particularly in the Native States. The hartal only means that we do not approve of a certain measure taken by the ruler. This tradition of resisting a law has been in vogue among us from very early days, when the English people were in a barbarous state. Thus, really speaking, the Resolution passed by the Transvaal Indians is nothing extraordinary and there is no reason why we should feel nervous.23 The editors of the Collected Works do not translate the word ‘hartal’. A hartal refers to the withdrawal of support and services from the state, or from one’s employers. Among the various forms it took, and takes, were workers laying down tools to demand larger wages, peasants migrating from a kingdom to protest high taxes, and shopkeepers closing their shutters to protest a new tax. A cognate word is dharna. A hartal is a collective act of protest; a dharna more often an individual act of resistance. A servant who refuses to wait on his master after being abused by him is on dharna. When, back in 1894, Gandhi would not eat in an Indian home until his hosts contributed their mite to the Natal Indian Congress, he was invoking this old (and well-regarded) tradition of moral- persuasion-shading-into-coercion. Now, twelve years later, he was redirecting that tradition in a collective protest against a racially biased law. The Ordinance that sparked the Resolution of 11 September was peculiar to the Transvaal. Residents of British India were not required to take out registration certificates. However, Indians in India had protested oppressive laws in similar fashion in the past. In Gandhi’s native Kathiawar, a distinction had long been made between two ways of protesting the arbitrary actions of a state. The first was to resort to violence, a method preferred by bandits who roamed the countryside. This was called baharvatiya – literally, going outside the law. On the other hand, a grievance could also be expressed without the use of force, as for example by sitting outside the home of the official responsible for the law or measure one was opposed to. By refusing to move, and perhaps combining this with refusing to eat, the protester hoped the state or its representative would be shamed into withdrawing the offending statute. This second, peaceful form of protest, was known as risaamanu, which meant the temporary severing of relations between people who were otherwise closely and even intimately connected.24  Indian precedents to the Resolution of 11 September existed; and Gandhi knew of some of them. Even so, his appeal to ancient Indian custom legitimized rather than explained the threat to court arrest. For the meeting at the Empire Theatre was carried along by its own momentum. Encouraged by the large crowd, the speakers competed with one another to raise the temperature. The speeches and resolutions represented a specific response to a specific situation. The new Ordinance had consolidated the grievances of the Indians in the Transvaal, who now sought means of protest more direct, and more radical, than any they had resorted to before. Notably, the Indians were supported by the Chinese in the Transvaal, who, as fellow Asians, were also affected by the Ordinance. The gathering at the Empire Theatre included several Chinese leaders. Two days later, the Chinese Consul- General in Johannesburg wrote to Lord Selborne urging him not to sanction ‘an offensive measure’ that was in breach of international law and which, if implemented, would harm friendly relations between China and Great Britain. By calling for the compulsory registration of all Asiatics, he said, the Ordinance would subject his countrymen to ‘the degrading exposure of all their bodily infirmities which to our Oriental minds is most repulsive, as such a system of identification, is only resorted to in cases of criminals in China.’ The sentiments of those present at the Empire Theatre were endorsed by their long-time supporter in London, Dadabhai Naoroji. As a Gladstonian liberal, Naoroji believed in the politics of gradual and incremental reform. His communications were generally couched in the most understated language. But this new Ordinance in the Transvaal prompted a scathing letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. Calling it a ‘wanton insult’ to his countrymen, a man who had been a rare brown Member of the Mother of Parliaments remarked that it is most galling to think that in British territories if [the great England cricketer of Indian extraction] Prince Rangitsinhjee [sic] wanted to enter the Transvaal he should have to apply for a permit and then in order that he might have a glass of beer he should have to apply cringingly to the Government for exemption from the Liquor ordinance [under which Indians were not allowed to buy alcohol] … Is this the way in which the most Liberal Government that the Empire has seen for years will protect weak and helpless members thereof?26 Back in South Africa, the threat of passive resistance was being held in reserve. For the moment, Gandhi would follow his friend Gregorowski’s advice and make a personal appeal to the authorities in London. With him would come  Haji Ojer Ally, a businessman active in social work in Johannesburg. They were booked to leave for the United Kingdom in early October. A few days before they departed, the Empire Theatre, the venue of the great meeting of 11 September, was gutted in a fire.            